Regale Necessarium: OR The Legality, Reason and Necessity OF THE Rights and
Privileges Justly Claimed by the Kings Servants, And which ought to be allowed
unto them.

By Fabian Philipps.

Seneca in Traged. Octavia, Act 2. Collecta vitia per tot Aetates diu
In nos redundant, Seculo premimur gravi.
Lucanus de Bello Civili, lib. 9. -- Squalent Serpentibus Arva
Durum iter ad Leges patriaeque ruentis amorem.
LONDON, Printed for Christopher Wilkinson, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Black-Boy in Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstans Church.
1671.

To the Illustrious and Right Honorable James, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
Ormond, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Lord
Steward of his Majesty's most Honorable Household, and Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter.
And unto the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Manchester, one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's
most Honorable Household, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
My Lords,
WEre it not that these unhappy times have brought forth a sort of reasonless
men, whose humors and Phancies led by an ignorance or Interest makes them
unwilling to submit to Laws, and the necessary and just means and Rules of
Government, unless their understanding which in those quarrelling and
contentious Skeptics is little enough, may be convinced and satisfied with
the Reason thereof; these my Labors might have seemed to be as needless as
Physic for those which are in Health, and to be little more than a quarrel
with my own Shadow: But they that hear the daily complaints now more than ever
made against the Legal and just Privileges of the Kings Servants, the affronts
offered to the Majesty and Supreme Authority of the King by Arresting and
Imprisoning them without leave first obtained of the Lord Chamberlain of his
most Honorable Household, or those other great Officers therein to whom it
appertains, and by bringing of Writs of Habeas Corpus by those which have
been taken and Arrested by the Kings Messengers for their contempts therein, to
be delivered by the subordinate Courts of Justice against the mind and
Authority of the King that Commissionated them and those many disparaging
contests which do arise thereupon, with the unwarrantable Opinions now put to
Nurse, that the King cannot in such a case protect his Servants, without a
great delay or hindrance of the Execution of Justice, that they being Outlawed
may be Arrested, whether he will or no; And that he has so conveyed his
Justice to his Courts of Justice, as he is not in the case of his Servants to
intermeddle therein: may I hope Apologize for my undertaking and endeavors to
persuade them out of those and some other their great mistakings and Errors,
which may produce a neglect and slighting of Authority, and many an unforeseen
evil consequence.

In the management whereof, I can call my most reserved and private thoughts to
witness, and they will therein (I am confident) acquit me that I have not built
an Altar to flattery, or made any design or hopes of preferment to be my guide
or incitement thereunto, but have done what I now present unto you, only to
maintain the Honor and respect which is due to our Sovereign Lord the King and
his Servants, casta mente and manu accompanied with a principle and opinion
that he deserves to be accounted the greatest of villains, that would make it
his design to lessen or detract from any of the Kings Rights, Prerogative and
just means of Government, and to be ever infamous, that for any ends
whatsoever, would endeavor to diminish or take away any of the peoples Legal
Rights, Liberties and Privileges; And in that middle way and path of Truth and
doing Right to all Parties, have no intention to give any assistance for the
defrauding, or too much delaying of Creditors just debts, or stopping the
course of Justice in any the peoples Actions or Prosecutions of their rights,
or for remedies against Wrongs or Injuries done unto them by any indirect
course or shelter for such as shall only pretend themselves to be the Kings
Servants, when they are not truly or really thereunto entitled.

In which my Labors, if any shall undervalue the Authorities which I have
brought from the Laws of Nations, Customs or usage of all or the most of our
Kings and Princes, and the Civil Law that great repository of Reason and
Prudence to fortify my assertion of the Privileges of the Kings Servants;
they may please to understand that they are principally derived from the Laws
of Nations, Civil Law and universal right Reason, consonant and agreeable to
our common Laws, which have instructed and guided themselves by many a maxim
and piece of right Reason which they have received from them.

Or shall say that the Records of this Kingdom which have been cited in
Conformity thereunto, are only fit to make a history, but do serve for no
proof, as some of those of the long robe have with much Injury unto them and
themselves, and the Truth not long ago been pleased to say, or that the old
things are passed away: those Antiquities are obsolete and little to be
regarded; We are now upon a new way, the Law has been much altered and
changed, and those evidences and venerable Monuments of Time, being the
vestigia and footsteps of ancient Laws and Customs are not to be much respected.

And will adventure to vent such Doctrines or Opinions, and make themselves, as
Gutherius a learned French Advocate complains, Gutherius de Offic. domus
August. lib. 1. ca. 1,
guilty of the neglects of those very necessary and useful parts of Learning
and Knowledge, which are to be found in the Treasuries of Time and Antiquities,
may upon better consideration, find cause to believe that the Reason of Laws
does never Expire, that the unerring Wisdom of the Almighty that Writ some Laws
with his own Finger, and commanded his beloved people of Israel to repeat them
Deuteronomy 4.32.
to their Children and after Generations, to ask of the days that were past,
and which were before them since the day that God Created man upon the Earth,
and that Bild^d the S^uhite one of Jobs Friends, Job 8. v. 8, and 9.
gave him no ill Counsel, when he advised him to enquire of the former Age, and
prepare himself to the search of his fathers, and enforces it by a Reason,
that we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are
a Shadow; Jer. 6. v. 16.
and the giver of all Wisdom did long after by his holy Spirit (in the Prophet
Jeremy) enjoin them to stand in the ways, and see and ask for the old Paths,
that in the making of new Laws, and the amending or correcting of the old: The
knowledge of those which have been altered, repealed or laid aside, is not a
little necessary, to the end, that by the old, we may see the necessity and
perfection of the new, and by the old, how to avoid the failings which might
happen in the Interpretation or Execution of the new, that the Graecians had
their Nomophilaces ad quos rerum gestarum consignatio pertinebat, Craigius de
repub. Lacedaemon. lib. 2. ca. 2.
utextarent Monumenta Publica, ad quae recurrere liceret quum aliqua in re
majorum exemplum requireretur, and that the Romans so greatly valued* their old
Records, as they gave great Preferments and Honors to Flavius a Scribe or
Notary: Livius lib. 9.349, and 350.
And the Privilege of a Curule Chair, for publishing and bringing some of
them to light, that all other Civilized Nations, and even those of China and
Japan have highly esteemed their Records and Memorials, that in our
Parliaments, Courts of Justice and Chancery, Records and precedents in any
Matters or Cases of Difficulty, are not seldom enquired after, and directed to
be searched, that the Dates, Clauses or Words of some Acts of Parliament, and
the Reports of Cases adjudged have been found to have been mistaken, and
rectified after by the Records; That it is Felony to imbezill or corrupt a
Record, that Courts of Records are more Honored and esteemed than those which
are not, and that the Law will not permit a Record to be averred against, or
much gainsaid.

And that such a care was taken of our Records by our Ancestors, as the Commons
of England did (...) Cause in their Petition of Parliament, in the 46th year of
the Reign of King Edward the 3d Petit. Parl. 46 E. 3.
style them the peoples Evidence, and pray to have upon their occasions a free
and uninterrupted access unto them. Our Kings have in several of their Reigns,
made allowances of Money, and Expenses for the Calendring and well ordering of
them, and caused them to be kept and preserved in places of strength and
safety, whereby to secure them from the fury of Wars or Fire, or other
destroying Casualties.

That if the Reports of cases adjudged upon Demurrers or special Verdicts, and
the responsa prudentum, and careful and well Studied Arguments of the Judges,
such as the Learned, Mr. Plowdens Commentaries, and the Reports of Dier,
Anderson, Coke, Crook, Hobart, and other the Labors and Memorials of the
venerable and learned sages of our Laws (the Errors too often attending the
Works and Labors of all Mankind only excepted) do deserve their ^ust esteem
and value, and are a light and guide to the Reason and Judgment of Posterity
and after Ages* and the more when they have the assistance of the Records to
back and Warrant them, and that even Histories are the better when they keep in
the sight and Company of Records, and enjoy their Assistance.

And if in their Truth and Evidence they conduce much to that verity and
certainty which ought to be in Histories, our Records certainly cannot by any
Reason or Rules of Prudence be believed or understood to be useless or
unnecessary for the Study or asserting of the Truth* and Rationality of our
Laws, and the Rules and Method thereof.

Nor are those Jewels of Time to be ranked with Romances, or such Trivial
things as may claim no more than a Cursory and careless reading, when if
carefully, as they ought to be entered, and kept they do give us the Certainty
and Truth of matters of fact, and do not seldom intimate or Illustrate the
Causes and Reason thereof.

And may well deserve a better Credit than any Reports of cases adjudged or
responsa prudentum, some of which are but Opinions and Answers not seldom
suddenly and unpremeditately given to the many times ill or untruly put State
of the case or question by the Advocates and Lawyers at the Bar, or than any
of the most severe and impartial Histories, which although they have been by
the Wisest and Major part of all Nations for many Ages past, believed to be
great and excellent Luminaries in their several Spheres, and should be Testes
veritatis, yet if the Records of every Nation, who have the happiness to have
them, being Tabulae and Monumenta Publica the faithful Registers of past
Actions are allowed to be good to make Histories, which are greater Strangers
unto them than they should be, and are too often written without any
acquaintance with them) that surely which crediteth and makes them the better
to believed, is not less but more to be valued, for a sad experience has told
us, that the destroying of the Books of the old Philosophers by Aristotle, and
the former Books of the Civil Law, by Justinian when he compiled his Code and
Institutes, and of our English Books and Manuscripts, when Polidore Virgil and
his History would not willingly suffer any other to be his Competitors, did
much obscure and hinder the Knowledge and light, which is now more dark and
hidden than otherwise it would have been; And we may believe, that if Records,
and faithful, and Ancient Memorials had ever deserved, as they never did, to
be slighted, they might now be spared and admitted into their former
reputation, and not be made to truckle under Reports of Cases adjudged, when
our last twenty years Confusion, have by the Knavery and Imposture of too many
of the Stationers, furnished out abundance of certain fragments of Laws, and
untrue and mistaken Reports, and too many Histories of the World have suffered
in the want of the most necessary Aid of Records, when so great a part of the
Knowledge of the first Ages of the World was washed away by the Deluge, and the
learning and Experience of many Ages after, lost by the want of Letters, which
the Wars, and the rude and unruly Behavior of those early Generations would
not admit, and that to despise Records and Antiquities, is to proclaim us, as
Tully the most excellent Roman Orator long ago said, to be willing to be
Children as of yesterday, and to have no retrospect into the Wisdom of the
Ancients, and experiences of past Ages, teaching us wherein some have succeeded
and others miscarryed, is to put our selves into as short a Memory as that of
the Thracians, some of whom were Reported not to be able to number or reckon
any further than four years, or to make light uncertain or loose traditions,
the most we can reach or attain unto, and refuse the ante Acta vitae, which
were wont to be the faithful guides and Conductors of our Actions to come, and
may render those who despise the old, and only delight in new things, to be in
no better a Condition than some of the worthy and learned Assembly of the Royal
Society of Gresham College, who by not heedfully considering old things have
unhappily been drawn into the field, and enforced to encounter with Mr. Henry
Stubs his Animadversions, wherein he undertakes to prove that some things which
they thought to be new, have been of a much more Early date.

So as whether Reports of Cases adjudged in Law, be old or new, well or ill
taken, both they and Histories are to acknowledge the Records to be their
Superiors, and that they are in all things the better for their acquaintance.

And those great Obligations must neither be denied or forgotten, which our
Laws do owe unto the Records of of this Kingdom, and our great Seldens Intimacy
and familiarity with them, by whose learned Labors and Observations, we have
had the benefit of the disdiscovery and dispelling of many an Error, and of the
Illustration of many difficult and dark Notions and places in our Laws, by
which his great insights and inquiries into the English Records and
Antiquities, and the Seuerest part of the Learning of our Common Laws and the
Civil Law, and Laws of many Nations, he became enabled, and was as a learned
Forreigner, has justly styled him a Dictator or mighty man of Learning, to
giving aid and assistance tanquam de Throno sapientiae to the republic and
Posterity of good Letters and Learning, his Knowledge therein being so
singularly exquisite, Surmounting and Supereminent, as he was not unfitly said
to be decus and gloria gentis Anglorum, and if Nature could have so long have
kept him from the fate of Mortality, ought to have survived many Centuries
more, and have continued his admired Course in Learning, until the period and
end of the World, for that as Sir John Vaughan Knight, now Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas, his contemporary and most intimate associate in
those more severe Recherces and choice pieces of Learning and Antiquities has
since his death, bemoaning the loss and want of such a Treasury of Learning,
not long since well expressed it. Debuit cum mundo mori it was too great a loss
to the World and after Generations, that he should dye before it, for although
the neglect of Records and Antiquities which might have a greater veneration
than this Age is willing to bestow upon it, have of late been so much
undervalued as to be termed rusty and motheaten, and those which do give them
their true esteem and value, superstitious Porers and Doters upon them; So as
the laborious Learned and well deserving Antiquarie Mr. William Dugdale was not
without Premises to Warrant his Conclusion, when with some regret mixed with
facetiousness he said that for any man in these Times, to busy himself in the
old Records, or to spend his Time and Candle in the search and sifting of
Antiquity, it would by the little encouragements which have been given unto it,
amount unto as small a Profit or Purpose, as to set up and keep a shop to sell
old fashon'd Hose, Trunk-Breeches, and long wasted Dublets, and expect to gain
by it. To so great a mispris and scorn are those useful inquiries and Lamps of
Learning fallen into, when as they do draw out of the pit and devouring Jaws
of Time, many a precious and hidden Truth, and are not seldom the only
rescuers of it, and was better respected when old Marculfus Wrote his
Formulae's Pancirollus his deperdita, and when Brissonius and Pasquier, Camden,
Seldom, Linden brogius, our Learned Sir Henry Spelman, and Mr. Dugdale, and
many other Worthies not here ennumerated, made it their Business to discover
them, and the very Learned Sir Robert Cotton was at so great an Expense of
Money and Time to Redeem so many as he did from the Captivity of an everlasting
Oblivion, which has taken away and concealed many a Truth from the former
Generations, this present Age which are to come, and to dig in those hidden
Mines of incomparable Treasure; But when the scorners of this Age shall have
surfeited with the villifying of the Wisdom of the former, and the Experiences
of men and times past, which Solomon, in the high and not to be valued Price,
which he did put upon Wisdom, and the Encouragement which he gave to the Study
and search after the Riches and Treasures thereof, would never have advised
them unto: They or some other after them may learn to forsake that grand piece
of resolved folly, by what this Nation and the Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland
have so greatly suffered in the late time of Rebellion and Confusion, by some
of our Lawyers and too many of our Nation, not understanding the Rights and
Prerogative of the King, which the old Records of the Kingdom did, and will
always abundantly witness, and by too many of the Inferior Clergies Ignorance
of the Ecclesiastical Histories and Primitive times which did not a little
contribute unto it, and believe that the greatest disservice which can be done
to Princes to endeavor to advance their Prerogative beyond the Laws of the
Land, right Reason, and the necessary and just means of Government, and that on
the other side they are small Friends or rather great Enemies to the Public,
that will go about to persuade the People or entitle them to more Liberties
than the Laws well interpreted will allow them, that there is a Justice to be
done to the King in giving unto him that which belongs unto him, and in not
denying his just and Legal Rights, as well as a Justice to be done by him, in
what shall concern his people and their Liberties; That there is a Majesty due
to Kings, and that the Rights of their Courts, Palaces and Servants, are
neither to be neglected or continued.

And therefore if the Romans those great Champions and Patrons of Liberty,
were so Jealous and Watchful in the Preservation of the Honors and respects
due unto Magistracy and Superiority, as their Consul Fabius would rather for
the time forget the Honor due and payable from a Son to his Father (of which
that Nation were great observers) than relinquish any thing of it, and
commanded by a Lictor or Officer his Aged Father Fabius (the Renowned preserver
of Rome) in a Public assembly, to alight from his Horse and do him the Honor
due unto his present Magistracy, which the good old man, although many of the
People did at the present dislike, did so much approve as he alighted from his
Horse, and embracing his Son, said^, Euge fili sapis qui intelligis, quibus
imperes, and quam magnam Magistratum imperes, I may give my self an Assurance
that your Lordships will with greater reason make it your endeavors, not only
to preserve the Rights of Majesty, but the Rights and Privileges of those
great and Honorable Offices and places, which you hold under the King our
Sovereign, and be as willing as your great and Honorable Predecessors in those
Offices, were to transmit them to their Successors, in no worse condition than
they found them.

Which that it may equally be done in that particular of the Kings Servants
just Rights and Privileges is the only design of the ensuing vindication of
them, and the Honor and respect due unto our Sovereign, and submitted to you
Lordships Judgment and Consideration, humbly entreating your Lordships to
pardon any the Errors or failings therein, which in the haste of the Press my
desire to keep pace with it, when I was crebris intermissionibus and aliorum
negotiorum incursionibus frequenter interpellatus might easily happen, and more
especially in an undertaking of that Nature nullius ante trita pede, being a
Path never before (as I could perceive) trodden by any but

Your Lordships most Humble Servant Fabian Philipps.

THE TABLE OR Contents of the Chapters.
THat there is a greater Honor due unto the Palace and House of the King, Then
unto any of the houses of his Subjects. Chap. I.4. That the Business and
Affairs of the King, about which any of his Servants or Subjects are employed,
are more considerable and to be regarded, then the Business and Affairs of any
of the People. Chap. II.29. That the Kings Servants in ordinary, are not to be
denied a more than ordinary Privilege or respect, nor are to be compelled to
appear by Arrest or otherwise in any Courts of Justice out of the Kings House
without leave or License of the Lord Chamberlain, or other the Officers of the
Kings Household to whom it appertains, first had and obtained. Chap. III.38.
That the Privileges and Protections of the Kings Servants in ordinary, by
reason of his Service, is and ought to be extended unto the Privileged Parties
Estate both real and Personal, as well as unto their Persons. Chap. IV.244.
That the Kings Servants whilst they are in his Service, ought not to be Utlawed
or Prosecuted in Order thereunto, without leave or License first obtained of
the King, or the great Officers of his most Honorable Household, under whose
several Jurisdictions they do Officiate. Chap. V.250. That the Kings
established and delegated Courts of Justice, to Administer Justice to his
People, are not to be any Bar or hindrance to his Servants in ordinary, in
their aforesaid Ancient, Just, and Legal Rights and Privileges. Chap. VI.289.
That the King or the great Officers of his Household, may punish those who do
infringe his Servants Privileges, and that any of the Kings Servants in
ordinary, being Arrested without leave, are not so in the Custody of the Law,
as they ought not to be released until they do appear or give Bayl to appear
and Answer the Action, Chap. VII.310. That the aforesaid Privilege of the
Kings Servants in ordinary, has been legally imparted to such as were not the
Kings Servants in ordinary, but were employed upon some Temporary and Casual
Affairs abroad, and out of the Kings House. Chap. VIII.318. That the Kings
granting Protections under the Great Seal of England to such as are his
Servants in ordinary, for their Persons, Lands and Estates, when especially
employed by him into the parts beyond the Seas, or in England, or any other of
his Dominions, out of his Palace or Virge thereof, or unto such as are not his
Domestics or Servants in ordinary or extraordinary, when they are sent or
employed upon some of his Negotiations, Business or Affairs, neither is, or can
be any Evidence or good Argument, that such only, and not the Kings Servants in
ordinary, who have no Protections under the Great Seal of England, are to be
Protected or Privileged whilst they are busied in his Palace, or about his
Person. Chap. IX.343. That our Kings (some of which had more than his n^w
Majesty has) have or had no greater number of Servants in Ordinary, than is or
has been necessary for their Occasions, Safety, well being, State, Honor,
Magnificence and Majesty; And that their Servants waiting in their Turns or
Courses, are not without leave or License as aforesaid, to be Arrested in the
Intervals of their waiting or Attendance. Cap. X.355. That the King being not
to be limited to a number of his Servants in Ordinary, is not in so great a
variety of Affairs and contingencies, wherein the public may be concerned, to
be restrained to any certain number of such as he shall admit to be his
Servants extraordinary. Chap. XI.365. That the Subjects of England had
heretofore such a regard of the King and his Servants, as not to bring or
commence their Actions where the Law allowed them, against such of his
Servants, which had grieved or Injured them, with ut a remedy first Petitioned
for in Parliament. Chap. XII.375. That the Clergy of England in the height of
their Privileges, Encouragement and Protection by the Papal overgrown
Authority, did in many cases, lay aside their Thunderbolts and Power of
Excommunications, appeals to the Pope, and obtaining his Interdictions of
Kingdoms, Churches and Parishes, and take the milder, modest, and more
reverential way of Petitioning our Kings in Parliaments; rather than turn the
rigors of their Canon, or Ecclesiastical Laws, or of the Laws of England,
against any of the Kings Officers or Servants. Chap. XIII.389. That the Judges
in former times did in their Courts and Proceedings of Law and Justice,
manifest their unwillingness to give or permit any obstruction to the Service
of the King and Weal Public. Chap. XIV.392. That the Dukes, Marquesses, Count
Palatines, Earls, Viscounts and Barons of England, and the Bishops, as Barons
have and do enjoy their Privileges, and freedom from Arrests or Imprisonment
of their Bodies in Civil and Personal Actions; As Servants extraordinary and
attendants upon the Person, State and Majesty of the King, in Order to his
Government, Weal Public, and safety of him and his People; And not only as
Peers abstracted from other of the Kings Ministers or Servants in Ordinary.
Chap. XV.413. That many the like Privileges and Praeheminences, are and have
been anciently by the Civil and Caesarean Laws, and the Municipal Laws and
Customs of many other Nations, granted and allowed to the Nobility thereof.
Chap. XVI.445. That the Immunities and Privileges granted and permitted by our
Kings of England unto many of their People and Subjects, who were not their
Servants in Ordinary, do amount unto as much, and in some, more than what our
Kings Servants in Ordinary did or do now desire to enjoy. Chap. XVII.466. That
many of the People of England, by the Grace and Favor of our Kings and
Princes, or along permission, us^ge or prescription; do enjoy and make use of
very many Immunities, Exemptions and Privileges, which have not had so great a
Cause or Foundation as those which are now claimed by the Kings Servanes. Chap.
XVIII.489. That those many other Immunities and Privileges have neither been
abolished, or so much as murmured at, by those that have yielded an Assent and
Obedience thereunto, although they have at some times, and upon some Occasions,
received some Loss, Damage or Inconveniences thereby. Chap. XIX.494. That the
Power and care of Justice, and the distribution thereof, is and has been so
Essential and Radical to Monarchy and the constitution of this Kingdom, as our
Kings of England have as well before as since the Conquest, taken into their
Cognizance diverse Causes, which their established Courts of Justice either
could not remedy, or wanted Power to determine, have removed them from other
Courts to their own Tribunals, and propria authoritate caused Offenders for
Treason or Felony to be Arrested, and may upon Just and Legal Occasions,
respite or delay Justice. Chap. XX.503. That a care of the Honor and Reverence
due unto the King, has been accounted, and is, and ought to be the Interest of
all the People of England, and that the Servants and retinue of a Sovereign
Prince, who has given and permitted to his Subjects, so many large Liberties,
Immunities, Exemptions, Customs and Privileges, should not want those
Exemptions, Immunities, Customs and Privileges, which are so Justly claimed by
them: Chap. XXI.587.
Errors of the Printer.
PAge 22. line 2. dele now and intersere after, p. 34. l. 25. dele to, p. 43.
l. 4. dele and and intersere by, p. 52. l. 22 dele feirce and incult and
intersere rude and uncivil, p. 61. l. 25. intersere always, p. 62. l. 2.
intersere in, p. 88. l. 26. dele not, p. 111. l. 28. dele yet. p. 137. l. 23.
dele not, p. 159. interscribe Bail, p. 166. l. 4. dele as, p. 197. l. penult.
dele or interscribe as p. 217. l. 28. dele the Corsaires, p. 219. l. 22. dele
not, p. 241. l. 6. dele unto, p. 265. l. 10. dele during the, and interline in
a more ^itting place, p. 416. l. 13. r. Aevo, p. 423. l. 17. r. Conquestorem,
549. in margin, r. Cromwell, p. 453. l. 2. intersere pleg. and l. 4. r.
distringas, l. 14. intersere them, p. 460. in margin, r. Valentinus, and l. 16.
r. nobiles, p. 461. in margin, r. Cassanaeus, l. 10. r. noblemen, p 475 l. 2.
r. Commons, p. 527. l. 19. intersere of Westminster, p. 552. from thence to
page 555. mispaged in p. 543. l. 4. intersere it, p. 596. l. 27. interline of
p. 614. l. 20. dele an Asilum, or and intersere a; which with some other
literal faults, redundancies, omissions of particles, and Errors of the Press,
are desired to be amended and excused.

The Reasons as well as Law of the Privileges and Freedom of the Kings Servants
in Ordinary, from Arrests and Troubles, of and in their Persons and Estates,
before Leave or License obtained of the King their Royal Master and Sovereign.
IF the Rights of Sovereignty and Majesty and it is Legal, Rational, and
necessary Protection and Preservation of the People, in their several Interests
and Privileges; That due care which they ought to take of him and the means
wherewith he should do it, the Honor of the King, and the support and
maintenance of it, the Reverence and Respect which they should upon all
occasions manifest to their Prince and Common Parent, and the influence which
all or most of his affairs have or may have in their successes and consequences
Good or Evil, upon all or the greatest part of the Affairs of the People, were
not enough, as it is, abundantly sufficient to persuade them to an abstaining
or abhorrency from the Incivility of late practiced to Arrest or Trouble the
Persons or Estates of the Kings Servants in Ordinary, before Leave or License
obtained of the King their Royal Master, and the Sovereign as well of the one as
the other.

For he that has not been a very great stranger to reason, and the Customs
and Laws of this Nation, as well as others, may without any suspicion of Error
acknowledge that it is and will be a due to Majesty and the Servants of it.

Yet the Civility long ago in Fashion, and not yet abolished in the
Neighborhood and Custom of Mankind one toward the other might invite them
unto it.

When it has been heretofore a part of the Law of Nations, Nature,
Christianity, Neighborhood, Civility, and the Practice thereof (which no Law
or Good Custom has, yet repealed) not to Arrest or bring into question at Law
a Neighbors Servant for a Debt due, or Injuries received, without an
Intimation or Notice first given, or a kind of License obtained, to or from
that Servants Master, to the end that the Love and Respect which ought to be
betwixt them might not be dislocated or disturbed, and the offending Servants
Masters attendance Business or Affairs prejudiced.

And being constantly held and observed betwixt Friends, Relations, Kindred,
Neighbors and even Strangers, where any Respect was thought fit to be
tendered, did probably give a Rise or beginning to that long and experimented
Adage or Proverb, Love me and Love my Dog; Insomuch as a Neighbors Dog causing
some mischief or Inconveniences by killing of Sheep, or biting such as he
supposed were not well willers to the Family and came to his Masters house is
not troubled or put into any danger of Beating or Hanging, without a Complaint
first made to his Master thereof, for where the Master has any respect, his
Servants and all that do belong to his Family do not seldom partake of it.

From all which or some of those Causes or Grounds, Rights of Sovereignty and
duty of the People tacito rerum and antiquitatis consensu by a long usage and
consent of time and Antiquity came that hitherto uncontrolled usage and Custom
allowed, and Countenanced by our Common Laws, and reasonable Customs not
contradicted or abrogated by any Act of Parliament or Statute Laws; That the
Kings Maenial Servants and Officers in Ordinary should not be Taken,
Imprisoned, Arrested or Compelled to appear in any Courts of Justice, in Civil
Actions or Causes, without a Petition, for Leave or License obtained, First
delivered unto the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household or other great
Officer of the Kings under whose more Immediate Jurisdiction such servant or
Officer is, whereupon after a Citation of the party, and if for debt, or
otherwise, a short and reasonable time as six months or something less (which
in the Ordinary course of Process and Proceedings at Law and the vacations and
absence of the Terms is not seldom as soon as they could by Arrest, or
Compulsion arrive or come unto their Ends) and many times a month or a
Fortnights time prefixed for satisfaction is as easily procured as asked.

SECT. I.
That there is a Greater Honor due unto the Palace and House of the King, then
unto any of the Houses of his Subjects.

FOr we may well believe that our Laws, Reasonable Customs, and the Practice of
our Forefathers were not out of the way or mistaken in their Respects to the
Servants of their Prince when his Aula, House or Court, wherein he and they
Inhabited as a place separate from Common uses or Addresses tanquam Sacra, had
a Majestatem quandam, certain awe or Majesty belonging to it which was as
Ancient as the days of King Ahasuerus that great Monarch of Persia and Esther
c. 4. ver. 11.
Media who Reigned from India unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and twenty seven
Provinces, when Esther c. 4 ver. 2.
Esther, as we are informed by Sacred Writ, could allege that all the Kings
Servants and the People of the Kings Provinces, did know, that whosoever,
whether man or woman, should come unto the King into the Inner Court, who is
not called, there is one Law of his to put him to death, Except such to whom
the King shall hold out the Golden Scepter that he may live. And none might
enter into the Kings Gate clothed with sackcloth.

Tiridates the great King of Armenia coming to Rome to see the Emperor Nero was
Xiphilinus in Nerone and Gr^gor. Tholosan in Syntagmate Juris. 378.
Commanded to lay by his Sword, which he refusing as supposing it to be
dishonorable to himself, was rather contented to have it as it was nailed in
the Scabbard, it being a Custom at Rome, Ne quis in domo se^ Palatio principis
arma deferret sine ejusdem permissione, that no man in the Palace of the Prince
was without his License to Wear a Sword, although in other Places it was
dishonorable for a Soldier not to Wear a Sword.

By a Cujacius Comment. ad lib. 11. Cod. Justin, tit. 77.
Constitution or Law of the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus, the one of
the West and the other of the East, made about the year of Christ 385.
Consecratae sibi aedes, id est, Inclita palatia ab omnium privatorum usu and
communi habitatione exceptae fuerunt, The consecrated Houses set apart for the
Emperors, that is to say, their Illustrious Palaces were not to be made use of
by any private person, or to be inhabited by them.

And many Ages after Theodoricus King of the Goths and Romans, though
descended from a Rude and Barbarous Nation, who were more used to Cottages then
Courts, Styles his Palace Goldastus Constit. Imperialibus. T^m. 3. and 4.8^.
^ect. 166 tit. de Cura Pal^tu. 15.
Potentiae Imperii decora facies, the Representation or Beauty of the Power of
his Empire, Cum Legatis sub admiratione, the wonder of Foreign Ambassadors, Et
prima front talis Dominus esse Creditur quale ejus habitaculum comprobatur,
and the Master of the House, and his Honor and Reputation is measured by his
House.

By the old Almaine Laws made in the Reign of Clotharius King of France, In the
year of our Lord 560. L. L. Alamannorum in Lindenbrogio. tit. 29.
Si quis in Curte Ducis hominem occiderit ^ut illic ambulantem aut inde
revertentem triplici were gildo eum solvat, If any should slay a man in the
Dukes Court in his going or coming thither or his return from thence, he was to
forfeit as much as the were gild or mulct for the amends should amount unto.

By the Laws of the old Baivarians or Bavarians confirmed by Dagobert King of
France, L. L. Bai variorum in Lindenbrogio. tit. 11.
In the year of our Lord 633. Si quis in Curte Ducis scandalum commiserit ut
ibi pugna fiat per superbiam suam vel ebrietatem, quidquid ibi factum fuerit
omnia secundum legem component and propter stultitiam suam in publico componat
quadraginta solidos, si servus est alicujus qui haec commisit manus perdat,
nullus unquam in Curte Ducis presumat scandalum committere. If any shall do or
Commit in the Dukes Court any thing which is scandalous, and shall make any
quarrel by his Pride or Drunkenness, he shall according to the Law compound for
it, and pay forty shillings for his folly, and if he be a Servant which did it,
shall loose his hand; For no man is to presume to do any thing scandalous in
the Dukes Court.

By the Laws of the Longobards, Written or compiled about the year of our
Redeemer 637. L. L. Longobard. in Lindenbrogio lib. 1. tit. 2. de Sc^ndalis.
Si quis in Consilio vel in quolibet conventu scandalum commiserit noningentis
solidis sit culpabilis Regi, si quis intra palatium ubi Rex praeest scandalum
perpetrare praesumpserit animae suae incurrat periculum aut animam suam redimat
si obtinere potuerit a Rege, If any shall do any Scandalous Act in the Council
or Assembly he shall be fined nine hundred shillings to the King, If in the
Kings Court or Palace his life shall be in danger to be lost, Unless he can
obtain the Kings pardon, a less fine if it be in the City where the King is not
Resident, and more in a City where he is.

And so much honor was not only in the Civil Law and Rescripts of the
Emperors, but of the Gothish and other Northern Nations attributed to the house
of the Emperors or Kings as it was frequently styled Divina Domus which without
any suspicion of Idolatry might well be afforded unto the House or Residence of
God's Vicegerents when holy Writ sticks not to say they are tanquam Dii as Gods.

Which occasioned Witlafe or Witlase King of the Mercians being some of the
Provinces in England now known by the name of Gloucestershire, Worcestershire,
Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, and many other of the Neighbor Counties, when
about the year of our Lord 825. he made a Confirmation to the Abbey of Croyland
in Lincolneshire, where he had hid and saved himself, when he fled from his
Enemies, of all their Land^ and granted them many Privileges ratified by a
Concilium Pan Anglicum, or Parliament holden at London the 26 day of May, Anno
Dom. 833. By Egbert Charta C^nfi^m^ti^nis Regis Witlaf^^ Mon^sterii de
Croyland. Dugdale Monas^icon Anglicanum ^65 and 166. Spelman Concilia,
Decret^^leges Ecclesiastic. 337.
King of the West Saxons, and Witlase King of the Mercians, to give them a
Privilege that Quicunque in Regno suo pro quocunque delicto reus vel legibus
obnoxious, Whosoever in his Kingdom guilty of any o^fence or obnoxious to the
Laws, should fly to the Abbey or Island of Croyland he should be there free from
any Arrest or pursuit, sicut in Asylo vel in Camera Regis propria, as in a
Sanctuary or in the Kings own Chamber, then understood not to be likely to be
molested with any Arrest or Imprisonment of any that were attending in it.

And put our wise and prudent King L. L. Aluredi. cap. 31.
Alfred (who sat in the Royal Throne of our Britain about the year of our
Lord 877. In the more incult and fierce behavior of our English and Saxon
Ancestors who thought his House deserved a Privilege not allowed to Ordinary
or Subjects houses) in mind to make a Law as Mr. Lambard in his Latin Version
of our Saxon Laws recites it, Sapientum adhibito Consilio by the advice of his
wise men much like a Parliament; qui in Regia Aula dimicarit, ferrumve
distrinxerit, Capitor and Regem penes arbitrium vitae necisque ejus esto, That
he that should fight or draw his Sword in the Kings Palace or Court should be
taken or punished with death or otherwise as the King pleased.

Which if the Annals of Winchester Annals Wintoniensis Ecclesiae M.S. in
Biblotheca Cottoniana sub Effigy Domitiani in A. 13. Et vide Asser Menevensis.
may as they ought to be credited, were but the Laws of the Brittons translated
into ^he Saxon Language by the assistance probably of Asser Menevensis or of S.
David's a Britton who was invited to his Court by that worthy Prince, and made
as it were one of his Domestics or Maenials.

The Courts and Palaces of our Ancient Kings being likewise such Asylums or
Privileged places as by a Law made by L.L. Edmondi* cap. 75 and 76.
King Edmond who Reigned in the year of our blessed Lord 940. Si qui^ ad
Templum Oppidumve Regium confugerit, eumque alius oppugnarit damnove affecerit,
he which should hurt or molest any that fled to the Temple or the Kings House
should be punished; but withal enacted that, non fore ei qui sanguinem humanum
effuderit suffugio domum meam ni prius Deo ac Caesi cognatis cumulate
satiffecerit and praeterea impleverit quodcunque ei ab Episcopo (in cujus
Dioecesi acciderit) imperatum, the Kings House should not be a refuge for any
man that had committed Manslaughter, unless he had first made satisfaction to
God Almighty and abundantly recompensed the kindred of the slain and performed
whatever was enjoined him by the Bishop in whose Diocese it happened.

By the Laws of Leges Ecclesiast. Hoell Dha in Spelmanni Decret. and Constitut.
Ecclesi. 409.
Hoell Dha or the good King Hoell of Wales made and ordained in or about the
same year, If any man made an affray or did strike in his Court he was to pay a
double Dirvy or Mulct and the like for doing it in the Church (whereas in other
places it was but a single Dirvy or fine) Leges Ecclesiast. Hoel^ Dha Regis
Walliae in Spelmanni Decret. leg. Ecclesiastic. 408, and 412.
Ex quo disteni praefectus sive Oeconomus in Aula steterit post prandium in
tribus festis Principalibus ponens in ea pacem Dei and Regis, Reginae and
optimatum Curiae pacem illa^ transgredienti nusquam erit refugium and Navt to
u' omnium refugium, after that the Steward of the Kings House shall appear in
the Hall in the three principal Feasts of the year, and causes the Peace of
God, and the King, Queen, and Lords of the Court, to be published, he that
breaks it shall be allowed no place of Refuge or Sanctuary, nor shall any
receive him; si quis ergo refugium Regis and omnium violaverit nec usquam nec
ab unius refugio vel a reliquiis sanctorum defendi potest nisi ab Ecclesia, If
any therefore shall violate that Sanctuary or place of Refuge of the King he
shall be no where, or by any one Protected or by any Relics of the Saints,
unless the Church shall Protect and defend him.

And say the same Laws, Tria sunt sine quibus Rex esse non potest, scilicet
sacerdos ad missam celebrandam and ad escas Regis and potus benedicend. and
Judex Curiae ad Causas discernendas and ad danda consilia and familia quoque ad
negotia Regis parata, Three things are so necessary for a King as he cannot be
without them, that is to say, a Priest or Chaplain, a Judge to hear Causes and
give him Counsel and Servants to do the business of his family, Et ubicumque
sacerdos familiae and Disteni and Judex Curiae insimul fuerint, ibi erit
dignitas Curiae brevit llys Aula Regia licet Rex absens est, and wheresoever
the Chaplain of the Family, and the Steward and Judge of the Court or Palace
shall reside and be altogether, there, the Honor and Dignity of the Court
shall be, and it shall be esteemed and taken to be as the Kings Court although
he be absent.

And so well did King Canutus L.L. Ca^uti, cap. 56.
the Dane who Reigned here about one hundred and twenty years after, approve
and allow of the beforementioned Law made by King Alfred, as he made another
much to the like effect, si quis in Regia dimicarit, Capitale esset nisi quidem
Rex hoc illi condonarit, That it should be capital or death unto any that
should fight in the Kings Palace unless the King should be pleased to pardon
him, Et nullae Citatio^^^ vel summonitiones liceant fieri cuicunque infra
palatium Regis Westminster.

King Charta Henrici primi Monasterio de Hide. Dugdales Monasticon Anglicanum
211, and 212.
Henry the first about 275 years after the Reign of the beforementioned
Witlafe or Witlase King of the Mercians in his Charter or Grant to the Abbey of
Winchester, does amongst other Privileges free them de Placitis and de omnibus
quaerelis sicut terra illa ubi Domus mea sedet in Winton fuit unquam melius
quieta, from all Plaints and Actions Issuing out of other Courts as much as the
Land where his own House or Palace stood in Winchester ever enjoyed; which was
then understood not to have been disturbed by them the said Charter being by
Inspeximus afterward in the 16th year of the Reign of King Edward the fourth,
allowed and confirmed and in regard of the Honor due unto the Kings Houses or
Palaces more then the Houses of any Subject or Private person they L.L. Henrici
primi per Cl. Seldenum in Lucem emiss. cap. 16. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 2. and Cokes
10. relat. en le case de'l Marchalsea.
are by Law and Ancient Custom allowed a Circuit or compass of 12 miles round
every way within the Virge whereof in matters appertaining to the Royal
Household or Servants for Contracts made one with another in the same House, and
of Trespasses done within the Virge, the Steward and Marshal of the Kings
House, and no Inferior or Commissionated, Jurisdiction were to intermeddle, Et
nullae Citationes aut summonitiones liceant fieri cuicunque infra Palatium
Regis Westminster, No Citations or Summons are to be made in the Kings Palace
at Westminster which (until it was disused by the accession of Whitehall unto
the Crown in the Reign of King Henry the eighth; and after that appropriated to
the Courts of Chancery, Law, Exchequer, Duchy of Lancaster, Star Chamber,
Court of Requests, House of Commons in Parliament, who do now sit in that part
of it heretofore called S. Stephen's Chapel and the House of Peers in another
part of that Ancient House or Palace of our Kings of England) was their only
House or Residence near London and retains to this day so much of it is Ancient
Privilege of Freedom from Arrests, as any man Arrested there, in any Civil
Action, before or in the Virge of any of the said Courts then sitting, although
it be by Process Issuing out of any of the said Courts, and he had no business
before depending in any of them, is propter reverentiam loci for Reverence to
the Place to be presently without Bail or answering, discharged, and the
Officer Arresting him, Imprisoned or otherwise punished.

Insomuch as Edmond Earl of Cornwall coming to London to the Parliament holden
in the 18th year of King Edward the first and per medium majoris Aulae
Westminster versus consilium domini Regis transisset passing through the great
Hall at Westminster toward the Parliament ubi quilibet de regno and pace
domini Regis, as the Parliament Roll mentions (not only Peers or Parliament
men) licite and pacifice venire and negotia sua prosequi debet, where every man
of the Kingdom and in the Peace of the King may Lawfully and peaceably come and
follow their business, absque hoc quod aliquas citationes vel summonitiones
ibidem admittat, without being troubled with any Citations or summons
complained of the Prior of the Holy-trinity London and Bogo de Clare, who
thereupon were attached to answer the King, and Placit. Parliamenti 18. E 1. n.
4. Ryleyes pl^c. Parl. 6.7. and Pryns Aurum Reginae, 28.
Peter de Chanet Steward of the King Walter de Fanecurt Marshall of the King
(whose Jurisdiction was thereby infringed) the said Earl of Cornwall, and the
Abbot of Westminster, for that the said Prior by the procurement of the said
Bogo de Clare had cited the said Earl in the Hall aforesaid to appear before
the Archbishop of Canterbury at a certain day and place to answer such things
as should be objected against him, to the manifest Contempt and Dishonor of
the King and His damage 10000 l. prejudice of the Abbot of Westminsters Liberty
and his Damage 1000 l. and in prejudicium Officii predict. senescalli and
marescalli manifestum and dampnum non modicum, and manifest prejudice of the
Office of the aforesaid Steward and Mareschall and no small damage ad quorum
officium and non ad alium Summonitiones and attachiamenta infra Palatium domini
Regis pertineat faciend, When as it belongs to their Office or Places, and
not unto any other to make or cause summons or attachments within the Kings
House or Palace and etiam ad dampnum predict. Comitis quinque mill librarum,
and likewise to the damage of the said Earl 5000 l. Whereupon the said Prior
and Bogo confessing the Citation but pleading that they were ignorant that the
place aforesaid was exempt, and that they did not understand that any contempt
was Committed against the King, or any prejudice done to his Officers by the
Citation aforesaid, and in all things submitting unto the Kings grace, good
will and pleasure, were Committed Prisoners to the Tower of London, there to
remain during the Kings Pleasure; and being afterward Bailed, the said Bogo
paid to the King a fine of 2000 marks and gave security to the Earl for 1000 l.
which by the intercession of the Bishop of Durham and others of the Kings
Counsel, was afterward remitted unto 100 l, and the Prior was left to the
Judgment or Process of the Exchequer.

And Cokes 3. part. Institut. tit. misprision, 141. Placita coram D^mino Rege
in Parl. apud Westm' in praesentia Regis, Anno 21. E. 1.
upon a Citation served in the Kings Palace at Westminster in the 21th year of
the Reign of King Edward the first upon Joane Countess of Warren then attending
the Queen upon a Libel of Divorce at the Suite of Matilda de Nyctford, it was
upon full examination of the Cause in Parliament adjudged (the King being
present) in these words Quod praedictum Palatium Domini Regis est locus
exemptus ab omni Jurisdictione ordinaria tam Regiae dignitatis and Coronae suae
quam libertatis Ecclesiae Westmonaster. and maxim in praesentia ipsius Domini
Regis tempore Parliamenti sui ibidem, Ita quod Nullus summonitiones seu
Citationes ibidem faciat and praecipue illis qui sunt de sanguine Domini Regis
quibus major reverentia quam aliis fieri debet, Consideratum est quod Officiar'
Committatur Turri London and ibidem custodiatur ad voluntatem Domini Regis,
that the said Palace of the King is a place freed from all ordinary
Jurisdiction as well by reason of the Kings Crown and Dignity Royal, as the
Liberty of the Church of Westminster, but more especially of the Kings presence
in the time of Parliament, so as none may presume to make summons or Citations
there, and especially to or upon those which are of the blood Royal, to whom a
greater Reverence then to others is due. The Kings Palace at Westminster Pascha
8 E. 2. coram Rege rot. 28. Norff.
having as Sir Edward Coke says, the Liberty and Privilege, that no Citations
or Summons are to be made with in it, and that Royal Privilege is, says he,
not only appropriated to the Kings Palace at Westminster, but to all his
Palaces where his Royal Person resides Cokes 3 par. Institut. 141.
and such a Privilege as to be exempted from all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
Regiae dignitatis and Coronae suae ratione, by reason of His Crown and Kingly
Dignity.

The Circuit of our British Ocean the Promontories with the adjacent Isles or
parts encompassing our Britain from the North of England by the East, and South
to the West, vindicated by our great and eminently Learned Seldom mare clausum,
cap. 22 and 26.
Seldom being called the Kings Chambers, do justly claim and are not to be
denied Dimissionem velorum, a striking or louring of Sail by the Ships of other
Nations in their passage by any of our Admirals or Ships of War heretofore
submitted unto, and acknowledged by our late causelessly contending Neighbors
the Dutch and French, and was not only done by those Nations, and all other
strangers Ships, in their passage by and through our Seas, but by them, and our
own Ships in their sailing upon the River of Thames, by the Kings Palace or
House at Greenwich though he be not present, by striking their Topsail, and
Discharge of a Cannon or Gun, seldom also omitted in other Countries, by Ships
that pass by any Royal-forts or Castles of Kings in Amity with them as at
Croninbergh and Elsenor, in or near the Baltic Sea.

And no small Civility or Respect was even in a Foreign Country or Kingdom,
believed to be belonging, and appropriate to the Residence in and Palace of a
King of England, and was not denied to our King Edward the first in the 14th
year Fleta lib. 2. cap. 3.
of His Reign, when he was as Fleta tells us at Paris in France in alieno
territorio, in the King of France his Dominions where one Ingelram de Nogent
being taken in the King of England's House, or where he was lodged at Paris
with some Plate or Silver-dishes which he had stolen, about him, Rege Franciae
tunc present, the King of France being then in the House, the Court of the
Castellan of the King of France claiming the Cognizance or Trial of that Thief,
after a great debate thereof had before the King of France and his Council it
was Resolved, Quod Rex Angliae illa Regia Praerogativa and hospitii sui
privilegio uteretur and gauderet, that the King of England should enjoy his
Kingly Prerogative and the Privilege of his House, and that Thief being
accordingly tried before Sir Robert Fitz John Knight Steward of the King of
England's House, was for that offense, afterward hanged at St. German lez
Prees.

The Bedel Mich. 12* E. 3. Coram Rege Rot. 101 Cant.
of the University of Cambridge was though he asked pardon for it, committed to
the Gaol for Citing one William de Wivelingham at Westminster Hall door, and
Henry de Harwood at whose Suit it was prosecuted, committed to the Marshal and
paid 40 s. Fine.

Which necessary and due Reverence to the Kings Courts or Palaces being never
denied (unless it were by Wat Tyler or Jack Cade, and the pretended Holy-rout
of the Oliver Piggs) bred that laudable custom of the best Subjects of
England, and all other men's going or standing uncovered in the Kings Chamber of
presence (even in those houses where he is not Resident) Privy-chamber,
Bedchamber and Galleries, the being uncovered or bare-headed when the Scepter
and Globe Imperial have been amongst the Kings Jewels and Plate kept in the
Tower of London being accounted one of the Kings Palaces showed unto any which
have desired to see them which the Prince of Denmark as also the Ambassador of
the King of Sweden have not lately denied, and allows not the Ladies Wives or
Daughters of Subjects (the Daughters of the King and the Wife of the Prince or
Heir apparent only excepted) to have their trains carried up in the aforesaid
separate rooms of State, nor a Lord of a Manor to Arrest or Sieze his Villain
27* Assis. pl. 49.
in the Kings presence, forbids the Coaches of any but the Kings or the Queens
or Heir apparents Wife or their Children, or of Ambassadors introduced in the
Kings Coach from Kings or a Republique such as Venice who in regard of the
Kingdoms of Cyprus and Candie now under their Subjection are said to have Test
Couronne to come into the Courtyards with their Coaches, which the little
Republique of Genoa in Italy has notwithstanding their contest for it been
lately refused both in France and Spain; in the latter whereof a Monarchy and
Kingdom much inferior to England it is a great Honor amongst the Domestics
and Servants of that Court to be a Gentleman de la Boca for that such may
attend the King at Dinner or Supper, and have at other times a privilege to
come into the Rooms of the Palace as far as a certain Hall beyond which no man
is to pass although there should be no Guards or Ushers to hinder it.

And no longer ago then in the month of December 1666 the Lady or wife of the
Spanish Ambassador in the Court of the Emperor of Germany at Vienna complaining
of the Emperors High Chamberlain that she was denied by the guards to enter
into the Antichamber of the Empress in her Chair or Sedan, she was answered by
him and informed also by a message from the Emperor that it was the custom of
that Court not to permit the Empress her self that Liberty, which very
necessary regard and respects always had to the Courts or Houses of Sovereign
Kings or Princes, might besides their safeties which have not seldom been
endangered by Brawls and Tumults swelled up into a multitude, be the reason
that in imitation or reviving of those old Laws of King Alfred and Canutus, the
Act of Parliament 33 H. 8. ca. 12.
In the 33th year of the Reign of King Henry the eight, did ordain the loss of
the Right hand of any striking or making bloodshed within any of the Kings
Houses or Palaces or the virge thereof, (Noblemen or others striking only their
Servants with a small stick or Wand for Correction or with any Tipstaff at a
Triumph or in doing Service by the Kings Commandment or of any of his Graces
Privy Council or head Officers excepted) and that any such offenses or Murders
Manslaughters or malicious strikings should be tried by a Jury of twelve of the
Yeomen Officers of the Kings Household before the Lord Steward or in his absence
before the Treasurer and Comptroller of the Kings Household and Steward of the
Marshalsea for the time being.

And so tender have our Kings and Princes been of the Honor of their Princely
Palaces and Seats and habitations of Majesty as they would not permit their
Mercy to have any thing to do with their Justice or to intercede for any
mitigation of their just indignation against such as would but in the least let
loose their passions, or Indiscretion to violate it, witness the case
(communicated unto me by my worthy friend Sir William Sanderson one of the
Gentlemen of His Majesty's Privy Chamber in Ordinary) of Mr. Mallet in the
Reign of Queen Mary, who being a Gentleman Usher, Quarter Waiter of the
Presence Chamber, and having rebuked one Mr. Pierce a Messenger of the Chamber
for some Negligence in the Queens Service, and being rudely answered to avoid
the punishment for striking him, if he should draw or enforce blood, did spit
in his face, upon knowledge whereof the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household,
without any complaint of Mr. Pierce committed Mr. Mallet to the Marshal, and
after some time punished him in this manner the Lord Chamberlain standing under
the Cloth of State uncovered in the presence Chamber with the Officers of the
Household, and others about him, Mr. Mallet kneeled down at the lowest step, and
his offense in Order to his sentence being read unto him, by a Gentleman Usher
of the Presence with this Praeamble, viz. For excercising that Jewish Inhumane
Act of Spitting upon Master Pierce, your fellow Servant in Court in the sight
and presence of the Cloth of Estate, against the Dignity of our Sovereign Lady
the Queens Grace, the Honor of the Court, and the Authority and Power of the
Lord Chamberlain; To which Mr. Mallet being still upon his knees answered with
an Humiliation sorrow and Submission, and craved Pardon of the Queens Grace for
his fault; Whereupon the Lord Chamberlain lightly Rapping Mr. Mallet upon the
Pate with his white Staff, who craved pardon for offending the Authority and
Power of the Court Represented by the Lord Chamberlain, Mr. Pierce was
appointed to wave a Cudgel over Mr. Mallets head, in sign of satisfaction for
the wrong received of him. And that being done Mr. Mallet was fined in a sum
of money to the Queen, and after a day or two released; After all which the
Chaplains and Clergy complaining that the holy Church was scandalized for that
Jewish Action, Mr. Mallet was ordered to do Penance in the Chapel Royal, in a
White-sheet holding a Wax Taper burning, during the Office of Divine Service;
and after those punishments Executed upon him, permitted to complain against
Mr. Pierce for neglecting the Queens Service, and Mr. Pierce was for answering
Mr. Mallet rudely turned out of his Waiting or place, and came not in again
until Mr. Mallet was pleased to make it his Solicitation and Request; And so
great a Respect was always given to the Rotul. parl. 21 Jac. and Cokes 3 part.
institut. 148.
Kings Palace or Court as it was holden to be a punishment and note of Infamy
to be Prohibited it; and was in the 18th or 21th year of the Reign of King
James a part of the Sentence given in Parliament against Lionel Earl of
Middlesex Lord Treasurer of England for Briberies and Extortions, that he
should never come within the Verge of the Kings Court.

And that blessed Martyr King Charles, was in the midst of His overgreat
Lenity or Meekness so careful to preserve the Honors and due Respects to His
Palace and Court, as when Doctor Craig one of His Physicians had in the Kings
Chamber given Mr. Kirk one of the Grooms of His Bedchamber, some offensive
words, and Mr. Kirk meeting him the same day in some of the Court-lodgings had
struck him with a blow of his Fist, and Doctor Craig complaining of it unto the
King, and the King referring it unto the Lord Chamberlain of His Household who
after Examination of the Fact Remitted the Punishment of the Offense to the
King, He did in much Indignation Banish Mr. Kirk from the Court, into which he
was more then a year, before he could by the Intercession of the Duke of
Buckingham, then the Great and Principal Favorite, be readmitted; And that
Pious and Excellent Prince was so apprehensive of any disrespects to His House
and Palace, as meeting one day or night the Earl of Denbigh then Lord Fielding
in his Masking Suit, as he was passing through the Privy Galleries toward the
Banqueting House, stayed him, and turned him back to go a more Common-way.

And was no less watchful to prevent any thing which might be prejudicial or
derogatory to the honor of the Garter, whereof he was Sovereign in the Palace
or House where his Honor dwelt, As when at another time finding the Lord Percy
now Earl of Northumberland, Mr. Jermyn now Earl of S. Albans, and Mr. Henry
Piercy in the Privy Gallery or Lodgings with blew Ribbons tied or hanging about
the upper part of their Legs or Boots, he was so displeased therewith as he
would not be pacified until he had called for a pair of Scissers and had with
his own hands cut or clipped them off.

And well might it be observed in England when the Vltima Thule and our less
Civilized Neighbors of Scotland, Infected with the Careless and over-bold
behavior of some of their late Presbyterian Clergy, toward Royal Majesty, are
not without those dutyful respects of being bare and uncovered in the Presence
Chamber or Chief Rooms of their Kings Palaces although they be absent, and out
of the Kingdom; and when any Acts of Parliament are agreed upon the Kings high
Commissioner Presiding in Parliament in his absence, brings the Acts of
Parliament to the Kings Chair of Estate, upon which, and a Velvet Cushion, the
Royal Scepter being laid, the Lord Commissioner kneeling before it, and
touching it with the Scepter gives a Sanction and Authority unto those or any
other Acts of Parliament, in that Submiss and dutyful manner touched therewith,
and makes them to be of as great Validity as if they had been Ratified by the
Royal Signature.

And with more or a greater Reason, might Kings and Free-Princes claim a
Veneration to their Palaces or Houses, when Bishops Anciently had their
Episcopia Council. Meldense. ca. 26. and Spelman. Glossar. in voce Epis. copium.
or Houses so Respected as a Synod or Council thought fit to Order it, a too
much or more then ordinary respect when they Decreed, Suggerendum est, and ex
Divino mandato intimandum Regiae Majestati ut Episcopium quod domus Episcopi
appellatur, Venerabiliter and reverenter introeat, etc. It is to be declared
and intimated to the Kings Majesty that he enter the Episcopium, which is the
House of the Bishop Reverently.

And not very long ago in the Reign of that Virtuous King Charles the first, an
Action of Battery being brought by Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Baronet,
against Sir Thomas Savile Knight, afterward Lord Savile and Earl of Sussex,
for assaulting and wounding him at Westminster Hall door, one or both of them
being then Parliament men, the Jury gave a Verdict for Sir Francis Wortley with
three thousand pounds Damages, the Offense being aggravated to that height, in
regard that it was done so near or in the Face of the Court of Common Pleas,
the Judges then sitting, which could have no greater or better reason for
heigthning that offense, then that it was done in that Ancient Palace of our
Kings, and the Place where the King Administered Justice to His People by His
Judges, who Represented His Authority in that their limited Jurisdiction.

And but lately when sitting the Parliament in the month of December 1666, the
Lord Saint John of Basing Eldest Son of the Marquess of Winchester being a
Member of the House of Commons in Parliament, had in Westminster Hall (no Court
of Justice then and there sitting) pulled Sir Andrew Henly Knight by the Nose,
whereby he according to the opinion of Cokes 3 part institut. tit. misprision.
Sir Edward Coke had forfeited his Lands, Goods and Chattels (although his
reason offered for it, that the offense was so punishable, because it might
tend ad impedimentum Justiciae, to the hinderance of Justice was not alone
sufficient for that, it may more truly be understood to be propter venerationem
loci for the Reverence and Respect due to the Kings House or Palace) was so
affrighted with the Penalty and consequence of that Offense, as he procured the
House of Commons (who could not tell how to believe the unhappy heretofore
unadvised and never to be proved Doctrine of the pretended Sovereignty of that
House) to go with their Speaker unto the King at Whitehall and intercede for
his Pardon.

And shortly after at a Conference in the Painted Chamber, betwixt the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, some hot words happening betwixt the Marquess of
Dorchester and the Duke of Buckingham, who upon the lie given him by the
Marquess of Dorchester had pulled him by the Nose or plucked off his Peruque,
they were both Committed Prisoners to the Tower of London, and within two days
after upon their submission to the House of Peers Released; but the Duke of
Buckingham coming after to the Kings Court at Whitehall before he had asked
leave of Him or His Pardon, the King did forbid him the Court, alleging that
howsoever the House of Peers in Parliament had pardoned him for the Offense
Committed against them, yet he had not forgiven him the Offense which he had
Committed against him.

And in support of those Observations and honors so justly due unto the Place
of His Royal Residences, the Lord Chamberlain, did lately cause a Constable to
be Imprisoned for an Ignorant and Indiscreet pursuit of a French Lacquaie, who
had slain an Irish Footboy, into Whitehal, and as far as the Royal Lodgings of
the Queen, where he took him: and shortly after deservedly Imprisoned one Mr.
White a Merchant, for bringing two of the Kings Marshals-men into the
Privy-galleries, and near the Council-chamber-door, the King sitting in
Council, bade them Arrest an Agent or Envoy of the Duke of Curlands, and he
would Indempnifie them; Who were notwithstanding severely punished.

Which just and fitting observations due unto the Mansions of Kings and
Princes; Cromwell that Leader and Conductor of the Rabble, and Scumme of a
Rebellious part of the people, and grand contemner of all Authority but what
himself had usurped, and of all Ancient Orders, Rites, Customs and Usages, did
not think to be unbecoming that Eagles nest into which He and His devouring
Harpyes had crept, and the House wherein the Kings Honor lately dwelt, when he
Committed Sir Richard Ingoldsby then one of his Colonels, but afterward a
Penitent and Loyal Subject of His Majesty that now is, Prisoner to the Tower of
London, for striking one in the Stonegallery at Whitehall.

And so unquestionable was a more then Common or Ordinary Honor and Respect to
be given to the Houses and Courts of our Kings, as some of our Ancient Nobility
have by that honor which our Kings did Originally confer upon their Persons,
in the Grant of Earldoms and Honors gained, by an Usage of Time and Custom,
some more then Common Privileges to their Chief Houses, Castles and Lands,
anciently belonging to their Earldoms; So as their Lands belonging to their
Earldoms have been exempted from the Contribution of the Wages of Knights of
the Shire elected to be Parliament men, and their Houses from any Search by any
Constable or Ordinary Officer, and in all or many of the Records or Memorials
of the Kingdom have been frequently called or termed Honors, as the Honors of
Oxford, Arundel Lincoln, Leicester, etc. for the Lands belonging to those
Earldoms; and there is to this day a Custom at Arundel Castle that none but
the Earl thereof (the Sovereign and Heir apparent exempted) have been permitted
or are to Ride or come into the Castle Gate with his Hat on or covered.

Those vast Empires of the Ottoman or Turk, Persians, Mogor, and King or
Emperor of Japan, are not without thos^ or the like Reverences, not only by
their profound silences and observations more then ordinary in their Apartments
and Retirements, but by other Demonstrations of Honor and acknowledgements of
Respect to their Sovereign Princes Houses or Palaces.

Nor are such or the like Reverences or Respects due to the Houses or Courts of
kings, unknown or disused even amongst the more Heathen and Barbarians who
although they are too much conversant with Ignorance, Rudeness and Incivilities
are notwithstanding by the Principles Law and light of Nature, guided and
directed unto it.

In the City and Country which was the Queen of Purchase Pligrimage 2 part and
voyage of Francis Alvareza Portugal. 1053. Ibid. 1071 and 1083. Ibid. 1107.
Sheba's, the people do use such Reverence to the Kings Houses or Palaces, as
although the Gates do stand open, no man dares presume to enter or to touch
them.

Before any do come to the Court or Tent of Prete John* Emperor or King of
Ethiopia or the Abassines, they do alight of their Horses and begin to do their
accustomed Reverences, stooping down with their right hand unto the ground, and
betwixt the Prete or Kings Tent, and the Tent of the Judges, no man passes on
Horseback in Reverence to the King and his Justice, but all do alight and go
on foot.

When any do come to the first Hall of the King of the Maldives Voyage Francis
Pyzard de la val. 2 part Purchase Pilgrimage, 1648, 1663, 1664.
Palace (who is King of thirteen Provinces, and One thousand Isles) where His
guard are, No Lord or Plebeian, man, woman or child dare go further except the
Domestical Officers of the King and Queens, and their Slaves and Servitors.

At the King of Mr. John Davis relation of his voyage to the East Indies 1 par.
of Purchase Pilgrimage, 132.
Achens Court in the East Indies, before any man can come into the Kings
Presence, he must put of his Hose and Shoes, hold the Palms of his hands
together, lift them above his head and bow with his body.

Amongst the rude and fierce Paulus Venetus in 3 p^rt of Purchase Pilgrimage, 66.
Tartars he that has been present with one that died, was not to come into the
house of the Mangu Chan within a year after.

The Barons and people who do come unto his Court, do within half a Mile where
the great Chan Resides make and continue a great silence (a sign or token in
the Eastern Countries of great Reverence) every Baron carrying a little fair
vessel to Spit in, and after Covers it (none daring to spit in the Hall) into
which 3 parl Purchase Pilgrimage, 88.
before they do enter, they put off their Buskins, and put on Furre Buskins of
white Leather, giving the other to their Servants.

In the City of Relation of Galeota Perera in 3 part of Purchase Pilgrimage, 2^5.
Nanquim is a Table of Gold wherein is written the Kings name in Memory of his
Residence there, which stands in the Palace Covered; and being to be seen upon
some of their Festival days covered, all the Nobility of the City do go to do
it Reverence.

In China Ricius and Trigantius in 3 part of Purchase Pilgrimage 392 and 353.
and at Pequin they which are to pass by the Kings Palaces do descend and
alight from their Horses and go on foot until they be passed; Yea, although the
King does not there reside, and they do at other times make their Reverences
unto the Kings Empty Throne.

And so much by the light of nature and the dusky and obscure glimmerings of
it, were the Palaces and Residences of their Kings and Princes Reverenced by
the 3 part Purchase Pilgrimage, 1139.
Mexicans a Populous Nation in the West Indies as all that were to come or
appear before Montezuma their King or Emperor, were except some Princes, his
kinsmen to come barefoot.

Such therefore and so great Honors being so deservedly due to the Houses and
Habitations of Kings and Princes, the Affairs or business of the Sovereign,
Acted either within or without it, are not certainly like Esau to be deprived
of it is Blessing or what is appropriate or belonging to it, but it ought as a
very great truth to be subscribed unto, by every one that will not abjure his
own Reason, the Laws and Reasonable Customs of England, Prudence and Practice
of all other Nations of Christendom, and where ever the Light of Reason and
Divine Wisdom have imparted their Glories, that the business and affairs of the
Kings-Servants in Ordinary are to be preferred and Take Place of the Affairs of
any Subject or Private Person.

SECT. II.
That the Business and Affair^ of the King, about which any of His Servants or
Subjects are Employed, are more considerable, and to be Regarded then the
Business and Affairs of any of His People.

WHen the General and Universal consisting of all the parts of a Body Politic,
and the Safety, Care and Concernment of the whole; must needs surmount any one
or two, or any Particulars, or some Private men's necessities or occasions.
Genes. 13. v. 7 and 8.
The brawls and controversies betwixt the Herdsmen of Lot and the Righteous
Abraham, for Pasture for their Flocks and Cattle, were understood in that
Particular to be no less then their Masters own Concernments; Exodus 20.
And the Servants of every Master, and consequently their business are by God
himself, and his never Erring Wisdom justly reckoned in the Tenth Commandment
or Decalogue, as a part of the Masters goods and Estate.

The Civil Law allows us to conclude, that, Gadd us in Comment. ad l. 19, 5.
nu. 2. and 4. and ad Sect* 4. de verborum significatione and L. Aedi les, 25.
Servi rerum appellatione comprehenduntur, Servants are accounted to be a part
of the Masters Estate and familiae significatione Servi includuntur, and in a
family Servants are included, Familia continentur liberi homines bona fide
servientes in a family are contained and intended Freemen (as well as Villains or
Bondmen) which serve therein, Sect. 2.3.6. Institut. de Injur. Besoldus in
Dissert. Juri. Politic. 48.
Et familia unum quoddam Corpus constituit; inde patimur Injuriam etiam per
liberos, uxorem, servos, and etiam mercenarios nostros, for a Family makes and
constitutes a certain body, and thereupon the Master of it may be said to be
wronged in his Wife, Children and Servants, and sometimes in those which are
hirelings.

And it was neither forbidden or disallowed by the Civil Law in Ancient times
before better and more convenient Securities by Pactions and Obligations were
found out, Servos and Ancillas tanquam bona and Catalla oppignorare to Pawn or
Deliver in Pledge their men Servants or maid Servants.

Our Saxon L.L. Inae cap. 18. and L. L. Aethelstani. 60*
Laws intended no less, when they did Ordain that every Lord or Master should
be obliged to bring his Servant to Justice.

Our liber Censualis or Doomesday Book, made about the 16th year of the Reign
of William the Conqueror as an Inquisition or extent of every man's Estate in
the Kingdom, both Real and Personal does therein Reckon, Servos, Ancillas and
villanos, as well Menservants, and Maidservants as Villains or Bondmen.

And our Laws do allow an Action in the Masters name, for the beating or
wounding of a Servant, per quod servitium servientis sui amisit, whereby he
lost the use or service of his Servant.

By the Laws of the Old Almains L.L. Alemanorum in Lindenbrogio Tit. 29.
uniusquisque pacem habere debet ad ducem veniendo and de illo revertendo. Et
nullus praesumat hominem de duce venientem aut ad illum ambulantem in Itinere
inquietare quamvis culpabilis sit, no man ought to be molested in his journey
or going to or from the Dukes Court, although there might be any Action or
Cause to trouble him.

By the Laws of the Lombards L.L. Longobard* in Lindenbrogio lib. 2. Tit. 4.
or Longobards, si quis ex Baronibus nostris ad nos venire voluerit securus
veniat, and illaesus ad suos revertatur, and nullus de Adversariis illi aliquam
Injuriam in itinere aut molestiam facere praesumat, If any of our Barons have
an intent to come unto us he is safely to go and come, and none of his
adversaries are to do him in his Journey any wrong or Injury.

By some Laws made in the Raigns of the Emperors Lindenbrogius* lib. 4. inter
Capi^l. Caroli.
Charlemaigne and Lewis his Son, nullus ad palatium vel in hostem pergens vel
de Palatio vel de host rediens tributum quod transituras vocant solvere
Cogatur, That no man coming to his Palace or going against the Enemy or
returning should be compelled to pay the Tribute called Passage-money.

The Tractatoria and Evectiones Cujacius Comment. ad lib. 12. Cod. Justiniani
1635 and Marculfi formulae.
allowed by the Western and Eastern Emperors, that Stables and Provisions of
Horse-meat, and man's meat should be provided sumptu publico at the Peoples
charge, for such as Ride post, Travailed or were sent upon the Emperors
Affairs, may inform us, how great the difference is and ought to be betwixt the
Kings Affairs and those of the Common People.

The Laws of the Wisigoths L, L. Wisigoth. in Lindenbrogio, lib. 2. Tit. 4.
a People not then much acquainted with Civilities compiled about the year or
Era of our Lord 504 may teach us the value of Princes cares of their own, and
the Public Affairs managed by their Servants or whosoever shall be employed
therein, Quod antea ordinare oportuit negotia Principum and postea populorum,
when they declared that the Affairs or concerment of the Prince, ought to take
place of those of the People, Quia si salutare Caput extiterit, rationem
colligit qualiter Curare cetera membra possit, because if it be well with the
head, it will be the better able to take care of the rest of the Members, Et
ordinanda primo negotia Principum, tutanda salus, defendenda vita, sicque in
statu and negotiis plebium ordinatio dirigenda, ut eum salus componens
prospicitur Regum fida valentibus teneatur salvatia populorum, That in the
first place the business of the Prince, the safety of his life, and the defense
of his Person are to be heeded, and the Affairs of the People so Ordered, as
whilst a sufficient provision is made for the safety of the Prince the good of
the People may be established.

Of which our English Laws, have such a regard as they would (some few Cases
only excepted) dispense with any man's not appearing or coming to Justice, If he
though not the Kings servant in Ordinary sent by His Attorney the Kings Writ
of Protection Vide Register of Writs Tit. Protect.
signifying that he was sent or Employed in the Kings Service.

That if any Archbishop, Bishop, 9 H. 3. c. 11
Earl or Baron do come to the King by His Commandment, passing by any of His
Forests, he might notwithstanding the great severity of the Forest Laws
against such as did Steal or Kill any of the Kings Deer or Venison take or kill
one or two in their going and return.

The Register of Writs does Register of Writs. 19. Tit. Warrantia di^i.
bear Record that where one of the Kings Servants has been returned of a Jury
or Summoned probably to be a witness or upon some other occasion, to attend
some Inquisition or Inquest to be made in any other place then the Kings House
or before any other Judges or Magistrates, a Writ has been sent under the
Great Seal of England to excuse his absence, because he was the same day to
attend the Steward and Marshal of the Kings House about some affairs of the
Household which may show that the King had a mind as well as reason not to permit
the necessary attendance of His own Servants in or upon His Household occasions
to be omitted to wait upon strangers or other men's business in Courts or matters
of Justice.

And the Law does so much prefer the Kings business above the Common Peoples as
that all Honor and Reverence is to be given to the Kings Privy Council.

For that as Sir Edward Coke Coke 4. Instit. 53. Lib. 5. D. de offic. ad sess.
Spartianus in Hadrian. and Gutherius de offic. Domus August. lib. 1 cap. 17.
says they are parts Corporis Regis, incorporated, as it were with him, are
profitable Instruments of the State bear part of his cares, and which is no
more then what the Civil Law allows them, when it terms them, Administri,
Adjutores, Adsessores, helpers and Adsessors, and qui arcanis Principis
interesse meruerunt in Contubernium Imperatoriae Majestatis adsciti, and which
deserve an Interess in the Princes secrets and affairs of State, and are as
Spartianus says, admitted as it were into the Society of Royal Majesty.

Where the body of a Debtor before the Statute of 25 of King Edward Coke 3.
Rep. Sir William Herberts Case.
the third have by some been believed, not to have been liable to Execution for
debt at the Suit of a Common Person; yet it was adjuged to otherwise in the
Kings Case, for that Thesaurus Regis est pacis vinculum and Bellorum nervi, for
otherwise the King might want His Money or Treasure which is the Bond of Peace
and Sinews of War.

Protections under the Great Seal of Register of Writs, 281.
England have not only been granted by our Kings but allowed by their Judges to
secure some Merchants, Strangers, from Arrests or Trouble in Corporibus, rebus
and bonis, in their Persons, goods or Estates, until the Debts and Money which
they did owe the King should be satisfied, and to suspend any Judgments or
Executions had against them, for other men's Debts until the King should be
satisfied the monys due unto him. And in the mean time taking them and their
estate, in their Royal Protection, did prohibit any Process against them to be
made in any of their Courts of Justice, or that they should be Arrested or
distrained for any debts or accounts, the Kings debts not being satisfied.

And although by an Act of Parliament or Statute made in the 25th year of the
Reign of King Edward the third 25 E. 3. cap. 19.
cap. 19. Their other Creditors might notwithstanding bring their Actions* and
Prosecute thereupon; yet they were not by that Statute to have Execution upon
any Judgments gained for their Debts, unless they would undertake to pay the
Debts due unto the King: and then he should be authorized to sue for, recover
and take the Kings Debt, and have Execution also for his own Debt, the Preamble
of that Statute mentioning that during such Protection no man had used or durst
to implead such Debtors.

In the 8th year of the Reign of King Henry the 6th it was agreed in Parliament
that all matters that touch the King should be preferred before all other as
well in Parliament as in Council. Rot. Par. 8 H. 6. m. 10.


And no longer ago then in the 34 and 35. C. H. 8. c. 13.
34th and 35th years of the Reign of King Henry the Eight, cap. 13. It was upon
Complaint made in Parliament that it was usual in the County Palatine of
Chester, that upon the suggestion of any Person that was Indebted to any other
Person or Persons, coming to the Exchequer within the said County Palatine (to
pay the Kings Rents and Moneys) and there taking a Corporal Oath that he or
they shall pay his or their Creditors, at such time as he or they should be
able thereunto, the Officers of the said Exchequer, have used without Warrant
to grant out of the said Exchequer, a Writ in Nature of a Protection whereby
the Creditors were greatly delaid, and in manner defrauded to their great
Impoverishment; It was Enacted that the said Writ of Course without the Warrant
of the King His Heirs or Successors containing any such Protection be no more
granted, any Usage or Privilege to the Contrary notwithstanding, which gives
an Allowance to any that in such a Case shall be granted by the King Warrant.

By the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws intended to be made by King
Edward Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum Imp^ess. 1571.
the sixth by His Commission directed unto thirty two Commissioners as well
Laymen and Doctors of the Civil Law, as Bishops and Divines Issued by
Direction of an Act of Parliament made in the third year of His Reign, Divine
Offices may be celebrated in familiis Nobilium quibusque non licet occupatione
publica distractis in Communibus Ecclesis versari, in the Houses or Families of
the Nobility, who by Reason of the Kings and Public Affairs could not so
conveniently come unto their Parish Churches.

And it was not wont to be denied either to be Law or Reason in England, that
such as Rid post upon the Kings business, might if his Horse were tired or for
the greater speed in the Kings Affairs Exchange or take any man's Horse whom he
met upon the way.

And therefore when the Houses of Kings and Princes, as to their bare Walls and
Rooms abstractly considered, are so greatly to be honored, respected and
distinguished in their Rights and Privileges, from those of the Nobility and
Common People, and every thing done within that Precinct or Virge, being in the
Placita Aulae Records or Rolls of the Marshal of the King in the Raigns of King
Edward the first, and King Edward the third, Placita Aulae. 33. E. 1. and 20.
E. 3.
In Trespass and other Actions, depending betwixt the Kings Servants or such as
might sue there alleged to be in Presentia Regis in the Kings Presence.

And the affairs or business of the King whether domestic or Public being of
so great a Concernment to the People, and so much to be preferred before any
others or that of the Private, the Servants certainly who do attend their
Sovereign therein may challenge some more then ordinary Priveledges and
Respects then others of His Subjects, which are not His Servants in Ordinary.

SECT. III.
That the Kings Servants in Ordinary, are not to be denied a more then Ordinary
Privilege or Respect, nor are to be compelled to appear by Arrest or
otherwise, in any Courts of Justice out of the Kings House, without Leave or
License of the Lord Chamberlain or other the Officers of the Kings Household to
whom it appertains, first had and obtained.

WHich Prudent Antiquity, and more respectfull Ages could never tell how to
deny; for if we will look into the Records of time which by showing us the
Errors and Successes of former ages and experiments, and teaching us how to
Judge of the New by the Old, are and will be found to be the best Instructors
if we believe as we ought the Divine Inspiration and Counsel of the Prophet
Jeremy Jer. 6 v. 16
and do but observe the old ways and paths of a better world, there will be
enough found to justify it.

For the book of God will evidence the great Honor and preferments given in
the morning of the world unto Joseph, that great Pattern of Fidelity and
preferment for it by Pharaoh King of Egypt, when he set him over his house,
made him Steward thereof, took his Ring off his hand, and put upon his, Arrayed
him in vestures of fine Linen, put a Gold Cha^^ about his neck, made him to
Ride Genesis 41. v. 40, 41, 4^.
in the second Chariot with a cry before him, Bow the Knee.

And by the Custom of the Nation or Children of Israel (from whom the Egyptians
are believed to have borrowed some of theirs) where the Beams of the Divine
Wisdom enlightened their Laws and Customs, the Servants of the King or Prince
were carefully chosen and merited a more then Ordinary regard which the well
meaning Vriah well understood, and had no mean opinion of when he ranked
David's Servants amongst the no small concernments of that Nation in refusing
to go down unto his own house and refresh himself, because the Ark of God and
Israel and Judah 2 Samuel 11. verse. 11.
did abide in Tents, his Lord Joab (the Kings Lieutenant General) and the
Servants of the King were encamped in open field.

And we find David so careful of the honor of his Servants or Ambassadors, as
he made the misusage of them by the King and Children of Ammon to be a cause of
his War against them and their destruction, and was so unwilling till necessity
enforced it, that his own Subjects should know of the scorns and reproach cast
upon them, by cutting their Vests or Garments so short as their naked Buttocks
might be seen, and the shaving off only the half of their beards, 2 Samuel 10.
verse. 2, 4, 5.
as he gave them Order to tarry at Jericho until their Beards were grown out.

When the King of Syria sent his Letters of recommendation by Naaman the
Captain of his host, 2 Reg. cap. 5. v. 13.6 and 7.
and a great man with his Master, to recover him of his Leprosy the King
despairing to get it effected, and not believing that the Prophet Elisha could
do it, and fearing least the King of Syria might take the not recovering of his
Servant, as a disrespect unto himself rent his clothes and said (unto his
Council or those which were near unto him) Consider I pray you and see how he
(the King of Syria) seeks a quarrel against me.

All which with the Excellent Order of David's Servants, the Magnificence of
Solomon's house (which was in building thirteen years by some thousands of
workmen) with his Servants various Offices and Honorable Employments therein,
did not a little contribute to their respect, The Princes or heads of the
Tribes attending upon the King, and the Honorable women upon the Queen,
mentioned in the 45th Psalm of David. And the Honorable opinion which Solomon
the wisest of men had of the Service of a King, when he said (which is
Registered amongst his wise sayings or Proverbs) That a man diligent in his
business Prove. 22. verse. 29.
should stand before Princes, he shall not stand before mean men.

The Princes that were in the House of Jehoiakim king of Judah recorded in the
36th Chapter of of the Prophet Jeremiah Jer. 38. cap. 41.
and of Zedekiah King of Judah, in the 38th and 41th Chapter of that Prophet,
and Benaiah one of David's mighty men, Captain of his Guard, and others
frequently found to be Attendants or Resident in the Houses or Palaces of Kings
thorough the Current of Holy Writ; And the Requisites belonging unto those
which Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon required in the captive Children whom he
intended to breed up in his Court that they should be well favored, skilful in
all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge and understanding and such as had ability
in them to stand in the Kings Palace, may give us to understand how much Kings
and Princes were concerned in the Honor or dishonor done unto their Servants,
and how greatly they were esteemed in former ages; and that the Jews were not
in an Error when they and some of their Rabbis Besoldus in opere Politico.
cap. 3.
did ascribe so much Honor to the Servants and Service of the King or
Sovereign as they conceived it to be de honor Regum ut tales ministri qui
Aulae semel initiati sunt aliis vilioribus officiis extraneis postea nunquam
contaminentur ut nemo utitur servis Ancillis vel ministris ejus nisi alius Rex
ejus successor, for the Kings Honor that those that had once served him should
never be employed in meaner business or afterward serve any other then his
Successor: which may be the reason that their names were so punctually entered
into the Register of the Kings Servants as Nehemiah Nehem. 7. verse. 57.
could long after the many Captivities, Tosses and Troubles of that Nation, by
the Divine Judgment and Indignation find in an old Register the Names and
Genealogies of Solomon's Servants.

That mighty King Ahasuerus did but exercise his just Power of giving Honors
and Rewards to his Servants, when he advanced Haman, and set his Seat above all
the Princes which were with him, and Commanded all His Servants which were in
the Gate to Bow and do him Reverence; And Haman being afterward demanded by
the King what should be done to the man whom the King delights to Honor
(little thinking that Mordecai whom he hated and was one of the meaner sort of
the Kings Servants, or any other then himself should be the better for it)
readily and without any doubt or scruple answered and said for the man whom the
King delights to Honor, Es^her c. 1. v. 1. c 6* v. 6, 7, 8 9. etc. 7. v. 15.
Let the Royal Apparel be brought, which the King uses to wear and the horse
that the King rides upon and the Crown Royal which is set upon his head; And
let the Apparel and Horse be delivered to the hand of one of the Kings most
Noble Princes that they may Array the man withal whom the King delights to
Honor, and bring him on Horseback through the Street of the City and Proclaim
before him, Thus shall be done to the man whom the King delights to Honor,
with which the City of Shushan were so well contented as it is said, that they
rejoiced and were glad.

The next Esther c. 1. v. 14. Ezr^ c. 7. verse. 15.
unto the King was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena and
Memucan, the seven Princes of Persia and Media, being his seven Counselors,
which saw the Kings face, and which sat the first of his Kingdom.

Those that served Kings and Princes were allowed Ornaments and Apparel which
the Common and Ordinary sort of People could neither claim nor merit; and
therefore that greatest Lord of the Earth, and Master of Humility made an
honorable mention of them when he concluded that they who were Matt. 11* verse.
8.
molliter vestiti and did wear soft Clothing were in Kings Houses, and the
Emperor Edict. Theodosii. l. 4. Cod.
Theodosius above 300 and 30 years after our Savior Chirst had left the earth
and in an Edict or Proclamation forbidding the use of Silk Raiments to all
people of what kind or profession whatsoever, excepts himself and his Servants,
and says solo Principi ejusque Domui dedicatur, that the wearing of such
apparel belonged only unto the Prince, and those which attends him in his House.

By the Lex Julia a Law made by Julius Caesar, tenetur tanquam reus laesae
Majestatis, qui Legatos, Oratores Vlpian. 1. leg. Julia 7. ad leg. Jul. de vi
pub. and l. 46. P^tit. 6.
Comitesque eorum (all of them being but the several degrees of the Servants of
Majesty) pulsaverit, (which in the Language of those Laws and times and some
after-ages signified an Arrest or Compulsion as well as an Assault or beating)
vel Injuria affecerit, he should be guilty of high Treason, which should
Arrest, Beat or wrong any Ambassadors or Agents, or any of the Sovereigns
Attendants or Assistants.

The diverse great and Honorable Offices and Employments in the Houses of the
Western and Eastern Emperors, as the Pancirollus in Notitia utriusque Imper.
Comites sacri Palatii, Comites sacrorum largitionum, Magister Officiorum cum
multis aliis, etc. Earls of the Sacred Palace, Earls or great Officers of the
Privy Purse, Lord Steward of the Household, Lord Chamberlain, etc. May persuade
us to more then an opinion of the necessary Respects and Honors due unto them
in the Exercise of their Offices and Places about their Sovereign.

The Guards of the Royal Palace of the Emperors of the West and East,
Privilegium retinebant, Pancirollus in Notitia utriusq* Imper. cap. 51.
had a Privilege not to be Cited or Convened before any but their own Captains
and Commanders.

The Fabricences Ibid. ca. 66.
or such as furnished the Magazines with armor nulli oneri Civitatis erant
obnoxii were freed from public Offices.

The Comes Ibid. ca. 89.
Domesticorum Equitum and Peditum, Earl or Commander of the Horse and
Foot-Guard was the Protector Domesticorum, Defender of the household Servants,
defunctorum quoque Parentum Domesticorum filii locum subibant; etsi ob teneram
aetatem armis apti non erant, nihilominus Protectorum matriculis inscripti
quaternas Annonas id est victum quatuor hominum accipiebant, and the Sons of
those Domestic Guards were to enjoy their places after their Fathers decease,
And if they were so young as not to be fit for it, were notwithstanding to be
entered into the Protectors Books or Registers, and to have a proportion of
diet or allowance fit for to feed them.

Claudius Augustus Caesar Dion. l. 60.
punished a Tribune of the people (then (though not so much as formerly) a
mighty Officer, Darling and Favorite of them) for beating of one of his
Servants.

The Pancirol. in Notitia utriusque Imperii, c. 90*
Primicerius or Chief of the Emperors Bedchamber, and all other of the
Bedchamber were Exempted from the Tax of finding Horse or Soldiers or of
giving Bail in any Action or Suite before the Magister Officiorum or Principal
Officer in the Court, so styled not unlike says the Learned Cujacius Comment.
ad l. 10. Cod. Justiniani, 1425.
Cujacius to the Prevost de l' Hostell in France, Et qui absunt Reipublicae
causa vacationem habent, such as are Employed about the Public are to be
Privileged.

To the Praefecto Praetorii Pancirol. in Notitia utriusque Imperii. cap. 7.5^.
Orientis, who was as it were the Captain of the Emperors Guard there were
says Pancirollus in His Court or Tribunal one hundred Advocates allowed qui
Clarissimi and spectabilis titulo gaudebant, who enjoyed the Title of Noble and
Illustrious, and had great Immunities as from Public works, etc.

The Emperors Gratian, Cuj^cius Comment. ad l. 10. Cod. Justin. 1425.
Valentinian and Theodosius about the year of Christ 380 Ordained that the
Earls and Masters of Requests should be exempted from all other Public charges
Cujacius Comment. and expositio ad Novel tit. 63
and upon Complaints, that in their Progress, their Servants received or took
too much of the People, did Ordain that when the Emperors went in Progress and
sacros vultus inhiantibus forte populis inferentes, should bless the people
with their Presence, their Servants and Attendants, ne quid accipiant
Immodicum, should not be unreasonable or Immoderate in it, the right use of
which Ancient Custom or manner of the Oblations or gratifications of Subjects
Inhabiting in any great Town or City, when our Kings of England passed by or
thorough them, being probably derived or come unto us from this or the like
Laudable Observances of Rights and Dues to Majesty, in return of Gratitudes to
their Prince, His Followers or Attendants for procuring or putting him in mind
to come that way, and give them the well-come opportunity of receiving new
Graces or Favors or making acknowledgements for many formerly bestowed upon
them by him or his Progenitors.

By a Rescript or Constitution of the Emperors Cujacius ad l 12. Cod. Justin.
tit. 5.
Theodosius and Valentinianus about the year of our Lord 386 aeterna lege, as
they there term it, by a Law for ever or unalterable Omnes cubicularii, All the
Chamberlains or Bed-chambermen, Except some of greater Eminency therein
mentioned, were to be freed from Pourveyance and Cart-taking and a sordidis
muneribus from all Public and Inferior Offices not concerning the Immediate
Service of the Prince and their Houses in the City from the Harbingers, upon
great Penalties unto such as should molest them therein; and the reason thereof
is therein given ne sordidis astricti muneribus decus ministerii quod militando
videbantur adepti otii tempore and quietis amittant, to the end that the
Dignity and quality of their Places which they obtained by their Services
should not be lost in the times of rest and quiet, and, Lib. 1. C. Praeb. Tyr.
and l. 3. inf. de Castrens.
Inter Cubiculares amongst those which attended the Royal-chambers, sunt qui
sacrae vesti deputati sunt those which belong to the Royal Robes and primicerii
sacri Cubiculi id est qui primum locum gradumque obtinent inter Cubicularios
and the Primicerii or Chief of the Bedchamber, (probably the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber) were comprehended amongst them.

The Emperor Leo Cujacius in Comment. ad l. 12. Cod. Justin. 155^.
about the year of our Lord 460 in a Rescript Johanni Comiti and Magistro
Officiorum the Great Master of His Household, ordained that Cubicularios tam
sacri Cubiculi sui quam venerabilis Augustae quos utrosque certum est obsequiis
occupatos and Aulae penetraliis inhaerentes diversa Judicia obire non posse ab
observatione aliorum Tribunalium liberati essent, their Chamberlains or
Bed-chamber-men, as also those of the Empress or Employed in any of their
Services and the affairs of the Court who could not attend diverse Tribunals
should be exempted from the Obedience of them ut in sublimitatis solummodo tuae
Judicio propositas adversus se excipiunt actiones to the end that they might
upon occasion be only summoned to his Honorable Tribunal; and the like
Privilege says Cuiacius was thereby also allowed unto those, qui sacrae vesti
deputati fuerunt, which belonged to the Royal Wardrobe.

The Emperor Zeno Cujacius Comment ad l. 10. Cod. Justin. 1545.
about the year of our Lord 480 Decreed that the Senators or other Honorable
Persons should not be obliged to give Bail to any Action, and illustre habent
privilegium ut de eorum Criminibus nemo cognoscat inconsulto Principe. That the
Nobility should not be tried in any Actions Criminal without the License of the
Prince first obtained (as is now done in England by the Kings especial
Commission granted to a Lord or one of the Nobility to be as a Lord
High-steward for such a Trial or Purpose.)

And a Servant to another once entertained in the Emperors Service, being
otherwise restrained became instantly a Freeman and might make his last Will
and Testament, and the reason given Cujac^us in Comment. ad lib. 12. Cod.
Justin. tit. 5.
quod hoc privilegium videatur principale esse proprium Majestatis ut non
Famulorum sicut privatae Conditionis homines sed liberorum honestis utatur
obsequiis periniquum est eos duntaxat pati fortunae deterioris incommoda, that
it was a Principle or Property of Majesty, that the Emperors Servants should
be in a better Condition then the Servants of Private-men, and it would be
unjust that his Servants should be in as bad a Condition as those of the
Common People.

The Servants of the Emperors L. fin. c. ^bi Senate. vel Clariss* Matheas de
Judiciis disput. 4* number. 36. and Vizzanius de mandatis* Principum cap. 5.162.
and 163.
house did enjoy a Privilege, ut a solo principe vel ab eo cui is per sacros
Apices injunxisset judicabantur, that they should be Judged by the Prince
himself or one Authorized by His Commission.

By a Law or Rescript of the aforesaid Emperor Cujacius Comment. ad lib. 12.
God. Justin. Tom. 3. tit. 16.
Zeno it was Ordained that ne ad diversa tracti viri devoti silentiarii
judicia, sacris abstrahi videantur obsequiis eos qui quemlibet devotissimorum
silentiariorum Scholae (Company or Regiment) Civiliter vel etiam Criminaliter
pulsare maluerint, minime eum ex cujuslibet alterius judicio nisi ex judicio
tantummodo viri Excellentissimi Magistri Officiorum conveniri, to the end none
of the Emperors guards in the Palace and at the Court Gates (then called
Silentiarii probably from their care and watchfulness) should be drawn or
hindered from their Duty and Services, that those which had any Action or Cause
of Complaint against them either Civilly or Criminally should not compel them
to come before any Judge whatsoever, but the Lord Steward, or Chamberlain of
the Emperor's Household.

By the Salicque Laws, or of the Francks the Ancestors of our Neighbors the
French, who then (though now they find it not to be so) thought themselves to
Constitutiones Pharamu^di in Goldastus tit. 1 de maniere Tom. 3. et ultimo, Et
Lind^nbrogi^^ in Lege Salica tit 1. Constitutiones ab Imp. Frederic. 1 and 2.
Et Lindenbrogius in Prolegomen.
be as free as their name signified made by Pharamond their first King toto
caetu populi, by the good liking of all that people assembled at Saltzburgh in
Franconia in Germany in the year of our Redeemer 424. Qui in Jussione Regis
fuerit occupatus, he which was in the Kings Service by his Command (and so are
all the Kings Servants rationally intended to be) manniri non potest, was not
to be cited or summoned to appear in any Court of Justice, which other men were
not to disobey under very great pecuniary Mulcts, and was a Constitution so
acceptable to the people as Charlemain long after in his Confirmation of that,
and the Laws of the Ribuarians and some other Nations declares them to be non
ex sua adinventione sed Communi Consilio et prout cunctis placuit
prudentioribus Regni, not of his own Invention or framing but by Common assent
or good liking of the most prudent and wise men of his Kingdom.

By the Laws of the Wisigoths, (from whence the Spaniards do so boast to have
been descended, as when they would signify one most nobly descended, they do
usually say he is Ne de los Godos, he is the Son of a Goth) where it was
expressly provided that the Testimony L. L. Wisigoth. lib. 20. tit de testibus
et testimoniis 4. Spelman. glossa. in voce Palatina et Con. to. 2. 1045.
Roderic Santius part. 1. Hist. Hispa. Casp. Ba^^. tr. de inop. deb. cap. 16. n.
44.
of Servants should not be allowed in Criminal Matters there was an exception
for the better sort of the Kings Servants.

King Ina who Reigned here over the West Saxons about the year of our Redeemer
712 amongst his Laws Suasu Heddae et Erkinwaldi Episcoporum suorum, omnium
Senatorum et natu majorum, Sapientum populi sui in magna servorum dei
frequentia, by the advice of Hedda and Erkenwald his Bishops, all his Senators,
Elders, and wise men of his people and Commonalty attended by many of the
Clergy, did ordain several degrees of Mulct or punishment, for breach of peace
in Towns according to the qualities of the owners or Lords thereof, videlicet
in oppido Regis vel Episcopi pacis violatae paena 120 solidorum, in L. L. Inae
cap. 46.
oppido Senatoris seu Ealdormannes ruptae pacis 80 solidorum in oppido Cyninges
Thegnes seu ministri Regis 60 solidorum, et in oppido custodis pagant
cujuscunque predia possidentis pacis tributae multa 35 solidorum censeatur,
that is to say, In every Town of the King or a Bishop for breach of the peace
120 shillings, in the Town of a Senator or Alderman 80 shillings, in a Town of
a Servant of the Kings 60 shillings, and in the Town of the Bayliffe or Reeve
of any other man having Lands 35 shillings.

Charles the great, or Charlemain Emperor of the West, and King of France, who
began his reign in the year 768 and after him the Emperor Lodovicus, by his
goodness and Piety surnamed Pius, or the Godly, Johannis Tilii Cem. de rebus
Gallicis lib. 2.183. tit. de Officiis domesticis Regum.
considering that in viros animosos plus honoris posse quam opum
remunerationem, that to men of Courage and Spirit, Honor was more in esteem
then Riches, edicto mandaverunt ut ipsis in tota ditione sua honor haberetur,
did by their Edicts which in those more obedient times when Subjects were not
so Critical (as too many of us now are) in their Princes Commands, by a Torture
of far fetched or Irrational Interpretations put upon their (just Authority
in order to the Weal-Publick) provide that in all their Dominions an Honor and
respect should be given to their Domestics or Servants.

And therefore Antiquity and the Learned Bignonius were not guilty of any Error
when they adjudged that Dignitas Domestici, the Dignity of the Kings Household
Servants, fuit non contemne^da was not to be contemned, but was greatly
honored under the Raigns of the first and second Kings of France, and about
the Reign of Clodoveus or Lodovicus the 12th. King of the first Race of the
Kings of France, who Reigned about the year of Bignonii notae ad veter formul
514. et L L. Ripuar tit. 90.
our Lord and Savior 648. Inter praecipuos Regni ministros saepe enumerantur
Comites Consiliarii Domestici et Majores Domus etc. Amongst the principal of
whom were reckoned the Lord Steward, Earls, Counselors of Estate, Chancellor,
and Chamberlane, the most Honorable and great men of the Kingdom, who did
sometimes in the Court attend the King, in the hearing and determining of
Causes, and were with those great Officers of the Household accounted to be de
Honestate palatii seu specialiter ornamento Hinckmarus Ep. 3. cap. 22. Biggonii
notae ad lib. 1. Marcu^fi formul.
Regali, a part of the Honor of the Kings Palace or Court, and an Ornament to
the Royal Dignity, and the Domestics, and Servants of that great and virtuous
Charlemain had that respect given unto them which a just consideration of the
Honor of their Sovereign, and concernment of the Weal-publique in his business
or affairs had procured for them as Solebant subditi Bignonii notae ^n
Marculfum 446.
non modo re^ipere missos et legatos Principis Comites Duces et etiam ministros
verum et viaticum eis pro unius cujusque dignitate praestare, the people did
use not only to receive the Kings, or Princes, Earls, Dukes, and their
Attendants but to give them Entertainment according to their several degrees or
qualities, it having been ordained Capit. Car. man. 1. in li. 3. cap. 39.
by him ut de missis suis vel de caeteris propter utilitatem suam Iter
agentibus nullus mansionem eis contradicere praesumat, that no man should
presume to deny lodging and entertainment unto any employed in his service.

King Alfred or Alured Foedus Aluredi et Guthr^n in Lamberts Saxon Laws ca. 36.
who began his Reign here about the year of our Lord 870 and had resident in
his house the Sonns of many of his Nobility which did attend him, did in that
time of the more incult and fierce behavior of the old English and Saxons and
their Neighborhood with their Enemies, the usurping Danes take care in the
League or peace which he was constrained to make with King Guthrun the Dane, to
provide that in case of a Minister Regis incusatus as the Version or
Translation renders it, any Servant of the Kings accused for Homicide, Et id
Juris in omni lite, and the same Law to be in every other Action or Suit, there
should be a Jury of 12 of the Kings Servants; or if the party grieved should be
the Servant of another King, non nihil inferior, not much inferior to the
Kings, probably intended of King Guthruns, it should be tried by undecim sui
equales unumque Ministrum Regium by eleven of his Peers or Equals, and one of
the Kings Servants added unto them.

And it was then accounted such an honor to serve the King as our Learned
Seldom Seldom tit. Honor. 621.
informs us, he that that had a House with a Bell, a Porters Lodge, and was fit
to be sent on his Princes Message, or had a distinct Office in the Kings Court,
was accounted (in those early days) as a Thainus or Nobilis, a person or Honor.

King Edward L. L. Edwardi Confessoris ca. 21.
the Confessor whose Laws the vanquished English after the Conquest took to be
so much a blessing as they hid them for preservation under the high Altar at
Westminster, and by the importunity of their prayers and tears, procured King
William the Conqueror to confirm and restore them, did ordain that the Earls
and Barons, Et omnes qui habuerint sacham et socam, Theme et Infangthiefe etiam
milites suos et proprios servientes scilicet dapiferos pincernas Camerarios
pistores et Cocos sub suo friburgo habeant, et si cui foris facerent et Clamor
vicinorum de eis assurgeret ipsi tenerent eos rectitudini in Curia sua, And all
those who had Courts Leete, or Baron amongst their Tenants, a privilege
granted by the King to have a Jurisdiction over their Tenants, and to fine or
Amerce such as failed to make good their Actions, try and punish Thieves, taken
in their Manors, or Liberties, to have Villains and Bondmen and a propriety
in their Villains, Lands, or Goods, and to have subject to their Manors those
that held of them by Knight Service, or were to attend them in the Wars, and
their Domestique Servants, as Sewers, Butlers, Chamberlains, Bakers, and Cooks
should upon any wrong done to their Neighbors, or Complaint made of them, see
right to be done unto them in their Courts, and certainly he that gave them
those Liberties to hear and determine Complaints against any of their Menials,
and Servants cannot rationally be supposed to be willing or intend to abridge
himself of the like.

William the Conqueror in his Law, entitled de hominum Regis privilegio of the
L. L Gulielmi Conquest. ca. 2.
privilege belonging to his Tenants, ordained, That si qui male fecerint
hominibus illius Ballivae et de hoc sit attinctus per Justitiam Regis (which
for a great part thereof was then administered in his House or Palace) foris
factura sit dupla illius quam alius quispiam foris fecerit. That if any one
should do wrong unto them and be thereof Convict by the Kings Justice, the
forfeiture of the Offender should be double to what should be paid upon the
like offense unto any other, who being afterward known by the name of Tenants
in ancient Demeasne were so exempt from being returned as Jury men either at
Assizes or Sessions, Mich. 26. E. 1. in Banco Ebor. Rot. 268.
as where they were so returned in the 26 year of the Reign of King Edward the
first, they did recover every man forty shillings damage against the Bayliffe
that returned them.

Et Domus L. L. Henrici primi ca. 80. Et in libro rigro de necesar^is
observantiis Scaccarii in Thesauro recepte Scaccarii fol. 27. cap. 25 et Sir
Henry Spelman glossar in voce Barons Sc^ccarii.
Regis, and the House of the King says King Henry the first in his Laws, is
where he is Resident Cujuscunque feudum vel Mansio sit, whose ever the Land or
the House be, and that wise King who for his wisdom had the Character or name
of Beauclerk as an Affix to his Royal Title, did not then take it to be
derogatory to the beloved Laws of Edward the Confessor or his grand design of
pleasing a lately discontended and subdued people or settling the English Crown
unjustly detained from his elder Brother Robert upon himself and his posterity,
to allow the Exchequer Privileges quod de Scaccario residentes, Clerici et
omnes alii ministri ibidem ministrantes sive enim de Clero sint sive Regia
Curia assident ex mandato ad alias quaslibet causas extra scaccarium sub
quibuscunque Judicibus non evocenter. That the Officers of the Exchequer (which
was then kept in the Kings House or Palace, and many of them and the Clerks
thereof as Sir Henry Spelman says his menial and domestic Servants) Clerks
and all other the Ministers there whether belonging to the Clergy or the Kings
Court, or which do sit there by his Command, shall not be cited or compelled to
appear for any causes whatsoever out of the Exchequer, or before any Judges or
Judge, Etquod iidem de Communibus Assizes sect. Comitat. hundred. et Cur.
quibuscunque tam de et pro dominiis suis, quam de et pro feodis suis Ac etiam
de Murdris scutagiis vigiliis et Danegeld.

And that they should be freed and exempted from common Assizes, suit of County
Courts, hundred Courts, or any Courts whatsoever as well for or concerning
their Demesne Lands, as for their Fees, or Lands which they held of others,
(which would otherwise after two years have made a forfeiture, and could not
have been dispensed withal) Murders, Escuage, Watch and ward, and Danegeld
(public Taxes which were not but by special favor to have been acquitted) Et
quod Barons et qui ad Scaccarium resident de quibuscunque provision. seu
provisoribus et aliis solutionibus nomine consuetudinis pro quibuscunque
victual. suae domus in quibuscunque urbibus Castellis et locis Maritimis empt.
Ac de solutione Theoloniae sive Toluet liberi et quieti esse debent, and that
the Barons and those which reside in the Exchequer should not be charged with
the payment of Toll in any City or place, Et quod non debent implacitari alibi
quam in Scaccario quamdiu idem Scaccarium fuerit apertum, and that they should
not be impleaded any where but in the Exchequer, when it shall be open (which
is not only all the Term times, but eight days before every Term.)

Si vero judex sub quo litigant sine sit Ecclesiasticus sive forensis legis
hujus ignarus ab jam dicta die convocationis ad Scaccarium citaverit quemlibet
eorum et absentem forte per sententiam possessione sua vel quonius Jure
spolaverit authoritate principis et ratione sessionis revocabitur in eum statum
causa ipsius in quo erat ante citationem. But if the Judge whether
Ecclesiastical or of the Common Law being ignorant of the opening of the
Exchequer should cite any of them, and in their absence give sentence against
him and take away from any of them any of their Rights or Possessions, by
virtue of the Kings Authority and their sitting the Cause (or sentence) shall
be forthwith revoked and reduced into the State it was before the Citation. And
were so greatly favored and taken care of as si quilibet etiam magnus in regno
in consulto animi calore conviciis lascesserit, If any great man of the
Kingdom should rashly or in anger revile any of them, he was to pay a fine for
it; or if any other should reproach or do them any wrong they should be
punished, and when that King had been ill advised and persuaded to charge the
Lands of the Barons of the Exchequer with the payment of Taxes in regard that
they, as was by some envious persons then alleag'd, did receive Salaries and
Wages or Liveries or diet at the Court for their sitting, and that some of
them, pro officio suo fundos habent et fructus eorum hinc ergo gravis jactura
fisco provenit, having Lands and Revenues given them also for it which was a
great loss to the Kings Treasury or Exchequer, But the King afterward
experimenting that evil Counsel, and growing weary of it, et nil ducens
Jacturam modici aeris respectu magni honoris, and not valuing the loss of a
little money, so much as the loss of a great Honor, ordained that Jure
perpetuo, by a constant Law and decree they should as formerly be free from
Taxes and in his Laws for the good of the Kingdom declaring his Kingly Rights
and Prerogative, which he solus et super omnes homines, habet in terra sua as
King of England had and was to enjoy and above all men in his Kingdom commodo
pacis et securitatis institutione retenta, reserving a fit provision for the
public peace and security did amongst many of his Royal Prerogatives mention
de famulis suis ubicunque occisis vel Injuriatis the punishment of such as any
where should slay or injure any of his Household Servants in any place
whatsoever: L L. Henrici primi ^a. 10.
Et qui in Domo vel familia regis pugnabit, such as should fight in the Kings
House.

And limiting the extent of the Jurisdiction of the Marshall of his Household,
declared it in these words, nam long debet esse pax Regis a porta sua ubi
residens erit, the peace of the King ought to extend a great way from the gate
(of his House) where he shall be resident (not much unlike that of the 12 miles
circuit of the Verge now and for many ages past allowed) and gave the reason of
it, multis sane L L. Henrici primi ca. 16.
respectus esse debet ac multa diligentia ne quis pacem Regis infringat maxim
in ejus vicinia, for that there ought to be a more than ordinary respect had
thereunto, and much diligence used that none should break the Kings peace, more
especially so near his House, which must of necessity and by all the rules of
Reason and Interpretation of Laws, and the meaning of the Lawgiver be only
understood to refer unto the peace and quiet of his own House and Servants,
and not unto the Kings care of the public and universal peace of the Kingdom
which was not be straightened or pend up in so narrow a room or compass, when as
many of his other Laws did at the same time provide for the universal peace and
this only aimed at the particular peace and tranquillity of himself and his
Family.

Nor can it appear to have been any intention of that foresighted and
considerate Prince, that any Sheriffs or Bailiffs should upon all occasions,
false or malicious or trivial suggestions presume to Arrest and hale from his
Palace or Service any of the necessary Attendants upon his Person Majesty and
Honor, or be the saucy and irreverent Infringers of their peace which by that
Law Entitled, De pace Curiae Regis, the peace of the Kings Court or Palace he
took so great a care to preserve.

At the Parliament of Clarindon holden by King Henry the Second in Anno Dom.
1164. When that Prince's troublesome Reign was afflicted with the Rebellion of
his Sons, and Domineering of a Powerful Clergy, backed by the Papal power and
Insolency, it was not thought to be either unreasonable, or illegal, when
Excommunications which the lofty Clergy of those times were not willing to have
clipped or limited, and the Thunderbolts fear or fury thereof, did far exceed
any effect or consequence of an utlary, to ordain That, Chronic Gervasii
D^robernensis. 1386 et 1387.
Nec aliquis Dominicorum Ministrorum Regis excommunicetur, nec terrae alicujus
eorum sub Interdicto ponantur nisi prius Dominus Rex, si in terra fuerit,
Conveniatur, That none of the Kings Servants or Officers be excommunicated, or
their Lands interdicted, until the King if he be in the Kingdom be first
Attended. And the reason of this Law, was says Sir Edward Cook for that the
Tenures by grand Serjeanty, and Knights Sir Edward Coke 2 part institutes 6^1.
service in Capite were for the Honor and defense of the Realm; and concerning
those that served the King in his Household, their continual Service and
attendance of the King was necessary.

And Glanvil who was Lord Chief Justice of England, and wrote in the Reign of
King Henry the second, or of King Richard the first, of the ancient Laws and
Customs of England, if that Book as some have thought were not written rather
in his name then by him, howsoever it is ancient and allowed both here and in
Scotland to be very Authentic, says Glanvil lib. 1. c. 27.
that Per servitium Domini Regis ration^biliter essoniare potest, et cum in
Curia probatur hoc essonium et admittitur, remanebit loquela sine die donec
constiterit ^um ab illo servitio domini Regis rediisse.

Vnde hi qui assidue sunt in servitio Spelman Glossar. in voce Essoin.
Domini Regis, Cui necessitates omnes forenses cedunt, (to which all other
businesses or occasions says the Learned Spelman in his gloss upon Essoines
are to give place) ut Servientes ipsius hoc Essonio non gaudebunt.

Ergo circa eorum personas observabitur solitus cursus Curiae et Juris ordo.
That a Defendant or Tenant being in the service of the King may rationally be
essoyned or for that time be excused, and when the Essoyne or excuse is proved
in Court and admitted, the Action or plea shall be without day, and suspended
until it shall happen that he be returned out of the Kings Service, but those
that be in the Kings daily Service as his ordinary Servants are not to be
allowed such an Essoyne or excuse, therefore as to their persons the accustomed
course of the Court and order of Law is to be observed, but does not declare
what that solitus Curfus Curiae et juris ordo, that accustomed course and order
of Law in case of the Kings Servants in ordinary then was. Or whether their
privilege was not so great and notorious as not to need any Essoine.

Yet as the Law then was, says, that where sometimes both the Plaintiff and
the Defendant did not appear, but made default, Ibidem ca. 33.
tunc in Domini Regis voluntate vel ejus Justitiariorum, erit si voluerint,
versus utrumque contemptum Curiae vel falsum clamorem prosequi, then it shall
be in the good pleasure of the King or his Judges if they will prosecute either
against the Defendant for his Contempt, or against the Plantiffe for his not
Prosecution.

By which again the King was at his liberty to protect or privilege his
Servant in ordinary if the Law had not allowed them any such privilege, as
well as to grant his Writ directed to the Judges ad Ibid cap 8.
warrantizandum to allow or receive an Essoine for one that was in servitio
Regis in his Service, recited by Glanvil with an Ideo vobis mando quod pro
absentia sua illius diei non ponatis in defaltam, nec in aliquo sit perdens,
therefore I command (our Kings not then in their mandates, writs, or Patents
speaking in the plural number, as we and us etc.) You that you enter not a
default against the Defendant or Tenant for his absence, or not appearing at
the day appointed, and that he be not damnified thereby.

And in that Kings Reign and the beginning of the Reign of King Richard the
first, whilst Chief Justice Glanvil attending his Court and Justice his Wars
in the Holy Land, died at Acon, and in all those foregoing times and ages it
was not probable that any Inroads should be made upon that ancient just and
rational privilege of the Kings Domestiques or other Servants in ordinary, for
that some of the Stewards and great Officers of the Kings most honorable
Household, who had under their several Kings the protection as well as
Government of the Servants in ordinary of the Royal Family, as Prince Henry the
eldest Son of King Henry the second and William Longchampe in the first year of
the Reign of King Richard the first, Lord Chancellor of England, were whilst
they held their several other places in the Kings Courts, successively Lord
Chief Justices of England, and attended in the Kings Court.

And it Glanvil. l. 10. cap. 1 et 16.
appears by Glanvil, that Actions or Summons, or Attachments of Debt, and
other process were then not infrequently directed to the Sheriff of the County
where the Defendant dwelt, made retornable, coram me, i.e. Domino Rege vel
Justitiis meis, i.e. Justitiis suis before the King or his Justices, in the
abstract Idem lib. 6. cap. 8.
apud Westmonasterium at Westminster, i.e. The Kings House or Palace, the Court
of Justice therein kept being called Capitalis Curia Domini Regis, Idem lib. 2.
ca. 2.14. et 18.
the Kings chief Court where those Justices or Judges then sat, and where the
great Assize or Writs of Assize in pleas of Land happily succeeding in the
place of the turbulent fierce and over-powring way of duels, or waging of
battles for the determination of pretended Rights were tried, Juries
impanelled, and a Fine passed and Recorded before the Bishops of Ely and
Norwich, and Idem lib. 8. cap. 3 et 5.
Ralph de Glanvile our Learned Author, Justitiis Domini Regis et aliis
fidelibus et familiaribus Domini Regis ibi tunc presentibus, the Kings Justices
and other of his Subjects and Household, Idem lib 12. cap. 22. lib. 13. cap. 33.
Assizes of novel desseisin and prohibitions to Ecclesiastical Courts awarded.

And was so unlikely to permit any Breach of his Servants just privileges as
he did about the 24th. year of his Reign, not only confirm all his Exchequer
Servants, Dignities and privileges used and allowed in the Reign of King Henry
the first his Grandfather, but although Wars and many great troubles assaulted
him, did when he laid an Escuage of a Mark upon every Knights Fee whereby to
pay his hired Soldiers not at all charge his Exchequer Servants, for that as
the black Book of Exchequer that ancient Remembrancer of the Exchequer
privileges, informs us Mavult enim In libro Nigro Scaccarii cap. 25.
Princeps stipendiarios quam Domesticos Bellicis apponere casibus, for the King
had rather expose his hired men of War to the inconveniences thereof, then
his Domestique or Household Servants, and being as willing as his Grandfather to
free them from being cited or troubled before his delegated or Commissionated
Courts of Justice or Tribunals, would in all probability be more unwilling that
those which more nearly and constantly attended upon his person, health or
safety should by any suits of Law be as to their persons or estates molested or
diverted from it, nor could there be howsoever any danger of arresting the
Kings Servants in ordinary without leave or License first obtained in the
after-Raigns of King Richard the first and King John when Hubert Walter
Archbishop of Dugdales origines Ju^id.
Canterbury and Chancellor of England in the 6th. year of the Reign of King
John was likewise Lord Chief Justice of England.

And the now chief Courts of the Kingdom as the Chancery, King's Bench,
Common Pleas, and Exchequer, were radically and essentially in the King; and in
the distribution of Justice of the said Kings and their Royal Predecessors
resided in their Council and great Officers in their Courts attending upon
their Persons.

For many of the Suits and Actions at the Common Law, and even those of the
Court of Common Magn. Chapter 9. H. 3. ca. 11
Pleas until the ninth year of the Reign of King Henry the third when it was
by Act of Parliament forbidden to follow the Kings Court, but to be held in
loco certo a place certain, in regard that the King and his Court were
unwilling any more to be troubled with the Common Pleas, or Actions betwixt
private persons which were not the Kings Servants were there prosecuted.

And until those times it cannot be less then a great probability that all the
Trades-mens debts which were demanded of Courtiers and the Kings Servants were
without Arrests or Imprisonments to be prosecuted and determined in the Court
before the Steward and the Chamberlain of the Kings House; and that the King
who was so willing was so willing to ease his Subjects in their Common Pleas,
or Actions, by freeing them from so chargeable an attendance which the
prosecution of them would commonly if not necessarily require, did not thereby
intend that they should have a Liberty without leave, or License first obtained
to molest any of his Servants in ordinary in their Duty or Attendance upon his
Royal person and Affairs by prosecuting, Arresting, imprisoning, or compelling
to appear before other Judges, or Tribunals, any of his Servants in ordinary.

Who in those times may well be thought to enjoy a freedom from Arrests or
Imprisonment of their Bodies, until leave or License first obtained* when Hugo
de Patishul Treasurer unto King Henry the third in the nineteenth year of his
Reign, Philip Lovel in the 34th. Sir Henry Spelman Catalogo Capital Justic.
Angliae 835.
year of the Reign of that King, and John Mansel Keeper of the great Seal of
England, in the 40th. year of that Kings Reign were, whilst they held their
several other places, successively Lord Chief Justices of England.

When the Court of Chancery being in the absence of Parliaments next under our
Kings the Supreme Court for the order and distribution of Justice, the Court of
the Kings Bench appointed to hear and determine Criminal matters, Actions of
Trespass and Pleas of the Crown, and the Court of Exchequer, matters and Causes
touching the King's Revenue, were so much after the 9th. year of the Reign of
King Henry the third, and the dispensing with the Court of Common Pleas from
following the person of our Kings to their several Houses or Palaces, or as
their Affairs invited them; to be sometimes Itinerant, or resident in several
other parts of the Kingdom did follow the King and were kept in their Houses,
or Palaces, notwithstanding that when like the Sun in his Circuit distributing
their Rays and Comforts to all the parts of the Kingdom by turns, they were
according to their occasion of business sometimes at York or Carlisle, in the
North; and at other times for their pleasures or divertisements kept their
Courts or festivals at Gloucester or Nottingham, and their Parliaments sometimes
at Marlebridge in Wiltshire, or Ruthland in Wales, or at Gloucester or Lincoln.

For it may be evidenced by the Retorn or days given in Writs, and ancient
Fines levied before the Justices of the Dugdales origines Juridiciales ca.
33.93.
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster after the allowance or favor given to
that Court not to be ambulatory, and to the people not to be at so great
trouble or charges, as would be required to follow the King and his Court in a
throng of Followers and other business, for the obtaining of Justice in their
suits or Actions as well small or often emerging, as great and seldom
happening, (the days of old also affirming it) that the Kings Palace at
Westminster in the great Hall, where the Court of Common Pleas has ever since
dwelt, some places thereunto adjoining; retaining at this day the Name of the
Old Palace, did not cease to be the Palace or Mansion House of our Kings Stows
Survey of Land. and Westminster. 840, 887 and 888.
of England, until that King Henry the 8th. by the fall of the pompous
Cardinal Woolsey, the building of St. James' House, and enclosing the now Park
thereof with a brick wall, made White Hall to be his House, or Palace, but kept
the name as well as business of the Palace or Mansion House of our Kings of
England; And the Courts of Chancery, King's Bench and Exchequer did after the
fixation of the Common Pleas or Actions of the people to a certain place in the
Kings Palace at Westminster, being then his more settled and constant
habitation and Residence for his not a few Servants and Followers, so much
follow the King and his Court and were kept in the Kings House or palace as in
old time King Solomon in his Stately Porch of 1 Reg. 7.7.
Judgment built in his House did judge and hear Causes, and as the Kings of
Johannes Tilius Comment. de rebus Gall.
France did long ago in their Palaces, and as long before the Romans had their
Senate or Parliament House, their Forum or place for their Courts of Justice
near adjoining to their Kings Palaces. Alexander ab Alexandro Geni^l dierum
lib. 1. cap. 16.


As our Bracton in the latter Cokes 4th. part Insti^tutes 71.
end of the Reign of King Henry the third, called the Court of King's Bench, as
Sir Edward Coke says Aulam Regiam the Kings Hall, because the Judges of that
Court did sit in the Kings Hall, and the Placita Aulae Actions or Pleas of the
Kings House or Hall were determined before the Steward of the Kings House.

And that King, who began his Reign in the year 1216, laboring under great
difficulties, the power of many of his unruly Barons and very great necessities
as well of money as friends had (notwithstanding the many Diminutions
endeavored of his Prerogative and regality) no assault or incursions upon the
Rights and Legal Privileges of his Domestiques or Household Servants; but had
allowed him that Reverence and respect which by the Civil Law) that universal
Guide or Director of Reason and Justice and (next to the Laws Eternal, and its
Deputy or Law of nature written in the heart of Mankind) the Mother, Nurse or
Parent, of a great part of that which is called our Common Law) is and ought to
be due and payable to the persons and Courts of Princes, but enjoyed so much of
it as Lord Chancellor El'esmeer in his Speech or argument concerning the post^
nati
Bracton, who was a Learned Lawyer and afterward a Judge, and as some have
believed a Chief Justice in the latter end of that Kings Reign, or the
beginning of the Reign of King Edward the first, his Son in his Book De legibus
et Consuetudinibus Angliae, of the Laws and Customs of England, whilst he
disputes where a Defendant excuses his not appearing to an Action, when he is
in Servitio Regis in the Kings Service, and whether being summoned before he
was in the Kings Service and might send or Bracton l^. 5 de Essoniis cap.
2.337. de Exceptienibus 439. cap. 31. et 444 ca. 33.
make his Attorney, should be excused, is willing to conclude in the negative,
yet forbeares to do it with a sed ita esset but so it would be, si quis posset
factum Domini Regis Judicare et in omnibus istis casibus magis erit spectanda
voluntas Domini Regis quam jus strictum cum servitium Domini Regis nulli debeat
esse damnosum, et sicut non debet esse tenenti (when it seems the Action spoken
of concerned plea of Land) Damnosum, ita non debet esse Petenti injuriosum, if
any were to be Judge of the Kings Actions, and that in all those Cases the will
of the King was more to be regarded than the strictness of the Law when as the
service of the King ought not to be grievous unto any: And as it ought not to
be a grievance unto the Tenant, so ought not the Plaintiff to take it to be a
wrong done unto him: And was of opinion that the solemnity and course of
process may be sometimes shortened propter reverentiam personae vel privilegium
contra quem illata fuit injuria vel contra nobiles personas, ut si Injuriatum
sit Domino regi vel reginae vel eorum liberis fratribus sororibus, etc. For
reverence or respect to the person or in regard of the privilege due unto him
unto whom the wrong is done as if it were done to noble Persons or some wrong
done unto the King, the Queen, or their Children, Brothers, Sisters, etc.

And when he would not allow the privilege or Essoine of being in the Kings
Service unto a Sheriff or Constable who were the Kings Officers during the
time of their employments, was content to do it, ubi aligua causa emergat
necessaria ex inopinato ubi praesentia talis debet esse necessaria sicut iter
Justitiariorum vel incursus hostium vel hujusmodi, quae guidem Causae
sufficientes sunt ad excusationem de servitio domini regis, where there was any
emergent and expected Cause where their presence was necessary as to attend in
the Iter or Circuit of the Judges or upon an Invasion of Enemies or the like:
which were causes sufficient of excuse by reason of the Kings Service, dum
tamen ad quemlibet diem datum per Essoniatorem de servitio Domini regis habeat
Essoniatus warrantum suum per breve Domini Regis, so as at the day of Essoin
that he or they were in the Kings Service the Kings writ (or protection) be
produced to prove Bracton tract. 2 lib. 5. de Essoniis ca. 2.
it. Item excusatur quis si implacitatus fuerit in Curia Domini Regis vel
vocatus ad Curiam Regis ob aliquam Causam in aliquibus Curiis inferioribus,
likewise any one impleaded in the Kings Court, or called or summoned to the
Kings Court upon any Cause or occasion shall be excused in inferior Courts. Sed
quid but what says that Learned Judge dicendum erit de Curia Christianitatis
cum magis obediendum sit Deo quam hominibus? Hoc dico quod ad hunc differendum
erit, et quod dominus Rex warrantizare poterit ob reverentiam quae principi
debetur, shall be said if the Cause be depending in the Court Christian when
God is more to be obeyed than men? I say that in such a Case it is to be left
unto God, and the King may warrant his so doing in respect of the Reverence
which is due to the Prince.

Being not much different from the Cares which some Foreign Princes did about
that time hold fit to be taken of their Domestique Honors and Servants.

For by the Laws of the Sicilians Constit. Siculorum in Lindenbrogio tit. 37.
lib. 1.
and Neapolitans made or confirmed by Frederick the Emperor about the year 1221
the Magister Justiciarius magnae Curiae, Chief Justice of the King's House or
Court had the Cognizance or hearing of Causes, de questionibus nostrorum
Curialium qui immediate nobis assistunt de speciali conscientia nostra in curia
commorantium, qui de Curia nostra sine speciali mandato nostro non possunt
recedere, or questions concerning any of the Kings Courts who do immediately
attend us, and by our privity are residing in Court and cannot depart without
our special License.

Et observent Constit. Siculorum in Lindenbrogio lib 3. tit. 33.
diligentissime Judices ut in occasion injuriarum Curialium personarum
dignitatem considerent, et juxta personarum qualitatem eorum quibus fuerit
facta injuria; ipsis autem facta injuria non ipsis duntaxat, sed etiam ad
Regiae dignitatis spectat offensam, The Judges are to take an especial care
that in all accusations concerning any of the Kings Servants or Courtiers they
take into consideration their worth, dignity, and quality, seeing that a wrong
done unto them is an injury or wrong done unto the Dignity of the Prince.

And when our Bracton tr. 2 lib. 5. de Essoniis ca. 2.
Bracton will not allow the privilege where it is ex voluntaria causa when the
party that would excuse his absence was voluntarily absent and not in the Kings
service, or will of his own accord without the Kings command go along with his
Army; yet he cannot but say that talibus non subvenit dominus nisi de gratia
unto such the King would not be aiding unless he should be otherwise graciously
pleased to do it.

By an Act of Parliament made Cook 4th. part institut.
in the 52 year of the Reign of our King Henry the third, all Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons and religious men and women (except that
their appearance be specially required for some other Causes) are excused from
appearing at the Sheriffs Turn, (Sir Edward Cook cap. 53.260. et cap.
54.261.262.
extending it to the Courts Leete and view of Franck-pledge) which with the
Sheriffs Turns were instituted for the Conservation of the Kings peace,
punishment of Nusances, and where all men within the Jurisdiction of it might
be summoned to take the Oath of Allegiance.

By an Act of Parliament made 3 Ed. 1. ca. 24.
in the third year of the Reign of King Edward the first providing a remedy
where an Officer of the Kings (which by common intendment were then understood
to be the Sheriffs Escheators or Bailiffs of the King, not his menial Servants)
does disseise any, It is in that only case left to the Election of the
Disseisee, or party disseised whether that the King by office shall cause it to
be amended (which the parties grieved were more likely to choose when besides
their just satisfaction they might be a means to punish or affright the Kings
Officers so offending with the loss of their gainful, as well as not smally
reputed Offices or places) at his complaint, or that he will sue at the Common
Law by writ of novel disseisin.

And by another act of parliament made in the same year, enjoining severe
penalties against the Kings Purveyors not paying for what they take; and of
such as take part of the Kings debts, or other rewards of the Kings Creditors
to make payment of the same debts; and of such as take Horses and Carts more
than need (a trick wherein Tacitus, says Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
the Roman Cart-takers whilst the Romans governed here were wont to abuse the
old Britains) and take rewards to dismiss them: it was provided that if any of
Court so do, he shall be grievously punished by the 3 E. 1. cap. 31.
Marshalls, and if it be done out of the Court, or by one that is not of the
Court, and be thereof attainted, he shall pay treble damages, and shall remain
in the Kings prison forty days: by which it is evident that the intention of
that Act of Parliament was not to deliver any of the Purveyors, the Kings
Servants in ordinary, to any other Tribunals than that of the Marshals or other
the Officers of his Household.

Britton who like the Emperor Justinians Tribonianus in compiling or putting
together the pieces of the Civil Laws, did by Command of that wise and Valiant
Prince King Edward the first in the fifth year of his Reign, write his book in
the name of that King concerning diverse Pleas, Process, and proceedings in the
Kings Courts, says in the Person of that King and French of those times,
Countes et Barons Dedans nostre verge (the Kings Palace, or 12 miles round
about) trovesnequedent estre destreint, that Earls Barons found within the
virge should not be attached or distrained, as ordinary men which were Debtors,
Britton tit. debt. 69. sect* 241.
Et nos Serjeans (or Servants) de nostre hostel soient avaunt summons pour debt
que destreyntz et attaches par leur cors les uns pour reverence de lour
persons et les Autres pour reverence de nostre service, of our House shall be
summoned for debt before they be destreyned, or Attached by their bodies, the
one in reverence and respect to their persons, and the other in reverence to
our Service.

By an Act of Parliament made by that prudent Prince about that time entitled,
Prohibitio formata de Statuto Articuli Cleri, where Prohibiti^ formata de
Statut. Artic Cleri v^t. Mag. Charta Coke 2. part institutes of the Laws of
England 600 Register 36. Bri^ton 356.
a prohibition was framed against certain matters which concerned the Clergy
and the limitting of their Jurisdiction. It was declared, tha^, Proceres et
magnates et alii de eodem regno temporibus Regis predecessor^m Regum Angliae
seu Regis Authoritate alicujus non consueuerunt contra consuetudinem illam
super hujusmodi rebus (i. e.) matters Civil or Temporal, (except matters of
Testaments or Matrimony,) in causa trahi vel compelli ad comparendum coram
quocunque Judice Ecclesiastico, the Noble men and others of the Kingdom, in
the times of the Kings Predecessors, or by Authority of any of the Kings, did
not use contrary to the said custom in such cases to be compelled to appear
before any Ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever.

In the 18th. year of his Reign, Mich. 18. E. 1. Norf. Rot. 46.
in an Action brought at the Kings Suit, in Banco Regis, in the Kings Bench
against Robert the Son of William de Glanville and Reginald the Clark of the
said William de Glanville for delivering at Norwich a panel and certain of the
Kings Writs, which the Kings Coroner ought to have Brought, the said Reginald
demurring for that Dominus Rex motu proprio de hujusmodi Imiuriis privatis
personis illatis sectam habere non debet, ex quo aliena actio sibi competere
non potest: unde petit Judicium. et si hoc non sufficiat, dicet aliud; et si
actio in hujusmodi caesu Domino Regi posset competere, dicit quod hoc deberet
esse per breve originale et non de judicio, unde petit Judicium, the King was
not to bring an Action for injuries done to private persons, and is not
concerned in another man's suit, and demanded the judgment of the Court. And if
that Plea will not be sufficient will plead somewhat else, And if such an
Action did belong to the King it ought to have been by Writ Original, and not
by a Writ Judicial, whereof he prayed the Judgment of the Court* but Johannes
de Bosco who followed for the King, dicit quod quelibet injuria ministris
Regiis licet minimis, illata vertitur in dedecus ipsius Regis; Et licet
hujusmodi minister Justitiam assequi de injur. sibi illat. contempsit, tamen
cum hujusmodi Injuria ministris Regis illata ipsi Regi fuit ostensa competit
sibi actio ad amend. consequend. de contemptu pleaded that every wrong or
injury done to the Kings Servants* though it be unto the least, is a
disparagement to the King. And if such a Servant will not take care to
prosecute such an injury, yet when the King shall be informed thereof, he is
concerned to punish the Contempt, and vouched a late President for it in a Case
betwixt Robert of Benhale and Robert Baygnar and others in a Writ of wast, and
prayed Judgment for the King.

In the same year John de Waleis Ryleys pla. Parliament. 18. E. 1.22. sect. 15.
complaining against Bogo de Clare for that some of his Servants, when he came
to the House of the said Bogo in London, and served him with a Citation in the
name of the Archbishop of Canterbury, enforced him to eat the Seal and
Citation, and the said Bogo de Clare pleading that he ought not to answer,
because it was not alleged that he was the doer thereof, nor that his Servants
did it by his Command, nor were they named, it was in that Record and pleading
adjudged, that although the Fact was committed by the Servants of the said
Bogo, yet quia Dominus Rex pred. Transgressionem sic enormiter factam, ut
dicitur, tum propter contemptum Sanctae ecclesie tum propter contemptum ipsi
domino Regi in presentia sua, videlicet infra virgam et in Parliamento suo
factum, propter malum exemplum temporibus futuris tum propter audaciam
delinquendi sic de cetero aliis reprimendam permittere non vult impunitam, in
regard that the King would not suffer so foul an offense not only in contempt
of the Church and of the King in his presence, that is to say, within the virge
and in time of Parliament, but for the boldness of the offense and the evil
example in time to come to pass unpunished, the said Bogo de Clare should
answer the Fact at the Kings suit for that the offense was committed infra
portam suam et per manupastos et familiares suos, within, the house of the said
Bogo and by his Household Servants, some of whom being named the said Bogo was
commanded to bring them before the King and his Council, to abide by what
should be ordered and decreed against them.

By the Statute or Act 28. E. 1. ^. ^.
of Parlimaent made in the 28th. year of that Kings Reign, the King and
Parliament may be understood not to intend that the Kings Purveyors or Servants
of that nature should be tried or punished for diverse offenses therein
mentioned before other Tribunals than that of the great Officers of his
Household, and therefore ordained that for those Offenses they should only be
tried and punished by the Steward and Treasurer of the Kings Household, nor when
by an Act of Parliament, made in the same year and Parliament, of what matters
the Steward and Marshall of the Kings Household should hold Plea, 28 E. ca. 3.
their Jurisdictions were confined to Trespasses only done within the Kings
House, and of other Trespasses done within the Virge, and of Contracts and
Covenants made by one of the House with another of the same House and in the
same House, and none other where. And whereas before that time the Coroners of
the Counties were not authorized to inquire of Felonies done within the Virge,
but the Coroners of the Kings House which never continues in one place,
whereby the Felonies could not be put in exigent, nor Trial had in due manner.
It was ordained that in case of the death of men, it should be commanded to the
Coroner of the County that he with the Coroners of the Kings House should do,
as belongs to his Office, and enroll it; and that the things which cannot be
determined before the Steward of the Kings House, where the Felons cannot be
Attached, or for other like cause should be remitted to the Common Law, the
King and Parliament can be rightly supposed thereby to intend that the Kings
Domestiques or Household Servants should for Controversies amongst themselves of
the nature before recited be compelled to attend or be subject to any other
Jurisdiction, when a Coroner of the Kings House was long before appointed to
prevent it: and it appears by that Act of Parliament it self, that the
matters therein mentioned were not to be remitted to the Common Law, but where
they could not be determined before the Steward of the Kings House. The care
and provision of which Act of Parliament to keep the cognizance of the Causes
and Actions therein mentioned within the Jurisdiction of the Steward and
Treasurer of the Kings House, did neither abrogate any of the former Rights and
Liberties of the King or his Servants, nor by any reasonable construction or
interpretation can be understood either to abolish and take them away, or to
intend to give a liberty to Arrest without license any of the Kiags Servants in
ordinary.

And 28. E. 1. c. 4.
an Act of Parliament being made in the same year, that Common Pleas or Actions
should not be holden in the Exchequer (which was then kept in his Palace) did
by a Writ under the great seal of England directed unto the Treasurer and
Barons of the Exchequer, reciting that secundum legem et consuetudines Regni,
according to the Law and customs of the Kingdom, Common Pleas ought not there
to be Register 187. B.
pleaded, does specially except nisi placita illa nos vel aliquem ministrorum
nostrorum scaccarii specialiter tangant, such Actions as did not especially
concern him or any of his Ministers or Servants belonging unto his Exchequer,
and commanded an Action of debt for five pounds brought against one of thc
Exchequer to be superseded and no further prosecuted, and that the said
Treasurer and Barons should on the Kings behalf declare to the Plaintiff, quod
breve nostrum de debito sibi impetret, si sibi viderit expedire, that he should
if he thought it expedient sue forth the Kings writ for the debt aforesaid,
which can import no less then a license preceding the obtaining of it, and
until such Actions were to the large and very great benefit of the Subjects in
a cheap and ordinary course to be obtained which in the morning and infancy of
our common and municipal Laws were wont to be petitioned for, and be not a
little costly dilatory and troublesome, as they which have made use of a friend
to the King or a Master of Requests, or Secretary of State may easily be
persuaded to believe, amounted to a greater trouble, delay, and expense of the
Plaintiffs, than now they are put unto, to get leave of the Lord Chamberlain of
the Kings House to Arrest any of the Kings Servants: and that prudent Prince
did certainly by that Act of Parliament touching the Exchequer not holding
Common Pleas as little intend, as did his Father King Henry the third, by that
Act that Common Pleas should not follow his Court, that his Servants in
ordinary should without leave or license first obtained be constreyned to
neglect their Service and attendance, and appear before other Tribunals.

For there is an ancient Writ says Sir Edward Coke, to be found in the
Register of Writs called de non residentia Clerici Regis, of the non-residence
of the Kings Clerk or Chaplain, or attending in some Office in the Chancery
directed to Cokes 2 par. institut. 624. Artic. Cleri. ca. 8. Register. 58.6. F.
N. B. 44. G.
the Bishop of the Diocese in these words, Cum Clerici nostri ad faciend* in
beneficiis suis residentiam personalem (which was for the cure of Souls being
the highest concernment, and greater then that of appearing to an Action of
debt or other Action) dum in nostris immorantur obsequii^ compelli aut alias
super hoc molestari seu inquietari non debeant, nosque ac progenitores nostri
quondam Reges Angliae hujusmodi liberate et privilegio pro Clericis nostris a
tempore quo non extat memoria semper hactenus usi sumus, vobis mandamus quod
dilectum Clericum nostrum A parsonam Ecclesiae de B. vestrae dioces. qui in
Caencellaria nostra nostris jugiter intendit obsequiis, ad personalem
residentiam in beneficio suo predicto faciendam, dum in obsequiis nostris
Immoretur nullatenus compellatis, et sequestrum (a penalty upon non residents
too much disused or neglected) si quod in fructibus aut aliis bonis Ecclesiae
suae predictae ea occasion per vos aut vestrum fuerit appositum, sine
dilatione relaxari faciatis, whereas our Clerks ought not to be compelled to a
personal residence in their benifices nor molested therein, whilst they are
employed in our Affairs or attendance, and that we and our progenitors Kings of
England from the time to which the memory of man does not extend, have always
hitherto used and enjoyed that liberty and privilege, we command you that you
do no ways enforce A our well beloved Clark Parson of the Church of B. in your
Diocese to a personal residence therein, whilst he is employed in our affairs
in our Chancery. And that, if by reason thereof you have sequestered any of the
profits or goods of his said Church, you do without delay discharge or release
the same.

In the 33th. and 34th. Mich. 33. et 34. E. 1. cor^m. Rege. to. 71.
year of the aforesaid Kings Reign William de Brewse a great and powerful Baron
of England being indicted in the Kings Bench for using contumelious and
reproachful words to Roger de Hengham one of the Judges (who are but as the
Kings Ministers or special Servants in his dispensation and Administration of
Justice) for giving Judgment against him and he pleading to the Coke 2 part
institutes. ca. 208 230.
said Indictment quod non intellexit in hoc Domino Regi aut Curiae suae se
aliquem Contemptum fecisse, that he did not understand that it was any contempt
or Jnjury done by him to the King or Court, sed si videatur Domino Regi et ejus
Consilio quod ipse in hoc in aliquo deliquit, ipse se inde totaliter submittit
voluntati Domini Regis, etc. But if it should appear that he had therein
offended he did wholly submit himself to the Kings good pleasure quibus
praemiss^s postea coram domino Rege and ejus consilio visis et diligenter
examinatis et plenarie intellectis, all which matters and premises being
afterward considered, diligently examined, and fully understood, Quia
manifest patet tam pro hoc quod praefatus Gulielmus post redditionem Judicii
praedicti contemptibiliter Barram ascendit and prefatum Rogerum Justic. Domini
Regis de Judicio per ipsum pronunciat. reprehendit, et postea eidem Roger.
eunti, etc. Verbis acerbioribus et grossioribus insultavit; for that it plainly
appeared that the said William after the said Judgment given by the said Roger,
contemptuously came to the Bar, and did reprehend the said Justice for the
Judgment aforesaid pronounced against him, and afterward followed the said
Roger as he was going from the said Court, and reviled him with gross and
bitter words. Quae express redundabant tam in dedecus praedicti Justic. quam
in Contempt. Cur. Dom. Regis et inobedientiam; Quae quidem, viz. Contemptus et
inobedientia tam ministris ipsius Domini Regis quam sibi ipsi aut Cur. suae
facta ipsi Regi valde sunt odiosa, which did expressly redound as well to the
reproach of the said Judge, as a disobedience to the King and a Contempt of his
Court: which contempt and disobedience as well to the Ministers of the King as
to himself or his Court are greatly displeasing. Et hoc express apparuit.

Cum idem Dominus Rex filium suum primogenitum et Charissimum Edwardum
Principem Walliae pro eo quod quaedam verba grossa et acerba cuidam ministro
suo dixerat ab hospitio suo fere per dimidium Anni amovit, nec ipsum filium
suum in conspectu suo venire permisit quousque dicto ministro de predicta
transgressione satisfecerat. And this says the Record expressly appeared, when
the King did for almost half a year banish from his Court, and presence his
dearly beloved Son, Edward Prince of Wales, for that he had given some foul
words to one of his Ministers or Servants that attended him, which as Sir
Edward Coke says Cokes third parts institutes 142. tit. misprision.
was the Treasurer of England who was so much misused by the instigation of
Pierce Gaveston, and would not suffer him to come in his sight until he had
given his said servant or minister satisfaction. Et quia sicut honor et
reverentia, quae ministris ipsius Regis ratione Officii sui fiant, ipsi Regi
attribuuntur, sic dedecus ministris suis factum eidem domino Regi infertur, And
in regard that any honor or reverence done to the Kings Ministers or Servants,
are attributed or taken as done to the King, so any reproach done unto his
Servants or Ministers, are such as done to the King himself. Et videatur quod
praedictus Gulielmus in praemissis tam ipsi Domino Regi et Curiae suae quam
praefat. Justic. suo contempt. fecit, Et dedecus manifestum. And that it was
evident that the said William had behaved himself contemptuously as well
toward the King and his said Court as to the said Judge, Concordatum est et
consideratum per ipsum Dominum Regem et consilium suum, it was by the King and
his Council (which by the Tenor and Title of the Records of the Court of Kings
Bench, in the Reigns of King Edward the first Edward the second and Edward the
third, Videlicet Placita coram Rege and Consilio suo, Were the Judges of the
Kings Bench, and are not as some have mistaken it, to be at all understood to
signify the Parliament the Kings Greater Council and Court) ordained and
ordered, that the said William de Brewse should without his Sword go
bareheaded, a Banco ipsius Domini Regis ubi placita tenentur in Aula
Westmonaster. per medium Aulae praedictae cum Curia plena fuerit usque ad
Scaccarium et ibidem veniam petat a prefat. Rogero et gratum sibi faciat de
dedecore et transgressione sibi fact. Et postea pro contemptu facto Domino Regi
et Curiae suae Committatur Turri ibid. moraturus ad voluntatem Domini Regis,
from the Kings Bench in Westminster Hall through the middle of the Hall
aforesaid, when the Court was full unto the Exchequer, and there ask pardon of
the said Roger of the wrong and injury done unto him, and after for the
contempt done to the King and his Court be committed to the Tower, there to
remain during the Kings pleasure.

And about that time limited the vast and heretofore more extensive power of
the chief Justice of England then so styled to the placita only coram Domino
Rege tenenda assignata (as the Letters Patents or Commissions of the other
Judges of the Court of Kings Bench are to this day) to such matters as properly
concerned Criminal matters, the Crown and Dignity thereof and the peace of the
Kingdom the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster being the only true and
proper Jurisdiction Commissionated to hear the Common Pleas and Actions for
Lands, and real and personal Estate or Civil matters concerning and between
Subjects one with another, where the contracts, or matters complained, were not
made or done in the Kings House or Palace, or Virge thereof, by the Kings
Servants within the same House to be heard and determined coram Rege ubicunque
fuerit in Anglia, before the King wheresoever he should be in England.

And there was so much care taken by King Edward the second, and his Council
of such as were in his Service, or employed in his Affairs as when in the ninth
year of his Reign, It was enquired or debated in Parliament in what case the
Kings Letters should be sent to discharge an Excommunicate person, the King
decreed, as the words of that Law or Act of Parliament do witness, that,
hereafter no such Letters should be suffered to go forth but in case where it
is found that the Kings Liberty is prejudiced by the Excommunications (which in
those times were the fulmina or most terrilbe Thunderbolts and Terrors of the
English Clergy.)

And it being in the same Parliament 9 E. 2. ca. 8.
complained of that the Barons of the Exchequer claiming by their privilege
that they ought to make answer unto no Complaynant out of the same place did
extend their privilege unto Clerks abiding there called unto orders or unto
residence and inhibit ordinaries that by no means or for any cause so long as
they be in the Exchequer or in the Kings Service they should not call them to
account, the answer was made by the King, it pleases our Lord the King that
such Clerks as attend in his Service if they offend shall be correct by their
Ordinaries (which was a protection and privilege as greatly contenting them as
the Kings protection or any privilege of that nature) Like as other, but so
long as they are occupied about the Exchequer they shall not be bound to keep
residence in their Churches.

With this Addition (says the transcriber of that Act of Parliament) of new by
the Kings Council (which if understood of the Kings Privy Council was without
doubt ratified and approved by the Parliament that greater Council) viz. The
King and his Ancestors time out of mind have used that Clerks employed in his
service during such time as they are in service shall not be compelled to keep
residence in their Benefices.

And such things as be thought necessary for the King and the Commonwealth
ought not to be prejudicial to the liberty of the Church, where we have in and
by a Parliament which was always intended as it ought to be a collected
wisdom and care of the Nation, a clear exposition of those words of Bracton,
quod servitium domini Regis nulli debet esse damnosum nec debet esse tenenti
and of Fleta nulli debet esse damnosum nec injuriosum; the service of the King
or any thing done in consequence thereof ought not to be esteemed a wrong or
Injury to the Subjects.

The like privilege (for many Nations do in their Laws and Constitutions not
seldom follow the light of reason in the observation of Neighbors good
Examples) Tilli Comment de rebus Gallicis lib. 2. cap. de. Officiis Domesticis
Regum.
having not above six years before been allowed by Philip surnamed the fair
King of France to the Chaplains and Clerks of the Kings and Queens of France.

Seldom dissertatione ad Fletam 454.
Fleta, who as our great and excellently learned Seldom says was an Anonymus
or Author without a name but a Lawyer and as is by some supposed to have been
at the time of the writing of his book a Prisoner in the Fleet, and therefore
gave it the name of Fleta by the mention of certain Statutes made in the 13th.
year of the Reign of King Edward the first as also of the Statutes made at
Winchester and Westminster, and a record in the 17th. year of the Reign of that
King, is believed to have written his book in the latter end of the Reign of
King Edward the second or the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the third,
says that by a Statute made at Gloucester in the sixth year of the Reign of
King Edward the first, if a Defendant were essoyned of the Kings 6 E. 1. Stat.
Glou. ca. 8.
service and do not bring his warrant at the day given him by his Essoyne he
shall recompense the Plaintiff for his Journey 20 s. or more after the
discretion of the Justices and shall be grievously amerced to the King, which
allows that if the Kings warrant be brought that the Defendant is in the
Kings Service (that Statute not mentioning whether in ordinary Fleta lib. 2.
cap. 1.
or Domestique Service or extraordinary,) such a Warrant should be received and
held good, the rule of Law being that, exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non
exceptis, Cases not excepted are always within the protection and meaning of
that Law which does not except them, and declares it to be then the Law, that a
man may be excused Fleta lib. 6. cap. 54.
in a Court of Justice, quod Clameum non apposuerit per servitium Regis quod
nulli debet esse damnosum dum tamen docuerit quod venire non potuit, ut si
occupatus fuit per Custodiam Castri vel alio modo in servitio suo detentus et
impeditus; that he did not enter his Claim to land within a year and a day, by
reason of the Kings service, which ought not to be prejudicial to any body, so
as he do make it appear that he could not come, as if he were employed in the
Custody of a Castle or any other way hindered by the Kings Service.

In the Chapter or discourse de Exceptionibus coram senescallo and Marescallo
Regis of the Exceptions of a Defendant to be used or taken in an Action brought
or commenced before the Steward or Marshall of the King has these words, Item
dicere Fleta lib. 2. cap. 61.
poterit quod non est obligatus ad districtionem senescalli, likewise he may
say that he is not obliged or bound to obey the process or command of the
Steward in the Bond taken for the payment of the money by a Clause inserted
(which was then not unusual as it appears by his next precedent Chapter) that
the Debtor should be obliged upon non-payment to appear or have the Action or
matter determined before the Kings Steward or Marshall, and etsi non obligetur
ad districtionem senescalli, hoc sibi prodesse non debet, though he be not
obliged specially in the Bond or obligation to the process or power of the
Steward, that will not avail the Defendant eo quod est de hospitio Regis et in
servitio suo continuo et quo casu respondebit vel indefensus remanebit et pro
convicto habebitur quia per servitium Regis essoniari poterit alibi ubique in
infinitum, for that he is of the Kings Household and continually in his service,
and in that case must answer, or not defending himself will be convicted, when
as he might otherwise in any other Court or Place have Essoined or excused
himself as often as he pleased, et servitium Regis nulli debet esse damnosum
nec Fleta lib. 6 ca 7.
injuriosum (being the very words of Bracton beforementioned) and the Kings
Service ought not to be a wrong or damage unto any.

And is notwithstanding of opinion that a defendant may be by his Essoin
excused, ex causa necessaria et utili aut causa reipublicae, for a necessary
cause or occasion, and where the good of the Commonwealth is concerned (as
surely it must be understood not to be in the safety, well being, and daily
attendance upon the Person of the King as much or very near the instance or
case by him there put) Si eat cum Rege in exercitu, if he go in the Army with
the King (as all King David's Servants did when he marched against his
rebellious Son Absalom, and as most or very many of the Servants of Kings and
Princes do use to be) ad patriae defensionem cum ad hoc teneatur vel per
praeceptum Regis, when he goes with the King to War for the defense of his
Country being obleiged thereunto by the Tenure of his Lands, or the Kings
Commandment.

And having said, that Pleas of Debt do belong unto the Court of Common Pleas;
concludes, Sunt tamen Fleta. lib. 2 ca. 61.
causae speciales quae alibi terminantur ex permissione Principis per querelam
coram senescallo Aulae and ut in Scaccario cum causa fuerit Regi necessaria,
videlicet, ne Ministri sui de Scaccario ab obsequio suo continuo quicquam
impediantur; There are notwithstanding some Causes, which by the leave or good
pleasure of the Prince are by Plaint to be determined before the Steward of the
Household, as also in the Exchequer, when it shall concern the King, that his
Officers or Servants be not in their Business hindered.

So as then, and for some time after, it was not likely that any Inroads should
be made upon that just and rational Privilege of the Kings Servants: For,
howsoever that even in those more frugal and thrifty days, some of the Kings
Menial and Household Servants might not then be so beforehand, as it is now
termed, or so far from being indebted, but that some Moneys or Debts might be
demanded of them, or there might be some occasion of Complaints or Actions to
be brought against them.

Yet there appears not any probability or foundation for it, that the Liberties
and Privileges of the Kings Servants were for many years after the twenty
eighth year of the Reign of King Edward the First, which limited all Actions
before the Steward and Marshal of the Kings House, to such Contracts and
Actions only as were or should be made betwixt one of the Kings Servants, with
any other of his Servants, disturbed or unsecured, or that the Kings Servants
were for many years after molested or troubled with the severe and disgraceful
way of Imprisonments now used, when the Chancellors and the Justices of the
Kings Bench were by an Act of Parliament in the same year enjoined Articuli
super Chartas, c. 5. Spel. Gloss.
to attend the King and his Court, and to be there a latere tanquam famulantes,
always near him, and as Domestiques, says the Learned Sir Henry Spelman; so
that as the words of that Statute are, the King might have at all times near
unto him some that be learned in the Laws, which be able duly to order all
such matters as shall come unto the Court, at all times when need shall
require: Which the Chancellor, and in all l^kelihood the Chief Justice did not
neglect; for, says Sir Henry Spelman, Such Causes as nulli constitutorum
Tribunalium rite competerent ad Palatium seu oraculum Regni, were not limited
to the determination or judgment of other Tribunals, came to the Kings Palace,
as to the Oracle of the Kingdom; and yet then the King was not without his more
than one Attorneys or Procurators, who were men learned in the Law.

And King Edward the third was so unwilling that his Servants should be drawn
before other Tribunals, as by a Statute made in the fifth year of his Reign,
where it was ordained, 5 E. 3. ca. 2.
That in Inquests to be taken in the Kings House, before the Steward and
Marshal, that they should be taken by men of the County thereabouts (to avoid,
it may be, partiality) and not by men of the Kings House, there is an Exception
of Contracts, Covenants, and Trespasses made by men of the Kings House of the
one part and the other, and that in the same House.

And the Chancellors of England were in former times so, or for the most part
Resident in the Kings Court, and accounted as a part of his Family, as until
the making of the Act of Parliament in the 36 year of the Reign of King Edward
the Third, which did restrain the Pourveyance to the Kings and Queens Houses
only, and did forbid it to be made 36 E. 3. c. 2.7. 7 E. 3. Rot. Parl. 1 part.
m. 1^. and 2 part. 7 E. 3. m. 4. Ordin. Cancellar. 12 R. 2.
for other Lords and Ladies of the Realm, the King did use to send his Writs to
the Sheriffs of the Counties where they had occasion to make any Pourveyance
for the Chancellor, his Officers and Clerks, some whereof, as their Clerici de
prima forma, now called the Masters of Cbancery, were ad Robas, had and yet
have an yearly allowance for their Robes or Liveries, commanding them to be
assistant to their Pourveyors, the Chancery Clerks being in the 18th year of
that Kings Reign so accounted to be a part of his Servants and Family, as a
Rot. Parl. 18 E. 3. m. 41.
Complaint or Petition being exhibited in Parliament by all the Clerks of the
Chancery, That whereas the Chancellors and Keepers of the Great Seal of England
ought to have cognizance of all Pleas and Trespasses done unto or by any of the
Clerks of the Chancery, Thomas de Kislingbury Draper of London had forged (the
best word they would then bestow upon a Writ or Action not commenced as it
ought to be by Original Writ issuing out of the Chancery) a Bill of Trespass
against Gilbert de Chishull one of the Clerks of the Chancery, whereby to take
away from the King and his Chancellor the Cognizance of the said Action, which
belonged unto them, contre Common Ley de la Terre, against the Common Law of
the Land, did by a Sergeant of the Mace in London arrest and imprison him in
the House of John de Aylesham one of the Sheriffs of London; and although the
King sent a Supersedeas, commanding the Plaintiff to surcease his prosecution
there, and that he prosecute the said Gilbert de Chyshull in Chancery, if he
have any cause of Action against him; the Sheriffs of London, contrary to the
Common Law of the Land, and in despite of the King, refused to obey it.

The Parliament acknowledging the aforesaid Rights and Customs of the said
Clerks of the Chancery, and the contempt of the King, did ordain, Que brief
soit mandez a Mayor de Londres, de attacher les divz Viscontes, and autres
quont este parties and maintenours de la guerele don't ceste bille fait mention
per le Corpse destre devant le Roy en sa dite Chancellerie a certain jour, a
respondre aussibien du contempt fait a nostre Seigneur le Roy and ses
mandements, and prejudice de son Chanceller come al dit Clerk des damages and
trespass faites a lui; That a Writ should be awarded and directed to the Mayor
of London, to arrest by their Bodies the said Sheriffs of London, and others
which were parties and maintainers of the said evil action, to answer before
the King in his Chancery at a certain day, as well for the contempt done to the
King and his Commands, and prejudice of his Chancellor, as also to the said
Clerk for his damages and wrong sustained.

And that King, by a Statute made in the 36 year of his Reign, forbidding under
severe penalties any 36 E. 3. c. 3.
Pourveyance to be made but for the King and Queen and their Houses, and to
take any such Pourveyance without ready Money, there is a pain or penalty to be
imposed (as Sir Edward Coke upon view of the Record thereof has observed) upon
the Steward, Treasurer, and Controller, Cokes 3 part institut.
and other Officers of the Kings Household, for not executing that Statute;
which need not to have been, if the cognizance of the Offenses therein
mentioned had not by that Act been thought fit to have been left unto them.

And was so far from being persuaded to release the constant Attendance of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, as when the Commons in Parliament in the 38th year
of his Reign Petitioned him, That the Kings Bench might remain in some certain
Place, and not be Rot. Parl. 38 E. 3. m. 12.
removed, he answered in the negative, That he would not do so.

And where the Court Marshal was so anciently constituted for the Placita Aulae
sive Regis Palatii, for Pleas, Actions, and Controversies concerning the
Servants of the Royal Family, when any should happen to arise amongst them, and
retained in the Kings House and Attendance, and the Court of Common Pleas was
designed and delegated to do Justice unto all the Common People, in Real and
Civil Actions, in certo loco, a certain place assigned in the Kings House or
Palace (for then, and long after, until our Kings of England made Whitehall
their Palace or Residence, it is probable that the Bars, Benches, and Tribunals
of the Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, and other
Courts since inhabiting that great and magnificent Hall of Westminster, were
movable, and not so fixed as they now are) and allowed not to travel with the
King and his Court, or to follow it, and the Court of Exchequer to take care of
the Royal Revenue in its Income, Receipts, and Disbursments; It cannot without
some affront or violence done to Reason be imagined, that our Kings, who would
have that Court of the Marshal to be nearer their Persons than any other of
their Courts of Justice always attending and resident for the concernment
properly of their Household and Servants, and because they should not be
enforced from their daily Service to pursue their Rights, or seek for Justice
before other Tribunals, should ever intend or be willing that their Servants
and necessary Attendants, should as Defendants, and at the suit of Strangers,
and such as are not the Kings Servants, be haled to Prison, diverted from their
Service, or obstructed in it, when as Justice in the old, more dutiful, and
respectful way, might as cheap, and with lesser trouble, be had against them at
the Fountain or Spring of Justice, by the King himself, the Alpha or beginning
of it, and Omega the Dernier Resort or last Appeal, where his ordinary Courts
of Justice fail and cannot do ir. And where some of our late Kings and Queens
of England, not to be wanting unto the Cries and Complaints of their People for
want of Justice, did afterward appoint and allow another Court in the Reigns
of King Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary,
Queen Elizabeth, called and known by the name of Curia Supplicatio^um and
Libellorum, the Court of Petitions and Requests, where those that were honored
with the Title and Offices of Judges, and as Commissioners and Masters of
Requests, for those particular Causes and Cases, were Bishops or Barons, Lords
Stewards of his Household, and other Great Officers thereof, Deans of the
Chapel, and Doctors of Law and Divinity, were styled or called Concilium
Regis, that Style or Title, and Masters of Requests, as Synonyma's then
signifying one and the same thing: And a Mastership of Requests was so highly
esteemed in the seventh year of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, as there was besides
Walter Haddon Doctor of the Laws, and Thomas Seckford Esquire a Common Lawyer, the
Bishop of Rochester a Master of Requests; and in the 22. Inter Rec. and
Registr. Cur. Requisitionum. 22 Eliz. f. 318.
year of her Reign, Sir William Gerrard Knight, Lord Chancellor of Ireland,
was, during the time of his being in England, made a Master of Requests
Extra-ordinary, and by the Queens Letter of Recommendation to the other Masters
of Requests, ordained to sit amongst them; and their Decrees were sometimes
signed by the King himself, with his Sign Manual: and in the tenth year of King
Henry the eighth, diverse Bills were exhibited unto Thomas Wolsey Archbishop of
York, Chancellor of England, and Cardinal, and Legate a Latere, to granr
Process for the Defendents appearance, to answer before his Grace, and others
of the Kings most Honorable Council in Whitehall (but at other times before
and since were constrained to appear before that Council by Writ or Process of
Privy Seal, or a Messenger of the Kings) that Court, as it may be observed by
the Registers and Records thereof, coming to be called the Court of Requests
only about the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the sixth. And such care
was taken by King Henry the seventh, to hear and redress the Grievances and
Laments of his Inter Record and Registr. Cur. Requisition. and 9 H. 7. Orders
and Decrees m^de by King H. 7.
People, as in the ninth year of his Reign he assigned and enjoined them
certain months and times diligently to attend unto that business, the greatest
Earls and Barons having in those times been made Defendants to several Bills
and Petitions, many of the Learned Sergeants of the Law there pleading for
their Clients; and Sir Humphrey Brown Knight. one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, in the sixth year of the Reign of King Edward the sixth, being
made a Defendant in this Court, where the Plaintiff after 12 years delays in
Chancery, and an Appeal from that Court unto this, obtained a Decree against
him, and yet no Pleas and Demurrers are found to be put in against the Legality
of this Court in the Reigns of King Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth, Edward
the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, or since, although Sir Edward Coke
Cokes 4. part institut. 97. and 98.
being unwilling to allow it to be a Court legally constituted, as not founded
by any Prescription or Act of Parliament, has thrown it under some scruples or
objections, with which the former Ages and Wisemen of this Nation thought not
fit to trouble their Times and Studies, that Court being not only sometimes
employed in the determining of Cases and Controversies irremedial in the
delegated Courts of Justice, out of the Palace Royal, or by the Privy Council;
but concerning the Kings Domestics or Servants in Ordinary, as may be seen in
the 33 year of the Reign of K. Henry the eighth, in the Case of David Inter
Record. and Decret. Cur. Supplicat. 33 H. 8.109
Sissel of Witham in the County of Lincoln Plaintiff, against Richard Sissel
his Brother Yeoman of the Kings Robes, for certain Lands lying in Stamford in
the said County of Lincoln, formerly dismissed by the Kings most Honorable
Privy Council, wherein the said David Sissel was enjoined upon pain of
Imprisonment to forbear any clamor further to be made to the Kings Grace
touching the Premises. In the second and third years of King Philip and Queen 2
and 3 P. and M. 16.
Mary, Sir John Brown Knight, one of the two Principal Secretaries to the King
and Queens Majesty's, was a Plaintiff in that Court; and in the thirteenth year
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Sir James 13 Eliz. 188.
Crofts Knight, Comptroller of the Queens Majesty's Household, against Alexander
Scoffeild, for Writings and Evidences in the Defendants Custody. And those
great assistants, Lords and Bishops, Commissionated by the King as his Council
or Commissioners, did sometimes in that Court, as in the thirtieth year of the
Reign of King Henry the eighth, superintend some Causes appealed as well from
the Lord Privy Seal, as the Common Law; and Sir John Russel Knight, Lord
Russel, the same man 13 E. 4. Ret. Parl.
or his Father being in an Act of Parliament in the thirteenth year of the
Reign of King Edward the Fourth, wherein he, with the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and others, were made Feoffees of certain Lands to the use and for performance
of the Kings last Will and Testament, styled Master John Russel his Majesty's
Keeper of the Privy Seal, was in that Court made a Defendant in Inter Record.
and Decret. Cur. Requisition. 30 H. 8. fo. 126.
the first year of the Reign of King Edward the sixth, to a Suit, 1 E. 6. fo.
298.
Petition, or Bill there depending against him, although he was at that time
also that Great and Ancient Officer of State called the Lord Privy Seal (there
having been a Custos Privati Sigilli, a Keeper of the Privy Seal, as early as
the later end of King Fleta, li. 2. ca. 13.
Edward the first, or King Edward the second, or the beginning of the Reign of
King Edward the third, about which time Fleta wrote, nor was it then mentioned
as any Novelty or new Office) the Lord Privy Seal, or Keepers of the Kings
Privy Seal having ever since the eighteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the
seventh, if not long before, until that fatal Rebellion in the later end of the
Reign of that incomparable and pious Prince King Charles the Martyr,
successively presided Coke 2. part Institut. 554.
and been Chief Judges in that Court, which was not understood to be illegal in
the twentieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when in a Case wherein
George Ashby Esquire was Complainant, against William Rolfe Defendant, an
Injunction being awarded Inter Record. and Decret. ejus^dem temp^ris in Cur.
Requisite. 85.
against the Defendant, not to prosecute or proceed any further at the Common
Law, and disobeyed by the procurement of the said William Rolfe, it was
ordered, That Francis Whitney Esquire Sergeant at Arms, should apprehend and arrest
all and every person which should be found to prosecute the said Defendant
contrary to the said Injunction, and commit them to the safe custody of the
Warden of the Fleet, there to remain until order be taken for their delivery by
her Majesty's Council of that Court; by Authority whereof the said William
Rolfe was apprehended, and committed to the Fleet for his Contempts; but
afterward in further contempt the said William Rolfe's Attorney at the Common
Law, prosecuting a Nisi prius before Sir Christopher Wray then Lord Chief
Justice of the Queens Bench, against the Complainant in Guildhall London, the
said Attorney was then und there presently taken out of the said Court by the
said Sergeant at Arms, and committed to the Fleet.

Nor by Sir Henry Mountague Knight, Earl of Manchester, who being the Son of a
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was in Legibus Angliae enutritus and in
praxi legum versatissimus, a great and well-experienced Lawyer, and from his
Labor and Care therein ascended to the Honor and Degree of Lord Chief Justice
of the Kings Bench, from thence to that of Lord Treasurer of England, thence to
be Lord President of the Kings most Honorable Privy Council, and from thence
to be Lord Privy Seal, and for many years after sitting as Supreme Judge and
Director of the Court of Requests, in the Reign of King James and King Charles
the Martyr, together with the four Masters of Requests, his Assessors and
Assistants in that Honorable and necessary Court.

Which Office or Place a Libellis Principis, of Master of Requests, having been
long ago in use in the Roman Empire, and those that were honored therewith
with maximorum culmine dignitatum Lib. 1. C. T. de Magist. Scriniorum and lib.
1. C. T. de Comi^ibus Consistor.
digni: men accounted worthy of the most honorable nnd eminent Employments;
and that Office or Place so highly esteemed, as that great and ever famous
Lawyer Papinian, who was styled Juris Vincent. Lupan^s, l. 2. tit. Magistr.
Requestarum
Asylum, the Sanctuary or Refuge of the Law, did under the Emperor Severus
enjoy the said Office, to whom his Scholar or Disciple Vlpian afterward
succeeded, and with our Neighbors the French summo in honor sunt, are very
greatly honored, quibus ab Aula Principis abesse non licet, and so necessary,
as not at any time to be absent from the Court or Palace of the Prince. The
Masters of Requests are and have been with us so much regarded and honored, as
in all Assemblies and Places they precede the Kings Learned Council at Law, and
take place of them; and amongst other Immunities and Privileges due unto them,
and to the Kings Servants, are not to be enforced to undergo or take upon them
any other inferior Offices or Places in the Commonwealth.

There being certainly as much, if not a greater Reason, that the King should
have a Court of Requests, or Equity and Conscience, where any of his Servants
or Petitioners are concerned, as the Lord Mayor of London (who is but the Kings
Subordinate Governor of that City for a year) should have a Court of
Conscience or Requests in the City of London, for his Servants or the Freemen
and Citizens thereof.

The Rights and Conveniences of our Kings of England doing Justice to their
Domestic or Household Servants, within their Royal Palaces or Houses, or the
virge thereof, and not remitting them to other Judicatures, together with the
Duty and Respects never to be denied to Superiority, in order more especially
to Government, being as well to be allowed unto our Kings and Princes, and
consistent with right Reason, as it was in the more ancient times of the Empire
or Rome, when the Magister Guther. de Offic. Domus Augustae l. 2. c. 20. and l.
3. c. 28.
Officiorum, or Steward of the Emperors House or Palace, cui totius Palatii
cura pertinuit, to whom the whole care of their Household did appertain, and
apud quem tam in Civilibus quam Criminalibus causis respondere tenentur, and
before whom all the Servants of the Household were obliged to answer, as well in
Causes Civil as Criminal, could do no less then incite and advise them so
watchfully to guard the necessary and allowed Priveledges of their Servants,
warranted by the dictates of right Reason, and our own Laws, as well as the
Laws and Customs of many of our neighbor Nations.

And therefore by an Act of Parliament in the second year of the Reign of King
Richard the second, confirmed by another in the twelfth, it was 2 R. 2. c. 5.
12 R. 2. c. 11.
ordained, That those that raised horrible and false lies against the Prelates,
Dukes, Earls, Barons, great Nobility, and great Men of the Realm, as also of
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Clerks of the Privy Seal, Stewards of the Kings
House (being the more special and eminent part of his Domestic Servants, and
those that did attend him, and in ancient and more respectful Times and Ages to
the Servants and Honor of Princes, did wear no less a Title than Proceres
Palatii, Lords or Men of great eminency in the Palaces of Kings and Emperors)
Justices of the one Bench or the other, and other great Officers of the Realm,
whereby debates and discords might arise betwixt the said Lords, or the Lords
and Commons, should be taken and imprisoned, until they had found him that
first moved it; and if they could not, should be punished by the advice of the
Kings Council.

And in the ninth year of his Reign John de Leicester Rot. Claus. 9. R. 2.
part. unica m. 35.
one of the Clerks of the Chancery being sued in the Court of Common Pleas by
the name of John de Sleford of the County of Leicester, for a Debt of 24 l. 16
s. and after his Writ of Privilege out of the Chancery, which commanded the
Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas to surcease any further proceeding
in that Action, being constrained to bring his Writ of Error to reverse a
Judgment thereupon notwithstanding had against him; the King, pro eo quod
principale placitum loquelae praedictae ad cognitionem Cancellarii nostri, and
nullius alterius, juxta consuetudinem Cancellariae mere pertinet, and ex
consequenti ejus accessarium ad eundem Cancellarium pertinere debet, volentes
Jurisdictionem, Privilegium, and Consuetudinem hujusmodi, a tam longo tempore
obtenta and approbata, Illaesa firmiter observare, in regard that the principal
Plea or Suit aforesaid belonged only to the cognizance of his Chancellor, and
none other, according to the custom of the Chancery, and that by consequence
the cognizance of the Accessory, or any thing concerning the said principal
Plea or Suit belonged to the Chancellors determination; and was willing to
preserve the said Jurisdiction, Custom, and Privilege, for so long a time
continued and approved, commanded the Record and Process aforesaid, with all
which thereunto appertained, to be sent and certified into the Chancery, that
he might do thereupon as to Justice appertains.

In the 35 year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth, the Abbot of Westminster
having an Action depending in the Court of Common Pleas against one of the
Yeomen of the Kings Buttery, and an Essoin being cast and allowed that he was
in the Kings Service, 35 H. 6. rot. 503.
the King at the day appointed and given by the Essoin, sent his Writ of Privy
Seal to the Justices of that Court, to signify that the Defendant was in his
Service before the day given by the Essoin, and at the same day, and every time
sithence.

By a Statute made in the third year of the Reign of King 3 H. 7. ca. 4.
Henry the seventh, it was declared to be Felony for making Confederacies
(though not brought to effect) or not so far as to an overt act, our Laws
declaring that affectus non punitur (thoughts and intentions only are not to be
punished) to imagine the death of the King, or of any Lord of this Realm, or
any other person sworn to the Kings Council, Steward, Treasurer, or Comptroller
of the Kings House, by any of the Kings Household Servants; and ordained, That
such Offenses should be inquired by 12 sad men of the Cheque Roll of the Kings
Household, and determined before the Steward, Treasurer, and Comptroller, or any
two of them.

Which may evidence the intention of that King, and his greater Council the
Parliament, to submit as little as might be such Offenses of his Menial
Servants unto the Judgment and Determinations of his Court of Kings Bench,
which otherwise was, the most proper Court and means for the Trial thereof.

In the Reign of King Henry the eighth, George Ferrers Gentleman, his Servant,
and a Member of the House of Commons in Parliament, being arrested and taken in
Execution, and Sir Thomas Moyle Knight, then Speaker of the House of Commons,
and the Knights and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, sending the Sergeant at
Arms attending upon them to the Compter in Breadstreet in London, where the
said George Ferrers was detained a Prisoner, to demand him, the Officers of the
City and others assaulted and grievously misused him; of which a Complaint
being made to the King, he called before him all the Judges of the Kingdom,
declared unto them, That he being Head of the Parliament, and attending in his
own Person upon the business thereof, ought in reason to have Privilege for
him and all his Servants attending there upon him; so as if Mr. Ferrers
Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Parliament, 72.
had been no Burgess or Member of Parliament, but only his Servant, that in
respect thereof he was to have a Privilege as well as any other. To which all
the Judges declaring their assent by Sir Edward Mountague Knight, Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, the Grandfather of the now Earl of
Manchester Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household, an Order was made to fine
the Sheriffs of London, punish the Riotors, and deliver Mr. Ferrers out of
Prison; but in compassion of the Creditor, an Order was made that he should not
lose his Money for which he had taken him in Execution.

And so great a regard was in that Kings Reign had of the Gentlemen of his
Privy Chamber, as that great and imperious Favorite Cardinal Wolsey Archbishop
of Negotia^ions, or Life of Cardinal Wolsey, written by one of his own
Servants, 100 and 101.
York, being at Cawood Castle in Yorkshire arrested by the Kings command, by
the Earl of Northumberland, attended by Mr. Welsh one of the Gentlemen of the
Kings Privy Chamber, of High Treason; and being unwilling to obey the Earls
Authority, unless he would show the Kings Commission for it, which the Earl
refused to do, the Contest at the last ended in the Cardinals turning to Mr.
Welsh, and saying, Well, there is no more to do, I trow you are one of the
Kings Privy Chamber, your Name is Mr. Welsh; I am contented to yield unto you,
but not unto the Earl without I see his Commission; for you are a sufficient
Commissioner in this behalf, being one of the Kings Privy Chamber.

And in the 21 year of the Reign of that King, such a care was taken to keep
not only the Chaplains of the King, Queen, Prince, and Princess, or any of the
Kings or Queens Children 21 H. 8. ca. 20.
or Sisters; but of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Chamberlain, Steward,
Treasurer, and Comptroller of the Kings Household, from any prejudice whilst
they attended in their Honorable* Households, and exempt them from the Penalty
of Ten Pounds a Month whilst they should not be resident at their Benefices, as
they did by an especial Exception provide for their Indemnity therein.

And in the same year and Parliament the Chancellor, Treasurer of England, and
the Lord President of 21 H. 8. ca. 10.
the Kings Council, are said to be attendant upon the Kings most Honorable
Person.

And in the 24 year of his Reign, some of his Servants having been impannelled
and returned upon Juries, he signified his dislike of the same unto the
Justices of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, in these words.

Trusty and Right-well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas we understand that
all manner of your Officers and Clerks of both our Benches be in such wise
privileged by an ancient Custom, that they be always excepted out of all
manner of Impannels: We considering that the Hedd Officers and Clerks of our
Household, by reason of the daily Business in our Service, have been semblably
excepted in time passed, unto now of late, that some of them have been returned
in Impannels, otherwise then heretofore has been accustomed; We will and
command you, That in case any Hedd Officer or Clerk of our Household shall
hereafter fortune to be put in any Impannel, either by the Sheriff of our
County of Kent, or by any Sheriff of any County within this our Realm, for to
be returned before you, without our special Commandment in that behalf, ye upon
knowledge thereof cause him or them so impannelled to be discharged out of the
said Impannel, and other sufficient Persons to be admitted in their place; and
that you fail not this to do from time to time, as often as the case shall
require, as ye tender our pleasure. Yeoven under our Signet at our Manor of
Richmont, the fourth day of October in the twenty fourth year of our Reign.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved the Chief Justices of both our Benches, and to
all other their fellows Justices of the same.

In the Act of Parliament made in the twenty fifth year of his Reign against
excess of Apparel, there was a Proviso, That all Officers and Servants waiting
and attending upon the King, Queen, or Princess, daily, yearly, or quarterly,
in their Households, or being in their Checque Roll, may by the License of the
King use or wear Apparel on their Bodies, Horses, Mules, etc. according to such
License.

And not only King Henry the Eighth, but his three Estates the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament, in the 31 year of his Reign,
did so 31 H. 8. ca. 19.
much attribute to the Kings Servants in Ordinary, and the Honor of their
Employments, as to grant by Act of Parliament, That the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord President of the Kings Council,
Lord Privy Seal, the Great Chamberlain, Constable, Marshal, and Admiral of
England, Grand Master or Steward of the Kings most Honorable Household, and
Chamberlain, should in Parliament, Star Chamber, and all other Assemblies
(which was in no Kings Reign before allowed) sit and be placed above all Dukes,
except such as should happen to be the Kings Sons, Brothers, Uncles, Nephews,
or Brothers or Sisters Sons; That the Lord Privy Seal should sit atd be placed
above the Great Chamberlain, Constable, Marshal, and Lord Admiral of England,
Grand Master or Lord Steward, and the Kings Chamberlain; and that the Kings
Chief Secretary, if he be of the Degree of a Baron, should in Parliament, and
all other Assemblies, sit and be placed before and above all other Barons; and
if he be a Bishop, above all other Bishops not having any of the Offices
abovementioned. Precedence amongst the English Nobility being heretofore so
highly valued and esteemed, as it was not seldom very much insisted upon; And
so, as in the Reign of King Henry the sixth it was 3 H. 6. Rot. Parl. m. 4*
artic. 13.
earnestly claimed and controverted betwixt John Duke of Norfolk, and Richard
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and in diverse other Kings Reigns greatly contended
for, and stickled betwixt some of the Great Nobility.

The Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and the
Chamberlain of the Kings House, and the Steward thereof, as appears by their
Subscriptions as Witnesses unto sundry Charters of our former and ancient
Kings, not having been before allowed so great a Precedence as that Act of
Parliament gave them, or as that high Place, Trust, and Office of Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, according to the
Custom and Usage of former Ages in all or the most of the neighbor Kingdoms
and Monarchies, have justly merited, who in the times of the ancient Emperors
of Rome were, as Guther. de Offic. Domus Augustae l. 2. c. 18. and Novel. 53.
and 114. Novel. Valentin. de Homicid. Casu fact.
Gutherius notes, styled the Quaestores Palatii, and had in Vlpian's time, who
flourished in the Reign of Alexander Severus the Emperor, antiquissimam
originem an honorable and long-before original; and so necessary in the then
Administration of Justice, as the Emperor Justinian, that great Legislator and
Compiler of Laws, ordained, That Divinae Jussiones Subscriptionem haberent
gloriosissimi Quaestoris nec emissae aliter a Judicibus reciperentur quam si
subnotatae fuerint a Quaestore Palatii, That the Imperial Mandates should be
subscribed by the Chancellor (who was sometimes styled Justitiae Custos, and
vox Legum, Concilii Regalis particeps, the Keeper or Repository of Justice, the
voice or mouth of the Laws, and one of the Privy Council) and those Mandates
being sent (not much unlike the Original Writs issuing out of our High Court of
Chancery, with were then also called Breves) were not to be received by the
Judges, unless they were signed by the Quaestor Palatii, or Chancellor; but
subscribed their Names as Witnesses to Charters after Bishops, Abbots, and
Barons, as amongst many other instances may be given in that of Robert Parning
Chancellor, and of Randolf de Carta H. 1. Coenobio N^rwicensi in 1 part
Dugdales Monasticon, 410. Cart. 17 E. 3. m. ^7.
Stafford Steward of the Household, in the seventeenth year of the Reign of King
Edward the third.

By a Statute made in the 32 H. 8. ca. 8.
thirty second of the Reign of King Henry the eighth, the Parliament did not
think it unreasonable that there should be a Great Master of the Kings House,
and have all the Authority that the Lord Steward had.

By a Statute made in the thirty third year of his 33 H. 8. ca. 12.
Reign, for the punishment of such as committed Murder or Manslaughter in the
Kings Court, or did strike any man there, whereby Bloodshed ensued, the Trial
of such Offenders was not thought fit to be within the Cognizance or
Jurisdiction of any of the Courts of Westminster Hall, or of any Court inferior
unto them; but ordained to be by a Jury of 12 of the Yeomen Officers of the
Kings Household, before the Lord Steward, or in his absence, before the
Treasurer and Comptroller of the Kings Household.

And the Parliament in the first year of the Reign of Queen Mary, repealing the
aforesaid Act of the 32 year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, did,
touching the Great Master of the 1 P. and M. ca. 4.
Kings House, notwithstanding understand it to be reasonable, that the Name,
Office, and Authority of the Lord Steward should be again established.

And so little the Privilege of the Kings Servants in Ordinary seemed to be a
Grievance, or illegal to be first complained of to the Lord Chamberlain of the
Kings Household (which Honorable Office and Place about the King appears to
have been before that Great Office of Chamberlain of England, by the mention of
Hugoline Chamberlain to King Edward the Confessor, and the Subscription of
Ralph Fitz Stephen, as a Witness to a Charter of King Henry the Second, Carta
H. 2. Coenobio de Shirburn in 1 part Dugdales Monastic. 424.
granted unto the Abbey of Shirburn) before they were to be subjected to Arrests
or Imprisonments for Debt, and other Personal Actions, before Execution or
Judgment had against them upon their appearance, and not claiming or pleading
their Privilege (for then or in such a case they have not sometimes been
privileged, although the cause and reason of their Privilege was as much
after Judgment and Execution, as before; which a submission to the
Jurisdiction of another Court, and not claiming their Privilege, should not
prejudice or take away, no more than it does in the Case of Members of the
House of Commons in Parliament, and their Servants, who by their Privilege of
Parliament are not to be disturbed with Executions, or any manner of Process
before and after Judgment) as Queen Dier Mich. 4 and 5 Ph. and M. 9.17.
Mary did in a Case depending in the Court of Common Pleas, betwixt Huggard
Plaintiff and Sir Thomas Knivet Defendant, direct her Writ to the Justices of
that Court (which was but as one of the old and legal Writs of Protection, or
something more especial) certifying them, That the said Sir Thomas Knivet was
by her command in her Service beyond the Seas, and had been Essoined; and
therefore commanded them, That at the time appointed by the said Essoin, and
day given for his appearance, he should not have any default entered against
him, or be in any thing prejudiced; which the Judges were so far from
disallowing, as having before searched, and finding but few, and that
beforementioned Privy Seal, in the 35 year of the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth, in the Case of the Kings Yeoman of the Buttery, being held by them to be
insufficient (but declared not whether in substance or Form, howsoever there
may be some probability that it was allowed, by the entering of it upon Record)
they did, as the Lord Chief Justice Dier has reported it, advise and assist in
the penning and framing of the Writ for Sir Thomas Knivet, whereby to make it
the more legal.

Queen Elizabeth, who was as tender of her Peoples Liberties as of her own, yet
was upon some occasion heard to say, That he that abused her Porter at the Gate
of her House or Palace, abused her, did cause a Messenger (of her Chamber) to
be sent unto a Defendant in the Court of Requests, commanding him in her Name
not to vex, sue, or trouble the Complainant, but suffer him to come and go
freely unto that Court, until such time as other Order be by the Council of the
said Court taken therein: And in the second year of her Reign an Injunction was
awarded to the Defendant, Inter Record. Cur. Supplic. 1 El. fo. 131. Ibid. 2
Eliz. fo. 221.
commanding him to permit the Complainant to follow his Suit in that Court,
without Arrest, upon pain of one hundred pounds. In the same year Sir Nicholas
Bacon, that great and well-experienced Lawyer and Statesman, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, and a man highly and deservedly valued both of Prince
and People, did, in the Case between Philip Manwaring Complainant, Henry
Smallwood and others Defendants, so well understand the aforesaid Privileges
of the Cases in Chancery, collected by Mr. Geo. Carry a Master of Chancery.
Kings Servants to be just and legal, as upon a Bill exhibited in Chancery by
the Plaintiff to stay a Suit in the Marches of Wales, he ordered, That if the
Complainant should not by a day limited bring a Certificate from the Officets
of the Queens House, or otherwise, (whereby the Court might credibly
understand, that his Attendance in the Queens Service was necessary) that Cause
should be determined in the Marches of Wales.

In the eighth year of her Reign Thomas Thurland Clerk of the Queens Closet
Inter Record. and D^cret. Cu^. Petition. and Supplicat. 8 Eliz. fo. 600.
being Plaintiff in the Court of Requests, against William Whiteacres and Ralf
Dey Defendants, an Order was made, That whereas the Complainant was committed
to the Fleet by the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, upon an Execution of
600 l. the Debt being only 300 l. it has been given this Curt to understand by
diverse of the Queens Highness most Honorable Privy Council, that Her Majesty's
pleasure is to have and use the present and speedy Travel of the said Thomas
Thurland in and about diverse of Her Highness weighty affairs in sundry places
of England and Wales, for and about the Mineral Causes there, to the very
likely Commodity and benefit of Her Majesty and all her Subjects: It is
therefore Ordered and Decreed by Her Majesty's Council of this Court, that the
said Thomas Thurland shall and may with his Keeper appointed by the Warden of
the Fleet Travel into any part of the said Realm, about the affairs aforesaid,
without the disturbance, Let or Interruption of the said Defendants; And to
that purpose an Injunction is granted against the said Defendants, their
Attorneys and Solicitors, upon pain of one Thousand pounds, and commanded that
neither they nor any of them shall vex, sue, trouble, molest or implead the
said Complainant, or Richard Tirrel Esquire Warden of the Fleet, or any other
person whatsoever for the Traveling or departing of the said Thomas Thurland
from the said Prison of the Fleet with his Keeper appointed as aforesaid, from
the day of the making of this Decree until the feast of all Saints next
ensuing, if the said Complainant so long shall have cause to attend about the
said affairs.

And many Cases might be instanced where that great Supporter of Monarchy,
Regality, and Honor, in Her best of Governments would not suffer the Just
Privileges of Her Court and Servants to be violated but would be sure severely
to punish the Contradictors and Infringers of them.

About the eighteenth year of her Reign, the Earl of Leicester Master of the
Horse unto that Excellent Queen and great preserver of Her Peoples Liberties,
did commit to Prison one that had Arrested one of Her Servants without leave,
and the Creditor being shortly after upon his Petition released by the said
Earl, who blaming him for his contempt and misdemeanor therein, and being
answered by the Creditor that if he had known so much before hand, he would
have prevented it, for that he would never have trusted any of the Queens
Servants, was so just as to enforce that Servant of the Queens to pay him
presently or in a short time after the said debt, And told him that if he did
not thereafter take a better care to pay his Debts he would undo all the other
of the Queens Servants, for that no man would trust them, but they would be
constrained to pay ready money for every thing which they should have occasion
to buy.

In the six and twentieth year of Her Reign, Henry Se^kford Esquire one of the
Grooms of Her Majesty's Privy Chamber, being Complainant against William Cowper
Defendant: the Defendant was in open Court upon his Allegiance enjoined to
attend the said Court from day to day until he be otherwise Licenced, and to
stay and Inter rec. and d^cret. Cur. Supplic. and Libell. 26 Eliz. fol. 96.
Surcease and no further prosecute or proceed against the Complainant in any
Action, at, and by the Order of the Common Law.

And about the Seven and twentieth year of Her Reign some controversies arising
betwixt the Lord Mayor and Citizens of London, and Sir Owen Hopton Knight
Lieutenant of the Tower of London, concerning some Liberties and Privileges
claimed by the Lieutenant and his refusal of Writs of Habeas Corpora, and that,
and other matters in difference betwixt them, being by Sir Thomas Bromley
Knight Lord Chancellor of England Stows Survey of London. 245.
the Earl of Leicester, and other, the Lords of the Council, referred unto the
consideration of Sir Christopher Wray Lord Chief Justice of the Queens Bench,
Sir Edmond Anderson Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight Master of the Rolls, they did upon hearing of both
parties, and their allegations, Certify under their hands, that as concerning
such Liberties which the Lieutenant of the Tower claims to have been used for
the Officers and Attendants in the Tower, (some of them being of the Queens
Yeomen of the Guard and wearing Her Livery Coats and Badges as they do now the
Kings) as not to be Arrested by any Action in the City of London, and
Protections to be granted unto them by the Lieutenant, and his not obeying of
Writs of Habeas Corpus, They were of opinion that such Persons as are daily
Attendant in the Tower of London, Serving Her Majesty there, are to be
Privileged, and not to be Arrested upon any plaint in London, But for Writs of
Execution or Capias Vtlagatum's (which the Law did not permit without leave
first asked the latter of which by the Writ it self brings an Authority in the
Tenor and purport of it to enter into any Liberties but not specifying whether
they intended any more than Capias Vtlegatum, when it was only after
judgment,) or such like they did think, they ought to have no privilege which
the Lords of the Council did by an Order under their hands as rules and
determinations to be at all Times after observed Ratify and Confirm.

And our Learned King James Rot. Par. 10. Jac. Part. 10. m. 8.
well understanding how much the Weal Public did Consist in the good Rules of
Policy and Government, and the support not only of His own Honor and just
Authority but of the respects due unto his great Officers of State and such as
were by him employed therein did for the quieting of certain controversies
concerning Precedence betwixt the younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons and the
Baronets and others, by an Ordinance or Declaration under the Great Seal of
England, In the tenth year of His Reign Decree and Ordain; That the Knights of
the Most Noble Order of the Garter, the Privy Counselors of His Majesty His
Heirs and Successors, the Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, the
Chancellor and under Treasurer of the Exchequer, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, the Chief Justice of the Court commonly called the Kings Bench, the
Master of the Rolls, the Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, the Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, and all other the Judges and Barons of the degree of
the Coife of the said Courts, Now and for the Time being shall, by reason of
such their Honorable Order and Employment, have Place and Precedence in all
Places and upon all occasions, before the younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons,
and before all Baronets, any Custom, Use, Ordinance, or other thing to the
Contrary, Notwithstanding.

In the four and thirtieth year of Her Reign Sir Christopher Wray Knight Lord
Chief Justice of Her Court of Queens Bench, Sir Edmond Anderson Knight Lord
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and the rest of the Judges of the
aforesaid Courts seeming to be greatly troubled that diverse Persons having been
at several Times committed without good cause showed, and that such Persons
having been by the Courts of Queens Bench, and Common Pleas discharged of their
Imprisonments, a Commandment was by certain great Men and Lords procured from
the Queen to the Judges that they should not do the like thereafter, all the
said Judges, together with the Barons of the Exchequer did under their hands
Exhibit unto the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Burghley Lord Treasurer of
England their Complaint or Remonstrance in these words, viz. We Her Majesty's
Justices of both Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer, desire your Lordships,
that by some good means some Order may be taken that her Highness Subjects may
not be Committed or detained in Prison by Commandment of any Noble Man or
Counselor, against the Laws of the Realm, either else to help us to have
access unto her Majesty to the end to become Suitors unto Her Andersons
Reports, Sect. 305. and. Rushworths Hist. Collect. 507 and 508.
for the same. For diverse have been imprisoned for Suing Ordinary Actions and
Suits at the Common Law until they have been constrained to leave the same
against their Wills, and put the same to Order, albeit Judgment and Execution
have been had therein, to their great losses and griefs. For the aid of which
persons her Majesty's Writs have sundry Times been directed to sundry Persons
having the custody of such Persons unlawfully Imprisoned, upon which Writs no
good or Lawful cause of Imprisonment has been returned or Certified; Whereupon
according to the Laws they have been discharged of their Imprisonment: some of
which Persons so delivered have been again Committed to Prison in secret
places, and not to any Common or Ordinary Prison or Lawful Officer or Sheriff,
or other Lawfully Authorized to have or keep a Goal; So that upon Complaint
made for their delivery, The Queens Courts cannot tell to whom to Direct Her
Majesty's Writs; And by this means Justice cannot be done. And moreover diverse
Officers and Sergeants of London have been many Times Committed to Prison for
Lawful Executing of Her Majesty's Writs, Sued forth of Her Majesty's Courts at
Westminster; and thereby Her Majesty's Subjects and Officers so terrified, that
they dare not Sue, or Execute Her Majesty's Laws, Her Writs, and Commandments:
Diverse others have been sent for by Pursevants, and brought to London from
their dwellings; and by unlawful Imprisonments have been constrained, not only
to withdraw their Lawful Suites, but have been also compelled to pay the
Pursevants so bringing such Persons great sums of money. All which upon
Camplaint the Judges are bound by Office and Oath to relieve and help, By and
according to Her Majesty's Laws. And where it pleases your Lordships to will
diverse of us to set down, in what cases a Prisoner, sent to Custody by Her
Majesty or her Council, is to be detained in Prison, and not to be delivered by
Her Majesty's Court or Judges; we think that if any Person be committed by Her
Majesty's Command from Her Person (which may be understood to be so when it is
by the Lord Chamberlain, of the Kings house or other great Off^cers of the
Household, who are commonly Privy Counselors, and do it by their Princes
Authority) or by Order from the Council Board: And if any one or two of the
Council Commit one for High Treason, such Persons, so in the Cases before
Committed, may not be delivered by any of Her Courts without due trial by the
Law, and Judgment of acquittal had. Nevertheless the Judges may award the
Queens Writ to bring the Bodies of such Prisoners before them; and if upon
return thereof the causes of their Commitment be certified to the Judges, as it
ought to be, then the Judges in the cases before ought not to deliver him, but
to remand the Prisoner to the place from whence he came; which cannot
conveniently be done unless notice of the cause in general or else in special
be given to the Keeper or Jailer that shall have the custody of such a Prisoner.

In which Remonstrance or Address it does not appear that any Commitments*
therein complained of, were for Arresting any of the Queens Servants without
leave first demanded, or that any of the matters, therein suggested, were for
that only cause or before Judgments or Execution obtained some of them being
expressly mentioned to have been after Judgments, and no certain evidence more
than for what came directly unto those Learned Judges by the before mentioned
Mandate of the Queen for the supposed grievances therein, which (though much be
attributed to the well weighed wisdom of those grave Judges, and that their
Information had as much of Truth as without a hearing of all parties and legal
Examination of Witnesses could be found in it) cannot be presumed to be had in
a judicial way after Trials or Convictions, but received and taken in from the
murmur and Complaints of some Attorneys or Parties only concerned, without
hearing of the other side or parties; or that it was so prevalent with the
Queen as to make any Order or restraint or cause any Act of Parliament to be
made for that purpose. For it will not come within the Compass or Confines of
any probability or reasonable construction that those Reverend and Learned
Judges Sir Christopher Wray and Sir Edmond Anderson, who together with Sir
Gilbert Gerard Master of the Rolls had in the case betwixt the Lord Mayor and
Citizens of London and Stows Survey of London. 245.
Sir Owen Hopton Knight Lieutenant of the Tower of London, In the seven and
twentieth year of Her Reign, which was but seven years before Certified under
their hands unto Sir Thomas Bromley Knight Lord Chancellor, and others of Her
Privy Council, that such persons as are daily attendant in the Tower serving
Her Majesty the (which was more remote from Her Person and Presence of Her
Royal Residence or Palace at White Hall) Were to be Privileged, and not to be
Arrested upon any plaint in London, but for Writs of Execution or Capias
Utlagatum or such like, they did think they ought to have no Privilege. And
that Master Lieutenant ought to return every Habeas Corpus out of any Court at
Westminster: So as the Justices before whom it shall be returned, as the cause
shall require, may either remand it with the body, or retain the matter before
them and deliver the body, as Justice shall require; would complain of
Commitments of such as Arrested any of Her Servants without leave, when it
might be so easily had: and the Lord Chamberlain of that time was likely to be
as little guilty of enforcing Creditors to withdraw their Suits, or loose their
debts, as the Lord Chamberlain and other great Officers of the Royal Household
have been since or are now. Nor do the words of that Information import or
point at the Marshalsea of the Queens Court, or Her Messengers; to whom as the
Kings Officers or Ministers of Justice the Queens Writ might have been brought
or directed, the sending of Pursevants there remonstrated being more likely to
have been for some other Concernments, and not for Arresting without leave
which for ought that appears was never yet in foro Contradictorio, upon any
Cause or Action argued solemnly at the Bar and Bench, adjudged to be a breach
of any of the Laws of England or Liberties of the Subjects, or not to be any
good Cause of Arresting or Imprisoning such* as in despite of Majesty would in
ConContempt thereof make it their business, especially when they needed not to
do it, to violate and infringe the Royal Jurisdictions and reasonable Customs
of their Sovereign and Protector, and the long ago and for many ages allowed
Privileges of their Servants.

And therefore William Earl of Pembroke, L. Chamberlain of the Kings House, a
man very zealous for the Peoples Rights and Liberties, may be believed not to
have transgressed therein, when he did about the latter end of the Reign of
King James give His Warrant to one of the Kings Messengers of the Chamber* to
take into His Custody and bring before him one Mr. Sanderson, for causing Sir
Edward Gorge one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber to be Arrested,
without License first obtained; and, being in the beginning of the Reign of
King Charles the Martyr Lord Steward of the Kings most Honorable Household, did
commit a Clerk or Servant to a Sergeant at Law to the Prison of the Marshalsea,
for Arresting one of the Kings Servants without License; and, when he was
bailed by the Judges upon a Writ of Habeas Corpus, committed him again; and
being let at Liberty the second time upon a Writ of Habeas Corpus, was again
Committed by him, and could not be Released, until he had set at Liberty the
Kings Servant.

And Philip Earl of Montgomery Lord Chamberlain of the King in His Most
Honorable Household, 1626.
when he did the first day of November 1626. direct his Warrant to all Mayors
Sheriffs Bailiffs and Constables, etc. to permit Mr. Thomas Musgrave of Idnel
in the County of Cumberland, His Majesty's Muster Master for the County of
Westmerland to come to London about His Majesty's special Service, and that
being performed to return without any their let molestation or Impediment.

The eighteenth of November 1626 in the case of Robert With and Susan His Wife,
who had Petitioned him for leave to take the benefit of His Majesty's Laws
against one Mr: Burton, and obtained his Lordships Order for their Relief
therein, if he gave them not satisfaction within three months after the sight
thereof; yet being after given to understand that the said Mr. Burton, who was
but a Surety, and in that respect deserved some Commiseration, had offered them
very reasonable satisfaction: which was refused, his Lordship being desirous to
understand the Nature of the debt with the qualities and reasons of Master
Burtons offers, and their refusal; did refer the Examination thereof unto Sir
Robert Rich and Sir Charles Caesar Knights, two of the Masters of the Chancery,
to mediate an Accord betwixt them, or otherwise to Certify and Report the true
state of the business betwixt them; and in the mean time required them as they
would answer the contrary at their peril, that they forbear to make use of his
former Order, or any other whatsoever, the which for that purpose he did
utterly revoke and annihilate.

The three and twentieth of November 1626 being the second year of the Reign of
that pious King Charles the Martyr, John Durat, and William Garnat were by the
said Lord Chamberlains, warrant apprehended by a Messenger of the Kings, upon
the complaint of Thomas Wadlow.

The sixth day of December, in the same year the said Lord Chamberlain granted
his Warrant, for the apprehension of Henry Cartar, Bayard a Sergeant, and John
Wright his Yeoman, upon the complaint of Mr. Simpson the Queens Jeweller.

The ninteenth day of January in the same year Thomas Marten Haberdasher of
London was by the like Authority apprehended, at the Complaint of Captain
Fortescue.

1627.
The eighth of May 1627 in the third year of His said Majesty's Reign James
Palmer of Leicester was by a like Warrant apprehended, upon the complaint of
Henry Stanford a Yeoman of the Guard.

The sixteenth of July 1627 a Warrant was granted by the said Lord Chamberlain
to apprehend Francis Hawker a Cook, and William Fulk Servant to Mr. Howard,
upon the Complaint of Joane Hewet, whose husband being Servant to Mr. Boreman
His Majesty's Locksmith, and employed by him in His Majesty's Service, was by
them hurt and wounded.

The seventeenth of July 1627 the said Lord Chamberlain sent his Letter unto
Mr. Atkinson, for the respiting of an Order (probably for a License to take his
course at Law against one Mr. Thomas Wood) until the end of Michaelmas Term
1627 withal advising him to forbear all further Prosecution against the said
Master Wood, or that he should hear further from his Lordship.

The fifteenth of September 1627 a Warrant signed by the said Lord Chamberlain
was directed unto all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. not to hinder or molest
Dixi Hickman, Esquire Gentleman Usher to the Queen of Bohemia, whilst he was here
Employed about Her Service.

The thirtieth of September 1627 a Warrant was granted by him for the
apprehension of William Wiltshire Under Sheriff of Hampshire, and Robert Prime
alias Island a Bailiff, upon the complaint of Sir George Hastings; and being
the tenth of November following thereupon committed to the Marshalseys, and
endeavoring to procure his release by an Habeas Corpus, the said Lord
Chamberlain Issued out another Warrant bearing Date the nine and twentieth of
that November, to detein him, with Certificate that his first Commitment, and
that warrant for his Commitment, was by his Majesty's Special Commandment.

The twelfth day of October in the aforesaid year granted his Warrant for the
apprehension of one Andrews a Constable of Petty France upon the complaint of
one Ward Yeoman of the Guard.

The two and twentieth of January next following, for the apprehension of
Francis Foster and diverse others for Arresting of John Smith His Majesty's
Girdler.

The tenth of March next following, wrote his letter to the Lord Mayor,
Sheriffs and Recorder of York, in the behalf of Robert Metham a sworn Messenger
in Ordinary appointed to attend upon the Receiver of Yorkshire upon his
Complaint for being there Arrested without leave.

1628.
In the year of our Lord 1628 granted his Warrant for the apprehension of
Richard Harris, Thomas Rosse of Leaden-hall-street London Merchants John Offley
of Hampshire and a Servant to the Clerk of the Peace for Middlesex upon the
Complaint of Francis de Champer.

Did write his letter to the Lord Mayor of London, acquainting him with the
Arrests and Imprisonments of Mr. George Morgan and others of his Majesty's
Servants and desired his Lordship to give notice to the Sheriffs of London,
and other Officers in London that they forbear to Arrest or Imprison His
Majesty's Servants without acquainting his Lordship therewith, who promised
upon such occasions to do Justice.

Grant a Warrant for the apprehension of Robert Armstrong for the Arresting of
the Post Master of Saint Albans.

And the like to apprehend William Martin of Itham in the County of Kent upon
the Complaint of Anthony Hobbes one of the Yeomen of the Guard for an
Attachment of his Horse, and a Warrant or Letter to discharge the Apprentices
of the King and Queens Watermen from being Impressed for Sea Service in these
words, viz. Whereas I understand that some of the Apprentices and Servants of
the King and Queens Watermen have lately been Impressed for His Majesty's
Service at Sea; These are to require you Immediately upon the sight hereof to
cause them to be released and discharged; And that hereafter you forbear to
Impressed them, the said Watermen or their Servants, they being Obliged unto a
daily Attendance upon His Majesty's Person and the Queens. And for so doing
this shall be your Warrant.

And the sixteenth day of February in the same year (after His Majesty's assent
by Act of Parliament unto the Petition of Right, which was the six and
twentieth day of June in the year aforesaid) upon an abuse committed upon the
Persons of Mr. Nicholas Laneir and other His Majesty's Servants in Ordinary by
haling them to Prison in an unwarrantable and barbarous manner the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, amongst which was the Lord Keeper Coventrey, did by
their Letter to Sir Richard Deane then Lord Mayor of London greatly blame him
for the permitting of the same in the words following, viz. AFter our Hearty
Commendations to your Lordship, Whereas it is come to the knowledge of His
Majesty and this Board that upon a light Affray or Breach of Peace fallen out
in the Exchange, wherein Master Nicholas Laneir and other His Majesty's
Servants in Ordinary mentioned in the Peti^ion, which we send you enclosed,
happened to be interessed; That the Constables and other Officers who came
under pretense of Keeping the Peace did by color of their Office
(notwithstanding they knew them to be His Majesty's Servants) in an
unwarrantable and barbarous manner carry and hale them along the streets to
Prison (being at noon day) refusing to carry them first before a Magistrate as
they ought to have done, and as was by the said Gentlemen demanded: however
upon calling some of the said parties complained of before us and entering into
examination of the business we found in general, that the carriage of the said
Officers and their assistants had been such as was informed, yet because the
more particular inquiry thereof was a work not so fit to trouble the Board
withal, we have thought good therefore to refer the due examination thereof to
your Lordship letting you to know that if (as is conceived) you understood of
the miscarriage of the said Officers and past it over without reproof, that you
have wilfully failed, both in discretion and duty for that you cannot be
ignorant that the proper and usual way of proceeding in a case of this nature
against his Majesty's Servants had been not by committing them to Prisons but
by an address or appeal to the Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, or
in his absence to such other Principal Officers unto whom it appertains to give
redress; and therefore as the more we consider of it the more we marvel at the
insolent carriage of your Officers and the Connivency of your Lordship and
other the Chief Magistrates of the City. So you are to know that His Majesty
and this Board expects not only a good account from you in the examination and
proceedings of the said Officers and others their assistants in this
particular, but that His Majesty expects and requires at your hands not as a
Respect only but as a Duty, that hereafter upon any the like occasions
happening within the City concerning His Servants the proceedings against them
be by Appeal and Information, first to the Lord Chamberlain or in his absence
to such other Principal Officers to whom it properly appertains, and not by
Commitments to Goals and Prisons at your pleasure; And so we bid your Lordship
very heartily Farewell,

From Whitehall the sixteenth of February 1628. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer.
Lord President. Lord High Chamberlain. Earl Marshal. Lord Steward. Earl of
Holland. Earl of Danby. Chancellor of Scotland. Lord Viscount Dorchester. Lord
Viscount Wilmot. Lord Newburgh.

To Sir Richard Deane Lord Mayor of London.



And in the year 1629 granted a warrant for the apprehension of Humphrey
Worrall for the Arresting of one of His Majesty's Pensioners. 1629.


In the year 1630 the like against Maurice Evans for serving a Subpoena in the
Court against John Durson. 1630.


The like for the apprehension of Edward Clark and Samuel Farrier of Canterbury
upon the complaint of Thomas Potter for abusing him being employed in the
Execution of a Warrant.

A Warrant for the Commitment of William Acheson to the Gatehouse for
transgressing his Order in arresting Master Shaw and giving his Lordship no
notice.

A Warrant for the apprehension of Tirrell and David Edwards upon the complaint
of Richard Air for detaining his Horse.

A Warrant dated the two and twentieth day of November in the year aforesaid
for the apprehension of Master Morgan Goodwin, Master William Small Under
Sheriff of Middlesex and Thomas Brook a Bailiff upon the complaint of Doctor
Robotham for an arrest; Whereupon they being apprehended did the five and
twentieth day of that November procure an Habeas Corpora to be brought to
Carter the Messenger to whose custody they were Committed, and were thereupon
Released; but presently by another Warrant his Lordship committed them to the
charge of William Wattes.

The Second of February in the same year the said Lord Chamberlain sent his
letter unto the Sheriff of Middlesex in these words. Sir I understand that Sir
John Wentworth is arrested upon an Execution at the suite of one Beeston, and
now remaining in your Custody, and that some others have Petitioned me, wherein
when I have found cause I have given way under my hand: if any other which have
not leave shall offer to bring any Actions against him, I do expect and require
that you forbear to receive or entertain them, unless you see my hand for your
Warrant; As you will answer the contrary.

The twelfth of February 1630 granted a Warrant for the Commitment of Simon
Hayton and William Tailor, for charging the said Sir John Wentworth in
Execution, being under arrest upon leave granted.

In the year 1631 a Warrant for the apprehension of Richard Grant, Fowler,
1631.
and John Havit upon the complaint of William Burton a messenger of the Court
of Wards.

The like for the apprehension of Samuel Twynne and Stephen Symons, for the
Arrest of Ralph Short a post Master.

A Warrant to apprehend Master Roger Vrmiseon (an Attorney of the Court of
Common Pleas) upon the complaint of Mr. Edward Crofts for an arrest without
leave.

A Warrant for the apprehension of Masier upon the complaint of Nicholas
Sherman for distreyning of his goods for his not appearance at the Marsh Court
at Greenwich.

A Warrant for the Commitment of Peter Price to the Marshalsea for serving a
Subpoena upon Master George Ravenscroft in the Council Chamber at Whitehall.

A Warrant for the apprehension of Robert Champion a Sergeant in the Poultry
Compter for taking a Prisoner from the Kings Messenger by a Writ (probably an
Habeas Corpus) out of the Kings Bench.

1632.
In the year 1632 a warrant for the apprehension of John Perkins a Constable for
serving the Lord Chief Justice's Warrant upon John Beard in Saint James's Park.

A Warrant for the Commitment of Leonard Ward (a Clark of the Court of Common
Pleas) and Potters a Bailiff to the Marshalseas for arresting of Edward Pigot a
Groom extraordinary without leave.

A Warrant for the apprehension of John Bishop one of the Lord Mayors Officers.

1633.
In the year 1633 a warrant for the apprehension of Anthony Tompson Clark, John
Richardson, and others for the arrest of George Nicholson a Yeoman of the Guard.

The like to apprehend Griffin Jones upon the complaint of John Heydon one of
His Majesty's Musicians for abusive Language given him, as fidling Rogue, etc.

1634.
The like to apprehend Arthur Toogood and Morgan Castle Butchers, for assaulting
Mr. Pitcarnes (the Master of the Hawks) man.

The like for the apprehension of Geoffrey Brittingham, Anthony Carnaby and
William Marbury, upon the Complaint of Robert Wood for Actions laid upon him
without leave.

A Warrant to the Bailiff of Westminster to forbear to admit any Writs or
Actions against Sir Henry Wotton Knight His Majesty's Servant (sworn in the
year 1627 one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Privy Chamber Extraordinary) in
the name of any Person or Persons whatsoever, but such as shall have leave
Granted unto them under the Lord Chamberlains hand.

In the year 1635 a Warrant for the apprehension of one Master Atkinson and
diverse others, 1635.
for the arresting of the Lord Rich (being not long before sworn a Gentleman of
the Kings Privy Chamber Extraordinary.)

In the year 1636 a certificate for Sir Gilbert Houghton Knight one of the
Kings Servants enumerating Particular Privileges for every of the Kings
Servants, viz. 1636.
Not to be arrested without leave first obtained, not to be warned or summoned
to attend at Assizes or Sessions, not to be impannelled upon enquests or
juries, not to serve in the Train bands, nor to be chosen in Offices, etc.

In the year 1637 a warrant for the apprehension of Francis Grove of Southwark
Grocer, 1637.
upon the complaint of the Earl of Morton Captain of the Guard for sending his
warrant (being in Commission for the New Corporation) for certain Yeomen of the
Guard in Ordinary to compel them to serve in Person with their Arms.

The like for the apprehension of Isaac Walter in Kent, upon the complaint of
Henry Hodsal a Yeoman of the guard, for undue molestation of him, by suing of
him to the Utlary, and seeking satisfaction in extremity upon his Goods and
Chattels without detaining his person.

The like against Ezechiel Johnson Clerk, and John VVilcox an Officer of the
Lord Mayor of London for an Arrest of Master Grimsdich of the Great Wardrobe
without leave.

A warrant for the apprehension of Alderman Andrews and of Kenelme Smith and
John Wright Officers of the Sheriffs of London, for the arresting of Mr.
Laurence Hilliard; Smith and Wright being thereupon Committed to the
Marshalsea.

And in the same year a Petition of one James Goodland against John All of
VVapping concerning a Debt of 400 l. pretended to be owing to him by the said
John All was answered by the said Lord Chamberlain in these words, I desire Mr.
Reeve to call John All before him, and to enjoin him to take some speedy course
for the satisfaction of this debt: for which if he cannot prevail with him he
is to let me understand so much, whereupon I will take further Order.

1638.
In the year 1638 a Warrant was granted by the said Lord Chamberlain for the
apprehension of Thomas Tyrrill, Gent. William Wrynne his servant, Thomas
Parker a Constable, Thomas Drew a Bricklayer, and Edward Spooner all of the
Town of Newington, upon the complaint of Tucker one of the Yeomen of the Guard
for being by them set in the Stocks.

Granted a warrant for the apprehension of Marriot Hewes and Carter Marshall's
men for the arresting of one Mr. Beiston His Majesty's Servant without leave.

And the like for the apprehension of Robert House and Christopher Bagehot
Constables in VVare, Thomas Swinsteed Post Master, and George his Brother for
setting Robert Redbury Harbinger, for the Huntsmen of the Buck-hounds in the
Stocks, who appearing were committed and afterward Released.

In the year 1639 a warrant was granted by the said Lord Chamberlain for the
apprehension of William Barker and other Bailiffs, 1639.
for the arresting of Robert Underwood a VVarder of the Tower of London, and
Ordered to pay him charges which they consented unto.

The like against Ralph Atkinson of Brainford and Edward Rabone a Marshals man
for arresting of Mr. Thomas Lisle the Princes Barbor Extraordinary.

And the like against Edmond Griffin of Cheapside and Richard Stersaker for
arresting of Mr. William Harbert.

In the year 1640 a warrant was granted by the said Lord Chamberlain for the
apprehension of Jeoffrey Sharp, 1640.
Hugh Osborne and William Sympson upon the complaint of Mr. Man one of the
Kings Chaplains for an arrest.

The like to apprehend Humphrey Lea, Ralph Reason and Henry Wickliffe, for
arresting and taking in Execution the goods of David Porrel without leave.

And the like for the apprehension of Charles Steward and William Wyamford upon
the complaint of William Lenet a Yeoman of the Guard for an abuse and affront
in the Streets.

That Excellent Prince, under whose authority he acted, being not only careful
to maintain His Servants just Privileges, but to avoid any ill consequences
which might happen by any abuse thereof being in the year of our Lord 1631
informed that one Thomas Barnes having been sworn one of the Grooms of His
Majesty's Chamber in Ordinary upon a pretense that he was one of the Company of
Players, who had a license to Practice under the name of the Queen of Bohemia's
Players; whereas in truth the said Barnes was by Profession a Carpenter, nor
did profess the quality of a Stage Player, but was dishonestly and sinisterly
obtruded upon the said Lord Chamberlain by the false and fraudulent Suggestion
of one Joseph Moore, that followed business in the name of the said Company,
out of a corrupt end to derive unto himself a benefit by entitling the said
Barnes unto the Privilege and Protection of His Majesty's Service, and did
most Injuriously seek to defraud men of their just debts, had drawn men to be
bound with him for great sums of money and exposed them to the danger of
Imprisonment; to the end therefore that His Majesty's Service might be purged
from the stain of so dishonest and foul proceedings, the said Lord Chamberlain
was commanded by His Majesty to call the said Barnes, and discharge and dismiss
him, and cause his name to be blotted and razed out of the list of His
Majesty's Servants.

All or many of which, upon due consideration had, may show the necessity
as well as legality of the cares of the said Chamberlain by and under His late
Majesty's Authority Anciently and by a long prescription of many ages vested in
his and other the Honorable Offices of the Kings most Honorable Household.

And might more fully have been manifested if many of the Books of State, Court
Memorials and Records had not in the latter end of the Reign of King James been
lost by the fire, which at that time burnt the Signet-Office, and other
buildings, and Repositories thereof at Whitehall and by other Books of that
most Honorable House; If those Sons of Spoil, Plunder and Rapine the godless
party of pretending holiness in the late confusions and Rebellion, when the
Frogs not by the hardening of our late blessed Kings heart but his too much
trust and condescentions and the Almighties permission did go up and come into
that Exodus c. 8. verse. 3.
house and into (our Kings) Bedchamber and into the houses of his servants and
upon his people.

When our England was a valley of slaughter all the beauty of the Daughter of
our Zion was departed, the grievous revolters and those which walked with
slanders, and our adversaries were the chief in that desolate and by them
misused Jer. c 6. ver. 25.28. and Lamentations of Jer.
palace had not left any more then three little Books of the Lord Chamberlains
Registry against their wills concealed and rescued from the year 1625 being the
first year of the Reign of His late Majesty of blessed Memory until the year of
our Lord 1641. When our miseries and troubles began to craul and engender.

In which small remains those most just and necessary privileges of the Kings
Servants contained (which reason of State and the Sovereignty of Princes can
neither want nor suffer to be disused,) do amongst other things appear to have
been so moderately and prudently used and with so much reason Justice and
Equity, as those books will testify that very few of such Creditours or others
which Arrested any of the Kings Servants without a license or leave first had,
being brought by the Messengers before the Lord Chamberlain, or other Great
Officers of the Court unto whose jurisdiction it appertained, were unless in
case of their great obstinacy and contempt committed to Prison, but with a
necessary and fitting reprehension dismissed; or if upon refusal to obey that
Authority so fortified and strengthened by Laws, Ancient, Customs, and reason,
they were Imprisoned or committed, they were upon their first Petition and
Submission as easily released and discharged from it as it would have been
easy for them not to have done it or disobeyed Kingly and just Authority, or
to have used but common Civility due to a neighbor much more to their Prince
and Protector of all their own Liberties and Privileges: and that the Warrants
for such offenders apprehension being so few and seldom were rather occasioned
or happened to be no more by a greater Civility and respect formerly used
toward the King and His Servants, than is now in the unruly and unmannerly
fancies and sauciness of such as would level all the Rights of Government, and
superiority to their own vain and groundless imaginations, attended by a wilful
and peevish pride and ignorance or the patience or ability of those that would
rather endure such affronts, and pay what was demanded, than complain of the
wrong done to Royal Majesty in the needless violation of His Servants Rights or
Privileges. For the Number of them in that compass of Time does not appear to
be any more than 27 in Anno 1626 -- 53. In Anno 1627 -- 15 -- in Anno 1628 --
25 -- in Anno 1629-21-in Anno 1630 -- 25 -- in Anno 1631-26-in Anno 1632-10-in
Anno 1633-18-in Anno 1634-13-in Anno 1635-6-in Anno 1636-16-in Anno 1637-14-in
Anno 1638-27-in Anno 1639-19-in Anno 1640. which in so great a number with
their Servants and Retinues amounting to a far greater number than 1000 or 1500
of His Servants which are in the Checque Roll or pay of the Greencloth or
Treasurer of the Chamber, besides not a few extraordinaries and such as have no
pay or quarter, as they Term it, attending upon the King and His Officers in
His House or Palace should not be enough to stir up any envious or causeless
complaints against that part of their Privileges, not to be Arrested or
Imprisoned without leave first granted.

Which can be accounted no less than necessary, when the leave demanded to
prosecute or bring Actions at Law may be to Arrest or Prosecute levi malitiosa
vel injusta de causa, upon some trivial or unjust pretenses; and their desires
not fit to be assented unto; when it may be for some little stroke push or Blow
given by the Kings Porters, Servants, Marshals or Marshals-men, or other His
Attendants to Repel or Keep Back a Crowding or unruly multitude of the vulgar
from disturbing some great Solemnities or Assemblies at the Kings Court or
Palace (which is so often done as by a Statute made in the 33 year of the Reign
of King Henry 33 H. 8 cap. 12.
the eight, which ordained the loss of the right hand of any striking or making
bloodshed within any of the Kings Houses or Palaces or the Virge thereof (there
is an Exception to the like purpose) or for the Heralds or Kings at Arms
legally throwing down or breaking the usurped Hatchments or Coats of Arms of
those who should not have been so proud or impudent as to have been guilty of
it, or for Moneys already satisfied, and the Bonds or Bills not taken up or
Cancelled or Shopbooks not crossed, and the Money paid not entered, or for
Tailors, Exchangemen or other Trades men's stretched and over multiplied
reckonings beyond either Justice or Truth, (who are many Times the more willing
to Trust whereby to gain the opportunity of reckoning as they please,) or for a
License to enter upon, and bring an Action of Ejectment to recover the
possession of some Lands Mortgaged for security of pretended and false reckoned
Debts and Forfeitures, and extremities beyond right reason and equity
endeavored to be put upon them by some small conscienced men abundantly versed
in oppression, or by some naughty and greedy Tradesmen (for all are not to be
ranked with them) who can fawn and creep and make friends to the prejudice of
other Shopkeepers and break the tenth Commandment in the Decalogue, to gain
their Worships Custom, and when they have well wrapped them in their largely
reckoned Items, make it their humble suit to have some bond or security by some
friends to be bound with them, or a Mortgage or Recognisance in the nature of a
Statute Staple; but when they have it by a late trick or cunning, now much
practiced, assign as soon as they can those Bonds or Securities, if they be not
originally taken in some of their friends or acquaintance names, unto some who
shall abundantly and with all the Rigors of the Law prosecute them, and their
Estates, and will then notwithstanding allege they cannot help it, they were
forced, if any can be so far fallen out with their understandings, as to
believe them to borrow Money or satisfy others upon that Security, or be
undone or go to Prison, and hope notwithstanding they will continue their
custom, and take such commodities as they need of them, and being by
themselves or Counterfeit Assigns become Masters of their advantages, and
swelled in their own conceits to an Empire or Command over a turmoiled
impoverished, and over burdened Debtor, will not only catch all opportunities
of keeping their extended Lands at an usual undervalued rate, but if not
restrained, be more merciless than some ship-racking Rock, and more fierce and
Cruel than some hunger bitten Banditties assisted by the encouragement of some
desolate or unfrequented places, or then some destroying Herecano in the Indies
or America, and Rail and Clamor if they may not tear them and their Estates in
pieces to satisfy their impatient and unjust designs and demands; and where
they have taken or seized any of their goods Chattels or Housesholdstuff, upon
Executions taken out upon two or three, or as many more Judgments with great
penalties as they can entangle them by lending a little more Money, or upon an
account or new made reckoning ensnare or seduce them into, can cause them not
only to be sold and bought again, by some of their Vulture acquaintance at far
undervalued Rates, but reckon charges never laid out or disbursed, or blown up
by the wasting and Lavish expenses of Bailiffs and Catchpolls amounting to as
much Ravage and spoil as a Kennel of Hounds would make in a Pantry, or the
incursions of the rude Tartars, and Savage Cossacks do not seldom bring upon
their more Civilized and unfortunate Neighbors.

So as a Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain, o^ other great Officer of the Kings
household cannot be rationally adjudged to have done amiss, when in Compassion
or Justice in the case of the Kings Servants he shall moderate the furies and
unjust pretenses of unrighteous and unreasonable Creditors or Complaynants; and
according to the Laws and reasonable Customs of England, and the Kings most
Honorable Household give them and the Kings Servants a just and fitting
protection respite or time of Respiration, the rather if he find that some of
their wants and distresses either would not or could not so quickly or heavily
have fallen upon them, if the public necessities and occasions had not for
the Protection and safeguard of those very Creditors or Complainants
(comprehended in the universality of the people) drawn away from the King the
Money which might have enabled him to a more Regular and Ordinary way of paying
them their Wages, Salaries or Pensions.

And should if right be done unto it, give a less cause of disturbance to the
Will or Fancies of those who would have it otherwise, than the course generally
well approved, and now holden in the City of London, in the Lord Mayors Court,
called the Court of Requests, or Conscience, Indulged at the first by no
greater Authority then an Act of Common Council, made by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council of that City, about the ninth year of the Reign of
King Henry the eight, continued by some other Acts of their Common Council, and
strengthened by some Subsequent Acts of Parliament, where upon any Action
Commenced in the Sheriffs Courts of Guildhall London, whereby any debt under
forty shillings is demanded of any Freeman of that City, the Defendant may
before or after Verdict mark it, as it is there Termed in a Clarks book
attending for that purpose the Lord Mayor in his house, and by that manner of
transferring the Actions or proceedings before his Lordship in his Court of
Conscience, procure as much of it as he shall be able to obtein with an Order
in case of Poverty or weakness of estate to pay it by Six pence or twelve pence
a Week or some other small manner of payment, the Plaintiff being to be
Arrested or Attached, if he shall disobey or transgress his Lordships
moderation therein. And such or the like Moderations may As Well be allowed to
the Lord Chamberlain and other great Officers of the Kings most Honorable
Household, in the case of the Kings Servants, as it is, and has been to the
Judges of the Courts at Westminster, in the case of all the Subjects of
England, where in Order to the Salvo Contenemento the saving the Reputation,
and support of failing or fainting Debtors or Defendants, and the Moderata
Misericordia, Moderation in punishments, which in the reconciling of Justice
and Compassion is not only Enjoined and Pattern'd by our many Excellent Laws
and reasonable Customs since the Norman Conquest, but ordained LL. Canu. cap.
2.
by a Law of King Canutus many years before in his direction to his Judges, Vt
in mulcta Irroganda Glanvile l. 9. c. 11. Coke 2 part Institutes Commen^. in
Magna Charta. c. 8.14 and 29.
adhibeatur moderatio, ut ad divinam Clementiam temperata hominibus tolerabilis
esse videatur, that in Punishments or Penalties there be such a moderation as
may resemble the Divine Clemency or compassion, and be the more Tolerable for
men to bear it: from whence or the like Dictates of Right Reason have Issued,
and been warranted, the Authority of those Sage Expounders of our Laws, and
distributers of Justice in their Remission of Penalties of Bonds and
Obligations, Moderation of Costs and Mitigation of Penalties, stay of Posteas
Verdicts and Executions, Arrests of Judgments granting Imperlances, Lessening
of Fines uncertain in Copyhold estates, and giving them a reasonable Time of
payment, disappointing of Rigors, Extremities and Oppression, by the relieving
of the Oppressed; wherein the wisdom of our Laws and the discretion and Office
of Judges and Courts do very often in some or other of those and very many
other the like well regulated* Acts of their prudence care and authority, which
might be here instanced, bless and make happy this Nation.

Such or the like Princely Cares of our Kings and Princes for their Domestiques
or Servants faithfully serving and attending upon their Sovereign, giving us
the reason, why, above three hundred and forty years ago Fleta lib. 2. cap. 3.
when Fleta wrote his Book; It was the Custom of the Aula Regis, the Kings
Palace si de aliquo familiari (i. e.) famulari Regis fiat querimonia, if a
Complaint should be made of any of the Kings Servants or Household, he should be
summoned to answer, and if he came not at the day prefixed, he should be
Attached (which is by sureties or pledges, or some of his Goods or Chattels
taken, whereby to compel him to appear) and another day prefixed, and if he did
not then appear, his body should be taken, if he were personally summoned
within the Virge, and should be brought before the Steward; and the Marshal,
having him in his custody videlicet sub tali loco partito secundum Legem and
consuetudinem Hospitii in a place to that purpose according to the Law and
Custom of the Kings Household appointed, was to be answerable for him; quod nisi
de corpore respondeat de petitione satisfacere tenebitur supposito quod de
corpore fuit seisitus; but if the Marshal did not keep him in Custody whereby
he might have his body forth coming, he should if he was ever seized of his
body make satisfaction to the party complainant: But where any person who is
not of the Kings Servants or House should desire to sue or prosecute a Debtor
in the Court of the Kings Palace before the Steward thereof, Fleta lib. 2. cap.
60.
he was to produce the Bond wherein the Debtor obliged himself to their
Jurisdiction; and in that case the Debtor was to be destrayned until he found
pledges to answer the Action, Et si Pleg. invenerit and quinquagesimum diem
litis receperit and illo die non comparuerit, and if he should find pledges and
not appear within fifty days after (for so many days it seems was then allowed
unto him, he was to be Arrested and detained until he gave Bail, it being also
as reasonable that a like or a greater time should be given to one of the Kings
Servants complained of before the Lord Steward or Lord Chamberlain or other
great Officers of the Kings Household, to whose Jurisdiction it belongs) for
in those more Reverential Times and acknowledgments of Superiority; It was a
Rule as well as an Ancient Custom that mitius agendum cum familiaribus and
servientibus Regis dum tamen Domestici sint Regis and Collaterales, the Kings
Servants in Ordinary and Domestiques were to be more gently and respectfully
dealt with then strangers, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 3.
and quod primo debent per Mariscallum summoniri quam si supersederint tum
primo Distringantur and tertio si necesse fuerit Attachientur; and ought first
to be summoned by the Marshal, and if then they did not appear they were to be
Distreined, and at or after the third distress if need were should be Attached,
Et hinc est quod vulgariter dicitur quod servientes Regis sunt Pares comitibus,
and from hence it is says Fleta, that it is Commonly said that the Kings
Servants are in that Respect Peers of the Earls, and are upon Actions or
Complaints of Debt or other personal Actions Fleta. l. 2. c. 3.
in the awarding of process in the Court appropriate to the Kings House or
Palace to enjoy the like Summons or respectful Usage.

But if there had been no such Custom or Privilege in the former ages, there
is now and has been for some years last past a greater necessity, and reason
for it then ever; when any of the Kings Servants being made a Defendant, by
feigned and fictitious Actions or Writs called Bills of Middlesex or Latitats
Issuing out of the Court of Kings Bench, in placito transgressionis upon a
supposed Action of Trespass as great as the Plaintiffs malice or designed
oppression to ruin, and lay unjust Actions upon him can invent, and a late
imaginary supposed custom with an ac etiam or supposition of an Action of One
thousand, or ten, or twenty thousand pounds added in the same Writ or Action to
be afterward ( viz. when the Plaintiff pleases) exhibited against him may be
cast into Prison and overwhelmed with such Complainants pretended Actions, his
friends so affrightned as they dare not bail him, if they were able, his
service lost, and his livelihood under his Sovereign and gracious Master taken
away from him, and our Kings of England by such Plaintiffs and their untruly
suggested Actions reduced to as manifest dangers by Arresting or taking away
their Guards, or Attendants from them, when he shall go or ride abroad, or be
recreating himself, in hunting, or other disports; as King James was by the
wicked Earl Gowries Traiterous purposes to Murder Him, by sending His Servanrs
the wrong way, and telling them that the King was gone before another way: and
when such Illegal and unwarrantable Writs may have neither cause or evidence,
or may be for an inconsiderable or small sum of Money, or perhaps none at all
due unto them; And have been of late such Midwives to wicked Designs and
Contrivances as a Married Woman has been by the confederacy of her Husband,
and the Arresting and Imprisoning her Servants by such Counterfeit Actions,
enforced to leavy a fine, whereby to pass away the Inheritance of her Lands of
a great yearly value, which was after Reversed by Act of Parliament; and a
Gentlewomans house in S. Martins Lane in the fields near London Robbed by
Arresting of the Mistress of the House, and those that were in it by such Bills
of Middlesex: for which the Cheater that contrived it was not long after
deservedly hanged.

And surely such a privilege, claimed by the Kings Servants in Ordinary, needs
not be so quarrelled at, when in the great Case which happened in Anno Dom.
1627 being the third year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr upon Habeas
Corpora's brought by four or five Gentlemen, who were Imprisoned per speciale
mandatum Domini Regis by the Kings Special Command signified under the hands of
eighteen Privy Counselors, for not lending money to the Public necessities
(when they were very able to do it) concerning the Arrest or Imprisonment of
any of the Freeborn People of England by the Kings Warrant or Command without a
cause Expressed; Whereby the Judges upon a Habeas Corpus might enquire and
Judge of the cause of such Imprisonment, and give any of his Subjects their
Libertys upon Bail to Answer the Action where the Law allowed it; the many and
elaborate Arguments made on those Gentlemen's behalf, in the Court of Kings
Bench by several able Lawyers, amongst which was that skilful Diver into our
Common Laws, Antiquities, Records and Presidents, the Eminently Learned Mr.
Noy, who except the Great and Learned Seldom brought as Great an Ingeny and
Intellect to the study of them, and a more solid and Penetrating wit and
Judgment, then any or many an age has yet produced, could not keep the said
Gentlemen from being remanded back to the Prisons from whence they came, or
hinder the opinion of the Judges of that Court; amongst which was the Right
Learned Justice Doddridge, upon view of the President in the case of Edward
Page in the seventh year of King Henry the eighth, committed to the Marshalsea
by the Lord Steward of the Kings House, who being afterward upon an Habeas
Corpus brought before the Justices of the Kings Bench was remanded; and the
like in the Case of James Desmeisters committed to the Marshalsea of the Kings
Household per concilium Domini Regis by the Kings Privy Council, that those
Gentlemen could not be Bailed and that by some Pesidents in many Cases, where
men have been Committed by the Kings Command, when they have been discharged by
that Court, it has been upon the Kings pleasure signified by His Attorney
General, or otherwise, that which Sir Robert Heath Knight the Kings Attorney
General then alleged for the King in his Argument, in that Case, not being
denied to be Law, or presidented, either by the Judges or the Council on the
other side that multitudes of Presidents might be shown M. S. Of the Arguments
in the Case of the Habeas Corpora.
wherein men Imprisoned for contempts of Decrees in the Courts of Chancery or
Requests, Courts of Exchequer and High Commission, or by the Corporations or
Companies of Trade in their Domineering Bylaws or Ordinances were not bailed
upon their Habeas Corpora's, and that in the Case betwixt the Bakers of London,
where they Fined, and Committed men to Prison for not paying of it, (and the
like not seldom done by the Corporations and Companies of Trades in London, and
the lesser sort of them as of the Waterm^n, etc.) Thomas Hennings and Little
Page being Imprisoned in 11 Jacobi Regis, when they brought their Habeas
Corpora; and the cause being shown to be by reason of an Ordinance or
Constitution of the Lord Mayor of London, the Prisoners were sent back to abide
his Order: in which grand Case of the Habeas Corpora that Pious and just King
did not, as Oliver that Canker of our English Laws and Liberties did in the
Case of Mr. Cony the Merchant, Imprison or Terrify the Lawyers which argued
for them, but in the Expectation and hopes of a better effect then afterward
happened upon it gave them as much Time and Liberty of Search and Arguments
against His Royal Prerogative in that particular as they could desire: and
those very Justices of the Kings Bench, being in the next year after called
before a Committee of Lords and Commons in Parliament, to declare their
opinions concerning those proceedings; And asserting their opinions, Justice
Whitlocke being one of the said Judges, denied that there was any Judgment
therein given, whereby either the Kings Prerogative might be enlarged or the
right of the Subject Trenched upon, that if they had delivered Rushwort^s Hist.
Collect* 505, 506, 507.
them presently it must have been because the King did not show cause, wherein
they should have judged the King had done wrong, and this was beyond their
knowledge, for the King might have committed them for other matters then they
could have imagined; and if they had bailed them, it must have reflected upon
the King, that he had unjustly Imprisoned them, and that the differences made
in the Arguments of that Case betwixt remittitur and rimittitur quousque
remitted or remitted how far or unto what Time he confessed he could find no more
in it; but that they were new inventions to trouble old Records, and Judge
Doddridge said, that for the difference betwixt remittitur and remittitur
quousque he could never find any: he had sat in the Court fifteen years, and
should know something surely, if he had gone in a mill so long (some) dust
would cleave to his Clothes.

And in the Petition of Right granted in the next ensuing year, in the framing
and procuring whereof Sir Edward Cook that Venerandus senex and investigator
legum Angliae very Reverend and great Lawyer (whose Learned labors after his
discontent for the loss of his place of Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Kings Bench, and the former favors of King James tended as much as he could for
the finding out and publishing of every thing that might advance the Peoples
liberties, but as little as might be for the Kings Just Rights and Prerogative)
assisted by that great Monarch of Letters and Learning Mr. Seldom, the
Excellently Learned Sir Edwyn Sandys, Sir Robert Philips, Sir Dudly Digges,
Knights, and other great Patriots, and well wishers to the Peoples Liberties,
there was nothing omitted of their care and industry in the search and scrutiny
of all that could be found of Law, Learning, Reason or Precedents to support
the Subjects claims therein or effect their desires; There is no restraint of
that just Legal and very Ancient Privilege of the King and Queens Servants not
to be Arrested or Imprisoned without License or leave first obtained of the
Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain Vide Petition of right assented unto and granted
by the King 26 June 1628.
of the Kings Household, or those other great Officers of His House or Court to
whom it appertained; nor any thing directly or consulto urged against that
necessary part of the Duty of Subjects to their Sovereign or Respects to Him in
His Servants.

Nor in that fatal Remonstrance made by the House of Commons in the after long
and over lengthened Parliament the fifteenth day of December 1641. wherein
every thing that could be imagined or had but a face of a grievance in the
government Vide Collection of Declarations in Parliament.
was too industriously amassed or mustered up, was there any complaint of the
Protections granted by the King or Privilege of the Kings Servants in Ordinary
from being arrested without License first had.

Neither in those high and mighty undutiful and unchristian like nineteen
Propositions sent to His late Majesty in June 1642. whereby they denied him the
care and education of His Children, office of a Common Parent to His People,
and a natural Father to His Children, and would have gained to themselves or
taken from him His Kingly Authority, is there any thing in that particular
complained of, or desired in remedy of that since supposed evil: But that
assembly then called a Parliament, were so far from hindering it, as when they
were afterward Petitioned by diverse Creditors against their own Privileges,
and the Protections of themselves and their Servants, they were pleased to
answer that they would take it into their Consideration* but in many years
after were so busy in the Ruin of the Kingdom and a Purveyan^e of Places of
honor and profit for themselves as the People had then, and may yet have,
reason to believe they never intended to do it.

And were so unwilling to have some Prisoners Committed by them to be
discharged by Bail upon Writs of Habeas Corpora as they bespoke it for their
Privilege to Commit Matthew Wren the late Bishop of Ely, and let him continue
16 or 17 years a Prisoner in the Tower of London without showing any Cause or
making any Charge against him under a Color and Pretense (never to be
justified) that the Legislative Power and Sovereignty was Inhaerent and
Radically in the People, who had delegated and entrusted it unto them, as the
Aenigmatical and unknown Keepers of their Liberties, whereby as they imagined
their Commitees and Sub-commitees might take as Extravagant Liberties as
themselves: insomuch as when Mr. Edward Trussel a Loyal Citizen of London about
the year 1643 brought his Habeas Corpus to be bailed upon that Parliaments
Commitment for not payment of the twentieth part of his Computed Estate,
Sergeant John Wild and Mr. Hill two Members of the House of Commons, of the
then miscalled Parliament, came publicly to the Judge sitting in the Kings
Bench, and took such a course by Whispering, and delivering Messages to him, as
the trembling Judge calling God to witness how willing he would be to do right
and be afraid of no body, declared it for a kind of Law that he could not Bail
any man where the Commitment was by such a Sovereign Court as the House of
Commons in Parliament.

Who believed it to be so great an Incident and necessary requisite to their
usurped Government as they did about the year 1645 Imprison a Citizen of London
for Arresting a Nobleman of Germany for some Wares Trusted, when he was but in
the Company of some of the Parliament so called Members as they were going unto
or coming from one of their Sumptuous or Thanksgiving Feasts or Dinners, for
success in their evil Actions.

And Oliver Cromwell their man of sin, great Captain and Master of as much
Perjury as he could himself Commit, or drive others unto, found it to be so
necessary for the maintenance of His pretended State and unjust Authority
enforced from the True Proprietor, as he was pleased so to Indulge and Protect
His Menial Servants with the like Privileges; as one Mewes who attended him
could not be Indicted for perjury without License first obtained, and one
Captain William Sadlington having taken from a Dutch Merchant, Residing in
London, Goods or Merchandise at Sea to the value of six or seven thousand
pound, or endamaged him as much, and coming afterward into England, and for
some special service done to that Protector of Mischief and Evil Designs, being
made one of his Domestiques or Servants in Ordinary, the Dutch Merchant
Commenceing an Action at Law against him for what he had lost and was damaged,
and causing him to be Arrested, was not only with the Bailiffs that Arrested
him Imprisoned, but enforced before he could have his Liberty to discharge the
said William Sadlington, and Release his Action. And some of his Major Gerals
can, if they please, bear witness how much their Oliver and themselves
protected his and their Menial Servants, and extended the freedom from Arrest
until leave or license obtained as far as their Common Red-coated Soldiers;
and how much those Major Generals in their several Provinces did in other
things all they could to Stifle the Law and Domineer over it is proceedings, one
of them Threatening to Hang up the Lawyers Gowns in Westminster Hall as the
Colors and Ensigns of their once dearly beloved Covenanting, but afterward
ill requited and beaten, Scots brethren had been used.

For to Ask or Petition for a License or Leave of the Lord Steward, Lord
Chamberlain or other Great Officers of our Kings Houses or Palaces, to whose
Jurisdiction it does belong, before any Arrest or Prosecution at Law can be had
against any of the Kings Servants, is no more then our Laws well Interpreted do
order and enjoin to be done in all Actions, Civil, Real or Personal, against
Private and Common Persons, or such as are not the Kings Servants; for if the
Action be laid or entered in the Court of Kings Bench, it is to be made
Returnable, Coram Domino Rege, before the King himself, who by the Justices of
that Court Assigned to hold such Pleas as the King in the Constitution and
fixing of the Court of Common Pleas reserved to be heard by himself or those
assistant Judges is supposed to Hear and Determine such causes as are proper
for that Cour^; or if the Action be desired to be Tried in the Court of Common
Pleas, upon the Kings Original Writ which may, as it was by the Franks, not
unfitly be called Indiculus Bignonii notae adi librum Maroulfi de formulis. 517.
commonitorius, A Monitory Letter or Writ of the Kings Issuing out of the High
Court of Chancery under the Test me ipso or witness of the King himself, and
is to be sued out giving the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, which is
the Legal and Proper Court Ordained for such matters, a Warrant, Power or
Commission to hold Plea therein; for otherwise says Fleta, nec Warrantum nec
Jurisdictionem neque cohertionem habent supposes a Petition of the Plaintiff
to the King as the Supreme Magistrate for a Debt Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 34.
or Sum of Money unjustly detained from him, or some Trespass or Damage done
unto him, for which he cannot Sue or Prosecute without a Writ Remedial or
Original, granted by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, Commanding the Sheriff of the County or Place, where the Plaintiff
lays or desires to try his Action, if it be in Debt, to take security of the
Complainant for the proof or making good of his Action, and to Command the
Defendant or Party Complained of to pay the money demanded; and that if the
Defendant do not pay the Money upon the Sheriffs or his Officers or Bailiffs
coming to him, then they are to Summon him to appear before the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, at a Return or Certain time prefixed,
which at the least is to be fifteen days after the Test or Date of the
Original, and many Times with a Longer Return, and as many more days given if
the Original be sued out but fifteen days before the Terms of S. Michael and
Hillary, Easter or Trinity Terms; but of it be procured or sued out in the
later end of a Michaelmas Term, and returnable Octabis Hillarii, will have more
then fifty days betwixt the Test and Return; and if sued out in the end of an
Hillary Term, returnable the first Return of an Easter Term following will have
no less then 60 days betwixt the Test or Date and the Return; or if it Issue
out in the end of a Trinity Term returnable the first return of a Michaelmas
Term following, will have no less then one hundred days betwixt the Test or
date thereof and the Return, and more if it be in any of the later Returns of
any of the said Terms, in all which if the summons had but fifteen days betwixt
the date of the Original Writ and the time prefixed, the Defendant has by
intendment of Law so much Time or Respite for the payment of the money in the
shortest prefixion; but a great deal more in those which are longer, which by
the reason and equity of our Laws is not to be understood to be easy or
probably upon the Instant of the Sheriff or his Officers Commanding the Debtor
to pay it, but upon a reasonable and possible Time betwixt the Test and return
allowed for the payment thereof, very Rich and sufficient able men not having
always so much money at hand to pay at an instant, and the monyes demanded do
many times in the end of the suit although it be not upon a bond or bill with a
penalty or doubling of the sum appear not at all to be due or for some or a
great part thereof to be unjustly required; and if upon a Bond or Bill with a
forfeiture doubling the principal Money, or in an Action of Covenant, Detinue,
Annuity or Account, cannot think it just or reasonable presently to pay as much
Money as an unjust Complainant will not seldom, if he may be his own Carver,
exact of him: and in all Actions Personal whether it be for Debt or Damage some
part of the time between the obteining the Kings License or leave to Sue in the
Case of those which are not his Household Servants, is between the Test and
Return of the Original, necessary to be employed for the Plaintiffs giving to
make good his Action; for more, but never less our Ancient Records do often
mention, until some of our later ages, and the Judges thereof since the Reign
of King Edward the fourth in favor of the Disabilities and Inconveniences
which might happen in the Cases of many of the Common or Impoverished sort of
people, who otherwise would be debarred from the Justice which our Laws
intended them, were content to dispense with it by reteining only the reason of
the Law and allow of the Sheriffs Indorsing and Returning upon the Writ the
feigned names of John Do and Richard Roe for the Sureties put in by the
Complainants to make good their Complaints or Actions; who being before hand
not a little furnished with their weapons of offense may without any difficulty
not seldom suddenly surprise the altogether unprepared Defendants; our Laws not
without cause believing it to be possible that Rich men might oppress the poor,
and that it is many times, easier to offend then to defend: and therefore that
way of Enforcing the Plaintiffs to give Sureties or Pledges to prosecute their
Actions was heretofore so strictly observed, as if no Sureties or Pledges to
Prosecute were put in by the Plaintiff, he could not prosecute the Defendant at
Law; and if he made not his Action or Complaint appear to be just, had in those
more Legally Thrifty Times for the Kings Rights and benefit a fine set or
Imposed upon him by the Judges pro falso clamore for his causeless accusation,
which does frequently occur in the fine or Iter Rolls of the Judges of Assise
in the Reign of King Edward the first and was Estreated and Returned into the
Exchequer to be leavied upon his Lands Goods or Estate. And all that or some of
that which was complained of, being not always likely to be true, would not
think it just to give them leave to Arrest or Hurry the Defendants to Prison,
as their Pride, Malice, Cruelty or oppressing Designs should incite them,
without some pause or Interval which many times cools the fury of men's rage
and Impetuosities in the pursuit of their causeless anger or malice, or by some
other way or means lays aside their intended Law Suit, our Laws in the favor
showed to Defendants imitating therein the Civil Law (from whose Excellent and
largly streaming fountain much of their reasons and Maxims are borrowed and
derived) which in it is Practice and Tenets is favorabilior reo quam Actori,
respects more the Defendant than the Plaintiff; Actor quippe potuit omnia
negotia ex consilio componere antequam reum vocaret, for that the Plaintiff
has commonly made all his matters ready, before he complains of the
Defendant, or cites him to appear to his Action, reus vero quadam necessitate
comparendi sibi imposita, ita facile saepe non potest sibi consulere, ut pro
voluntate quae vult exequatur; but the Defendant having a necessity put upon
him Greg. Tholos. Syntagmate Juris, lib. 48. cap. 2. Sect. 18.
to appear when he is summoned, cannot in that time so well provide for his
defense, as to do, or perform, what he otherwise would do, which may be the
cause, that apud Romanos Lege cautum ut Accusatori (which was then in Civil, as
well as in Criminal Cases) in foro Plin. secundus lib. 4. Epist. urso suo.
horae sex ad dicendum reo vero novem ad defendendum darentur, a Law was made
by the Romans, that the Accuser should be allowed six hours at the Barr^ or in
a Court of Justice, to charge the Defendant; but the Defendant was for his
defense to have nine, that apportionment of time being afterward contracted
and abridged by Cn. Pompey, unto two for the Plaintiff, and three for the
Defendant; and long before that, amongst the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, fuit
constitutum, ut aequalibus votis super vindicando facinore Alexander ab
Alexnndro Gemal dierum, lib. 3.25. b.
in diversa trahentibus pro reo judicium staret quod videbatur aequissimum, it
was their Law or Custom, that where in a Case betwixt the Accuser or Plaintiff,
and the Defendant, the Votes of the one side, and the other, sell to be equal,
they held it most just or equitable to absolve or free the Defendant, and for
that, or the like reason, it was, that Judge Hengham said in the Reign of King
Edward the first, Hengham magna, cap. 6.
quod Curia Domini Regis neminem decipere vult, that the Kings Court of Justice
would not have any Defendant to be surprised or deceived, that by the Statute
of the 51. of King Henry the third, the days or Retourns in the Court of
Common Pleas in Real Actions for Lands, had so long a time allowed, as from the
Octaves, or eight days after Michaelmas, which as to the day of appearance, is
about the 9 th. day of October unto the Octaves or eight days of St. Hillary,
which is as to the day of appearance, the 23. day of January next following,
and of five Retourns in Dower which concerned only an Estate for life, from the
Octaves or eight days of St. Hillary, which is the 23. day of January, unto
quindena Paschae, or fifteen days after Easter, which in most years does
happen about the middle of April next following, and by the Statute of 32 H. 8.
cap. 2. days were given in real Actions retornable in Octabis Sancti Hillarii,
unto Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis, which is more than four months. And that
there are and have been, to the intent that according to our Magna Charta the
Defendant as well as the Plaintiff should be heard before Sentence or Judgment
given, those Indulgencies of Essoins de malo vemendi, that a Defendant could
not coveniently come, or of malo lecti, that he was sick, etc.

Such Licenses or kind of leave, before Actions begun or prosecuted, being so
essential to a right distribution of Justice, as anciently the parties could
not compound or agree an Action or Suit depending, without a License from the
King to ag^ee, as it is yet in praxi, in the course or manner of leavying Fines
upon Writs of Covenant for a certain sum of money called by the name of the
Kings Silver, paid to the King upon the prae-fine, and another sum of money
also upon the Post-fine, and sometimes, though now altogether dis-used, upon an
Action of Debt, for no greater a sum of money than 11 l. and some odd money;
nor could the Plaintiff upon any mistake in his Action, amend the matter, or
bring another Writ, without a Petition or Request ut recedat a brevi, that he
might forsake that Writ or Action to purchase a better, all the pleadings at
Law where the obtaining of a Writ is mentioned, alleging that the Plaintiff
impetravit breve, did Petition for that Writ, and the special awarding of very
many of the Writs and Process of Law being in the word petit breve de
inquirendo de dampnis, etc. that the Plaintiff prays that he may have a Writ
to inquire of Damages, etc.

And was not without the pattern of ancient days, and the reasons that guided
or conducted them unto it, when in King David's time, as we may read in the
Conspiracy and Rebellion of his Son Absalom, the people were coming to David
with 2 Reg. cap. 15. Et Sigonius de Repub. Hebr. lib. 7. cap. 3. and cap. 7.
with their Petions for Justice, and there were amongst the Hebrews, or people
of Israel (God in his most righteous Laws to that Nation which Moses afterward
told them far Deuteronomy. 4. v. 8. and 25. v. 1, and 2.
surpassed the Laws of other Nations, ordaining ut ex praescripto res
Judicarent, that matters of Controversy should be judged according to certain
praescript forms and rules) a certain sort of Magistrates, called
Grammatoisogogei, which prefided over the Judges, qui causas quae ad se
deferrentur, who received Petitions for Justice, recipere vel rejicere possent,
and quas recepissent ad Judices introducerent, and having authority to receive
or reject them, did deliver to the Judges those which they approved, to which
custom or course, that speech of our Savior Christ in the 12 th. Chapter of
St. Luke alludeth, Cum vadis cum Luke 12. v, 38.
Adversario tuo ad Principem in via da operam liberari ne forte trahat te ad
Judicem, when thou go with thine Adversary to the Prince, (or Magistrate,)
as thou art in the way, give diligence, that thou may be delivered from him,
lest he hale thee to the Judge. And the Athenians having afterward used the
like, the Romans, their wise Imitators, considering that hominem homini Lupum
esse verissime dici solet, men are too often Wolves to one another, and cum
vita nostra ob corruptam naturam sine litibus transigi non posset melius erat
Judiciorum formulas introducere, quibus Judice cognitore homines disceptarent
quam far quod quotidianis dissidiis ad arma and rixas prosilirent; and the
life of mankind by their corrupt nature, could not be without some Suits or
Controversies, it would be better to introduce certain forms of Laws in the
proceedings thereof, by which by the Judges appointment men might manage and
frame their actions and fuits, than to suffer men to fight and brawl one with
another, did ordain that, nemini liceret in judicio experiri nisi impetrata
prius agendi formula a Collegio Pontificum, No man was permitted to prosecute
another at Law, until he had obtained a form or direction for his Action from
the College of Priests, who were then as the Priests amongst the Hebrews, the
most learned and experienced; afterward the Praetor or Lord Chief Justice, or
Juris Civilis Custos Guardian or Keeper of the Law in the time of their
republique had authority actionem dare, to allow of the action, or negare to
disallow it, and prohibited any Action to be prosecuted against a Parent or
Children, or against a Patron, or the Parents Oldendorpius de Action.
Solemnitatibus, aequissimum in permiss. de usu fruct.
of a Patron, sine permissu suo, without his license: But afterward when that
imperious mistress of the world was married to the Caesar's or Roman Monarchy,
their Emperors, as Dioclesian and Alexand. ah Alexandro Ge^nal dierum, lib. 1.
cap. 15
Maximian, Gordian, Valerian, and Galienus, and their successors, did by their
Rescripts, of which infinite examples says Brissonius Brissonius de formulis
lib. 3.280, 281, 282, 283* 288.
might be instanced, allow of their Petitions for Debts, Trespass, or other
matters before they were remitted to the Judges appointed, and thinks that the
original of that Custom came ab ultima antiquitate, had a long before and very
ancient foundation, Et apud Bignonii notae ad librum 1. Marculfi formul. 520.
and in lib. 1. Marculfi formul. cap. 37. and passim in eodem libro.
Francos, amongst the old French there appears to have been anciently the like
address to their Kings for Justice before they were recommended to the Judges.

And howsoever by the favor of some of our later Kings, and their Subordinate
Courts of Justice for the ease and expedition of the Subjects in their suits
and actions, as they can now of course, (as it was acknowledged to be in the
Reign of King Edward the ^* ex gratia cursoria, by an indulged course, as they
call it, out of the Courts to whose Jurisdiction it belongs) take out writs
and process to arrest and prosecute as they shall have occasion, without the
observance of those good and wholesome former rules and directions of our Laws,
yet there is no record or proof to be found that any of our Kings have so far
indulged those courses, as to release in that particular the rights and
privileges of themselves and their servants in that necessary and well-becoming
enforcing of leave or license first to be had, before any action or suite
commenced against any of their servants, which the Laws and reasonable Customs
of England derived from the rational Laws and Customs of so many wise and
prudent Nations standing yet in force and unrepealed, or unabrogated, did and
do yet intend and direct to be used in the case of all other men that were not
the Kings Servants.

And the Civil Law having taught our Common Law that excellent use and policy
of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, the rules whereof they ought to
observe in those services obliging a gratitude as long as they hold those lands
in so beneficiary a manner* which do tanquam ossibus haerere, fix and become
inherent, and as it were connatural to the Lands, would if our Common Law
should be silent, and there were no Ancient Customs or usages to direct it,
enjoin an observance and respect toward their fellow servants, as much as is
now claimed in that particular by the Kings servants, not to be arrested,
imprisoned or molested in their Persons or Estates without leave or license
first obtained of their Sovereign; for if any sought to disturb their service
or quiet, before that late unhappy conversion of those Tenures into free and
common socage, which our seri nepotes and posterity will, as may justly be
feared, rather lament with the weeping Prophet Jeremy, than have any the least
cause or occasion of rejoicing or taking any comfort in that their supposed
freedom or acquest, they would not only have been deservedly branded with that
most infamous, and in it self a worse than Pilloried note of Ingratitude, but
where the Civil Law and the reason of it could reach them, be liable to the
forfeiture or loss of the Fee or Land holden; and therefore it was that those
feudatary Laws, which have gained so great a reputation and entertainment
throughout all Europe, the most civilized and well-governed quarter or fourth
part of the world, and extended it self into some considerable parts of the
other three, as far almost as the habitations of the wild and savage part of
them, did adjudge Vasallum ob feudarii juris inficiationem proprietate feudi
mulctari, That a Vassal or Tenant by Knight Service, may, if he deny the rights
and observances due to the Lord of the Fee, be deprived or punished by the loss
of it, Et contumacia Choppinus de de domanio Franciae, lib. 3. tit. 2.523, and
524.
quodamodo inficiationi feudi aequiparatur ex qua ingratus cliens ipsa etiam
mulctaretur fundi proprietate Clientelaris, and a contumacy or contempt of the
Lord, of whom the Client or Tenant holds his Land, is somewhat like to the
denial of the Lord Rights, whence it is, that an ungrateful Client or Tenant
may be punished by the loss of the Land, for Reverentiam and honorem debet
vasallus Patrono, nec Tit. in feud. de Vassal. qui contra constable. Lothar. regis
benif. aliea l. generaliter 13. D. L. venia 2. C. H.
eum offendere debet, the Vassal or Tenant owes reverence and honor to his
Patron or Lord of his Land, ubi autem debetur reverentia, vel ubi honor
naturaliter est praestandus ibi est necessaria veniae impetratio, for where
Reverence is due, or honor by the Laws of nature is to be performed, there or
in such cases the asking of leave or license will be necessary, from which our
Common Law does not much dissent; when by King Henry L. L. Henrici primi cap.
43. and 83.
the first his Laws, Qui facit advocatum contra Dominum suum per superbiam,
perdat quod de eo tenet, he which proudly and presumptuously retains an
advocate against his Lord, was to forfeit the Lands which he held of him, and
where leave is given, unicuique se defendere in quolibet negotio, to every one
to defend himself upon all occasions, there is an exception that it must not be
contra Dominum quem tolerandum, against the Lord, whom he is to forbear; and
the words of the Tenant by Knights-service doing his homage, wherein he does
say, Jeo deueigne vostre home foyal and loyal, I become or acknowledge my self
to be your man faithful and loyal, carries with it an obligation of fidelity,
de vita and membris suis and terreno honor and observatione consilii sui per
honestum and utile, of life and members, and of all earthly honor and
observance, and keeping his Counsel in all things honest and profitable, says
the authentic or Red book of the Exchequer, and the Tenants holding of his
hands betwixt the Lords in the doing of his homage, signifies says our
Bracton Fleta and Coke reverentiam Cokes 1 part Comment upon Littleton, lib. 2.
cap. 1. and lib. Rub. cap. 55.
and subjectionem, Reverence and subjection, and being then unarmed, and his
sword ungirt, denotes that he is never to be armed against, or opposite to his
Lord (which by prosecuting or arresting any of his servants without leave, he
may well be deemed to do) and in that faedere perpetuo, as to them, eternal
league betwixt him and his Lord, is not says Bracton propter obligationem
homagii, by the obligation of his homage, to do any thing, quod vertatur domino
ad exhaeredationem vel aliam atrocem injuriam, which may turn to the
disheriting of his Lord, or other great injury, (which a saucy and unmannerly
arrest and haling of his servants to prison without license first obtained,
hindering thereby his daily and special service, wherein his health, safety and
honor, may be more than a little concerned, endangered, or prejudiced, must
needs by understood to be) which if he shall do, justum erit judicium quod
amittat Bracton 80. Britton. 174. and Coke Comment. super Littleton lib 1. tit.
homag.
tenementum, it will be just that he should lose his Land, and our Writ of
Cessavit per (...), by which the Tenant, if he perform not his services to his
Lord within two years, shall have his Land recovered against him, redeemable
only by paying the arrears of rents, if any, and undertaking to perform his
services better for the future, bespeaks the same punishment, and a certain
conclusion will therefore follow upon these premises, that all such as did
before the conversion of Tenures in socage, hold the King their Lands
immediately, in Capite, and by Knights service, ought not to sue or molest any
of his servants without license; and although that inseparable Incident of the
Crown, and most Ancient and noble Tenure of Chivalry and military service is
now as much as an Act of Parliament can do it, turned to the Plow, or socage
Tenure, yet the fealty, which is, says Coke Comment. super Littleton tit.
homag.
Sir Edward Coke, included in every doing of homage, which being done to a
mesne Lord, is always to have a Salva fide, saving of the Tenants faith and
duty to the King his heirs and Successors, does or should put all that are now
so willing to hold by that tenure, and to leave their Children and Estates to
the greedy and uncharitable designs of Father-in-Laws under the conditions, and
obligations of fealty, in mind or remembrance that by the fealty which they do
or should swear unto the King, and the oath of Allegiance, which contains all
the Essential parts of homage and fealty, which are not abrogated by that Act
of Parliament for alteration of the Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service
into free and common socage, and the Oath of Supremacy, to maintain and defend
the Kings Rights, Praeheminences, and Jurisdictions, cannot allow them that
undutifull and unmannerly way of Arresting, Molesting, or Imprisoning any of
the Kings Servants, without leave or license first had, and that a Copyholder
in Socage, forfeits his Lands if he speak unreverent words of his Lord in the
Court holden for the Manor, or goes to any other Court wherely to entitle the
Lord thereof to his Copyhold, or does replevin his Goods or Cattle upon a
Distress taken by the Vide complete Copyholder said to be Written by Sir Edw.
Coke.
Lord for his Rent or Service, or refuse to be sworn of the Homage which in
Copyhold Estates is not taken away by the Act of Parliament of 12 Car. Regis
Secundi, for the taking away of Homage upon Tenures in Capite, and by Knights
Service. And where a Copyhold Tenant, against whom a Recovery is bad, cannot
have a Writ of false Judgment, he has no other remedy but to petition the
Lord to Reverse the Judgment, nor can have an Assise against his Lord, but may
be amerced if he use contemptible words in the Court of the Manor to a Jury,
or without just cause refuse to be of Cokes 4. relat. tit. Copyhold 146. idem
1. part. comment upon Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 1.
it, that all the Lands of England are held immediately or mediately of the
King, that every Freeman of London, besides the Oaths of Allegi^nce and
Supremacy, takes a particular Oath when he is made Free to be good, true, and
obeysant to the King, his Heirs, and Successors, and does enjoy all the
Liberties and Freedom of the City, Trade, and Companies, by and under them.
And that they, and all other Subjects his astricti Legibus, which are under
such Obligations, cannot by their Homage, Fealty, Tenure of their Lands,
natural Ligiance under which they were born, and Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, without violation of them, and the hazard of their dreadful
consequences, incroach upon those just and rational Rights and Privileges of
the Kings Servants, confirmed by as many Acts of Parliament, as our excellent
Magna Charta of England has been at several times after the making thereof, at
the granting of which, King Henry the 3 d. took such care of his own Rights and
Privileges, as by his Writ of Proclamation to the Sheriff of York, wherein
mention being made that he had granted to the people the Liberties mentioned in
the Magna Charta, which Claus. 9. H. 3. m. 9.
he would have to be observed, he commanded him nevertheless, that all his own
Liberties and privileges which were not specially mentioned and granted away
in that Charter, should be specially observed as they were used and accustomed
in the times of his Ancestors, and especially in the Reign of his Father King
John.

For our allegiance due to the King being vincul^m ar^tius, a more strict tie
betwixt the King and his Subjects, engaging the Sovereign to the Protection and
just Government of his people, and they unto a due Obedience and Subjection
unto him; by which says the Custumary of Normandy, ^i tenentur contra omnes
homines qui mori possunt, and vivere proprii corporis praebere consilium, and
adjuvamentum, and ei se in omnibus Innocuos exhibere, nec ei adversantium
partem in aliquo fovere, to give him council and aid against all men living,
and dying, to behave themselves well toward him, nor to take any ones part
against him, Spelmans Glossar. in voce ligeantia et Custumar. vet. Norman. cap.
43.
will leave such infringers of his Royal Rights and Piviledges inexcusable for
the dishonor done unto him by Arresting, Molesting, or Imprisoning his
Servants upon any Actions or Suit without leave or license, and at the same
time when many of them do enjoy the Privileges of HAMSOCNE (a word and
privilege in use and practice amongst our Ancestors the Saxons) or
questioning and punishing of any that shall come into their House,
Jurisdiction, or Territotory, by the Spelman Glossar. in voce Hamsocne.
gifts, grants, or permission of the King, or some of his Royal Progenitors,
deny or endeavor all they can to enervate the Rights and Liberties of him and
his Servants, when they may know that he and his Predecessors, Kings and Queens
of England, have, and ought to have an Hamsocne, Ham in the Saxon Language
signifying domus vel habitatio, an house or habitation, and Socne, libertas,
vel immunitas, a liberty, immunity, or freedom, to question and punish any that
shall invade the Liberties and Privileges belonging to his House, Palace, and
Servants, vel aliquid aliud faciendum contra voluntatem Vetus M. S. Monaster.
de Coxford.
illius qui debet domum vel curiam, or by doing any thing, says an old
Manuscript of Coxford Abbey or Monastery, which is against the will of the owner
of the House or Court, which King Henry the first in his Laws de Jure Regis,
concerning some particulars of his Prerogative and Regality, did number amongst
the rest, and account to belong unto him and his Successors, and in the
perclose of that Law, which in some Copies is mentioned to be made assensu
Baronum Regni Angliae, by the consent of the Barons of England, it is said haec
sunt Dominica placita Regis, nec pertinent vicecomitibus apparitoribus vel
ministris LL. Henrici primi. cap. 10.
ejus sine diffinitis praelocutionibus in forma sua, these are the Rights and
Jurisdictions belonging to the King in his Demesne, and do not belong to any
Sheriffs Apparitors or their Bailiffs, unless especially granted unto them.

By which, and the HVSFASTENE, an old course and custom amongst the Saxons,
which ordained that every house with their FOLGHERES, Followers, or Servants,
should be in Franco Plegio, in some Frank pleg. or Liberty, where by the
Courts held in those places, or Justice there to be had, any controversies
betwixt them and others, or wrongs done by or unto them, might be determined
the rule of the Civil Law, which in many of the Customs or Municipal Laws of
this and other Nations, was the guide or Pole star which conducted them, being
that actio sequitur forum rei, the Action to which our Common Laws have ever
since in their Real and other actions much agreed, is to be tried in the Court
where the person or lands of the party defendant are, and that before recited
law of K. Edw. the Confessor, which amongst other his highly valued Laws,
Enacted, that Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all that had Soc a
liberty of distributive Justice in their Lands or Territories, and Sac L L.
Edwardi Confessoris, 21, 22, 23.
a power to fine or punish such as were found guilty, either by complaining
without a cause, or proved to have done wrong to another (which gave or
confirmed many a liberty, or set the example of the succeeding Kings,
gratifying many of their Subjects with the like, in making them tanquam Reguli,
little Princes within their own Estates or Dominions) should have suas Curias
and Consuetudines, their Courts and liberties in their view of Frank Pleg.
Court Leets, and Court Barons, and should have under their Jurisdiction, etiam
milites suos and proprios servientes, such as served them in wars, or held of
them by the service thereof, or were their domestic or household servants, Item
Bracton, lib. 3. c. 10.
and isti suos Armigeros and alios sibi servientes, and the Esquires and
servants likewise of their servants, says Bracton, expounding that Law of King
Edward the Confessor, the King certainly should not be denied his own Franchise
view of Frank-Pleg or jurisdiction to do Justice where either his service or
servants were concerned, or at least to be complained unto before any violent
course of Law should be taken in other Courts against them, for otherwise if
the King should not have always had such a franchise view of his Frank Pleg. or
Laws or Customs Hospitii sui, as Fleta terms them, of his Royal House or
Palace, there would have been some vestigia foot steps or track to be found
either in the Ancient Monuments and Memorials of our Laws, or of those of later
ages, or of some other time, That the King had been an immediate or single
Complainant by way of Action for any abuses only offered to his servants, or
contempts to his person or Royal Authority, which by a long most just and
necessary prescription, as far as time with his Iron teeth has left us any
remembrances was always left and reserved to the authority and Jurisdiction of
the Lord Chamberberlain of the Kings House, and the Kings other great Officers,
who by the Messengers of the Kings Chamber, who in such particulars have been
as the Lictores, Sergeants or Bailiffs pro ista vice, upon such occasions to
arrest and bring them to the Justice of the King in his Royal Court or Palace,
and must needs be as lawful, or a great deal more in his own particular and
immediate concernment, as it is for the Lord Keeper of the great seal of
England, or Lord Chancellor to direct the Kings Sergeant at Arms allowed to
attend that great and illustrious Officer and Superintendent of the Chancery by
himself, or his Deputy to arrest and take into his chargeable custody the
person of any that shall have committed any grand or reiterated contempt
against the process orders or decrees of that honorable Court, or for that or
the Court of Common Pleas, to make the Warden of the Fleets men or the Virgers
or Tipstaves attending upon the said Courts, or for the Courts of Kings Bench
or Exchequer to make the Marshals or Tipstaves thereof to be the Lictores or
Messengers of their punishments and displeasure, or as the house of Peers in
Parliament do make use of the Kings Usher of the black rod, and the house of
Commons in Parliament of the Kings Sergeant at Arms; nor could it have been
likely that the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings house, who in the Reigns of our
Kings Edward the first, second, or third, and probably by foregoing and elder
constitutions, did in the absence of the Lord Chief Justice of England, vicem
gerere, execute in the Kings Court, as Fleta tells us, the Office or place of
the said Lord Chief Justice should not retain in the Government of the Kings
Servants and Household, so much power as might protect them from injuries or
their Royal Master from contempts or neglects of Duties, or respects to his
person Palace or servants, for who that has not bid defiance to his own
Intellect, as well as the wisdom of former ages can pretend any show or color
of Reason, that the King should want the power or authority to do as the late
blessed Martyr King Charles the first did in the apprehension of certain
Watermen in the year 1632. and committing them to Bridewell for refusing to
carry the French Ambassador by Water, upon the complaint of the Kings Master of
the Barge in the year 1634. for the apprehension of William Hockley a
Hackney-Coachman for refusing to wait upon the French Ambassador, or of John
Philpots Postmaster of Rochester for dis-respects to Monsieur St. German the
French Ambassador, or in the year 1636. for the arrest of John Clifford of
Chelsey, upon the Complaint of the Spanish Ambassador, or to cause one Robert
Armstrong to be taken into custody by one of his Messengers in the year 1639.
for arresting the Postmaster of St. Albans, who it may be, for ought the
offender then knew, was bringing some Packet or Letters to the King or his
Lords of the Council, for the discovery of some impending dangers, which would
need as sudden a prevention, as the Gunpowder once intended, and near achieved
Treason, or to cause in the same year Richard Horn of Watton in the County of
Oxford to be arrested and taken into custody upon the complaint of Mr. Hiorne
Deputy Steward of Woodstock, for not only refusing to furnish horses to carry
the Kings Venison to Court, he being Constable, and required, and of duty ought
to do it, but for reproachful and ill language; or as was done not long before
or after in his Reign, by a Warrant under the hand of the L. Chamberlain, for
the apprehension of one that had spoiled or killed a Mastiff of the Kings, when
as our Laws have not yet had any prescript, form, or writs remedial for any of
those or the like accidents at the Kings suit only, for it would be no small
disparagement to the Majesty of a King, and supreme of such an ancient Empire,
not to have power enough to redress complaints of that nature, or to be
enforced to put Ambassadors to be Petitioners to his inferior and delegated
Courts, of Justice, which no Monarchy, Kingdom, or Republique in Christendom
was ever observed to suffer to be done for that which their Superiors,
according to the Law of Nations ever had, and should have power to grant
without them; for when our Laws, which do not permit the King as a Defendant,
to be commanded in his own name, under his own Seal, and by his own writs, or
as a Plaintiff to supplicate those whom he commissionated to do Justice in his
name, and by his authority to all and the meanest of his Subjects, to do a
parcel of Justice to himself when he wanted no remedies, by his own Messengers
or Servants to imprison any that should offend against his dignity and
authority, and in matters of his Revenue, or for contempt of his Royal
authority can by seisures or distress, office or inquisitions and process of
his Courts of Exchequer, Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Duchy of
Lancaster, etc. give himself a remedy, and is not to prosecute in any Actions
at Law, as common persons are enforced to do, for our Kings should not
certainly be denied their so just and legal rights, when by their Office and
dignity Royal they are the principal Conservators of the Peace within their own
Dominions, and by their Subordinate authority the Judges of their Courts of
Record at Westminster, and the Justices of Assize can and do legally punish and
command men by word of mouth to be Imprisoned or taken into Custody by their
Tipstaves, Virgers, Marshals, or by the Warden of the Fleet, or his men
attending them, when the Lord Steward of the Kings Household, Earl, Marshal, and
Constables of England, are by their Offices Conservators and Justices of the
Peace in all places of the Realm, and the Steward of the Marshalsea within the
virge by that derived authority can do the like, and all the Justices of Peace
in England were and are authorized by him who has, or should have certainly a
greater power than any Justice of Peace who may by Law award a man to prison
which breaks the peace in his presence, or appoint his servant to serve
Lambards Eirenarch. 1 lib. c. 12 and 13. lib. 2. c. 2.88, 89. 8 E. 4.14. 20 H.
7.13. 14 H. 8.18. and lib. 1. ca. 3.14 and 15. Lamberds Eirena^ch. lib. 2.84,
85. and 9 E. 4.3. and Lamberts Eirenarchi^ lib. 1.26.60 and 61. lib. 1. cap.
12. and 13.
or execute his Warrant, or cause by word of mouth to be arrested or
imprisoned, the person offending for contempts, or an offender being in his
presence, to find security for the Peace, and by the Common Law cause Offenders
against the Peace to be punished by corporal punishments, not capital, as
whipping, etc. when a Sheriff of a County, and the Majors and head Officers of
Cities and Towns Corporate do the like, under and by the power given them, by
grants of the King and his Progenitors, when the Steward of the Sheriffs Turn,
or a Leet, or of a Court of Piepowder, may commit any to ward which shall make
any affray in the presence of any of them, when the Lord Mayor of London, whose
Chamberlain of that City has a power appropriate to his Office Stowes Survey
of London.
of Chamberlain, to send or commit any Apprentices of London upon complaint of
their Masters, or otherwise to the Prison of the Compters, or to punish and
reform such disobedient Servants (though the younger Sons of Baronets, Knights,
Esquires, of Gentlemen, and sometimes the elder Sons of decayed or impoverished
Esquires or Gentlemen, who should have a greater respect given unto them then
those of Trades men, Yeomandry, or lower Extractions by cutting and clipping
their hair, if too long and proudly worn, or cause them to be put into a place
well known in Guildhall London, Called Little Ease, where to a great Torment of
their bodies they cannot with any ease sit, lie, or stand, or by sometimes
committing them to Bridewell, or some other place, there to be scourged and
whipped by a Bedel, or some persons disguised, for no man can tell where to find
or discern any reason that the King should not, upon extraordinary occasions
have so much power and coertion in his high and weighty affairs of government,
protection of his people, and procuring and conserving their peace, welfare and
happiness, as a St^ward of a Court Leet, or the Lord thereof in their far less
affairs of Jurisdictions, by punishing of Bakers and Brewers, by that very
ignominio^s and now much wanted use of the Pill^ry and Tumbrel, in the later
whereof the Offender was to be put in a Cathedra or ducking stool placed over
some stinking and muddy pool or pond, and several times immerged in it, or that
by any law or reasonable custom our Kings of England are to have a more limited
power in matters of punishment and government, or a less power than the Masters
and Wardens of that petty and lower most (the late erected Company or
Corporation of the Midlers only excepted) Company or Corporatio^ of the
Watermen who, acting under the Kings authority, can fine the Master Watermen
for offenses committed against bylaws of their own making, and imprison them
without Bail or Mainprize for not paying of it, and cause their Servants for
offenses against their Masters, to be whipped and punished at their Hall by some
vizarded and invisible Tormentors, or less than the power and authority of a
Parish, and most commonly illiterate and little to be trusted Constable, who
may upon any affray or breach of the Peace in his presence, or but threatening
to break the peace, put the party offending in the Lambards Eirenarch, lib. 2.
cap. 3.133 and 134. and tract. de office Constabl. 16, 17.
stocks, or keep him at his own house until he find sureties of the peace, or
less than those necessary military powers and authorities exercised in Armies,
Garrisons, or Guards, by inflicting upon offenders that deserve it, the
punishment of running the Gantlet, riding the wooden horse, etc. or in maritime
affairs, by beating with a Ropes end, ducking under the main yard, etc. when as
the Powers given by God Almighty to his Vicegerent the King and Supreme
Magistrate, and the subordinate and derivative power concredited by him to his
delegated and commissionated inferior Magistrates, are not debarred that
universal and well-grounded maxim of Law and Right Reason, Quando Lex aliquid
concedit concedere videtur and id sine quo res esse non potest, when the Law
grants any thing it grants, the means without which the matter or thing
could not be, which the now Lord Mayor or London, or some of the Sheriffs or
Aldermen of that City thought to be Warrant sufficient for imprisoning (if
report be not mistaken) a poor Cobbler living in or near Fleet street, for
stumbling upon a piece of a Jest or Drollery, and saying, he thanked God he had
dined as well as the Lord Mayor, when his Lordships coming or being invited to
dinner with the Reader and Society of the Inner Temple, in or about the latter
end of the Month of March 1668. had upon his claiming a liberty to have the
Sword of the City born before him within the Liberties of the Temple, caused
some Tumult or Riot, begun as the Gentlemen of that Society alleged, by his
own party, the harmless Cobblers curiosity had only persuaded him to leave his
small subterranean Tenement, shaded with his usual frontelet of a few old
shoes, to be amongst many other of the Neighborhood a Spectator of that
contention betwixt the Lord Mayor and that Inn of Court concerning its
Privileges, the one endeavoring to infringe, and the other to defend the
Temples very ancient and clearly to be evidenced privileges: And many Justices
of the Peace would be unwilling that their punishments by committing of men to
prison for ill words, mis-behaviours, or sometimes by a but supposed affront,
given or used unto some of them for a Tobaccoe-pipe casually thrown out of the
window of an Alehouse into a neighbor Justice of the Peace his Garden, when
unperceived by the Thrower he was walking therein, should be adjudged to be
without the bounds or limits of their Commissionated Authority, nor should they
or any other of the Kings Subjects refuse to subscribe to that well-known*
Axiom conse^ted unto by our Laws, as well as the Law of Nations* that
derivativa potestas non potest esse major primitiva, that a derivative power 2
Ass pl. 4.
or authority cannot be greater than the power and authority which gave it.

And therefore it should neither be taken to be any over bold assertion, vain
imagination, or inference weakly built, conjecture or conclusion without
premises, that the servants of the Kings of England in ordinary ought not to be
bereaved of their aforesaid Privileges, and that all the Subjects of England
are more then a little obliged to take a care that they should enjoy them, when
as every Male of England and Wales, above the age of 12 years, are to take and
swear the Oath of Allegiance, which was a law so long ago instituted and
ordained, says Sir Edw. Coke before Calvin's Case, Coke 7 Report. and LL.
Edwardi Confessor. 3.35.
the Conquest as King Arthur, is by good Warrant believed to be the Author of
it, and all the People of England, who since his Majesty's happy restoration
have sworn it, and by that great tie and obligation did undertake to bear truth
and faith unto him and his Successors of life and member, and terrene honor,
and that they should neither hear or know of any damage intended unto him which
they should not defend, and all which do take degrees of learning and faculties
in our Universities, all Judges, Sergeants at Law, Justices of Peace, Baristers
at Law, Mayors, Sheriffs and Magistrates whatsoever, under Sheriffs and their
Deputies, and all Bailiffs Officers and Clerks entrusted in any Court of
Justice do not only take and swear the Oath of Allegiance, but the Oath of
Supremacy, which is to defend the jurisdictions and privileges, preheminencies
and authorities of the King his Heirs and Successors annexed to their imperial
Crown and dignity, and by all those very binding, and soul as well as body
engaging obligations should in no case endeavor to impugn or obstruct (which
the arresting of his Servants in ordinary, or his necessary attendants without
leave or license first obtained does assuredly do) his so ancient, so legal,
and so long accustomed just Rights 26 H 8. cap. 1.1. Eliz. cap. 1. and 5 Eliz.
cap. 1.
Jurisdictions, Privileges and authorities inseparably incident and appurtenant
to his Royal government, it having been in the Reign of King Henry the 8 th.
one of the Articles against Cardinal Wolsey, subscribed by the Lord Chancellor,
the Dukes of Lord Herberts History of King Henry the 8 th.
Norfolk and Suffolk, diverse Earls, Barons, and some of the Kings Privy
Council, that where it had been accustomed within the Realm, that when Noblemen
do swear their Household Servants, the first part of their Oath has been, that
they should be true Leigemen to the King and his Heirs, Kings of England, the
same Lord Cardinal had omitted to do it.

Nor have those rational, legal, necessary and well grounded privileges of
Kings or Princes Servants, decursu Temporis, by any change or long course of
time been so discontinued, antiquated or altered upon any pretense of grievance
or inconveniences whatsoever, as not now to be extant and found in our
Neighbor Nations, and most other of the civilized parts of the world, not only
where the fear of God or honor of Princes have any thing to do, but even
amongst those which having not had light enough to know the true God, have in
their ignorance fancied and made to themselves Deities of their own
imaginations.

When our Neighbors of France, who were heretofore better acquainted with
their Liberties than since they are, or are likely to be, did not think it to
be a thing unreasonable that the King of France his servants in ordinary should
enjoy those or the like immunities and privileges, when non nisi Vincentius
Lupanus, lib. 1. tit. Magistr. hospitii.
venia prius impetrata, without leave first obtained ab Architriclino sive
Oeconomo hospitii regis, from the Master of the Kings household, (as with us the
Lord Steward or Lord Chamberlain) neminem licet per Francorum leges in jus
vocare in Palatio, It was not lawful by the Laws of France to sue or arrest any
in the Palace, or belonging to the Kings household, Pares Franciae praetoribus
Regiis non subjiciantur, The Peers of France Jo. Tilii Comment. de rebus
Gallicis* lib. 2.141.150. and tit. de paribus Galliae.
are not to be tried by the Kings ordinary Courts of Justice, Et non ferebat
nobilitas de feudis ab ignobili ullo judicari, the Nobility of France will not
endure that any thing concerning their Fieffs or Lands should be tried and
adjudged by any which were not of the Nobility.

In the year 1288. which was about the 24 th. year of the Reign of our King
Edward Tilii Commentar. de rebus Gallicis lib. 2.183.186.
the first in the case of John Pompline it was in the Parliament of Paris
adjudged that he being the Kings servant in ordinary ought not to pay any
Assessment.

And the like in the year 1311. in the Reign of King Philip the fair of France,
which was Johannis Tilii Commentar. de rebus Gallicis lib. 2.183. and 186. Tit
de officiis domesticis Regum and Reginarum. Vincentius Lupanus lib. 1. tit.
Magistr. hospitii*
about the 4 th. year of the Reign of our King Edward the second, in the case
of Baldwin and Proger, Et Philippi pulchri constitutione ad Architriclinum sive
Oeconomum actionalium personalium jurisdictio pertinebat quae a ministris
Regiis omniumque criminum cognitionem sibi vendicabat quae in Comitatu Regis
admittebantur, and by an Ordinance made by the said King the cognizance of all
personal actions commenced by any of the Kings Servants did appertain to the
said Master of the household, who claimed likewise the Trial of all Criminal
matters committed in the Kings House.

Philip King of France called the Long, in the year 1317. which was about the
10 th. year of the Jo. Tilii Commentar de rebus Gallicis lib 2* 183, 186*
Reign of our King Edward the second did command that Taxes or Assessments
taken from three of his servants should be restored unto them, which was
consented unto by his Parliament, and by a decree in Parliament the next year
after it was ordained that, Omnes Domestici Regis administri pronunciantur
immunes ab omni commeatuum vectigalibus quos ad necessitatem and usum suum
apportari curant, all the Kings household servants should not pay any Taxes for
the provisions which they bought or provided for their necessary uses or
occasions.

In a Decree of that Parliament made in the Reign of their King Charles the 5
th. called Charles the wise, in the cause of Silvester Cornelius the Kings
Almoner, in the year 1367. which was about the 41 th. year of the Reign of our
King Edward the 3. it was adjudged, that, Domestici officiarii immunitate
gauderent a vectigalibus, the Kings household servants should be freed from
Taxes.

By an Edict made by K. Charles the 6. of France* and ratified by Parliament in
the year 1408. which was about the 5. year of the Reign of our K. Henry the 5
th. It was ordained, Vt qui ministri Regis viginti Annos aut amplius
ministraverint vacantes a ministerio stipendia tamen habeant, that those which
had served the King 20 years or more, should, though they left their service,
have their wages continued.

Immunitas ab indictionibus subsidiariis omnibus attributa domesticis Regum
officiis de praediorum suorum fructibus cum approbatione Parliamenti, a
privilege and freedom was granted by the aforesaid King Charles the 6. from all
subsidies to be charged upon any of the Kings household Servants, by allowance
of Parliament in the year 1411. which was in or about the 8 th. year of our
King Henry the 5 th.

By a Letter of Lewis the 11 th. who reigned in France in the time of our King
Edward the 4 th. sent to the Parliament and Registered therein, that King
required, ut primo loco suorum officialium causas judicet nisi contendentium
sit ipsius aut Reginae domesticus in quo casu se moveri jubet ut exponat de eo
voluntatem suam, that in the first place they should hear and determine the
causes of their own Officers, unless one of the parties should be the King or
Queens servant in ordinary, and in such a Case commands that he be first moved,
and his pleasure thereupon declared.

Francis the first, King of France in Anno 1525. which was about the 16 th.
year of our King Henry the 8 th. sent his Declaration to that Parliament,
wherein he ordained that his Mothers household servants should enjoy the like
privileges as his Officers and servants did, and another Declaration to that
Parliament in the year 154^. quod officiales domesticos and commensales suos ab
omnibus tributis Indictionibus pensitationibus etiamque Canone in quinquaginta
peditum millia praestando Immunes erunt, that all his Domestic Officers and
Household servants should not be charged with any Taxes or Tributes, or with
Assessments toward the payment of 50000 foot men, and a like Declaration in
the year following de simili immunitate officiis Reginae domesticis and
commensalibus attributa, of the like privileges to the Officers and Household
servants of the Queen, seconded by a Declaration of Henry the second King of
France Registered in Parliament in the year 1548. which was about the second
year of our King Edward the 6 th. of the Privileges of the Kings Domestic and
Household servants, and the like to the Domestics and servants of Elianor the
Widow Lovet Recueil d' Aucuns notables Arrests donnez* en la Cour* de Parliament
de Paris* cap. 31*
Queen.

In which Kingdom also notwithstanding an ordinance made at Moulins about the
year of our Lord 1566. which was about the 8 th. year of the Reign of our Queen
Elizabeth, the Masters of Requests are not to be arrested or imprisoned for
debt, until four months expired after legal notice.

In the year 1626. the King of France sending the Marshal de Bassompierre his
extraordinary Ambassador into England, to reconcile some differences betwixt
our late Royal Martyr King Charles the first and his Royal Consort the Queen,
concerning the discharge and sending away most of her servants of the French
Nation attending upon her, contrary as was pretended to the Marriage Contract*
for some insolences and misdemeanors not to be tolerated, and that great
Ambassador bringing in his Retinue, Father Sancy a Popish Priest, whom our King
had no respect for, in regard of some ill offices supposed to be done betwixt
him and his Royal Consort the Queen, was no sooner come to Gravesend, but he
had an express Order from our King to send back the Father Sancy, who was in
his ill opinion, and could not be endured, to which the Ambassador returning an
Answer, that he was one of his Domestics, and humbly entreating his Majesty
not to intermeddle therein, said, that the example alleged of Mr. Walter
Mountague, who being in the Retinue of our Ambassador, Sir Dudley Carleton in
France, was upon the command of the French King in like manner dismissed, was
not to be any rule or reason in his case, and that howsoever our English
Ambassador Carleton permitted it, he would Negotiation du Marescal. de
Bassompiere en Angleter. en l' An. 1626. p. 91, 92.153
rather lose his life than suffer such an affront to be done unto him;
whereupon the Lord Conway, principal Secretary of State after his coming to the
Court, bringing him a message from the King, that he would not give him
audience, although he had promised it, unless he would first send Father Sancy
back into France, the Ambassador replied, that it would be in vain that his
Majesty should desire any such thing of him, parce que absolument il ne le
feroit ponit and que si il ne vouloit plus donner audience il retourneroit verse
son roy, for that he was absolutely resolved not to do it, and if he might not
have his Audience, he would return home without it, and notwithstanding that he
was extremely pressed by some of our Ministers of State, who alleged that the
Kings honor and reputation was engaged therein, continued his Refusal, for that
the Father Sancy came along with him by order of his King and the Queen Mother,
whereupon the Ambassador having certified his King of France of the proceedings
therein did not long after by a Letter under his own hand receive his
approbation for what he had done.

In the Empire of Germany the Domestique servants of the Emperor are not
bereaved of the Privileges of servant^ attending upon the Severinus de
Monzombono de statu Imperii Germanici cap. 5, 6, 9.14. and 21.
person as well as the public cares of their Sovereigns, when the Familiae
Regiae cum inter se tum vel adversus alios controversiae in Consilio Procerum
and Populi disceptantur, the controversies of suits (which is to be understood
where the Judicium or Tribunal in Aula Caesarea in the Emperors Court cannot
compose them) of the Emperors family brought eith^r by or against them, are to
be heard or decided in the Diets of other public meetings of the States of the
Empire.

At Florence, Siena, and Pisa in Italy no man may arrest or Dalingtons Survey
of the great Duke of Tuscanies Estate in the year 1596.
commence a suit against a Courtier, Soldier, or Estranger without a special
License from an Officer of the great Dukes Court thereunto appointed.

In the very large Dominions of the Ottoman Empire, such as receive any wages,
or pay coming from the Exchequer, or have any Office depending on the Crown,
are commonly free from the least Paul Ricault state of the Ottoman Empire, c. 3.
Injury to be offered unto them, when such as offend therein are sure to be
severely punished.

Those sons of Winter and rudeness the Russians or Moscovites can in their
small commerce with Latin or other learning, and the better manners of their
neighbor and other Nations so well understand the Privileges or respect of
Kings and Princes Ambassadors, who are therein but as their especial Servants
or Messengers, as when in the Earl of Carliles Embassy from our Sovereign King
Charles the second thither to the Tzar or Emperor of Moscovy in the year 1664.
a Gentleman of Plescoe having seized or distreyned two Horses belonging to the
Ambassadors Train, which he had found in the night to have broken into his
Pastures, the Governor or Plescoe was Relation of 3 Embassies of the Earl of
Carlisle into Moscovy, written by G. magie one of his attendants 322. and 366
no sooner informed thereof, but he apprehended the Gentleman, and sent him
bound to the Ambassador to beg his life, which upon his acknowledgement of the
indiscretion of the fact was easily pardoned by the Ambassador, the King of
Sweden not denying those respects which are due to Ambassadors, when in an
Embassy into Sweden in the same year, he did at the Ambassadors request release
out of prison one of the Ambassadors servants that had in a Duel slain a German
Colonel of the Ambassadors retinue.

The People of Holland and their confederate Provinces who do so fondly dream
of their freedoms, do not think their so hardly gained liberties lost or
retrenched, when for the military part of their Illustrious Princes of Orange
or Stadtholders, Domestiques, or any of those they call the States general
servants, being the greatest part of their Menials, they cannot Arrest and
prosecute any of them at Law, before leave petitioned for, and obtained; and as
for any other of their servants not employed in the War, or any of those many
several sorts of Officers and Offices appurtaining thereunto, there are enough
of that Nation can tell that their Greffiers or Process makers can, although
they are to make out their Mandates and Process ordinarily, and in common
forms, without a special order of the Judge or Recht Here so easily find the
way to a Biass, or partiality as to deny it, in the case of any of their
Superiors Domestiques, until they have a special order for it, which after a
tedious attendance is not to be gained until the matter or debt complained of
be referred and put to certain vreede mackers Peacemakers, or Arbitrators, who
can toss the Case in a Blanket, and make the Plaintiff a Labyrinth of delays,
which at long treading shall only bring him to a Mandate, and a tyring,
chargeable and tedious prosecution at their Law against such a p^otected
seemingly unprotected servant.

Nor is it rationally to be believed that the servants attending upon the
person, or in the Samedo relat. del China part 1.20.
Court of the Emperor of China, whose Dominions are, as Samedo says, as big as
Spain, France, Italy, Germany, the Belgicque Provinces, and Great Britain,
where the Mandarines his great Officers of State, Lord Lieutenants or Governors
of Provinces, are by the common people so highly reverenced, Hornii orbis
Politic. part 4.71. S^medo part 1. cap. 22.115.
as they are as they pass almost adored in all places, the people passing in
the Streets alighting off their horses, or coming out of their Chairs or
Sedans, when they meet them do not enjoy as great a Privilege as the Servants
in ordinary of our English Kings do claim to be free from Arrests or suits in
Law, before leave or license first obtained of some of the superior Officers
of his Court or Household, wherein there are nine Tribunals called Kicu Kim,
particularly appointed for matters of controversies which concern the Servants.

In those largely extended Empires of Japan, Persia, Industan, and all the
African and Asiatique Varenius de regno Japan. cap. 7.
Kingdoms and Dominions, where the power and will of the Princes are their
Laws, the fear and obedience of their Subjects are so very great, and their
reverence so extraordinary, as they do honor and esteem them as Demigods, and
have so great a respect of their Chancellors, Privy Counselors, great Officers
of State and servants employed by them, no man can so much mis-use his reason or
understanding, as to harbor any thought or imagination that the servants of
those Emperors or Princes are at any time without leave or license arrested or
prosecuted at Law.

And well might our Kings and Princes, and all other Sovereign Kings and
Princes understand the mis-usage and disgrace of their servants to be Crimen
immunitae Majestatis, no small crime or lessning of Majesty, and an abuse and
disparagement to themselves, when the Romans, with whom their neighbors the
Sabines scorned to Ally or marry, in regard of their then ignoble race and
originals, could in the height and grandeur of their all-conquering Republique,
after so many liberties obtained by taking them from others, creat and
constitute Majestatem populi Romani, a Majesty so called of their faction
breeding, inconstant and popular government, and accuse Rabirius Posthumus of
Crimen laesae Majestatis, high Treason, for that being a Citizen of Rome, he
had contra morem majorum, the usage and custom of the Romans, made himself a
Servant or Lacquey to Ptolomy King of Egypt at Alexandria, whereby to procure
Suetonius in Claudio, and Budaeus Annotat. in Pandect 45. ex libro 47. digest.
some money to be paid which was there owing unto him.

Neither are those that stand before our Kings and Princes, or attend upon
their persons, or near concernments of their Royal Household, as Servants in
ordinary to be ranked amongst the multitude, or put under an ordinary
Character, when reason of State, reputation of Princes, and the usage and
custom of Nations have always allowed distinctions and respects proper and
peculiar unto them.

For so much difference was always betwixt the servants of the Kings of
England, who by the irradiation of Majesty, and Regal Resplendency are not
without some participation or illustration of it, as they were always allowed a
precedence before the greatest part of their Subjects, not of the Nobility and
Clergy, for the Grooms of the Kings Bedchamber do take place of any Knight,
whether he be the Kings servant or not; and a Knight being the Kings Servant,
is to take place of any Knight which is not the Kings servant in ordinary, the
Kings Attorney, and Solicitor general, and Sergeants at Law, except the two
Puisneys of the Kings Sergeants at Law have not only precedence before other
Lawyers and men of the long Robe, not Judges or Mas^ers of Requests Cassan^^s ^
part Catalog. gloriae mundi. ^6 consid. and per Text ad literam in ^uth* ^t
ordinariae praesentur.
the later of which if but extraordinary, and Advocates or Lawyers debet alios
Advocatos precedere) but with the Kings other Council of Law extraordinary, and
the Queens and Princes or heir apparants Attorney and Solicitor general, are
in their Pleadings allowed to sit within the Bars of the Chancery and Courts of
Justice beneath the L. Chancellor, L. Keeper or Judges, and are to have a
prae-audience before any other Lawyers, by the custom of England drawn and
derived from that of the Civil Law, the superintending reason of many of our
Neighbor Nations, which ordains, Budaeus Annotat. in Pandect. titulo de
officio quaestoris.
that Advocatus Fisci the Kings Attorney general being first instituted by the
Emperor Adrian, prae^dit quoscunque advocatos etiam eo antiquiores, quoniam
major est autoritate, is to precede and take place of all other Advocates,
although they be his Ancients, for that he is greater in authority, and post
advocatum fisci sedere debet in foro procurator Fisci, gl. est notab. in verbo
restituuntur, Sect. fi F. de Jure Fisci and de Procuratoribus.
etiam ante omnes alios advocatos simplices non habentes aliam dignitatem cum
Procurator Fisci etiam advocatus dici potest, and next to him in the Court
ought the Kings Solicitor general to sit before any other Advocates having no
other dignity, when as the Kings Solicitor general may in some sort be said to
be the Kings Attorney general, and the kings Attorneys and Sollicitors general
are styled Spectabiles, a title betwixt that of Illustris anciently given to
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and that of Clarissimus given to Senators, and
tale officium confert dignitatem and est nobile ossicium, and such an Office
conferreth or makes a dignity, and is a noble Office, Jason in A Rub. text in
l. in sacris 3 Sect. modum. Seldom 2 part Titles of Honor c. 16. Sect. 2.
and many of the Kings Maenial or Domestic Servants which are under the ranks
and titles of Nobility, and were not theeldest Sons of Knights, are as our
learned and judicious Sir Henry Spelman has observed, merely, and only by
their serving the King, said to be Esquires or Gentlemen and Tradesmen serving
their Prince, Spelman Glossar. in voce Armiger 42.43.
or the kings Sadler, the kings Grocer, and the kings Haberdasher, the kings
Lock-smith, etc. may by their offices or places style themselves Ant. Faber
defin. 18* number 4. and defin. number. 8.
Gentlemen, for although by the Civil Law, vaenalitia seu usus vilis artificii
ipso facto nobilitatem amittat, a Trade consisting of buying and selling or
handicra^, does in the very act not allow them to be Gentlemen, yet Principum
artifices nobiles sunt, the Workmen of Princes are (as it were) Nobles, the
comprehensive term of Gentry, quia Flamin de rubes cons. 22. n. 20. Nolden de
statu nobil. cap. 22. Sect. 1. and Cassanaeus catalogo gloriae mundi 8 part
consid. 11.
omnes in dignitate positi, for they have a kind of dignity belonging
officiariis principum, to the servants or Officers of Princes.

It being adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas in the 14 th. year of the Reign
of King Henry the 6* that the Sergeant of the 14 H. 6. tit. debte 71.
Kings Kitchen, or any other servant of the King in any other Office in his
house is a Gentleman, and it was then said by Juin the Chief Justice, that
those of the Kings house would be grieved if they shoul be otherwise named, and
it was by Newton one of the Judges of that Court then declared, that Gentleman
or Esquire is a name of worship, that of Esquire being as ancient in the Courts
of our kings as the time of king Alfred, who by his last will and testament,
recorded by Asser Menevenses Asser Menevensis.
gave Legacies Armigeris suis to his Esquires, that Title being formerly so
uncommunicable to the Vulgar, as the eldest sons of Dukes and Barons have not
believed themselves to be disgraced by it, and in France Tilius Comment. de
rebus Gallicis lib. 2.173.
as late as the reign of their King Francis the first, who was contemporary
with our king Henry the 8 th. a valet de Chamber, to the king was appellatio
honorifica an honorable title, and the French kings Karvers were no longer
ago than in the reign of our Queen Elizabeth styled Armigeri, Esquires; and
was not heretofore so apt to be mis-used as it is now, when too many of our
Barristers, or Apprentices at Law, do so much mistake themselves as to dream
that a Tailor, Tanner, Butcher, Victualler, or Yeomans Son, though nothing of
kin to a Gentleman, is ipso facto an Esquire when he is called to the Bar in an
Inns of Court, or being an Officer in a Court of Justice, and admitted into an
Inns of Court, heretofore only destinate and appropriate to the Sons of
Nobility, or real, not self made or created Gentry, as the learned Sir John
Fortescue Fortescue de laudibus legum Angl.
Chief Justice, and believed to be afterward Chancellor of England under our
King Henry the 6 th. has rightly observed, with whom Sir John Fern a learned
Antiquary and Lawyer, who lived in the later end of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and was so great an honourer of the Profession Fernes glory of
Generosity, 9.^*
and Professors of the Civil and Common Laws,, as he says they do deserve
honor and reverence of all men, and referring us to Ludovicus Bolognius of the
130 Privileges due to a Doctor of the Laws, declares that they ought to be
honored in the Courts of Princes, according to that saying, Doctores Legum
Ang^l lib. 2. cap. de Officiis.
sunt honorandi ab omnibus, Doctors of Law are to be honored of all men, and
under that notion comprehends Sergeants at Law, and other the Legists and
Professors of the Common Law does not disagree when he gives us not only the
evidence that none but Gentlemen Fernes glory of Generosity, 37, 43.58.
were admitted into the Inns of Court, but the reason thereof, for that
Nobleness of Blood joined with Virtue makes a man fit and most meet to the
enterprizing of any public service; and for that cause it was not for naught
that our ancient Governors in this Land did with a special foresight and wisdom
provid^ that none should be admitted into the houses of Court being Seminaries,
sending forth men apt for the Government of Justice, except he were a Gentleman
of blood: And that this may seem a truth, I my self, says he, have seen a
Calendar of all those which were together in the society of one of the same
houses, about the last year of King Henry the 5th. Fernes glory of Generosity,
24.
with the Arms of their Houses and Family marshalled by their names, when
Gentry was in that Kings Reign so rightly esteemed and valued, as he being to
raise an Army to go with him into France did in that warlike age by his Edict
or Proclamation prohibit any to go with him but such as had Tunicas Armorum,
did bear Coats of Arms, or were gently born or descended, except such as had
served in the Battle of Agen-Court.

And the strict observance of admitting none into the Inns of Court but such as
were born Gentlemen, was so lately used in some if not all of the Inns of
Court, as Sir John Archer Knight, now one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, did in his valedictory oration or speech made to
the Society of Grays-Inne, whereof he was a member, at his departure from
thence, when he was made a Sergeant at Law, mention it to have been a custom
in that House at his first coming thereinto, to admit none but such as were
Gentlemen born. And Sir John Fern was so far from allowing the degree or title
of Barrester, to make one ignobly born to be thereby ipso facto in truth a
Gentleman, as he was of opinion that if such a Barrester were not before a
Gentleman born, it only gave him as it did to Doctors of Law, Divinity,
Physic, Prothonotaries, and other Learned men, a capacity to demand or have a
Coat of Arms given him, and to be then styled a Gentleman; otherwise he might
only write himself A. B. Gentleman of Lincolns or Grayes-Inne, but not A. B. of
Lincolns or Grayes-Inne Gentleman, and was no longer such a reputed Gentleman,
than he continued in that Society into which he was admitted; and wished that
Supreme Authority would renew the first institution of those Assemblies, and
that by Visitation all such might be weeded out that cannot show the badge of a
Gentleman: For notwithstanding that the famous Lawyer Vlpian Cassanaeus 8 part
Catalog. gloriae mundi, consid. 10.
was sometimes styled Nobilis, and at other times Clarissimus, yet if he were
not born a Gentleman, it was propter Sapientiam vel Nobilitatem animi, in
regard of his Wisdom and Nobility of mind, improprie dictum, and improperly so
called.

For the title of Gentleman well understood, has more of a Worshipful
signification, than the name or title of Esquire Budaeus in suis Annotationibus
in Pandect. in l. fi. in fi. ff. de origin Juris, and Cassanaeus in 8 part
Catalog. gloriae mundi, 3 consid.
, which in its primitive use or acception was but a Scutifer, or Armiger, a
Shield or Armor-bearer, as was that of Jonathans Servant to a Horseman or
Gentleman; 1 Samuel ca. 14.3.
for such were they most commonly called or allowed to be, who held their Lands
of the King in Capite, or by Knight Service; and at the old Rome it was a
credit or mark of esteem, to be said and believed to be a Gentleman de gente
Julia, Octaviana, vel Claudia, of such or such a Kindred, Offspring, or Race,
as the Children of Israel were long before known and distinguished by their
Tribes or Genealogies.

And that eminently learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, inveighing against
such an abuse of the title of Esquire, wonders that the Benchers of the Innes
of Court would suffer it, and says, that not long before this present Century
or age wherein we now live, Spelmans Glossar. in voce Armiger. 43.
Nominatissimus in patria Jurisconsultus aetate provectior etiam munere
gaudens, publico and praediis amplissimis generosi titulo been se habuit, the
worthiest ancient Lawyer, and most eminent in his Country, of great Estate,
and in a public Office, did well content himself with the title of a
Gentleman; sic alii nuper viri splendidi, sic quidem hodie celeberrimus
Serviens ad Legem, so other eminent men Spelmans Glossar. in voce Armiger. 43.
, and so a famous Sergeant at Law, forte guod togatae genti magis tunc
conveniret Civilis illa Appellatio quam Castrensis altera, probably because
that Civil Appellation or Title, did more agree with the Gown, or men of the
Long Robe, than that of Esquire, which was derived from War, or anciently used
but as an attendant upon it.

And in that did not much dissent from the learned Sir Robert Cotton, who
believed, that the bearing of Arms was not before the time of Bartolus that
great Civil Lawyer, who lived about the year of our Lord 1356. in the Reign of
Charles the 4th. Emperor, permitted to Gownmen, Lawyers or Advocates, or as the
French do Sir Robert Cotton in tractat. variorum de Officio Constabularii
Angliae.
term them, Men of the Long Robe, (and under that name, says he, are Learned
men, Clergy, and Scholars comprehended) or else why should that great Lawyer
Bartolus argue the matter, whether it were convenient that he should take or
bear the Arms which that Emperor offered to give him, being a peculiar Reward
and Honor in Military Service in ancient time, or whether he should refuse it
at the Emperors hands; for if it had been then usual for the Long Robe to have
enjoyed the honor of bearing of Arms, Bartolus would never have doubted
thereof: But since it was not then accustomed, he made it a question whether he
should take those Arms or no; but in the end concluded, that the Fact of his
Prince was neither to be disputed or rejected, and therefore was willing to
assume the Arms which the Emperor had given him.

And in England without the Authority of their King and Sovereign, amongst
other the affairs and businesses of Genealogies bearing, allowing or granting
of Coats of Arms, and usage of titles and distinctions of Degrees, delegated
to the principal Heralds and Kings of Arms in their several Provinces, will as
little become those which are not of Gentle extraction, in their unduly assumed
title of Esquire, as it would do an High Sheriff, Justice of Peace, or
Escheator, being no Esquires, and sometimes no Gentlemen, to imagine themselves
to be Esquires, or any more than quasi Esquires, or Esquires improperly so
called, because they themselves gave the Clerk or writer of their Patents or
Commission, a direction so to style them; or the Clerk or writers pen,
following the mode of the like mistakings, did with as little authority as
reason so create them; which supercilious self-conceited Errors the Kings Great
Seal of England, and the great Honor and Authority which does legally and
justly appertain unto it, cannot support or make to be no Errors; when as it is
male recitando, (although the Kings giving by an actual Ceremony the Honor of
Knighthood, to one that is not a Gentleman born, does ipso facto in the opinion
of our learned Seldom, Seldom 549. 24.
make such a Knight to be a Gentleman) and will be as much without the reach of
a Non-obstante or dispensation, as where Lands are said to be one man's, when
they are another; a Town named a City, when it is not; a Church said t^ be in
one Diocese or County, when it is in another; or when a man disenabled, or
ungentleman'd by reason of his Fathers attainder of Treason, and corruption of
blood, shall without restoration or reversal of that Attainder, be mentioned or
recited in the Kings Letters Patents as an Esquire or Gentleman.

Or that an High Constables Wife should swell her self into an opinion, that
her Husband is as much an Esquire as the best, because the Sheriff,
Undersheriff, or Under-Sheriffs Deputy* or Clerk of the County where he
dwells, when he was returned to be a Jury-man, foolishly and carelessly styled
him in his Panel by the name and title of Esquire.

But would be as great an affront to truth, and contradiction to reason, as
some Citizens of London late invented piece of proud nonsense, or ungrounded
fancy, to style a wealthy Citizen an Alderman, or dream that he is one, when
he is none at all, and paid a great Fine that he might be none, and is not so
much as entitled to wear an Aldermans Gown, but is no more than a Gownless
mis-called Alderman; and can have no more of truth or reason in it, than for a
Chambermaid to a Lady, dressed up in her Ladies old Clothes, to believe her
self to be a Lady, because some overcomplementing small piece of wit has
mistakenly called her so; or for a man of 20 l. per annum Free Land, to believe
himself to be a Knight, and his Wife a Lady, because when according to the
Statute made in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the Second, he was
summoned to take the Order of Knighthood upon him, he compounded and paid a
Fine to escape that dignity, which was too big for his quality or estate; and
as great a madness and ridiculous, as that of Don Quixot, or our late
Countryman Parsons the Tailor, fancying himself to be the Romance Knight of the
Sun; or for a Bum Bailiff, or Country Catchpole, to imagine himself to be a
Knight, or his Wife a Lady, because in imitation or observance of some ancient
courses or usages in our Laws, he was upon a Writ of View, in a Writ of Right
or Entry, Dower or Formedon, returned by the Sheriff to have been present at
the View, by the title or addition of a Knight; and as little consonant to
reason and truth, as for a Sheriff or Justice of Peace to think himself to be
an Esquire, because the King by his Commission for that particular time or
purpose, was pleased to style him so; or if it did confer such a Title or
Dignity, yet it ought not to remain either to a Sheriff or Justice of Peace,
when they are exuti dignitate, out of those temporary Offices, by the Office of
Sheriff being determined, or the turning the Justice of Peace out of
Commission, which our reason as well as the Civil Law will not permit; when by
the summoning of a Great man of England to assist in the House of Peers in
Parliament, or to attend therein, he is not thereby to be accounted a Baron by
Writ, or to have Fee therein to him and his Heirs, unless he have been thrice
summoned and obeyed those Writs.

And the Civil Law will tell us, that Si ratione alicujus officii debeantur
aliqua signa seu insignia, if any Arms be given (the like being to be said of
Titles) by reason of any place or office, they are but Cassanaeus catalog.
gloriae mundi, part 1. concl. 52.
durante officio, and finito illo transeunt ad successores officiarios, during
the continuance of that Office, which being determined it goes unto those
which do succeed in that Office.

And that and the Law of Nations will give us the reason of a greater respect
to be given unto the Kings Servants, rather than unto any other men's Servants,
when the Emperors of the West and East were so careful that their Domestic
Servants and Guards should have a more than ordinary regard wheresoever they
came, or had any occasion of business, though in any part of their large
Dominions far or remote from their Imperial Courts, as in a Rescript of the
Emperors Valentinianus, Theodosius, and Arcadius, order was taken and a command
given, ut Domestici ac Protectores osculandi cum salutaverint Vicarium,
Praefecti, Praetorii, habeant potestatem poena enim Sacrilegii similis erit si
his honorificentia non deferatur qui contingere purpuram Imperatoris digni sint
aestimati; that the Domestics or Household Servants (of note) of the Emperors,
and the Guards attending the Court, who were thought worthy to be about their
persons, when they came to salute the Deputy or Lieutenant Cuiacius ad Comment.
lib. 12. Cod. Justiniani tit. 17. in l. 1. C de Domesticis and Protect. l. 12.
and Salmuthius Commentar. in Panciroll. tit. 46.
of the Major Domo, Lord Steward of the Emperors Household, and General or Chief
Captain of the Guards, or the Governors of some Provinces or part of the
Empire in the later Emperors times, should be allowed to kiss him; which the
very learned Salmuthius in his Comment upon Guido Pancirollo, interprets to be
commonly a kissing of the hand, as well as the sometimes receiving of a salute
or kiss of the mouth; which summi honoris loco tribuitur, says Cuiacius, was
esteemed to be the greatest honor, for they deserved as much as the punishment
usually inflicted upon those who committed Sacrilege, which gave not due
honor or respect unto those which were thought worthy to be near their persons.

And were so unwilling that any of their Servants, which were employed in any
eminent places about their persons or affairs, should when they had quitted
their Offices or places, be reckoned amongst the Vulgar, as the Emperors
Valentinianus and Theodosius did by their Rescript ordain, that qui suae
quodammodo adsidere Majestati videntur, which had the honor to be near their
persons, should post depositum officium Cuiacius Commentar. lib. 12. Cod.
Justiniani tit. 9.
ab omni Indictionis onere seu Civilium seu Militarium judicum prorsus immunes,
after they had left their places, be altogether free from all Taxes Civil or
Military; for si quis lateri Principis ipsius permissu adhaereat nobilis
efficitur, Aug. in l. omnium col. 1. and Tiraquel. de nobilitate ca. 6.48.
such of the Kings Servants as are attendant and near unto his person, are
reputed Noble and Honorable, and their Virtue conjoined with Riches, and their
employment about the Fountain of Honor may well deserve a pre-eminence above
other men's Servants; when as the Service of such as received their honor from
the Plinius ad Spurinam Epist. 5.
Prince, was as the younger Pliny said in his time, pronum ad honoris iter, a
ready way to honor and gentleness, or the bearing of Arms, says Sir John
Fern, may be obtained by the service of the Sovereign, according to the Rule
of the Civil Law, with which that learned Civil as well as Common Lawyer was
not meanly or little acquainted; adhaerentes lateri Principis, and eidem in
officio quocunque Sir John Fernes glory of Generosity 60.
minimo ministrantes nobilitantur, those which are in the Service of the King,
and near unto his Person, or employed by him in the meanest Service, are in
some sort so enobled as to claim the bearing of Arms, or Badges of Gentility;
and Ideo and Coquum Principis in dignitatem haberi and Cassanaeus in Catalog.
gloriae mundi 1 part consid. 48. and Bartolus in l. 1. C. de dignitat. lib. 12.
nobilem esse oportet, and omnes famulantes Principi sunt in dignitate,
therefore a Kings Cook ought to be so much respected, as not to be denied the
like Privilege, and all the Kings Servants have a certain Dignity to them
appertaining; and some of our English Nobility have granted, as an Earl of
Stafford did to Mackworth one of his Servants, Insignia Nobilium, Coats of
Arms to their Servants and Followers. And the French, Burgundians and
Millanois, as well as many of our ancient English Nobility, have heretofore
permitted their Clients, and such as held their Lands of them Cassanaeus in
Catalog. gloriae mundi 1 part concl. 48.
, to take and use some part or resemblance of the Arms of their Lords or
Seignors. Wherefore the excellently learned Cassanaeus, having traveled
through the vast Volumes of the Civil and Caesarean Laws, and wrote his Book
entitled Catalogus gloriae mundi, in the beginning of the Reign of our King
Henry the 8th. did not certainly stray or wander out of the paths of right
reason, when he understands the Honor acquired by being the Servant of a
Sovereign Prince, to be as well the cause of their Privileges and Immunities,
which he positively affirms to be ratione dignitatis Officii, by reason of the
dignity of their Offices and Places, as the import and necessary use of their
Offices and Places about the Person, health and safety of the Prince, in which
the well-being of the Universality of the people and Body Politic are
concentred: And that they are called Cassanaeus in 6 part Catalog. gloriae
mundi, consid. 33, 38.19. l. 4. C. de dignitatibus l. 12. Tex. in l. cum
dilectus and ibi gl. fi.
Curiales, Courtiers, ex quo cum Cura esse debent, in respect of the Cares
which they take in the service of their Prince; and mitius agendum Curialibus
and Aulicis quam aliis, and parcendum honori and verecundiae domus Regiae, and
his qui pro domo and parentibus Regiis laborarunt, and the Servants of the King
are to be more favored than the Servants of other men, and a special regard
ought to be had unto the honor of the House or Palace of the King, and those
which do labor and take pains for the good thereof, and the Kings Family; that
amongst the Domestics or Servants of the King or Sovereign Prince, omnis ordo
recipit splendorem a Principe, every degree or rank has in some sort the
resplendency and reflection of their Sovereigns imparted or communicated unto
them. Et cum Senatores excusantur a fortiori Curiales and Cassanaeus in 6 part
Catalog. gloriae mundi, 29 consid.
Familiares Principum, nec ex eo eorum conditio deterior fieri debet cum circa
Principem se obsequiales exhibent universis, and when Senators (or
Parliament Men) are privileged, by a greater reason ought the Princes Servants
to be privileged; neither should their condition be made to be worse than
theirs, seeing that when they do Officiate about the Prince, they do at the
same time serve the People and Weal-publick; and recounting some of the
Privileges of the Court Officers and Servants, does amongst others agree, that
Curiales in hoc privilegiantur quod praedia eorum non possunt alienari sine
solemnitate, that their Lands and real Estates cannot as other men's be aliened
in a common and ordinary manner, but by special words and expressions of the
certainty of the cause, and money given for it. Et istud est in favore ipsorum
Curialium, ut Respublica habeat divites Curiales, and in tantum in hoc
privilegiatur res Decurionum seu Curialum quantum res Curialium de praediis in
l. f. C. Cassanaeus in 6 part Catalog. gloriae mundi, 25 consid.
minorum and Ecclesiae and in hoc pari passu ambulant; And that in favor of
the Courtiers or Kings Servants, to the end that the Commonwealth may be the
better served by the Kings Servants being rich, and that their Lands and real
Estate are in that as much privileged, as the Lands and real Estate of Infants
and the Church, (which was not a little) and as to that have equal Privileges.

And further assures us, that in France the Kings Servants have a Privilege,
quod non Cassanaeus in Catalog. gloriae mundi 6 part consid. 30.
possunt conveniri coram Judice Ordinario loci ubi habent Domicilium, they are
not to be cited or prosecuted before the Ordinary Judge, or Court where they
inhabit, (which all other persons not privileged are only to be) sed debent
conveniri in Curia, and ibi causae eorum tractari debent maxim pro negotiis
Curialibus coram Magistro Officiorum, aut magno Praeposito domus Principis, but
ought to be cited or compelled to appear in the Court, and there the cause
ought to be tried, especially if it concern any affairs of the Court, before
the Lord Steward, or the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household; in aliis vero
causis non concernentibus eorum statum Curialem, sed negotia privata seu
particularia and suarum rerum, but in other causes not concerning the business
of the Court, but for any of the Kings Servants private or particular business,
there was at Paris in France in the Kings Palace a particular Chamber or Court
called the Court of Requests, wherein by the Kings Letters called Commitimus,
the causes of any of his Servants were to be decided and determined. Which
honors and respects due and given unto Kings and Princes Servants in so many
Neighbor Nations, may be enough to assure us, that that which our English Laws
and Customs have afforded those that serve our Princes, ought not to have such
outcries or complaints against them.

And that Sir Hugh Hamersley Knight, Lord Mayor of London in the Reign of King
James, was not much if at all mistaken, when he stood so much upon his
privilege of the Kings special Servant or Lieutenant in the City of London,
Sir John Finets Philoxenis, or Treatise of Ambassadors 2^6, 237.
in the time or year of his Mayoralty, as he resolved not to give place unto
the King of Denmarks Ambassador, who intended to come and dine with him, but to
insist upon the honor and privilege of his Place in that particular; which
the Ambassador understanding by Sir John Finet then Master of the Ceremonies,
who was to attend him thither, thought it better to forbear, as he did, that
designed visit.

For a common and innate civility and respect, which should be used amongst
Servants and all others, could never yet think it consonant to reason, that a
Butchers Apprentice, or the Foreman of a trim Citizens Wives shop, should take
place of the Servant of any of our Princes of the Blood, Nobility, or other
Persons of Honor, much less of our Kings; there being degrees and precedencies
of Servants amongst all people any thing acquainted with good manners and
civility, proportioned and laid out according to the ranks or qualities of
their Masters; and in that also a consideration to be had of the nature of
their Employments, taught us by the difference betwixt a Footman or Coachman,
and a Gentleman, wherein our gracious Sovereign did but preserve the Majesty
due unto his Sovereignty, when (if report be true) he did in the later end of
the year 1666. prohibit the Duke of Newcastles Footmen the wearing of black
Velvet Caps, (which the Kings Footmen usually do) whilst they attend his Caroch.

And if Histories, the monuments of Time and former Ages, were as they are not
in that particular silent, a common and frequent, and almost every years
experience will evidence how much the Honor of Princes are concerned in the
respects or not respects of their Servants, by the care and circumspection
those resemblances of their Masters greatness do take and use to preserve, and
not diminish the least Iota or tittle of the Honor due unto those that sent
them; the strict and piercing inspections of Princes into the qualities,
greater or lesser, of those that are sent, and all and every the circumstances
and ceremonies of their Receptions and Entertainments, Punctilioes, niceties
and formalities insisted upon by Ambassadors; complaints of the least omissions
or preteritions, exact and curious measures in the giving or not giving them
respects to the full or height, with their strivings for place or precedence,
even to bloody Combats betwixt the Ambassadors of emulating Princes, as betwixt
the French and Spanish Ambassadors not long ago in Holland, and a little after
in England; the cares which Princes to whom they are sent have taken to give
them satisfaction, or to prevent their jealousies or discontents; their gifts
and presents unto them, their Secretaries, and principal of their Servants,
personal and peculiar honors and favors to Ambassadors, distinct from a
greater to their Sovereign; and their sometimes bold and resolute refusals
where they found any diminution or neglects, of which Bodin Besolus, our
learned Doctor Zouch, and Sir John Finet, in their learned Books de Marsellaer
Albericus Gentilis Legatis and Legationibus, concerning Embassies, and the
Relation of the Earl of Carlisle's stout and prudent management of his
Embassies into Muscovy, will afford plenty of instances and examples.

With the more than ordinary civilities and respects used by diverse Princes,
Cities and Commonwealths, to Ambassadors of Princes and States in League or
Friendship with them, in their passage to the Princes to whom they are sent, or
return from their Embassies, when the character or representation of their
Prince being laid by, they are but little more than what they were in their
former degrees or qualities, as our Sir Daniel Harvey sent to Constantinople,
and the Earl of Winchelsea in his coming home from the like Employment, can
testify.

And the great care which has been taken by the Law of Nations, and all
civilized Kingdoms, States and Commonwealths of Christendom, of the Privileges
of Ambassadors, which at the highest esteem that can be given them are no other
than Extraordinary Servants, which for their great abilities in Learning, State
affairs, or Foreign Languages, were made choice of by their Sovereign,
sometimes out of the Subjects and Nobility, not immediate Servants, and at
other times some of the Servants and Officers in Ordinary, as of the
Privy-Chamber, and Bedchamber, held by the Custom of the wiser and more
prudent part of Nations to be so sacred and inviolable, as the Emperor Augustus
made the putting to death of his Ambassadors and Heralds Titurius and Suetonius
in vita Augusti.
Arunculeius by the Germans, to be the cause of a War made against them, and
swore never to cut the hair of his head and beard until he had punished them
for that misdemeanor: And the Greeks and Romans, those great Masters of wisdom,
prudence and civilities, and the Persians and many other Nations, made it to be
some of their greatest concernments to vindicate any the least indignities or
injuries offered or done unto their Messengers or Ambassadors; And our Laws
have informed us, that in the 22 th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3 d.
one John at Hill was 22 Ass. 49.1.
condemned for High Treason, for the Murder of A. de Walton Nuncium Domini
Regis, missum ad mandatum Regis exequendum, the Kings Ambassador, for which he
was drawn, hanged and beheaded; for, says Sir Edward Coke, Cokes 3 part
Institute, ca. 1.8.
Legatus ejus vice fungitur a quo destinatur, and honorandus est sicut ille
cujus Vicem gerit and Legatos violare contra jus gentium est, and Ambassador
represents him that sent him, and is to be honored accordingly; for it is
against the Law of Nations to violate or wrong an Ambassador. Et honor Legati
honor mittentis est, and Proregis dedecus redundat in Regem, the honor of an
Ambassador is the honor of him that sends him, and any dishonor done unto
him, redounds unto his Prince or Superior. For it was in the Reign of King
Richard the second, adjudged in Parliament to be High Treason to kill or
violate an Ambassador of any Prince or Commonwealth, in the Case of John
Imperial Rot. Parl. 3 R. 2. m. 18
an Envoy or Ambassador from Genoa, slain by the malice of some of his
Adversaries, and declared in Parliament, que le case eslant examine and dispute
inter les Seigniors and Commons, and puis monstre al Roy en pleine Parliament
estoit illonques nostre Seignior le Roy declares, determinus and assentus que
tiel fait and coupe est Treason, and crime de Royal Majesty blemye en quel
case il ne doit allower a nullui privilege del Clergy, that the Case being
examined and debated betwixt the Lords and Commons, and afterward showed to
the King in full Parliament, it was then before the King determined and agreed,
that the act was Treason, and a crime in derogation of Royal Majesty, in which
no Privilege of Clergy was to be allowed.

The great Gustavus Adolphus not long ago victorious King of Sweden, made the
neglect and slighting of his Ambassadors by Ferdinand the second Emperor of
Germany, a Justification or Proem of his after most famous and notable exploits
against him in Germany, and his Ambassadors to be had in such regard, as they
could safely travel through Fields of his subdued Enemies blood, conquered
Towns, Cities sacked, and Armies ready marshalled to act and execute the
direful Tragedies of Battle and Bellona, and to be every where protected, and
not injured.

And within a few years last past, Don Mario the then Popes Brother being
guilty only of an affront given at Rome to the Duke de Crequy, the French Kings
Ambassador, by the Corsairs the Popes Guards, the Popes Nuntio was in great
displeasure sent away from the Court of France, and a War so threatened, as that
imagined Spiritual Father of the Popish part of Christendom, was with great
loss of reputation enforced to submit to such Conditions as the King of France,
claiming to be the eldest Son of the Church, would (besides the punishment of
the Delinquents) impose upon him, and suffer a Pillar to be erected in Rome, to
testify the outrage and the severe punishment inflicted for it, to the wonder
of many Nations and people coming thither, that he who sold so many Millions of
Pardons to the living and dead, should not be able to obtain of the Most
Christian King a pardon and forbearance of that Pillar of Ignominy, which
continuing some years, was lately as a signal favor to the Sea of Rome
permitted to be taken down, and no more to be remembered.

And it was not without cause that our Royal Sovereign did in October 1666. by
his Lettre du Roy a Messieurs les Estates en le description de tout ce qui se
est pass dans le guerres enter Angleterre and les Estates, etc. de l' An.
1664. jusques l' conclusion de pais, p. 189.
Letter to the Estates of Holland, and the United Provinces, justly charge upon
them amongst other the causes of his War with them, injuries done unto him and
his Subjects, by the imprisoning of the Domestic Servants of his Envoy, and
likewise of his Secretary, and putting a Guard upon his House. And was so
necessary an observance amongst Princes and Republiques, as howsoever they then
faltred and misused their Wisdoms therein, that Nation and their Union of
Boores, Mariners, Artificers, and others, although many of them could hardly
find the way to put off their hats, or use civilities unto their great and
Princely Protectors the Illustrious Princes of Orange, have deemed it to be a
part of the Subsistence and Policy of that now flourishing Republique, to be
strict observers of all manner of civilities and respects to the Ambassadors of
Princes. And the Swisses, and Mountainous petty Cantons or Republiques, who not
long ago having massacred all their Nobility, and eternally as they hope
prohibited the race of them from enjoying any Offices or Employments in their
Armies or Republiques, and can boastingly answer inquisitive strangers or
passengers, Ambassade du Marshall de Bassompierre en Suisse l' An. 1625.
with nos non habemus Nobiles, we have no Nobility, can notwithstanding all
their Military Barbarities, pay those fitting and well-becoming civilities, and
due regards, to the Ambassadors of Foreign or Neighbor Potentates.

And may give us to understand, that the honors given to Ambassadors do not
conclude that there are no respects due to the Servants in ordinary of the
Kings and Princes which sent them: But that the honor and respect of the
Kings, manifested in the respect to their Servants, is not the cause and
foundation of that which is so punctually required and given to Ambassadors.

When it is as certain, that great and often discontents and quarrels have been
raised and kindled in the affairs and businesses not only of Nobility, and men
of great Estates and Eminency, but of the vulgar and meaner sort of people, for
injuries done to their Servants, who have been very unwilling to bear or put it
up.

Which the Civil Law, and the Custom of many Nations, believed to be warranted
by that Axiom l. eum qui 18. v. 1. de injur. P. L. it^m apud Lambeonem 15.. Et
interdum eod.
or Rule, that Domini pati dicuntur injurias qui suis fiunt servis, Masters do
partake and suffer in the injuries done to their Servants. And amongst the
Jews, as their Rabbis expound their L. Empereur de Legibus Ebraeorum
forensibus Annotat. Cod. cap. 9. * 2.
Laws, were for the time they dwelt with them ^undi instar, as settled a
Propriety as the Lands which they enjoyed. From which our Laws of England Fleta
lib. 2. cap. 1.
do not dissent, when they adjudged, that injuriam patitur quis per alios quos
habet in familia sua, sicut per servientes and servos in contumeliam suam
fuerint verberati, vulnerati, vel imprisonati, quatenus sua interfuerit
operibus eorum non caruisse; that a man may have wrong done him in those of his
Family, as in the reproach done unto him by the beating, wounding, or
imprisoning of his Servants, whereby he loses their service.

A due consideration whereof, and that the honor and respect of Kings is and
ought to be manifested in the respect to their Servants, probably was the cause
which made William Walworth, that valiant and brave Lord Mayor of London in the
Reign of King Richard the second, not able to withhold his loyal passion and
indignation from knocking down with his Mace Wat Tyler the Rebel, in the head
of a mighty and unruly Army of Clowns, for abusing and making Sir John Newton
Knight, Stows Survey of London, and the History of Wat Tyler.
one of the Kings Servants sent on a Message to him, to stand bare before him
on foot, whilst he sat on horseback.

So as the people of England may in a less light than the New Lanthorn or Light
men do now pretend unto, discern a reason for a greater respect to be given
unto the Kings Servants in Ordinary, than of late they have given, when it is
to no other, or no less than the Servants of Gods Vicegerent, some of which
enobled by their Birth or Creation, others by their Offices Enobleissantaes,
enobling them, as the Treasurer, or Comptroller of the Kings most Honorable
Household, who when they do happen, as many times not, to be of the Nobility,
are ipso facto at the instant of the conserring those Offices upon them, or
shortly after, made to be of the Kings Privy Council; and with the Lord
Chancellor, or the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, President of the
Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, Great Chamberlain, Constable, Marshal, and
Admiral of England, Great Master, or Steward, and Chamberlain of the Kings most
Honorable Household, have in this Kingdom, as has been used in other Nations,
been styled the Officers of the Crown.

And our King Henry the 7th. taking a care that his Servants should be as well
born, as virtuously educated, did call and elect to the service and attendance
of his Privy Chamber, the Sons of his Nobility, and Gentlemen of the best
houses and alliance in most of the Shires of England and Wales. And King Henry
the 8th. his Son, did by his Ordinances for Regulation of his Household, called
the Statutes of Eltham, made by the advice of his Privy Council Statutes or
Orders of Eltham, made An. 17 and 33 H. 8.
in the 17th. year of his Reign, command, That no Servant be kept by any
Officers within the Court under the degree of a Gentleman, and that none be
admitted into his Majesty's service, but sueh as be likely persons, and fit for
promotion; and that it should be lawful to all the Kings Counselors, the King
and Queens Chamberlains, Vice-Chamberlains, and Captain of the Guard, the
Master of the Horse and Henchmen, and the six Gentlemen of the Kings Privy
Chamber, to keep every of them one Page to attend upon him in the Court, so
always that he be a Gentleman born, well apparelled and conditioned. That the
six Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber should be well languaged, expert in outward
parts, and meet and able to be sent on familiar Messages, or otherwise to
outward Princes, as the case shall require; and charged the Great Officers of
his Household in their several Offices and Places, that none should be admitted
into any Place within his House, and especially those which beginning in low
rooms and places, and are accustomed by course to ascend into higher, but such
as be of good towardness, likelihood, behavior, demeanor and conversation,
and as nigh as they could should have respect that they be Personages of good
gesture, countenance, fashion and stature; so as the Kings House, which is
requisite to be the mirror and example of all other within his Realm, may be
furnished of Ministers elect, tried, and picked for the Kings Honor, as to
good reason and congruence does appertain.

And by other Orders made in the 33th. year of his Reign, That no Officer of
the Household should keep any Servant within the House under the degree of a
Gentleman, and such as should be honest and of good behavior. And by his
Proclamation commanded, That no Vagabonds, Masterless Rascals, or other Idle
persons, should come and harbor in the Court. And as he had a great respect
for his Great Officers of State, so he had no small one for his more inferior
Servants, when in the Orders appointed for his Tables at meat in his Royal
House he did ordain, that the Lord Great Chamberlain at his three Messes of
meat, should have sitting with him the Vice-Chamberlain, Captain of the Guard,
Cup-bearers, Karvers, Sewers to the King, Esquires of the Body, Gentlemen
Huissers, and Sewers of the Chamber.

The Master of the Horse to have the Equirries and Avenors to sit with him, and
Gentlemen Pensioners as many as can sit.

And Queen Elizabeth in the first and third year of her Reign, intending (as
the Preamble thereof declared) to follow the Godly and Honorable Statutes of
Household of her Noble Progenitors, did by her Proclamation straightly charge
and command* That no Vagabonds, Masterless men, Boys, or Idle persons, be
suffered to harbor in her Court.

Wherefore the Servants attending therein should not now be so much in the ill
opinion, and causeless contempt of the Mechanic and vulgar part of the people,
(for those which are ex meliore luto, better born and more civilly educated,
cannot certainly so lose their way to a grateful acknowledgement of their
Princes daily protection and needed favors, as to villifie or slight his
Servants, by imitating the sordid examples of a less understanding part of the
people;) or want their due respects, if it shall be rightly considered, that
our Ancestors and a long succession of former ages, were not so niggard or
sparing of their well-deserved respects: When our Kings and Princes, and the
wiser part of their people supposed to be in Parliament, did attribute so much
unto them, and so very much trust and confide in them, as they did from time to
time put no small power into their hands, and leave no small concernments of
themselves and the Kingdom to their prudence, fidelity and discretion.

When the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, who
administreth the Oaths usually taken by the Lord Privy Seal, Lord Treasurer of
England, Lords of the Kings most Honorable Privy Council, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Master of the Rolls, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Justices
of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, Barons of the Exchequer, Kings
Attorney and Solicitor General, Sergeants at Law, Masters of Requests and
Chancery, upon and before their admission into their several Places and
Offices, nominates and appoints the 3 and 4 E. 6 ca. 1.
Custos Rotulorum, and Justices of the Peace in every County of England and
Wales, some few Franchises and Liberties excepted; and by his largely extended
Jurisdiction committed unto his trust, does by the Writs remedial of his
Sovereign guide and superintend the Cisterns and Streams of our Laws, those
living waters which do cheer and refresh our Valleys, and make them to be as a
watered Garden. And with the two Lord Chief Justices, Master of the Rolls, the
other Reverend Vide Oath of the Judges in 18 E. 3.
Judges, and the Masters of Chancery, appointed to distribute the Kings Justice
according to the laws and reasonable customs of the Kingdom, have their Robes
and Salaries allowed, and are (as Justice Croke acknowledged in his argument M.
S. of his argument against the Ship Money.
against the Ship Money) as the Kings Council at Law, the chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas, being as is mentioned in a Manuscrip of Henry Earl of
Arundel, copyed out of a book of George Earl of Shrowsbury, Lord Steward of the
M. S. of Henry Earl of Arundel.
household unto King Henry the seventh, and King Henry the eighth, (communicated
unto me by my worthy friend Mr. Ralph Jackson, one of his Majesty's Servants in
ordinary) a great Member of the Kings house, for whose favor, counsel, and
assistance in the Law, to be showed to the household matters and servants, he
takes an yearly Fee by the B^tler of England of two Tuns of Wine, at two Terms
of the year, which is allowed in the Court of household.

When the Justices of Peace in every City and County are, or should be the
under Wheels in that excellently curiously framed Watch of the English
Government (as the late blessed Martyr King Charles the first, when he so sadly
forwarned the pulling of it in pieces by a mistaken Parliament, and the
Rebellious consequences of it, not unfitly called it) are at their quarter
Sessions under his pay and allowance, when the Assize of the bread to be sold
in England, was in the fourth year of the Reign of King John, being thirteen
years before his granting Mat. Paris, 208.
of Magna Charta, ordained by the King, by his Edict, or Proclamation, to be
strictly observed under the pain of standing upon the Pillory, and the rates
set, and an Assise approved by the Baker of Jeoffry Fitz-Peter chief Justice of
England, the nas one of the Kings more especial Servants as to matters of
justice resident and attendant in the Kings House or Palace, and by the Baker
of R. of Thurnam, that Constitution and Assise being not at all contradicted by
his Magna Charta, or that of his Sons King Henry the 3 d.

Which Assise of bread, contained in a writing of the Marshalsea of the Kings
house, being by the consent of the whole Realm exemplified by the Letters
Patents of King Henry the 3 d. Assisa Panis and Cervitiae, 51 H. 3.
in the 51 th. year of his Reign, was confirmed and said to be proved by the
Kings Baker.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 9 th. year of the Reign of that 9 H. 3.
cap. 12.
King, if the King be out of the Realm, the chief Justices, one of which, if not
both, were then residing and attending in the Kings Court, were once in the
year through every County, with the Knights of the Shires, to take Assizes of
Novel Disseisin, and Mortdancester, in which, if there be any difficulty, it
was to be referred unto his Justices of the Bench, there to be ended.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 6th. year of the Reign of K. Edward the
first, 6 E. 1. ca. 15*
Wine sold against the Assise, was to be by the Mayor and Bailiffs of London
presented before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer; who then resided in
the Court or Palace of the King.

The Statute of 13 E. 1. ca. 42.
Westminster the 2. made in the 13th. year of the said Kings Reign, mentions,
That the Kings Marshal is to appoint the Marshal of the Kings Bench and
Exchequer, the Criers and Virgers of that and the Court of Common Pleas, which
at this day is done by and under the Authority of the Earl Marshal of England,
who by his Certificate made by his Cokes 1 part Institutes, 102.
Roll of a personal service in a Voyage Royal performed by those that held
Lands or Offices in Capite, and by Knight Service, he discharged an Assessement
of Esonage by Parliament, superintendeth the cognizance and bearing of Arms of
the Nobility and Gentry, and the duty of the Heralds and Officers attending
thereupon. And with the Lord Great Chamberlain, before the unhappy change of
the Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, into Free and Common Socage,
introduce and bring unto the King such as were to do Lib. Rub. in Scac. f. 30
Spelmanni Glossar. in voce Marescalli, Fleta lib. 2 cap. 7.
Homage unto him for their Baronies or Lands. By an Act of Parliament made in
the 14th. year of the Reign of King Edward the third, and by the Kings
Authority, the Sheriffs of every County in England and Wales, who are for the
most part under the King the only Executioners of Justice in the Kingdom, are
three out of six for every County presented by the Judges of every Circuit, the
morrow after the Feast of All Souls in every year, to the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord
Steward, (the later of which at the beginning and opening of Parliaments, is by
his Elsings Modus tenendi Parliamentum. 24.
Office to administer the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to every Member of
the House of Commons in Parliament) the Master of the Horse, Lord Chamberlain,
Treasurer and Comptroller of the Kings most Honorable Household, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, with other of the Kings Privy Council, who together with the
Justices of both Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer, do out of the six for
every County, make choice of three, who are in a written Bill by the Statute of
Lincoln, 9 E. 2. and 14 E. 3. ca. 7.34 H. 8 ca. 26.
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, shortly after
presented to the King, who appoints as he pleases one of every three
presented unto him as aforesaid for every County, to be Sheriff, by his Letters
Patents under the Great Seal, for the year next following.

And by Authority of the King and his Laws, the Lord Chancellor, Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Chancery Elsings Modus tenendi Pa^liamentum.
or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, appoints the Judges in every
year their several Circuits, makes and discharges all Justices of the Peace.
And such Petitions as could not be dispatched before the end of Parliaments,
were frequently adjourned to be heard and determined by the Chancellor; and
presents to all Parsonages or Spiritual Benefices in the Kings right or gift,
which are under the value of 20 l. per annum, according to the ancient
valuation.

All the Records in the Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench, and Common Pleas,
Justices of Assise and Goal delivery, are to be safely kept by the Treasurer
and Chamberlains of the Exchequer; which the Commons of England in Parliament,
in the 46th. year of the Reign of King Edward the third, did in their Petition
to the King call 46 E. 3. n. 43.
the Peoples perpetual evidence; and our Kings of England have therefore in
several of their Reigns, sent their Writs and Mandates to the Chief Justices of
both the Benches, to cause their Records for some times therein limited, to be
brought into his Treasury, and entrusted with the Treasurer and Chamberlains
thereof, in whose custody the 9 H. 6. ca. 6.
Standard for all the Weights and Measures of England is likewise kept.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 14th. year of the Reign of King Edward the
third, Sheriffs abiding above one year in their Offices, may be removed, and
new ones put in their place, by the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Chief 14 E. 3.
ca. 7.
Baron of the Exchequer, taking unto them the Chief Justices of the one Beneh
or the other, if they be present.

Escheators who were and should be of very great trust and concernment in the
Kingdom, betwixt the King and his 14. E. 3. ca. 5.
people, were to be chosen by the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, taking into them the Chief Justices of the one Bench or the other,
if they be present; (but are since only made by the Lord Treasurer.)

By a Statute made in the 14th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3d. the
Lord Privy Seal, 14 E. 3.
and other great Lords of the Kings Council, are appointed to redress in
Parliament delays and errors in Judgment in other Courts.

20 E. 3. ca. 6.
By an Act of Parliament made in the 20th. year of the Reign of the aforesaid
King, the Chancellor and Treasurer were authorized to hear complaints, and
ordain remedies concerning gifts and rewards unjustly taken by Sheriffs,
Bailiffs of Franchises, and their Under Ministers; and also concerning
mainteiners and embracers of Juries, taking unto them the Justices and other
Sage persons, such as to them seems meet.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 31th. year of the Reign of that King, 31
E. 3. ca. 3^
the Lord Chancellor and Treasurer shall examine erroneous Judgments given in
the Exchequer Chamber.

And the Chancellor and Treasurer, taking to them Justices and other of the
Kings Council, as to them seems, shall take order and make Ordinances
touching the buying and selling of Fish.

By several Acts of Parliament made in the 37th. and 38th. year of his Reign,
Suggestions made by any to the King, shall be sent with the party making them
unto the Chancellor, 37 E. 3. ca. 18. and 38 E. 3. ca. 9.
there to be heard and determined, and the Prosecutor was to be punished if he
prove them not. And that upon untrue suggestions, the Chancellor should award
damages according to his discretion.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 11th. year of the Reign of King Richard
the second, the keeping of Assizes in good Towns are at the request of the
Commons in 11 R. 2. ca. 11.
Parliament, referred to the Chancellor, with the advice of the Judges.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 13th. year of his Reign, in every pardon
for Felony, Murder, or Treason, the 13 R. 2. ca. 1.
Chamberlain or Under Chamberlain was to endorse upon the Bill the Name of him
which sued for the same.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 20th. year of his Reign, no man shall go
or ride armed, except the Kings Officers or Ministers 20 R. 2* ca. 1.
in doing their Office.

By an Act of Parliament made in the first and second year of the Reign of K.
Henry the 4th. no Lord is to give any Sign or 1 and 2 H. 4. ca. 21.
Livery to any Knight, Esquire, or Yeoman, but the King may give his honorable
Livery to his menial Knights and Esquires, and also to his Knights and Esquires
of his Retinue, who are not to use it in their Counties, but in the Kings
presence. The Constable and Marshall of England for the time being, and their
Retinue of Knights and Esquires, may wear the Livery of the King upon the
Borders and Marches of the Realm in time of War; the Knights and Esquires of
every Duke, Earl, Baron, or Baneret, may wear their Liveries in going from the
Kings House, and returning unto it; and that the King may give his honorable
Livery to the Lords Temporal whom pleases him. And that the Prince and his
menials may use and give his honorable Livery to the Lords and his menial
Gentlemen.

By an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the
6th. the Lords of the Council may assign money to be coined in as many places
as they 1 H. 6. ca. 1.
will. A Letter of request may be granted by the Keeper of the Privy Seal, to
any of the Kings Subjects, from whom Goods be taken by the King of Denmark, or
any of his Subjects.

By an Act of Parliament made in the tenth year of his Reign, the Mayor of
London shall take his Oath before the 10 H. 6. ca. 3.
Treasurer of England, and Barons of the Kings Exchequer, wherein he shall be
charged and sworn to observe all the Statutes touching Weights and Measures.

By an Act of Parliament made in the eleventh year of his Reign, Fees, Wages,
11 H. 6. ca. 8.
and Rewards due to the Kings Officers, were not to be comprised within the
Statute of Resumption, made in the 28 th. year of the Reign of the King.

By an Act of Parliament made in the third year of the Reign of King Henry the
7th. for punishments of Maintenance, Embracery, Perjuries, Riots, and unlawful
demeanors of Sheriffs, and unlawful Assemblies, it was 3 H. 7. ca. 1.
ordained, That the Chancellor and Treasurer of England for the time being,
Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or two of them, calling unto them a Bishop and
a Temporal Lord of the Kings most Honorable Council, and the two Chief
Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas for the time being, or other two
Justices in their absence, may upon Bill or Information put to the said
Chancellor for the King, or any other, have authority to call before them by
Writ or Privy Seal the said misdoers.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 12th. year of his Reign, 11 H. 7. ca. 25.
Perjury committed by unlawful maintenance, embracing, or corruption of
Officers, in the Chancery, or before the Kings Council, shall be punished by
the discretion of the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, both the Chief Justices, and
the Clerk of the Rolls; and if the Complainant prove not, or pursue not his
Bill, he shall yield to the party wronged his costs and damages.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 19th. year of his Reign, 19* H. 7. ca. 6.
Ordinances made by Fellowships of Crafts, are to be approved by the
Chancellor, Treasurer of England, Chief Justice of either Benches, or three of
them, or both the Justices of Assise in their Circuits, where such Ordinances
shall be made.

By an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the
8th. the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, 1 H. 8. c. 9.
may appoint two, three, or four persons, to receive Toll or Custom, and to
employ the same upon the repair of the Bridge of Stanes, in the County of
Middlesex, and to yield account thereof.

By an Exception in an Act of Parliament made in the 14th. and 15th. year of
his Reign, touching 14 and 15 H. 8. c. 2.
Aliens, and their taking of Apprentices, any Lord of the Parliament may take
and retain Estrangers Joyners and Glasiers in their service.

In the Act of Parliament made in the 21th. year of his Reign, prohibiting
Plurality of Benefices, and the taking of Farms, under great penalties, there
are Exceptions, for the 21 H. 8. ca. 13.
Kings Chaplains not sworn of his Council, and of the Queen, Prince, or
Princess, and the Kings Children, Brothers, Sisters, Uncles or Aunts, the eight
Chaplains of every Archbishop, six of every Duke, five of every Marquess and
Earl, four of every Viscount and other Bishop, the Chancellor, and every Baron
of England, three of every Duchess, Marquioness, Countess and Baroness being
Widows. And that the Treasurer and Comptroller of the Kings House, the Kings
Secretary, Dean of his Chapel, the Kings Almoner, and Master of the Rolls, may
have every one of them two Chaplains, the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench one
Chaplain, the Warden of the Cinqueports for the time being, the Brethren and
Sons of all Temporal Lords, may keep as many Benefices with Cure, as the
Chaplains of a Duke or Archbishop; and the Brethren and Sons of every Knight,
may keep two Parsonages or Benefices with Cure of Souls. And that the Widows
of every Duke, Marquess, Earl or Baron, which shall take to Husband any man
under the degree of a Baron, may take such number of Chaplains as they might
when they were Widows, and every such Chaplain have the privilege aforesaid.

By an Act of Parliament made in the same year and Parliament, a Commission was
granted to Cap. 16.
Cutbert Bishop of London, Sir Richard Brook Knight, Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, John More one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, etc. to assign how
many Servants every Stranger shall keep within St. Martins le Grand London.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 23th. year of his Reign, 23 H. 8. ca. 5.
Commissioners of Sewers to survey Streams, Gutters, Letts, and Annoyances, are
to be named by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and two Chief Justices, or
any three of them, and their Decree to bind the Kings and all men's Lands.

By an Act of Parliament made in the same year and Parliament, Cap. 7.
the prices of the Tun, Butt, Pipe, and Hogshead of French Wines, Sack, and
Malmsey, shall be assessed by the Kings Great Officers.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 25th. year of his Reign, 25 H. 8. ca. 2.
Butter, Cheese, Capons, Hens, Chickens, and other Victuals necessary for men's
sustenance, are upon complaint of enhancing, to be assessed by the Lord
Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, the Lord President of the Kings most
Honorable Privy Council, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Steward, the Lord
Chamberlain, and all other Lords of the Kings Council, the Treasurer and the
Comptroller of the Kings most Honorable House, the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, the Kings Justices of either Bench, the Chancellor, Chamberlains,
Undertreasurer, and the Barons of the Kings Exchequer, or seven of them at the
least, whereof the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the
Kings Council, or the Lord Privy Seal to be one.

By another Act of Parliament made in the same year and Parliament, 25 H. 8.
ca. 15.
the prices of Books upon complaint made unto the King, are to be reformed by
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, or any of the Chief Justices of the one
Bench or the other, by a Jury or otherwise.

By another Act of Parliament made in the same year and Parliament, Cap. 16.
every Judge of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, the Chancellor and
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the Kings Attorney and Solicitor for the time
being, may have one Chaplain, who may be absent from his Benefice, and not
resident.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 28th. year of the Reign, 28 H. 8. ca. 14.
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most
Honorable Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices of either
Bench, or any four or three of them, are empowered by their discretions to set
the prices of all Wines by the Butt, Tun, Pipe, Hogshead, Puncheon, Tearce,
Barrel or Rundlet, (the pint of French Wine being then set at 1 d. per pint.)

By an Act of Parliament made in the 33th. year of his Reign, 33 H. 8. ca. 28.
the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Courts of Augmentations and
First Fruits, Master of the Wards and Liveries, Treasurer of the Kings Chamber,
and Treasurer of the Court of Augmentation, and Groom of the Stool, may each of
them retain one Chaplain, who may be absent from their Benefices, provided they
be twice a year at their Benefices with Cure of Souls, by the space of eight
days at a time.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 34th. and 35th. year of his Reign, 34 and
35 H. 8. ca. 7.
the Lords authorized by the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 14. to set the prices of
Wines in gross, may mitigate and enhance the prices of Wines to be sold by
retail.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 37th. year of his Reign, for 37 H. 8. ca.
12.
the settlement of Tithes betwixt the Parsons, Vicars and Curates of London,
and the Inhabitants thereof, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor,
Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Council, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, with some of the Judges, were chosen Arbitrators to
make a final conclusion betwixt them, which shall be binding by their Order
under any six of their hands.

By an Act of Parliament made in the same year, Cap. 23.
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord
Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices, or three, four, or five of them, are
yearly to set the prices of Wines; And upon refusal to sell after those rates,
the Mayor, Recorder, and two ancient Aldermen of the City of London, not being
Vintners, shall enter into their Houses, and sell their Wines according to
those rates.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 7th. year of the Reign of King Edward the
6th. 7 E. 6. ca. 5.
no person having not Lands or Tenements, or which cannot dispend above 100
Marks per annum, or is not worth 1000 Marks in Goods or Chattels, not being the
Son of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, or Baron, shall keep in his house any
greater quantities of French Wines then 10. Gallons.

By an Act of Parliament made in the same year, Cap. 7.
the offenders in the Assise of Wood and Fuel, if they be poor and not able to
pay the Forfeiture, may be by a Justice of Peace, or any other of the Kings
Officers, put on the Pillory.

By an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of Queen Mary, 1
Mar. ca. 5.
if the Justices of Peace do not put the Act of Parliament in execution,
touching the repair of the Causway betwixt Sherborn and Shaftsbury, in the
Counties of Dorset and Somerset, the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper shall upon
request grant Commissions to certain discreet persons to do it.

And by an Act of Parliament made in the 43th. year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, 43 Eliz. ca. 4.
the mis-imployment of Lands, Goods, Chattels, or Money, given to Hospitals and
Charitable uses, are to be reformed by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal of England, and the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster for
the time being, in their several Jurisdictions.

Which amongst many other, may be some of the causes or reasons that the People
of England, and Commons in Parliament, giving in former times as they ought to
do, those grand and more then ordinary respects, and many more not here
repeated, unto the Great Officers of the Crown, Royal Household, and other the
Servants of our Kings and Princes, and lodging so many of their grand
concernments in their care and trust, did not trouble themselves, or any of our
Parliaments, with any Petitions (there being none to be found amongst the
Records thereof) against those ancient, rational, just and legal Privileges of
the Kings Servants in Ordinary, nor any Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain, or
other Officers of the Kings most Honorable House, for allowing or maintaining
it, (although there were some against Protections, granted to some that were
not the Kings Servants in Ordinary) nor has there been any Statute or Act of
Parliament made, to take away, or so much as abridge those well deserved
Privileges which have in all ages, and by so good warrant of right reason,
Laws of Nations, and the Laws and reasonable Customs of this Kingdom, appeared
to be so much conducing to the Weal public, and the affairs and business of
the Head or Sovereign: For surely if there had been but the least suspicion of
any Grievance in them meriting a remedy, there would not have been such a
silence of the peoples Petitioning, or Complaints against it, either by
themselves, or their vigilant and careful Representatives in the Commons House
in Parliament, which heretofore seldom or never omitted the eager pursuit, and
Hue and Cry after any thing of Grievance which molested them. And if there had
been any such Petitions and Complaints in Parliament, that Great and Honorable
Court not giving any order, or procuring any Act of Parliament against the
Privileges of the Kings Servants, is and may be a convincing argument, that
such Complaints or pretended Grievances were causeless, unfitting or not
deserving the remedies required; and will be no more an evidence or proof
against what is here endeavored to be asserted, then the Petition of the
Commons in Parliament in the 21th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3d.
against the payment of 6 d. for the seal of every Original Writ in Chancery,
and 7 d. for the sealing of the Writs of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common
Pleas, which has ever since been adjudged reasonable and fitting to be paid;
then the many Petitions against the ancient legal and rational payment of Fines
upon Original Writs in Chancery, then the Petitions of Nonconforming
Ministers, then the many designed and desired Acts of Parliament not found to
be reasonable or convenient, and therefore laid by and miscarried in the
Embrios; or multitudes of other Petitions in our Parliaments, or then the many
late Petitions for an imaginary liberty of Conscience, can or will be for what
was desired, and not thought fit at those or any other times to be granted.

Which ancient Privilege of the Kings Servants, not to be Arrested without
leave, was not so limited to their Persons, but that their Lands, Estates, and
Goods, participated also of that Privilege, not to be molested by any Process
or Suit of Law, without License first obtained of the Lord Chamberlain of the
Kings most honorable Household, or unto such other great Officers therein, to
whose Jurisdiction it belonged.

CAP. IV.
That the Privileges and Protections of the Kings Servants in Ordinary, by
reason of his Service, is, and ought to be extended unto the Privileged
parties Estate both Real and Personal, as well as unto their persons.

FOr if we may, as we ought, believe antiquity, and its many unquestionable
authorities, and our Records, which as to matters of fact, judgments, pleas,
writs, therein allowed, Records of Parliament, and the Grants of our Kings by
their Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, being the Public Faith
of the Kingdom, from and under which, most of the peoples Real Estates and
Privileges, have had their originals and establishments (not the falsely
called Public Faith, which afterward proved to be Bankrupt, and was until
then the Medea or Witch of the late incomparably wicked Rebellion) were always
so impartial and credited, as not to have their truth so much as suspected.
That Privilege was not only indulged and allowed to their Persons, but to
their Lands and Estate also, as will plainly appear by the course and Custom
of the Law in former ages, and amongst many others not here enumerated, was not
understood to have been either unusual or illegal in that which was granted to
Sir John Staunton Knight.

By King Edward the 3 d. in the 29th. year of his Reign, in these words,
Omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem Rot. Pat. 29 E. 3. m. 27.
considerantes grata and laudabilia obsequia tam nobis quam Isabellae Reginae
Angliae Matris nostrae charissimae, per dilectum and fidelem nostrum
Johannem-de Staunton, impensa and proinde. Volentes personam ipsius Johannis
(suis condignis meritis exigentibus) honorare ipsum Johannem* Camerae nostrae
militem and familiarem quoad vixerit tam tempore quo extra curiam nostram
absens quam tempore, quo ibidem presens fuerit duximus retinendum. Ac de gratia
nostra speciali ipsum Johannem, Terras, Tenementa, Bona, and Catalla sua,
quaecunque ac universos legales tenentes suos omnium and singulorum maneriorum
suorum in protectionem and defensionem nostram suscepimus specialem. The King
to all unto whom these presents shall come sends greeting, We considering the
well accepted and laudable Services, done as well unto us, as our dear Mother
Isabel Queen of England, by our trusty John de Staunton, and being therefore
willing to honor him according to his deserts, have made the said John a
Knight of our Chamber, and one of our Servants in Ordinary whilst he lives, as
well when he shall be absent as present. And of our especial grace, have taken
into our special protection the said John de Staunton, and all his Lands,
Tenements, Goods, and Chatels, and likewise all his Tenants of his Manors;
Omnibus and singulis nostris fidelibus tenore presentium firmiter inhibentes ne
eisdem Johanni, Terris, Tenementis, Bonis, seu Catallis suis, aut legalibus
tenentibus maneriorum praedictorum malum molestiam prisas, aut aliud
impedimentum inferunt vel faciunt indebite vel injuste, and si quis eis
injuriatum vel forissactum fuerit, id eis debite reformari and corrigi faciunt;
Straightly charging and prohibiting all our good Subjects, that they do not
unduly or unjustly endamage or molest the said John de Staunton, his Lands,
Tenements, Goods, Chatels, or his said Tenants, and if any shall injure or
wrong them therein, that you do duly cause it to be reformed and amended.

And the Writs of Protection which our Kings of England have sometimes granted
unto some which were employed in their Service upon some special motives and
reasons, and were not his maenial or domestic Servants, having been very
often, if not always, made and granted not only to protect the persons of such
Register of Writs, tit. Protection 22.23.26.
as were not the Kings Servants in Ordinary, but specially employed upon
extraordinary occasions, but de non molestando res terras tenementa homines
(which in the legal acceptance, anciently signified their Tenants, as well as
their Maenial or Household Servants, especially when instead of Rents, or for
some abatements made of them, they Plowed and Sowed their Landlords Land,
Reaped their Corn, and did many other Services belonging to Husbandry) bona
Catalla and possessiones suas, not to molest, trouble, or permit them to be
troubled in their Estates Real and Personal, Lands, Tenements, Servants,
Tenants, Goods, Chatels, and Possessions, and do agree with those privileges
which our Neighbor Princes of Europe, and many other Nations, have allowed
their Servants.

And such or the like Protections, are, and have been, an ancient allowed
privilege, not only to Foreign Ambassadors, but their Assistants, Servants,
Goods, and Chatels, in the Dominions and Territories of Kings and Princes to
whom they are sent, and where they are resident. Et sane quae potest tanta vis
esse privilegii personae Legatorum, si privilegium and istis accessionibus non
conceditur, says Albericus Gentilis; And truly to what purpose will the
privilege of Albericus Gentilis de legationibus, lib. 2. ca. 15. of the Kings
Servants.
Ambassadors be or enure, if the Protection of their Estates, as well as their
persons, should not attend their employments; for where their persons may not
be summoned, cited, or enforced to lay by, or forsake his Service in the
attendance upon the process of any of his Subordinate Courts of Justice, and
there cannot by the rules of Common Justice, and our Magna Charta, that great
piece of right reason and Justice, be any Judgment had or obtained without
appearane against them, or any Execution thereupon against their Goods or
Estate. And it being so just and necessary for the Plaintiffs to demand Leave
or License for the compelling of them to appear to their actions, it will be as
necessary and becoming certainly to demand a second Leave or License to take
out process of Execution upon any judgment obtained, when as in the ordinaay
course of our Laws, and the intendment thereof, every Plaintiff, as the Records
of our Courts of Justice will abundantly testify, is (as it were by Petition)
to pray and ask leave to take out his Writ of Execution; for that as the Judges
may in their inferior Orbs sometimes find cause to Arrest or stay for a time
some Judgments and Executions, so certainly, and much more in the Superior,
may the urgency of some present and necessary Service of the King, and the Weal
Public (the Kings Service and the public being as inseparable as his Person
and Authority, Body Politic and Corporal) require some pause, or a License
first to be demanded.

Such requisites and privileges drawn from the same Fountain of privileges and
reason, being no otherwise in their effects then as to the joint privileges of
Persons and Estates, then the privileges of Parliament, and the Protections
allowed Elsing in his book of the ancient and present manner of holding
Parliaments.
unto the Peerage and Members of the House of Commons, and their Maenial
Servants, in order to that public affair and service of the King, who does not
limit those favors only to their Persons, and the personal service of their
Servants attending upon them, but do for that time comprehend and secure their
Estates both Real and Personal, and will not willingly permit so much as the
minds of any of the Members of Broke 6.24.29. Fitz-Herbert N. B. 42. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts. Dyer 287.42. Coke 4 th. part Institutes 227.
Parliament to be vexed by any disturbance of process, or legal proceedings,
whilst they are employed and intended by Law to be only busied in those weighty
occasions, which they would be, if the Real and Personal Estates of themselves,
or Servants which attended upon them, were molested and troubled; and therefore
King Henry the 8th. in his Speech to the Judges in the Case of his Servant
Ferrers, and a Member of the House of Commons in Parliament in the 33th. year
of his Reign said, that his Learned Council at Law had informed him, that all
Acts and Process coming out of any Inferior Courts, must for the time cease
and give place to the Parliament as the highest of Courts, and that whatsoever
Offense or Injury is in Parliament time offered to the meanest Member of the
House of Commons, is to be adjudged as done both against the King and the whole
Court of Parliament; which was then assented unto by all the Judges of England
then present, says Crompton Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Parl.
Mr. Crompton, and confirmed by diverse reasons.

And well may it be so, when it is and has been not unusual for the Judges of
the Court of Kings Bench or Common Pleas (which do stand upon a less but legal
Foundation) to free or unattach Goods attached in the City of Land. by their
course or custom of Process of a man that had occasion to attend either of
those Courts Rastals vet. lib. intruc. tit. cerciorar. sur. brev. de
privilege, 8.
concerning some Suit or Suits there depending, as to procure a Capias
utlegatum against one, etc. and declare it to be a privilege or liberty
belonging unto those Courts in their several Jurisdictions to protect such
persons in veniendo versus eandem Curiam ibidem morando, and inde ad propria
redeundo absque arrestatione Corporum, Equorum, Bonorum, seu Catallorum, in
coming to the said Court or Courts there abiding* or returning homewards
without any Arrest of their Bodies, Horses, Goods, and Chatels by any process
out of any Inferior Court; Et habere debeant salvum and securum conductum sub
protectione and defensione Ibidem tit. Privil. 9.440.
Regis and Progenitorum suorum; and in that respect were to have asafe conduct
of the King and his Progenitors, and to be in their Protection; and it was in
former and less factious times, not unusual to have such or the like
Protections of our Kings for the Lands and Goods of the persons protected, as
well as for their persons, to be allowed in our Courts of Justice witness the
Writ to be found in the Register, before or much about the 11th. year of the
Reign of King Edward the 3 d. entitled a Writ of Trespass, contra protectionem
Regis, for molesting or troubling a man protected by the King, directed to a
Sheriff to attach the Defendant, in these words of the commanding or mandatory
part thereof, Ostensur quare cum suscepimus in protectionem and defensionem
nostram praedictum A. homines terras Register of Writs 121. tit. de inquirend.
de transgressione.
res reditus, and omnes possessiones suas, omnibus and singulis inhibentes, ne
quis eis injuriam, molestiam, damnum inferret, aut gravame^ idem B. Bona and
Catalla praedicti A. dum sub protectione nostra, sic fuit ad valentiam centum
Solidorum apud H. inventa vi and armis cepit and asportavit, and in homines and
servientes suos insultum fecit, etc. per quod servitia sua amisit, and alia
enormia, etc. ad grave dampnum, etc. and contra protectionem nostram
praedictam, and contra pacem nostram, and habeas ibi nota plegiorum, etc. To
show cause, whereas when we took into our Protection the aforesaid A. his
Lands, Goods, Tenants, and all that he possessed, prohibiting all and singular
whatsoever, that no man do or cause to be done unto him any injury, damage, or
trouble, the said B^ the Goods and Chatels of the said A. whilst he was under
our Protection, to the value of five pounds at H. by force and arms did take,
and carry away, and made an assault upon his Tenants and Servants, etc. whereby
he lost their Services, etc. and did other injuries unto him, etc. to his great
damage, against our Protection and Peace; and have you there (at Westminster)
the names of his pledges or sureties, etc.

With good reason therefore, and much more in the case of the Kings Servants,
when it would be of a small avail for any man to be Privileged or Protected in
his person whilst he is employed in the Kings Sercice, when all his Lands shall
be seized or extended, his Goods and Personal Estate taken away, his Wife
Children and Family starved, undone, or ruined, and like Job stripped of all he
had, may be at liberty to complain of his misery and calamity, and hear an
impatient Wife Job 9. v. 1.
blame him for being so careful to serve a King that would not or could not
protect him; And as little it would be for the good or dispatch of the Kings
affairs, when it cannot be so well done as otherwise it would, by a man whose
soul is grieved, the faculties of his mind and understanding weakened and
astonished, his thoughts racked or tormented with cares and apprehensions of
damage, losses, dangers, or disgraces, and cannot rest or follow his business
as otherwise he would do, but be looking homeward, either to provide some
remedy or comfort, as well as he can, for his sorrowful Wife and Children, to
which many times his presence is so requisite, as nothing can help or relieve
them or himself without it; and that surely which serves for a Reason or
Justice in the case of a person not the Kings Servant in ordinary, where he is
specially employed in his service, should be as necessary or reasonable, or
rather more, in the case of his Servant in ordinary, who in such a trouble and
sadness as appeared in the face of the good Nehemiah, the Nehemiah c. 1. v. 2.
and 3. c. 2. v. 2. and 6.
Cup Bearer of King Artaxerxes, when he heard of the great affliction and
reproach of his Brethren at the distressed Jerusalem, must when he shall he
asked as Nehemiah was, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick, it
is nothing else but sorrow of heart, be enforced to declare his sorrows to his
Sovereign, who when he shall be informed of the cause of it, must be
constrained to do as that tenderhearted King did, to give such a troubled
Servant leave to depart to his distracted Estate, and in the mean time want his
service.

CAP. V.
That the Kings Servants whilst they are in his service, ought not to be
Vtlawed or prosecuted in order thereunto, without leave or license first
obtained of the King, or the Great Officers of his most H^nourable Housh^ld,
under whose several Jurisdictions they do officiate.

ANd to as little or no purpose would that ancient and just Privilege of the
Kings Servants in ordinary, not to be arrested, troubled or imprisoned without
leave first obtained, profit them, if whilst they shall be busied in attending
the person of the King, or some other of his affairs, they may be sued to an
Utlary, and forfeiture of all their Goods and Personal Estate, put out of the
protection of the King and his Laws, and thrust under the many damages,
inconveniences and incapacities which do waylay and fall upon Utlawed persons,
and will be hugely contradictory to the right reason and intention of our Laws;
neither can any Sheriff retorn upon an Original Writ, retornable in the Court
of Common Pleas, to which and no other Court (except in the Court of Kings
Bench, in Actions of Trespass, or upon the Case importing a breach of the
Peace) in all Civil Actions, the prosecution of Writs to the Utlary does only
and properly appertain; or upon a Bill of Middlesex, a great encroacher upon
the Rights and Jurisdiction of the Court of Common Pleas, and a greater upon
the Rights and Liberties of the people; or an Action entered in the Sheriffs
Courts in the City of London, or of any other City or Corporation, that any of
the Kings Servants who were not wont to be either Beggars or Runagates, nichil
habet, nec est inventus, (the later of which however now disused, was anciently
never omitted, but as a companion in separable upon such Retorns of Writs, went
together with the former) when as the Offices and Places in the Kings Court,
were not usually so poor or unprofitable, as that they should be worth nothing,
or those that enjoyed them so willing to leave them, as to run away from them.

And then certainly if by Law any such Retorns cannot in the case of the Kings
Servants in ordinary, be justly or legally made, nor any Process of Capias, or
to arrest, executed against them, without a leave or license first obtained;
nor any Utlary without a Capias, after that an alias Capias, and afterward a
pluries Capias, being all three of them with fifteen days betwixt the Testes
and Retorns first and successively to be returned, as now the manner of
retorning them of course is usually, before any Exigent can be awarded in order
to an Utlary, if the Defendant do not appear before unto the Action, whether
Civil or Criminal, to prevent it; which so often repeated process and warnings
the Law does so strictly enjoin, as in the Reigns of King Henry the 4th. and
King Henry the 6th. Brook tit. Vtlary 62. and 3 H. 4.10.
Utlaries have been reversed, for that the Exigent was awarded to Utlaw the
Defendants upon the second Capia^.

There cannot be any just or legal possibility of Utlawing of them, although
they be neither Great Officers of State, nor of the Kings Privy Council, or of
the Baronage, who by reason of their eminencies, high degrees, and qualities,
are always to be excepted from those ordinary kinds of Process.

For if any of the Kings Servants in ordinary should be wronged by any such
false Retorns, which must necessarily fore-run and open the doors of the
Process of Exigent, the Prologue or Ushers to an Utlawry, they are and ought to
be as justly entitled, as any of the common people of England are to an Action
of the Case, against the Sheriff or any other who shall make or cause to be
made any false Retorn, quod nichil habet, that he had nothing, (when as many of
them have good, or great, or some Estates in Lands and Freehold in the County
or place where the Action is laid) or, quod non est inventus, was not to be
found in his Balywick; the later of which was in former ages used to be so ill
resented, as in the Reign of King Edward the 3d. an Action was brought against
one for retorning upon a Writ, quod non est inventus, that he was not to be
found, whereby a Capias or Writ to arrest him was awarded against him.

And as much against the mind of the Law it would be, and a very great distance
from truth and reason, that the King in the usual process and proceedings unto
or toward an Utlary, should cause an Original Writ to be directed unto the
Sheriff of Middlesex, who is by Law to execute no Writ in his Court or Palace,
to command one of the Kings Servants to pay a Debt demanded by the Plaintiff;
or if he did not, to summon him to appear before his Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, to show cause why he did not, when his own
Officers of his most Honorable Household, upon leave obtained to prosecute the
Debtor in the Court of Common Pleas, were more properly to have made that
summons, should upon a nichil habet nec est inventus, that he has nothing, or
is not to be found returned upon such an Original Writ by Clerks or Attorneys
of course, without the warrant or privity of the Sheriff in whose name it is
returned, and to whom it is directed, suffer a Capias in his Name, and under
his Seal, to arrest or take his body, to be issued out against his Yeoman of
the Robes, or his Physicians in ordinary, or some other of his Servants in
ordinary necessarily attending him, not by courses, (as many other are by the
indulgence of his Royal Majesty, for the ease of his Servants, permitting them
to officiate by turns, which within a few weeks or months brings them again
into their duty and places of attendance) but constantly every day and night in
the year.

And should upon a non est inventus, returned of course as aforesaid, when the
time or day prefixed in that Writ of Capias is expired, suffer in his Name and
under his Seal another Writ of alias Capias to be made to the said Sheriff,
commanding him to arrest or take the said Yeoman of his Robes, or any other of
his Servants in ordinary, whom he knows not to be absent from his service or
affairs; and upon a like feigned and false retorn of course upon that Writ,
when the time prefixed for to arrest him is expired, cause or command a Writ of
pluries Capias to be made or issued out against him; and upon the like feigned
and false retorn, made upon the said Writ of pluries Capias, when the time
prefixed to arrest him is expired, cause a Writ of Exigent to be issued out,
commanding the Sheriff in five several County Court days, to call the said
Yeoman of the Robes, or such other his Servant in ordinary, and if he appear,
to take him, if not, to retorn him Utlawed; and should likewise at the same
time, issue out at the request of the party Plaintiff, his Writ of
Proclamation, directed to the Sheriff of the County where his Family resided,
to be proclaimed at two several County Court days, and a third time at the
Parish Church door upon a Sunday, immediately after Divine Service ended,
commanding the said Yeoman of the Robes, or such other his Servant, to appear
and render himself to the Sheriff, otherwise to be Utlawed, when he knows he
was at that instant of time, and would be at other times prefixed, busy and
employed in a near attendance upon his Person; or that the Ye^man of his Robes,
or such other Servant in ordinary, should be Utlawed upon an intendment or
supposition in Law, that after so many iterated contempts of the King, and his
Process or Writs, being twelve in number, that is to say, a contempt upon not
appearing upon the Original Writ, three several contempts upon the Capias,
Alias, and Pluries, five other contempts in not appearing at the five Husting
days, if the Action had been laid in London, or five County Court days, if
the Action were laid in any County, and three several contempts in not
appearing upon the Proclamation, when he either knew not of the Process, as it
very often happens, or if he did take notice of them, refused to appear to the
said Action, because his business about the Kings own person and affairs would
not permit him.

And should thereby subject him to all the mischiefs and inconveniences of an
Utlawed person, and that fierce Process of Utlary called a Capias Vtlegatum,
and command a Sheriff to enter into any Liberties, as if he intended such
Servants might be taken in his Bedchamber, or his Court, which no Law or
Custom has hitherto permitted, or held fitting or reasonable; and seize his
Person, Lands and Goods, and Lease and Demise away his Lands to the Plaintiff,
until he shall appear and answer the Action, and the King for the Contempts in
not appearing thereunto; when as it was the Kings own necessary affairs and
business that hindered him, and he was at that instant of time busied in his
duty and attendance upon his person; and cannot be restored unto the benefit of
the Laws, and the Birthright of a Subject, until he shall have reversed the
Utlary by Plea, or Error, or as the usage of the Law was in the time of King
Henry the 4th. and long after, that the Utlawed person could not be restored,
till he had been by the Court committed to the Prison of the Fleet for his
contempts, purchased and pleaded his Charter of Pardon from the King, under the
Great Seal of England, and appeared to the Action, when the King and his
service and attendance, was the only cause that he did not or could not attend
or appear thereunto, or put in Bayl to answer it, when there was no danger of
his absence, or flying away from the Kings Service, which is or ought to be not
a little advantageous or beneficial unto him.

And when the Plaintiff, at whose instance such a prosecution was made, might
with as much ease, and as little charge, and a far less expense of time, have
petitioned the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household, and obtained a license
to have taken his course at Law against him: And if the Lord Chamberlain had
given the Defendant a reasonable time or prefixion for the Plaintiffs
satisfaction, as his Lordship usually does, it would probably not have exceeded
the time of six months, which is by our Laws the shortest time wherein a
Defendant can be Utlawed, which as Bracton says, ought not to be suddenly
done, but to have five months warning or time given in regard of the severity
thereof, when a man is Utlawed and is thereby to forfeit bona and catalla,
patriam and amicos, his Goods, Chattels, Bracton lib. ^. ca. 11.125. and
Stamford Plees del Corone, lib. 3. ca. 35.
Country, and profits of his Lands, to be as an exile or banished man, was not
to be received or entertained by his Friends, could not bring an Action for any
thing due unto him, until the Utlary be reversed, but was as ancient as the
Saxon times accounted to be a Friendless and Lawless man.

And it would be a great piece of incivility, to prosecute such a Servant of
the Kings in ordinary, so busied and employed about his person, and not first
of all to Petition for his license, when in an ordinary way and with no great
charge, and a great deal sooner than the Defendants appearance to his Action
can be enforced by an Utlary, it might have been so easily procured; and
possibly the Kings great occasions and expense of money for the Public and
their defense and protection, wherein the good and safety of that Plaintiff was
amongst the rest included, might be the cause that he could not pay such
Servant in ordinary his wages, and that such Servant could not so soon as he
otherwise would have satisfied the party prosecuting, there being no reason to
be assigned by any whose exuberant phancies have not altogether divorced them
from it, that one that is but employed upon a seldom and temporary employment
of the Kings, and is not his Servant in ordinary, nor the business he is
employed in so continually near and relating to his person, should during that
his temporary employment, and of a far less concernment as to go on a Message
for him, or in company of some Ambassador, be privileged during his absence in
his Person, Goods and Estate, and a Servant in ordinary continually attending
his Sacred Person, should be only protected in his Person, but not in his
Estate; or that the privileges and immunities so anciently due and appropriate
to his Servants in ordinary, and near his person, should be curtailed, and have
less allowed them than Strangers, and such as are only employed for some small
time or occasion.

Or that the Utlawing of any of his Servants in ordinary, should forfeit their
so just Rights and Privileges, when as by the Law and reasonable Customs of
the Kingdom, they are not to be Utlawed, or put in Process of Utlary, without
license or leave first asked; and no man should be Utlawed or punished for a
default of not appearing, or have any Process of arrest or contempt awarded
against him, where he had a reasonable excuse or impediment, or cause of
Essoyne, as by Inundation of Waters, being sick, or in the parts beyond the
Seas, or so great a one as the Service of the King; for if Utlaries in such a
case unduly obtained, should cause a forfeiture of just and legal Customs and
Privileges, any that had a mind to do a mischief to a supposed adversary,
might as well contrary to the Privileges of Parliament, in the time of
Parliament, find or make a pretense to Utlaw any of the Members of either of
the Houses of Parliament, and make that to be as it were a forfeiture of their
Privileges, and a justification (which they can never make out) of the
infringing of them, and the Parliament Men of the House of Commons might be
Utlawed persons, which the Law forbids, and by tacit and many times
undiscerned Utlaries, might lose and be deprived of their Privileges.

And the parties offending or endeavoring such breaches of Privilege, should
not take advantage de son tort, of their own wrongs or tortious doings, which
our Common Law maxim does abhor, and the Civil Law does as little like or
allow, when its Rule is, that Nemo Peregrini Janninii de Citatione reali, lib.
2.
commodum consequi debet ex suo delicto, no man is to take profit by his
offense against the Law.

For in vain should the Kings Servants be by the Constitution of Clarendon in
the Reign of King Henry the second, freed from Excommunications, or the
Ministers or Priests be by the Act of Parliament in the 50th. year of the Reign
of King 50 E. 3. c. 5. 1 R. 2. c. 15.
Edward the third, and the first year of the Reign of King Richard the second,
exempted from being arrested in the Church or Churchyard, if an Utlary, which
being very anciently used in Criminal matters, but not in Civil in Bractons
time in the Reign of King Henry the 3d. taught the way and manner of it in
Civil, should be able to forfeit it, or take them away; for in and before that
Kings Reign, Bracton says, Bracton lib. 3. c. 12.8.
Videtur nulla esse Vtlagaria si factum pro quo quis Interrogatus est Civil
sit and non Criminale, pro quo quis vitam amittere non deberet vel membra, it
seems there ought to be no Utlary, where the Defendant or party is prosecuted
for any Civil matter, not Criminal, wherein he was not to lose either life or
members.

And very unbecoming the Majesty and Honor of a King it would needs be, to
have any of his Servants Utlawed, and pursued with Process of Utlary, whilst
they are attending upon him, and made to be as the outcast and reproach of the
people, and not be able to protect them in their just Rights and Liberties; or
that any of our Kings Servants should Lupina capita gerere, be as men wearing
Wolves heads, which was the ancient mark or note of infamy of such as were
Utlawed in Criminal matters, instead of honorable Liveries, or marks of the
Kings Servants in ordinary.

When in the 6th. year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th. Roger Oliver the Son
of John Oliver, being in obsequio Regis in Norff. Termino Paschae An. 6 H. 4.
Rot. 34. coram Rege.
Comitiva Johannis Lardner, Capitanei Castri de Oye in partibus Piccardiae, pro
munitione Castri praedicti, in the Kings Service in fortifying the Castle of
Oye in Picardy, under the command of John Lardner Captain of the Castle
aforesaid, was Utlawed by Process out of the Court of Common Pleas, at the Suit
of John Paxman, in an Action of Debt for Forty pounds, when as die
promulgationis Vtlagarie, and diu antea and postea fuit in obsequio Domini
Regis, at the time of his being Utlawed, and long before and after, he was in
the Kings Service as aforesaid, and brought his Writ of Error in the Kings
Bench to reverse it, prayed a Writ to the Captain aforesaid, to certify
whether he was then in obsequio Regis, in the Kings Service; per quod mandatum
fuit praedicto Capitaneo, whereupon it was commanded to the aforesaid Captain,
to certify quo die and anno, what year and day the said Roger was employed as
aforesaid, and per quantum tempus ibidem remansit in obsequio Regis in Comitiva
sua continue, and quo die and anno recessit, and how long he there served
without intermission, and what day and year he departed; whereupon he giving
Bayl by four Sureties, to appear ad praefatum terminum, and sic de die in diem
quousque, etc. at the term or time appointed, and so from day to day until he
should be discharged. And the Captain certifying the day when the said Roger
came into the Kings Service, and when he departed, the said Roger prayed a Writ
of Scire facias, to warn or summon the said John Paxman to appear and hear the
Error alleged; and the Sheriff not having executed the first Scire facias, and
a second being awarded, executed and returned, and the said John Paxman not
appearing, the said Roger assigned for Error, that he was in obsequio Regis, in
the Kings Service as aforesaid, and prayed that the Utlary might be reversed
for the Error aforesaid; and quod Curia ad examinationem recordi and processus
ex officio procedat, and that the Court would as they ought proceed to examine
the Record and Process aforesaid; which being considered and examined, the
Court ob Errorem illum, and alios in recordo and processu compertos, for that
and other Errors appearing in the Record and Process aforesaid, did reverse and
annull the said Utlary.

And in the 9th. year of the Reign of the said King, a man being Utlawed for
Felony, (which is of a worse nature and consequence then in an Action of Debt)
did reverse that Utlary upon a Certificate that he was in the Kings Service at
Brook Tit. Vtlary 10. and 9 H. 4.3.
Bordeaux in France, at the time of the Utlary pronounced; and in the second
year of the Reign of King Edward the 4th. a man taken upon a Capias Vtlagatum
for Felony, pleaded that at the time of the Utlary pronounced, he was in the
Kings Service at Brook ibidem 47. and 2 E. 4.1.
Calais, under the Governor or Captain thereof, which being certified was
allowed; when in all cases of Vtlary, the Judges of Courts, and the Kings
Sergeants, or Council at Law, were always not a little watchful to preserve
all the Kings Rights and advantages.

For if upon a command of the King by his Letters Patents, to do any of his
commands or affairs, (which kind of Authority certainly the Kings Servants in
ordinary Brook Tit. Vtlary 79. and 11 H. 7.5.
neither need or ever demanded) or the party impleaded alleging that he served
at Calais under such a Captain, shall be sufficient Pleas to avoid Vtlaries,
the one (as was adjudged and holden for Law in the 11th. year of the Reign of
King Henry the 7th. in the Kings Bench) being to be tried by the Certificate of
the Captain, and the other by the Kings Letters Patents.

And the party Vtlawed shall have a Writ of Scire facias, without showing the
Kings Letters Patents, unless the Plaintiff do traverse it, as well as in the
other Case he shall be discharged of the Vtlary by the Certificate of the
Captain; the Certificate certainly in the Case of an Household Servant of the
Kings, of the Lord Chamberlain, or other Great Officer of the Household to whom
it appertains, may deserve to be as available.

And yet in all the aforesaid Cases of Protection or Privilege, they that were
abiding within the Realm, might ever since the making of the Statute in the
20th. year of the Reign of King 20 H. 3. ca. 10.13 E. 1. ca. 10.
Henry the third, and of the Statute made in the 13th. year of the Reign of
King Edward the first, and such as departed the Realm by the Kings license, by
an Act of Parliament or Statute made in the 7th. year of the Reign of King 7 R.
2. ca. 14.
Richard the second, make their Attorneys to answer for them in any Actions to
be brought against them. And if in case of less consequence, or upon a smaller
ground of Law or Reason, the Law has so much favored a privare person, as to
permit him to reverse an Vtlary, because he was itae languidus Brook Tit.
Vtlary 75. Fitzherberts Abridgement Tit. Challenge 153.
tempore promulgationis Vtlagarie, so sick at the time of the pronouncing or
adjudging him to be Vtlawed, that he could not propter periculum mortis, appear
without danger of death, (when as he might have made or sent his Attorney) as
it was adjudged and admitted in the 4th. year of the Reign of King Henry the
5th. the Kings 4 H. 5.
Servants should in matters so very much concerning his Person, and the Weal
public, not be debarred of their plea of a greater impediment, by their
necessary attendance upon the person of their Sovereign.

All which may certainly give us to understand, and persuade every one that
wilfully gives not way to his fancies and misapprehensions, to overrun and
trample upon his reason, that the Privilege of the Kings Servants in ordinary,
had its beginning and continuance as well from the necessity of their
attendance upon his person and affairs, as from the respect and honor which
was and should be always due unto the King their Master.

And that therefore if the Laws and reasonable Customs of England, do as they
have ever done, and by a right interpretation of them are always to be
understood, will not permit that the Kings Servants in ordinary may be arrested
in any Civil Action, without the leave or license of the King or the great
Officers of his most honorable Household, under whose jurisdiction they do
officiate first obtained, nor suffer any Member of the House of Commons in
Parliament in the time of Parliament, whilst he is in the service of their King
and Country to be outlawed, because he cannot be Utlawed without Process of
three Capiasses of Writs to arrest and an Exigent and Proclamation first
awarded and returned against him, and such Writs or Process could not be
awarded, during the against him continuance or adjournment of Parliament.

It may justly, rationally and legally be concluded, that they cannot be
Utlawed.

Until there can be an Utlary without a Capias or Process of Arrest and a
Capias without leave or license first obtained of the great Officer of the
Kings most honorable Household to whom it appertains, and an alias and
pluries Capias also to arrest, returned with a non est inventus, that such of
the Kings Servants being sought to be arrested, is not to be found, and until
there can be a contempt where there is none, a consequent without an
antecedent, and an effect without a cause.

Howsoever if any of the Kings Servants should at any time be so indirectly and
unduly outlawed he may by the favor of their Royal Master be inlawed and
restored to the benefit and protection of Him and his Laws, as was some hundred
of years ago, held to be Law and right reason by Bracton, who left it as a Rule
to posterity, that Rex poterit utlagatum de gratia ^ua per literas suas
Patentes inlegare and recipere eum ad pacem suam, and reponere eum in legem,
extra quam prius positus fuit, The King may of his Grace by His Letters Patents
pardon the Utlary, and Bracton lib. 3. ca. 14.1.
restore him to the benefit of his Laws, but if he were outlawed contra legem
terrae debet eam pronunciare esse nullam and utlagati secundum legem terrae
facilius recipiuntur ad pacem secundum quod ibi fuerit causa, vera vel nulla,
vel minus sufficiens, contrary to the Law of the Land the Utlary ought to be
annulled, and the Defendant more easily received into the protection of the
King and his Laws, where there was a just cause for to reverse it, or where the
cause of the Outlawry appeared to be none or insufficient, with whom concurred
Fleta Fleta lib. 1. ca. 28
who likewise said, quod utlagati extra legem positi ad legem gratia Principis
concomitante restitui possunt and inlagari dum tamen causa utlagariae nulla
fuerit vel nimis mature, That men outlawed or bereaved of the benefit of the
Laws may by the favor of the Prince be restored, when the cause of the Vtlary
was none, or it was sooner promulged or adjudged then it ought, and may well be
understood to be no otherwise.

When our very learned Bracton did long ago rightly define an outlawed person
to be qui principi non obediat nec Legi, which obeyed not the King nor the Law,
and the cause of an Outlawry Bracton lib. 3. de Corona, ca. 11.
to be contumacia and inobedientia, contempt of the King and disobedience unto
him and his Laws, such Servant of the King which obeys the King his Sovereign
and Royal Master in the duty of his place, necessary attendance, and service
cannot be adjudged to disobey the King at the same time when he does more
especially obey him: And if not guilty of any disobedience contumacy or
contempt to the King cannot be understood to be so unto his Laws or established
Courts of Justice, which do act and do justice and punish in his name only and
by his authority, for where there cannot be a contumacy or cause of it
according to the privilege of the Kings Servants in the first Process or
Summons in Order to the intended Vtlary nulla sequi deberet captio and cum
Bracton Tract. 2. lib. 5. de Essoniis cap. 1.
captio nulla says Bracton Tract. 2. lib. 5. de Essoniis cap. 1.
Bracton, nec ea quae sequntur locum habere debeant, no Capias or Writ to
arrest ought to issue, and when there is no Capias or Writ to arrest, the
Vtlary which shall be endeavored to be the consequence of it is not to be at
all quia ubi primum and principale quod est summonitio non subsistit, for that
the principal which was the Summons was not duly awarded.

But if any shall think it to be a contempt of the Kings Process or Courts of
Justice although it be none against the K. himself, such a contra-distinction
will prove to be as invalid, illegal and irreligious as that abominable one in
the late Times of Confusion of distinguishing betwixt the person of the King
and his Authority, and his natural and politic capacity, which our Laws do
declare to be so united as though most of the Regal Privileges are adjudged to
appertain to the Sacred Persons of our Kings for the Kings Prerogative, as
Justice Brown alleged in the argument of VVillon and Berkleys Case, en respect
de son person and vaont a son person, is in respect of his Person Plowdens
Commentaries in Willon and the Lord Berklyes case, 238. b. and 248. a.
and do attend it, and howsoever there are some that do only and properly
belong to his Politic capacity, yet his natural and politic capacities are
neither to be confounded or so separated, as one to be against or contrary to
the other.

And they which are so willing to entertain or harbor any such opinions may do
themselves more right to believe that which a more serious consideration may
inform them, That the Civil Law defining representation does make it to be no
more then locum Vlpian. l. 1. and 1. Si is qui testam. l. 1 ^ ubi causa Stat.
and novell.
alterius obtinere vel tantundem valere to be in the place of another or to
avail as much as if he were present, and preses Provinciae dicitur in
provinciis representare qui in eadem judicis and juris vicem tenet, the
President of a Province is said to represent, and is as a substitute of the
Judge and the Law and Acts there in the place of them, which to all that are
but smally acquainted with those excellent Laws cannot seem to be abs^lute,
when they may every where find the Praetors or Proconsuls of Provinces,
advising (as the younger Pliny sometimes did with Trajan the Emperor) in their
Letters to the Emperors upon all emergencies and cases in Law, and directing
and steering their Judgments and sentences according to their rescripts and
answers returned unto them, and our common-Laws of England, where they do
sometimes seem to say that the King is virtually present in his Courts of
Justice, do it but as authorative, with a quoad, quatenus and quodam modo, as
unto such or such things and particulars, in a certain manner, as far as the
reach and compass of the Delegated power committed unto their care and trust
will extend, for the King is not in such a manner represented by or in his
Courts of Justice by his authority granted unto them as to be no where else in
his natural or personal Capacity or Commands, for then he must be Apotheosed or
more then mortality or mankind will permit, and so omnipresent and every where,
as to be at one and the same morning, hour and instant of Time in the Terms or
Law days in the Court of Common Pleas, Exchequer, King's Bench and Chancery,
out of the later whereof he could not issue out in the same day and moment of
Time, his Writs Original and remedial under his Test meipso, witness our self
in the Chancery authorizing the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas to hold
Plea in most of the Actions which they have cognizance of and are empowered to
hear or determine, and be at the same time truly and properly believed to be in
the Court of Common Pleas, nor could cause any of their Records to be
transmitted coram nobis, unto himself in his Court of King's Bench to correct
the Errors committed in some Action by the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas,
nor by a Writ of Pone upon a Certi^rari out of the Chancery under his Test
meipso, as ^f he were there present to direct it to be tried in the Court of
King's Bench coram nobis, by a supposition, that it should be there determined
before himself, neither did some of our Kings need to have holden Parliaments
by their Substitutes or Commission, as King Edward the third did in his absence
to his Son Edward Duke of Cornwall, and at another time unto Lionell Duke of
Clarence another of his Sons, if he could by any just or legal intendment, have
been supposed to have been there always absolutely, and to all purposes
virtually present.

But if there should be a refusal by any of the Kings Servants in Ordinary, to
appear upon any Writs or Process issuing out of any of his Courts of Justice,
whilst they are in the Service of the King their Master, yet when the King
shall have discharged that refusal or contempt (if it should be so called) by a
greater and more necessary command in the case of any of his Servants attending
upon Him, that contempt is no more to be insisted upon, for if in such a case
of his moeniall Servants, his command in the necessary attendance upon his
person or affairs in one place shall not amount to a Supersedeas or discharge
of any supposed contempt of his Writs and Process and delegated Mandates in
another. And his commissionated Courts of Justice, should adjudge his Servants
to be guilty of a contumacy or contempt against his Courts of Justice, in not
obeying of his Process, whilst they do attend upon his person in the safety and
well being of Him and all his Subjects, and of the Courts of Justice
themselves, they must separate themselves from themselves, and themselves from
the King which entrusted them with that authority, and by too much supposing
his authority to be in themselves, mistake and fancy that authority in them to
be Superior to him that gave it, erect to themselves a kind of Superiority
over him which gave them that authority, by and under which they do act and are
empowered, the bounds and limits whereof they should not go beyond or exceed.

For although there may be a contempt charged upon some one or more of the
Kings many Servants, attending in his Court or Palace, for disobeying or not
performing some of his personal commands, and upon the same party much about
the same Time for a contempt for not obeying or performing the Precept or
Process of his subordinate Judges, by not appearing to some Action prosecuted
before them, and so a double contempt or contumacy against the King, yet the
contempt to the Kings personal command is and must needs be greater then that
which is to his Justices or Courts of Justice, and is more immediate then that
which is but mediate, and concerns but some one particular Plaintiff, and not
seldom in a malicious or unjust cause of Action, or if just, for some trivial
hot headed uncharitable and unneighborly cause of Action, as for Trespass of a
Horse or Cow broken into his Pasture, by the default or occasion of his own ill
Fence or Hedges when the Beast knew as little of reason or property, as the
Plaintiff did of Religion or the rules of Christianity, when that which is more
immediately to the King, may not a little, but greatly concern the well or ill
being of the whole Nation* or of multitudes, and in that general and universal
concernment of the angry prosecutor himself, when that which is but mediate,
and a lesser contempt to some one of the Kings Courts of Justice in not
appearing to some of their Writs or Process made out in the Kings name, and by
his authority, concerns only a few particular persons.

And therefore we should too much thwart those common principles of reason and
understanding, to deny the greater command, its power and efficacy before the
lesser, and that of the King, before that of his Justices or to punish and
arrest any of the Kings Servants, if they were not so justly entitled to the
Privileges aforesaid (for all or the most part of Arrests by order or course
of any Courts of Justice in civil Actions before appearance, are grounded
either upon contempts or propter suspitionem sugae, to prevent running away)
for disobeying the lesser authority, and a private and particular concernment,
to obey the greater, or the commands of the King in just and lawful things as a
Servant in matters relating to his service and in that to the weal public, or
greatest concernment, and may well be excused for failing in the lesser or
private, when he is by his Oath usually administered unto the Kings Servants,
truly and diligently to attend and wait, and not to depart out of the Kings
Court, without license had or obtained of the Lord Chamberlain, or other the
Officers of the Kings most honorable Household, unto whom it appertains Vide
the Oaths of the Kings Servants in the Reign of Henry the 8 th in a Book
entitled the Book of Oaths.
and to obey all and singular commandments given in charge on the behalf of the
King, and is not by his Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to lessen or abrid^e
any of the Kings Royal Jurisdictions, Preheminences and Privileges, from and
under which are legally derived the aforesaid Rights and Privileges of his
Servants, who if they were not privileged, are not in the contrariety and
conflict of superior and inferior commands, to neglect those of the Superior,
where he is so bound and engaged by the duty of a Subject and Servant, and so
many obligeing Oaths to obey the Writs or Precepts of an Inferior, to whom they
are under no Obligation of Oaths, nor are to be compelled to break those Oaths
and Obligations, or to do impossible things when as id possumus quod de Jure
possimus, things unlawful should be ranked amongst the impossibles and our Laws
do assure us that Lex non cogit impossibilia, that the Law does neither ordain
nor compel impossible things to be done or does punish for the not doing of
them.

But if a restless Spirit of opposition to the Kings Rights or Regalities shall
not permit an acquiescence unto that which has been already said in defense of
that part of it which concerns the Privileges of his Servants, but that an
objection must be picked up to support their factious incivilities, that the
King ought not to punish or imprison any for the breach of his Servants
Privileges, in the causing of any of them to be Arrested or Outlawed without
leave or license first procured when the Writs and Process, tending thereunto
are made in his own Name, and under his small or lesser Seals, as to Writs and
Process issuing out of the Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas delegated and
entrusted by him unto the two Lord Chief Justices thereof, Hill. 14 H. 6. Rot.
1.
the answer will have no difficulty, if it shall be as it ought to be
acknowledged, that those Writs and Process seldom expressing that the Defend.
is the K. Servant, are of course made out and Sealed by Officers and Clerks of
the Court whence they issued without the privity or knowledge of the King or
his Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, or the Judges of
the Court of Common Pleas, and that if those Writs which now and for many years
past, to the great ease of the people have been made in an ordinary way and
course at small rates and charges as anciently, as the Reign of King John and
King Henry the third Bracton lib. 5. de Exceptionibus, ca. 17. Tract. 5.
should have been made by the privity of the Chancellor, or Chief Justice, or
of the King himself, or granted upon Motion or Petition, and read, and recited
in the Kings presence, or in Court by or before the Chancellor or
Chief Justice, when such Actions, Writs or Complaints were few and seldom, yet
when afterward they should appear to be mistaken, too suddenly or erroniously
granted, or that the King or the Court have (as in humane affairs it may often
happen) been misinformed or deceived therein, such Writs or Process, surprise
or mistake may be revoked and rectified, and the Writs and proceedings
thereupon contradicted by the King or his Authority, as has been done in the
Writs of Supersedeas to the Barons of the Exchequer to stay their proceedings
in Common Pleas, or to Register of Writs 185 191.
the Marshalsea, of matters wherein they have no Jurisdiction, that known Rule
of Law declaring the Kings Letters Patents of the Grant of Lands to a man in
Fee or Fee Tail to be void, where the King is deceived in his Grant, or as King
Henry the 3d. superseded his Writ de Rot. Clausis, 7 H. 3. m. 6.
Excommunicato capiendo to Arrest, or take an excommunicated person, because he
was circumvented in the granting of the Writ, or made void his Conge d' Rot.
Vascon. 36 37 38 and 39 H. 3. in Mr. Prynnes Annotations and amendments of and
upon the 4 th. part of Sir Edward Cokes Institutes 320 and 321.
Eslire, to the Priory of Carlisle, and confirmed an election upon a former
Conge or license, or as is often done by that common and usual way of
Supersedeas Rot. Vascon. 36 37 38 and 39 H. 3. in Mr. Prynnes Annotations and
amendments of and upon the 4 th. part of Sir Edward Cokes Institutes 320 and
321.
made by the King upon matters ex post facto, or better information, or by his
Justices and Courts of Justice by Writs of Supersedeas quia improvide or
Erronice or datum est nobis intelligi, in regard of misinformation, Error, or
better information, or in the vacating of Recoveries and Judgments, and
discharging Actions, for abuse of the Courts, or ill obteining of them,
Wasthulls case in Banco Regis Sharingtons in Hill. 23 Eliz. Allensons case 3
Car. 1. Comes Oxon. contra Johannem Harbert in An. 1657
or their Writs and Process, and freeing of prisoners taken and Arrested by
Writs or Process not duly warranted.

And that such an indirect and feigned prosecution of the Kings Servants to the
Utlary, designed only to abridge the King of his regal Rights, forfeit and
annul the Privileges of his Servants, and obstruct and hinder his service and
attendance as well deserves a punishment, as that which was usual in our Laws in
the Reigns of King Henry the 3d. and King Edward the 1. for indirect
recoveries, or Judgments obtained by a malicious surprise, falsehood or
non-Summons, as the ensuing Writ will evidence.

Rex vic. Salutem praecipimus tibi quod habeas coram Justitiariis nostris, etc,
talem petentem, Bracton lib. 5.135.
scilicet ad audiend. Judicium suum and considerationem. Curiae nostre de hoc
quod ipse per malitiam and manifestam falsitatem fecit disseysiri talem de
tanta Terra cum pertinentiis, etc. Et unde cum ipse B nullam haberet
summonitionem optulit se idem A, versus eum itaqd. terra capta fuit in manum
nostram semel and secundo and per quani defalt idem A terram illam recuperavit
desicut illa defalta nulla fuit ut dic. catalla ipsius B in eadem terra tunc
inventa and ei occasion praed^cta ablata eidem sine dilatione reddi facias and
restitui Praecipimus etiam tihi quoth. habeas coram, etc. ad eundem Terminum A and
B per quos summonitio prima facta fuit and in Curia nostra Testata and
praeterea quatuor illos per quorum visum terra illa capta fuit in manum nostram
and per quos captio illa testificata fuit in Curia nostra, etc. and etiam illos
per quos secunda summonitio facta fuit and testata ad certificandum
Justitiarios nostros de praedictis Summonitionibus and Captionibus. Et habeas
ibi hoc breve Test, etc.

The King to the Sheriff ( talis loci) County or place sends greeting, We
command you, That you have before our Justices, etc. such a Demandant, that is
to say, to hear the Judgment and Order of our Court, in regard that he by
malice and manifest fraud caused such a one (the Tenant to be disseised of so
much Land with the appurtenances etc. whereupon when the said E the Tenant or
Defendant) had no Summons the said A (the Plaintiff or Demandant) did so
prosecute that Action, that the Land was taken into our hands, a first and
second time, by which default the said A recovered the Land, whereas there was
no default as was alleged, and took the Goods and Chattels of the said B then
found upon the Land, and taken from him by that means, We command you that
without delay you cause the same to be rendered and restored unto him, that you
also have before our Justices at the same time A and B, by whom the first
Summons was made and certified into our Court, etc. and likewise those by whom
the second Summons was made, whereby our said Justices may of the aforesaid
Summons and Captions be certified, and have you there this Writ, Witness, etc.
Or that which King Richard the Second did in Parliament, in the fifteenth year
of his Reign, inflict upon Sir Rot. Par. 15. R. 2. m. 18.
William Bryan, for procuring a Bull of the Pope to be directed unto the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, to excommunicate some that had broken his
house and carried away his Writings by committing him prisoner to the Tower of
London, that fact and doing of his, being by the Lords in Parliament, adjudged
to be prejudicial to the King, and in Derogation of his Laws, such and the like
artifices and devices, being so much disliked by the Commons in Parliament, in
the 39th. year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth, as they complained by
their Petition to the King and Lords, that Petitiones Parl. 39 H. 6. n. 9.
Walter Clerk one of their Members, a Burges for the Town of Chippenham in
the County of Wilts, had been outlawed and put in Prison, and prayed that by
the assent of the King and Lords he might be released, and their Member set at
Liberty.

Or that which King Henry the eighth did in the Case of Trewynnard* a Burgess
of Parliament Dier. Pasch. 28 and 29 H. 8. Sect. 18*
imprisoned upon an Utlary after Judgment, in delivering him by his Writ of
Privilege, which upon an Action afterward brought against the Executors of
the Sheriff, and a Demurrer was resolved by the Judges to be legal.

And therefore Philip late Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain of
his late Majesty's Household should not be blamed, for causing in the year of
our Lord one thousand six hundred thirty and seven, one Isaac Walter to be
taken into custody, as has been before mentioned for a contrivance not to
trouble himself to ask leave to arrest Henry Hodsell one of the Kings Servants,
by suing him to the Utlary, and endeavoring by that artifice and way of rigor
and extremity to do what he pleased with his Goods and Estate, without
arresting his person, or infringing of that part of his Privilege, which being
a Correlate to the King becomes to be his concernment as well as a concernment
of any of his Servants which shall be arrested or imprisoned without leave or
license first, as aforesaid to be demanded, for it is the K. Privilege, and a
part of his Regality and Honor, that his Servants should not be arrested or
taken from his Service without a license first procured: And it was therefore
no indigested or unwarranted opinion of Bracton, when putting the Case where a
Laick has consented to a Trial before a Judge Ecclesiastical, or in foro
vetito in a Court, where he should not, of matters quae pertinent ad Bracton,
lib. 5. de Exceptionibus Tract. 5. ca. 2. and 7. ca. 2. and 16. Sect. 2.
Coronam and dignitatem Regiam, which appertained to the Kings Crown and
Dignity, he concludes, That poterit enim quis renuntiare iis quae pro se
introducta sunt sed tamen non in praejudicium aliorum sicut in praejudicium
Regiae Dignitatis quia injuste non trahitur ad alienum forum ex quo renuntiando
privilegio suo hoc voluit injuste tamen propter privilegium Regis, That any man
may renounce those things which were granted in his favor, but not to the
prejudice of another, because he cannot be said to have been unjustly drawn to
appear in another Court or Jurisdiction, when he did waive or forsake his own
privilege, yet he did it unjustly in regard of the Kings Privilege, Et imponi
non potest necessitas Regi quod suam Jurisdictionem amittet, and the King is
not to be necessitated or imposed upon to loose his Jurisdiction, which will
appear to be consonant to the wisdom of many other Nations, the rule of the
Civil Law being, that a Privilege cannot be renounced or disclaimed in
praejudicium reservantis sibi Jus in Privilegio, to the prejudice of him that
reserved a right in that privilege, videtur enim inter parts ultro Ex Doctr.
Barchol. in l. 1. super de judict. Bald. in l. si convenerit 2. lect. de
Juredict. cum Jud. l sicut (...) de act. and oblig.
Citroque obligatio contracta quo fit ut unus consensu tantum distrahi non
potest, for there is such an Obligation or contract betwixt the parties on both
sides, as with the consent only of one of the parties it cannot be discharged
suc^ deceitful Contrivances to defeat the King of his Regalities and
Privileges, and bereave him of the attendance of his Servants, by arresting
and imprisoning them, whether he will or no, and if they cannot do it one way,
to compass and do it by another, upon an impulse only of some over fierce,
malicious or uncivil Creditors or Complanants will or haughty humor, to
prejudice or abstruct their Sovereigns affairs or service, when they knew a
more easy and mannerly way to compass their pretended rights by petitioning
for a leav or license to take their course at Law against them, if in the mean
time they were not satisfied, and do by so do^ng, make themselves guilty of a
greater contempt and more immediately to the King, then any pretended contempts
of the Kings Servants in not appearing, whilst they are busied in his service
to the Writs or Process of his Courts of Justice for which they would arrest or
Outlaw them, may very well require the care which King Edward the third did
take to secure his Servants from damage by their not appearing to any Process
or Summons in his Courts of Justice, Register of Writs 19. a.
whilst they were in his Service, by his Writ under his Great-Seal of England,
in these words, Rex Justitiariis suis de Banco Salutem. Sciatis quod A fuit in
Servitio nostro per praeceptum nostrum die Lunae in Crastino Quindenae Paschae
prox praeterito. Ita quod eo die interesse non potuit loquelae quae est coram
vobis per breve nostrum inter B, petentem and praedictum A, tenentem de uno
Messuagio cum pertinentiis in N, unde idem A ( versus praedictum B inde vocavit
ad warrantum, etc. ut dicitur and ideo vobis mandamus quod praedictus A,
propter absentiam suam ad diem illum non ponatur in defaltam nec aliquo sit
perdens, quia idem il^um quoad hoc VVarrantizamus, etc. The King to h^s
Justices of the Bench or Common Pleas, sends greeting, Know ye that A was in
our service by Our Command, upon Monday being the morrow after Quindena Paschae
(or fifteen days after Easter) last past; So that he could not that day appear
in the Action, which was depending before you by Our Writ, betwixt B Demandant
against the aforesaid being Tenant of one Message, with the appurtenances in
N, wherein the said A vouched C (to warranty against B as is said, and
therefore we command you, that no default be entered against the said A in
regard of his absence, that day, and that he receive no damage therein, because
we do, as to that, warrant him which seems to be no Novel Writ, or but once or
seldom made, when the Rule of the Register, is, that the like Writ may be sent
to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, the Bishop of Durham within his Liberty of
Durham, the Justices of Assise, or to a Sheriff, etc. in these words, Sciatis
quod A fuit in servitio nostro per praeceptum nostrum die Jovis in Octabis
Sancti Hillarii and die Lunae in Crastino Animarum proximis praeteritis, which
may seem to be upon some King's Bench Writ or Process, where they do now use to
make them retornable upon certain days of a retorn of Writs, or if they were
upon Writs or Process of the Court of Common Pleas, where the retorns are
commonly not upon a certain day of a week, these days appointed, and past,
might probably be some Courts or Husting days upon an Exigent in order to an
Vtlary, or if not out of either of those Courts upon some day of appearance
before some Judges of Assise, but out of what Court soever, the Writs or
Process were issued, it appears there were some defaults recorded or entered and
were notwithstanding to be superseded, or not to be to the prejudice of the
Kings Servant or service; there being likewise subjoyned a Rule in the Register
quod breve de VVarrantia de servitio Domini Regis potest fieri pro petente
sicut pro tenente and factum fuit Anno quarto decimo Edwardi Regis Tertii, that
such a Writ of Warranty by reason of the Kings service, may be made as well for
the Demandant as the Tenant, and that the like was done in the fourteenth year
of the reign of that King.

So as such or the like proceedings against any of the Kings Servants, whereby
to bereave them of their just Privileges, may deserve the Cheque and Comptrol
of the Protector of our Liberties, and his care and vigilance to vindicate the
just Rights and privileges of himself and his Servants, which being to be as
dear unto him, and of a greater concernment, then the Privileges of the
University of Oxford, which were granted and confirmed by diverse of his Royal
Progenitors Rot. Pat. 18 E. 3. Part. 2 m. 31. Intus
and Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England, may persuade those Invaders of
his Royal Rights in the Privileges of his Servants, to esteem it no severity
or injustice in our Gracious Sovereign, to say and resolve as King Edward the
third, did in the Case of the Privileges of the University of Oxford
endeavored to be undermined and subverted, that he would have them to be
inviolably observed and that he would impugnatores eorundem debite, cohercerc,
the violators thereof duly restrain and punish, and in another Case concerning
Suits or Actions unduly brought in the Courts Ecclesiastical, declare, as that
King did in these words, ad jura nostra ne depereant seu per aliquorum
usurpationes indebitas, aliqualiter subtrah^ntur Rot. Pat. 26 E. 3. m. in Dorso.
quatenus just poterimus manutenendo subtractaque and occupata si quae fuerunt
ad Statum debitum revocand. nec non ad impugnatores eorund. Jurium refrenand,
and pro ut convenit juxta eorum demerita puniend. eo Studiosius nos decet
operam adhibere and solicitius extendere manum nostram quo ad hoc Juramenti
vinculo teneri dinoscimur and astringi pluresque conspicimus Indies Jura illa
pro viribus impugnare, least that our Rights may not be lost or diminished, or
by any undue usurpations in any wise subtracted, and to the end we may revoke
or resume them, and likewise punish the impugners thereof, as it behooves us
according to their demerits, and are the more carefully to use our endeavors
therein, to which we are by the Bond of our Oath obliged, in regard we
understand those our Rights, to be more and more opposed, notwithstanding that
which to those, who will look no further into it, may seem but not prove to be
an Objection, that an Exigent being awarded in the Court of Common Pleas
against one R. C. in Easter Term, in the seventh year of the Reign of King
Henry the 8th. in the County of Surrey, the said R C, as it is mentioned in
Rastalls Book of Entries, did the 13th. In veteri libro Intrat. tit. Exigent
216 Sect. 8.
day of June then next following, being the first County Court day, appear and
deliver to the Sheriff the Kings Protection under the Great Seal of England,
wherein he styled him his Servant, and one of the Grooms of his outward
Chamber, took him and his Estate into his Salva guardia, safeguard and
protection for one year next ensuing the 16th day of September then last past,
and prohibited the outlawing or molesting of him, whereupon the Sheriff
forbearing to proceed; and at the retorn of the Exigent, which was A die Sancti
Michael is in unum mensem. a month after Michaelmas, retorning and reciting
the Tenor of the Protection, and concluding, Ideo ad ulterius Executionem
ejusdem brevis de Exigi fac nihil Actum est, that therefore nothing more was
done in the execution of the Writ of Exigent the Court, Quia praedictus
Vicecomes executionem dicti brevis de Exigend. non fecit sed de executione
ejusdem pretextu brevis alterius supersederit prout per retornum ejusdem
vicecomitis constat, in regard that the Sheriff did by color or pretext of the
said other Writ (the Kings Protection) supersede the said Writ of Exigent, as
appeared by the retorn of the said Sheriff, amerced the Sheriff in forty
shillings, and ordered that a new Exigent (the retorn of the former being
expired) should be awarded against him retornable, Pascha, 7 H. 8. rot. 66.
A die Paschae in unum mensem, a month after Easter, for upon view of the
Record, it appears, that the date of the Kings Protection was the sixth day
of February in the sixth year of the Reign of that King, and to endure for a
year from the 16th. day of September next before the date thereof, and that the
said R. C. being in the Exigent, whereunto he appeared, and the Writs of Capias
alias and Pluries leading thereunto, named Richard Camden of the Town of
Westminster in the County of Midlesex, Fishmonger, otherwise called Richard
Camden of the Town of Westminster Fishmonger, the Action being an Action of
Debt for 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. at the Suit of William Isack, Alderman, and Draper of
London, the King also mentioning him immediately after the Title of his
Servant, and one of the Grooms of his Chamber, to be otherwise called Richard
Camden late of London Fishmonger: It is very probable, that he had been only
sworn one of the Grooms of the Kings Chamber Extraordinary, and evident enough,
That the Sheriff was justly amerced for taking upon him to supersede the said
Exigent, as if he had been a Judge, when he was but a ministerial Officer, and
was to have attended the Judges allowance or disallowance thereof, who might
well afterward award an Exigent de novo to be made against him, when the
Protection was expired, and if it had not been expired were not to take notice
of it from the Sheriff, but from the Writ of Protection it self, when it should
have been brought and delivered unto them; as it was adjudged in the 38th year
of the Reign of King Henry the 6th where 38 H. 6.23. Rolls Reports tit.
Protection.
a Sheriff was fined for delivering a prisoner out of his Custody by the Kings
Writ of Protection which should first have been brought to the Judges, and
allowed by them.

And might besides have been well disallowed, by the Sages of the Law in the
said 7th year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th for variance betwixt the
Addition of the Defendant, in the Exigent and Writ of Protection, as the like
had been 19 H. 6.48. Et Rolls Reports tit. Protection.
done in the 19th year of the Reign of King Henry the 6th.

And if he had been the Kings Servant in Ordinary might have been as legally
granted unto him, to revoke and supersede an Utlary unduly Br. tit. Privilege
10 E. 4*4.
prosecuted, as the Judges of the Court of King's Bench, or Common Pleas, Br.
tit. Vtlary 4 H. 4. and 4 H. 5.75 and 77.1 H. 7.68 Br. 5 E. 4. tit. offic. del.
Court
have reversed or stayed Utlaries by reason of the Defendants imprisonment,
sickness of malady, hindering an appearance to an Exigent, or as the Judges of
the Court of King's Bench, in the 5th year of the Reign of King Edward the 4th
did resolve, that they themselves might ex officio by Office of Court do it, in
case wherein an Indictment was insufficient or an Exigent was awarded, where it
ought not, or as the Judges did in the 10th 10 E 4.4. Brook tit. privilege. 40.
year of the Reign of that King, in allowing upon a Traverse and Issue joined
upon an Exigent in an Action of Trespass, the privilege of a Filacers
Horsekeeper, travailing with his Master to London, and bringing back his
Horses, or as the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, in the 5th year of the
Reign of King Henry the 8th, In veteri libro intras tit. Error and Trin. 5 H.
8. rot. 3.
did by his authority supersede an Exigent by a Protection allowed, by reason
of serivce in War or as the Court of Chancery did in the 8th year of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, by her Writ, supersede and stay 2 Writs of Exigent in the
Court of Common Pleas at the Suit of two several persons against Robert Webb,
one of the Cursitors of the Court of Chancery by reason of his Office and
Attendance in that Court, which Writ of Privilege and Supersedeas was allowed
by the Judges of that Court, and an entry made upon the Roll, where the Plea of
his Privilege was entered in these words, Ideo consideratum est quod praedictus
Robertus libertatibus and privilegis praedictis gaudeat. Ac separalia brevia
praedicta ei conceduntur, therefore it is Innovo libro Intras tit. Error.
ordered, that the said Robert VVebbe shall enjoy his Liberties and
Privileges, and that several Writs, as a foresaid be granted unto him,
probably Writs of Supersedeas to the Sheriffs of London, unto whom the Writs of
Exigent had been before sent and directed; or as the Court of Chancery has
done, in the ninth year of the Reign of King James, Moyles entries 83. Mich. 9
Jac. Regis rot. 705.
in the Case of Valentine Saunders Esquire, one of the Six Clerks of that
Court, require by the Kings Writs the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, to
surcease the prosecution of the said Valentine Saunders to the Utlary; or might
as well defend their Regal Rights in the case of their Servants in Ordinary by a
Writ de Rege inconsulto, Register of Writs, 220.
commanding, as in some other cases of their concernments, not to proceed
against them, until their pleasure be further signified, or assert and command
the Liberties and Privileges of their Servants, Ibid. 262.
by Writs de liberate allocanda, as well as for Liberties to be allowed unto
Citizens or Burgers, which contrary to their Liberties were impleaded.

But too many of the Kings Servants Creditors (for all are not so uncivil) who
would be glad to find a way, or some color, or pretense of Law rudely to treat
the Rights of the King* and his Servants, would willingly underprop that their
humor and design with an objection, that our Kings have conveyed their Justice
unto their established Courts of Justice at Westminster, and are not to
contradict alter or suspend any thing, which they do in his name therein.

And that if any of the Kings Servants in Ordinary, be arrested without leave,
the King or the great Officers of his Household, may not punish those that do
offend therein, and that being so Arrested they are so in the Custody of the
Law as they ought not to be released, until they do appear. or give Bayl to
appear and answer the Action.

CAP. VI.
That the Kings established and delegated Courts of Justice, to administer
Justice to his People, are not to be any bar or hinderance to his Servants in
Ordinary, in their aforesaid ancient, just and legal Privileges and Rights, or
that the Messengers of his Majesty's Chamber, may not be sent to summon or
detein in custody the Offenders therein, or that any of his servants being
arrested without license, are so in the custody of the Law, as they cannot
before appearance or bayl to the Action be delivered.

WHich will not at all advantage their hopes or purposes, if they shall
besides, what has been already proved as well, as alleged, give Admittance
unto a more weighed consideration, Bart. l. cum furiosus F. de Jud.
that delegatio ad causas non intelligitur ad futuras, a Commission or
Authority entrusted for some special, or determinate matters, is not to be
understood to extend unto all that in the administration of Justice may
afterward happen, that in the Court of Exchequer, the Barons are and should be
the special Ministers, and Supervisors of the Kings Revenue, subject to his
Legal Mandates and disposing power, that the Court of Common Pleas, being a
Court erected, and continued by our Kings for the dispatch of Justice, and ease
of their Subjects and People in Common Pleas or Actions, wherein the King his
Crown and Dignity are not immediately concerned, do only hold Pleas and have
Jurisdiction and Cognizance, ratione Mandati by reason of the Kings Original
Writs, Command or Commission, issuing almost in every Action from himself out
of his High Court of Chancery, that the Justices of the King's Bench, are, ad
placita coram Rege tenenda assignati, assigned as coadjutors to the King, to
hear and determine Pleas supposed by Law to be heard before himself in that
Court, and by the ancient style and title of their Records, said to be, de
consilio Regis, of the Kings Council, and that in the High Court of Chancery,
the King, by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
as his Substitute or Deputy, as some of our Judges in the 9th year of the Reign
of King James, Coke 9. relat. Sir George Reynells Case. Vide Book of Oaths.
have believed them to be in that supereminent and superintendant Court of and
over all his other Courts of Justice, commands his Sheriffs (who are sworn to
execute his Writs, and not to prejudice his Rights) to execute their Writs
directed unto them in his Name and under his Seal, does provide and give
remedies in all emergencies of Law and Justice, where the Supreme and Legal
Authority, is implored or prayed in aid or assistance. And that where a
Delegated Power or Jurisdiction is granted by the King (as not only the Laws
of many other Nations, but our Bracton and Fleta, men not meanly learned in the
ancient Laws and Customs of England, as well as in the civil Laws have
adjudged) he does not exuere sede potestate, so grant away that Jurisdiction as
to exclude himself from all power, and not be able upon just and legal
Occasions to resume it, or intermeddle in some part thereof, when a Lord of a
Manor, though he has by a Patent or Commission granted to his Steward for
life, the power or jurisdictions of keeping his Courts, assessing of Fines and
the like matters appurtenant thereunto is not debarred, when a just occasion
shall either necessitate, or invite him thereunto from his personal assessing of
Fines, or other Acts belonging unto the Court, or that power and authority,
which he should have over his Tenants, and that where the Liberty of a Court
Baron appurtenant to the Grant of a Manor with the jurisdiction of Sake or
Soke, holding of Pleas, and punishment of Offenders is granted by the King, or
allowed to any man and his heirs by Custom or Prescription, the King is not
debarred upon any grievance or complaint of any Tenant of the Manor, to command
Justice to be done unto him, by his Writs of Right, Close or Patent, and where
a Leet being a more large or greater Jurisdiction has been granted to a man
and his heirs to seize and grant it to another for not rightly observing the
order of Law therein, as for not erecting a Pillory, making of a Clerk of the
Market, and the like or altogether disusing of it, and where liberties of
retorna Brevum, executing and returning Writs in a certain Precinct or Liberty,
have been granted to a man and his Heirs, common practice and course of Law and
its Process may inform us, that the King has notwithstanding such a power and
superintendency of Justice inherent in him, over all the Courts of Justice,
high or low in the Kingdom, as upon the Sheriffs retorn quod mandavit Ballivo
libertatis, that he made his Warrant to the Bailiff of such a Liberty to arrest
such a Defendant, and that the Bailiff nullam sibi dedit responsionem, had made
him no retorn nor answer, he may thereupon by his Justices, cause a Writ to be
made to the Sheriff, commanding him, quod non omittat propter aliquam
libertatem Ballivi libertatis, etc. quin capiat, that he do not omit to enter
into the said Bailiffs liberty, and arrest the Defendant, and may also when a
Defendant is outlawed, cause at the instance of the Plaintiff, a Capias
Vtlegat. Writ to be made to take and arrest the utlawed person, with a non
omittas propter aliquam libertatem, power and authority to enter into any
Liberty under the name of his Attorney General as an Officer entrusted with the
making of the said Writs of Capias Vtlegatum, and that Offices either granted
by the King for term of Life, or in Fee or Fee-Tayle are forfeitable by a
Misuser or non user, by not executing that part of the Kings Justice committed
to the care and trust of the Officers thereof.

Mich. 34 E. 1. incipien. rot. 1^3 coram Rege and Consilio videlicet in Banco
Regis.
And so necessary was the Kings Supreme Authority heretofore esteemed to be in
the execution and administration of Justice as in the Case between the Prior of
Durham and the Bishop of Durham, in the 34th year of the Reign of King Edward
the first, where amongst other things an information was brought in the
King's Bench, against the Bishop, for that he had imprisoned the Kings Officers
or Messengers; for bringing Writs into his Liberty, to the prejudice as he
thought thereof, and that the Bishop had said that nullam deliberationem de
eisdem faceret, sed dixit quod ceteros per ipsos castigaret ne de cetero
literas Domini Regis infra Episcopatum suum portarent in Lesionem Episc^patus
ejusdem, he would not release them but would chastise them or any other, which
hereafter should bring any of the Kings Letters (or Writs within his
Bishopric, to the prejudice of the Liberties thereof. And in the entering up
and giving the Judgment upon that Information and Plea, says the Record, Quia
idem Episcopus cum libertatem praedictam a Corona exeuntem and Dependentem
habeat per factum Regis in hoc minister Domini Regis est ad ea quae ad Regale
pertinent infra eandem libertatem loco ipsius Regis modo debito conservanda and
exequenda. Ita quod omnibus and singulis ibidem justitiam exhibere, and ipsi
Regi ut Domino suo and mandatis parere debeat prout tenetur licet proficua and
expletia inde provenientia ad usum proprium per factum praedictum percipiatur,
in regard that when the Bishop had the liberty aforesaid by the Kings Grant or
Charter from the Crown and depending thereupon, he is in that as a Servant or
Minister of the Kings, concerning those things which do belong unto the Kings
Regality, within the Liberty aforesaid, to execute and preserve it in a due
manner for, and on the behalf of the King; so as there he is bound to do
Justice to all men, and to obey the King and his Commands, as his Lord and
Sovereign, although he do by the Kings Grant or Charter, take and receive the
profit arising and coming thereby.

Wherein the Judges and Sages of the Law, as in those Ancient Times they did
not unfrequently in matters of great concernment, have given us the reason of
their Judgment in these words, Cum potestas Regia per totum Regnum tam infra
libertates praedictas quam extra se extendant videtur Curiae, and toti Consilio
Domini Regis quod hujusmodi imprisonamenta facta de hiis qui capti fuerunt
occasion quod brevia Domini Regis infra libertatem praedictam tulerint simul
cum advocatione and acceptatione facti. Et etiam dictis quae idem Episcopus
dixit de Castigatione illorum qui brevia Regis extunc infra libertatem suam
port^rent manifest perpetrata fuerunt, when as the power and authority of the
King, does extend it self through all the Kingdom, as well within Liberties as
without, it seemed to the Court and all the Kings Counsel, that such
imprisonments made of those which brought the Kings Writs within the Liberty
aforesaid, the Bishops justifying and avowing of the Fact and the Words which
the Bishop said, That he would punish all such as should bring any Writs to be
executed in his Liberty, were plainly proved, Et propterea ad inobedientiam and
exhaereditationem Coronae and ad diminutionem Dominii and potestatis Regalis,
Ideo consideratum est quod idem Episcopus libertatem praedictam cujus occasion
temerariam sibi assumpsit audacim praedicta gravamina injurias and excessus
praedictos perpetrandi and dicendi toto tempore suo amittat Cum in eo quo quis
deliquit sit de Jure puniendus. Et eadem libertas Capiatur in manus Domini
Regis Et Nih^lominus corpus praedicti Episcopi capiatur, Wherefore, because it
tended to disobedience and a disherison of the Crown and diminution of the
Kings Power and Authority, It was adjudged, that the Bishop for his rash
presumption and boldness, and for committing the aforesaid wrongs and injuries,
should forfeit his Liberty aforesaid, for that every man is to be punished
according to the nature of his offense: And it was ordered, That the Liberty
should be seized and taken into the Kings hands, and that the Body of the
Bishop notwithstanding should be taken into Custody.

For the Kings Justice, to which his Coronation Oath is annexed, is inseparable
from his Person, and so fixed to his Diadem and Regal Authority, as it is not
to be absolutely or any more then conditionally deputed and entrusted to any
other, or otherwise then with a reserve of the last Appeal, and his
Superiority, and therefore King Edward the first, in some of his Writs,
Commissions or Precepts, says, that he (but not his Judges) was De^itor
Justitiae, so a Debtor to Justice, Register of Writs 7, 15, 23, 34* b. and 36.
b. 37 and 39 b.
as not to deny it to any of his People complaining of the want of it, and ad
nos pertinet, the care thereof belongs to the King, and to that end appointed
his high Court of Chancery, and his Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, and required all the Officers and Clerks of that Court, to
take care that pro defectu Justitiae nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine Remedio,
13 E. 1. ea* 24.
no man for want of Justice do go away from the Chancery destitute of remedy;
from whence also lies an Appeal to the King himself in Parliament: and in the
Case of Sir William Thorpe Chief Justice of England, in the 24th year of the
Reign of King Edward^ the third, being put out of his place for Bribery and
Extortion, it was in the Sentence or Judgment given against him, said that
Sacramentum Domini Regis quod erga Populum habuit custodiendum ^regit
maliciose, Coke 3 part Institutes 223 and to. Pat. 24 E. 3. part. 3. m. 24. in
Dorso.
false and Rebelliter quantum, in ipso fuit, he had falsely, maliciously and
traitorously, as much as in him lay broke or violated the Kings Coronation
Oath, which demonstrates, that although he had at the same time violated his
own Oath made unto the King, when he was admitted into his Office or Place, yet
his fault was the greater in breaking the Kings Oath, and that part of his
Justice with which he was trusted.

For the Grants of the Judges Places by the King durante been placito, or
quamdiu se been gesserint, during the Kings pleasure, or as long as they do well
behave themselves, the Kings Commissions of Oyer and Terminer. Et Gaola
deliberanda, of Gaol Delivery, and to hear and determine Causes in their
Circuits, their Oaths, (besides their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
taken at their admittance into their Places) prescribed and directed in the
18th year of the reign of King Edward the third, and administered by the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keepers of the Great Seal of England, for the time being,
18 E. y. 20 E. 3* ca. 1.
That they the King and his People in the Office of Justice, shall not counsel
or assent to any thing that may turn unto his damage, shall take no Fee or
Robes of any but the King himself, nor execute any Letters from him contrary to
the Law, but certify him and his Council thereof, and shall procure the profit
of the King and his Crown in all things, that they may reasonably do the same,
and in an Act of Parliament, made in the 20th year of the Reign of that King,
they are expressly mentioned to be, 20 E. ca. 1.
Deputed by the King to do Law and Right according to the usage of the Realm,
the Kings Writs directed unto them, stiling them no otherwise then Justitiariis
suis, and those Courts the Kings Courts, the acknowledgment of the Judges
themselves, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Andersons Reports sect. 201. in
Cavendishes case, Cokes 3 part* Inst^stutes ca. 54. tit. Praemisnire.
and their readiness to obey all her lawful commands, in the Case of Cavendish,
and that of Sir Edward Coke, that the Judges are of the Kings Council for
proceedings in course of Justice their assisting the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, upon request or sending for some of them
out of their own Courts into the Chancery, 3 and 4 Eliz. 22.
their attending upon the King in his House of Peers in Parliament, to assist
and advise in matters of Law there debated, when required, but not with any
power of Vote or decisive Judgment, their often meetings out of their Courts
and altogether, upon any Dier Mich. 34 Eliz. 25 Jenkins Reports of Cases
referred to all the Judges Airs contoa Allanson in 3 Car. 1. and ubique inter
legum Authors.
of the Kings commands, or references in causes difficult by Petition or Appeal
to the King, and their Opinions humbly certified thereupon, and attending upon
the King and his Council upon matters doubtful, wherein the aid and advice of
the Regal Authority was required, and whether their Patents or Commissions be
durante been placito, or quam diu se been gesserint, during the Kings pleasure,
or as long as they shall well behave themselves, are void, per demise le Roy,
by the death of the King that granted their Patents or Commissions, and to be
renewed at the pleasure of his Successor, may abundantly evidence that they may
not claim or justly be believed to be independent Sovereign, absolute or
without an Appeal to their King and Sovereign who grants amongst many other
Offices in the said Courts, the Office and Place of Warden of the Fleet by the
Name of the Keeper of the Kings Palace at Westminster, aad the Office thereby
to attend by him or his Deputy, the Courts of Chancery, Common Pleas and
Exchequer, and keep in safe Custody the Prisoners committed by them, when all
the Writs and Process of those Courts, are issued under his Name and Seal, and
all but the Chancery, (which are honored by his own Test) are under the
several Testes or Subscriptions, as the Law intends of the Chief Justices or
Judges thereof together with the Exemplifications of Fines, Recoveries,
Verdicts and other Records in the Court of Common Pleas, and the Court of
King's Bench, and in their several and distinct Jurisdictions, are subjected
unto and dependant upon the Regal Authority, Crown and Dignity.

And cannot be otherwise understood to be, when our Kings have sometimes fined
Judges for Extortion or Bribery as King Edward the first, did Sir Ralph de
Hengham, and diverse other Judges in the 16th year of his Reign, and when
Samuel Daniel History of England.
the Judges in the said Courts, cannot ex officio, pardon or discharge, a fine
or punishment imposed or inflicted by them upon Offenders, nor without his Writ
of Error, amend or correct Errors, committed by themselves after the Term
ended, wherein they were committed, and are if they exceed their bounds subject
by his Writ and punishment of Praemunire to a forfeiture of all their Lands,
Goods and Estate, and of their Lands in Fee-Simple or for Life, and to have
their Bodies imprisoned at the will of the King and to be out of his
Protection, and when he as he pleases commands the Rolls and Records of the
Courts of Chancery, King's Bench and Common Pleas, to be brought into his
Treasury, or the Tower of London for safety, adjourneth those Courts, upon
occasion of Pestilence or other reason of State, or War, as King Edward the
first, did to York, where they continued for some years after, and that the
Judges are by Office of Court to stay and surcease in many things, where they
do perceive the King to be concerned either in point of profit or other Brook
tit. Offiice del. Court 25 H. 25, 28.
concernment, until they have advised with the Kings Sergeants, or Council
learned in the Law:: when the Writs of Prohibition frequently granted by the
Court of Common Pleas or King's Bench in his name, do signify, that he has
haute Justice, power and authority over those, and the inferior Courts of
Justice, and by his Supreme Authority, does by his Legal Rescripts and Mandates
issuing out of his High Court of Chancery upon any defects in his Subordinate
Courts, for want of power and authority consonant or agreeable to the rules of
right reason and equity, moderate the rigors of his Laws, correct Errors, and
provide fitting remedies for all manner of Contingencies or Disorders,
happening in the course execution or manage of his Laws or Justice, testified
by his Injunctions out of the Chancery, to stay the rigors and proceedings in
the Courts of Common Law, Commissions of Trail Baston more rightly ottroy le
Baston, granted by King Edward the first, to inquire of and punish
misdemeanors, riots, extortions, etc. which the Courts of Justice, then in
being, had cognizance of, and might have upon complaint punished and redressed,
and many other Commissions of that kind, made out by that and other of our
Kings, with Commissions of Assise and Association, cum multis aliis, or the
like, the Writs of Rege in consulto not to proceed in matters concerning his
own particular, without his being first consulted* de Attornato Register of
Writs 8 220 Ibidem 170 172. Register of Writs 217 b. 229 b.
languidi recipiendo, to admit an Attorney for one that is sick, Writs of
A^^aint, against Jurors falsely swearing in their Verdicts, Writs de A^sisa
continuanda* to continue the pr^^^^dings upon an Assise, Audita querela, to
relieve one that is oppressed by some Judgment, Statute or Recognisance,
Register of Writs 169 170.
Writs de Certiora^i de ten^re Indictamenti* to be certified of the Tenor of an
Indictment, and de Vtlagaria of an Utlary, Ibidem 4.
de tenore pedis Finis, of the Tenor of the Foot of a Fine, mittendo tenorem
Register of Writs 221 b.
Assise in Ev^^entiam, to send the Tenor of a Writ of Assise into the Chancery
to be from thence transmitted by a Copy for Evidence into the Court of
Exchequer, Writs quod Justitiarii procedant ad captionem Assise, impowring the
Justices of Assise to proceed in the taking of an Assise and his Commissions
frequently granted in some special cases, as Dedimus potestatem, impowring the
Judges or others to take the acknowledgements of Fines, with many other kinds
of Commissions, a posse Comitatus ad vim Laicam amovendam, to remove a force,
where a Parson or Minister is to be inducted into a Church or Benefice, and
Commissions granted ob lites dirimendas, to compose contentious suites of Law,
where the poverty of one of the parties is not able to endure them; and the
granting of a privilege by some of our ancient Kings to the Bishop and
Citizens of new Sarum or Salisbury, that the Judges of Assize or Itinerants
should in their circuits hold the Pleas of the Crown at that Town or City which
King Edward the first did 9 E. 1 placit de Jur. and Assise coram Solamone de
Roff. and sociis suis Justic. Itinerant. rot; 15
by his Writ or Mandates allow or cause to be observed; and many more which
might be here instanced, which with the Laws and practice thereof, and the
reasonable customs of England do every where and abundantly evidence, that the
King does not entrust his Courts of Justice, or the Judges thereof with all his
Regal power, and all that with which he is himself invested in his politic
capacity, or has so totally conveyed it unto them, as to make Register of
^ri^s 59.
them thereby the only dispensers of his justice, but that the appeal or
dernier ressort from all his Courts of Justice, is and resides in the King,
being the ultimate supreme Magistrate, as from the inferior Courts of Justice
in the Counties or Cities, to the Superior Courts of Justice at
Westminster Hall, from the Court of Common Pleas by Writ of Error to the Court
Cromptous Jurisdiction of Courts. 12 Dyer 315.
called the King's Bench, from that Court to the Parliament: And as to some
matters of Law fit to be tried by action at Law, from the Chancery unto the
King's Bench or Courts of Common Pleas, or Exchequer, reserving the equity when
what was done there shall be returned and certified, and even from the
Parliament it self, when Petitions there nepending could not, in regard of
their important affairs, be dispatched to the high Court of Chancery, Elsings
modus tenendi Parlamentum.
and that appeals are made to the King in his high Court of Chancery from the
Admiralty Court, when as the process and proceedings are in the Name and under
the Seal of the Lord Admiral, and from the Prerogative Court of the Archbishop
of Canterbury for proving of Wills, and granting of Administration when the
Process and proceedings are not in the Kings name, but in the name and under
the Seal of that Archbishop.

So as the Gentlemen of the long Robe, who in the Reign of King Charles the
Martyr argued against the Kings Prerogative for the just liberties of the
people of England, in the case of the Habeas Corpora's, when they affirmed the
meaning of the Statute made in the third year of the Reign of King 3 E. 1. cap.
15.
Edward the first, where there was an Exception of such not to be Baylable as
were committed by the command of the King, or of his Justices, to be, that the
Kings command was to be understood of his commands by his Writs or Courts of
justice, might have remembered, that in former times his Authority by word of
mouth, or in things done in his presence (in matters just and legal, not
contradicting the established rules, customs and courses of his Courts of
Justice, and the power and authority wherewith our Kings have entrusted them)
was accounted to be as valid, if not more than any thing done in his Courts of
Justice, witness that notable record and pleading aforesaid betwixt the Prior
and Bishop of Durham in the 34 th. year of the Reign of that, by his own and
his Fathers troubles, largely experienced King Edward the first (which was not
long after the making of that Statute, concerning such as were to be bayled or
not to be bayled) where it was said, and not denied to be Law, quod Ordinatio,
(meaning an award or something acknowledged in the presence of the King) in
praesentia Regis facta and per ipsum Mich. 33 and 34 E. 1. rot. 103. in Banco
Regis.
Regem affirmata majorem vini habere debet quam finis in Curia sua coram
justitiariis suis levatus, that any Ordinance or acknowledgment made in the
Kings presence, and by him affirmed, was to be more credited, and to have a
greater force then a Fine levied before his Justices in his Courts of Justice,
which may be a good Foundation and Warrant, for several agreements and
Covenants made betwixt private persons, and ratified by the King under his
Great Seal of England by inspeximus and confirmations by his allowance and
being witness thereunto as that of Rorger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, with Robert
de Vere Earl of Oxford, for the Honor and Earldome of Oxf^rd, and the great
Estate and Revenue^belonging thereunto, forfeited by the said Earl in taking
part with the Barons against King Henry the third, and many others which might
be instanced, and are plentifully to be found in many Agreements and Covenants
made betwixt Abbots and Priors and their Covents, and diverse of the English
Nobility and great men mentioned in Master Dugdales first and second Tomes or
Parts of his Monasticon Anglicanum. Dugdales 1 and 2 part Monasticon Anglicanum
For it was resolved in Easter Term in the fourth year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, by the then Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, the
Lord Chief Baron and Whiddon Brown and Corbet Justices Carus, the Queens
Sergeant, and Gerrard her Attorney General, upon a question put unto them, by
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, that in case of Piracy or other
the like crimes, the Queen might in the intervals or vacancy of a Lord Keeper
of the Dier 4 Eliz. 33.
Great Seal of England, by a necessity of doing Justice without a Commission
granted unto others to do it, punish such offenders, although the Statute made
in the 28th year of the reign of 28 H. 8. ca. 15.
King Henry the 8th Ca. 15th does direct Piracy to be tried by Commission. And
it was allowed to be Law, in a Case put by King James, Sir Isaac Wake in his
Rex Platonicus.
that where an Affray or Assault was made by any in the Kings presence, the
King himself might commit or command the party offending to prison, which may
surely upon some emergent or particular occasions admit him to a just
intermedling therein, for it cannot be denied, but King Henry the 3 d. has
sometimes sat amongst his Judges or Barons in the Court of Exchequer,
Gregorius Tholos. Syntagm. Juris lib. 47. ca 21. sec. 23
and we may believe those dictates of reason which are to be found in the Civil
Law when it says that, Jus superioritatis jurisdictionis Regis, Cum non liceat
cum ex Officii de praescript comperit d^ praescript. 30. vel 40. Anno.
non potest ab inferioribus dominis jurisdictionem habentes contra Principem,
praescribi quia quae sunt in subjectionis data impraescriptibilia. The right of
Superiority of Jurisdiction cannot by any inferior Jurisdictions be prescribed
against the Prince, for that those things which were granted or given in sign
of subjection are impraescriptible, Posset enim si hoc fieret paulatim, collabi
Imperium and redderentur subditi Acephali, for if that should be suffered, the
Dominion or Empire of Kings and Princes, would by little and little so moulder
and wast away, as the Subjects would be more then Subjects and as men without a
head. Et cum omnes jurisdictiones habeant vim a Regia permissione tanquam radij
a Sole fieri non potest ut remanente jurisdictione non agnoscatur Sol unde
dependet. Bal. in autho actiones de sacr. Eccles. and in proaem. fec. fac. null
r^tione 93. distinct.
And when all Jurisdictions do receive their force and vigor from the Kings
permission, as the Beams or Rays do their Luster from the Sun; it cannot be
but that as long as the Jurisdiction remains, the Sun on which it depends
should be acknowledged. Quomodo etiam poterit quis dicere praevalere
jurisdicttiones concessas a principe, contra anthoritatem principis cum haec
potestas annexa Regio diademati est and innata ei videtur: For how can aany one
affirm that any Jurisdiction granted by the Prince can be used or prevail
against his authority, Greg. Tholosanus Syntagin. Juris lib. 47. ca. 21.24.
when he may at his pleasure for just and legal Causes alter, diminish, or
revoke them; it being a power innate and annexed to his Royal Diadem* Says
that Civilis prudentia, those excellent rules of government which are to be
found in the Cesarean or Civil Law. And there can be no power says a late
learned Author where there is not a power to exercise it, for in France says
the learned Charles, Loyseau le dernier ressort de Justice, est tellement un
droict de Soverainete que mesme en Commun language est appelle Soverainete,
traicte des Seigneuries ca. 3.58.
the last resort or appeal for Justice is so much esteemed to be a right of
Sovereignty, Cod. lib. 8. Tit. 14.
as in common or vulgar speech it is called Sovereignty. And where the King is
by our Laws not denied to be the Lex viva and Lex loquens, the living and
speaking Law, the Civil Law says, Rex solus judicat de causa a jure non
diffinita, the King is the only Judge in such Causes where the Law has not
already defined or determined them: Brodon lib. 2. de acquire Domino ca. 16.3.
And Bracton has these words, in dubiis and obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio
duos contineat intellectus Domini Regis erit expectanda Interpretatio and
voluntas cum eius sit Interpretare cujus est condere, in matters doubtful and
obscure, or if any word shall contein or seem to bear a double signification,
the Kings will and Interpretation is to be attended when as he that makes a Law
is and ought to be the fittest Interpreter, and Britton says, Britton 1.
that the Kings Jurisdiction is superior to all the Jurisdictions of the Realm,
and according to Bracton is Author juris unde jura nascuntur, the Author of the
Law, Bracton lib. 2.
and from him all Laws are derived, Omnes sub eo and ipse, sub nullo nisi
tantum sub Deo parem autem non habet in Regno suo, quia sic amitteret
praeceptum, idem lib. 1. ca. 8.5.
all his people are subject unto him, and he under none but God only, has none
equal unto him in his Kingdom, for if he had; he would loose his power of
Command or Authority: and in another plaee of his book, ca. 8.9.
repeating that Opinion and well founded Doctrine says. Parem autem habere non
debet, nec multo fortius superiorem maxim in justitia exhibenda, that he ought
not to have an equal, nor which is more any superior, especially in the
Administration of Justice, which made the Judges in the 13 th year of the Reign
of King James, rightly style him the fountain of Justice. Magdalen Coliedge
Case en Cokes 1 Reports 74.


And this dernier ressort or appeal has been so necessary an Assistant to our
Laws and Courts of Justices, as the reverend Judges thereof have not seldom
been constrained to pray in aid of it, and therefore a Marginall ( d) Note in
an old Stathanis Abridgment, has this remarque that in Hillary Term in the
13th year of King Henry the 7th, Cheeseman being under Sheriff of Middlesex,
and having arrested un Cutpurse en le Sale de Westminister, a Cutpurse in
Westminister-Hall, hastement veign un Fog and fut Sergeant Porter, le Roy A
donques le Roy eant Hill. 13 H. 7. en le margent d' un-Stathanis abridgement.
a Westminister and prist le dit Cutpurse del vic en le Sale Sur que le vic lui
complaint al Fineux Chief Justice and mand un des Marschalls ovesque le mace
pour le dit Porter qui don respons quil ne voil vener al request dast des
Tipstaves Sur que le Chief Justice alast al Chanc and monstra le matter and le
Chanc mand soon Sergeant d' Arms pour liu and il respond a liu quil conust lui
pour Sergeant nostre Seigneur le Roy and quil voil aler ouesque lui and donques
il veign and le Chief Justice command le vic de liu arrest quant il vei and
issint il fit and il a lui fit rescous surque le dit Justice alast al Roy and
monstre le matter and le Roy command le dit Fog d' obier le Justice and de
vener a le Court de lui submitter a le ley issint il fit and fut mis a son fine
and troue pleg de fine faciend, whereupon one Fog Sergeant Porter of the King,
the King being then in his House or Palace of Westminister, came hastily and
took away from the Sheriff, being then in the Hall the said Cutpurse, whereof
the Sheriff complaining to Fineux Chief Justice of the Court of Kings-B^nch, he
sent one of the Marshalls with his Tipstaffe for the said Porter, who answered,
that he would not come at the request of any of the Tipstaves, whereupon the
Chief Justice went unto the Chancellor and showed him the matter, and the
Chancellor sending his Sergeant at Arms, for him, he answered him, that he
knew him to be the Kings Sergeant at Arms, and that he would go with him, and
being come, the Chief Justice commanded the Sheriff to arrest him when he saw
him, who did arrest him, but he rescued himself, and thereupon the Chief
Justice went unto the King and showed him the matter and the King commanded the
said Fog to obey the said Justice and to go unto the Court, and submit himself
unto the Law, which he did, and was put to his fine gave sureties to pay it.

Which proofs and arguments, touching the subordination of the Judges or their
Courts of Justice, are not nor ever were intended for the reverend Judges and
Sages of the Law, or the Students, Professors and Practisers thereof, whose
learning and Judgments neither scrupled or needed it, but unto those vulgar and
mechanic busy headed and unquiet part of the People, qui nesciunt se
ignorare, will not own any ignorance, when they are most ignorant, but will be
sure to dislike every thing which they do not understand, because they take
their measures by the shortlines of their vulgar take and incomprehensive
capacities, which makes them to be so restless and unsatisfied in their
mistakings, and so lincked and wedded unto them, and I had not been so large in
clearing that particular (which unto some may seem more then requisite) but
that it may justly be feared that those opinions, or impressions if not
dis^odged and fully convinced, may as those long ago condemned Heresies and
Errors in the Church, did in our late distractions and distempers rise up again
under the pretense of new notions and gain, a kind of Succession too like a
perpetuity.

And therefore every man may without any the Encumbrances of doubts or
controversies, be assured.

CHAP. VII.
That the King or the great Officers of his Household may punish those that do
infringe his servants privileges, and that any of the Kings Servants in
Ordinary being arrested without leave, are not so in the custody of the Law, as
they ought not to be released until they do appear or give Bayl to Appear and
Answer the Action.

37. E. 3. ca. 18. and 38. E. 3.9.
WHen it must or should be acknowledged, that notwithstanding that by the
Statutes made in the 37th and 38th years of the Reign of King Edward the third,
untrue Suggestions made to the King and his Council were prohibited and to be
punished, and that by a Statute made in the 42 d. year of the Reign of that
King no man was to be brought to answer any accusation to the King without
praesentment before Justices or matter of Record, yet matters extraordinary, or
suggestions which had truth or evidence to accompany them, were not by any of
those Acts of Parliament forbidden, and howsoever that by a Statute or Act of
Parliament made in the 17 th year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, the
Kings Privy Council were restrained from intermedling in matters concerning
Freeholds, and the Properties of the Subject which comprehends many of the
matters which may concern any man brought before them, or accused, yet there is
no restraint of Arrests or sending for Delinquents by the Kings Messengers, or
prohibition against the right use of them, or the high and super eminent
authority of the King and the Lords of his Honorable Privy Council in cases to
prevent Duells, and make abortive dangers and inconvenient to the public,
punish Riots, unlawful Assemblies and misdemeanors, beyond the reach and
Authority of Justices of the Peace, and many other emergencies, who may
certainly as legally make use of Messengers or Sergeants at Arms to compel
disobedient and refractory persons to appear before them, as the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, by or under the Kings
authority, does now and has long ago used to do, in cases of contempt of the
Process of that Court after an Attachment with Proclamation and Commission of
Rebellion, or as the Lord Privy Seal, did usually in the Court of Requests,
after the like Process could not apprehend or take the person contemning his
authority, or not appearing before him, for unto what purpose shall that
honorable and venerable Assembly who Sir Edward Coke Cokes 4 Part of the
Institutes, ca* 2.53.
says, are Profitable instruments of the State, and do bear part of the
Soveraign^ cares, and employ their time and endeavors in the Execution of the
Duty of their Oaths and Places, and that great trust incumbent upon them, if
they may not enjoy a coercive Power, which the Judices paedanei, petty
Judicatures, and even the Pye-Powder Courts of the Kingdom do enjoy, or should
make it their business to baffle their own authority, and only send for People
to come unto them when they please, or when they are come before them do what
they please, but should within their Conusance and Jurisdiction, according to a
Maxim and Rule of the Civil Law well allowed and entertained by our
Common Law, Cum aliquid conceditur id quoque concedi videtur sine quo id
efficere non potest, when any Jurisdiction or authority, is granted, that also
which should support and attend it, seems to be granted with it, have as
great a power of coercion to attend their authority as the Parliament, the
greater and more extraordinary Council under the King and Head thereof, is
allowed and all other Councels in all the Kingdoms and Republiques of
Christendom, and are not therefore to be denied a just and competent Power to
attend them in the administration of the affairs or business of the King
entrusted unto them, or to be debarred their inspection into all the affairs of
the Kingdom, concerning the good and welfare of the King and his People, upon
casualties, accidents, and cases extraordinary, reformations of abuses by the
Kings Edicts or Proclamations, and in the deficiency of Laws, in matters or
things not foreseen or provided for by Laws, 39 E. 3.4 and 35. Mich. 40 E.
3.4.34. Lord Chancellor Ellesmere in his arguusent upon the post nati.
which cannot be either so prophetic or comprehensive, as to supply or give a
Remedy to all things, but must leave many things to ragione di Stato, reason of
State, and the cares of our Pater Patriae, Father of his Country and Kingdom
to provide against necessities, otherwise irresistible, which can neither at
all times tarry for the calling of a Parliament, or the suffrages of it, or be
communicated unto the vulgar, especially in unquiet or cloudy times, when our
Peace, the blessing of our Nation, cannot either enjoy her self, or impart her
comforts to the People, without the more then ordinary vigilance of the King
and his Privy Council, where the King himself is very often present,
especially in the absence of that, as ancient as the Reign of King Edward the
third, then and many ages after well regulated Court of Star Chamber, many of
whose Judges were the Kings Privy Council, the King himself being there rarely
or seldom present, and of that necessary Court of the High Commission,
preventing and watching over such abuses or misdemeanors, as might either
scandalize or disturb the peace and good order of holy Church, and such as
served at the Altar.

And certainly that formerly great power and authority which resided in the
Steward or Majordomo of the Kings Household, who as Fleta has recorded it,
enjoyed in the Reign of King Edward the first such an extraordinary power, as
he did vicem gerere, exercise as it were the Office of Deputy to the Lord Chief
Justice of England, whose Office and place until it was by that prudent Prince
restrained and limited to the Authority and Jurisdiction which it now enjoys,
was much more large and extensive than now it is; and that of the Lord
Chamberlain of the Kings House, whose power and privilege over that part of
the Kings Servants which are under his Authority, Fleta lib. 2. ca. 3. and 6.
being exempt from that of the Lord Steward, having been not by any Act of
Parliament prohibited, may not be thought to exceed the power and au^hority
inherent in their Offices and places, when they shall punish or commit to
prison any who shall attempt to violate or infringe the honor and privileges
of the Kings House or Servants, derived unto them from his Supreme Authority,
who having Bracton lib. 5. De Exceptionibus, ca. 15.
Ordinariam Jurisdictionem in regno suo, and pares non habet neque superiores,
an Ordinary and Supreme Jurisdiction, and has neither Peer nor Superior, may
as well protect his Servants in his affairs and business in his House, or about
his Person, and punish any that shall hinder them therein, as the Judges in his
Courts of Justice, who neither have or can claim any other power or authority,
than what he delegates or entrusteth them withal, do upon all occasions in the
Case of their Officers, Clerks, or menial Servants.

They therefore who shall so much suffer their reason and understanding to
wander and be mislead, as to deny the Kings most Honorable Privy Council, or
any other Court within their Cognizance, Power and Authority, tueri
Jurisdictionem, such a coercive power as may support their Jurisdiction, may
think but never find; they have any ground or cause for it; and if they please
to tarry for a conviction, until the never failing unhappy consequences, shall
bring them too late to acknowledge that which in viridi observantia, by late
abundant sad experiments is more then a little visible in the disorders of the
present Church Government, occasioned by the reverend Governors want of power,
who having their hands as it were tied behind them, are made to be as good old
Ely admonishing and reproving to no purpose, and how little the directive or
commanding Power of Laws will signify, where the coercive shall be absent, may
bitterly repent it.

And will meet with as little reason to second or assist their opinion that a
privileged person imprisoned contrary to his privilege, is so in the custody
of the Law, as not to be able to claim or make use of his privilege to release
or discharge, him, when the frequent use of discharging men out of prison by
Habeas Corpus, Supersedeas or Writs of Privilege, and their Bayles or Sureties
given for their appearances discharged: And in matters of Parliament Privilege
can teach and prove the contrary, for in the Case of Trewynniard, a Burgess of
Parliament in the Court of King's Bench in Easter and Trinity Term in the 38th
year of the Dyer Pasc* and Trin. 38 H. 8.
Reign of K. Henry the 8th. the said Trewynniard was discharged by his
Privilege although he was arrested upon an Utlary after Judgment, and the
Judges of the Court of Kings Bench, did adjudge and declare, That every
Privilege is by prescription, and every praescription which sounds for the
Commonweal is good although it be a prejudice to any private person; And that
such a privilege has been always granted by the King to his Commoners at the
request of their Speaker the first day of the sitting of Parliament: And it is
common reason that forasmuch as the King and all the Realm has an interest in
the Body of every of its Members, it seems that the private commodity of any
particular man ought not to be regarded, for it is a maxim, That magis dignum
trahit ad se minus dignum, the more worthy is to be preferred before the less,
and concluded, That the Parliament is the most High Court, and has more
Privileges then any Court of the Realm, and that in such a Case every Burgess
is to be privileged where the Action is but at the Suit of a Subject, and that
by such a temporary discharge the Execution is not discharged, but remains.

When as men protected, that were not the Kings Household Servants, had their
Brook Tit. Protection 51.
Protections allowed after the commencement of the Action, sometimes after
Issue joined, at other times of the nisi prius, or Trial at other times after
the Verdict given, and sometimes at the days in Banck, and where any Defendant
neither protected or privileged was imprisoned, he was not so believed to be
in the Custody of the Law, but that the Judges, or any one Judge of the Court
out of which the Process or Writ issued, might not as well out of the Term as
in the Term, grant in their Subordinate Jurisdiction, a Supersedeas, quia
improviae or erronice emanavit, because there was some Error or mistaking in
the awarding or granting of the Writ by which he was taken: And those
Authentic Books of the Register of Writs, old and new Book of Entries, and
the presidents therein contained, will sufficiently testify that arrests of
Register of Writs, old and new Book of Entries, Tit. Privilege and Protection.
privileged persons, and the goods or persons of privileged persons, have
been and ought to be discharged from Attachments, Arrests and Imprisonments,
and that which they would call the Custody of the Law, by Habeas Corpus,
Supersedeas, or Writs of privilege, and their Bayles or Sureties given for
their Appearances, discharged.

But however the pride and disrespectfull and disobedient humors of too many of
our Nation be now so much in fashion, as to quarrel with every thing of
Authority, and the Regalities of their Sovereign, the days of old, and Ages
past will evidence, that the before mentioned Privileges of the Kings Servants
in Ordinary, were for ought appears to the contrary believed to be so legal
and reasonable.

CHAP. VIII.
That the aforesaid Privilege of the Kings Servants in Ordinary, has been
legally imparted to such as were not the Kings Servants in Ordinary, but
employed upon some temporary and casual affairs abroad, and out of the Kings
House.

AS it was desired and thought fit, and necessary to be communicated to such as
were not the Kings Servants in Ordinary or his Domestics, but only employed as
extraordinaries upon some of his special affairs or occasions, which were but
Temporary, and to that end it was requisite that some signification or notice
should be given that they were so employed, and that they should not be
arrested, imprisoned or disturbed in it, but be protected from it, the like
being also done when any of the Kings Servants in Ordinary where employed out
of the Kings House or Palace by their Writs of Protection under the great Seal
of England, for otherwise probably it would not have been known, that they were
his Servants either ordinary or extraordinary, or what was their business.

And therefore in the Register of Writs, a Book in the Statute of Westminster
the second, made in the 13th year of the Reign of 13 E. 1. ca. 24.
K. Edward the first in the year of our Lord 1285, called the Register of the
Chancery, and of great antiquity and authority in our Laws, and very well
deserving the respect is paid unto it, being but a Collection of Writs out of
the public Records made and granted under the Kings Great Seal, warranted
either by the Common Law, or grounded upon some Acts of Parliament, Register of
Writs, 22, 23.
Protections have been granted under the Great Seal of England, with a
Supersedeas of all Actions and Suits against them, in the mean time, unto some
that were sent into Foreign Parts, or but into the Marches of Scotland, or
Wales, or in Comitativa, retinue of some Lord or Person of Honor employed
thither in the Kings Service, or unto such probably as were none of the Kings
Servants in Ordinary or Domestic, but as more fit persons were only sent as
appears by the Writs, upon some special and not like to be long lasting
occasions, with an exception only of certain Actions and Cases, as in Writs of
Dower (for which Sir Coke First* part Instit. 131.
Edward Coke gives us the Reason) because the Demandant may have nothing else
to live upon, in Quare Impedits, Quaere non Admisits, or Assizes of Darrein
Presentment, for the danger of a lapse for not presenting within six months, in
Assizes of Novel Disseisin, to restore the Demandant to his Freehold wrongfully
entered upon, and not seldom gave their Protections quia moraturus, unto some
Workmen, Engineers, or others employed in the Fortification of some Castles or
Fortress, sometimes but as far as the Marches of Wales, with a command that if
they were incarcerati, or imprisoned, they should be forthwith released; and at
other times upon his Protections granted quia profecturus, revoked his
Protections because the party desiring to be protected, did not go as he
pretended upon the Kings message or business, or having finished the Kings
business, Vide Register of Writs 23, 24.
employed himself upon his own, and upon better information that he did
continue his employment in his service, revive it again; sometimes sent his
Writ to the Justices not to allow his Protection, because the party protected
did not go about the business upon which he was employed; and at other times
sent his Writ to the Sheriffs of London, to certify him whether the party
protected for a year did go in obsequium suum versus parts transmarinas in
Comitativa, etc. upon the Kings business in the company and attendance of A. B.
(possibly some Envoy) (which makes it probable that the party protected was
rather some Stranger, than any of the Kings Servants) and more likely to be in
the cognizance of the Sheriffs of London, than of the King, or any of the
Officers of his honorable Household, as may appear by the subsequent words of
the Writ, which were, Register of Writs, 24.
an in Civitate nostra London moretur propriis negotiis suis intendendo,
whether he remain in the City and follows his own business: And not only
granted such Protections, but as was in those times held also to be necessary
and convenient, added a clause de non mole^tando, of not troubling the party
whilst he was thus employed in his service, homines, terras, etc. his Lands,
Servants, etc. except or in regard of any of the aforesaid Pleas which were
usually mentioned in the said Writ of Protection.

And if it were directed to the Sheriffs of London, a clause by a rule of the
Register was to be inserted, dum tamen idem, Register of Writs, 24.
so as the protected person (probably employed in the victualing of a Town or
Fort) do satisfy his Creditors for Victuals bought of them. And where the
Protections appeared to be granted after the commencement of the Action, did
sometimes revoke them; but if it were for any that went in a Voyage that the
King himself did, or other Voyages Royal, or on the Kings Messages for the
business of the Realm, it was to be allowed and not revoked; and the Kings
Protections in that or any other nature, had the favor and allowance of diverse
Acts of Parliament, either in the case of such as were not their Servants, or
otherwise, and had such respect given unto them by the Law, and the Reverend
Judges in Bractons time, as he says, Cum Bracton lib. 5. De Essoniis, ca. 2.
and 3. sect. 3.
breve Domini Regis non in se contineat veritatem, in hoc sibi caveat
Cancellarius, if the matter be not true, the Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England is to answer for it; and quando quis Essoniaverit de malo
veniendi, quia in servitio Domini Regis admitti debet, Essonium and allocari
and dies dari dum tamen warrantum ad manum habet, cum de voluntate Domini Regis
non sit disputandum.

And King Edward the third did in the 33th. year of his Reign, by an Act of
Parliament de Protectionibus, concerning the repealing of Protections Statute
de Protectionibus 33 E. 3. An. Dom. 1304*
unduly granted, by his Writ directed to all his true and faithful Subjects,
now printed amongst the Statutes and Acts of Parliament, and allowed the force
and effect of an Act of Parliament, as many other of the Kings Mandates,
Precepts or Writs anciently were, declare, that for as much as many did
purchase his Protections falsely, affirming that they were out of the Realm, or
within the four Seas in his service, did provide, That if their Adversaries
would except or aver that they were within the four Seas, and out of the
Kings service, in a place certain, so that they might have well come, and if it
be proved against the Def^ndant, it should be a default; and if such Protection
be on the Plaintiffs behalf, he should lose his Writ and be amerced unto the
King; (which can signify no less then that a Protection granted where the
party is really and truly in the Kings service, should not be disallowed or
refused) which the Commons of England were used so little to disgust, as that
in the 47th. year of the Reign of that King, they did in 47 E. 3. r^t. Parl. m.
28.
Parliament only Petition, that any having a Protection for serving in the
Wars, and do thereof fail by one month, to the deceit of the Kings people,
such Protection to be void. To which the King only answered, Let the party
grieved come into the Chancery and he shall have remedy. The Act of Parliament
made in the first year of the 1 R. 2. ca. 8.
Reign of King Richard the second, ordained, that no Protection with a clause
of Volumus, our will and pleasure is that he be not disturbed with any Pleas or
Process, except Pleas of Dower, Quare Impedit, Assise of Novel Disseisin, last
Presentation, and Attaint, and Pleas or Actions brought before the Justices
Itinerant, shall be allowed where the Action is for Victuals taken or bought
upon the Voyage or Service whereof the Protection makes mention, nor also in
Pleas of Trespass, or of other Contract made before the date of the said
Protection. The Statute of the 13th. year of the Reign of the aforesaid King,
which was made for that many people, as well such as be not able to be retained
in War, (for in those days 13 R. 2. ca. 16.
diverse of the Nobility and Gentry and their Servants, were accustomed to be
retained by the King to serve in his Wars) as others, by the testimonial of the
Governors of the Marches, Captains of Garrisons, Admirals, and others, did
purcbase Protections with a clause of Volumus* or Quia profecturus, because he
was going in the Kings service, after a Plea was commenced against them,
whereby to delay the said Plea, and after do not go into the said service;
ordained, That no Protection with a clause Quia profecturus, be allowed after
the Suit commenced before the date of the Protection, if it be not in a Voyage
that the King himself goes, or other Voyages Royal, or in his Messages for the
business of the Realm.

But says that Act of Parliament, it is not the intention of this Statute but
that the Protection with the clause Quia moraturus, because the party protected
abides in the Kings service, be allowed in all cases as it was before that
time. And if any tarry in the Country without going to the service for which he
was retained, over a convenient time after that he has any Protection, or
return from the same service, if the Chancellor be thereof duly informed, he
shall repeal such Protection as it has been used before that time. In the 9th.
year of the Reign of King Henry the 5th. Protections were granted to them that
were in the Kings service in 9 H. 5. ca. 3.
Normandy and France, or which should pass with him into France.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 14th. and 15th. years of the Reign of 14
E. 4. ca. 2.
King Edward the 4th. it was ordained* that the like Protections as were
granted by an Act of Parliament made in the 9th. year of the Reign of King
Henry the 5th. cap. 3. to such as were then in the Kings service in Normandy or
France, or would pass with that warlike King Henry the 5th. into France, should
be observed and avail for all such as should pass over with him. By a Statute
made in the 6th. year of the 6 H. 6. ca. 2.
Reign of King Henry the 6th. there was a rehearsal and confirmation made of
the aforesaid Statute in the 9th. year of King Henry the 5th. touching
Protections granted to those who were in Wars in Normandy or France, which
extended it further then the preciser time of their present service. And by an
Act of Parliament made in the 8th. year of the 8 H. 6. ca. 13.
Reign of that King, there was only to be excepted in all the Protections of
such as should go with the King into France, Writs of Assise of Novel
Disseisin. King Henry the 7th. in the 4th. year of his Reign, did by an Act of
Parliament grant Protections 4 H. 7. ca. 3.
unto all which then were or after should be in the Kings service in Britany,
together with certain Immunities granted to the Feoffees, Executors and Heirs
of them which should dye in the service, (which was more than a personal
protection:) And by another Act of Parliament made in the 7th. year of his
Reign did ordain, That every person that should be in the Kings wages beyond
the Sea, or on the Sea, should have a Protection. By an Act of Parliament made
in the 11th. year of the 11 H. 7. ca. 18.
Reign of the said King Henry the 7th. mentioning in the Preamble, That it is
not reasonable, but against all Laws, reason and good conscience, that the
Kings Subjects going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars, attending upon him in
his person, or being in other places by his commandment within or without his
Land, (as some of his menial Servants may possibly) whilst he is absent from
his Palace either in the Kingdom or without, any thing should lose or forfeit
for doing their true duty and service of Allegiance; it was enacted, That no
manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend upon the King
and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time being in his person, and do him
true and faithful Allegiance in the same, (which certainly his Household and
menial Servants are understood to do) or be in other places by his commandment
in his Wars within this Land or without, be convict or attainted of High
Treason, nor of other offenses for that cause by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise by any Process of Law, whereby to lose or forfeit life, lands,
possessions, or rents, goods, chattels, or any other things, but be for that
deed utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble, or loss; and any Act or
Process of Law contrary thereunto to be void. And King Henry the 8th. did
likewise by an Act of Parliament enact, That 3 H. 8. ca. 4.
they which were or should be in the Kings Wars beyond the Seas, or upon the
Sea, should have a Protection of Quia profecturus, or moraturus, cum clausula
volumus, as aforesaid.

Such or the like Protections being held to be so necessary in the former ages,
when the people of England not enjoying under the Papal Tyranny so great an
happiness and liberties as they have done since the Reformation, were so little
of kin to the murmuring Israelites, as they troubled not the ears of their
Kings or their Courts of Justice with complaints against Protections, when
there was no deceit in the obtaining of them, or abuse in the use of them, when
in the third year of the Reign of King John, a Protection was granted by him
unto one Rot. Pat. 3. Johannis part unica.
Peter Barton the son of Peter Barton, then living or residing in Poictou,
parcel of his French Dominions, for his Goods and Estate as well as for his
person, as his Father had the day that he died; and commanded all his Bailiffs
and Officers in that Country, to protect and defend them sicut servientem suum
quousque sibi servierit, as his Servant for so long time as he should serve
him. Robert de Ver, qui de licentia Regis peregre profecturus est in terram
Jerusalem, habuit liter as patentes de pr^tectione sine clausula, duraturas
per trienninm, had the Kings Protection for three years, without any clause or
exception; and Rot. Claus. 32 H. 3.
Gerard de Rodes traveling to the same place, had a Protection with a clause,
quod quietus esset de secta Comitatuum and Hundredorum, and de omnibus placitis
and quaerelis, exceptis placitis de Dote unde nihil habet, assisa Novae
Disseisinae and Vltimae praesentationis Ecclesiarum, duraturas quamdiu idem
Gerardus fuerit in peregrinatione praedicta, that he should not be molested
with any Suits in the County Courts and Hundreds, and with any other Pleas and
Actions, except Actions or Pleas of Dower, Assizes of Novel Disseisin, and the
last presentation unto Churches, to remain in force as long as the said Gerard
should continue in his travels (or Pilgrimage) as aforesaid; and a Protection
granted by King Edward the first, in the first year of his Reign, to Robert de
Plessetis, sine clausula, without any clause or condition, to endure until
Easter then next following; and the like unto Hugh de Weston, who had the Kings
license to travel to 1 E. 1. Rot. Pat* m. 3.
Rome, to endure until Michaelmass then next following; and King Edward the
4th. by virtue of his Kingly Prerogative, as the Writ and the Record declared,
granted his Protection unto John Namby Gentleman, Executor of William White
alias Namby, for 22 E. 4. m. 17.
himself and his Servants, and their Lands and Estates, to endure for three
years: very many of the Subjects of England in those days, and the Reigns of
our former Kings, traveling on Pilgrimage for devotion or penance to
Jerusalem, or St. James of Compostella, or which were Cruzadoed or voluntarily
went unto the Holy Land so called for recovery of it, in such numbers as about
the year of our Lord 1204. being in the 2 part of Purchase Pilgrimage, 1225.
latter end of the Reign of King John, sixty thousand English took the Cross
for the Holy Land: whose Protections, says Fleta, were not in those days
disallowed in the Courts of Justice, because it was then Fleta lib. 6. ca. 7.
understood to be in causa Dei, the cause of God, or for some which were sent
on the Kings messages or affairs to Rome, Normandy, or Gascoigny in France, or
other parts beyond the Seas, or in those many our English Warlike Expeditions
and Armies sent to Jerusalem, France, Spain, and Scotland, or the Borders
thereof, in the Reigns of many or most of our Kings and Princes, from William
the Conquerors entering into England and the subduing of it, until the Reign of
King James, and into Wales or the Borders thereof, until the Reign of King
Edward the third, when the Nobility and principal part of the Gentry were even
in those times more likely then the Commonalty or vulgar to be in debt, and
wanted not upon occasions the credit and good will of the Common people to
trust them, and freedom from Actions at Law and troubles in the mean time; and
the many thousands of our Tenants in Capite, who by the Tenure of their Lands,
as well as by the bond and obligation of their Loyalty to their Kings and
Princes, were to attend them in the service of War not only upon their Summons
and Commands in their Foreign Expeditions, but at home in their defense against
Rebellions, and sudden Insurrections, and had in the mean time no doubt
Protections, and freedom from Suits and Arrests, whose Court Barons and Leets
more then now orderly kept, permitted not their Tenants disobedience unto them
or their Jurisdictions, or an enhance of the price of their Commodities; and
their Lands so entayled, as they could not if they would either borrow or owe
much money: When the Nobility and Gentry, like the Stars in our Hemisphere,
kept their courses, and great Hospitalities, addicted themselves to actions of
greatness, goodness, charity and munificence, and their numerous Tenants
depending upon them, returned them submissive and humble obedience, a
reverential awe and gratitude, and held much of their Lands upon trust of
performance of their Services, and many Husbandry works, instead of Rents, and
in that were more endebted to their Landlords, and entrusted by them, then
their Landlords were unto them; who did not, as now they do, with their Wives
and Daughters resort to London, to learn vice and vanities, and run into Debt
more than they should do; nor make themselves at costly rates so great and
often purchasers of Transmarine Wares and Commodities, which the small Income
of the Customs in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when our
Clothing and Exportation far exceeded our Importation, will witness, when the
profit of her Customs in both was at first let to Farm but at 13000 l. per
annum, and afterward at no more then 50000 l. per annum; when there was not so
great and consuming expenses in Coaches, Wine, and other Foreign Toys and
Trifles; when by reason of 600 Monasteries and Religious Houses, and the great
Retinues and number of Servants kept by them, and the Nobility, Bishops and
Gentry, and depending upon them, the younger Children of the Nation were so
largely provided for, as there were not so many Trades or Apprentices in London
as there have been of latter times, so many Taverns, Cooks, or Trades of pride
and luxury, to entice the Nobility and Gentry into debts and expenses; when the
rates and prices of their Wares and Commodities, honester made, and of Victuals
and Household provisions, were limited and bounded by our then better than now
executed Laws, and Trade was not let loose to all manner of fraud and unlawful
gains, and the Companies or Corporations of Trades were not so many
Combinations, to adulterate and abuse the Trade of the Kingdom, as now they do;
when there was not so frequent trusting by Tradesmen, as now of late, only to
increase their gain, double and raise their prices, and make a more then
ordinary usury upon the kindness they pretend to do their Customers by trusting
of them; when Trade and the furnishing of vice and excess, had not made the
Gentry so endebted to the City, who are not in their Countries or Neighborhood
so much under the lash of their complaints or prosecution; when the Churchmen,
by reason that some contracts were upon distrust of performance sworn and bound
up by Oath, would ratione s^andali sometimes take occasion to draw into their
Courts the cognizance of Debts, and Excommunicate them, until they were about
the Reign of King Edward the first prohibited by the King and his Courts of
Justice. And Usury was as well before as long after accounted such a mortal
sin, as Christian Burial, and the power of making last Wills and Testaments was
denied unto them, the personal Estates of the Usurers confiscated, the dying in
debt reckoned a sin punishable in the next World; all or some of which might
give us the reason why there was in former times but very little complaint
against Protections, (for most of that little which appears of the use or
pleading of Protections in our Law Books or Records, through so many past ages,
were in Pleas or Actions concerning Lands, or Replevins, etc. but few in
personal Actions, or Actions of Debt) and those which do in every Kings Reign
appear in our Records to have been granted in respect of the many occasions and
importunities which might otherwise have induced the granting of them, to have
been but a few in respect of many more which might have been granted, if the
prudence and care of our Kings had not restrained or limited their own power
and authority therein; for that there were then either few, or out-lying,
overgrown, or long-forborn Debts, or the reason of the parties protected being
employed in the Kings Service, (which was and ever is to be accounted the
interest of every man, and a concernment of the Public) was enough to pacify
them; and the care and reverence of the King and his business, taught the
people to obey rather then dispute that necessary part of his Prerogative,
which deserves our imitation, when conform to the Laws of Nations. Queen
Elizabeth by the advice of as wise and careful a Council as any Prince of the
World was ever blessed with, did in the 17th. year of her Reign, by her Writ
under the Great Seal of England, directed to that Rot. Pat. 17 Eliz.
learned and judicious Lawyer Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of it,
(who allowed and sealed it) and the Lord Treasurer of England, and her
Justices, Barons of the Exchequer, Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. signify,
that she had taken into her Protection for three years Martin Frobisher Gent.
(probably the eminent Sea-Captain) and his ordinary Servants, whom she had
employed in her affairs beyond the Seas, and therefore by virtue of her Royal
Prerogative, which she would not have disputed, commanded every of them, that
during the say Martin Frobishers absence, and before his departure, and after
his return, during the said three years, they should not suffer him or his
Servants in ordinary to be arrested, attached or outlawed, or to be molested or
disquieted in their Persons, Goods, Chattels, Lands or Estates; and that the
Justices in their several Courts should supersede and discharge all Actions,
Plaints and Suits tending thereunto, and not proceed thereupon; and may give us
to understand, that howsoever in Warhams Case in the 20th. year of her Reign,
before her Judges of her Bench, her Protection signifying that she would not
have her Prerogative disputed, Moors Reports Warhams Case, 239.
was without debating as the Writ commanded not allowed, but silently laid by,
possibly by reason of variance or incertainty of time, or upon some defect of
form or words in the Writ, or in regard that it mentioned not whether the party
desiring to be protected was Cokes 1 part Instit. ca. 11.130. b.
profecturus, or moraturus, to go or abide in the Queens service, or because
the Writ of Protection came too late, or the nature of the Action, or some
matter in the Pleading or the Issue, which was omitted by the Reporter, would
not admit it; yet the disallowance of one Protection, is no argument or enough
to conclude that no Protection was or ought to be allowed, when so many do
appear in the Records and Year-Books of our Laws to have been allowed: For
certainly if that great Queen had the year before 1588. and that almost
unavoidable ruining storm of the Spanish Armado, which threatened the
destruction of her and this Nation, given her Protection Royal to Sir Thomas
Gresham Knight, that Prince of Merchants, for the securing of his person and
Estate from arrest or troubles, when for her service and the safeguard and
defense of the Nation, he had stretched that grand and all the Credit which he
had in Foreign parts, to dreyn the Banks thereof, and to borrow and take up at
Interest so great a part of the moneys thereof, as he prevented the King of
Spain therein, and so disappointed him of money, as he could no sooner send
that formidable Navy against England, which he designed to have sent the year
before, whereby she was not suddenly attaqued, but had time to provide a
gallant resistance; and whether the clause of commanding her Prerogative
therein not to be disputed, had been inserted or not, (which in such a secret
and important affair ought not to have been made public, either in such a Writ
or in a Court of Justice) every man that had not sued a Bill of Divorce against
his reason, common sense and understanding, might have believed such a
Protection in such an exigent to have been as legal as it would have been for
public good and necessary.

And although the Reverend Judge Fitzherbert was of opinion, that a Protection
of the King Fitzherbert Tit. Par. 99. and 101.
quia in servitio Regis, because the party to whom it was granted was in the
service of the King, or the like, is not to be allowed for a longer time than a
year and a day, being supposed to be a competent time for the dispatch of such
an emergent or extraordinary employment of the Kings as was pretended, (which
no Act of Parliament has yet limited, there being a possibility of a longer
time of the employment, either as profecturus or moraturus, in the going or
tarrying, when the time of the dispatch of business cannot be circumscribed,
especially in Foreign parts, whither and whence in longer or shorter Voyages
the winds as well as other occasions and accidents are to be a^^ended) and that
in the 39th. year of the Reign of King Henry the 6th. a Protection was not
allowed, because the Defendant having obtained it in regard that he was in
servitio Regis, and sent to Rome; Pleas of Dower and Quare Impedit were not as
they used to be, and ought by Law to be excepted in the Writ of Protection, yet
Mayle one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas then said, that in a
Brooks Abridgement Tit. Protection, 67.
Voyage Royal, or in business concerning the Realm, or in an Embassage or the
like, a man should be protected; and a Voyage Royal, says Fitzherbert, is
where the Fitzherbert Not. Br^v. Tit. Protection, F. and H.
King goes to War, or his Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenant; and that a man is
to be protected when he is in the Kings service for guard of the West Marches
of England toward Scotland; and in the 21th. year of the Reign of King Henry
the 6th. a Protection was allowed after the Nisi prius, or Issue tried; and
Brook Tit. Protection, 51.
sometimes for the Plaintiff, as well as the Tenant or Defendant, as in the
14th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 4th. Essoines of the Kings service
being likewise ordinarily allowed by the Judges, upon allegation or proof of
the Kings service at the time of casting or praying for them, there being an
ordinary course of Essoining allowed communi jure, of common right, to such as
are not in servitio Regis, or the Kings Servants, as de malo lecti, for
sickness, etc. and are now in many Actions allowed of course, without any proof
or question made thereof: And those kind of Protections were so effectual and
respected in the 21th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3d. as in an Action
where the Queen (who was to enjoy some greater Privileges then others of the
Subjects) was Plaintiff, such a Brooks Abridgement Tit. Protection, 44.
Protection was allowed; and it is not without some warrant or reason of Law
observable, that the Protections and Essoines which were quia in servitio
Regis, in regard that the person to be protected was in the Kings service, were
most commonly quia profecturus, because he was to go or abide upon some
employment for the King, do mention per praeceptum, or in obsequio Domini
Regis, that they were sent by the Kings command, or upon his service; which in
case of ordinary or domestic service, needs not to be so much mentioned by the
words per praeceptum, or in obsequio Regis, the word obsequium being by the
Civil Law only understood to be reverentia and honoris exhibitio erga parents
and patronos, an honor and reverence of Freemen to their Parents and Patrons,
contradistinct to the duty of work or labor in Servants; that such men were
commonly Strangers, and none of the Kings Household Servants; and that in those
early days and times of Popery, when there was such an intercourse betwixt
England and Rome, and our Kings had so much ado to guard the Rights and
Privileges of themselves and their people, from the Papal attempts and
usurpations, and many of our Kings had in their possession Normandy, Aquitain,
and in other Provinces of France diverse Forts and Castles, they might well have
occasions of sending many that were not of the Household, which were better to
be spared then those of whom they had daily use of occasion of service; and
that where the Protections were quia moraturus, it was not seldom mentioned to
be about fortifying a Castle or Town, or providing Victuals for them or an
Army, and may rather be deemed to be none of the Household, for that in the
Register of Writs some Protections are revoked by the King, because they
pretended to go when they were commanded, but did not, or followed their own
occasions and affairs, not the Kings; which cannot be easily understood of the
Kings Servants in ordinary, who in those days would not be willing to absent
themselves from such profitable and eminent services and employments.

And Cokes Institutes, or Comment. upon Littleton, 130. b. and 131. a.
Sir Edward Coke in his greatest aversion to the just Rights and Regalities of
the Crown, is positive, that besides the Kings general Protection of his loyal
Subjects, there is a particular Protection of two sorts, the one to give a man
an Immunity and freedom from all Actions or Suits, the second for the safety of
his person, Servants and Goods, Lands and Tenements, whereof he is lawfully
possessed, from violence, unlawful molestation or wrong; the first is of
right, and by Law, and the second sort are all of Grace, saving one; and that
the Kings Protection so as it be under the Great Seal of England, as well
moraturus as profecturus, upon any man's going or abiding in the Kings service,
must be regularly to some place out of the Realm of England, and that in some
Actions, as in a Scire facias, upon Recoveries, Fines, Judgments, etc. In a
Writ upon the Statute of Laborers, (although by the Statute made in the second
year of the 2 E. 6. ca. 15. 5 Eliz. ca. 4.
Reign of King Edward the 6th. cap. 15. and the Statute made in the 5th. year
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, cap. 4. no Protection is to be allowed) and in
a Writ of Deceit, (notwithstanding the rule of Law is, that fraudi aut dolo Lex
non patrocinatur, Deceit is not to be favored) a Protection does lie: And that
the Kings Protections are to be brought to the Courts of Justice where the
Action is laid, be they Courts of Record or not of Record, and not to the
Sheriff, or any other Officer or Minister; and are allowable not only unto men
of full age, but within age, and for Countesses and women, as nutrix, lotrix,
or obstetrix, Nurses of the Kings Children, the Midwife to the Queen, or
Laundresses of the King or Queen. Protections do lie and have been allowed,
where Essoines do not; and denies not but a man having a Protection Quia
moraturus, and returning from beyond Sea only to provide Ammunition,
Habiliments of War, Victuals, or other necessaries for the Kings service, and
be arrested or imprisoned, he shall enjoy the benefit of his Protection; and
denies not but that some Protections Quia nolumus, because we will not that he
should be molested, may be granted by the King of grace, and gives his opinion
that where it is pro negotiis regni, for the concern or business of the
Kingdom, jura publica ante ferenda privatis, private men's actions are to give
way or yield to the public; and private men's Actions and Suits must be
suspended for a convenient time, where it is pro bono publico, the
Weal-publick, as certainly the necessary attendance of his Servants in
ordinary, either for his honor, convenience, health or safety, do relate unto
and concern the peoples good and safety, the protection of their lives and
estates, and the well being of themselves and their posterity, and all that can
be dear or near unto them.

And such kind of Protections of Servants in ordinary or extraordinary, may be
as consistent with Law or Reason, as a Writ of Rege incon^ulto, commanding a
forbearance of proceedings in the case of one of the Kings Servants, arrested
or prosecuted at Law without leave first obtained, should not be awarded, as
the Law and practice thereof is well contented to do it, where the King is in
Reversion, or has any Title to the thing or matter in demand, which may be
done at the prayer or request of the party concerned, or of the Kings Council,
or ex officio Curiae, by the Court it self; and as well as the Justices allowed
a Supersede as to stay an Assise, where the Defendant was in the service of the
King in his Wars beyond the Seas; or to stay Suits against diverse Tenants in
Northumberland, upon Writs of Cessavit, to forfeit their Lands for non-payment
of their Rents, and performing their services to their Lords, in regard of the
then Wars with the 22 Ass. P^. 9. and 25. Not. Brev. 19, 25.
Scots, until the War should be ended; or to save a default of the Tenant or
Defendant, and to adjourn the Suit or Action to another day; or where one is
convict of redisseisin, and 2 E. 4.16.
taken or arrested by a Capias, the King commanded by his Privy Seal that no
Process should issue, and if any should issue, that they 4 E. 4.19.
should surcease, and the Writ was thereupon staid.

For surely had not such or the like Protections been heretofore accounted to
have been as legal as they were warrantable and usual, there would not have
been an Act of Parliament made in the 5th. year of the 5 E. 3. ca. 6.
Reign of King Edward the 3d. to forbid the allowance of them in Writs of
Attaint against Jurors, or in Writs of Novel Disseisin, and is the first Act of
Parliament which did in any case absolutely deny the allowance of the Kings
Protection; imitated and followed by the Act of Parliament made in the 13th.
year of the 13 R. 2. ca. 17.
Reign of King Richard the 2d. to prohibit Protections in the case where upon a
default of the particular Tenant in a real Action, he in the reversion is to be
received to plead in a Suit commenced against him; and the Act of Parliament
and Penal Law made in the 23th. year of the 23 H. 6. ca. 2.
Reign of King Henry the 6th. against such of the Kings Purveyors as did take
Provisions from the people without paying for them, and many an Act of
Parliament and Penal Law from thence unto this present.

Which Protections or Tabulae ^utelares, have been by Law, and may be granted
for a reasonable time unto any of the Kings Debtors, until the Kings Debt be
paid, with liberty given to their Creditors to proceed in the mean time, but
not to take out any Writs of Execution; or to some that in unruly and
troublesome times obtained their salva Guardia, or Protection, propter quosdam
Aemulos, where force or Register of Writs, 281, 282, 283.
incivilities were feared, or where upon sudden and unexpected Embargoes laid
by a Foreign Prince, some English Merchants Estate had been destroyed, or had
their Ships or Goods taken at Sea by the Subjects of another Prince, and only
desired a Protection from the many times Unchristian-like fury of their
Creditors, until by Letters of Reprisal or otherwise, they might enable
themselves to make them a just satisfaction; and did but in the mean time, like
the innocent Doves, fly to the shelter of the Rock of their Sovereign, from the
cruelty of the pursuing Hawk; or when any employed in the service of the King,
or for the good of the Nation, although he be at the present neither protected
or privileged, was by feigned or malicious Actions sought to be hindered or
endamaged upon some reason or necessity; and in all or either of those kinds,
have also been sparingly granted by King James, and King Charles the Martyr,
unto some few particular men, as to Philip Burlamachi, and Pompeio Calandrini,
Natives and Merchants of Italy, denizen'd and resident in England, who had
employed in their services not only at home, but in the parts beyond the Seas,
in the important affairs of ayding the Kings Allies, all the Estate and Credit
which they had or could procure; some if not many of which sort of Protections,
have not been nor are unusual in our Neighbor Countries, and in Brabant,
adversus Creditorum multi juges, vexationes and assultus, to protect a Debtor
against the cruelties, assaults and vexations of some unmercifull Creditors,
quoties vel inclementia maris vel infortunio graviori demersi ad certum tempus
solvere non possunt, when by some great misfortunes by Sea or at Land, they are
not at the present able to pay; whereof Hubert de Loyens in his Treatise Hubert
de Loyens tractat. de Curia Brabantiae and munere Cancellarii ejusdem, 273, 303
and 304.
Curia Brabantiae and munere Cancellarii ejusdem, of the Court of Brabant, and
the Office of the Chancellor of that Province, gives the reason, quoniam
Reipublica interest subditos non depauperari, sicut nec Principem, cujus cum
illis annexa causa est, because it concerns the Weal-publick not to suffer the
people, nor likewise the Prince, whose good or ill is annexed to theirs, to be
impoverished; by which the poor Debtor obtains some respite, and time either to
pay or pacify their enraged Creditors: a custom and usage conveyed to them by
Antiquity, and deduced from the wisdom of the Grecians and Romans, in their
well ordered Governments and Commonwealths.

But those who might rest well satisfied with the wisdom as well as practice of
our Laws, are so unwilling to be undeceived, and to quit their stubborn
ignorance and affected errors, as they will like some Garrison willing to
maintain a Fort, and hold out as long as they can, when they can no longer
defend it, seek and hope to march out with better advantages in relinquishing
or parting with it, then they could by keeping of it, and therefore will be
willing to allow unto Strangers, or those which the King imployeth upon Foreign
or Extraordinary occasions, and are not his Menial or Domestic Servants, the
Privileges aforesaid, so as they may exclude those that are immediately
attending upon his service, or the greater concernments of his person.

CHAP. IX.
That the Kings granting Protections under the Great Seal of England, to such
as are his Servants in ordinary, for their Persons, Lands and Estate, when
especially employed by him into the parts beyond the Seas, or in England, or
any other of his Dominions, out of his Palace or Virge thereof, or unto such as
are not his Domestics, or Servants in ordinary or extraordinary, when they are
sent or employed upon some of his negotiations, business or affairs, neither is
or can be any evidence or good argument that such only, and not the Kings
Servants in ordinary, who had no Protections under the Great Seal of England,
are to be protected or privileged whilst they are busied in his Palace, or
about his Person.

WHich the men of Israel could so highly value, as they dissuaded King David
from going in person with the Army against Absalom, saying, 2 Samuel 18 v. 3.
thou shall not go forth, for if we flee away they will not care for us,
neither if half of us dye will they care for us, but now thou art worth ten
thousand of us; or as they shortly after said in their loyal contest with the
men of Judah, 2 Samuel 19. v. 43.
we have ten parts (meaning the ten Tribes) in the King: which just esteem
caused David's three mighty men or Worthies think they had cause enough to
adventure their lives to break through the Host of the Philistines, and draw
water out of the Well of 2 Samuel 23. v. 15. and 16.
Bethelem, to bring it to David to satisfy but his thirst or longing to
assuage it.

For if reason may be the guide, or hold the Balance, and the cause be any
thing of kin to the effect, the more worthy and the greater is to be more
respected than the less, and the more necessary than that which is not so much
necessary; the heart and nobler parts, more than the inferior; and the person,
health and welfare of the King, more than any Foreign Message or Employment, or
any private man's concerns in any particular affair; and that which is to be
every day and night, and continually more to be taken care of, than that which
is but accidental or temporary, or upon seldom occasions, for the salus populi
cannot be suprema Lex, nor the good and safety of the people be maintained or
provided for, if the King who is the Lawgiver, and by his Ministers and
subordinate Magistrates the Laws executer, and the Laws and peoples protector
and defender, be not so attended as he which is the H^ad and better part of the
Body Politic may be kept and preserved in safety; and if Lex be summa ratio,
the quintessence or chief of reason, and semper intendit rationem, always
intends that which is reason, we may not think it to be a paradox, or any
stranger to reason, that the Persons and Estates of the Master of the Robes,
the Gentlemen and Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Gentlemen of his Privy
Chamber, Esquires of the Body, Physicians in ordinary, Gentlemen Vshers,
Gentlemen Pensioners, Yeoman of the Robes, Gentlemen and Yeomen of his Guards,
and those many other sorts of Servants and Attendants, which are as the learned
Causabon terms them, servi ad manum, or de interioribus Aulicis, necessary
Servants unto his person, and often and daily attendants upon him, or are
otherwise necessary and becoming the Majesty of a King, as the Great Officers
of State, Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord
Privy Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Chamberlains, the Lords of his most Honorable
Privy Council, Secretaries of Estate, Masters of Request, etc. being as
Pasquier a learned Pasquier Recherches, liver second, chapitre 10.
French Advocate says, a la suitte le Roy and joignantes a la person de
Prince, attending the person of the King, and should neither be absent or
receive any impediment in their service, should be as much or more protected
and secured from the trouble of Lawsuits, or disgraceful Arrests, whilst they
are busied about the King, or in his ordinary service, then those which are not
his Servants in ordinary, but as Envoyes, Messengers or otherwise, shall be
employed upon seldom or emergent affairs.

When Nehemiah's Nehem. 2.
Commission to rebuild Jerusalem, and the Royal Protection of King Artaxerxes
by his Letters Patents under his Great Seal, whilst he was busied therein,
cannot conclude that in those Eastern Countries where Artaxerxes had such an
Imperium despoticum, a large and absolute authority, and a people so
reverential and obedient, that Nehemiah did not before his Journey, or after
his return, enjoy the privilege and freedom of one of the Kings Cup-bearers,
and a daily and constant attendant upon his person; for it would be as
illogical and unconcludent, as to argue or believe that a Kings Servant known
to be one of his Servants in ordinary, without a Pass or Protection, is not to
enjoy as much privilege as when he has a Pass or Protection, which can
signify no more then that he is a Servant, or employed as a Servant upon the
Kings affairs, especially when the only ground and reason of his Protection,
and upon which it is built or founded, was the Kings service; and it is not so
much because it concerns the Weal-publick, which the words in the Kings
Protection do not bear or intimate, but only in relation to the King and his
service, and that the protected party is employed or sent per praeceptum Regis,
or in obsequio Regis, by the Kings command, or upon his business; for otherwise
the subordinate business of the Offices of a Sheriff, or a Clerk to a Justice
of Peace, being something appurtenant to the common good, might (which they
never yet did) claim or demand a cessation from Lawsuits, or a respite, as the
Protections for men employed in the Kings Service have done; there being as
great a distance betwixt the reason and cause of the privilege of the Kings
Servants in ordinary, and their attendance upon his person and affairs relating
thereunto, and that which is not immediately but remote, as betwixt immediate
and mediate, proximate and remote; nor can it be either truth or reason, that
if the Abbot of Dugdales Monastico^ Tom. 1.275.
Burton upon Trent in the County of Stafford, had been employed by the King
beyond the Seas, and being as he was none of the Kings Household Servants, such
a Protection granted unto him whilst he was in the Kings service, could have
bereaved him of the privilege which King Edward the 4th. did grant unto him,
his Covent, and Tenants, which were many, to be free ab omni vexatione
Vicecomitis Staffordiae, sive eorum Satellitum in perpetuum, from all vexation
and trouble of the Sheriff of the County of Stafford, or his Bailiffs or
Catchpoles; or that if the Abbot of Dugdales Monasticon Tom. 1.219.
Tavestoke in the County of Devon, had been sent as many Abbots in those times
used to be, upon any of the Kings affairs into Foreign parts, and obtained the
Kings Protection under the Great Seal of England, that he and his Servants or
Tenants should not be molested or troubled during his absence, such an
exemption for that small part of time, ought to have abridged him of that
privilege which King Henry the second granted to his Predecessors Abbots of
Tavestoke, and his Successors, that he or any of his Monks should not be
impleaded or sued at Law, nisi coram Domino Rege, nisi Dominus Rex nominatim
praeceperit, but before the King himself, unless the King should otherwise
especially command or appoint it; or should not at his return have enjoyed the
privilege of a Baron, if he had held his Land by Barony, to have been only
summoned and liable to the Process at Law usually granted against Barons; or
that if the D^gdales Monasticon Tom. 1.130. and Spelmans Glossary in voce Abbas.
Prior of Spalding in the County of Lincoln, had been commanded to go into
Scotland or Wales upon any of the Kings necessary occasions, and had been
allowed a Protection under the Great Seal of England, to respite any Actions or
Suits at Law in the mean time to be commenced or brought against himself, his
Servants or Tenants, that could after that business ended have debarred him of
the privilege of a Baron, or of one holding his Land per Baroniam, by Barony,
to have been only summoned and distrained according to the Process of the Law
usually granted against Barons; or of that privilege which K. Richard the
first and K. John granted unto the Abbot of Spalding and his Successors, that
none should implead them, their Servants or Tenants, de aliquo Tenemento suo,
for any of their Lands or Tenements, nisi coram Rege, vel coram Capitali
Justiciario suo, vel per speciale mandatum Domini Regis, unless it should be
before the King, or his Chief Justice, (who then resided in the Kings Court) or
by the Kings special mandate; and amounted to no less then the privilege as
aforesaid claimed by the Kings Servants in ordinary, not to be arrested without
license or leave first given by the King, or those Officers of his Household to
whom it belongs.

Nor can it be any thing but a paradox, and a very great enemy to reason, that
obsequium and praeceptum Regis, the Kings affairs and command, employing
Strangers and none of his Household Servants, as questionless the Register of
Writs, 18.
Abbot of Miravall was not, who as appears by the Register of Writs, had a
Protection granted unto him whilst he was employed in the Kings service in the
parts beyond the Seas, should be allowed for a ground and foundation of a
Protection, and available in the case of one that was not at all busied in a
continual attendance upon his Person, or Household affairs, and be denied his
Servants in ordinary, who were a latere, always employed about him, or his
more necessary, constant or durable affairs; and that it should be a causa
causati, cause of the effect or thing caused, in the protection of a Stranger
employed for some few days or weeks in the Kings affairs, and not for those
which were more near unto him, and daily conversant in his immediate and
Domestic affairs, in whose care and fidelity his Sacred Person and the light
and welfare of our Israel is entrusted; and that those that were not his
Servants, should be in a better condition when they are employed by him, and
his menial and ordinary Servants in a worse; and the same cause not operate at
all in the case of his Servants in ordinary, who have more need of it, and be
so vigorous and effective for those that are Strangers, and have less need of
it as to their persons, who being beyond the Seas, were out of the reach of any
arrest or imprisonment, and as to their Lands and other Estates, might if they
had not had the Kings Protection under the Great Seal of England, have defended
any Actions by their Attorneys, or have been Essoined, or reversed any Utlary
quia ultra mare, because they were then beyond the Seas; or that if the King
had sent beyond the Seas any of his Privy-Chamber, or Bedchamber, as has been
not seldom done by-divers of our Kings and Princes, to some Foreign Prince or
Potentate, for the greater credit of their Messages, as Numb. 22. v. 15.
Balak King of Moab did, long before the World was gray, or hoary headed, when
after he had sent Messengers unto the Prophet Balaam, and he refused to come
unto him, he sent yet again Princes more Honorable then they; not thinking it
fit or honorable to employ any below stairs, or the inferior sort of their
Household Servants, or their Barber, (as Lewis the 11th. of France did in his
unfortunate Espargne or saving of charges, when he sent him as an Agent or
Envoy to the great Inheretrix of Burgundy, and the 17. Netherland Provinces,
which brought him a reproach and loss of those grand expectations, which he
might otherwise probably have compassed, and saved millions of money, some
hundred thousand men's lives, and the trouble and disquiet of the greatest part
of Christendom, in the since seeking in vain to obtain those rich Countries by
Conquest, which that Marriage and a more solemn Embassy might have more easily
gained) such Bedchamber man, or Gentleman of the Kings Privy-Chamber, should
have the immunity or freedom not to be arrested or molested by reason of any
Actions or Suits at Law whilst he was thus employed, because it was per
praeceptum Regis, by the Kings command, and fuit in obsequio Regis, and was in
his service, and yet when he was come and returned to his place and attendance
in the Kings Bedchamber or Privy-Chamber, where he did before daily officiate,
and was in obsequio Regis, and per praeceptum Regis, in the Kings service,
(unless it could be then understood to be any either reason or sense to
believe, that he was not in the service of the King, or by his appointment,
when if truth and reason might as they ought to do consort together, it was
evident he was) must be arrested or imprisoned without the Kings leave or
license, as if he were not of the Kings Bedchamber or Privy-Chamber, or any of
the Kings Servants; or if the granting of a Protection by the King to an Earl,
or any other of the Nobility, whilst he was employed in his Wars or affairs, as
many have been, in Foreign parts, should at his return into England be debarred
of his privilege not to be Utlawed or Arrested by Process or Writ of Capias;
or that Ambassadors sent from hence unto Foreign Kings or Princes, without any
Writ of Protection, which has ever been though^ needless to be granted unto
them, should not when they come home enjoy those Immunities and Privileges
were before their going or after their return appropriate and justly due unto
them.

Or that the King may not with as great or greater reason, or cause of kindness
unto himself and his Servants, as well grant his Writs of Protection unto his
Servants in ordinary, as he has done unto some Strangers, or Foreign
Merchants, or unto the Register of Writs, Tit. Protection, 281, 283.
Prior of an Hospital, or some other person, with a nolumus or command not to
molest or permit to be troubled their persons, lands, goods or possessions, and
a suscepimus in protectionem and defensionem, taking them into his defense or
protection; or that the service or attendance of his Domestics, or Servants in
ordinary, either in relation to his person, or his affairs subservient
thereunto which do concern him, and in him the Public safety and welfare,
should not claim a greater regard then other more remote.

And should heretofore be a Supersedeas to some of his Servants elected to
serve for the people of their Country in Parliament, which with the House of
Peers, and presence and authority of the King, makes it to be the Highest Court
of Justice in the Kingdom, and next unto the King, who is the head, life, and
being of it, their greatest and most darling concernment, far exceeding any or
the most part of Employments in the Kings extraordinary occasions either at
home or abroad, which has been the usual subject matters of the King^
Protections under the Great Seal of England, and not now be able or allowed to
receive a just and fitting respect and privilege in his more subordinate and
ordinary Courts of Justice.

When as in the 7th. year of the Reign of King Richard the second, Rot. Claus.
7 R. 2. and Elsyngs ancient and present manner of holding Parliaments.
James Barners being elected a Member of Parliament, was discharged by the
Kings Writ, and a new Writ caused to be made for another election, quia est de
retinentia Regis, and familiaris, and unus Militum Camerae Regis, because he
was of the Kings Retinue, one of his Household Servants, and one of the Knights
of his Chamber, attending in or near unto it; and in the same year Thomas
Morvile was discharged of his election into the House of Commons in Parliament,
which was superseded quia est de retinentia charissimae Dominae and Matris
nostrae Johannae Principissae Walliae, for that he was in the service or
retinue of his Mother the Princess of Wales.

But that and all which has been said and evidenced, will it seems not yet be
enough to remove the pride of heart of such as take a delight to arrest and
imprison the Kings Servants and Attendants, without license or leave first
granted, for Debts or other Actions to which they are entitled, or persuade
them to abandon that unmannerliness, and an Objection which they have lately
found out (as they think) to support it, That if the number of the Kings
Servants were less, there would not be so many to demand their Privileges, or
cause their Creditors to complain against them; and that if any of the Kings
Servants in ordinary be so without leave or license arrested or imprisoned,
whereby the King should or might lose their service, he was to provide others
in their places.

And that any of the Kings Servants in ordinary, waiting upon him by turns or
courses, (for some of them do not) may without leave or license be arrested in
the intervals of their waiting or attendance; which undutifull and uncivilized
opinions, too near of kin to the Principles of Wat Tyler and Jack Cade, and
their Clownish Associates, might have been laid upon the Levelling Dunghill,
and ought to be buried with their illiterate and ungodly Levelling Principles,
which has so long afflicted this Nation, and so greatly helped to ruin and
undo the peace and happiness of it, the Adjutants or Authors whereof may upon a
more sober and modest enquiry easily find.

CHAP. X.
That our Kings (some of which had more then his Majesty now has) have or had
no greater number of Servants in ordinary, then is or has been necessary for
their occasions, safety, well-being, state, honor, magnificence and Majesty;
and that their Servants waiting in their turns or courses, are not without
leave or license as aforesaid to be arrested in the intervals of their waiting
or attendance.

ANd submit themselves and those their innovated formerly unheard of cavils and
pretenses, to the power of truth, and a conviction of those their great
mistakings, if they shall but examine the necessity as well as the reason of
it; for to a Sovereign Prince whose cares are to reach as far as his Monarchy,
there cannot be in respect of the multitude and various sorts of his daily and
ever importuning affairs, in the behalf of himself and the Weal-publick, a few
or small number to be employed therein, if there were neither Honor nor
Majesty to be heeded or supported, both which by an universal consent, Law,
Custom, and usage of Nations, approved and subscribed unto by a general consent
of the intellect and rational faculties of Mankind, should be not only the
desire and joy of the people which are to be ruled and governed by them, but is
a ready means, help and stay unto their welfare, peace and happiness, of which
the examples are as many, as the ages past and the people and Kingdoms of it:
When Abraham although sometimes styled a Prince, (but was no Sovereign (Prince)
but a Sojourner in the Plain of Genesis 12.13, 14, 15.
Mamre) had 318. Servants to go to Battle with him against his five Neighbor
Kings, who had taken and spoiled his Brother Lot. David had together with the
Princes and Rulers of the Tribes, great numbers of Officers, and Men of War,
Officers of his Household, and 1 Chronicles. 26.27, 28.
Servants therein and over his Estate, besides the twelve Captains which as his
Guards did in every month of the year by turns and courses attend him, and the
safety of his person, with four and twenty thousand fighting men. Solomon his
Son had twelve great Officers in their severally appointed Provinces, to
provide Victuals for the King and his Household by courses, each man for his
month, and made the Children of Israel to be his men of War, and his Servants,
and his 1 Reg. 4.
Princes, and his Captains, and Rulers of his Chariots and his Horsemen, had a
thousand and four hundred Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen; which
declared the number of his Servants not to be small, petit, or inconsiderable:
and were so well ordered, as the Queen of Sheba with a great train coming from
far to 1 Reg. 9.22.
see his Glory and his Court, when she did behold the meat of his Table, the
standing of his Servants, as the Margin notes it, the attendance of his
Ministers, and their Apparel, and his Cup-bearers, suffered under a Deliquium
and failing of her spirit; when he had such a state and magnificence to
accompany his Regal power, and so great a number of Servants to furnish out the
glory and honor of his house and person. 1 Reg. 10. v. 4, and 5.16, 17, 18,
19, 20.
Ahasuerus had seven Chamberlains, as Solomon had more then one Cup Bearer, and
Esther had seven Esther 1. v. 10. and ca. 2.
Maidens allowed to her. The Western and Eastern divided Empires of Romes
vastly extended Conquests, glorying in their magnificence, had to adorn the
honor and state of their Emperors, in their Houses and Palaces busied with
multitudes of Civil affairs, their Scholaes and Offices daily and hourly
conversant in the attendance of their Persons, Household or Civil employments;
in every one of which, although Alexander Severus the Emperor did lessen and
Lampridius in vita Alexandri Severi.
contract them* and ordained, ut essent t^t homines in singulis, Officiis* quot
necessitas postularet, that there might be in every Office or employment, so
many Servants as necessity required; there wree of one and the same sort
several ranks and orders, amounting to as great a number as the Imperial port,
state and employments might require, and could not be small, when they kept as
we say open houses to ^eed or refresh those great numbers which came either to
honor or petition their Princes, had so many several Governors, Procurators
and Servants, and so many several Houses and Palaces in their many Kingdoms and
Provinces* and sometimes made and set out so many Epulae and public Feasts,
and many thousand Tables of them at one time to entertain, comfort or please
the people; and to any that shall read the elaborate and learned Comment of
Cuiacius Comment. lib. 10, 11, 12. Cod. Justiniani Pancirollus notitia
utriusque Imperii, Gutherius de Offic. domus Augustae.
Cuiacius upon the 10th. 11th. and 12th. Codes or Books of Justinian
Pancirollus notitia utriusque Imperii, and the laborious and learned Book of
Jacobus Gutherius, of the various Offices and kinds of Services as well private
as public, in the Houses and Palaces of the ancient Emperors, will not appear
to be much if at all supernumerary.

Charlemaigne the Great King of France and Emperor of Rome, as Hinckmarus
Archbishop of Remes writes, who in the latter end of his Reign Hinckmarus Tomo
posteriori, Epist. 14, 17, 24, and 25.
lived and was bred up in his Court, had his several Servants, and took a more
then ordinary care pro honestate Palatii and Rega^i Ornamento, for the honor
of his House or Palace, and his Royal Ornaments, singulis quibusque quotidianis
necessitatibus occurrentibus, every one in their station performing their
several Offices; and the Constitution of his house so laudable, as multitudo
congrua sine qu^ rationabiliter and honest esse non possit, such a competent
number or multitude was necessary, in regard that otherwise the business of the
Household or Palace could not be rationally or honorably done; and care was to
be taken, ut semper esset ornatum Palatium and Consiliariis condignis nunquam
destitutum esset, that the honor of the Kings house might be preserved, and
never want the advice and help of worthy Assistants; and where he speaks of the
number of Huntsmen and Falconers, and their constant attendance within or
without the Court, says, Sensus in his omnibus talis erat ut nunquam Palatio
tales vel tanti deessent ministri, that the meaning was, that there should
never want such or the like Servants: And imparts to us a further reason of
such a number of Servants attending the Courts of Princes in those heroic
times, ut ex quacunque part totius regni quicunque desolatus, orbatus, alieno
aere oppressus injusta calumnia cujusque suffocatus, seu caetera his similia,
maxim tamen de Viduis and Orphanis unuscujusque secundum suam indigentiam vel
qualitatem; Dominorum vero misericordiam and pietatem semper ad manum haberet,
per quem singuli ad pias aures Principis perferre potuissent, that from all
parts of the Kingdom whoever was distressed, afflicted, endebted, or unjustly
accused, or the like, especially Widows and Orphans, might according to their
several necessities and qualities have some at hand to procure the mercy and
piety of their Lords or Masters, whereby every ones Petition or Complaint might
come unto the gracious ears of the Prince.

King Aelfred or Alured who reigned here in the year of Christ 856. had in his
Court a great and Princely attendance of Bishops, Earls and Nobility, Knights
and Esquires, and three Asser Menevensis de gestis Aelfredi, 20.
Troops of Soldiers for the Guards of his Palace, (as if he had an intention
somewhat to imitate David the King of Israel and Juda) tanquam (...) seu
exemplar, as a great and ancient example worthy to be imitated, whereof one
waiting by the space of a month, menseque finito and adveniente alia prima
domum redibat, which being ended that returning home, another succeeded the
other two, propriis quivis necessitatibus students commorabantur, being busied
about their own affairs, tarried in the mean^time at home; secunda itaque
cohors mense peracto adveniente tertia domum redibat, and the second Troop
having served their month, the third came into their places; and the thirds
course or time allotted being ended, the first returned to his former
attendance: Et hoc ordine omnibus vitae praesentis temporibus talium
vicissitudinum in Regali Curto rotatur administratio, and in this manner all
the life time of the said King, and by such changes or courses was the service
in his Royal Court administered. And certainly no small number of Officers and
Servants were heretofore thought to be sufficient in England to attend on our
Kings and Princes, when Hardi-Canutus King of England furnished Tables of meat
for his Servants and all comers four times a day; when Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, who was an Attendant himself upon the King, had in the Reign of King
Edward the second, a Bishop and Barons officiating in his house, 100 Knights
and as many Esquires, besides Officers and common Servants; Bishops, Earls and
Lords in after ages rode and traveled with great Trains and Retinues; Nicholas
West Bishop of Ely in the Reign of King Henry the 8th. had Stows Survey of
London, 134, 135, 138, 139.
continually in his house 200 Servants; Edward Earl of Darby 200 men in
Checque-Roll, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and John Earl of Oxford,
although a well-deserving Ancestor of his that led the Vantguard of King Henry
the 7th. at the Battle of Bosworthfield, was in that Kings after Halcyon days
fined in a then great sum of money for attending him at his house with a very
great Retinue, did usually ride from his house in Essex to his house at
London-Stone in London, with 80 Gentlemen in Livery of Red or Tawny, with
Chains of Gold about their necks, and 100 tall Yeomen in the like Livery to
follow him without Chains, but all wearing his Crest of the blew Boar
embroydered on their left arms, or shoulders; so as in the difference betwixt
the Majesty of a great and Sovereign Prince, being as the Sun in our Firmament,
and the grandeur which his Nobility as the Stars in their lesser lights derived
from it, either did or should endeavor to support the measure or rule of
proportion, may evidence how necessary it is for a King to have an honorable
and competent number of Servants, when those that were so much inferior to the
Majesty, Power and Sovereignty of a free Prince, could in their lesser Orbs not
want a fitting number to attend upon the Honors which he or some of his
Ancestors gave them; when as by an Order of his late Majesty in the year of our
Lord 1626. 40 Messengers of his Chambers were at all times to be ready to do
his Majesty service; and at all entertainments and receptions of Ambassadors,
many of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber are commanded to attend such
of the Nobility as are appointed by the King to receive and conduct the
Ambassadors unto him, in so much as in the year 1636. eight Gentlemen of the
Kings Privy Chamber were appointed to attend the Earl of Lindsey, to bring the
King of Polands Ambassador to Hampton Court; and such multitudes and variety of
cares and business which do attend a King, and the consequences and grand
concernments thereof, so hugely different from any of their Nobility or
Subjects may persuade us to allow our 1 Samuel ca. 10.
Saul to be as well in the number of their Household Servants, as in all other
things, higher from the shoulders upwards than all or any of them; and will
better become him, than those many which our murmurers were so well content to
afford their Oliver the Protector of their intended sl^very, when by his
Instrument so called of his Usurped Government, he was to have two hundred
thousand pounds per annum, for defraying the necessary charges of the
administration of Justice, and other expenses of the Government, besides all
the Kings Revenue which was left unfold, being a considerable part thereof,
with the Fines, Amerciaments, and casual profits of the basely misused and
despoiled Crown of England, and a pay and constant yearly maintenance of Ten
Thousand Horse and Dragoons, and Twenty Thousand Foot in England, Scotland and
Ireland, with a settled yearly Revenue for the maintenance of a convenient
number of Ships for guarding of the Seas, allowed unto him; had his
Chamberlain, Treasurer, and Comptroller of a better house than the Brew House
which he could not thrive in at Huntington, his mis^called Lords of his Privy
Counsel, Commissioners of his Great Seal, Secretary of State, his Turn-coat
Heralds, Sergeants at Oliver Cromwells Instrument of Government made 16 th. of
December. 1653.
Arms, Messengers of his Chamber, Ushers, and many other Servants and Officers
belonging to his Counterfeit Highness, and his Envoys and Ambassadors, one of
which could not be dressed out or sent with a lesser state and magnificence
than 200 Attendants.

And the Lord Mayor of London, being but a temporary and yearly Governor of
that City, and one of the lesser rays of the Majesty of our Kings,
communicated to that annual Magistracy under them, can be allowed for his state
a Recorder, Common Sergeant, Chamberlain, Town^Clerk, Coroner, Sword Bearer,
Marshall, Common Hunt, Common Crier, Water-Bayliff, and Under-Chamberlain, four
Clerks of his Mayors Court, three Sergeant Carvers, as many Sergeants of the
Chamber, a Sergeant and Yeoman of the Channel, four Yeomen of the Waterside,
an Under Water-Bayliff, two Yeomen of the Chamber, three Meal-Weighers, two
Yeomen of the Wood-Wharfs, the Sword-Bearers man, the Common Hunts two men, the
Common Cryers man, the Water-Bayliffs two men, and the Carvers man, some of
which several Officers or Attendants do wait by turns or courses; and has one
of the Kings Maces or Sergeant at Arms at some certain times of Solempnity
attending upon him, a resemblance of a House of Peers in his Court of Aldermen,
where the Recorder is the Prolocutor, and a House of Commons in his Common
Counsel, both which upon occasions he calls and adjourns at his pleasure, has
his Court of Conscience like a Chancery for equity, and several Courts of
Justice; and when he goes with above 60 Companies of all Trades, in a kind of
triumph of their Trade and Mysteries, to take his Oath before the Barons of the
Exchequer, has all the worship and attendance which his Townsmen or Citizens
can help him unto, every one of which Companies of Trade having some 20, some
45, some 120 Livery men, some in their Gowns of Budge, and others with Foines,
who at 20 or 28 l. a piece are willing to purchase a share of pre-eminence in
the rule and ill ordering (instead of better) of their several Fraternities of
Deceipts, together with their Whiflers, Marshals-men, Beadels, and many other
Attendants upon that and all other times of Solempnity, to furnish out the
magnificence of the City.

Nor should the number of the Kings Servants, which the 19. undutifull
Propositions, and all other the unreasonable restrictions and conditions
endeavored by the late Rebellion to be imposed upon our late blessed King and
Martyr, did not seek to restrain or limit, be thought to be too many by the
addition of some extraordinaries.

CHAP. XI.
That the King being not to be limited to a number of his Servants in Ordinary,
is not in so great a variety of affairs and contingencies wherein the public
may be concerned, to be restrained to any certain number of such as he shall
admit to be his Servants Extraordinary.

WHen as there are many times as great a necessity of them, as of those in
Ordinary, either as to service or state, the honoring of persons well
accomplished for services formerly done, or likely to deserve it, or the
retaining of them near unto the King in a dependency upon him, or as it were
allecti or proximi, as many of the Roman Emperors Servants Extraordinary were,
in reversion for special uses or service, when time or occasion should call for
it; and the Grecian and Roman Western and Eastern Emperors, in imitation
probably of those customs and usages of the Hebrews, who were more participant
of the light and emanations of the Divine Wisdom, did so separate those which
had once been employed in their service, from their other Subjects, as they
would not dismiss them where age or other impediments, not their own default or
offenses, did occasion it, without some mark of honor, dependency, or
retaining of them, but did ordain an Ordo Dignitatum, several degrees or
respects to be given unto them, with a sitque plane Sacrilegii reus qui divina
praecepta neglexerit, a penalty that they that offended therein should be
accounted guilty of Sacrilege: The first degree being, 1. For those which were
in Ordinary. 2. For Extraordinaries, or such as deserved to be honored. 3.
Cuiacius ad lib. 12. Cod. Justiniani tit. 8.
For such as did not wait, but were absent. 4. For such as had those titles or
honor given them by certain Letters Patents or Codicils, and were therefore
called Honorarii; it being not unusual in those ancient Registers of reason the
Books or Volumes of the Civil Law, to find the Curiales, Courtiers or Servants
of the Prince, styled Milites Palatini, and the Doctors and Advocates Milites
literati, contradistinct unto the Milites Armati, a more proper kind of
Soldiers or men at Arms guarding or attending upon the person of the Prince;
and the Supernumerarii, Proximi vacantes, (a title borrowed from the customs of
warfare) and Honorarii, being as it were Extraordinaries, as they are at this
day in the Empire of Germany, France, and other Countries and places, and have
been allowed the same privileges with the Princes Servants in actu or agentes,
in ordinary, as to be free from Purveyance, lodging of Strangers, all Parish
and Country Offices, and ab omnibus sordidis Idem ibid. tit. 9.1. tit 29.2. and
tit. 49.2.
muneribus, all employments in the Commonwealth, not becoming the honor of the
service of the Prince; and ut lege vetustissima subjaceant Jurisdictioni
Magistri Officiorum, they should be under the Jurisdiction of the Lord Steward
of the Household, and not be enforced to appear in the subordinate Courts of
Justice; and those privileges were retained post depositam administrationem,
after the quitting of their services, offices or places; and the reason given,
ne sordidis astricti muneribus decus ministerii quod militando videbantur
adepti otii tempore and quietis amittant, lest that being afterward put upon
inferior offices and employments, they should lose the honor they had gained
in the service of their Prince: From which the laudable care of our King Henry
the 8th. did not deviate, when in the 17th. year of his Statutes and Orders
made at Eltham, An. 17 H. 8.
Reign he did by advice of his Privy Counsel ordain, That such of his Servants
as should be found to be impotent, sickly, unable or unmeet to occupy their
places, the King of his gracious disposition, being not willing that any of his
old Servants should be rejected and left without some competent being, unless
their demerits should so require, did order that some convenient entertainment
should be assigned for every one of them toward their being, and to be
discharged from attendance in his Household, and other able, meet, honest and
sufficient persons put in their places, which entertainments upon the death of
every or any the persons discharged, shall cease.

And for such of the Yeomen of the Guard which shall be discharged, the Kings
Grace is contented to make them Yeomen of the Crown, and in consideration of
their service, that such of them as have none Offices of his Grace to the value
of two pence by the day, shall have the wages of six pence by the day uncheque.
So as the reason being the same, and since by a common and customary usage in
the Courts of Princes arrived to a jus gentium, or Law of Nations, it may from
thence and the Civil Law with warrant and authority sufficient be truly
affirmed, that much of our method and courses of Parliaments, Feudal Laws,
Tenures, Great Offices of the Crown, Grand Serjeanties, Privileges of the
Kings Servants, Honors and respects due to Majesty, rules of Honor,
Precedence and Dignities, as well within our Kings and Princes Courts as
without, our Military and Civil Orders and Government, and many of the
proceedings in our Courts of Justice, and the Vizz. anius l. 1. de mandatis
Principum, l. 1. sect. sed etsi 7. C. de vet. Jur. emol. l. 1. ff. de
constitut. Princip.
Latin part and superintendency of our High Court of Chancery, in granting of
our Kings Rescripts and Writs remedial to prevent a failer of Justice, have had
their patterns and originals, well approved by right reason and our Common Laws
and reasonable Customs.

By directions of which Law of Nations, and the Civil Law, (from whence our
Common Laws have borrowed many a maxim, and much of their excellency and
reason) our late blessed Martyr King Charles the First, as many of his Royal
Progenitors and Predecessors had done before him, did sometimes as his
occasions or affairs persuaded him, admit some to be sworn his Chaplains
extraordinary, where the worth or budding eminency of some Divines or Students
in Theology attracted his eye or intentions to prefer or take them nearer to
himself, to be his Chaplains in ordinary upon the next avoidance or vacancy, or
otherwise to prefer them in some Church, Office or Dignity, as in the year
1628. Doctor Miclethwaite Master of the Temple, and an eminent Preacher; Doctor
Samuel Ward, a man more then he should have been averse to the Discipline of
the Church of England; Peter Heylin a well deserving Divine, and dutiful Son
of the Church; in the year 1632. the learned Robert Saunderson Bachelor of
Divinity, afterward Bishop of Lincoln, and a great light of the Church; Ralph
Brownrigge Doctor of Divinity, afterward Bishop of Exeter, sworn in the year
1638. one of his Majesty's Chaplains Extraordinary; and in Anno 1630. Herbert
Croft Bachelor of Divinity, now Bishop of Hereford; and did not refuse diverse
of the Sons of the Nobility, who sought to partake of the honor of access unto
his Majesty, and the more select rooms of State in his Court, (which in that of
the Kings of Spain is not thought fit to be communicated but to some of their
especial Attendants) to be sworn Gentlemen Extraordinary of his Privy-Chamber,
as in the year 1631. the Lord Matravers eldest Son to Thomas Earl of Arundel
and Surrey, and Sir William Howard Knight of the Bath, now Viscount Stafford,
his Brother; and in the year 1638. the Earl of Kildare the first Earl of
Ireland, who could not be blamed for their inclinations or tendency to the
center of Honor, when as long before the Conquest or fatal period of our Saxon
Ancestors, King Alfred had many of the Asser Menevensi^ de rebus gestis Alfredi.
Sons of the Nobility educated and brought up in his Court; and that noble and
well becoming custom received and met with in many ages after so great an
encouragement, as the young Lords or Nobility had a constant Table or diet in
the Court, until in the Reign of King Edward the 6th. the persuasions of a
needless and unhappy parsimony did put an end to that part of the Royal
munificence, which King Henry the 3d. in some hundred years before would not in
his greatest wants of daily necessaries, occasioned by some of his unruly
Barons, when he took such relief as some Abbeys would afford him, quit that
part of the honor of his Court or Household; nor did our late King of blessed
memory, deny the like honor of his Privy-Chamber to diverse Gentlemen of note
or great esteem in their Countries, as Sir Arthur Capel Knight, a^terwards Lord
Capel, that heroic and loyal Martyr for his King, and the Fifth Commandment of
his Heavenly King, charged upon all Mankind in the Decalogue, Sir Thomas
Richardson Knight, Son of Sir Thomas Richardson Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
the Court of King's Bench, or Sir Thomas Roe Knight, a learned and well
experienced Ambassador to the Mogor or Mogull, that great Prince in the
East Indies, and to several States and Kingdoms in Christendom; Sir Fulk Hunkes
Knight, and Sir Ferdinando Knightley Knight, two well experienced Commanders in
the English Regiments in the Netherlands or United Provinces, Sir Edward
Dearing Knight, one of the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament in the
year 1641. and unto Sir William Waller Knight, who afterward bitterly repented
the vainglory of being a Conqueror of some of his Sovereigns Forces,
endeavoring to defend him and their Laws and Liberties in the late Rebellion,
and to some others who could afterward stain their formerly more loyal
Families in that horrid Rebellion, and employ their time and Estates against
their King which had ^o much honored them; or to admit into his service as a
Servant Extraordinary Edmond Cooper a Drummer, John Houghton a Surgeon, or
some excellent Picture-drawer, as the famous Sir Anthony van Dike, or some
Foreign curious Engineer, Gunsmith, or other excelling Artificers, who without
some such encouragements would not have benefited our Nation with their skill
and residence; and was in that Prince of blessed memory, and will be in our
gracious Sovereign no less allowable than i^ was in King David, to take into
his Family as an Extraordinary, when his affection and gratitude prompted him
unto it, 2 Samuel 19. v. 37, 38.
Chimham the son of the good old Barzillai, when many of the Yeomanry of
England have besides their Servants in ordinary, some that are as
extraordinary, and work a great part of the year with them.

And the Nobility and Gentry of England (sinc^ their restraint of giving
Liveries by several Acts of Parliament, to prevent the too freequent use of
that in making of parties and factions, in one of which, viz. that of the first
and second year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th. cap. 21. it is provided, as
has been mentioned, That the King may give his Honorable Livery to his menial
Knights and Esquires, and also to his Knights and Esquires of his retinue, who
are not to use it in their Counties, but in the Kings presence, and the Prince
and the Nobility coming unto the Court and returning from thence, were
specially excepted) are not at this day debarred the moderate use of Liveries,
or some as extraordinary Servants to be employed upon several occasions, to
retain unto them; as the Lord Mayor of London is not without the attendance of
Liverymen of the Companies or Fraternities of Trade, or such as he shall select
out of them, in some grand Solemnities, as the meeting or welcoming of the King
to his City or Chamber of London, at his return from a Progress, or from
Scotland, to conduct into the City a Russian or Persian Ambassador, and it has
been ever accounted to be a Royal or honorable way of Espargne to have some to
be extraordinary Servants, without the charge of Bouche of Court, or annual
salaries, to be always in readiness at grand festivals or occasions; and those
Citizens of London, and men of the Mysteries of gain and Trade, who have
aggrandized their Credits and Estates by the Sunshine and warmth of the
residence of the King and his Courts of Justice, can when a little before they
could busy themselves in needless murmurs and complaints against the
Privileges of the Kings Servants in ordinary and extraordinary, think
themselves to be no mean men in their Parishes and Companies, if they can
procure the favor to be admitted the Kings Servants extraordinary, as he shall
have occasion to be cozened in such Manufactures or Wares as their Trades
afford, in so much as it is become the preferment and ambition of one of every
Trade, great or little, (some few only excepted) in the City of London, to be
entitled to be the Kings Servant, as the Kings Grocer, Brewer, Apothecary,
Mercer, Draper, Silkman, Tailor, Printer, Stationer, Bookseller, Girdler, (a
Trade now altogether disused) Shoemaker, Spurrier, etc. and are well contented
to enjoy all the Privileges appertaining to the Kings Servants, as not to bear
Offices in their Parishes or Custard-cram'd Companies, and not to be arrested
without license. And their Wives swelling into a tympany of Pride, will be apt
enough to think their former place and reputation too far beneath them, and not
let their Husbands purse have any rest or quiet until they can be fine enough
to go to the Court, and see the Lords and Ladies their Husbands fellow
Servants: And they which cannot attain to that honor to be such a Servant of
the Kings extraordinary, for they cannot be truly said to be any thing more
than the Kings Servants extraordinary, when as he as to many of them has no
daily, or but a seldom and occasional use of them, and where he has most it is
not constantly or often, do think it to be worth the utmost of their endeavors
to obtain the honor and privilege of being the Queens Tradesmen or Servants
extraordinary: And therefore the King having fewer Servants or Officers in
ordinary, than the Kings of France his Neighbors used to have, who besides
their numerous Guard* have four Kings at Arms, eight Masters of Request, deux
Maistres d'Hostel, two Masters of the Household, thirteen Pages of Honor, and
two hundred Gentlemen Pensioners, etc. and a far lesser number than many of his
Royal Progenitors, should not now be thought to have too many because he has
some extraordinary.

And although it is not hard or difficult to believe, but that heretofore the
Common people of England were sometimes troubled at the unruliness and
misdoings of the Purveyors, (which were afterward well prevented in the Reign
of Q. Elizabeth, by a Composition made with the several Counties, what
proportions of Provisions the City of London and every County should by equal
charge and collection pay and deliver toward the support and maintenance of
the Provision for the Kings Household) yet notwithstanding they did in their
duty and reverence unto the King, and respect unto his Servants, not think it
reasonable or comely to arrest or trouble his Purveyors or Servants by any
Arrest or Actions, without asking his leave or license.

But where they had any grievance by his Officers and Servants, and the Laws in
force would have given them their Actions and remedies, were so unwilling to
make use of those ordinary helps which the Laws were at all times ready to
afford them, as they would rather trouble the Commons in Parliament to petition
in their behalf for a redress therein, who could not but understand that where
an Act of Parliament gives remedies either against the Kings Servants, Barons,
Bishops, or others, it is to be more aut cursu solito, in such ways and
manner, if no other in particular be prescribed, as the Laws and reasonable
Customs of England will allow, and not otherwise. A prospect whereof, and of
our Kings of Englands care to protect their Servants in their Liberties and
Privileges, as well as to do Justice unto the rest of their Subjects
complaining of them in Parliament, needs not be far to seek to those that will
but retrospect and enquire into the ages past.

CHAP. XII.
That the Subjects of England had heretofore such a regard of the King and his
Servants, as not to bring or commence their Actions where the Law allowed them,
against such of his Servants which had grieved or injured them, without a
remedy first petitioned for in Parliament.

WHen in the 13th. year of the 13 E. 3. Rot. Parl m. 14, and 15.
Reign of King Edward the third, the Commons petitioning the King in
Parliament, (which they needed not to have done, when the Law would have given
them remedy without the trouble of petitioning the King in Parliament, and they
might by the Statute made in the 28th. year of 28 E. 1* ca 2.
King Edward the first, have pursued them as Felons) That all Purveyors as well
with Commission as without, might be arrested if they make not present pay. All
that was answered unto it, (as if there were altogether an unwillingness to
expose them to Arrests, and with which the Commons seemed to be satisfied) was,
That the Commissioners of Sir William Healingford and all other Commissioners
for Purveyance for the King be utterly void.

In the 20th. year of that 20 E. 3. Rot. Parl. m. 19.
Kings Reign, the Commons in Parliament petitioning, That payment be made for
the last taking of Victuals: The Kings answer was, That order should be taken
therein. In the Ibid. m. 23.
same year the Commons in Parliament petitioning the King, That Purveyors not
taking the Constables with them, according to the Statutes of Westminster,
might be taken as Thieves, and that the Judges of Assise or Justices of the
Peace might enquire of the same: The King only answered, That the Statutes made
should be observed

In the 21th. year of the said 21 E. 3. Rot. Parl. m. 22.
Kings Reign, the Commons in Parliament not thinking it fitting that the
Purveyors who did them wrong should be instantly laid hold of, or troubled with
Suits or Actions, or the King and Queens Horses impounded, which would be a
less affront to Majesty than the arresting of his Servants, did only petition,
That whereas the King and Queens Horses being carried from place to place in
some Counties, had Purveyance of Hay and Oats, etc. made for them; That the
said Horses might abide in some certain place of the Country, and provision
made for them there in convenient times of the year by agreement with the
Owners of those Goods, and that inquiry might be made of the ill behavior of
those Takers before that time, and that by Commissions the Plaintiff or party
grieved in that kind, as well of wrongs heretofore done or hereafter to be
done, might have redress therein.

To which the King answered, That he was well pleased that the Ordinances
already made should be kept, and Purveyance made for his best profit, and ease
of his people.

And in the same year the Commons having complained, That whereas the King and
his Council had assented, that Men and Horses of the Kings Household should not
be Harbinged but by Bill of the Marshal of the House delivered to the
Constable, who should cause them to have good sustenance for themselves and
their Horses as should be meet, and before their departures should pay the
parties of whom the Victuals were taken, and if they did not, their Horses
should be arrested, and that contrary thereunto they departed without payment:
(when it seems they used so much civility to the Horses as not to arrest them)
did only pray, that in every Bill mention be made of the number of Horses, that
no more but one Garson be allowed, and that payment according to the Statute
might be made from day to day. Whereunto the King answered, That that Article
should be kept in all points according to the form of the Statute.

In the 28th. year of the Rot. Parl. 28 E. 3. m. 34.
Reign of that King, by an Act of Parliament not printed, when it was enacted,
That no Purveyor arrested for any misdemeanor should have any Privy Seal to
cause such as arrested him to come before the Council to answer to the King,
(when it seems the King and his Council were unwilling to put the Kings
Servants under the command of every man's pretended Action) but the party
grieved might have his remedy by the Common Law; the utmost extent of that
Statute did not include any other of the Kings Servants then his Purveyors.

And did so little disrelish Rot. Parl. 45 E. 3. m. 44.
Protections, and the just grounds and reason thereof, as in the 45th. year of
the Reign of King Edward the third, the Commons in Parliament petitioned the
King, That such as remained upon the Seacoasts by the Kings commandment, might
have protection with the Clausa volumus; which the King supposing to be too
general, or at that time unnecessary, answered, That the same would be to the
apparent loss of the Commons.

In the 46th. year of the 46 E. 3. Rot. Parl. m. 25.
Reign of that King, the Commons petitioning the King in Parliament, That
whereas it was granted that no Purveyance be but where payment is made at the
taking, that it would please him that that Ordinance be holden as it was
granted.

The King does not in express terms answer, that the party should take his
course at Law, but only, That it pleases the King that he that finds himself
grieved shall pursue it, and right shall be done unto him.

In the 47th. year of the Rot. Parl. 47 E. 3. m. 23.
Reign of King Edward the third, the Commons did in Parliament (although the
Statute made not long before in the 36th. year of his Reign, cap. 2. gave them
sufficient remedy and power to resist) petition the King, That the Statute made
whereby buyers for the Kings Household should pay readily should stand, and that
no man be impeached for r^sisting them therein.

To which the King answered, The Statute therefore provided shall be kept, and
who will complain shall be heard.

In the 50th. year of the (...). P^rl* 5^ ^* 3. m* 77.
Reign of the said King Edward the third, the Commons in Parliament did
petition the King, That the Clarks of the Market for the Kings Household (when
as the Common Law, and the Statutes of 9 H. 3. cap. 26* and 14 E. 3. cap. 12.
had before given them sufficient remedy against Clarks of the Market) should
not by extortion take Fines in gross or certain of any Towns, but that there
might be appointed a certain^y of weights and measures according to the
Standard and Statutes thereof made: The King answered, That he would be thereof
advised.

In the same ^
Parliament the Commons (although the Common Law and the Statutes made in the
28th. year of the Reign of King Edward the first, and the 5th. and 10th. years
of the Reign of King Edward the third, had provided sufficient remedies) did
complain against the Court of the Marshalsea; to which the King answered* ^he
would charge the Steward and Officers to make redress.

And in the ^
Parliament aforesaid petitioning the King, That by Protections cum ^lausa
Volumu^ many men were undone, and praying that one made to Jacob Jacomino, a
Lombard, might be repealed, and no such hereafter granted: The King answered,
That upon examination of such had by the Council, it should if need be
repealed. And in the year next following, petitioning the King in Parment, That
Rot. Parl. 51 E. 3. m. 49.
the Protections of such as did lie at Calais, or about Picardy, only to delay
such as did sue them, might be repealed, and no such from thence granted: The
King answered, That if his Council should be informed of such covin, it should
be redressed.

And the Commons in Parliament in the same year of the 51 E. 3. Rot. Parl. m.
42. 3 E. 1. c. 28. 28 E. 1. c. 11. 1 E. 3. c. 14. 4 E. 3. c. 11. 20 E. 3. c. 4.
Reign of that King, though by a Statute made in the third year of the Reign of
King Edward the first, cap. 28. a Statute made in the 28th. year of the said
King, cap. 11. a Statute made in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the
third, cap. 14. another in the 4th. year of the Reign of the aforesaid King,
cap. 11. a Statute made in the 20th. year of the said King, cap. 4. remedies
were for the same provided, and there were diverse Writs framed in the Register
and to be thereupon had of course, petitioning the King, That none of his
Officers be maintainers of any quarrels (which the said Statutes did severely
prohibit) in the Countries, on pain to lose their Offices, and to answer double
to the party grieved: The King answered, That he had forbidden his Officers so
to do, and if any be grieved he should be heard.

And in the same year, when they had remedy given them by the Law against any
the unjust dealing of Purveyors, did petition the King, That the Statutes made
be not repealed but by assent of Parliament, and that the Statute of Purveyance
might be executed: To which the King answered, they cannot; and that for the
Purveyors the Law made should stand.

In the first year of the 1 R. 2. Rot. Parl. m. 64.
Reign of King Richard the second, the Commons (when there were Laws in force
which might have saved them that trouble) did petition the King in Parliament,
That no Officers of the Exchequer, or of the Kings Household, do maintain any
quarrels in their Countries, and that the privilege of the Exchequer might be
declared. To which the King answered, touching maintenance, order is before
taken; and for further declaration it has been used, that all Officers of the
Exchequer and Servants with them abiding, should in all personal Actions be
sued and sue in the Exchequer, and not elsewhere.

In the same 1 R. 2. Rot. Parl. m. 65.
Parliament the Commons petitioning the King, That the Jurisdiction of the
Marshalsea (which is a Court greatly concerning the Kings Household) might be
limited, and that all men might have their Liberties allowed as well within the
Virge as without; and that no Court of Ancient Demesne be thereby disturbed:
The King answered, The Marshalsea shall have such Jurisdiction as heretofore,
and who will complain shall be heard.

And petitioning also the King in Parliament, That every man might upon the
Kings Protections aver that the party was not in the Kings service according
to the (...) of his Protection; The King answered, Tha^ (...) Averment lay not
in such cases.

In the same Parliament the Citizens of London thinking to (...) R^t. Parl ^ R
^. m. 97.
unto their hea^s of Liberties more then (...) fitting, or right reason could
grant them, did with much partiality petition the King, That no Protection
Royal might be allowed in Debt, Account, or Trespass, wherein a Freeman of
London should be Plaintiff. Unto which as to Rot. Parl. 1 R. 2. m. ^33*
Victuals bought after the voyage or service whereof the Protection mentions,
or for Debt or Contract after the date of such Protection purchased, the King
granted and it was enacted accordingly.

In the third year of the Reign of that King, (when but the year before the
hindering and delaying of men in the pursuit and recovery of their just Debts,
was in the Parliament of the second year of that King, in the case of Robert de
Hawley, pursued upon an arrest in an Action of Debt, and slain at the High
Altar in Westminster Abbey, being then a Sanctuary to which he fled, declared
before the King in Parliament to be a grievous sin, the Judges and Rot. Parl. 2
R. 2. part^ prima.
Lawyers of the Land, and the Doctors of Divinity, Canon and Civil Law
assenting thereunto: And the Doctors of Divinity, Canon and Civil Law, upon
grave and well advised deliberation, delivering upon Oath their opinions, That
in case of Debt, Account, or Trespass, where life or member was not in
question, no Sanctuary or Immunity of Holy Church ought to be allowed; and in
high expressions further said, que Dieu salvez sa perfection, ne le Pape salvez
sa sanctitee, ne null Roy ou Prince purroit granter tiel privilege, that God
saving his perfection, nor the Pope saving his holiness, nor any King or Prince
could grant such a privilege: Et si aucun Prince vorroit tiel privilege
granter, and if any Prince should grant any such privilege, the Church whose
actions should be according to virtue, was not to accept of any privilege
whereby such a grievous sin might arise, to delay or hinder any man voluntarily
of his just Debt.) Rot. Parl. 3 R. 2. m. 2^.
William of Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, having a great Plea of Land long
depending for the Honor and Castle of Denbigh in Wales, against the Earl of
March in Parliament upon a Writ of Error, Sir John Bishopson Clerk and Servant
to the said Earl of March, in the absence of the said Earl then being in Wales
preparing himself to go into Ireland, where he was appointed to be the Kings
Lieutenant, showed the Kings Protection made to the said Earl for one half
year, which being read was allowed.

In the 6th. year of the said 6 R. 2. Rot. Parl. m. 1^.
Kings Reign, the Commons in Parliament not desirous as it may seem to take
their course in Law, which several Acts of Parliament had allowed them, did
pray, That the Statutes of Purveyors be observed, and that ready payment may be
made. To which the King answered, That the Statutes therefore made should be
observed.

In the 7th. year of the Reign of the aforesaid 7 R. 2. Ro^* Parl. m. 58*
King, the Commons in Parliament petitioning the King, That remedy might be had
against Protections: The King answered, That the Chancellor upon cause should
redress the same.

In the 8th. year of that King, the Rot. Parl. 8 R. 2. m. 29.
Commons in Parliament did pray the King, That remedy might be had against the
Clerks of the Exchequer, (whose business under the Treasurer being to collect
and gather in the mone^s and profits of his Revenue, might in some sort be
taken to be a Latere, and as his Servants) who would not allow the pardons of
King Edward the third without great charge to the parties. Unto which the King
answered, That he who has cause to complain may do so and be heard.

In the 9th. year of his Reign, the Rot. Parl. 9 R 2. m. 31.
Citizens of London did in Parliament petition the King, That the Patent lately
made to the Constable of the Tower of London, who by color thereof took Custom
of Wines, Oysters, and other Victuals coming by water to London, (wherein their
Charter and the Common Law would have relieved them) might be revoked; which
was granted.

In the 10th. year of the said Rot. Parl. 10 R. 2. m. 26.
Kings Reign, the Commons in Parliament petitioning the King, That no
Protection to delay any man be granted: The King answered, That who should
especially complain may find remedy at the Chancellors hands. And in the same
year and Parliament, praying That no Protection be granted from thenceforth in
Assise or Novel Disseisin, or other plea of Land: The King answered, If the
same be demanded he will be advised before the grant.

And in those and other Parliaments, where within the virge and compass of
loyalty and modesty, they were by the favor, indulgence, and allowance of our
Kings, permitted by their Petitions, Procurators, or Representatives, to speak
more plainly than at other times, or in other places in the representing of any
grievances, did it with such an awful regard and tenderness:

As conceiving themselves to be grieved by a more than ordinary number of the
Kings Sergeants at Arms bearing the Royal Masses or Maces, they did in the
aforesaid Parliament of the 10 th. year of the Reign of the aforesaid King
Richard the second, Petition the King, That there might be no more Sergeants at
Arms than had been heretofore; and that for doing otherwise than they should,
they might be expelled.

And were in the 20th. year of his Rot. Parl. 20 R. 2. m. 36.
Reign so careful of his Officers, as they did in Parliament complain, That
they were excommunicated for making Arrests or Attachments in the Churchyards;
and prayed remedy: To which the King answered, Right shall be done to such as
be especially grieved.

In the second year of the Rot. Parl. 2 H. 4. m. 58.
Reign of King Henry the 4th. petitioning the King in Parliament, That no
Protection be granted to any person Religious: The King answered, That the
Protections with the clause Volumus granted to them, shall be revoked, and they
shall have such Protections granted unto them.

In the same Parliament the 2 H. 4. Rot. Parl. m. 64.
Commons did pray, That no man be kept from Justice by any Writ, or other means
obtained from the King by sundry suggestions, on pain of twenty pounds to the
obtainer of the same: whereunto the King answered, The Statute there appointed
shall be kept, and who does the contrary, shall incurr the pain aforesaid.

In the fifth year of that Kings Reign, they petitioned in 5 H. 4. Rot. Parl.
m. 73.
Parliament, That no Supersedeas (which may be understood of Protections) be
granted to hinder any man of his Action: whereunto the King answered, The
Statute therefore made, shall be observed.

In the 7th. and 8th. year of his Reign, the Rot. Parl. 7 and 8 H. 4. m. 69,
70, and 82.
Commons in Parliament (although there were then diverse Laws and Statutes in
force to quiet their sears, or relieve their grievances,) did petition the
King, That none about his Person do pursue any suit or quarrel by any other
means, than by the order of the Common Law; and that none of the Officers of
the Marshalsea of the Kings house do hold Plea, other than they did in the time
of King Edward the first.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 7 H. 4. cap. 4.
7th. year of the Reign of that King, grounded upon some Petition to that
purpose, No Protection was to be allowed unto Gaolers of the Marshalsea,
King's Bench, Fleet, etc. that do let Prisoners for debt go at large, and
afterward purchase Protections; which admits such Prison-keepers capable of
Protections where they were not guilty, or to be sheltered from the punishment
of such offenses.

In the 7th. and 8th. year of the 7 and 8 H^. 4. Rot. Parl. m. 38. and 2 H. 4.
cap. 14*
Reign of that King, the Commons in Parliament (although by an Act of
Parliament made in the second year of the Reign of that King, Every Purveyor
that did not make ready payment for all that he took, was to forfeit his
Office, and pay as much to the party grieved;) Petitioning the King, That
payment might be made for Victuals taken by the Kings Purveyors from the time
of his Coronation: The King answered, He is willing to do* the same, and that
all Statutes of Purveyors be observed.

And in the 11th. year of his 11 H. 4. Rot. Parl. m. 16.
Reign petitihning him, That payment might be made for Victuals taken by his
Purveyors; he promised convenient payment.

In the third year of the Reign of King Henry the fifth, the 3 H. 5. Rot* Parl.
m. 38.
Commons in Parliament (although they had before sufficient remedies by Law,
did Petition the King, That the Purveyors may take no provisions in the Market,
without the good will of the party, and ready money: To which the King
answered, That the Statute therefore should be observed.

In the Parliament holden in the 4th. year of the 4 H. 5. Rot. Parl m 28.
Reign of King Henry the fifth, the Commons did Petition the King, That none of
his Subjects be fore-barred of their due debts or suits for the same, by color
of protections granted to any Prior Alien, but during such time as they should
serve the King beyond the Seas: unto which he answered, The Prerogative and
Common Law shall be maintained.

In the 20th. year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth, the Commons in 20 H.
6. Rot. Parl. 12.
Parliament were so unwilling that their own concernments should hinder any of
the Kings affairs, as they did petition him, That John Lord Talbot purposing to
serve the King in his Wars in France, a Protection with the Clausa volumus
might be granted unto him for a year, and that by Parliament it might be
ordained that it it be without the exception of Novel disseisin, and to be put
under the Great Seal of England with other Immunities, whilst he be so in the
Kings service; which the King granted, Provided that the said John Lord Talbot,
and Margaret his Wife, Edward Earl of Dorset, and others named, should not
enter upon any Lands whereof James Lord Barkly, and Sir William Barkley his son
were seized the first day of that Parliament, or bring any Action concerning
the same.

And so little desired the heretofore too powerful Clergy of England to
extend their power where they legally and inoffensively might do it.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Clergy of England in the height of their Pride and Superlative
Privileges, Encouragements, and Protection by the Papal overgrown Authority,
did in many cases lay aside their Thunderbolts and power of Excommunications,
appeals to the Pope, and obtaining his Interdictions of Kingdoms, Churches,
and Parishes, and take the milder, modest, and more reverential way of
petitioning our Kings in Parliaments, rather than turn the rigors of their
Canon or Ecclesiastical Laws, or of the Laws of England, against any of the
Kings Officers or Servants.

AS they did in the 14th. year of the Reign of King Edward the third (although
by the Statute made in the 28th. year of the Reign of King Edward the first,
making some Actions and Injuries which they then complained of to be Felony,
they might without their petitioning in Parliament have had ample and easy
remedies) petition the King in 14 E. 3. and Rot. Parl. 14 E. 3. m* 12.
Parliament against some grievances and oppressions done by some of the Kings
Servants to people of holy Church by his Purveyors and Servants, amongst which,
were the abuses done by his Purveyors, in taking the Corn, Hay, Beasts,
Carriage, and other goods of the Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons and Vicars,
without the agreement and good will of the Owners, and did thereupon obtain the
Kings Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, which in the Parliament
Roll is called a Statute, and is as an Act of Parliament printed among the Acts
of Parliament; did declare, That he took them and their possessions into the
especial Protection of him, and his Heirs, and Successors, and that they should
not be any more so charged, nor to receive into their houses Guests nor
Sojourners of Scotland, nor of other Countries, nor the Horses, nor Dogs,
Faulcons, nor other Hawks of the Kings or others against their will, saving to
the King the services due of right from them, which owe to the King the same
services to sustain and receive Dogs, Horses, or Hawks.

In a Parliamant in the first year of the Reign of King 1 R 2. Rot. Parl. m.
115.
Richard the second, although diverse Laws in force had provided them remedies
of course which needed no petitioning, they did petition the King, That they
were upon every temporal suggestion arrest^d into the Marshalsea, and paid for
their discharge 6 s. 8 d. where a Layman pays only 4 s. unto which the King
did answer, Let the party grieved complain to the Steward of the household, and
they shall have remedy.

And did in that but follow the patterns of Loyalty, Prudence, and self
preservation, cut out and left unto all true hearted Englishmen by their worthy
and pious Ancestors and Predecessors, who when the Tenures in Capite and by
Knight Service which obliged all the Nobility, and many thousands of the best
part of the Gentry, to follow their Prince to his Wars abroad, or defend him
and his honor at home, did in their duty to him, and the care of their own
estates and concernments, with their numerous well-wishing and dutiful Tenants
attending them, follow him into the Wars and Voyages Royal, and remained there
by the space of forty days at their own charges, and afterward as long as
they lasted at the the Kings, which must needs be a great obstruction to many
men's Action, or the recovery of their Debts or Rights, and much better
understand that universal Axiom and Rule of the Laws of Nature, Necessity, and
Nations, then the late ill advised Lord Mayor, and some Citizens of London did,
who in the late dreadful fire in the year of our Lord 1666. did, to save the
pulling down of a few houses to prevent the fury of a most dire and dismal
fire, and not a seventh part of their goods, did see but too late the necessity
of pulling down some houses, and when they might have endeavored it, would
allow it to be warrantable by the Lord Mayors order, but not the Kings, and in
that fond dispute and his Timidity, most imprudently suffer and give way to the
burning down of many thousand houses, and converting into ashes almost all that
once great and flourishing City, that privata cedere debent publicis, every
man's private affairs were to be laid aside, and give place to the public
being, the best way of self preservation: And did not as they would do now,
rush upon, Arrest, or Imprison either the Kings Servants, or such as were
employed by him, or unto whom he had granted his Writs of Protection, without
asking leave of him; but with a modesty and reverence becoming Subjects,
plicate him for a Revocation: or if they did not or could not purchase it that
way, did sometimes become Petitioners in Parliament for some regulations in
Protections granted upon some special and temporary employments to such as were
not his Servants in ordinary, not for a total abolition, or to take away that
part of the Kings Prerogative in order to the Government and their own well
being; the answers whereunto showed as much care in the King and his Council,
as might be to give them content and satisfaction, and at the same time not to
depart from or lessen the Rights of the Crown more than was merely necessary or
in grace or savor for that particular time, occasion, or grievance, to be
granted or remitted unto them.

And no less careful were the Judges in former ages in their delegated Courts,
and proceedings in Justice, to pay their respects to the service of the King,
and likewise to his Servants, or any other employed therein.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Judges in former times did in their Courts, and proceedings of Law
and Justice, manifest their unwillingness to give or permit any obstruction to
the service of the King, and Weal Public.

WHen Bracton declares the Laws and Usage of the Kingdom to be in the Reign of
King Henry the third, and King Edward the first, that Warrantizatur Essonium
multipliciter quandoque per breve Domini Bracton lib. 5. de Essoniis cap. 2.
Regis, ubi non est necessitas jurare cum Dominus Rex hoc testatur per literas
suas quod sic detentus est in servitio suo; and videndum est utrum quis
teneatur de necessitat^ ad tale servit^um, vel si fuerit cum aliquo qui tenetur
sicut Miles vel Serviens de familia omnibus istis debet subveniri: An Essoin is
warranted many ways by the Kings Writ, where the Tenant or Defendant needs not
to swear when the King witnesses by his Letters that he is detained in his
service; wherein it is to be observed, whether he be necessitated to such a
service, or if he be with another who as a Knight is obliged thereunto, or as a
Servant in the Kings Family, in all which he is to be helped and such an Essoin
allowed.

In causa dotis and ultimae praesentationis Ibidem ca. 3.. 4.
propter necessitatem lapsu temporis inductam warrantia vero de servitio Domini
Regis, non est concedenda in omnibus nec sine rationabili causa. Et cum
aliquando de voluntate Domini Regis concedatur, non erit omnino per justic.
quassanda, sed voluntas Regis expressa inde erat expectanda: In a case of doner
and last presentation, the warranty of the King that the Tenant is in his
service is not to be granted, in regard of lapse of time which may cause a
prejudice to the Demandant, nor is not to be granted in all cases, nor without
a reasonable cause. And when it is sometimes granted at the pleasure and will
of the King, it is not at all to be quashed or rejected, but the Kings express
will and pleasure is to be expected.

Where a man is Essoined in servitio Domini Regis ultra Mare vel citra,
differri poterit loquela quamdiu Essoniatus fuerit in servitio Domini Regis,
dum tamen Idem ibidem ca. 5.
habet ad manum quolibet die warrantum suum breve Domini Regis, in regard that
he is in the service of the King either beyond or on this side of the Sea, the
suit is to be deferred as long as he shall be in the service of the King, so as
he do every day produce the Kings Writ to testify it; after a defalt entered,
capiatur dies amoris per officium Judicis, vel ex voluntvtate Regis, vel ex
necessitate aliqua, the Judge may in favor (or discretion) grant Bracton lib.
5. de defaltis,. 4.
another day, or at the Kings command, or upon some other necessity.

Where the King is vouched to warranty, it is cum quandum curialitate, in a
certain Idem lib. 5. de warrantia,. 9.
observance of duty or respect unto him to be only entered, because he may not
be summoned and sine Rege respondere non potest, that he cannot answer without
the King.

Ralph de Hengham a Chief Justice of England under King Edward the first, about
the 16th. year of his Reign, says that Essonium de servitio Domini Regis
semper admittitur, and locum tenet Hengham magna. ca 4.
ad alium diem dummodo porrigatur breve Domini Regis de warranto Essonii
praedicti, an Essoin of the service of the King is always to be admitted, and
gives a respite to another day, so as a Writ of the Kings be brought to warrant
the Essoin, Quando Dominus Rex est in exercitu Reo secum existente, when the
King is in the Army, and the Tenant or Defendant with him, and it be made to
appear in the Chancery there shall be the like warranty; but if the King be not
in the Army himself, but sends one into it in his service, and it is not found
in the Rolls of Chancery a Writ of Protection shall be granted, Si aliquis
Miles Compatriota ipsius sacramento testificetur ipsum esse tali die in
servitio Domini Regis, if any Knight (or Soldier) shall upon his Oath testify
that he was such a day in the Kings service.

After a Writ of View, and a Petit Cape, and aliis diebus praeteritis and
futuris, absentia Rei salvari potest per Essonium and Warrantum de servitio
Regis, and other days past and to come, the absence of the Tenant may be saved
by an Essoin and Warrant of the Kings service, at which time also, if default
be made, de plano constat possit Idem ibidem ca. 11.
prorogari hujusmodi loquela de uno termino in alium, it cannot be denied but
the Action may be prorogued from one Term to another, although the death of the
Demandant, loss of rents and profits may happen in the mean time, and says
Hengham, frequenter fit talis dilatio ex lege and principis benificio,
frequently such delays may happen by the Law and the Princes favor.

In Trinity Term, Trin. 17 E. 3.21.
in the 17th. year of the Reign of King Edward the third, a common Essoin was
cast for the Defendant, and also an Essoin of the service of the King.

In Hillary Term, Hill. 17 E. 3.7.
in the same year, a Protection of a later date than the quarto die post was
allowed in a Plea of land, eo quod in servitio Regis.

In Easter Term, in the 18th. year of his Reign, in a Writ of disceit brought
by Gilbert Colley Plaintiff against Pascha 18 E. 3.6.
William de Milborne Chivaler, for that after a Venire facias sued in a Writ of
Formedon a Protection was brought by the Tenant which did put the Action
without day, supposing by the Protection that he was in the Kings service
beyond the Seas, where before and after he was continually in England in such a
County and place in despite of the King against the Law and Custom of the
Realm, disceit of the Kings Court, and disseisin and damage of the Plaintiff or
Demandant, the Defendant pleaded, that as he was going beyond the Seas, he fell
sick at such a place, and could neither go nor ride; before which time the
Protection was allowed, whereupon Issue was joined.

In Trinity Term, in the 19th. year Trin. 19 E. 3.1.
of the Reign of King Edward the third, the Avowant being Essoined de service
le Roy, and at the day not bringing his Warrant, the Plaintiff prayed damages
and the 20 s. allowed by the Statute, which the Court granted, but not the
damages.

In Trinity Term, in the 21th. year Trin. 21 E. 3.18.
of the Reign of King Edward the third, a Writ of Error being brought in the
Kings Bench by an Infant to reverse a fine levied in the Court of Common Pleas,
after Errors assigned, and a Scire facias returned, the Tenant of the Cognisee
brought a Protection, whereupon the Judges to avoid the mischief which might
happen to the Infant if he should not be inspected during his Nonage, and
understanding the Kings will that he had taken the Tenant into his Protection,
did examine and inspect the Infant, and respited the reversal by giving a new
day for him that had brought the Protection to allege what he could against
the reversal.

In Mich. Term in the same year Mich 21 E. 3.
an Essoin de Service le Roy was challenged, for that the Essoiner was under
age, but it was not allowed, and in an Action of debt brought against the
Countess of Kent as an Executrix, after Issue joined and a Venire facias, she
did cast a common Essoin, and at another day was Essoined de Service del Roy,
and had another Eodem Termino 32. and 9.
day given by the like Essoin, but not bringing her Warrant, the Court would
not turn it to a default, but in regard of great delay and damage alleged,
taxed the 20 s. allowed by the Statute to 40 s. and the Nisi prius was granted.

In the 22th. year of his 22 Assise P. 9.
Reign in an Assise, the King by his Writ reciting that it was ordained by him
and the great men of the Land, that an Assise brought by any which was in the
service of the King, should from thenceforth be continued, testified that the
Defendant was in the Kings service at Calais, and commanded the Judges to
continue the Assise, and the Writ was, that although that the name of the said
Defendant was afterward inserted in the Writ Original, the Assise should
continue as long as the Defendant remained in that employment, or that the King
should otherwise command, whereupon the Assise was continued until the next
Assise, notwithstanding the Statute which commands the Court not to surcease by
any command of the great or lesser Seal.

In Michaelmas Term, in the 22th. year Mich 22 E. 3.3.
of the said Kings Reign, a Woman was Essoined de Service le Roy, quia Nutrix
Isabellae filiae Regis. Et allocatur.

In Trinity Term, in the 28th. year Trin. 28 E. 3.^2.
of that Kings Reign, in an Action of debt the Defendant after he had been
attached by his body gave bayl, and was therefore adjudged to be in Custody;
but because the Protection was quia profecturus, and the Judges at all times
have used to allow such Protection, it was allowed.

In Michaelmas Term, in the same year, Mic^* 2^ E. ^.10.
a Woman was Essoined de Service del Roy, quia Nutrix Domine Elizabethae filae
Regis Angliae, and the Demandant alleging that she to whom she was Nurse, was
of full age, and so is not to be understood to have a Nurse, and prayed that
the Essoin might be quashed, it was answered by the Court, she could not be a
party to that averrment, whereupon the Essoin was adjudged and adjourned.

In Trinity Term, in the 29th. year Trin* 29 E. 3.
of the aforesaid Kings Reign, Essoin de Service del Roy being mistaken, was
amended.

Upon a Protection quia profecturus, the King signifying by his Writ that the
party was maimed and could not go in his service, commanded the Justices to
proceed in the Action.

In the same Term, in an Action of debt brought against John Clinton Executor
of William Clinton Earl of Huntington, a Protection being brought for John
Clinton, the word Executor being interlined; the Court notwithstanding the
Allegations made against it, allowed it.

A Protection quia profecturus was brought after an emparlance when the
Defendant was come to an answer, and was of an elder date than the appearance,
yet notwithstanding was allowed.

In Hillary Term, in the said Hill. 29 E. 3. tit. disceit.
year, a day was given upon a Protection after a grand distress, and in the
said Term Thomas Dallirine brought a Writ of disceit against one, and counted
that having brought a Writ of Formedon against him, and day was given until
the Octaves of St. Michael, the Tenant brought a Writ of Protection to endure
for a year, suggesting that he ought to remain at York, whereas he remained at
the time when he should have appeared in Court at Compton in the aforesaid
County, and continued there by the space of a Month, and traversed that he was
not in the service of the King to his damage of forty pounds, to which the
Defendant pleaded, that he was in the service of the King according to the
purport of the Protection, and traversed that he was not continually at Compton
aforesaid; and the truth being that he went to York and remained there one week
in every month, the Court left it to a Quaere what was to be done therein, and
what kind of Plea he might have in such a matter.

In Trinity Term, in the same Trin. 39 E. 3.
year, in a Writ of ravishment de guard against diverse, a Protection was brought
for one which discharged and put without day all the others.

In the 43th. year 43 E 3.33.
of that King, a Protection was allowed for the Husband and Wife.

Where a man was Mich. 6 H. 4.
Essoined, and afterward brought a Protection quia en Service le Roy, Thirning
Justice said, that the Essoin was for the service of the King, and the
Protection proves that he is in the service of the King, and the one is
dependant upon the other, and therefore awarded that the Protection should be
allowed.

In Easter Term, in the 7th. year of the Pasch. 7 H. 4.
Reign of King Henry the fourth, a Protection being cast in a Writ of Formedon,
quia moraturus in partibus VValliae, the Justices were in doubt whether it were
to be allowed, for that Wales was within the Realm, and took time to advise.
And in the mean time, although the time of the Protection was expired, would
not suffer the Action to pass by default, but awarded a Resummons.

In Michaelmas Term, in the 11th. year Mich. 11 H. 4.
of the Reign of that King, it was adjudged, that if a Purveyor took Victuals
for the Kings Household, and be afterward sued, he shall have aid of the King.

In Easter Term, in the same Pasch. ^1 H. 4.
year, it was allowed by the Court to be Law, that if a man give bayl upon a
Capias, and after brings a Protection, he and his Bayl are excused.

In Trinity Term in the 12th. year Trin. 12 H. 4.
of the said Kings Reign, it was adjudged that in whatsoever Plea an Essoin
does lie, there also lies an Essoin pour service le Roy, and two Essoins of
the service of the King do not lie but one after the other.

In Hillary Term, in the same Hill. 12 H. 4.
year, it was agreed that an Essoin pour service le Roy, may be ^u^t upon a
Petit Cape; and if he which does cast the Essoin does not make it good, or
bring his Warranty, a Capias was to be awarded against him to answer the
disceit.

And it is to be observed, that anciently before it was taken away by an Act of
Parliament, the Essoiner in a common Essoin was to make Oath.

In Easter Term, in the third Pasch. 3 H. 6.3.
year of the Reign of King Henry the 6th. a Protection being cast at the Nisi
prius, and it being for one year, and the party coming again within the year, a
repeal was obtained, and two precedents showed, that in the like case
Protections were repealed; whereupon by advice of the Judges a resummons was
granted, and it was alleged that the Plaintiff was at no mischief, because he
may have his writ of disceit.

In Trinity Term, in the same Trin. 3 H. 6.
year, at an Alias nisi prius, the Defendant being Essoined quia in servitio
Regis, it was denied because there was a great difference betwixt an Essoin and
a Protection of the King, for that by the Kings protection the King takes the
party into his protection which is of record under his Seal.

In Easter Term, in the fourth Pasch. 4 H. 6.4.
year of that King, in an Action of Trespass after a distress awarded against
the Jurors, and the Array challenged, a Protoction was after a grand debate
allowed, Martin one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas going to the
Justices of the Kings Bench to ask their advice, and from thence into the
Exchequer Chamber to Juni Chief Baron.

In Michaelmas Term, in the 19th. Mich. 19 H 6.8. tit. Protection.
year of the Reign of that King, a man being taken by a Capias, had a
Protection allowed quia moraturus, for the victualling of a Fort in Scotland,
upon a probability that he came to London to buy victuals, and that issue might
be taken thereupon, and a repeal obtained.

In Hillary Term, in the same year, Newton Justice said, that if the Demandant
cast a protection it lies not, yet an Essoin of the Service of the King does;
And where the King commands an Attorney Hill. 19 H. 6. tit. Formedon.
to do him service, whereby he appeared not, and the Client loses in the mean
time his land, and he brings a Writ of disceit against him, then it would be
against reason that the King should compel him to do him service, and that he
should not be Essoined for that service; but in such a case it seems to be
usual to record the Kings service, and in that case the Essoiner shall be sworn
that he was in the Kings service.

And that a woman may be in the Kings service, for that she is Nurse or
Landress; and a man, as his Carver.

In Michaelmas Term, in the 22th. Mich 22 H. 6.
year of the Reign of that King, in an Action inter Brookesby and Everard
Digby, al jour de nisi prius a Protection was brought, and although Paston was
of opinion it was not allowable because it did not agree with the Record, yet
Ascue was of opinion, that if the Protection said suscepimus in Protectionem,
it was to be allowed.

In Michaelmas Term, in the 27th. Mich. 27 H. 6.5.
year of the aforesaid King, an Essoin cast for one who was gone into the
Holy Land was refused, because six months were passed, and the Defendant should
be allowed a year and a day, and it was said by the Judges that it was the like
where the party was in service del Roy; yet it was allowed to be good in a
common Essoin, and a common Essoin was cast accordingly.

And in an Action brought in the Exchequer by a Denizen against two Aliens, and
the Jury adjourned, a Protection was brought by the one, bearing date the first
day of the Nisi prius, and by the second, bearing date the second day, and both
allowed as it was in a like case, and as it was held by the Judges of the one
Bench, and the other in the case of the Lord Hungerford.

In Michaelmas Term, in the 8th. Mich. 28 H. 6.3.
year of that Kings Reign, Danby Justice said, in the case of Sir Robert
Hungerford, that in one and the same day the Defendant may cast many
Protections; and it was said that no Protection quia profecturus purchased
pending the plea is allowable, if it be not in a Voyage Royal, or with the King
himself, or for great business of the Realm, as appears by the Statute made
in the 13th. year of the Reign of King Richard the 2d. cap. 16. and Prisot
chief Justice did bid the Defendant sue to the Privy Seal, and bring a
Certificate that his Captain by Indenture was to serve the King in his wars,
which being showed, and it appearing that he was to go into Norusandie to serve
under such as the King should appoint, but because it appeared not by the
Indenture nor the Protection that it was in the case of the Statute, the
Protection was not allowed.

In the same Term Richard Vere bringing a Protection quia moraturus super
vitulationem ville Calesie, and the Plaintiff averring that he was within the
four Seas and not in the Kings service, the Plaintiff was ordered upon a
resummons to prove his averment.

In Easter Term, in the 30th. Pasch. 30 H. 6.2.
year of that Kings Reign, after an Imparlance the Defendant bringing his
Protection quia moraturu, super salva custodia Castri Domini Regis de B. in
partibus transmarinis, that he was employed in the safe custody of the Castle
of B, in the parts beyond the Seas, and was afterward seen in Court; it was
said, that if a man protected be afterward seen in England, the Plaintiff may
sue forth the Kings Innotescimus to repeal the Kings Letters Patents for the
Protection.

And that if a man bringing his Protection at the Nisi prius, if betwixt that
and the day in bank the Protection be repealed, there shall be a resummons
sued; and Danby said, that the Protection until the repeal was always
allowable.

In Easter Term, in the 35th. Pasch* 35 H. 6.3.
year of the Reign of that King, it was agreed to be law, that where Justices
of Nisi prius have no power to allow or disallow a Protection, they ought to
surcease.

In Hillary Term, in the 38th. Hillar. 38 H. 6.5.
year of the Reign of the said King, a Protection being cast for one that was
committed to the Fleet, and had a Cepi corpus returned against him; Moyle
Justice alleged that he might notwithstanding be in the Service of the King,
whereupon the next day after he was mainprised, and the Protection was allowed
until the Court should further consider of it.

In Hillary Term, in the 39th. Hill. 39 H. 6. tit. quar^ impedit.
year of the Reign of the said King, a Protection being disputed because it
wanted the usual form, it was alleged, that there needed no special Protection
to go to Rome, for that the Ambassadors or Procurators of the King who go and
remain there for the profit of the King and his Realm, have never used to have
such Protections; and if they had, it would have been seen before that time,
and that the King by his Prerogative may take a man into his protection, where
another is not to be disherited; and Moyle one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas then said, that the King might grant a Protection for a year, and
that being elapsed, might grant another for the like Term, etc. but not at the
first, and that a Protection quia profecturus does not lie pendente placito,
depending the Plea, if it be not in a Voyage Royal, or business of the Realm.

In Michaelmas Term, in the second Mich. 2 E. 4.9.
year of King Edward the fourth, at the return of a Petit cape against the
Husband and Wife (which is a Judgment by defalt) the Husband did cast an
Essoin of the Service of the King which was allowed; and it was in that case
said by Moyle, that a Protection of the King differed from an Essoin of his
Service, for that the intent and effect of the Protection is, that the King is
the parties Protector, and has taken him into his protection and defense.

In Hillary Term* in the 7th. ^
year of the Reign of that King, the Judges were of opinion, that a Protection
cast quia moraturus that he remained with the Earl of Worcester, who was Deputy
to the Duke of Clarence, was to be allowed; for if the Duke by his Commission
had power to make a Deputy, it is reason that he which was with the Deputy in
Service, should be excused by the Protection.

In Trinity Term, in the 11th. Trin. 11 E. 4.12.
year of that King, where one of the Vouchees made a defalt, and the other had
a Petit Capias awarded against him, at the day of the retorn of the Petit
Capias, he that made the defalt brought a Protection, which was adjudged to
enure to them both.

In Hillary Term, in the 21th. Hill. 21 E. 4.26.
year of the Reign of that King, a Protection being granted to T. Rokes, a
Certiorari was directed to the Sheriffs of London to enquire if he attended in
the Service of the King according to the tenor of the Protection, or followed
his own business; and the Sheriffs of London certified that he did not attend
the Service of the King, but remained at London attending his own business;
whereupon the Plaintiff had an Innotescimus directed to the Judges of the Court
of Common Pleas to repeal the said Protection, and he showed the Writ to the
Court, and prayed a resummons against the Defendant and had it.

In Hillary Term, in the 21th. Hill 21 E. 4 35.
year of the said Kings Reign, after issue joined upon a Writ of Entry and the
Jury had appeared, the Counsel for the Defendant prayed the Court to grant an
Habeas Corpus for him: and the Justices demanded of the Plaintiff and the Jury,
if they would agree unto it, who consenting thereunto, the Habeas Corpus was
granted, and the morrow after when the Jury appeared, a Protection quia
moraturus that the Defendant was in the Kings Service at Calais was brought, to
which being excepted that he was under age, and that it appeared by his own
sheweing that he was in prison, it was answered, that the Protection was of
Record, and to be believed before any such allegation: and afterward the
Justices demanded several times of the Defendants Counsel, if they would agree
that the Demandant and the Jury should be adjourned until the next day, to the
intent as was believed that the Demandant might in the mean time procure a
repeal of the Protection which they supposed to be false, and the Counsel for
the Plaintiff praying time till the morrow to be advised touching the
Protection which the Justices granted, the Justices perusing again the
Protection, found that there was no default therein, and said, they ought to
allow it; which was done accordingly, and the Jury was discharged.

And in the same Pasch. 21 E. 4 6.
year, it was adjudged and declared to be Law, that where a Tenant in a Precipe
quod reddat, had unduly purchased a Protection of the King, whereby the
Plaintiff was put without day and prejudiced, that in that case he might have a
Writ of disceit.

In Michaelmas Term, in the fourth and fifth year of the Reign of King Philip
and Queen Mary, in a Writ of Entry in Le per brought by one Huggard against
Knevet, an Essoin was cast by one Anthony Knevet for (...) 5. P. and M.
Tho. Knevet, that he was in the service of the King in the parts beyond the
Seas, and day thereupon given, and some doubt arising amongst the Judges about
the warranty of the Essoin and the form thereof, and amongst the precedents
which could be found, that in the 35th. year of the Reign of King Henry the
sixth, wherein the Abbot of Westminster was Plaintiff against VV. Yeoman of the
Kings Buttery under the Kings Privy Seal, not pleasing them, but being adjudged
insufficient, the Judges were so unwilling to disappoint the purpose and
expectation of the Supreme Authority, as they themselves framed and devised a
Writ to excuse the absence of the said T. Knivet.

And although in Trinity Term, in the same year, the Queen who began her Reign
the 26th. day of July 1553. did by her Attorney General by advice of the Lords
of her Privy Council, demand the opinion of the Judges of the Court of Common
Pleas, if a Dyer Trin. 4 and 5 P. and M.
prisoner in the Fleet upon an Execution, who might be very useful in her wars,
might be licenced by the Queen with his Keeper to go unto Barwick for the
defense thereof, it was resolved by all the Judges of both the Benches, that he
could not be dismissed by her Protection, for that he was there to be kept in
safe custody.

Yet in the fourth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, she did by her Letter
under her Sign Manual and Signet directed unto Tirrel Warden of the Fleet,
cause Dyer ibidem.
Thurland who was in Execution for debt, to go with his Keeper, as has been
before mentioned, about some affairs of hers and the public.

So tender were the Judges in the ancient and past ages of the Supreme
Authority they sat under, and the honor of their Princes, which imparted unto
them so much of the honor and dignity they enjoyed; and so careful of the
safety and concernment of the public, which was, or should be the greatest
care and interest of every man, and had such an awe and veneration of Majesty
in which the Supreme Authority and governing power resides, as where they
perceived any Essoin of the service of the King unduly cast, or Protection not
legally granted, as by misinformation, or necessity of preserving the public
peace and tranquillity, or upon reason of State they might sometimes happen,
they did not presently reject the Writs of Protections of our Kings, but remit
those that excepted against them to petition for their repeal by Innotescimus,
and where Essoins of some employed in their service were cast, did admit them,
and put the cause without day, and order the Essoiners in the mean time to
bring their Warrants, which if they failed, a resummons of them was awarded,
and the fine of twenty shillings penalty imposed by an Act of Parliament,
sometimes paid, and at other times pardoned; and as careful of the high
Authority of his Sovereign was Sir Orlando Bridgeman late Lord Chief Justice of
the Court of Common Pleas, when he refused to bayl upon a Habeas Corpus one
that was committed by the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household for Arresting
one of the Kings Servants in ordinary without license, and advised him to
submit himself to the Lord Chamberlain; that humor and fashion of kicking
against the Supreme Authority, and wrestling with the Lords Anointed, in
seeking to be bayled upon Writs of Habeas Corpus, granted by the inferior and
delegated powers, for commitments upon contempts by the Superior, being so
novel and unusual, as the Books and Records of the Law, or our Courts of
Justice have afforded us no mention at all, or very little of them, until the
Reign of King James, or the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr,
when by the unhappy arguments upon the case of the Habeas Corpora in the
beginning of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, the drawing aside of the
curtain of State, and the dispute of the Kings power of committing any one for
contempts against him or his Authority (which every Justice of Peace, and
Master of a Company of Trade in London, can be allowed to do) and by the
peoples misunderstanding of the Arcana Imperii, secrets of State, and necessary
rules of government, an unhappy fancy and spirit of opposition so intoxicated
many of them, as they have believed it to be law and right reason, that if the
King will not, so soon as they would have him, give leave to Arrest any of his
Servants, the Law and his Courts of Justice are to do it, that if the King
should by such a way of prosecution be inconvenienced by the want of their
service, it is by his own default in making so ill a choice of men indebted to
attend him, or if they being so Arrested cannot perform their duty, he is to
provide such as may better do it, and if the King should cause any to be
committed that had Arrested any of his Servants without license, they were upon
his Hab^as Corpus to be bayled by the Judges of some of the Courts of Law at
Westminster, and left at liberty to go to Law with him if they could tell how,
or to encourage as many as would follow that evil example to misuse his Royal
Prerogative, which without any stretching or dilating of it to the very
confines or u^most bounds of its regal Jurisdiction, is legally warranted by
the design and reason of public good, the preservation of every man's estate
and property, and the good at one time, or in something or other of him that
thinks himself the most delayed or injured in his humor or expectation; for it
ought to be every where reason, and so acknowledged, that as long as there is a
King and Supreme Governor who is to take care of the universality of the
people subjected, born, or protected under his government, he is not to want
the means wherewith to do it, and that in order thereunto his service must
needs be acknowledged to be for public good, and the exemptions and
privileges belonging thereunto no less than a Salus populi, the great
concernment of the peoples peace, protection, welfare and happiness, and should
be the Suprema Lex, that great Law in and by which the means of government, and
the Royal Prerogative, was and is founded and established; and that such a
cause built and sustained by the rules of right reason and justice, ought to be
every where reason, and justly entitled to that Axiom, manente causa non
tollitur effectus, the cause always remaining constant and unalterable, the
effects and operation naturally from thence arising are necessarily to follow
and be allowed, and that the cause of privilege claimed by our Kings, the
cause and fountain of all exemptions and privileges so largely given to many
of their people, should not in the case of their own Servants have its course
or passage stopped or diverted.

When from that Spring, and those causes which have fertilized and gladded the
Valleys of our Israel, have sprung and arisen those necessary privileges which
the Nobility, Peers, and Baronage of England have anciently enjoyed in their
personal freedom from Arrests, or Imprisonment of their bodies in Civil
Actions, Pleas or Controversies, and from Common Process, or any Utlaryes which
might trouble them or their high Estates, not only for the reason given in the
11th. year of the Reign of King Henry the fourth by Hull or Hulls, that 11 H.
4.15.
in Actions of Debt or Trespass, a Capias will not lie against an Earl or any
of like Estate, because it is to be intended that they have Assets, and a great
Estate in Lands, whereby they may be summoned and brought to answer, or as many
misled by that opinion do and would yet understand it. But principally,

CHAP. XV.
That the Dukes, Marquesses, Count Palatines, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of
England, and the Bishops as Barons have and do enjoy their privileges and
freedom from Arrests, or imprisonment of their bodies in Civil and Personal
Actions, as Servants extraordinary, and Attendants upon the Person, State, and
Majesty of the King, in order to his Government, Weal Public, and Safety of
him and his people, and not only as Peers abstracted from other of the Kings
Ministers or Servants in Ordinary.

IN regard of their service to their Prince, and a not seldom personal
attendance upon him, and the honor and dignities thereunto allowed, and
appertaining to those Illustrious and high born Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Peers, and Nobility, who are accounted to be as extraordinary Servants, (not as
the word Extraordinary has been of late times misused by applying it unto
those who were but quasi Servi, scarcely Servants, or but listed and put into
the Rolls of the Kings Servants, when they are neither known to him, or ever
were or intended to be in his actual Service) and honorable Attendants of
their Prince, as well in times of Peace, as emergencies of War, and as Generals
or Commanders of their Armies in times of War, Cuiacius ad lib. 10 and 12.
Justiniani Commentar. and Gutherius de offic. domus Augustae* lib. 2. cap. 19.
and therefore the Emperor Justinian in his Letter or Epistle to Narses a
great General or Commander of his Army, mentions Aulus Anduatius, and C.
Tubero, to be sub Narsetis Ducatu, as Soldiers under the conduct of Narses,
making the word Ducatus which in after ages only signified and was applied to a
Dukedom, then to denotate no more than an Army or Command only of it.

The Dukes:
And the Latin word Dux since used for Duke, was as Spelmans Glossa^. in voce
Dux.
Sir Henry Spelman well observes, anciently nomen officiale, a name of Office,
or Dux delegatus vel praefectus exercitus postea feudale, by reason of the
Lands which were Seldom tit. honor. cap. 4.. 2.
annexed to its honor by reason of that service afterward honorarium, merely
Titular or honored with that Title, in being heretofore his Chieftaine or
Leader of an Army.

And so were the Marquesses Scholi^ Jacobi Sp^egel in lib. 2. Ligurini Guntheri
Poetae 301, 302.
in those ancient times who were as Capitanei, Generals or great Commanders in
the Empire or kingdom, and were as to that by reason of their honorary
possessions, partakers in some sort of the Royal Dignity.

Whereby to defend the Frontiers, Marquesses.
the Title and Military Office thereof, being about the year 1008. after the
Incarnation of our blessed Savior, by the Emperor Henry surnamed Auceps of
the house of Saxony, instituted to defend some of the Frontiers of Germany
against the Incursions of the Hungarians, was so little known or respected in
England about the Reign of King Richard the second, as he having created Robert
de Vere Earl of Oxford, Marquess of Dublin in Ireland, and afterward in the
21th. year of his Hornius in orb Politis, 3 part. 81.
Reign John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, Marquess of Dorset, which dignity being
afterward taken from him by the tempest and change of those times in the
beginning of the Reign of King Henry the fourth; and the Seldom tit. honor.
cap. 1.. 47. Rot. Parl. 4 H 4. m. ^8.
Commons in Parliament in the fourth year of that Kings Reign, petitioning that
he might be restored to that dignity, he humbly upon his knees besought the
King that he might not be restored to that which was so novel and strange.

The Earls or Counts of England anciently, Earls.
and before those dignities came to be granted for life or hereditary, were as
to matters of justice and government of Provinces as the Dukes Officiary, and
before the Norman Seldom 2. part. tit. honor. cap. 3.. 5. and cap. 5.. 3.
Conquest, were as our learned Seldom observed, sometimes Synonimously
entitled Dux or Dukes, as the Dukes were sometimes styled only Comites or
Earls, and signified men of Officiary dignities, or Counselors of State about
their Prince and Sovereign, and were called Comites, quia a Comitatu vel
Familia Principis Spelman Gloss^r* in Diatrib^^^ Comit^bus.
erant, in regard of their daily or often attendance upon the King, or relating
to his House or Family, and quasi in laborum principalium curarumque consortium
assumpti a principibus Vizz^^ius de (...) Princi^um, l ^ ^. 24.
qui per eos maxima quaeque and gravissima negotia expedire consueverant, and
as more especially employed to assist their Kings and Princes in their public
cares and labors, and the dispatch of their most weighty affairs, that custom
or usage being Aeno Taciti, when Tacitus wrote his Book or Annals, and Agricola
his Son-in-law wrote his book de moribus Germanorum, of the Customs and Manners
of the Germans, amongst the Germans, about the Reign of the Emperor Domitian,
where the Comites Earls (...) in Gloss^r. Salis v^^um (...) vo^e Centenarius.
or Graven, were Regum suorum Comites, atque Adsessores sacra vice Judicantes,
and Jura per pagos vicosque reddiderint, were Attendants upon their Kings, sat
in the Courts of Justice as Assistants unto them, and did as their Delegates
distribute Justice not only there, but in all the Towns and Villages: Et ex
more antiquis Germanis passim usitato, Cluverius de Germ* lib. 1. cap. 15.
ex precipua Nobilitate illos sumebant qui provinciis and munitioribus locis
imperitarent; and it was a custom amongst the old Germans every where used, to
choose out of the chief Nobility such as might govern the Provinces and places
of most concernment; Choppinus de domanio Franciae, lib. 1.44.
Et Verus Imperator confecto Bello Parthico Provincias Comitatibus suis
regendas dedit; and Verus the Emperor, after his war ended with the
Parthians, made certain of his great men or followers his Comites, governors
of his Provinces, (and who might also without an overstreining, conjecture
which is not here endeavored to be asserted, but is only left to the further
enquiry and disquisition of the learned, be called Comites, in imitation
probably or resemblance of the fidus Achates and Comites, faithful Attendants
of the warlike and afflicted Eneas, from whence the Romans, we, and many other
Nations, have believed their discen^s and originals Alexander ab Alexand.
Genial dierum lib. 9. cap. 9.
not a little honored, and in the darkness and obscurity of former times and
ages, was the Gades ne plus ultra, and farthest reach of many of the Europaean,
British, and Western Nations Genealogies;) were tanquam administri adjutores
and Consilii ac rerum participes and Gutherius del officiis domus Augustae lib.
1. cap. 17. and lib. 2 cap. 21.
proceres Palatii habentur, as Ministers of State, coadjutors, and partakers of
their Princes, Coun^el, and Affairs, and the most noble of the Empire attending
upon the Emperors.

So as Marcellinus Idem lib. 2. cap. 19.
was said to be Comes Justiniani, a near attendant upon the person and affairs
of the Emperor Justinian, who Reigned about the year of Christ 520. and were
so entitled says Loyseau a learned and considerable French Author, pour ce
que les Empereurs esloyent contrainctes fair plusieurs voyages pour Charles
Loyseau traite des Seigneuries, cap. 5.27.102.
mainteni^ ceste grande estendue de leur Empire appelloient Comites leurs
Compagnons ceux qui les accompanoient and suivoyent, for that the Emperors
being constrained to make many voyages to maintain and keep in order that great
extent of their Empire, termed those which accompanied and followed them
Comites, or their Besoldus in dissertatione de Comitibus Imperii 99.
Companions (as Julius Caesar was before contented to call his Soldiers
Commilitones: or fellow Soldiers) de sort que Comitat^s and Comites estoient
a Eux proprement ce que nous disons icy la Court and les Courtisons, and
Comitatus anciently signified ipsam Aulam and familiam Principis, the Palace or
Court of the Prince and Earldome and Counts or Comites properly signified that
which we call the Court or Courtiers, says L' Oysean, nom qui en ^in soulz
L'Oysean traite des Seigneuries ibidem.
Constantin fut un titre de haute dignite attribue particulierement aux
principaux Officers de l' Empire, a name which at length under Constantine came
to be a Title of great dignity, particularly attributed to the principal
Officers of the Empire.

As the Comites Praetorii sacri Patrimonii Consistorii Domesticorum Peditum and
Equitum rei privatae largitionum portus Riparum, Pancirollus in notitia
utriusque Imperii, Spelman^ Glossar. in voce Comitis and Seldom tit. honor 2.
part. cap. 1.. 8.
Earls of the Sacred Palace, or Steward or Master of the household, or Court of
the casual Revenue (as a Lord Treasurer) of the Privy Council, of the Guards of
Horse and Foot, of the private expenses, or privy purse, the tributes, rewards,
or bounties, of the Aquaeducts, Havens, Lymits, or Borders of Rivers, Comes
Stabuli, Constable or Earl Marshall, Comes Castrensis sacri Palatii, Captain of
the guards, Comes Africae, Comes Britanniae, Comes litto^is Saxonici per
Brittanniam, Earl of Africa, Earl of Britain, and Earl of the Saxon Shores in
or by Britain, Comes limitum Italiae, Earl of the Borders of Italy, Comes
Illirici, Hispaniarum, Orientis, Earl of Illiria, or Sclavony, and the East.

And unto them, and other Earls, gave many great and noble Privileges and
Immunities, and were accounted by the Civil Law to be as the Emperors more
especial Servants or Domestics; Et inter Cubicularios Cuiacius Commentar. ad
lib. 12. Cod. tit. 5. Justiniani.
recensetur Comes Domorum, and the Earl or Master of the Household, though
employed in Cappadocia far from the Imperial Coure, was reckoned as of the
Emperors Bedchamber, as was likewise the Comes Sacrae Vestis, Earl or Master
of the Wardrobe had their Legions, Palatine, and Comitacenses, Regiments or
Brigades under the Ensigns of the Counts Palatine, and unto them and other
Earls, gave many great and noble Privileges and Immunities, entertaining them
in some honorable Offices in their Courts and Palaces, and afterward upon
their merit and diligence therein, did assign them as there was occasion to the
Government of Provinces, wherein they, as the Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, had
at the first but a grant or estate durante been placito, at the pleasure of the
Prince, or for a certain number of years, afterward for life, and after that,
in the declension of the Empire or the Sovereign Authority; sometimes by
Usurpation or Custom, and very often per sacros Codicillos, by Grants or
Letters Patents enlarged to an Estate in Tail or Fief Masculine, or of
Inheritanc^ to them and their Heirs, who being by those Titles of Honor, and
Military and Civil Offices and charges daily or frequently conversant about the
safety of the Sovereign and his people, were justly accounted to be in all or
most of the ages and civilized Nations Decus and Gloria Imperii, the Splendour
and Glory of Majesty and Empire, signified by the Emblems or Figures of the
Lions guarding or supporting of Solomon's Throne and astonishing Royalty.

Which most laudable custom was not only observed in the time of the Western
and Eastern Emperors, Chiffletius ad vindicias Hispanicas lumina prerogat.
lumin^ 3. 5.
but of the Franks, Goths, Longobards, and other Northern Nations who imitated
them. And from such honorable services and employments about Emperors, Kings
and Princes, likewise were derived Count Palatines, whom they found a kind of
necessity to institute when they understood their other Subjects to be
troubled, that none but Romans had those honors and dignities conferred upon
them, and their Courts and Palaces Huberti Leodii Commentar. de Palatinorum
origin.
appeared to be solitary and unfrequented; and therefore opened the doors of
honor to their Subjects of other Nations and Provinces, as appears by the
after usage of the Roman and Grecian Emperors, and made and ordained Comites
sacri Falatii, Count Palatines, which the Title of Count Palatine given by
Charlemaine to Antholinus will further evidence; and the Count Palatines of the
Empire of Germany, as Pasquier that learned Advocate of Egnihartus de vita and
gest. Caroli Magni.
France has remarked, had their names from their Offices, Superintendencies,
and Places which they anciently held Pasquier des Recherches de la France lib.
2. cap. 12.
au tour des Empereurs de Rome and de la Suitte des Empereurs, and in their
service and attendance as Crmites Palatii, were in Comitativa Principis, in the
Retinue of the Emperors, which in the elder times were so reverenced and
respected, as it was not unfrequently in many Laws and good Authors styled
Sacra, as meriting a veneration due unto Gods Vicegerents: Et ipsa Principis
Aula and residentia; and the Court and Palace of the Prince was, says
Marquardus Freherus, sometimes known by the name of Comitatus Freherus originum
Palatinorum comment. cap. 1.
and sacer comitatus, a place of reverence more especially appropriate to honor
and men deserving it, and the French Kings Court is by the modern French at
this day termed Comitatus; and in the time of Charlemaine and his Son
Hludowick Kings of Paulus de Fage^ in vita Petri de Marca Padriensis
Archiepiscopi.
France, the Earls were tanquam Judices, Judges in their several Earldomes or
Provinces, qui post Regem populum regere debent, who next under the King (as
the Dukes did in their several Dukedoms) were to govern the people, and necesse
est ut tales instituantur qui sine periculo ejus qui ^os constituit, quos sub
se babent cum justitia and aequitate gubernare, and Hinckmarus cap. 14. and 15.
Epist. 4. and Choppinus de domanio Franciae lib. 1.45*
officium adimplere procurent, there being a necessity that such should be
appointed, who without danger of those who constituted or deputed them, may
have under them such as may govern them with Justice and Equity, and do what
belongs to them.

And our Earls and English Nobility were of the like Character, Esteem, and
Subserviency to our Kings and Princes, when in the time of Bertulphus King of
the Mercians, who Reigned Spelmans consil. 347.
in England in the year of our Lord 851. such of them as had not, as Sir Henry
Spelman says, constant Offices or places in the Kings Court, tenebantur ex
more and obsequii vinculo antiquissimo (as also were the other Baronage) in
tribus maximis festivitatibuus Christi scilicet natalitiis Sancti Paschatis and
Pentecostes Regi Annuatim adesse cum ad curiam and personam ipsius exornandum
tum ad consulendum de negotiis regni statuendum que prout fuerat necessarium,
were by most ancient custom and tie of obedience at three of the greatest
Feasts in every year, that is to say at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, to
attend at the Kings Court, as well for the honor of his Person and Court, as
to advise and council him as there should be occasion in the weighty affairs of
the Kingdom, Spelmans co^sil. ^47.
which (says that great light and restorer of our English Antiquities) gave at
the first an original and beginning to our great Councels, afterward Seldens
titles of honor cap. 5. 15. and Spelman Gloss^r. in voce Comitis.
and now called Parliaments; and Johannes Saresburiensis styled all the great
Officers of the English Court Comites Palatini, Earls or Lords of the Palace
Royal, at least such as being Earls were also honored with the greater Court
Dignities, and had relation to the Dignities and Privileges of our English
Nobility: Such service and attendance of the Nobility upon the person and
affairs of their Sovereign being not unusual in the days of Jer. 36. ^ers. 12.
Jehoiakim King of Judah, when Michaiah the son of Gemariah found all the
Princes sitting in the Kings house in the Scribes chamber, and standing besides
the King when the Roll of Baruch was read.

When the great King Ahasuerus made a Feast unto all his Princes and his
servants, the Esther cap. 1. verse 3, 4, 13, and 14.
power of Persia and Media, the Nobles and Princes of the Provinces being
before him, and he showed the honor of his Excellent Majesty, he advised
concerning the misbehaviour of his Queen Vaschi with the wise men which knew
the times (for so was the Kings manner toward all that knew law and judgment)
and with the seven Princes of Persia and Media, which saw the Kings face, and
sat the first in the Kingdom.

And those Officiary Dignities, Honors, and Privileges of the English Nobility,
were so consonant to the Law of Nations, and the usage and customs of the
Empire; as in Anglia tam ante quam post Conquestore Besoldus in dissertatione
de Comitibus Romans Imperii. Seldom in Jano Anglorum and ejusdem tit. hon. 2.
part. cap. 5 3*
Wilhelmum Normannum Comites seu Graviones Justitiarii hisque cum ad privata
quam publica judicia suis fuere in comitatibus, and not only before, but for
sometimes after the Norman Invasion, did under their Kings preside and govern
the Justice of that County or Territory of which they were Earls, and had
allowed unto them the Tertium denarium, Third penny, or part of the fines and
amerciaments, and the customs, and some other casual profits belonging to the
Crown in their several Counties, as our Seldom a Seldom 2. part. tit. hon. 651
lib Rub. in Scacc. f. 26. inter l^ges H. ^.
most universally learned and judious Lawyer has in the Earldoms of Chester
and Oxford observed, and for some of the Ages succeeding the Norman atchievment
have been Chief Spelman Glossar. in Catalog. cap^tal. Justitiar Angl.
Justices of Englund, as in the Reign of King Stephen, Awbrey de Vere Earl of
Guisnes Father of Awbrey de Vere the first Earl of Oxford, Robert de Bellomont
or Beaumont Earl of Leicester in the Reign of King Henry the 2d. and Geoffrey
Fitz-Peter Earl of Essex in the Reigns of King Richard the first and King John,
our Bracton acknowledging that our Earls and Nobility were upon occasions to
Seldom tit. hon. 2. part.. 8.
attend upon the person of their Sovereign Prince, calls our Earls Comites a
Comitando sive a Socie^ate, from or by reason of their accompanying or
attendance upon the person of the Prince, Bracton lib. 1. cap* 8.
says, dici possunt Consules Reges enim tales sibi associant ad consulendum;
and our Nation was not without its Local Count Palatines, who had greater
authorities and profits in their Counties and Jurisdictions than other Earls,
as those of Chester, Lancaster, Pembroke, and the Palatineships belonging to
the Bishopicks of Durham and Ely.

And Hoveden our old Annals, and Seldom that Monarch of Letters, do tell us,
that King John, die Coronationis suae accinxit Willielmuw Marescallum gladio
Comitatus de Striguil, and Galfridum filium Petri gladio Hoveden and Seldom 2.
part. tit hon. cap. 5* 13.
Comitatus Essex) qui licet antea vocati essent Comites, and administrationem
suarum Comitatuum habuissent tamen non erant accincti gladio Comitatus, and
ipsa illa die servierunt ad mensam Regis accincti gladiis, did upon the day of
his Coronation gird William Marshal with the Sword of the Earldome of Striguil,
(or Pembroke) and Jeffery Fitz-Peter, with the Sword of the Earldome of Essex,
who although they were before called Earls, and had the government of their
Earldomes, yet until then were not invested or girt with the Sword of their
Earldomes, and the same day they waited upon the King as he sat at meat with
their Swords girt about them; and the service of our Earls and Nobility were
held to be so necessary about their Sovereign in the Reign of King Edward the
second, as John de Warrenna Earl of Surrey had in the 14th. year of that King a
dispensation not to appear before the Justices Itinerant, before whom in
certain of his affairs he had a concernment in these words, viz. Edwardus dei
gratia Rex Angliae etc. Justitiariis notris Itineratur in Com. Norff. Quia
dilectum and fidelem nostrum Johannem de Warrenna Comitem Surrey, quibusdam de
causiis juxta latus nostrum retinemus hiis diebus per quod coram vobis in
Itinere vestro in Com. praedicto personaliter comparere non potest ad loquelas
ipsum in eodem Itinere tangentes prosequendi and defendendi nos ex causa
praedicta Indempnitati praefati Comitis provideri, cupientes in hac part vobis
mandamus Placita de Jur. and assis. coram Solomone de Roffe and al. Justic.
domini Regis Itin. apud Norwicum in Com. Norff anno 14. Regis Edw. 2. rot. 2.
quod omnes praedictas loquelas de die in diem coram vobis continuetis usque ad
Octabas Paschae prox. futur. Ita quod extunc citra finem Itineris vestri
praedicti loquelae illae andiantur and terminantur prout de jure and secundum
legem and consuetudines regni nostri fuerit faciend. Edward by the grace of God
King of England, etc. to his Justices about to go the Circuit in our County of
Norfolk, sends greeting, In regard that for certain causes we have commanded
the attendance of John of Warren Earl of Surrey upon our person, so as he
cannon personally appear before you in your Circuit to prosecute and defend
certain actions or matters wherein he is concerned, we desiring to indempnifie
the said Earl therein for the cause aforesaid, do command you that you do from
day to day adjorn the said Pleas and Actions until eight days after Easter
next; so as you may according to the laws and custom of our Kingdom, before
the end of your said Circuit, hear and determine the said matters or actions.

In which Writ, the said Earl being descended from William de VVarrenna who
married a daughter of King William Rufus, was not styled the Kings Cousin, as
all the Earls of England have for some ages past been honored either by the
style of Chancery, or the Secretaries of State in a Curiality, with which the
more ancient and less Frenchified times were unacquainted; for notwithstanding
an opinion fathered upon our learned Seldom, that in regard the ancient Earls
of England being the Cousins, or of the consanguinity or affinity of William
the Conqueror, or many of the succeeding Kings, those Earls that were
afterward created did enjoy that honorable Title of the Kings Cousin; it will
by our Records and such Memorials as time has left us, be evidenced and
clearly proved, that all the Earls which William the Conqueror and his
Successors have created, were not of their Kindred or Alliance, and those that
were of the consanguinity of our Kings and Princes, as Awbrey de Vere the first
Earl of Oxford, whose Father Awbrey de Vere married the Sister by the half
blood of William the Conqueror, was neither in the grants of the Earldome of
Oxford, and office of Great Chamberlain of England, by Maud the Empress or King
Seldom 2. part. tit. hon. cap. 5.. 10.
Henry the second her Son, styled their Cousin, nor William de Albiney formerly
Earl of Sussex, who married Adeliza Widow of King Henry the first, Daughter of
Godfrey Duke of Lorrain in the grant of the Earldome Castle and Honor of
Arundel by King Henry the second, was termed that Kings Cousin, neither in the
recital in other grants wherein the great Earls of Leicester and Chester are
mentioned, is there any such intimation; for in the first year of the Reign of
King John, William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, William Earl of Salsbury, and
Ranulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln, in the second year of King Henry the third
had it not, Rot. Parl. Johan. part. 1. m. 4. Rot. Parl. 2 H. 3. m. 3. Rot.
Claus* and Fines 5 E. 3.
and in the Summons of Parliament, Diem clausit extremum, and other grants or
writs of diverse of the succeeding Kings in the former ages, until about the
Reign of King Edward the fourth, where mention was made of some of those and
other great Earls of this Kingdom, there were none of those honorary Titles,
and it is not at this day in the ordinary Writs and Process where they are
named either as Plaintiffs or Defendants, and in France where those graces are
in the Royal Letters and Missives, frequently allowed to the greater sort of
the Nobility, howsoever the Queen Mother and Regent of France was about the
year 1625. pleased in a Letter to the late Embassades de Marescal de
Bassompierre.
George Duke of Buckingham to give him the honor to be called her Cousin, very
often omitted.

And those honors of attending their Kings, and being near his person, or
being employed in his Royal commands, were so desirable by as many as could by
their virtue (anciently the Seminary and cause of all honor) obtain it, as
they thought the service of their Prince not happiness enough, unless their
Heirs and after Generations as well as themselves might partake of the honor
to do service unto him; and therefore could be well content to have some of
their Lands which some of our Kings of England gave them, which they hoped to
hold unaliened to them and their Heirs in Fee or in Tail, astrictae, obliged
and tied also as their persons to those no inglorious services, as the Earls of
Oxford holding the Castle of Hedingham in the County of Essex, and the Manor of
Castle Camps in the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, to them and their Heirs
in Tail, by the Tenor and Service of being great Chamberlain of England, and
the Manors of Fingrith in the County of Essex, and Hormead or Hornemead in the
County of Hertford, descended unto them by the Marriage of a Daughter and Heir
of the Lord Sanford, by the Service and Tenure of being Chamberlain to the
Queens of England, die Coronationis suae, upon the days of their Coronation,
that of great Chamberlain of England being an Office distinct and separate from
that of Chamberlain of the Kings House, which was as appears by many Charters
of our ancient Kings and their Chamberlains Subscriptions thereunto, as
witnesses long before the grant of great Chamberlain of England, and as then
are now only holden at the good will and pleasure of our Kings and Princes.

And Time in his long Travels has not yet so let fall and left behind him
those reverential duties and personal services of our Dukes, Earls, and
Baronage, as to invite a disuse or discontinuance of them, when they have of
late time not only when Summoned, performed several Ministerial Offices, as at
the Coronation of our Kings, but at other great Solemnities and Festivals, as
at the Feast of Saint George.

Where in the year 1627. being the third year of the Reign of King Charles the
Martyr, the Lord Percy afterward Earl of Northumberland, carried the Sword
before the King, the Lord Cavendish and Wentworth bearing up his Trayn, the
great Basin was holden by the Earls of Suffolk, Devonshire, Manchester and
Lindsey, the Earl of Devonshire the same day serving as Cupbearer, the Earl of
Cleveland as Carver, the Lord Savage as Sewer, none of the Knights of the
Garter that day officiating.

In the year of our Lord 1638. the Earls of Kent, Hartford, Essex, Northampton,
Clare, Carlisle, Warwick, Dover, St. Albans, and the Viscount Rochford, were
summoned by the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings household to attend at the
instalment of the Prince Knight of the Garter; and in the year 1640. amongst
other young Noblemen appointed to attend the King at his going to the
Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Oxford, and Lord Buckhurst, did
bear up his Trayn.

The Earls of Leicester had the Office of Steward of England distinguished
from, and not so ancient as the Steward of the Household who enjoyed but an
uncertain estate of during pleasure, annexed to the Earldom of Leicester, and
accounted as parcel of it, William Selde^ ^ 2. p^rt tit. ^on. cap. 5.. 10.
Marshal Earl of Pembroke to be Earl Marshal of England, Bohun Earl of Hereford
and Essex to be Constable of England, and to hold some principal part of their
Lands and Estates by Inheritance, in Fee or in Tail by the Tenure of those very
honorable Offices and Services, as the Manor of Haresfield in the County of
Gloucester, per servitium essendi Constabular Angliae, by Spelman ^loss^r. in
vocibus Constabular* and Marescal. 14^, 147.399.4^1.402.403. 46 E. 3. Esc^^t.
the Service of being Constable of England; and the Offices of Earl Marshal and
Constable were distinct, and anciently exercised in the Kings Court as
Marescalcia Curiae, and Constabularia Curiae, were afterward, as the Learned
Sir Henry Spelman conceived, by some extent and enlargement gained of their
Jurisdictions (or rather by the Tenure of some of their Lands) separately
styled Constable and Earl Marshals of England, leaving the Office or Title of
Sub-Marshal or Knight-Marshal, to exercise some part of the Office of the
Earl-Marshals Jurisdictions, as more appropriate to the Kings House or Courts
of Justice; some ancient Charters of our Kings of England before the Reign of
King Henyy the second, and some in his Reign, after his grant of the
Constableship of England, was made by him to Miles of Gloucester, informing us
by the Subscriptions of Witnesses that there was a Constable during the Kings
pleasure, and D^gdales 1. part. Monasticon Anglicanum.
sometimes two, besides the Constable of England, who claimed and enjoyed that
Office by Inheritance.

The Custody of the Castle of Dover, and the keeping Rot. Parl. 33 H. 6.
of the Cinque Ports, were granted by King Henry the sixth to Humphrey Duke of
Buckingham, and the Heirs Males of his body.

The Earls of Oxford for several Ages, and the now Earl of Lindsey descending
from them Rot* Cla^s. 3 E. ^.10.
as Heir General, now being Stewards, Keepers, or Wardens of the Forest of
Essex, and Keepers of King Edward the Confessors ancient Palace of Havering at
the Bower in the said County, to him and his Heirs claimed and enjoyed from a
Daughter and Heir of the Lord Badlesmere, and he from a Daughter and Coheir of
Thomas de Clare.

And some of our Nobility believed it to be no abasement of their high birth
and qualities, to be employed in some other Offices or Employments near the
person, or but sometimes residence of the King, as to be Constable of his
Castle or Palace of Windsor, as the late Duke of Buckingham was in the Reign of
King Charles the Martyr, and Prince Rupert that now is, or Keeper of the Kings
house or Palace of Woodstock, and Lieutenent of Woodstock Park, as the late
Earl of Lindsey was for the term of each of their natural lives. And some
illustrious and worthy Families, as that of the Marshals, Earls of Pembroke,
Butler now Duke of Ormond, the Chamberlains anciently descended from the Earl
of Tancarvil in Normandy, who was hereditary Chamberlain of Normandy to our
King Henry the first; and our Barons Dispencers have made their Sirnames, and
those of their after Generations, the grateful Remembrancers of their very
honorable Offices and Places under their Sovereign, it being accounted to be
no small part of happiness to have lands given them, to hold by grand Serjeanty
some honorable Office or attendance upon our Kings at their Coronation, as to
carry one of the Swords before him, or to present him with a Glove for his
right hand, or to support his right hand whilst he held the Virge Royal,
claymed by the Lord Furnivall, or to carry the great Spurrs of Gold before him,
claymed by John Hastings the Son and Heir of John Hastings Earl of Pembroke, or
to be the Kings Cupbearer, claymed by Sir John de Argentine Chivaler, And some
meaner yet worthy Families have been well content to have Lands given unto them
and their Heirs to hold by the Tenures of doing some personal Service to the
Kings and Queens of England at their Coronations, the Service of the King or
Prince being in those more virtuous times so welcome to all men, and such a
path leading to preferment, as it grew into a Proverb amongst us not yet
forgotten, No Fishing to the Sea, no Service to the King.

And was and is so much a Custom of Nations, as in the German Empire long
before the Aurea Bulla, the Golden Bull or Charter of Charles the 4th. Emperor
was made in the year 1356. being about the middle of the Marquardus Freherus de
Orig* Palatin. and de Aurea Bulla ca. 25. ex Archivit Illustrissimi Principis
Electoris Palatini. Seldom tit. hon. 2. part. cap. 1.. 54.
Reign of our King Edward the third, and not a new Institution as many have
mistaken it, as is evident by the preamble and other parts of that Golden Bull
which was only made to preserve an Unity amongst the seven Electors, and better
methodize their business and Elections.

The Princes Electors were by the Tenure of their Lands and Dominions to
perform several services to the Emperor and his Successors; As the Prince
Elector or Count Palatine of the Rhine was to do the service of Arch Sewer of
the Empire at the Coronation of the Emperor, or other great Assemblies; the
Duke of Saxony, Stall Master or Master of ths Horse, the Marquess of
Brandenburgh Chamberlain, the King of Bohemia Cupbearer, and in Polonia at this
day Sebradousky the now Palatine of Cracow claims and enjoys by Inheritance
the Office or Place of Sword Bearer to the Crown or King of Poland.

And so highly and rightly valued were those Employments and Offices, as they
that did but Officiate under them as their Deputies, believed their Heirs and
Lands to be blessed in the continuance and enjoyments of such Offices as might
but sometimes bring them into the notice and affairs of the Prince and
Emperors, as the Baron of Papenheim in Germany, and his Heirs, to be
Sub-Marshall to the Duke and Elector of Saxony, the Baron of Limpurgh
Vice-Butler Actus Electionis and Coronationis Mathiae Imperatoris an. 1612.
Hornii orbis politic. in 8* part. 2.23*
to the King of Bohemia, and the Baron of Falkenstem Vice-Chamberlain to the
Elector of Brandenburgh, who has also an hereditary Marshall, and the Electors
of Mentz, Colen and Triers the like, and Christophorus Leisserus a Baron, was
Culinae Magister at the Coronation of the Emperor Mathias, in Anno Domini 1612.

Viscounts.
The Viscounts, a Title no longer ago than the Reign of King Henry Seldom tit.
hon. 2. part. cap. 3. 19. and 20. 1 Part Dugdales Monasticon Anglican. 380. and
ibid. Carta H. 3.382. Abbati and Monachis de Salopesbury
the sixth, as our great Seldom says, turned into a Dignity, Titular or
Peerage, being formerly and long after the Conquest, but the Deputies of the
Earls in their several Counties for the Administration of Justice with which
the Carta Gulielmi Rufi in Dugdales Monasticon. Rot. Pat. 18 H. 6. part 2. m.
21.
Earls were entrusted, since c^ntra distincts to the Title or Honor of
Viscount, and but a Sheriff or Officer of the Kings for the execution of
Justice, and so well liked of before that new Title of Viscounts was brought in
betwixt the Earls and Barons of England, as Hubert de Burgo, afterward Earl of
Kent, was in the Reign of King John Spelmans Gloss^r. in Catalog. Capital.
Justic. Angl. 340.
not only Chamberlain to the King, but at one and the same time Sheriff of
Norfolk and Suffolk, and the noble and ancient Family of Cliffords accounted it
as a favor of the Crown to be hereditary Sheriffs or Ministers of Justice in
the County of Westmerland, where they had Lands, Baronies, and honorable
Possessions, and having afterward a greater honor by the Earldome of
Cumberland conferred upon them, disdained not to let the one accompany the
other in the service of their Prince.

Barons Temporal.
The Barons, whether as the Judicious and Learned Sir Henry Spelman Spelman
Glossar. in voce Baro.
informs us they be feudall as gaining their honors by their Lands and
Baronies given them to that purpose, which in our Records and ancient Charters
are not seldom mentioned by the name of Honors, as the Honors of Abergavenny
Dudley, etc. or by Writs summoned to Parliament, or by Patents created only
into that Titular Honor, either of which made a Tenure in Capite (for
otherwise they could not sit and enjoy their Peerage in Parliament, the Kings
greatest Council) are and anciently were accounted to be in their several Orbs
Robur Belli, the Bracton lib. 1. ca. 8. and Seldom 2. part. tit. hon. cap. 5.
15.
strength and power of War, and as Barons or Vassalli Capitales, men of
greater estate or note than ordinary, and were as the old Barons (...) or
Barangi, wbo did with their Battel-Axes attend the Emperors of the East in
their Courts or Palaces as their Guard, sometimes on Foot, and at othertimes on
Horseback, and were as Codinus says, reckoned inter Honoratiores Officiales,
the most honorable Offices of Spelman Glossar. in voce Baro.
the Court attending near the Emperors either at their Meat or Chapel, or
public Addresses, and in the Kingdom of Bohemia, which is now no more than
elective, and where there are neither Dukes nor Marquesses, and but few Earls;
the Title of Baron is of so high an esteem, and the Barons of that Kingdom so
jealous of any thing which might diminish it, as when a Duke Relation de la
conspiration de valstein.
who is a Stranger comes to be there naturalized, they do first oblige him to
quit or renounce the using of his Title of Duke there, and to content himself
only with the Title of a Baron of Bohemia, and says Sir Henry Spelman, sub
Baronis appellatione recte veniunt, our Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Viscounts,
are comprehended under the name of Baron, Cum vel maximus (as the experience
and practice of our Laws and Kingdom will evidence) principis sit Vassallus,
when the greatest of them is but a Liege-man and Vass^l of the King, eique
tenentur homagii vinculo seu potius Baronagii hoc est de agendo vel essendo
Barone suo quod hominem seu Clientem praestantiorem significat, and is by the
Bond of his homage or Baronage to do all things as his Baron, which signifies
to be his Liege-man, and more extraordinary Subject, holding his Lands of him
upon those beneficiary gainful and honorable conditions, and depending upon
him and his Patronage, it being to be remembered that those honorary possessions
and the owners thereof, did by that dependency well deserve that encomium and
observation which John Gower Joh. Gower confessio Amantis, and Seldom tit. hon.
2. part. ca. 5. 16.
made of them about the Reign of King Richard the second, that The Privilege of
^egalie was safe, and all the Barony worshipped was in his Estate.

And it is well known that our ancient Kings in all their Rescripts, Grants or
Charters unto Abbyes, or any other of their people, directed them
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Justiciariis, Baronibus, Dugdales 1.
part. Monastic. Anglic. 384.
Vicecomitibus and Ministris suis, to their Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, Justices and Sheriffs, and other their Ministers; the word Ministris
being in the language of the times, not only since but before the Conquest, not
infrequently Mich. 18 E. 1. in Ba^co Regis Norff. Rot. 46. and Mich. 33, and 34
Et* coram Rege Rot. 75.
appropriate to the Kings household Servants, as the Charters and Subscriptions
of witnesses of many of our elder Kings will abundantly evidence, and the
Barons Majores styled by our Kings not unfrequently in many of their Charters
Barons suos, Barons nostros, and Barons Regios, their Barons, and the Kings
Barons, as William de Percy, and many other have been called, though by such
Charters they could be no more concerned in it than to be Assistant in the
performance and obedience of the Royal Mandates, and in many Acts of Parliament
have been styled the Kings Nobles or Nobility; the De^ne^ Thanes or Nobility,
says the eminently and universally learned Seldom, Seldom tit. hon. 2. part.
cap. ^. 2. and 4.
denoting a Servant or Minister, was as well before, as sometimes since the
Norman Conquest, Officiary, Personal and Honorary, and the Possessions of the
Thanes from whence our Barons and Baronies were derived, were held by the
Service of Personal Attendance: Et certissimum est, says that great and
eminent Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, Spelman Glossar. in voce Baro.
that Barons Majores, the greater Barons which hold of the King in Capiti
Judiciis praefuere Aulae Regiae, did usually sit and determine causes or
controversies in Seldom tit. hon. 689.2. part. cap. 5. Sect. 16.
the Kings Court or Palace (as the Barons of the Coife in the Exchequer who
were heretofore Earls and Barons of England do at this day in Westminster Hall
judge and determine of matters concerning the Kings Revenues) And as the Lords
of Manors in their Court Barons do admit none to be Judges in those little
Courts but their Tenants (who are Freeholders, and which do immediately hold of
them, are styled and said to be of the Homage) and do subserviently manage and
order their Affairs therein, as very anciently they did consilio prudentum
Spelman Glossar. in voce Baro.
hominum and militum suorum, by their presentiments and judgments so (not much
differing from the Laws and Customs of the Germans; where by the Court of Peers
are understood causarum Feudalium Judices a Scholia Jacobi Spiegel in lib. 2.
Ligurini Guntheri, 301, 302.
Caesare constituti qui sine provocatione cognoscebant, the Judges appointed by
the Emperor to hear and determine without appeal matters concerning their
Lands and Territories) in the House of Peers in Parliament, being the highest
Court of the Kingdom of England, none were there admitted, or did administer
Justice, nisi qui proximi essent a Rege ipsique arctioris fidei and homagii
vinculo conjuncti, but such as were near unto the King, held of him in Capite,
and were therefore called Capitanei Regni, as Sir Henry Spelman says, Captains
of the Kingdom and Peers being obliged and bound unto him by Homage Spelman
Glossar* in voce Baro, and in vocibus Pares and Parliament.
and Fealty, that highest and most honorable Court of the Kingdom wherein the
Judicative Power of Parliament under the King their Head and Chief resides (for
the lower house or Representative of the Commons are but as a Court of grand
Enquest to exhibit the grievances of the Nation and the People, who did choose
them to represent them as their Procurators give their consent to the raising
of moneys for public occasions and benefit, and the making of good Laws,
intended to be obeyed by them) being constituted by the King their Head and
Sovereign, the Prince or Heir apparent, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts,
Barons, Archbishops, Bishops, (and some of the greater Abbots and Pryors
holding their Lands and Possessions of the King in Capite until they were
dissolved) the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seal of England, Lord
President of the Kings Council, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Admiral,
Lord Chamberlain of England, and of the Household, Grand Master or Steward of
the Kings house, and the Kings Chief Secretary 31 H. 8. cap. 10.
though no Barons assisted by the Learned and Reverend Judges of the Law and
Courts of Justice at Westminster Hall who have no vote, Masters of Chancery,
Clark of the Crown, and Clark of that more Eminent part of the Parliament
sitting in their several and distinct places according to their qualities and
degrees upon benches or woolsacks covered with red cloth before the Kings
Throne or Chair of Estate, attended by the Kings Senior Gentleman Usher of the
Presence Chamber called the black Rod, to whom for or by reason of his
attendance upon that honorable Assembly, is, and has been anciently allowed
and annexed for his better support the little Park of Windsor, with an house or
lodge thereunto belonging, of a good yearly value) Sergeants at Arms, and
Clarks of that higher house of Parliament, as the members reverencing and
taking care for their Head and Sovereign, the Only under God, Protector of
themselves and all their worldly concernments, laws and liberties, in which
high and honorable Assembly the Archbishops and Bishops do enjoy the
privilege and Spelman Glossar in voce Baro. Barons Spiritual.
honor of being present by reason of their Baronies, which howsoever given in
Frank Almoigne and as Elemosinary are holden in capite and debent interesse
judiciis curiae regis cum Baronibus, are not to be absent says the
constitution or Act of Parliament made at Clarendon by K. Henry the second and
that honorable Tenure being Servitium Militare, a tie of duty and service to
them as well as to the other Baronage, any neglect therein was so penal unto
them as the Lords in Parliament says Seldom tit. honor 795. part 2. cap. 5.
Sect. ^0.
William Fitz Stephen cited by the learned Seldom, did in the Reign of King
Henry the Second, notwithstanding that Archbishops plea and defense, wherefore
he did not come to that great Council or Parliament when he was commanded,
condemn the Ruffling and domineering Archbishop Tho. Becket in a great sum of
money, the forfeiture of all his moveable goods, and to be at the Kings mercy,
and guilty of high Treason for not coming to that high Court when he was cited,
and the reason given of that judgment, for that ex reverentia Regiae
Majestatis, and ex astrictione ligii homagii quod Domino Regi fecerat, and ex
fidelitate and observantia terreni honoris quemei Juraverat, for that in the
reverence and respect which he ought to have showed to the Majesty of the King,
and by his homage made unto him, and his Oath of Fealty sworn to observe and
defend his Honor, he ought to have come but did not; and a Fine was afterward
likewise obout the Reign of King Edward the second imposed upon the Lord
Bellomonte or Beaumont for not attending when he was summoned ad Consulendum
Regi to give the King his Advice or Council.

And certainly those great and many singular privileges and immunities given by
our Kings the Fountains and Establishers of honors, and the Offices and
Employments about their Sacred Persons appurtenant unto that noble and very
Ancient Degree and Titles of Episcopacy, may easily invite the order of Bishops
not to think it to be a disparagement to their Hierarchy, when the dignity
Royal of our Kings do as the Roman Emperors since the time of Constantine the
Great, necessarily require by turns or sometimes in every year the attendance
of the Bishops in their Courts or Palaces, and they are to be a la Traitte du
politicque de France par Mon^sieur P. H. Marquis de C. in fine.
Suite du Roy pour honorer sa Majeste, to be near the King for the honor of
his Majesty, when the King is the Guardian and Head of the Church, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury his Apocrisiarius (which was an ancient Office and
Title of the Bishops, afterward appropriate to the Archbishop or Spelman
Glossar. in voce Apocrisiarius and in voce Comes Palatinus.
Metropolitan) who was in Palatio pro Ecclesiasticis negotiis excubare, to
oversee and take care of the Affairs of the Church in the Kings Court or
Palace, and Capellanus Regis dictus omnibus praefuit negotiis and ministris
ecclesiae, was styled the Kings Chaplain, presided and was (under the King)
superintendent as to Ecclesiastical Affairs over all the business and Ministers
of the Church and Chapel, and in those things quae ad divinum Cultum in
principi^ aula pertinent precipua semper fuit cura atque sollicitudo
Archiepiscopi, which appertained to Gods worship in the Kings Palace the chief
care and business thereof in the duties of Religion and holy Rites belongs
unto him, and is in that particular but as the Kings special Chaplain; not as
Matthew Parker, a learned and worthy Archbishop Mat. Parker antiquit^tes
Eccles^^ (...) 28.
of that See in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when the Papal inflations were
out of fashion, would make the reason of those privileges to be because the
Kings and Queens of Enggland were ejus speciales atque domesticos Parochianos,
his more especial Parishioners, and the whole Kingdom howsoever divided into
distinct Diocesses was but as one Parish, though he could not be ignorant that
the Archbishop of York, and his Suffragan Bishops in one and the same Kingdom
were none of his Parish, nor was as Doctor Peter Heylin a right learned and
dutiful Son of the Church of England by ancient privilege of the Sea of
Canterbury, supposes him to be Ordinary of the Court of his Majesty's
household, being reckoned to be his Parishioners, History of the life of Will.
La^d Arch-bish^p of Canterbury. 2^9.
or of his Peculiar wheresoever the same shall be, the Chancellor or the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England being by special privilege Visitor of all
the Kings Chapels.

For the Kings Chapel and the Prelate of the Honorable Order of the Garter,
Dean and Sub-dean of the Chapel, and all other Officers of that religious and
excellently ordered Oratory being as a part of the Kings most Honorable
Household, when the extravagant and superaboundant power of the English Clergy
by the Papal influency* which had almost overspread and covered the Kingdom,
assisted many times by the Popes Italian or English Legates a latere, such as
were Ottobon, and some Archbishops of Canterbury was in its Zenith, or at the
highest; and sat as Jupiter the false God of the Heathens with his Tri^^lce or
Thunderbolts were not, nor are at this day although the Doctrine and Rights
therein are of no small importance to the Religion and Exercises thereof in the
Kingdom subjected to the Visitation of any Bishops or Archbishops but of the
King, who as Sir Edward Coke also acknowledges is their only Ordinary; And
were heretofore so exempt from either the Popes or any Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction; as King Joh^ did in the first year of his Reign grant to Walter
Bi^starr for his service done, Serjeantiam in Capella sua scilicet ill^m quam
Martinus de Capella To. cart. 1 Johannis in 29.
tenuit tempere Henrici Regis patris sui and praeterea medietatem Caparum
Episcopalium Habendum and tenendum de se and Heredibus suis cum omnibus ad
predictam Serjeantiam pertin: the Serjeanty in his Chapel, which Martin de
Capella held in the time of his Father King Henry: And also the Moiety of the
Bishops Capes or Copes (used therein) to have and to hold together with the
said Serjeanty of him and his Heirs.

And when all the Bishops of England which have been Chancellors or Keepers of
the great Seal, Chief Justices of England or Treasurer, as some of them have
been, might understand that their more immediate service of the King, brought
them an accession of honor and were then in a threefold capacity. First as the
Servants and Ministers of the King, Secondly, as Bishops and Barons, the duty
whereof King Henry the 3 d. did so well understand, as in the 48 th year of his
Reign traveling by Herefordshire into Wales and finding the Bishop of
Hereford absent, and many of that Clergy not resident, he sent his Writ unto
him; commanding him to take more care of his Clergies residence, and threatened
otherwise to seize and take into his hands his Temporalties, Et omnia quae ad
Baroniam Cokes 2. part Institutes 625.
ipsius Ecclesiae pertinent, and all other things which to the Barony of his
Church or Bishopric belonged.

And Thirdly, as great Officers of Trust and State under him the later being so
esteemed to be the worthiest as the Act of Parliament made in the 31 th year of
the Reign of King Henry the 8 th, how Lords in the Parliament should be placed
did especially ordain that if a Bishop happened to be the Kings Chief Secretary
he should sit and be placed above all other Bishops not having any the great
Offices of State and Trust under the King in the said Act of Parliament
mentioned, and if the chief Secretary of the King were above the degree of a
Baron, he should sit and be placed above all other Barons being then and there
present. The Puisney Bishop attending in that high and honorable Court, being
by ancient usage of that Court to pray every morning before the rest of that
assembly during the Session of Parliament, before they do proceed to any
Consultations or business, the other Bishops and the Archbishop of York, who
once contended with the Archbishop of Canterbury for the primacy taking it to
be an honor to Officiate before the King or to be near him, so as Edward
Archbishop of York, and Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of Duresme being sent by King
Henry the eight to signify unto Queen Catherine Lord Herberts History of King
Henry the 8th. 376.
the sentence of his divorce and they shortly after giving an account of her
answer, did in a joint Letter subscribe themselves, Your Highnesses Obedient
Subjects, Servants and Chaplains, and the Archbishop of Canterbury for the
time being was by the Statutes or Orders of King Henry the eighth Statutes or
Orders made at Eltham Anno 17. H. 8.
made at Eltham in the 17 th year of his Reign, ordered to be always or very
often at Court; and all the other Bishops as well as the Archbishop, believing
themselves to be by sundry Obligations bound unto it, are not seldom employed
by our Kings in their several Diocesses and Jurisdictions, as the Bishop of
Durham and the Bishop of Ely and their Successors in their County Palatines, 33
H. 8 ca^. 10.
and with the Archbishops and other Bishops, are by the Kings appointment and
Election, to preach in his Chapel at Court, in times of Solemn Festivals and
Lent, and in the Lord Chamberlaines Letter or Summons, thereunto, are required
to be ready at the several times appointed to perform their service therein,
one of that ancient and necessery order or Hirarchy being the Kings Almoner
another the De^n of his Chapel to govern and see good orders obs^rved therein,
the later whereof has his lodgings in the Kings Courts or Palace, and until
the unhappy remitting of the Royal Pourveyance, had his Be^che at Court, or
diet; the Bishop of ^^^chester and his Successors to be Prelates of the (...),
another Clark of his Closset, as the Bishop (...) Oxford lately was to attend
upon the King in the place where he sits in his Chapel or Oratory, the
presence of the Prince, and an opportunity (...) in 4. (...) ad lib. 12 God.
Justinian 1 (...). 11. Se^^ion 1. p. tit. (...) ca. 3. Sect. ^. and in (...).
a^^rare ejus purpuram to be often in their sight, not by any Idolatreus
worship, but as the civil Law and usage of the Ancients have interpreted it by
an extraordinary reverence done to him by kneeling and touching the Hem, or
lower part of his purple or outward Garment; and immediately after kissing his
hand, which was accounted, says Cui^^ius, to be no small favor which the
people and all the great men of the Eastern and Western Empires under their
Emperors, deemed to be a happiness as well as an honor, as do the German
Bishops Electors in their larger and more Princely Jurisdictions; the
Archbishop of Mente being Chanceller to the Empire for Germany, and to have a
privilege to assist at the Coronation of the Emperors by putting the Crown upon
his head; the Archbishop of Cologne for Italy, (...) Imperii (...). 14.84
and the Archbishop of Tryers for France, or rather for the Kingdom of Arles
or Burgundy, as well as to be Electors of the Emperors and their Successors.

So as our Laws, which if a Bishop be riding upon his way, will not enforce him
to tarry and examine the ability of a Clark presented unto him though it may
require have and prevent a lapse or other inconvenience, but his convenient
leisure ought to be attended, will allow an Earl^ in respect of his dignity and
the necessity of his attendance upon the King and the Weal Public, to make a
Deputy (...) Cokes ^ Rep*
Steward and gives our Nobility many great and high privileges as not to be
examined in an action of debt upon account, but their Attorneys are permitted
to be examined upon Oath for them, not to be amerced or taxed, but by their
Peers, and secundum modum delicti, ^
according to the nature of their offense, Et hoc per Barons de Scaccario vel
coram ipso Rege, and in such cases before only the Barons of the Exchequer or
before the King himself; if a Parkership be granted to an Earl without words to
make a deputy, he may do it by his Servants; if a Duke, Earl, or any other of
the Baronage do chase or hunt in any of the Kings Parkes, the law for
convenience, and in respect of his dignity, will permit him so many attendants
as shall be requisite to the dignity of his estate, are not to be summoned to a
Court Statute of (...) or (...) ^^. H. 3. c. 10.
Leet or Shire Reeves Turn or take their Oaths of Allegiance as all other
Males above the age of 12, are to do neither they nor their Wives are where
they cast an Esseine to make Oath as those which are under the degree of Barons
ought to do of the truth of the cause alleged for their Essoine, but are only
to find pledges, and if upon that Flet* lib. 6. ca. 9.
Essoine allowed a default be made at the day appointed, amertiandi sunt
Plegii, the pledges (but not the Earls or Barons) are to be amerced, are
exempted by the Seatute of the 5 th of Eliz. c. 1.
Eliz. cap. 1. from taking the Oath of Supremacy, for that the Queen; as that
Statute says, was well assured of the Faith of the Temporal Lords, shall have
the benefit of their Clergy in all cases, but Murder and 1 E^iz. c. 2.
Poisoning are not to be put to the Rack or tortured, nor to suffer death even
in cases of Treason, by the shameful death of Hanging, Drawing and affixing
their Heads and Quarters in some public places, (or as at Naples, Memoires du
duc du Guise.
they execute common persons for such most execrable offenses, by beheading
them, and putting their Heads upon the Marketplace, and hanging afterward the
naked Corpse in some pubblick place by one of their Toes) but are by the favor
and warrant of the King only beheaded, and their bodies with their heads laid
by, permitted to be decently buried: Shall not be tried by any Ecclesiastical
Courts, but per Pares, by their Peers, for Nonconformity to Common Prayer
shall have Chaplains according to their several degrees 21. H. 8. ca 13.
and limitations of number, who may hold two Benefices with cure; When the
Sheriff of a County is commanded to raise the posse comitatus, the power of a
County, he is not to command the personal service of the Baronage Coke 3. part
of the Institutes. ca* 56. tit. approver.
or Nobility, a Baron or a Noble man is not to pray that a Coroner may receive
his accusation or to prove and approve his accusation or appeal in every point
or to be disabled for want thereof, When the King by Writ of Summons to
Parliament, Scire Facias or his Letters missive shall send for any of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls or Barons to appear before him or give their
attendance, they may in their going or returning 9 H. 3* ca. 11. Hill. 20. E. 1
coram Rege Wallia Rot. 37.
kill a Deer or two in any of his Forests, Chases and Parkes, and carry them
away, a Capias ad satisfaciend. lies not against a Peer or Baron of England, a
Baron shall not be impannelled of a common Jury although it be for the service
of the Country, no Attachment for a contempt in not appearing 14. Eliz.
Gromwell's case Dyer. 316.
or answering in Chancery lies against them, their Lands, parcel of their
Earldoms, Baronies or Honors, being not to be contributary to the wages of
Knights of the Shire Magna Charta 29. 20 H 6* c. 9. 10 E. 4*6. 20 H. 6. c. 9.
or County wherein those Lands do lie, are in cases of Felony or Treason; to be
tried only by their Peers, and their Wives are by a Statute made in the 20 th
year of King Henry the 6 th, to enjoy the like privilege; upon the Surety of
the Peace prayed against a Baron, he is not to be arrested by warrant from a
Justice, and upon a Supplicavit out of the Chancery, shall give Lambard
Eirenarch. 81.
no surety but promise only upon his Honor; A Defendant shall not have a day of
Grace 27 E. 3. 27 H. 8.27.
given him against a Lord of Parliament, because he is supposed to attend the
affairs of the public: a Baron shall not answer upon Oath to a Bill in
Chancery or Equity but upon protestation of Honor, nor in a verdict upon a
Trial by Peers, for says Crompton, the Law makes so much account of the word
of a Peer of the Realm Crompton Jurisdiction of Courts. 1 H. 4.1. and Stamford.
152.
when he speaks upon his honor, though it be in Case, or upon Trial for life as
it shall be believed, a Baron shall not have a writ of Subpaena directed unto
him, but a Letter under the Hand and Seal of the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper
of the great Seal of England; is not to be arrested or outlawed for Debt 21 E.
3 39. 43 E. 3.33* 8 R. 2. 7 H. 4. 11 H. 4.15. 1 H. 5.14. 14 H. 6.2. 22 H.
6.226. 27 H. 8.27. Countee de Salops case. Cokes 9. Report 49.
or any other personal action not criminal, there being two Reasons, says our
Law, why the person of a Lord should not be arrested or outlawed for Debt or
Trespass; the one in respect of his dignity, and the other in respect that the
law presumes that they have Countess of Rutlands case. Cokes 6 Reports 52. and
53. and 3. H. 6 48.
sufficient lands and tenements by which they may be distreined, in the Long
Writ called the Prerogative Writ issuing out of the Exchequer to distreine the
lands and goods of the Kings debtors, or in default thereof to attach their
bodies; there is an express exception of Magnatum dominorum Vernons
considerations for regulating of the court of Exchequer. 18.
and dominarum of the Nobility and their Ladies; and the Office of Count or
Earl was of great trust and confidence for two purposes, the first, ad
consulendum Regi Nevills case Cokes 7. Rep. 34. Dier 20 Eliz 360 Coke 2 part
Instit. cap 2.
tempore pacis, to council, assist and advise the King for the Weal public in
time of peace; and the second ad defendendum Regem and patriam tempore belli,
to defend their King and Country in time of War, and by their power, prowess
and valor, guard the Realm; both which are the proper business of the Barons
and the other Nobility as well as the Earls, and in action of Debt, Detinue or
Trespass, or in any other action real or personal brought or commenced for or
against 13 E. 3. Dier 107 and Crompton Jurisdiction des courts.
any of the Nobility, two Knights shall be impannelled on the Jury with other
men of worth, and by a late necessary and honorable care of the late Lord
Chancellor and Master of the Rolls; no Original Writ against any of the
Nobility in a subsequent Term is permitted to be antedated or to take benefit
of a precedent as is now commonly used against such as are not of the Peerage
or Nobility: Mr. Seldom giving us the Rule, that tenere de Rege in Capite and
per Baroniam to hold of the King in Capite Seldom tit. honor. 704. 2 part ca.
5. 20. Coke comment. super Littleton 58.
and to have lands holden by Barony, and to be a Baron, are one and the same
thing, and Synonymies, and not a few of our ancient Writers and Memorialls have
understood the word Baronia to signify an Earldom, or the lands appertaining
thereunto, which may make it to be more then conjectural that it is their
dignity, service Dugdale 1 part Monasticon Anglic
and attendance upon the King and Weal public, more then any supposition of
their great Estates sufficient to be distreined, which has founded and
continued those just and warrantable liberties and privileges unto them tam
tacito omnium consensu usuque longaevo derived and come down unto us as well
from antiquity the law of Nations, and the civil and Imperial laws, which were
no strangers unto us above 400 years after the comeing of our blessed Savior
Christ Jesus into the flesh, or when Papinian the great civil Lawyer Seldeni
dissertatio ad Fletam ca. 4. 3. and ca. 5. 1. and 3.
sat upon the Tribunal at York seven years together, whilst the Emperor
Severus kept his Court, and was there Resident, wherein are only to be found
the Original ( g) of many honorable rational and laudable customs of honor
and Majesty, used not only in England, but all the Christian Kingdoms and
Provinces of Europe; quam Regni Angliae Institutis latisque quae in Juris
necessitatemque vigorem jam diu transiit, as our common and Municipal laws and
Reasonable customs of England necessarily to be observed, for if it could be
otherwise, or grounded only upon their sufficiencies of Estate whereby to be
distreined, every Rich Man or good Freeholder which differ as much from our
Nobility, as the Hombre's Rico's, rich men without privileges do in Spain from
the Rico's Hombre's Seldom tit. h^nor 573. part. 2. ca. 4. Sect. 4
dignified, and rich men might challenge as great a freedom from arrests;
especially when our laws do allow an action upon the case against a Sheriff, or
other which shall make a false Return, that a Freeholder has nothing to be
distreined when he has estate sufficient, whereby to be summoned or
distreined, but it neither is nor can be so in the case of our Nobility and
Baronage who are in times of Parliament to be protected by their Dignities, and
the high concernments of Parliamentary affairs from any mol^station or
disturbance by any Writs or Process either in their Persons or Estates, and
are by some condiscention and custom in favor to such as may have cause of
action against them in the vacancy of Parliaments and when their privilege of
Parliament cease, become liable to the Kings Writs or Process, yet not by
any Process of arrest or imprisoning of their persons, but by Writs of
Summons, Pone per vades and salvos, taking some Pledge or Cattle, that they
shall appear, and Distringes to distrein them by their Lands, Tenements, Goods
and Chattels, until they do appear and answer to the action, that which is
returned or levied thereupon being not returned into the Exchequer or forfeit
to the King if they do appear in any reasonable time unto which privilege of
Process the Bishops of England and Wales holding by Barony, may justly claim or
deserve to be admitted, when as the Metropolitans having an Estate for life in
their Bishoprics and Baronies, ought not to have a Nihil habet returned
against in their several Provinces, nor the Suffragan Bishops in their
Diocesses nor have their dignities subjected to the violence of Arrests or
sordid usage of prisons; hindering the execution of their sacred Offices in the
Government and daily occasions of the Church of God: neither are any of the
Baronage or Bishops of England to be Register of Writs 100. b.
distreined in their Journeys, per equitaturam, by their Horses or Equipage,
for any Debt, or upon any other personal action whilst they have any other
Goods or Chattels whereby to be distreined.

So as if any of the Temporal Baronage of England holding their Earldomes or
Baronies in Fee or Fee Tail or for Life should by the prodigality of themselves
or their Ancestors or by misfortunes, troubles or vicissitudes of times as too
many have been since their honors have not been (as if rightly understood they
ought to be) accounted feudall, and the Lands thereunto belonging as the lands
of the Bishops and spiritual Barons unalienable be reduced to a weak or small
Estate in lands, or should have none, as John afterward King of England, a
younger son of King Henry the Second was: who until his father had conferred
some honors and lands upon him was called Jean sans terre, John without land,
yet they having a Freehold in their honors and dignities, and the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls and Viscounts of England having at their Creations some
support of honor, by way of Pension or Annuity, yearly paid unto them by the
King and his Heirs and Successors annexed thereunto, and not to be severed from
it; The ancient Earls having the third penny, or part of the Fines and
Amercements due to the King out of the Counties, of which they were Earls
afterward about the Reign of King John reduced Seldom 2 part. tit. honor 637.
ca 5.. 7. to. liberat. 2. Regis Johanis in 3.
to 20 Ma^kes per annum, as all the later Earls and Viscounts now have, and
the Dukes and Marquesses a greater yearly, annuity or Creation money, as 40
Marks or 40 l. per an. And all the Nobility and Baronage of England having
besides a Freehold in their honors and dignities and their houses nobly
furnished, some of them having above 20 thousand pounds per an. lands of
Inheritance many above 10, others 7, 6, 5, 4. or 3, thousand pounds per annum
lands of Inheritance in Tail, or for Life, and none unless it be one or two
whose misfortunes have brought their Estates for Life or Inheritance something
under one thousand pound per annum. There can be neither ground or reason for
any Sheriff upon any the aforesaid Writs awarded or made against any of them to
return, Quod nihil habet per quod summoniri possiit, that he had nothing
whereby to be summoned attached or distreined, and if that could as it cannot
rationally be truly or legally done, yet the Judges sworn unto the observance
of the laws, and to do Justice unto all sorts of people cannot in any of their
Courts award or cause Writs or Process of Capias against them to arrest or
imprison their bodies upon any action of debt or other personal actions not
criminal which makes an impossibility for any of them in civil actions to be
outlawed.

And if they had neither Creation, money nor Lands, Goods or Chattels, which is
neither rationally or probably to be either imagined or believed, yet they are
not to be denied those honorable privilege so anciently and by the laws of
nations belonging to their high calling and dignities, when as the ancient
Charters or Creations of Earls (those later of some of our Dukes, Marquesses,
Viscounts and Barons having words and clauses amounting to as much) do grant
them as in that ancient one by King Henry the second to Earl A^berick or
Albercius de tere of the Earldome of Oxenfordscyre their honors ita libere
quiet and Seldom tit. honor 651, 652. 2 part ca. 5. Sect. 10.
honorifice sicut aliquis comitum Angliae liberius quetius and honorificieutius
habet as freely and honorably as any Earl of England held his Earldome as that
grant of the same King to William d'Abbiney of the Earldome of Arundell, cum
omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus predicto honori pertinentibus,
with all the liberties and free customs to the said honor appertaining that
of later Pat. 5. E. 6 in 4. Seldom tit honor 664. 2 part. ea 5 Sect 10
granted to the Earl of Pembroke by King Edward the 6 th of the Earldome of
Pembroke, cum omnibus and singulis praeheminentiis honori Comitis
pertinentibus, with all preheminencies and honors belonging to the honor and
dignity of an Earl, Et habere sedem locum and vocem (as all the grants and
Creations of the later Earls do now allow and import) in Parliamentis publicis
Comitiis and Consiliis nostrorum haeredum and successorum infra regnum Angliis
inter alios Comites, and to have place vote or suffrage in the Parliaments or
Counsels of the King his heirs or successors amongst the Earls within the
Kingdom of England, nec non uti and gandere omnibus and singulis Juribus
privilegiis praeheminentiis and immunitatibus statui comitis in omnibus rite
and de I're pertinentibus quibus caeteri comites Regni Angliae ante haec
tempora melius honorificentius quietius and liberius usi and gravisi sunt, as
likewise to use and enjoy all and singular rights, privileges, immunities and
preheminencies to the degree and state of an Earl in every thing rightly and by
law appertaining as other Earls of the Kingdom of England, best most
honorably and freely have used and enjoyed, all who the aforesaid ancient
honorable privileges, preheminencies, and immunities granted and allowed the
Nobility and Baronage of England those Sons and Generations of merit adorned by
their ancestors virtue as well as their own and the honors which their
Sovereigns have imparted unto them have been ratified by our Magna Charta so
very often confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, and the Petition of Right
(in and by which the properties and liberties of all the people of England are
upheld and supported) and therefore the honors and dignities being personal
Officiary, or relating to their service and attendance upon the throne and
Majesty Royal, and conducing to the Honor, Welfare and safety of the King and
his people; King Henry the 6 th may be thought to have been of the same opinion
when the Commons in Parliament having in the 29 th year of his Rot. Part hincu.
29. H 6.
reign, Petitioned him that the Duke of Sommerset, Duchess of Suffolk and
others may be put from about his person, he consented that all should depart
unless they be Lords whom he could not spare from his person.

And in Asks Rebellion in Yorkshire, in the latter end of the Lord Herberts
History of King Henry the eighth. 418.
reign of King Henry the 8 th, the Commons complained that the King was not
(although he had many about him of great Nobility) served or attended with
Noble or worthy men, And also the Lords Spiritual assembled in Parliament in
the second year of the reign of King Charles the Martyr, when they Petitioned
the King against the Inconveniences of some English men's being created Earls,
Viscounts and Barons of Scotland or Ireland that had neither residence nor
estates in those Kingdoms did amongst other things allege that it was a Shame
to nobility that such persons dignified with the titles of Barons Viscounts,
etc* should be exposed and obnoxious to arrests, they being in the view of the
law no more Rushworths Historical Collections. 237.
then mere Plebejans, and prayed that his Majesty would take some Course to
prevent the prejudice and disparagement of the Peers and Nobility of this
Kingdom who being more peculiarly under the protection of their Sovereign in
the enjoyment of their privileges have upon any invasion thereof a more
special address unto him for the Conservation thereof, as in the case of the
Earl of Northampton, the twentieth day of June in the 13 th year of the Reign
of King Charles the Martyr against Edmond Cooper a Sergeant at Mace in London
and William Elliot for arresting of him they were by the Lord Chamberlains
warrant apprehended and committed to the Marshall and not discharged but by
warrant of the Lord Chamberlain bearing date the third day of July next
following, and needs not seem unusual strange or irrational, unto any who shall
but observe and consult the liberties privileges immunities and
praeheminencies granted and permitted unto the Nobility of many other Nations
and Countries as well now as very anciently by their Municipal and reasonable
customs and the civil or Caesarean laws.

CHAP. XVI.
That many the like privileges and praeheminences are and have been anciently
by the Civil and Caesarian laws and the Municipall Laws and reasonable Customs
of many other Nations granted and allowed to the nobility thereof*

WHen as the Hebrews who thought themselves the most ancient wise and
privileged of the Sons of men Sigonius de repub. Hebraeorum ca. 5. and 6.
Menochius de repub. Hebraeorum lib. 1. ca. 6. Sect. 8. Jos. 29.51 2 Samuel 23.23.
1. Reg. 8.1.3. 2 Reg. c. 2. 2 Reg. 1.5.9.11. 1 Paralip. ca.
had their (...) tribuum principes and Capita qui cum Rege sedentes partim
consilia mibant partim* Jus reddebant, Princes of the Tribes under the King
were the chief Magistrates and heads of the people attended the King, sat with
him as his Council and assisted him in the making of laws, of which the book of
God gives plentiful evidences, Solomon had 1 Reg. 4.2.
his Princes, some of whom were set over his household Ahab had Princes of his
Provinces, Jehoram King of Israel leaned upon the hand 2 Reg. 7. v. 2. and 17.
of a Lord that belonged unto him, And our Savior Christ alludeth to the
Princes of Israel the Elders and Judges of the people when he Mat. 19.28
says his twelve Apostles should after the Consummation of the world, sit and
Judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, amongst Sigonius de repub. Atheniensium.
lib. 1. ca. 2. and 4. l. 2. c. 5.
the Graecians the nobility derived their honors from their Kings and Princes
and by the laws of Solon and the ten Tables were always distinguished from
the Common people and had the greatest honors and authorities, and in all
other Nations, who live under Monarchs have been favored and endowed
therewith, the old Roman Nobility refused to marry with the Ignoble (as those
of Denmark and Germany do now which our English descended from the later, did
so much approve of as they accounted it to be a disparagement to all the rest
of the Family and Kindred to marry with Citizens or people of Coke 1. part
Institutes. vel comment sup. Littleton tit. Knight service Sect. 107. and 108
mean Extractions) Julius Caesar when he feasted the Patricii or Nobility and
the common people entertained the Nobility in one part of his Palace, and the
Common people in another, (and not denied some part of it even in the Venetian
and Dutch Republic) as amongst many other not here ennumerated, Nobilis
Valentius Fostevus in Hist. Juris Civilis Romans lib. 3. ca. 12.480.
minus su^t puniendi quam ignobilis, Noble men are not to be so severely
punished as ignoble, Nobiles propter debitum Civil vel ex causa aeris alieni
non debent realiter citari vel in Carcerem duci, are not for debts or moneys
owing to be arrested or imprisoned propter furtum vel aliud crimen suspendio
dignum laquei supplicio non sunt plectendi, are not for Theft or any other
Crime to be hanged, and that privilege so much allowed and insisted upon in
the Republic or Commommon wealth of Genoar in the height of their envy or
dislike of their Nolden de S^atu nobilium civili. ca. 15 Sect. 5. and 7.
Cuiacius com^ment. ad lib. 12. Cod, Justiniani tit. 1. d. l. 2. Cod. and nemo
privatus.
Nobility, as they did about the year of our Savior 1220 displace the learned
Jacobus Baldwinus a Doctor of the Civil Law, and removed him from his place of
Praetor or Lord Chief Justice into which they had elected him for that he had
caused a Noble man to be hanged when as ^atrio Statuto strangulationis
ignominia eximuntur nobiles, a Noble man was by their Laws not to be put to
death in so ignominious a manner and thereupon enacted by a Law, that from
thenceforth no Doctor of Law should be admitted into the Office or place of
Praetor, Hispanus nobilis jure Regio Hispaniarum ex Nobilitatis privilegio in
Carcerem mitti non potest nec in ipsius Nolden de Statu nobilium Civili
Synopsis Bract. ca. 1^ Sect. 2.3.5.
armis and equo recte fit executio, A Spanish Noblemen is not by the Kingly law
and Prerogative of the King of Spain and tbe privilege of his nobility to be
imprisoned or his Arms or Horse taken in Execution; by the Laws of Poland and
of Flanders a Noble man is not to be imprisoned but taken into custody by the
Magistrate or Judge in their houses, or confined to some City or place, until
the debt demanded or Action be satisfied, or by plea discharged in
depositionibus attestationibus and testimoniis ferendis magis creditur
Nobilibus quam Ignobilibus, in attestations or testimonies, Noble men are more
to be credited then ignoble, ac etiam cum de illorum re agitur, even when it is
in their answers or own concernments, ad officia secularia magis quam plebei
assumuntur are sooner to be preferred to secular Offices and employments then
such as are ignoble, reverenter sunt salutandi are to be reverently saluted ad
omnem occursum illis assurgendum caput revelandum de Gratian tom. 2 discept.
for. ca. 284. Cassaenaeus in Catalog gloriae mundi Fr. Marci. deors Delph 806.
n 11. tom. 1.
via decedendum etc. men are to rise unto them at their coming toward them:
uncover their heads, or give them way or place, for in doing them honor the
Prince or King that gave them the honor is honored, Si in judiciis comparent
Index Bonfin lib. 7 Chronic. Hungar. 4 Schrader cons. 3. n 197. vol. 1.
(qui in Hungaria in causis nobilium non nisi nobilis) eos salutare and ad
sedendum: aliquo humiliori loco iuvitari debet, if he appear in any Court of
Justice the Judge (who in Hungary in the causes of any of the Nobility is
likewise to be a Noble man) is to salute them and invite them to sit in some
place beneath the Tribunal, Non verbo sed in scriptis sunt citandi are Nolden
de Statu Nobilium Civili ca. 13.297.
not to be cited by word of mouth, but by writing, de calumnia personaliter
jurare non tenentur, are not to take in any action, the Oath de Calumnia, that
the action is not merely brought in Nolden Synoptis tractat. de Statu nobilium
civili ca. 13. Sect. 6. idem 304. Sect 11. ca. 15. Sect. 2.
malice or for contention, injuria nobilibus illata long aliter aestimatur
quam ea quae ignobili infertur an injury done unto them is more then to one
which is ignoble, torqueri non debent, ought not to be put upon the Rack, or
tortured, Offendens Consiliarium principis incurrit crimen Majestatis quando
offenderetur in odium and contemptum siu Nolden de Statu nobilium Civili ca 5.
Sect. 1.
principis, he which hurts or offends a Councellor of the Prince (our
Temporal Baronage being so in Parliament by Inheritance) commits Treason if
it be done in hatred or contempt to the Prince. Cuiacius comment ad lib. 12.
Cod. justinian. tit. 1.
And the reason given for the high esteem of Nobility, and those more then
ordinary favors and privileges granted and imparted unto them and the
Baronage of the Empires of Rome, Germany, and many Neighbor Kingdoms are that
they are de familia Principis, Alberis Ruland de Commissor part 1. l. 5. ca. 6
n. 15. Menoch. cons. 902. n. 30. Nolden de statu. Nobil. civili. ca. 5.79.
accounted as a part of the Families of the Emperors and Kings, unum cum ipso
faciant corpus unum Consistorium, are as one body and incorporate inhaerere
principi dicuntur sicut stellae firmamento soli are said to attend the Prince,
as the Stars in the firmament do the Sun, and radii solares solemn, and as the
Rays or Beams of the Sun do accompany it. The Emperors Honorius Theodosius
Cujacius ad l. 12. Cod. Justiniani tit. 18. Petrus Granetius de stylo regie
Gallorum Juridict. olim. Salucianis prescripto 321. Sect. 365. and 366.
declaring that immunitate digni sunt quos sui lateris comitatus illustrat,
that they which had the honor to attend and be near their persons deserved to
be privileged.

Poloni Nobiles cum de illorum vita and honor agitur non ab alio quam ipsom
and Rege Judicari possint and non nisi consulto principe sunt puniendi, the
Nobility of Poland in any matter concerning their life and honor, are only to
be tried by the King, and are not to be punished unless the Prince be first
consulted and do approve thereof. Et Barons apud Gallos non aliorum Judicio
subsisti poterant in prima instancia quam Nobilium and Seneschallorum ad quos
Idcirco illorum causae maxim feudales remissae fuisse leguntur apud Jo.
Tilleum recollectorum Franciae regum. And the French Baronage are in the first
instance to to subject to no other Court or Judgment, then that of the
Nobility and Stewards (appointed by the King) and therefore their causes
especially such as concerned their feudal estates or honorary possessions were
as appears by John Tilly thither remitted, Et ab omni aevo Nobilium Galliae
fuit spec^ale privilegium ut omnes eorum cause semper essent reservatae
singulari Regis Supremi eorum principis salvo guardia protectioni and
jurisdictioni. And it was in all ages a special privilege of the French
Nobility to be under the Guard, Protection and Jurisdiction of their
Sovereign, Atque hinc Ballivorum antiqua Institutio quod illi essent and esse
deberent tanquam custodes and conservatores omnium jurium and privilegiorum
nobilibus Petrus Granetius de stilo rigio Gallorum 359.. 440. and 441.
competentium, and from thence came that ancient institution of Bailiffs
(Judges or officers specially appointed) who were and ought and were to be as
Guardians and conservators of all the rights and privileges appertaining to
the Nobility, Et nobiles non minus privilegiati and favorabiles quam Ibid. 338.
sect. 437.
familiares and domestici principum vel Officialium, And the Nobility are there
to be no less privileged and savoured then the Servants and domestiques of the
King or any of his Officers, the distinction betwixt the Nobility and common
people of all the Kingdoms and Nations of the Earth being so universal: As in
China, 3 part Purchase Pilgrimage. 185, 187.
the Mandarines being the Nobility and Governors of Provinces cannot be
imprisoned but for heinous faults, have two Maces of Silver carried before them
in the streets, and none are to cross the streets whilst they pass along and
all men are to give way unto them; Montezeuma Emperor of Mexico in the
West Indies ordained that the Noblest men of his Empire should live in his
Palace, would have none of the Plebeyans but Knights in any office in his
Court, who had privilege to carry Gold and 3 part Purchase Pilgrimage 1019.1663.
Silver, wear rich Cotton and use painted and gilt vessels which the common
people might not. And even the most wild and barbarous of mankind inhabiting
the Earth in those Countries and places where the glimmerings of nature and
civility could give any admission, have so every where acknowledged an honor
due to their nobility, as upon the Coasts of Guinee in Africa, a Country Le
Sieur Villault Voyage to Guinee in Annis 1666 and 1667.251 252.
not at all acquainted with learning or the more civilized Customs of Africa,
Europe or Asia: those that they take for their Nobility, have a liberty which
the vulgar have not, to trade in every place as they please, sell and buy
slaves have their Drums and Trumpets play as they think good before them, and
those who are advanced for any Noble Atcheivement have always the principal
charges in the Army.

Nor should our Nobility or the Kings servants be debarred of any of their just
rights or privileges, when as per reductionem ad principia, by a view and
reflection upon the Original and causes of all those many privileges and
immunities granted or permitted by our Kings of England unto others of his
Subjects and people it will appear that his own servants in Ordinary should not
be grudged that which by so many grounds of law and right reason, and the
ancient and reasonable Customs of England may be believed to belong unto them.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Immunities and Privileges granted and permitted by our Kings of
England unto many of their People and Subjects who were not their Servants in
Ordinary do amount unto as much and in some more then what our Kings Servants in
Ornary did or do now desire to enjoy.

FOr ab hac solis luoe from those or the like rays and beams of Majesty and
emanations of right, reason and necessity of the Kings affairs (which
notwithstanding the late groundless, mad and fond rebellious principle of
seperating the Kings person from his Authority, and a pretended supremacy in
the Parliament, or at the least a co-ordination, should not be disturbed) came,
and was derived that grand privilege of the Nobility and Baronage of England,
many of whom are not his Domestics, not to be molested in time of Parliament
or forty days before the beginning of it in their coming unto it upon the Kings
Summons, and as many days after the end of a Parliament in their retorn to
their Habitations, (though there is no direct way or Journey from their
habitations to any place in England where the Parliament is to be kept or
holden, which can require so much expense of time as twenty days in traveling
unto it, or twenty days in retorning home) by any Process, Writs or Summons,
out of any the ordinary or extraordinary Courts of Justice law or equity, the
Baronage of England enjoying those privileges in the 18 th year of the Reign
of King Edward the first which were then not newly granted or permitted, but
were ancient and justly and legally to be insisted upon, as the punishment of
the Prior of the holy Trinity in London, not meanly fortified with his own
privileges, and the power and protection of the Church, and that also of Bogo
de Clare, who was imprisoned and fined two thousand Marks to the King, at that
time a very great sum of money, pro transgressione sibi facta for the trespass
committed against the King for citing Edmond Earl of Cornwall in Westminster
Hall, in the time of Parliament, to appear before the Archbishop of
Canterbury, whose spiritual Court and Power was then very predominant, as has
been before mentioned and it appears in the Records of that Kings Reign; that
he refused to give leave to the Master of the Temple to distrein the Bishop of
St. David's in Parliament time, for the Rent of an house held of him in London,
and answered, quod non videtur honestum quod Rex concedat tempore El^ings
ancient and present manner of holding Parliaments England.
Parliamenti sed alio tempore distringat, that it would not be just or fitting
for the King to grant such a License in time of Parliament, but at another time
he might distrein, and by a very ancient right are to be exempted from arrest
and the Ordinary Course of Process when there were no Parliaments.

The Writ of Summons directed to the Sheriffs for the Election of two Knights,
the wisest and most discreet of every Shire and County of England (the County
Palatine of Chester then only excepted) and for two Burgesses to be sent unto
Parliament out of the Cities and certain Boroughs of England the King in the
Parliament, being without suspicion of any unwarrantable conjecture, to be
rationally believed to have been first framed and sent out in K. Henry the
thirds name, in the 49 th year of his Reign, by the Earls of Leicester and
Gloucester, after the Battle of Lewis in Sussex wherein he and his Son Prince
Edward, afterward King Edward the first, were taken Prisoners by them and
other the Rebellious Barons who had taken arms against him as my learned and
worthy friend Mr. William Dugdale, Norroy King at Dugdales Origines
Juridicial.13. and 18.
Arms, by comparing the date of those Writs, the one bearing date the 14 th
day of December at Worcester in the 49 th year of the Reign of that King, and
the other at Woodstock the 24 th of December in the same year, to meet at
London on the Octaves of St. Hi^lary then next ensuing, with the day or time of
that Battle, and that Kings imprisonment has after it had for so many Ages
past, escaped the Industry, Inquiries, Observations and Pens of all other our
English Writers, Annalists, Chronicles and Antiquaries, very judiciously and
ingeniously observed, which Summons of the Commons to Parliament does not,
says Vid. Prynns Register of Parliament Writs.
Mr. William Prynn, appear to have been put in Execution, until about the
23th. year of the Reign of King Edward the Vide Prynns Register of Parliament
Writs.
first, whence by Regal Indulgencies and no Innate or Inherent right of their
own, but ab hoc font, from the same spring and fountain of the attendance and
affairs of the King, proceeded the privileges of Parliament for the Members of
the house of Commons in Parliament, to be free from actions at Law or Pleas in
time of Parliament, as Early as the reign of King Edward the second, when he
sent his Writ or Rot. claus. 8 E. 2 m 22. and 33. in dorso.
Proclamation to the Justices of Assize in all the Counties of England to
supersede all actions against the Barons and others summoned to Parliament.

In the 11 th year of the reign of King Richard the second, upon a riot and
trespass committed upon the Lands, Goods, Servants, and Tenants of Sir John
Derwintwater chosen to Prynns Animadversions upon Cokes 4 part of the
Institutes and additional Appendix. 332.
be a Member of Parliament for the County of Cumberland, a Commission was
granted by that King under the great Seal of England to Henry de Percy Earl of
Northumberland to inquire by a Jury of the County of Westmerland concerning the
same, and to cause to be arrested and taken, all that should be found guilty
thereof, and to appear before the King and his Council wheresoever he should
be 15 days after the Michaelmass then next ensuing.

In the fifth year of the Reign of King Henry the fourth, the Commons in Rot.
Parl. 5 H. 4. m. 7.
Parliament alleging that whereas according to to the Custom of the Realm,
the Lords, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses coming to Parliament at his Command,
and there staying and in retorning to their Countries, ought With their men and
their servants with them to be under his special protection and defencc and
ought not for any debt trespass or other contract whatsoever to be arrested, or
any way imprisoned in the mean time; And that many such men coming to
Parliament with their men and Servants, have been during the time of Parliament
arrested by them who had full knowledge that they so arrested by them were of
the Parliament in contempt of his Majesty, great damage of the party and delay
of the business of the Parliament, did Petition the King to establish that if
any hereafter do arrest any such man coming to the Parliament, as aforesaid,
or any of their men or servants or any thing attempt, contrary to the said
Custom, he should make fine and ransom to the King, and render treble
damages to the party grieved.

Which was no more than what the Aurea Bulla, or Aurea Bulla in Archiv.
Electoris Palatini edit, per Marquardum Freherum: ca. 1. and 12.
Golden Bull, confirmed by Charles the 4 th Emperor of Germany in his Edict
touching the seven Electors of the Empire, and the manner of their election of
the Emperors bearing date in January 1256 did ordain that the said Electors or
their deputies or Ambassadors in their going to Frankfort upon the Main,
tarrying and return from thence should with 200 Horse attending each Elector,
be freed from all injuries, molestations, process or arrests, and in their
going and retorn have the like, and a safe conduct with the like freedom and
privilege as they passed through each of the other Electors Territories and
the like in their meetings or assemblies at the Comitia, Diets or Parliaments
of the Empire and should have their provisions and necessaries at reasonable
rates, and that those that should molest them in their persons or Estates,
should be pr^scribed and banished and forfeit their lands and estates, And it
appeared to be so reasonable to the French, as before the Ordinance of Moulins,
which was made and verified by themselves in Parliament, which provided that
the Counselors, Judges or Senators, in the Courts of Parliament might be
arrested for debt after four months legal notice or Summon did ad adjudge that
it belonged not to a Subalterne or inferior Judge, ordonner contre la person
d' un Senateur person privilegie que les Senateurs partem corporis principis,
faciebant, to award process against a Senator being a person privileged, that
the Senators were a part of the body (politic) of the Prince Qu'il estoit
honteux voir en prison ceux qui en un momeat, se pouvoyent seoir au senate, that
it would be a shame to see a Senator in Prison which might shortly after sit in
the Senate, that as their wages were privileged from being arrested for a
Debt, so where their persons Que Love^ recueil d' Aucums notable arrests en le
Parliament de Paris ca. 31.
les Rayons, de ceste Souverainete (du Roy) ne se ponvoient separer d'avec eux,
that the Rays of the Kings Sovereignty could not be separated from them.

Those or the like Protections, privileges and immunities being in England
accounted and believed to be so necessary to the service and affairs of the
King and the weal public, as in the same year and Parliament, the Commons did
Petition the King, that whereas All the Lords Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
and their 5 H. 4* rot. Parl m 78.
servants coming to Pariiament by the Kings Writ are in coming staying and
retorning under his protection R^yal, and that many mischiefs and impeachments
do often happen unto the said Lords Knights Citizens and Burgesses, and their
maenial servants at those times as by Murder, Maims, and Batteries by people
lying in wait or otherwise, for which due remedy is not yet provided, and that
namely and particularly in this Parliament an horrible Battery and Mischief was
committed upon Richard Chedder Esquire who came to the Parliament with Sr. Thomas
Brook, Knight, one of the Knights for the County of Somerset, and Maenial with
him by John Sallage, otherwise called John Savage, whereby the said Richard
Chedder was imblemished and maimed to the peril of death, that he would please
to ordain upon that matter sufficient remedy, and for other such causes
semblable, so as the punishment of him might give example and terror unto
others not to commit the like mischeifs in time to come, that is to say, If any
man shall kill or murder any that is come under the Kings Protection to
Parliament that it be adjudged Treason, and if any do maim or disfigure any
such coming under the Kings Protection, that he lose his hand, and if any do
assault or beat any suoh so come, that he be imprisoned for a year, and make
fine and Ransom to the King, and that it would please the King of his special
grace hereafter to abstain from Chartere of pardon, in such cases, unless that
the parties be fully agreed,

Upon which they obtained an Act of Parliament, and a Proclamation, that the
said John Savage should appear, and render himself into the Kings Bench within
a El^ings ancient and modern holding of Parliaments 150
quarter of a year after, and if he did not he should pay to the party
endamaged double damages to be taxed by the discretion of the Judges of the
said Bench, for the time being or by Inquest if need be, and make fine and
ransom at the Kings will, and that it should be so done in time to come in like
cases.

Whereupon the said John Savage not appearing upon the said Proclamation, and
being prosecuted in the Court of Kings Bench, by the said Richard Chedder, and
convicted, and the Justices giving no full judgment therein, but sending a writ
of inquiry of damages several times to the Trin. 7. H. 4. coram Rege rot. 69.
Sheriffs of London, who did nothing, thereupon did at length upon view of his
wounds and maim, not think it necessary to proceed by a Jury upon a writ of
inquiry of damage, but according to their discretion did adjudge that the said
Richard Chedder should recover against the said John Savage his damages, which
were taxed at one hundred marks, and likewise taxed him to pay the double
thereof being another hundred marks.

Our Statutes and acts of Parliament being then as in former times, and all
along until these later times usually or most commonly ushered in and
introduced by Petitions to the King in Parliament, as the Parliament Rolls and
Journalls, compared with the printed Statutes or acts of Parliament will
abundantly testify.

And such a care was taken of the conservation of those privileges.

As in the 8 th year of the Reign of King Henry the 6 th at the request of the
Commons in Parliament 8. H. 6. rot. parl. m. 57.
one William Lark servant to William Mildred a Burgess in Parliament for
London being committed to the Fleet upon an Execution for debt was delivered by
the privilege of the Commons House, and authority given by the King to the
Chancellor, to appoint certain by Commission to apprehend him after the
Parliament ended to satisfy the said Debt and Execution.

In the same year and Parliament, for that the prelatee and Clergy 8 H. 6. ca.
1.
of the Realm of England called to the Convocation, and their servants and
families that come with them to sach Convocation often times, and commonly be
arrested molested and inquieted, the King willing graciously in that behalf to
provide for the security and quie^ness of the said Prelates and Clergy, at the
supplication of the said Prelates and Clergy and by the assent of the great
men and Commons in Parllament assembled, did ordain and establish, that all the
Clergy hereafter to be called to the Convocation by the Kings writ and their
servants and familiars should for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such
liberty or defenee in coming tarrying and retorning as the great men, and
commonly of the Realm of England, called or to be called to the Kings
Parliament, did enjoy or were wont to enjoy, or in time to come ought to enjoy.

In the 23. and 24 th year of the Reign of that King the Commons in Parliament
Rot. parl. 23 and 24. H. 6. m. 40.
did pray the King that every person being of the Lords or Commons House,
having any assault or fray made upon him being at the parliament, or coming or
going from thence might have the like remedy, therefore as Sir Thomas Parre
Knight had (which shows that in those days they did not endeavor to punish any
breach of their privileges by their own authority, but made their address by
their petitions unto the King as their Sovereign and Supreme for his Justice
therein) To which the King answered the Statutes therefore made should be
observed.

In the 28 th year of the said Kings Reign, It was at the request of the
Commons in Rot. parl. 28. H. 6. m. 56.
parliament, for that William Taylebois of South Lime, in the County of Lincoln
Esquire would in the Parliament time have slain Ralph Lord Cromwell, one of the
Kings Council in the Palace of Westminster; Enacted that the said William
Taylebois should therefore be committed to the Tower of London, there to remain
one year without bail baston or Mainprize, and that before his delivery he
should answer unto the same.

In the 14 th and 15 th year of the Reign of King Edward the 4 th, William Hide
a Burgess of Parliament for the Town of Chippenham in Wiltshire being a Rot.
parl. 14. and 15. E. 4. m. 54.
Prisoner upon a Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum obtained a Writ out of the
Chancery to be delivered with a saving of the right of other men to have
Execution after the Parliament ended, (notwithstanding the P^ecedent of Sir
William Thorpe Knight, Speaker of the house of Commons in the 18 th year of the
Reign of the Reign of King Henry the 6 th taken in Execution for a debt of
1000 l. at the suit of Richard Duke of York betwixt the adjournment and recess
of that Parliament and could not be released, so as a new Speaker was chosen in
his place, which may well be conjectered to have been so carried by the then
overbearing power and influence of that Duke and his party great alliance and
pretenses to the Crown, which that meek and pious King was not able to resist.

For in the 17 th year of the reign of King Edward the 4 th at the petition of
the Commons in Parliament the Rot. parl. 17. E. 4. m. 35.
King with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal granted that John
Atwill a Burgess of the City of Exeter condemned in the Exchequer during the
Parliament, upon eight several informations at the suit of John Tailor of the
same Town should have as many Writs of Supersedeas as he would until his
coming home after the Parliament.

In the 35 th year of the Reign of King Henry the 8 th. Trewyniard a Burgess
of Parliament being imprisoned upon an Utlary in an action of debt upon a
Capias ad satisfaciendum was delivered by privilege of Parliament, allowed to
be legal by the opinion of the Judges before whom that case of his imprisonment
and release was afterward debated and their reasons as has been before
remembered given for the same with which agrees the precedent in the case of
Edward Smalley a servant of Mr. Hales a member of Parliament taken in Execution
in the 18 th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth in the Report whereof made
by the Committee of Parliament for his delivery, it is said that the said
Committee found no precedent for the setting at large any person in arrest but
only by writ and that by diverse precedents on Elsings ancient and present
manner of holding of Parliaments in England 199, 200. and 201.
Record and perused by the said Committee, it appeared that every Knight
Citizen and Burgess of the house of Commons in Parliament, which does require
privilege has used in that case to take a corporal oath before the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being that
the party for whom such writ is prayed came with him to the Parliament, was his
servant at the the time of the arrest made, whereupon Mr, Hale was directed by
the house of Commons to make an oath before the Lord Keeper as aforesaid, and
to procure a warrant for a Writ of privilege for his said servant, howbeit the
Lords in Parliament did in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth usually of their own
authority deliver their Servants out of Execution, if arrested in Parliament
time.

In the 27 th year of her Reign, a Member of the house of Commons having been
served with a Writ of Subpaena issuing out of the Chancery, and the house
signifying to the Lord Keeper that it was against their privilege Journal of
the House of Commons in Parliament. 27. Eliz.
he returned answer, that he could not submit to any opinion of the house
concerning their privileges, except those privileges were allowed in Chancery
and would not recall the Subpaena.

With which accords Mr. William Pryn too violent an undertaker in the late
times of usurpation, to assert their phantosme or feigned sovereignty whereof
he was then and since his Majesty's happy restoration until his death, a
member who having by the keeping of the Records in the Tower of London, found
the way to a better weighed and more sober consideration and cause enough, if
he would have well inspected himself and what he had formerly written to
retract those many errors which an overhasty reading and writing had hurried
him into, has in his animadversions Pryns Animadversions upon Cokes 4 th part
Institutes.
upon Sir Edward Cokes 4 th part of his Institutes declared, that the house of
Commons in Parliament had until the later end of the last Century assumed no
Jurisdiction to themselves or their Committee of privileges to punish breaches
of privileges but only complained thereof to the King or the Lords in
Parliament.

And therefore King James in an answer to a Petition of the House of Commons in
Parliament in Anno Dom. 1622, was not in an error, when he said, that although
we cannot allow of the style calling your privileges your ancient and
undoubted rights and inheriiance, but could rather have wished that you had
said that your privileges were derived from the grace or permission of our
Ancestors and us, for most of them were from precedents, which shows rather a
tolleration then inheritance, yet we are pleased to give you our royal
assurance, that as long as you contain your selves Rushworths Historical
Collections. 52*
within the limits of our duty we will be as careful to maintain and preserve
your lawful liberties and privileges as ever any of our predecessors were, nay
as to preserve our own Royal Prerogative.

Et ab hac radice Regalitatis and rectae Rationis, And from that root of
Regality and right reason, only Foundation and Original, though Sir Edward Coke
is willing to mistake it when he would have it to flow from a respect only due
to Justice and the Courts thereof have proceeded the great reverence and awe
due unto the Superior Courts of Justice at Westminster Hall, (for lesser or
inferior Courts do neither deserve nor claim it) when the Judges do sit there
in their several Superior Courts under the Shadow and protection of the Royal
Oak.

Whence also came that very necessary custom and usage, to be bare, uncovered,
and respectful in their words and behavior to one another in the Judges
presence, as well as unto the Judges themselves, and from whence, and the
reflex of Supreme authority, have the Judges power to fine or imprison such as
mis-behave themselves therein as in the case of William Botesford, fined to
pay two Marks, by the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench, for threatening to
kill one Hawis Gaygold, for prosecuting him in an action of trespass Pasch. 10.
E. 3. Lincoln. Rot. 59.
and using those Menaces in aula placitorum in presentia Justic. ipsius Regis
and Curiae suae contemptum in Westminster Hall, in the presence of the Kings
Justices, and in contempt of the Court, and was committed to the Marshall, and
that at an Assize holden at Northampton North. assize. 3. E 3 Rot. 7.
in the third year of the Reign of King Edward the third, John Blundell was
attached, ad Respondend tam domino Regi quam VVillielmo de Towcester Attorn:
Thomae Comitis Mariscalli Angliae de placito quare insultum fecit super ipsum
in domini Regis and curia contemptum, and per verba contumeliosa ipsum vili
pendebat in retardationem prosecutiones negotiorum praedict. comitis and
aliorum, to answer as well unto the King as William of Towcester Attorney for
the Earl Marshall of England wherefore he made an assault upon him in contempt
of the King and his Court, and did with many scandalous words revile him to the
disturbance of the business of the said Earl and others. Super quo Juratores
de consensu partium praedict. instanti die transgressionis impanellat whereupon
a Jury being the same day of the trespass and offense by the consent of both
parties impannelled, the Jury found that the said John Blundell was guilty, and
he was committed to prison, and fecit finem domino Regi per dimid. Marcae per
pleg' etc. qui manuceper. quod been se gereret and pacifice versus predictum
VVillielm. and alios quoscunque, and was fined to pay half a Mark to the King,
and gave bayl for his good behavior toward the said William and all others.

And whence all the Judges are empowered to free such as are arrested in the
face or sight of the Court, though it be upon process granted by themselves or
any other Court in the Kings name, or upon the most just and legal action, as
likewise to aggravate or make the punishment greater for offenses done in the
face or contempt of the Court, and that all such misdemeanors are in
Indictments or Writs, brought or commenced upon them said to be in contemptum
domini Regis and curia suae, in contempt of the King and his Court, from which
or the like ground or reason came also that great honor, respect and care of
Judges in the superior Courts, by the Statute of the 25 th year of the Reign
of King Edward the third, which makes it to be high Treason to kill any of
them, with a forfeiture of all their lands and estates 25 E. 3. ca. 2.
as in case of Treason committed against the King, and no less then misprision
of Treason for any to draw a Weapon upon any Judge or Justice sitting in the
Courts of Chancery, Exchequer, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, or upon Justices of
Assize or Justice of Oyer and Terminer, although the party offending do not
strike, for which he shall lose his right hand, all his goods, suffer
imprisonment and forfeit his Lands during his life; and no less a punishment
for rescuing a prisoner in or before any of the Courts, committed by any of the
Judges, or arrested by any of their Writs Mandates or Process, the no small
punishments inflicted for abusing of Jurors, or for beating Pasch. 10. E. 3.
coram Rege. Trin. 19. E. 3. and Hill. 20. E. 3. coram Rege. Rot. 160.
a Clerk in vemendo versus curiam, in his way to one of those Superior Courts
where he was employed, or for threatening a Counceller at law for acting or
pleading for his Client, the privilege of the Barons Officers and Clerks of
the Exchequer* granted or allowed by King Henry the First, and to this day not
to be denied them, not to pay Toll or Custom for any thing they shall buy for
there necessary uses or occasions, nor to be compelled to appear at Hundred
Courts, Assizes or Sessions (which the Officers, Clerks and Ministers of the
other Superior Courts are likewise indulged) nor to bear Offices in the parish
wherein they live, as Constable Churchwarden, etc. either in the Vacations or
Term Times, and that the Barons of the Exchequer, Et omnes alii ministri ibidem
ministrantes sive de clero sint sive Regiae Cur. qui assident, as the words of
their Writs of privilege are* (which exempts such of the Clergy from the
dominering power in those days of the Ecclesiastical Court) ex mandato ad
alias quaslibet Forma brevis de privileg. officiar' et clericorum Scaccarii
domini Regis nunc usitat' sub magno Sigillo Scaccaria vide librum ingrum dicti.
Scaccarii.
causas extra Scaccarium sub quibusounque Judicibus and vero Judice sub quo lis
mota fuerit sive sit Ecclesiastious sive Secularis non evocentur, and si forte
vocati fuerunt ratione regiae potestatis publica authoritate tam ex dignitate
Regia quam consuetudine antiqua excusantur, and all the Officers Clerks and
Ministers sitting in that Court, or attending therein by the Kings command,
shall not be constrained to appear or attend upon any causes, actions or suits
against them before any Judges whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or Secular,
and if they be cited or called before such Judges by reason of any of the Kings
Writs or Process, are as well in respect of the Kings Royal Dignity, as also by
ancient custom to be excused the Writs of privilege granted unto them where
they are prosecuted in any other Court, Pleas, or actions concerning freehold
appeal, or felony only excepted, mentioning as they do in case of privilege of
the Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench and Common Pleas, that if the Plaintiffs
have any cause of action except as is before excepted, they may if they please
prosecute or bring their actions or complaints against such privilege person
in the Court where he is attendant.

From which Royal Fountain and Original, and the care of public preservation
flowed or was necessitated that privilege now and heretofore allowed to the
Kings Guards, both Horse and Foot, Garrisons and Commanders of Castles, Towns
or Forts, and was believed to be nec^ssary in the time of Justinian the
Emperor, Qui statuit milites conveniri tam in causis Civilibus quam
Criminaelibus coram ducibus suis and quod miles nisi a suo judice coerceri non
possit, that Soldiers should be cited and tried as well in causes civil as
criminal before their Captains or In l fin. cum suis de re milit. l. b. 12. C.
tit. 36. Gregorius Tholosanus lib. 17. ca. 13.1. and 2.
Commanders. And that a Soldier should not be compelled to appear before any
other, which was not in that time any new Edict or Ordinance, but a Declaration
of an ancient law and custom in use amongst the Romans in the Infancy of their
mighty Monarchy some hundred of years before the birth of our Redeemer as may
be evidenced by Juvenal, and what was in use and practice and accounted to be
of ancient institution in his time, which was not long after the birth of our
Savior, when he says, Legibus antiquis Cas^^erum and more Camilli
Servato miles Juvenal Satir. 16.
ne vallum litiget extra
Et procul a Signis, justissima Centuriorum
Cognitio est igitur de milite,
By ancient laws and customs sacred held
By great Camillus, Soldiers were not to be compelled
To appear in Courts of Justice, but in the Camp to abide,
And by their own Commanders to be tried.


And from the like causes and considerations of the Kings service and safety of
the Kingdom are allowed by our reasonable laws and customs, the privileges
and franchises of the Cinque Ports, that the Inhabitants within the liberties
thereof do sue, Cinque Ports
and are only to be sued in the courts thereof, and the Kings ordinary Writs
and Process do not run or are of any (...) therein, and such as are in certain
special cases are only to be directed to the Constable of the Castle of Dover
and the Warden of the Cinque Ports and those franchises were so allowable by
law, Coke 4. part of the Institutes ca. 42.
as the Abbot of Feversham in his time a man of great power and authority, and
armed with many and great privileges of his own, both Spiritual and Temporal,
being imprisoned by the Warden of the Cinque Ports for an offense committed
therein, for which the Archbishop of Canterbury citing the Kings Officers
there into his Ecclesiastical Court, the Record says, Quia secundum
consuetudinem regni approbatam and ratione juris Regii ministeri Regis pro
aliquibus quae fecerunt ratione officii trahi non debeant Hill. 18. E. 1.
Rex prohibuit Archiepiscopo Cantuar. ne volestari faciat ministros suos Dover
de eo quod Abbatem de Feversham pro delicto suo incarcerassent per
considerationem Curiae quinque portuum de Shepway, in regard that by the
custom of the Kingdom approved, and the right and prerogative of the King,
the Kings Officers are not to be compelled to appear (in other Courts,) the
King prohibited the Archbishop of Canterbury that he should not molest or
trouble his Officers (or servants) at Dover, for that by a judgment of the
Court of the Cinque Ports holden at Shepwey, they had imprisoned the Abbot of
Feversham, for an offense by him committed.

From the like causes and considerations of the Kings service and good of his
household and servants, the multitude of tenants heretofore of the Ancient
Demesnes of the Crown, which were in the hands of King Edward the confessor or
William the Conqueror, Ancient Demesne*
for that as Sir Edward Coke says, they plowed the Kings Demesnes of his
Manners, sowed the same, mowed his Hey, and did other services of Husbandry for
the sustenance of the King and his Cokes 4 th part Institutes. ca. 58.
honorable household to the end that they might the better apply themselves to
their labors for the profit of the King, had the privilege that they should
not be impleaded in any other of the Kings Courts for any their lands or in
actions of account, Replevin ejectione firmae Writs of Mesne and the like,
where by common intendment the realty or title of lands may come in question,
are to be free and quit from all manner of Tolls in Fairs and Markets for all
things concerning their husbandry and sustenance, of Taxes and Tallages by
Parliaments, unless the Tenants in Ancient Demesnc be specially named; of
contributions to the expenses of the Knights of the Shire for the Parliament,
and if they be severally distreined for other services, they may all for saving
of charges join in a Writ of Monstraverunt, albeit they be several Tenants,
and where they recover in any action, LL Guliel. Conquestor.
are by the Laws of William the Conqueror, to have double costs and damages.

From which Spring and fountain of privileges in relation only to and for the
concern of the Prince, and Son and Heir apperant of the King of England and his
revenue has been derived those of the Court of Stanneries, or jurisdiction
over the Tyn Mines, where by the opinion of Sir William Cordell Knight, Master
of the Rolls, Sir James Dier Knight, Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas, and Justice Weston, no Writ of Error lies upon any judgment in that
Court, and by an act of Parliament made in the 50 th year of the reign Cokes 4
th part Institutes ca. 45.
of King Edward the third, and the grant of that King, all Workmen in the
Stanneries are not to be constrained to appear before any Justice or other
Officers of the King his Heirs or Successors in any plea or action arising
within the Stanneries, unless it be before che Warden of the Stanneries for the
time being, Pleas of land, life or member only excepted, nec non recedant ab
operibus suis per summonitionem aliquorum ministrorum seu heredum nostrorum
nisi per summonitionem dicti custodis, and should not depart from their said
works or labors by reason of any Summons of the Officers of the King or his
Heirs, unless it be by the Summons of the aforesaid Warden, were to be free as
to their own goods from all Tolls, Stallage, Aides and Customs whatsoever in
any Seldom 2. part tit. honor. ca. 5.. 37.
Towns, Havens, Fairs and Markets, within the County of Devon; and that the
Warden aforesaid should should have full power and authority to administer
Justice to all that do or should work in the Stannaries or any foreigners in
and concerning any plaints trespasses contracts or actions except as is before
excepted arising or happening within the Stannaries and that if any of the
workmen be to be imprisoned they shall be arrested by the said Warden, and kept
in the prison of Lydeford, and not else where, until according to the Law and
custom of England they shall be delivered.

All which before mentioned Exemptions and Privileges, as effects flowing and
proceeding from their true and proper causes may justify those more immediate
and proximate of the Kings Servants in Relation to his person, and a greater
concernment more especially when so many of the people of England can be well
contented to enjoy not a few other immunities exemptions and privileges which
have had no other cause or foundation then the indulgence and favor of our
Kings and Princes.

CHAP XVIII.
That many of the People of England, by the grace and favor of our Kings and
Princes, or a long permission, usage or prescription, do enjoy and make use of
very many immunities, exemptions and privileges, which have not had so great a
cause or foundation, as those which are now claimed by the Kings Servants.

ANd do and may more inconvenience such part of the People which have them not,
than the little trouble of asking leave, or license to sue or prosecute at Law
any of the Kings Servants, as the freedom of Copyhold Estates not long ago,
three parts in four of all the Lands in England* but now by the making and
enfranchising of too many Freeholders, reduced to less than a fourth part from
extents, or the encumbrances of Judgments, Statutes, or Recognizances.

Not to permit upon any one Creditors Judgment, any more than the Moiety of
Freehold Lands to be extended, that old part of our English mercy to Men
impoverished or indebted; which to this day and many hundred years before, has
been constantly observed, nor to seize, or take in Execution, unless for want
of other Goods and Chattels, the Beasts and Cattle of their Ploughs and Carts,
derived unto us from the law of Nature or Nations, or the providence and
compassion of Nebuzar-adan, the chief Marshal, or Captain of the Army Jer. ca.
5^. v. 15. and 16.
of Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon, who when he had taken and destroyed
Jerusalem, and carried away captive to Babylon many of the people of Judah and
Jerusalem, left certain of the poor of the Land for Vinedressers and for
Husbandmen; and from the reason, equity and moderation of the Civil Law.

Or when Renatus Choppinus de privilegiis Rusticorum lib 1. ca. 7.
the Laws or reasonable Customs of England will not permit a Horse to be
destrained when a Man or Woman is riding upon him; an Ax in a Man's hand cutting
of Wood, the Materials in a Weavers Shop, Garments or Cloth in a Coke sur
Littleton Sect. 281.
Tailors Shop, Stock of Corn or Meal in a Mill or Market, or Books of a
Scholar; the many and great Franchises, Liberties, Exemptions and Privileges,
some whereof have been already mentioned, of about six hundred Abbeys and
Priories, the many Liberties and Franchises in every County and Shire of
England and Wales, which if no more than five in every County one with another,
would make a total of more than two hundred and fifty; and if ten amount to the
number of five hundred, besides those of above six hundred Cities and
Corporations, which are not without great Privileges, Immunities, Exemptions
and Liberties, which do occasion more trouble and loss of time by sueing out of
Writs of Non omsttas propter aliquam libertatem, to give power to the Sheriffs
to Arrest within those Liberties, than the attendance upon a a Lord
Chamberlain, or other great Officer of the Kings Household, to obtain leave to
Arrest any of the Kings Servants would bring upon them, those many thousand
Manors, to which are granted Court-Leets and Court-Barons, with their many
other Liberties and Franchises, little Judicatories, Sace and Soke authority,
and a Coercive power over their Tenants, Free and Copyhold, and Free Warren,
granted to many of those Lords of Manors, whose Hunting and Hawking brings
many times no small prejudice to their Neighbors or Tenants; the Franchises,
Liberties and privileges of the City of London, given or permitted by our
Kings, that no Citizen shall be compelled to Plead, or be Sued or Prosecuted at
Law, out of the Walls of their City, and their Prohibitions Charta H. 1*
Bracton l. 5. de Exceptionibus ca. 14. and vide more at large the Liberties of
London, and Rot. Pat. 1 E* 3. and Trin* 3 E. 3. coram Rege Rot. 113.
by Acts of Common Council, which do prohibit Freemen upon great Penalties,
which have been severely inflicted, to Sue one another out of the City, when
they may have their recovery in their own Courts; and every Freeman bound
thereunto by Oath at their admission to their Freedom: their privilege of
Lestage* to be Toll-free; of all which they buy or sell in any Market or Fair
of the Kingdom: are not to be constrained to go to War out of the City, or
farther than from whence they may return at Night, that none but such as are
free of the City shall Work or Trade within it, or the large extended Liberties
within the circumference thereof: That of the City of Norwich to have the like
Liberties as London; the Liberties of the City of Canterbury, Bracton lib. 5.
de Exceptionibus ca. 14. Pasch. 18 E. 2. coram Rege Rot. 88.
City of Winchester, and Towns of Southampton and Derby, not to be impleaded
out of their Cities or Corporations: That of the Hospitallers and
Knight-Templers (and many others, says Bracton) not to be impleadid but before
the King or his Chief Justice: That of the University of Oxford, That no
Scholar, Servant, or Officer to any College or Hall in the University, or to
the said University belonging, shall be Arrested within the City, or the Verge
or Circumference thereof, extending from the said University and Town of
Oxford, Ab orientali part ejusdem Villae usque ad Hospitalem sancti
Bartholomei, juxta Oxon, and ab occidentali part ejusdem Villae usque Trin. 2
H. 4. coram Rege Rot. 13. and Sr. Isaac Wakes Rex* ^latonicus.
ad Villam de Botelye, and a part Boreali ejusdem Villae usque ad pontem vocat
Godstow Bridge, and ab australi part ejusdem Ville usque ad quendam Bosc^m
vocat Bagley, and sic in circuitu per Loca praedicta and quemlibet locum
eorundem in perpetuum, From the East part of the said Town unto the Hospital of
St. Bartholomew near Oxford, and from the West part of the said Town to the
Village of Botely, and from the North part of the said Town of Oxford to
Godstow Bridge, and from the South part of the said Town of Oxford to a certain
Wood called Bagley, and in the circumference of the said City and University,
extending unto all the Places aforesaid, and every of the said Places for ever,
but by Process or Mandate of the Chancellor of the University of Oxford, or if
prosecuted or impleaded in the High Court of Chancery, or in the Court of
King's Bench (where the Party prosecuting has been a Sub-Marshal of the said
Court, and a Commissary of the Chancellor of that University) has been
Indicted forbeating of him, or in any of the other Courts of Justice at
Westminster, or any other Court of the Kingdom, do by their Certificate under
their half Seal, as it is called, that the Defendant is a Scholar, or
belonging to the University, or some Hall or College therein, demand and
obtain Cognizance of the Action: which with other of that famous Universities
Privileges were in the thirteenth Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
confirmed 13 Eliz.
by Act of Parliament, that of the University of Cambridge, Rot* Parl. 5 R. 2.
M. 51, 58, 59. and 8 R. ^. M. 11.
being not without those, or the like franchises, privileges, and immunities,
against which, or many more of the like nature, which might be here recited,
there ought not to be any murmr or repining, as there never was, or but
seldom or very little, by alleging any prejudice, loss, or inconveniences,
which some have sustained thereby, or may happen to particular Men by any of
those or the like Franchises, Immunities, or Privileges, which are not to
stand in the way, or obstruct the Rights or those to whom they were indulged or
granted.

CHAP. XIX.
That those many other Immunities and Priviledge^ have neither been abolished,
or so much as murmured at by those that have yielded an assent and obedience
thereunto, although they have at some times, and upon some occasions received
some loss damage or inconveniences thereby.

FOr the Law which has allowed them to be good and warrantable, could not but
apprehend, that a possibility of loss and prejudice would come to others by
them, and our Kings and Princes did by their Laws bear a greater respect, and
took a greater care of the whole than of the less, or of any parts of the
greater, Coke Comment upon Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 12. Sect. 281.
and had a greater regard to the general and more universal than particulars,
where the latter as less considerable, were to give way to the former, as of
the greater concernment and tendency to the weal of the Public; when as the
Sun and the Moon by their happy influences, in doing good to the universality
of Mankind, do sometimes, we know, occasion much evil and damage unto many men
in particular, one man's gain is another loss; the benefit, comfort, and joy of
one, happens to be the grief and disappointment of another; and the
aggrandizing of some, the lessening of others: Lex ad particularia se non
resert, sed ad L. Suus quoque puto F. de haer. instit. L. si ma^or de legit.
generalia, The Law does not intend to provide for particulars, but generals;
Legis ratio non fit raro accidentibus, Laws are not usually made for things
which do seldom happen; Et citius tolerare volunt privatum damnum quam publicum
malum, Will sooner tolerate a private and particular damage, than a public
evil or grievance; for the Privileges granted to the City of London to be
Toll-free in all Markets, Fairs, and Places of the Kingdom, which makes them
able 2 E. 3. coram Rege Rot. 220.
to under-sell all others, and to be Masters (as now they are) of all the
Commerce and Trade of the Nation: Their custom, That no Attaint shall be 2. E.
3. coram Rege Rot. 120.
brought of a Jury impannelled in London, to enforce a Gentleman or Foreigner,
not Free of the City, Arrested, to give Bail or Surety by Freemen or Citizens:
That every Citizen or Freeman may devise Lands or Tenements in Mortmain; Crokes
1. part Reports Hilar. 9. Car. primi.
or that any Man to whom Money is owing, may Arrest any Man for Money upon a
Bond or Bill before the Money be due or payable, or Attach Moneys in another
Man's hand within the City, of one which owes Money to the Debtor: The
forbidding Foreigners, and Men not Free of the City, to Work, or keep Shop
within the City or Liberties thereof: That if any Freeman, sufficient and
Customs and Usages of the City of London.
able, shall be summoned by a Sergeant of the Sheriff of the City, to appear at
Guildhall, to answer a Plaint, and make Default, he shall be Amerced, the grand
Distress presently awarded, and his Doors fastened and Sealed, until he shall
come to answer; and if it be testified that he has broken the Sequestration,
shall be Arrested by his Body; or if otherwise he is like to escape away, or is
not sufficient, a Writ of Capias shall be awarded to take his Body, or a Writ
to Arrest and take his Goods: That in a Writ of Dower, the Tenant shall be
three times summoned: That a Citizens Wife can have no Estate in Lands devised
unto her, further than during her life: The ancient and just Privileges of the
Clergy not to be tried before a Secular Stamfords Pleas of the Crown lib. 2.
cap. 41.
Judge for any criminal Matter, nor be compelled to abjure, if having committed
Felony he fly to a Church; Cokes 1. Part Instit. cap. 15.633.
and albeit he has had his Clergy for Felony, may have it again, and shall not
be Burned in the Hand, nor have his Tithes or Horse distrain'd as he traveleth,
in any Civil action or matter, whilst he has other Goods; not to have his
Goods and Chattels to be distrained in his Fee or Estate of the Church for
purveyance, when it was required; and is to be free from bearing any temporul
Office; Register of Writs 100 b. and 147 b.
and their Bodies not to be arrested or imprisoned upon a Statute Mechant,
although an Act of Parliament does without exception of any Persons, severely
enjoin it: That Privilege allowed to Knights by the ancient Laws of England,
which (says our Seldom) was that their Equitatura, or Horse and Armor were
privileged from Executions Gervasius Tilburien. M S. in recept. Senecar. and
Seldom 2. Part Titles of Honor, cap. 5. Sir William Herberts Case, Cokes third
Reports.
of Fieri, or Levari facias, although they were to Levy the Kings Debts, which
the Law did so geratly favor, as it is to be preferred before all other Men's,
and if he should dishonourably absent himself from the Kings Service when his
aid was required, and that all that he had was subject to an Execution, yet one
Horse was to be left him, Propter dignitatem militiae, in regard of the honor
of Knighthood; and such other of his Horses as were for his ordinary use, were
to be spared: The exemption of diverse Abbeys and Dugdales 1 and 2 Tom.
Monasticon Anglie.
Monasteries, from the Jurisdictions and Visitations of their Diocesan, or
Metropolitan Bishops: The Privileges and Jurisdictions granted by King Edward
the third, in the 27th Year of his Reign, to York, Lincoln, 27 E. 3. cap. 188.
and 16.
Norwich, Canterbury, Westminster, and diverse other Staple Towns, to be free
from purveyance and Cart-taking, giving them liberty to hold Pleas by the
Law-Merchant, and not by the common Law of the Land; That they should not
implead, or be impleaded before the Justices of the said Places in plea of
De^^, Covenant, or Trespass, concerning the Staple: And that the Houses shall
be let for reasonable Rents, to be imposed by the Mayor of the Staple: The
Modus decimandi, abatement, or manner of Tithes, being at the first a temporary
favor or kindness, continued and crept into a Custom, and thence into a Law
and Privilege, which has carried away, or choked a great part of the Clergies
Tithes and Maintenance: The abundance of Rights and Privileges of Common, of
vicinage, or appendant, or of some stinted or not limited sorts, in the Ground
and Soil, of the Propritors throughout the Kingdom, of Common of Estovers in
some of their Woods, the throwing of many Meadows open, to have Common in some
Woods for their Cattle after seven years, growth and to Common upon the first
day of every Hill* 1 E. 1. coram Rege.
August, the Custom of the Town of Wycombe in the County of Buckingham, that
any under the age of thirteen years, might give or devise Lands, and that no
Tithes should be paid for any 6 Jac. in Com. Banco.
Wood in the Wild of Kent.

Together with the many Freedoms, Franchises and Privileges, to be quit
Dugdales 1 and 2 Tom. Monasticon Anglie. and in 2 Tom. Sect. 12.
ab omni secta Shirarum and Hundredorum, all Suit, Scot and Lot, etc. and
Service to Sheriffs Courts and Hundreds, which with very many others not here
recited, do necessarily appear to be as prejudicial to some part of the People
(who in the Weal-publick, or some of their Posterities afterward, partaking or
enjoying of the like Privileges, do or may find themselves abundantly
recompensed) may be as prejudicial to some as they are beneficial to many, who
may at the same time consider the damage which our Kings have suffered by their
Grants to diverse Abbeys, as amongst others, unto the Abbey of St. Edmonds-Bury
in Suffolk, which in a Plea betwixt that Abbot and the Bishop of Ely and his
Steward, in the sixth Year of the Reign of King Richard the First, appeared by
the Charters of King Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror, and King
Henry the First: to be in general words, all the Liberties which any King of
England might grant, the very large Privileges of Common, of Pasture, and
Estovers; the later of which has spoiled much of the Timber of the Kingdom in
many vast Forests and Chases, their many deafforrestations, and that of three
Hundreds at once in the County of Essex, at the Request and Petition of an Earl
of Oxford, their taking their Customs and Duties upon Merchandise Exported or
Imported at small and privileged Rates, and manner of payment of Tonnage and
Poundage, and by the granting away of so many Franchises, Exemptions,
Privileges, view of Frank Pleg. and Liberties, which the Commons in Parliament
in the one and twentieth Year To. Parl. 21 E. 3. m 17. and 36.
of the Reign of King Edward the Third, thought to be so over-largely granted,
as they complained, That almost all the Land was Enfranchised; and Petitioned,
That no Franchise-Royal, Land, Fee, or Advowson, which belong, or are annexed
to the Crown, be given or severed from it: And so very many more Immunities,
Franchises, and Privileges, which since have been indulged and granted to very
many of the People, which like the dew of the heavenly Manna, which so
plentifully covered the Camp of the Exodus ca. 16. v. 13, 14.
Children of Israel, and lay round about them, have blessed many of the English
Nation, and their after Generations, as the dew of Hermon, and that which
descended upon the Mountains of Zion.

And so many were those exemptions, customs prescriptions and immunities, Quae
longi temporis usu recepta quaeque ratio vel necessitas suaserit introducenda
rata and stabilita fuerin^ quasi tanto tempore principis consensu Jud^cioque
probata, Which by a long accustomed use, introduced by reason or necessity, as
the Learned Baldus says Baldus ad l. Human. and de legibus D. D.
concerning those which by the Civil Law, and the Law of Nations have, as
approved by the consent and Judgment of the Prince, been ratified and
permitted, as they would if faithfully and diligently collected (as my worthy
Friend Mr. Tho. Blount has done very many of them, in his Learned and
laborious Blount's Nomo Lexicon.
Nomo Lexicon, not only put Posterity in mind how very many, and almost
innumerable they are, and how much they ought to be thankful for them, but that
their Forefathers did without any the least doubt or scruple believe, that the
Kings and Princes which granted them, had power enough to do it.

And ought not to have their ways or passages stopped or blocked up by those
Opinions of Sir Edward Coke, and the rest of the Judges, in contradiction of
the late Learned Doctor Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the case of
Prohibitions, argued and debated before King James and his Privy Council, and
Council Learned in the Law, in Michaelmas Term, in the fifth Year of his Reign,
that Rex non Judicat in Camera sed in Curia Coke's 12 Reports. Mich. 5 Jacobi.
the King is to decide and determine the Causes and Controversies of his
Subjects, in his assigned and Commissionated Courts of Justice, but not out of
them, or in his Palace, Court, or Chamber, nor take any Cause out of his Courts
and give Judgment upon it, and that no King after the Conqu^st ever assumed to
himself to give Judgment in any Cause whatsoever, which concerned the
administration of Justice within the Realm, and that the King cannot delay
Justice, or Arrest any Man, neither Arrest any Man for suspicion of Treason or
Felony, as other of His Lieges may.

Wherein the Men of new Notions, who in the Itch and Hope of Gain, or the good
will and applause of a Factious Party, can, like the after hated Ephori of
Sparta, upon all occasions oppose the Kings legal Rights and Prerogatives, and
thinking to satisfy others as well as themselves, in making ill-warranted
matters of Fact the Directors or Comptrollers of the Law, may suspend their
adoration of those Errors in that (so called) twelfth Report of Sir Edward
Coke, which being published since his Death, have not that candor, or fair
dealing of Plowden's Commentaries, or the Reports of the Lord Dyer, or many
other of his own Reports; but concealing the Arguments and Reasons urged by the
Opponents, does only give us a Summary of his own and the other Judges
Opinions, which we hope may vanish into a mistake, and meet with no better
entertainment from those Reverend Judges and Sages of the Law, if they were now
in the Land of the Living, to revise and examine those Opinions so Dogmatically
delivered, then a Retractation, or Wish, that they had never seen the Light, or
walked in the view of the Vulgar, and advise those who would gladly make them
the Patroni of so many ill Consequences, as either have, or may follow upon
such Doctrines, to build upon better Foundations, and not to adhere so much
unto them, or any others, though they should be willing to seem to be as wise
therein as Socrates or Plato, but rather subscribe to the Truth.

CHAP. XX.
That the power and care of Justice, and ihe distribution thereof, is and has
been so essential and radical to Monarchy, and the Constitution of this
Kingdom, as our Kings of England have as well before as since the Conquest,
taken into their Cognizance diverse Causes, which their established Courts
either could not remedy, or wanted power to determine, have removed them from
other Courts to their own Tribunals, and propria authoritate, caused Offenders
for Treason or Felony to be Arrested, and may upon just and legal occasions
respite or delay Justice.

WHen the King is Author omnis Jurisdictionis, the Author of all Jurisdiction,
which is the specifica forma A. Blackvodaeus in Dialogo adversus Geo. Buchanan
281 and 283.
and virtus essentialis Regis qua se nequit abdicare quamdiu Rex est neque vis
illa summae ditionis and potestatis Regiae dignitate citra perniti^m ejus and
interitum separari distrahique potest, Speci^ick form and essence of Kingly
Majesty, which the King cannot alienate or depart from, as long as he is King,
nor may that Jurisdiction or supreme Power be severed from the Regal Dignity
without the ruin or destruction of the King, as Mr. Adam Blackwood a Scotchman
has very well declared, in his Book against Buchanan, his Learned more than
Loyal Countryman, concerning the Magistracy, Lords of Sessions, and Judges in
Scotland, That all Judges and Magistrates Ne in Civilibus quidem causis nullam
nisi munere beneficioque Regis sententiae dicendae and nullam Juris and
judiciorum potestatem habent, derived even in Civil Causes, all their power and
authority from the Kings Authority, and without it had no power to give a
Sentence or Judgment, quicquid enim Ibid. 286 and 287.
Magistratuum est quicquid judicium Regibus obnoxium, for what ever any
Magistrates or Judges do, is subject to his control or superintendency:
Quicquid pot^statis ditionis imp^rii nacti sunt id receptum benignitati Regum
praestare tenentur in quorum praesentia non s^cus evaneseit quam in meridiano
sole stellarum fulgor quae coruscant in tenebris and lucidissimis radiis mirum
in modum scintillantes apparent, Whatever Power or Jurisdiction they had was to
be attributed to the Grant and Favor of the King, in whose Presence it does
vanish and disappear, as the brightness of the Ibid. 282.
Stars which shine in the dark, do at the shining or glory of the Sun:
Quemadmodum enim illae praesenti quicqued habent luminis soli foenerantur, Ita
Magistratuum potestas omnis vis and imperium ubi praesto Rex est ad eum redit
aquo profectum est, for as they do borrow their light from the Sun, so all the
Power, Force and Rule which the Magistrates have, when the King comes or acts
in his own Person, do return to him from whom they received it: and that if
Kings do abstinere non tantum a sententiae dictione sed a foro ne Regiae
dignitatis splendore judicum oculi perstringantur, forbear from intermedling in
their Courts of Justice, it is that by the luster of their Presence the
Business of the Judges may not be hindered or disturbed, Non igitur abs re
tribunalia creatis a se Magistratibus relinqunt idque solemn Reges habent ut
nunquam in orchestra conspiciuntur nisi quid momenti gravioris inciderit quod
ipsorum authoritate and absoluta summaque ditione potestate and numine
decidatur; Wherefore it was not without cause that they did leave their
Tribunals to Judges or Magistrates, made or created by them, and made it to be
as a Custom duly to be observed, not to appear themselves in their Courts of
Justice, unless some great matter of weight or moment happened, which required
the aid or assistance of their supreme and absolute Authority, and that
notwithstanding that James the Ibid. 28^*
fourth King of Scotland did in imitation of what he had learnt in France,
Institute a kind of supreme Court, and called it The Court of Sessions for
determination of Causes, like that of the Parliament of Paris; and in Criminal
matters made it to be without Appeal, Quaedam vero quae majoris Exempli sunt
regis cognitionem desideran^ quae Scotorum Jurisperitorum vulgus puncta vocat
sive Capita Coronae reservata cujusmodi sunt Majestatis, raptu^, incendii and
id genus aliorum. But yet there were certain matters or things which the
ordinary sort of Lawyers amongst the Scots, called Points, or Pleas of the
Crown, especially reserved to the Determination and Judgment of the King
himself, such as Treason, Rape, burning of Houses, or the like; which being in
the Year of our Lord 1581, when Mr. Ad. Blackwood wrote that Loyal and Learned
Treatise, not denied to be good Law and right Reason in Scotland, and of as
long a Date or Original, as about 300 years before the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ was, (although it has since the time that Mr. Blackwood wrote strangely
deviated, into the sullen surly and unwarrantable Doctrines and Practice of a
factious and domineering Presbytery, and other the heretofore Corahs, Dathans,
and Abirams of Scotland) Omnium regnorum perpetua lege more and consuetudine
receptum, A received and well approved Law and Custom amongst all Nations, and
may seem to have been derived from the Council which Jethro (many Generations
after that an inundation of Sin had in the grand and most Genes. 7. v. 13.
universal punishment of the Deluge washed away all Mankind but Noah and his
Sons and Daughters, in all but eight Persons, and left them to tremble and
stand amazed at his Justice, and adore his Mercy) gave to Moses his Son-in-law,
to ease himself of his continual toil and tiring labors, From the Morning
until the Even in determining the Controversies Exodus 18. v. 14, 15, 21, 22.
Number. c. 36.
of the People, by constituting Judges over them, and reserve to his own
Decision and Judgment every great Matter; Wherein it can not well accord with
the rectified Reason of Mankind, that Jethro had in that his Council any the
least design to diminish the Superiority, Right, or Authority of Moses, or that
Moses by harkening unto it, did intend thereby to bereave himself of the
dernier ressort, ultimate Appeal and Authority with which God had entrusted
him. And those not to be contradicted sacred Records of the Almighty can assure
us, that not only King David, who is therein said to have been a Man after
Gods own heart, Solomon, the wisest of Kings, and the succeeding 1 and 2 li.
Reg. and Paralipom. Ezra ca. 9. and 10. Nehem. cap. 5. and 13. v. 25.
Kings of Israel and Judah, but Ezra and Nehemiah, who were but as Governors,
or Stadtholders under Artaxerxes over the remnant of the Captivity of the Jews,
did come close up to that advice of Jethro, and adhere to those eternal Laws of
right Reason, Superiority, and Rules of Government, ever since observed in all,
or the greatest part of the Kingdoms of the habitable Earth, amongst which our
Kingdom of England, and her early as well as later Inhabitants, alterius orbis,
of this our other World, for the Reasons and Authorities herein before
declared, and that which shall be added hereafter in confirmation thereof, and
the excellent and incomparable constitution and method of her Monarchy and
Government, which will manifest it self, and be plainly evidenced to any, who
shall rightly inspect it, is to be ranked and reckoned.

And may reduce to a better understanding all those who have taken up those
Opinions on trust, or a slight or no examination, that such a pattern of the
Divine wisdom in his Theocraty and Monarchical Government of the promised Seed
of Abraham, is no way repugnant to those Rules of Government which have been
not only approved and practiced by our British, Saxon, and Danish Kings,
before the Norman Success and Victory, but continued by their Successors.

When King Canutus, taught by the no seldom Petitions, Appeals and Complaints
of the People, was about the Year 1016. enforced to make a Law, That Nemo
injuriis alterius Regi LL. Canuti ca. 16.
quaeratur nisi quidem in Centuria Justitiam consequi and impetrare non potuit,
no Man should complain to the King of any wrong or injury done unto him, unless
he could not in the Century, or Hundred-Cou^t obtain any Remedy.

In that great and remarkable Pleading for three days together in the Reign of
William the Conqueror, at Pinnendene in Kent, in the grand Controversy betwixt
Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, the Kings half
Brother, for diverse Manors, Lands and Liberties of that Archbishopric, of
which the Bishop of Bayeux had disseised him (although that King did upon
special occasions sometimes hold LL. Gulielmi Conquest. ca. 5^ and Seldem
Spic^lleg. ad Eadmeri Hist.
his Commune Concilium, or Parliament) the King Pr^cepit Comitatum totum absque
more considere and homines comitatus omnes Francigenas and praecipue Anglos in
Antiquis legibus and c^nsuetudinibus peritos in unum convenire, Commanded the
whole County without any delay to assemble together, as well French as English,
and more especially such of the English as were skilful in the ancient Laws and
Customs of England, ubi Goisfredus, Bishop of Constance Eadmeri Hist. lib. 9.
and Seldeni ad Eadmerum notae and Spicilegium 198 and 199
in loco Regis, says the Leiger Book of Rochester; vel vice Regis, says
Eadmerus; fuit and Justiciam illam tenuit, ^at Judge for, or in the place or
stead of the King, as his Commissioner, Hujus placiti multis testibus multisque
rationibus determinatum finem postquam Rex audivit laudavit laudans cum
consensu omnium principum suorum (which could not be the Commons in Parliament,
as it is now formed, or the then Commune Concilium, the Parliament, consisting
of his Nobility, Bishops, and Peers, who could not all of them be styled
Princes, but were rather such of his greater sort of Nobility as were then
attending upon him in his Court, assembled and met together by his Command in
that great and more than ordinary County Court) confirmavit and ut deinceps
incorruptus persev^raret ^irmiter praecepit; the end of which Trial made by
many Witnesses and Reasons, being certified to the King, he greatly approved
it, and by the consent of all his Princ^s confirmed, and strictly commanded it
to be inviolably observed.

In the Reign of William Rufus his Son, the Delegated Justice of the King in
his Courts was so little believed not to be the Kings, or the Judgments thereby
or therein given, not owned or understood to be given by the King, as it was
the Opinion as well as Complaint of Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury (how
justly or unjustly the Men of that Age, when the Churchmen were unruly, and
did not seldom forget themselves and their Benefactors, did best know) quod
cuncta Regalis Eadmeri Hist. lib. 2.37.
Curia pendebant ad nutum Regis nilque in ipsis nisi solum velle illius
considerari, That all matters in the Kings Court depended upon his Will, and
his only Will was the Director thereof; and whether the particular Interest of
that stout and pious Prelate had therein misled his Judgment or no, they must
be too much unacquainted with our Laws, reasonable Customs, Annals, Memorials,
Records and Accounts of Time, and Transactions bigane and past, as well as
those of other Nations, and the right origination or signification of the word
Curia, or Court, and the no infrequent usage or acceptance thereof, if they do
not acknowledge that (...) nuncupatur potestas and Dominium (...) qui potestate
fretus est judiciumque exercet and (...) quasi habitacula Domini, That Curia
signifies Power and Dominion, and (...) he that exercises that Power, in
giving Judgment therein, and (...) the Habitation, or Place of Residence of the
Lord or Superior, dicebatur autem Curia, says the judicious Sr. Henry Spelman,
primo de Regia seu palatio Spelman. Glossar. in vocibus Curia and Curtis.
Principis inde de familia, and Judiciis in ea habitis ritu veterrimo, it being
at the first, or more especially called Curia, or the Court, and took its
Denomination by a most ancient Usage or Custom from the Kings House or Palace,
and afterward from their Household or Family, and the Place where Kings did
administer Justice.

And so until Courts for the distribution of Justice were allowed for the ease
of Princes, and better accommodation of their People, out of their Houses or
Palaces, it will not be easy or possible to espy any essential difference, as
to the Place of doing Justice, betwixt Curia Regis and Camera Regis, the Court
or Chamber of the King; for after that some of our Courts of Justice in
England, by the indulgence of their Sovereigns, ceased either to be ambulatory,
or resident in their Palaces, those that have not bid a defiance to that
universally allowed and entertained Maxim, by all or most part of Mankind, Qui
facit per alium facit per se, He that does by another, is truly and rightly
said to have done it himself, and are not resolved to encounter, or be
adversaries to all the right Reason which they can meet with, or to pick up
such weak and incogent Arguments, as may make a shadow rather than substance of
Truth or right Reason, ought to confess, that there is no real difference
between the Kings doing of Justice in his own Person, and cau^ing it to be done
by others, or betwixt the hearing of Causes or doing of Justice in the Hall or
his Privy Chamber, or any other Room of his House or Palace; and that before
and from the Conquest, until after the thirty eighth Year of the Reign of King
Edward the Third, whilst the Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench attended
our Kings as well in their Courts as Progress, to assist him in matters of Law,
and the Decision of Pleas of the Crown, and such matters of Law as were not
appropriate to the Decision of the Court of Common Pleas, as it was then and
has been since constituted, which Claus. 20 H. 3. in dorso m. 14.
did not leave the Kings Court or Palace, until King Henry the Third commanded
it in the twentieth Year of his Reign to abide at Westminster.

Our Kings of England have in their own Persons heard some or many Causes, and
given diverse Judgments in Aula, in their Court or Palace, in some Causes
wherein they had the assistance of the Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench;
and when they did not do it personally, by reason of their frequent
Divertisements, Addresses of Ambassadors from Foreign Princes, or in respect of
the many great Affairs and Cares of State and Government, which could not
afford them the time or leisure to do it, did cause it to be done by their
Authority, and by their constituted Justices, who Vicaria Potestate, by, as it
were, a Deputation, Lieutenancy, or Assignation, to those only purposes
represented them, and were empowered to do it; the Courts of Justice in William
the Conquerors time LL. Guli^lm Conquestoris apud Seldenum in Spicileg. ad
Eadmerum Sect. 20.
being called Justicia Regis, the Justice of the King; and the Judges or
Justices in the Reign Glanvile de legibus Angliae.
of King Henry the Second, Justiciae Regis in the abstract, the Kings Judges or
Justices.

For the Kings Justice or Superiority was never yet by any Law or Reason
absolutely or altogether con^ined to his delegated Courts, or authorized Judges
or Justices, or to any certain or determinate Place, as that froward and
powerful enough Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, could not but acknowledge,
when in a Parliament or Great Council holden in the Kings Court at Winchester,
by the Command of King William the Second, or William Rufus, in the Contest
betwixt him and that King Eadmer Hist. lib. 2* 38, 39* and 40.
concerning that Archbishops resolution o^ going to Rome, and the Kings
refusing to give him License, diverse of the Lords and Bishops passed in and out
betwixt them, and at last the Archbishop himself went in unto him to
expostulate and debate the Matter with him.

And in the making of the Constitutions of Clarendon, in the Reign of King
Henry the Second, when Thomas Becket the stubborn Archbishop of Canterbury,
having Judgment ready to be given against him by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in that Parliament or Great Council, upon the Complaint of John
Marshal, for Injustice done unto him by the said Archbishop, and his Defense
heard. Rex exigit Judicium. The King demanded Judgment to be given against
him: But the Earls, Barons, and Bishops delaying of it, and contending who (as
it has been said in other cases) should hang the Bell about the Cats Neck, and
begin the Vote or Sentence; Rex hac audita de pronunciando Seldom 2 Part Titles
of Honor, cap. 5. sect. 20.
Controversia motus est, the King hearing the Controversy who should begin the
Vote, was displeased; whereupon Henry de Blois Bishop of Winchester, impositus
d^cere tandem and invitus pronunciavit, being put to it to give his Vote, did
at length begin it.

In the second year of the Reign of King John, that great Suit touching a
Barony which William of Mowbray claimed against William of Stutuile, which had
depended from the Reign of King Henry the Second, is said to have bin ended
Consilio Seldom 2 part Titles of Honor, cap. 5. sect. 20. Hoveden de Anno 1204.
Regni and voluntate Regis, by the Kings Will, and Advice of Parliament.

In the One and twentieth year of the Reign of King Henry the Third, a
Complaint being made to the King Stowe's Survey of London in 4to 35. tit.
Prescription
that Jordan Coventry, one of the Sheriffs of London, having by the Order of
the Mayor and Aldermen of London, arrested and taken diverse persons that were
offenders in Annoying the River of Thames with Kiddels, upon Complaint made to
the King, he sent for the Mayor and Citizens, and upon hearing of the Matter,
confirmed the Cities Jurisdiction, convicted the Complainants, Amerced every of
them at Ten Pounds, and adjudged the Amerciaments to the City.

In the Thirty eighth year of that Kings Reign, upon a Quarrel betwixt some
young Ibidem 145.
men of that City, and some of the Kings Servants, the Londoners being
despitefully used by them, fell upon them, and did beat them shrewdly, who
thereupon complaining to the King, he Fined the Citizens to pay One thousand
Marks.

In the one and fortieth year of his Reign, being in the year 1256. he sat in
the Court of Exchequer in Westminster Hall, where he did make Orders for the
Appearance of the Sheriffs, and bringing in of their Accounts, and Fined the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of Ibid. 885. Tit. City of Westminster*
London, for Oppression and Wrongs done by them, who submitted themselves in
that place to the King.

And if so, and the Records and Memorials, as well of the Court of Exchequer,
as of that City do speak it, there can be nothing within the pale or verge of
Reason, or the fancy or imagination of any whose Intellectuals are not in a
Lethargy, to make it either possible or rational, that the King himself had not
then and there the Pre-eminence or Courtesy afforded him to give or pronounce
the Order or Judgments; or that the Sovereignty (as the Law in more inferior
matters betwixt party and party amongst private persons, does sometimes adjudge
it should be at that instant or part of time in abeiance or suspense, and
operate nothing,) or that the Barons of the Exchequer could at that Time by
intendment of Law be supposed to represent the King when he was personally
present* it being by the Law of Nations a constant usage and custom settled and
approved in the most parts of Christendom, that the Governors of Cities and
Forts do at the coming and personal Presence of their Sovereign, deliver unto
him upon their knees the Keys thereof, and in all obedienee and humility
receive them and their Authority again upon their departure and re-delivery.
And it is not yet gone out of the memory of man, that Sir William Cokain
Knight, Lord Mayor of London, when King James in a Great Solemnity came to St.
Paul's Church, did at Temple Bar deliver upon his knees unto him the Keys and
Sword of the City, and carried a Mace before him.

Or that it would not be Contrarium in objecto, a Parcel of Contradictions,
that Esse at one and the same instant of Time can be a non esse, idem non idem,
and ibi non ibi, the King should be understood not to be there, when he was
there, and to be there only virtually and in power, and not present when he
was there in his Person as well as in his Power; Or that He should sit and be
there only as an Auditor or Spectator; Or as Sir Edward Cokes 12 Reports Mich.
5 Ja.
Coke said concerning King James his personally sitting in the Court of
Star Chamber to consult, but not in Judicio, in Judgment, when the Law and the
Reason of the Law, and the Fact, and the Records and Memorials thereof do give
so full an evidence against that Pseudo Doctrine and ill-grounded Opinion,
which the Learned Lawyers and Judges in the Reign of King Henry the Third, did
so little believe.

As Bracton discoursing where Actions Criminal by the Laws and Customs, as well
Bracton lib. 3 de Actionibus. cap. 5.
before his Time, as in the Reign of King Henry the Third, were to be heard and
adjudged expressly, concludes with a Sciendum est quod in Curia Domini Regis
debent terminari cum sit ibi poena corporalis infligenda, and hoc coram ipso
rege si tangat personam suam sicut Crimen laesae Majestatis, vel coram
Justiciariis ad hoc specialiter assignatis si tangat personas privatas. It is
to be known or certain, that Actions Criminal ought to be tried in the Kings
Court, and that before the King himself; if, as in cases of Treason, they
concern the Person of the King, because there is a corporal punishment to be
inflicted; or before Justices specially thereunto assigned, if they concern
private persons. And gives the reason, vita vero and membrum hominum sunt in
manu Domini Regis, vel ad tuitionem vel ad paenam cum deliquerint; for the
lives and members of all the Kings Subjects are in the hand of the King, either
to defend or punish.

Habet enim plures Curias in quibus diversae actiones terminantur and illarum
Ibidem cap. 7.
Curiarum habet unam propriam sicut Aulam Regiam and Justiciarios Capitales qui
proprias causas Regis terminant and aliorum omnium per quaerelam vel per
privilegium sive libertatem: ut si sit aliquis qui implacitari non debeat nisi
coram ipso Domino Rege; for he has many Courts in which diverse Actions are to
be tried. And of those Courts has one of his own, as that of the Kings Palace,
and has Chief Justices who are to hear and determine the proper Causes of the
King, and of all others upon complaint, or by reason of privilege or liberty,
as where a man sued or prosecuted ought not to be impleaded but before the
King. For in vain were many since the Conquest exempted by Privilege not to be
tried before any but the King himself: if our Kings did never use, nor could in
person hear and determine such Causes (as all the Kings and Princes of the
civilized Part of the World have used to do.) And of small or no force or avail
would be that Clause in our Magna Charta so hardly obtained by our
Forefathers, that the King Nulli negaret Justitiam vel Rectum, should not deny
Justice or Right unto any who demanded it, and little deserving to be called or
thought a Liberty, if it were not within the reach of his Power, and it would
be a kind of Injustice to oblige or require him to do that which he could not.

Which the Reverend Judges and Sages of the Law in the eighteenth year of the
Reign of King Edward the First, were so unwilling to interpret to be out of his
Power.

As when John Bishop of Winchester 18 E. 1.
having granted unto him free Chase in all the Demesne Lands and Woods of the
Prior and Covent of St. Swithen in Winchester, and their Successors, and being
in the Kings Service in the Parts beyond the Seas, and having his Protection
for all his Lands, Goods and Estate, brought his Action, wherein he did set
forth the Kings Protection, and his being as aforesaid in his Service, against
Henry Huse, Constable of the Kings Castle at Portcester, for that he had hunted
in his aforesaid Chase and Liberty in contempt of the King, and contrary to his
aforesaid Protection whilst he was in his Service as aforesaid. To which the
said Henry Huse pleading that what he had done was lawful for him to do, by
reason of a Privilege belonging unto his said Place or Office of Constable of
the Castle aforesaid; and Issue being joined thereupon, the Court stayed it,
and delivered their Opinion* That no Jury ought to be impannelled, nor any
Inquisition taken thereupon, in regard that Inquisitio ista Domino Rege
inconsulto tam propter Cartam ipsius Domini Regis porrectam quam nemo per
inquisitionem patrie vel alio modo judicare debet nisi solus Dominus Rex quam
ratione Ballivae predict' que est ipsius Domini Regis and ad quam predictus
H^nricus dicit libertatem predictam pertinere, that such an Issue or Inquiry
ought not to be, the King not consulted or made acquainted therewith, as well
in respect of his Charter produced, which none but the King by any Jury or
Trial ought to Judge, as in regard of the Liberty alleged by the said Henry to
be belonging to the King. Et dictum est partibus quod sequantur versus Dominum
Regem quod precipiat procedere ad predict' inquisitionem capiend' si voluerit
vel quod alio modo faciat voluntatem suam in loquela predict. And the Parties
were therefore ordered to attend, and petition the King to command the Judges,
if he please, that they proceed in the said Action, or by some other way
declare his Will and Pleasure concerning the said Action (and is a good
direction for Subjects to ask leave of the King before they Arrest, or any way
endeavor to infringe the Privilege of his Servants.)

In the twentieth year of the Reign of that King, in a Case in 20 E. 1.
the Court of Common Pleas, where William de Everois being Demandant, had
complained to the King that the Judges of that Court did delay to give
Judgment, and the Judges acknowledging that he had been long delayed, in
regard that the said William required Seisin to be delivered unto him by a
Contract made in the time of War, which he denied: Dictum est prefatis Justic'
quod ad judicium procedant prout facere consueverunt. Et faciend' est de
seisina and contractibus factis and in tempore and parts Guerre; the King
ordered the Judges that they should proceed to Judgment, as they used to do,
and make an Order concerning the Seisin and Contracts had between the parties
thereunto in the time of the War.

In the same year a Complaint being made to the King, that Sir John Lovel
Knight, being Plaintiff, before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in a
Writ which had long depended, and was made in an unusual Form of the Chancery,
and the Defendant in the beginning of the Plea before Thomas of Weyland, and
his Associates the Justices of the said Court, had put in his Plea of Abatement
and Exceptions to the said Writ, and prayed that it might be Entered upon the
Rolls and Recorded, which afterward could not be found; but in regard that
Elias de Beckingham one of the Judges remembered the said Plea, to whose only
memory a greater Credit is to be given, than to the Rolls of the said Thomas of
Weyland, who with the rest of his Fellow Judges, except the said Elias of
Beckingham, were formerly Fined and punished for other Misdemeanors: Et idem
Elias semper fideli^ extiterit, and in servicio Regis fideliter se gesserit;
and the said Elias was always faithful, and in the Service of the King did well
behave himself; And all the then Judges did agree, that if a Writ of that Form
should be brought unto them and pleaded in Abatement, they would immediately
quash it; And for that non est Juri consonum quod per maliciam predict. Thome
and sociorum suorum sibi adherentium qui Exceptiones Tenentis admittere
noluerunt, and cum ipsum proposuerit tempore Competenti non allocaverunt per
prout prefatum Eliam recordatum est. It is not agreeable to Law, that by the
malice of the aforesaid Thomas and his Fellow Judges confederating with him,
who would not admit or allow of the Tenants Exceptions, when it was in due time
pleaded, as by the said Elias was witnessed; Dictum est Justic' quod procedant
ad Judicium super exceptione Tenentis prout fuerit faciend' and ac si in
Recordo inveniretur; The Judges were ordered to proceed to Judgment upon the
Tenants Exception, as it ought to be done if it had been recorded.

In the year next following, William de Mere Sub-Escheator of the King in the
County of Stafford, and Reginaldus de Legh, 21 E. 1. coram Rege.
who was one of the sworn Justices of the King, having an Information brought
against them before the King and his Council, (the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench) for that after the death of Jeffery de How^l, who held Lands of
Ralph Basset by Knight Service, and the death of the said Ralph, who had seized
all the Lands of the said Jeffery, and had in his life time the custody and
marriage of William the son of Jeffery, and dying seized of Lands holden of the
King in Capite, and of the custody of the said William, and the Heir of the
said Ralph being likewise under age, and with the Lands of the said Ralph
seized by the said Sub-Escheator, he suffered the Heir of the said Jeffery
without the Kings Writ, to enter upon the Lands of the said Jeffery. And the
said Reginald de Legh by fraud and collusion betwixt him and the said
Sub-Escheator, took away the Heir of the said Jeffery* and married him* To
which Information the Sub-Escheator pleading that he did not seize the Lands;
which he that followed the Suit for the King proved that he did: and Reginald
de Legh pleading that the said Ralph before his death, upon view of the said
Wards Writings and Evidences, finding that he had no Right thereto, did acquit
and release it; and that the like appearing to the said Reginald by the sight
of the said Writings, he did satisfy and agree with the Friends of the said
Ward for the said Marriage; but confessed that he did take notice that the
Sub-Escheator had seized the said Lands: but the said Sub-Escheator perceiving
that the King had no Right thereunto, did relinquish it to the Friends of the
said Heir. And as well the said Reginald as the said Sub-Escheator petunt and
dicunt quod si videatur consilio Domini Regis quod in aliquo deliquerunt quod
Dominus Rex suam inde faciat voluntatem, did petition and pray, that if it
should appear to the Court that they had offended in any thing, the King might
do his Will and Pleasure therein (a Modesty and Submission too little used now
of later Times) whereupon the Court declaring Quod potius pertineat Ministris
Domini Regis, and maxim Justiciariis suis Statum Domini Regis and jura
Haeredis in custodia ipsius Regis Existentium manu tenere quam in aliquo
infringere; That it belonged rather to the Ministers and Officers of the King,
and more especially his Justices, to maintain his Estate and the Rights of the
Heir within his custody, than in any thing to infringe them, did adjudg that
the said Reginald and Sub-Escheator should be sent prisoners to the Tower,
there to remain during the Kings pleasure; and that the said Reginald should
satisfy the King for the Marriage of the said Heir, and the said Lands should
remain in the Kings hands with a Salvo Jure, saving of the Right of all
Pretenders thereunto.

In the three and thirtieth 33 E. 1. Ryleys placit Parliamentorum.
year of the Reign of the aforesaid King, upon the Petition in Parliament of
Ranulph the Son of Hugh le Mareshal, that whereas he was Demandant by a Writ of
Entry against the Rector of Ashrugg, for a Message and diverse Lands, and he
alleged that he could not answer without the King. It was answered, Rex vult
quod respondeatur quod Justiciarii procedant, sed certificent Regem super hoc
ante redditionem Judicii, etc. The King wills that the Tenant do answer the
Demandant, and that the Justices do proceed, but certify the King thereof
before they give Judgment.

And if then, and ever since our Kings have had a Super-intending decision and
confirming Power of Judgment in matters of Justice, and that without it
nothing can by our Laws and reasonable Customs be done in Parliament, the
highest of all their Courts, where the King is as it were the Ens Potentiale,
and is no less than the Constituent Principle and Soul that animates all their
Sanctions, where the Laws and Judgments receiving life and vigor from Him, and
have their Energy, do not seldom appear to have been made with Rex voluit, the
King wills; 3 E 1. cap. 45. 10 E. 1 Statute of the Exchequer. 13 E. 1 Statute
of Acton, Burnel. 13 E. 1. 25 E. 1. cap. 2. 28. E 1. and eodem Anno cap. 5. 1
E. 1.3. and eodem Anno cap. 5.9.14. and 17. 2 E. 3. 25 E 3. 28 E. 3. 2 R. 2. 9
R. 2. 10. R. 2. 5 H. 4. Rot. Parl. in 62. 4 H. 5. 10 H. 6. cap. 4.
Rex providit, the King provideth; Rex mandavit, the King commands; Rex
statuit, the King appoints; Rex ordinavit, the King ordains, etc. all the
Courts of Justice and Equity in Westminster Hall, and all the Inferior Courts
of Justice will not be able to produce (if Prescriptions could avail against
the Kings Rights and Means of Government,) any Prescription, or any Law,
Custom, or Allowance to exempt them from the Kings Supreme Jurisdiction, whose
Royal Ancestors and Predecessors did heretofore upon all extraordinary
occasions so much praeside and intermeddle in their Courts of Justice; as Fleta
an Author of good account, Fleta lib.. 2. ca. 3. sect 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
who as has been before mentioned, did about the later end of the Reign of
King Edward the Second, or the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third,
write his Book of the Laws of England, and Customs of Courts at that time used,
does declare the usage then to be, That when the King in his Progress or
Removal from his Palace at Westminster, to any other County or Place to reside
for a time, as our Kings did heretofore often use to do, and was in any other
County, the Steward of his Household, as Deputy to the Chief Justice, issued
forth his Writ to the Sheriff of the Place or County where the King was to
reside, to cause to come before him at a certain day wheresoever the King
should be in his Bailywick, all Assizes of Novel Disseisin, Mort d'Auncester,
last Presentations, Grand Assizes, all Juries, Inquisitions, and Attaints,
Pleas of Dower, and which were summoned to be determined before the Kings
Justices at the first Assizes when they should come into those Parts; And all
Pleas, Juries, Inquisitions and Attaints assigned to be heard before the said
Justices, but were not determined, giving the parties a day to prosecute, if
they pleased; and likewise to come before them at a day prefixed; And to cause
to be brought before them all Prisoners, Bails, and all Attachments which
appertain to the Jail-delivery, quod quidem mandatum frequentur retro. trahitur
per ejusdem Senescalli mandatum; Which Trials might notwithstanding, says
Fleta, be recalled by the Stewards Mandate, which would necessarily produce
some delay of Justice, or disturbance of the Peoples affairs or expectations,
Eo quod Rex forte novis emersis propositum suum mutaverat, in regard that the
King upon some new Emergencies had altered his mind or purpose; But if the
King did not decline or forbear his intended Progress, then was holden the
Jail-delivery by the Steward; And all Duels or Trials by Battles, Appeals, and
all criminal Matters were determined by him, with what convenience he might;
and afterward all Causes concerning Trespasses done within the Verge, and
after that the Assizes and Juries Obligations and Contracts, wherein the
Debtors had of their own accord bound themselves to be tried before the Steward
and Marshall of the Kings House, placita autem quae ibidem terminari non
poterint de Comitatu in Comitatum and die and in diem poterit adjornare, Ibidem
Sect. 8. and 9.
vel in Banco vel ad primas Assisas, vel alibi secundum quod fuerit faciend'
donec fuerunt omnia terminata; but those Pleas which could not be there
determined, were to be adjourned from day to day, or County to County, or to
the Common-Bench, or unto the first Assizes, or elsewhere, as it should be
thought meet, until all were rightly determined. Et haec omnia ex Officio suo
licite poterit facere non obstante alicujus liberate; And all this he might by
his Office lawfully do, notwithstanding any man's liberty.

And surely such a Super-intendency of the Sovereign was as much allowed to be
Law as Reason, in the nineteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth,
when upon an Affray in London for rescuing a Soldier a Prisoner in Newgate, as
he was leading by an Officer toward Guyhald, by five persons, and carrying him
by force into the Sanctuary, or Priviledge-place of St. Martins le Grand, the
Kings Free-Chappel, being a Liberty of the Dean and Chapter; and the Sheriffs
of London having the same day Rot. pat* 19. H. 6. part 3 m. 3 m. dorso.
taken out of the same Church of St. Martins the five men who rescued him, and
led them fettered to the Compter, and thence chained by the Neck to Newgate;
complaint thereof being made to the King by the said Dean and Chapter, for the
violation of their Privileges, he sent his Writ to the Mayor and Sheriffs,
reciting that from a long time beyond the memory of man, fugientes ad Capellam
predictam pro immunitate ejusdem habend' seu in eadem ex quocunque causa
existentes and residentes quieti fuerint, and Immunes and sic esse debuerint,
and debent ab omni Jurisdictione, Arrestatione Impedimento, sive Attachamento
Majoris and Vicecomitum Civitatis praedicta, aut Officiariorum seu Ministrorum
suorum quorumcunque pro tempore existentium; those that fled to the Chapel
aforesaid to enjoy the Privilege thereof, or being therein resident upon any
cause or occasion whatsoever, have used, and ought to be quiet and free from
the Jurisdiction, Arrests, Impediments, or Attachments of the Mayor and
Sheriffs of the City aforesaid, or any their Officers or Ministers whatsoever
for the time being; and that notwithstanding the said Sheriffs had to the
prejudice and detriment of the Churches Liberties, and derogation of His Crown
and Royal Dignity, violently taken from thence John Knight, John Reed, Thomas
Blackbourn, William Janiver, and Richard Moreys, and committed them to Prison,
wherefore the King, to preserve inviolably the said Rights, Customs,
Immunities, Liberties and Privileges prout vinculo Juramenti in Coronatione
astringitur, as he is thereunto bound by his Coronation Oath, enjoined them
that immediately after the Receipt of that Writ, they should restore and
deliver to the said Dean and Chapter, or their Commissary, the said Prisoners,
tam corpore quam bonis sicut eos prefati Vice-comites a Capella predicta
abstraxerunt, in their bodies and goods, as the said Sheriffs took them from
the said Chapel as aforesaid, so as the said Dean and Chapter in eorum culpam
seu defectum causam non habent sibi iterum conquerendi; Et hoc sub Fide and
Ligeancia quibus teneantur nullatenus omittant, by their default or neglect may
have no more cause to complain again to the King; And this under the Faith and
Allegiance which they did owe unto him, they were not to fail to perform: Which
Writ being by the Kings Command sent and delivered by John Earl of Huntington,
the said Sheriffs yet notwithstanding detained them in prison; of which the
King being informed ore tenus precepit, he did by word of mouth command John
Bishop of Bath his Chancellor, and Ralph Lord Cromwell his Treasurer, that they
should go to the said St. Martins, and upon Examination of the Parties, hearing
of Council on both sides, and due consideration of their several Charters,
Customs, and Evidences, certify him what by Law was to be done therein; who
thereupon taking unto them John Hody and Richard Newton, Chief Justices of both
the Benches, called before them the said Dean and Chapter, Mayor, and Sheriffs,
and heard both sides, who gave to them in writing, as well what could be
alleged for the said Privileges, as against it; which being duly understood
by the said Chancellor, Treasurer, and Justices, it was adjudged by the said
Chancellor and Treasurer, by the advice of the said Justices, Quod personae
predictae a Capella praedicta violenter abstractae, restitui debeant ad ^andem
tanquam ad locum plenaria liberate tam de Jure quam consuetudine gaudere
debentem, and non de Civitate praedicta, nec Majoris, Vicecomitum,
Aldermannorum, au^ Officiariorum ejusdem Jurisdictioni, seu districtioni
Subject', sed eisdem Immunitatibus, Privilegiis and Libertatibus quae
Westmonasterium, Beverly, aut alius lo^us privilegiatus in Anglia meliores
^abet, tam de Jure quam consuetudine pro se and precinctu ejusdem ad tuend'
quascunque personas pro quibuscunque causis Criminalibus sive Civilibus illuc
confugientes gaudere debentem; That the persons aforesaid violently drawn out
of the Chapel aforesaid, ought to be restored to the same place which of right
and custom ought to enjoy their full Liberty, and not to be subject to the
Jurisdiction or Distrsss of the City aforesaid, or the Mayor, Sheriffs,
Aldermen, or Officers of the same, but to enjoy the said Immunities,
Privileges and Liberties, as Westminster, Bev^rley, or any other privileged
Place in England, of right and custom ought to enjoy, for them and their
Precincts most largely had, to protect and defend any persons flying thither,
for any causes Criminal or Civil: And thereupon the King being informed of
their Proceedings, and what they found therein, commanded his Chancellor that
by his Writ directed to the Sheriffs of London, that they should bring before
him in his Chancery the Bodies of the said Prisoners taken out of the Chapel
as aforesaid, with the cause of their taking and detention; who being brought
by the Kings Command into his Chancery by the said Sheriffs, they did there by
the advice and consent of the Duke of Gloucester, and of others of the Kings
Council, and by Order of the said Court discharge the said Prisoners, who were
there in the presence of the Sheriffs, Recorder, and Council of the said City;
ad hoc evocatorum Thome Collegge servienti Domini Regis ad arma personaliter
liberati ibidem ad effectum quod idem serviens dictos Prisonarios and eorum
quemlibe^^usque dictam Capellam and Sanctuarium salvo and secure adduceret, and
eos ibidem de mandato Regio praefato Decano sive ejus Deputatis liberaret and
ibidem juxta libertates, privilegi^, and immunitates predicta in Sanctuario
predicto quam diu eis placeret moraturos, thereunto especially called
personally delivered unto Thomas Collegge the Kings Sergeant at Arms, to the
end that he might safely and securely bring the Prisoners to the said Chapel
and Sanctuary, and there by the Kings Command deliver them to the said Dean or
their Deputies, there to remain as long as they pleased, according to the
Liberties, Privileges and Immunities aforesaid; which was done by the said
Sergeant at Arms, and a Certificate made by him to the said Chancellor,
Treasurer, and Court of Chancery accordingly.

And he must be altogether composed of, or addicted to Scruples and Doubts,
wherein he never desires to be satisfied, and fit to sail to Anticyra in
pursuit of Hellebore, who shall against so clear a Light and Evidence, bestow
his time and labors to vindicate and under-prop so manifest and notorious
Errors, or that shall deny the King a Judicial Power in His Courts of Justice,
and High Court of Chancery, whence do almost daily issue his Writs remediall
under His Seal, and Test Me Ipso, directed to all His Courts of Justice. And
are, as Bracton Bracton lib. 5 fol. 413. and Cokes preface to his 8 Reports.
says, Formata ad similitudinem Regulae Juris, framed by and according to the
Rules of Law, which warranting many of the Proceeding thereof are in the Assize
betwixt Wimbish and the Lord Willoughby in Trinity Term, in the sixth year of
the Reign of King Edward the Sixth said, and not denied to be Law, and Plowdens
Comment. ^6 ^.
the Act of the King, but not of the Chancellor.

So as they who shall endeavor to impose upon other men, that the King is not
by Law presumed to be present in his Court of Kings Bench, where the Records do
mention the Judgments given therein to be coram Rege, before the King, as if
he were personally present with the Judges of that Court, who are assigned to
assist Him, may, as to the Kings Power in matters of Justice, and over the
Judges and Courts delegated by Him, do well to seek a reason, which is justly
to be feared will never be found, why it should be Law or Reason for King
Alfred in the Asser Menenensis de rebus gestis Alfredi and Seldom. 2 part. ^it.
of Honor, ca. 5. sect. 5.
discords or ignorance of his Subordinate Judges in the distribution of
Justice, to hear and determine the Causes Himself: or for King Canutus long
after to judge the Causes of such as complained unto him, when our Bracton does
not at all doubt of it, when he says, Bracton lib. 3. de Actionibus, cap. 12.
fol. 108.
that the Judges nullam habent Authoritatem sed ab alio, i. e. Rege sibi
Commissam cum ipse qui delegat non sufficiat per se omnes Causas sive
Jurisdictiones terminare, they have no Authority but what they are entrusted
with by the King who granted it, when as he who delegated them is not able or
sufficient by himself to hear aad determine all Causes in every Jurisdiction;
unto which our Register of Writs that Pharmacopeia, Director, and Magazine of
Medicines and Remedies for many a Disease in the Estates and Affairs of the
People, which Justice Fitz Herbert in his Coke Preface to his 8 Reports.
Preface to his Book De Natura Brevium, of the Nature of Writs, calls The
Principles of the Law, and the Foundation whereupon it depends; and in
Plowdens Commentaries is as to many things truly said to be the Foundation of
our Laws, and so Authentic, as Brown Justice in the Case betwixt Willon and
the Lord Barkley, in the third year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth Plowdens
Commentari^s. 228.
declared, that all Writs were to pursue the Forms in the Register, and it was
enough to allege, so is the Register, will easily assent; and all our Books of
the Law, all the Practice and Usage of our Courts of Justice, all our Records,
Close, and Patent Rolls, and our Kings hearing and determining of Differences
betwixt the Common Law and Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdictions, and their
making of Orders to reconcile the Proceedings of the several Judges thereof;
and the like betwixt the Admiralty Court and the Courts of Common Law, ordered,
decided, and agreed before King Charles the First and His Privy Council, in the
ninth year of His Reign, the Judges in criminal Matters not seldom attending
the King for a Declaration of His Will and Pleasure, where a Reprieve, Pardon,
or Stay of Execution shall be necessary, will be as so many almost innumerable,
powerful, and cogent Arguments to justify it; And a common and daily
Experience, and the Testimony of so many Centuries and Ages past, and the Form
used in our Writs of Scire Facias 13 E. 1. cap. 45.
to revive Judgments after a year and a day, according to the Statute of
Westminster the 2. with the words Et quia volumus ea que in Curia nostra rite
acta sunt debite executioni demandari, because we would that those things which
are rightly done in our Courts should be put in execution, etc. may bear
witness of that Sandy Foundation Sir Edward Coke has built those his great
mistakings upon; and those also that the King cannot, propria Authoritate,
Arrest any man upon suspicion of Treason or Felony, when the Statute made in
the third year of the Reign of King Edward the First expressly acknowledges,
that the King may Arrest, or cause men to be Arrested, as well as His Chief
Justice without distinction, in ordinary and civil, or criminal matters, and
when by the beforementioned Opinions of Sir Christopher Wray Lord Chief Justice
of the Queens Bench, Sir Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas, and of all the Judges of England, delivered under their hands in
the Four and thirtieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was
acknowledged that She, or the Lords of Her Privy Council might do it; And in
the before recited great Case of the Habeas Corpora in the Reign of King
Charles the Martyr, there was no question made, but that the King might
lawfully do it, with a cause expressed in the Warrant; And many a Nobleman and
others has in several of our Kings Reigns* either upon suspicion of Treason,
or Flagranti Crimine, in or very near the acting of it, or upon great
Misdemeanors, been Arrested by our Kings and Princes only Command, and sent
Prisoners to the Tower of London; As the Great Mortimer Earl of March, by King
Edward the Third; the Pompous Cardinal Wolsey, and Queen Ann of Bulloin by King
Henry the Eighth* the Duke of Northumberland by Queen Mary; the Duke of Norfolk
and Earl of Essex by Queen Elizabeth, for Treason; Robert Earl of Somerset and
his Lady committed for Felony; Sir Tho. Overbury for refusing to go Ambassador
when he was sent by King James; Henry Earl of Oxford, for striking up a Great
Lords heels in a Solemnity of a great Feast, when the French Ambassador was
entertained in Westminster Hall, for presuming to offer to wash his hands after
the King had washed in the Basin, which as Lord Great Chamberlain of England,
he had holden to the King; Thomas Earl of Arundel, for marrying the Lord
Matravers his Son to the Sister of the Duke of Lenox and Richmond, without his
License; and Philip Earl of Pembroke, and the said Lord Matravers, for striking
and scuffling with one another in the House of Peers in Parliament, and some
others by King Charles the First; and some by His now Majesty and our
Parliaments have many times in some Charges brought against offenders of the
Weal Public, petitioned our Kings and Princes to do it; and many others have
been so committed in the Reigns almost of all our Kings and Princes, of which
every Age and History of this our Kingdom can give plentiful Examples, which we
may believe to have been done by good and legal Warrant, when in all our many
Parliaments and Complaints of the People therein, such Arrests and
Imprisonments have not been in the number of any of their complained
Grievances; for otherwise what Power, Writ, Authority, or Warrant of a Judge,
or Justice of Peace could have seized upon that Powerful Mortimer, and taken
him in Notingham Castle, out of the amorous Embraces of Queen Isabel, the then
Kings Mother? Or the popular and greatly beloved Duke of Norfolk, out of the
County of Norfolk? And Sir Edward Coke that great Lawyer, so deservedly called,
might, if he were now again in his house of clay, and that Earthly Honor which
his great Acquests in the Study and Practice of the Law had gained him, do well
to inform us, that the Report of Husseys the Chief Justice, 1 H. 7.5.
who is by him mistaken and called the Attorney General to King Henry the
Seventh, was any more than an Hearsay, and nothing of kin to the Case put by
the King, whereupon they were commanded to assemble in the Exchequer Chamber,
whether those that had in those tossing and troublesome times been Attainted,
might sit in Parliament whilst their Attainders were reversing; And the Case
concerning the King himself, whether an Attainder against himself was not void
or purged by his taking upon him the Crown of England; or that which in that
Conference was brought in to that Report impertinently and improperly, to what
preceded or followed by the Reporter of that Conference was not at the most,
but some by discourse and not so faithfully related, as to mention how far it
was approved, or wherein it was gain-sayed by all or any* or how many of the
Judges, it being altogether unlikely that if Hussy had been then the Kings
Attorney General, he would have cast in amongst those Reverend Judges such an
illegal and unwarrantable Hearsay of an opinion of the Lord Chief Justice
Markham in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth (whom that King as our Annalist
Stow records, displaced for condemning Sir Thomas Cook an Alderman of London
for Treason, when it was but Misprision) said unto that King, That the King
cannot Arrest a man upon suspicion of Treason or Felony, because if he should
do wrong, the Party cannot have an Action against the King, without a bestowing
some Confutation, Reason, or Arguments against it, which the Reporter was
pleased to silence; And was so weak, and little to be believed an Opinion, as
the practice of all the Ages since, have as well as the Times preceding,
disallowed and contradicted it; and whether such an Opinion can be warranted by
any Law or Act of Parliament; And whether the King may not take any Cause or
Action out of any of His Courts of Justice or Equity, and give Judgment
thereupon; and upon what Law, Reason, or Ground it is not to be done.

For if the Answer which Sir Edward Coke made to what the King alleged, That
the Law was grounded upon Reason, and that he and others had reason as well as
others; That true it was, God had endued His Majesty with excellent science,
but His Majesty was not learned in the Laws of England, and Causes which
concern the Life and Inheritance, or Goods of his Subjects, which are not to be
decided by natural Reason and Judgment of Law, which Judgment requires long
study and experience. And when the King was therewith greatly offended, and
replied, That he should then be under the Law which was Treason to be said*
Cokes 12. Report.
answered, that Bracton says, That Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo
and Lege; That a King ought not to be under man, but God and the Law, shall be
compared with the Opinion of Dy^r, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas, and the Judges of that Court in the Case betwixt Gre^don and the
Bishop of Lincoln, and the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, upon a Demurrer in a
Quare Impedit, in the eighteenth and nineteenth year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth reported by Mr. Edmond Plowden, as great and learned a Lawyer as that
Age afforded, and one whom Sir Edward Coke does acknowledge to be no less, did
allow, and were of opinion, That the King cannot be Plowdens Comment. 502 a.
and b.
held to be ignorant of the Law, because He is the Head of the Law, and
ignorance of the Law cannot be allowed in the King, there will be as little
cause as reason to dote upon such Conclusions, especially when the erroneous
Mis-application and evil Interpretation of that alleged out of Bracton will be
obvious to any that shall examine the very place cited, that his meaning was,
that where he said that the King was sub Deo and Lege, under God and the Law,
it was, that he was only non uti potentia sed judicio and Bract. lib. 1. de
rerum div^sione. c. 8 and lib. 3 de Actionibus cap 9. Lib. 2. de Acquirend.
Dominium cap. 24.
ratione; And in other places of his Book speaking who primo and principaliter
possit and debeat judicare, who first and principally shall and may judge,
says, Et sciendum quod ipse Rex, and non alius si solus ad hoc sufficere
possit, cum ad hoc per virtutem Sacramenti teneatur astrictus. And it is to be
understood, that the King Himself, and none other* if he alone can be able, is
to do it, seeing He is thereunto obliged by His Oath; Ea vero quae
Jurisdic^ionis sunt and Pacis, and ea quae sunt Justiciae and Paci annexa ad
nullum pertinent, nisi ad Coronam and Dignitatem Regiam, nec a Corona seperari
poterint, cum faciant ipsam Coronam; for that which belongs to his
Jurisdiction, and that which belongs to Justice and the Peace of the Kingdom,
does belong to none but the Crown and Dignity of the King, nor can be separated
from the Crown when it makes the Crown, so as those who should acknowledge the
strength and clearness of a Confutation, in that which has been already, and
may be said against those Doctrines of Sir Edward Coke, may do well to give no
entertainment unto those his Opinions, which nulla ratione, nulla authoritate,
vel ullo solido fundamento, by no reason, authority, or foundation can be
maintained, but to endeavor rather to satisfy the world, and men, of law and
reason, whether a Sovereign Prince, who as Bracton says, habet omnia Jura sua
in manu su^ quae pertinent ad Regni gubernaculum habet, etiam Justiciam and
Judiciam quae sunt Jurisdictiones ut ex Jurisdictione sua sicut Dei Minister
and Vicarius, has all the Rights in his hand which appertains to the
Government of the Kingdom, which are Jurisdictions; and as His Jurisdiction
belongs unto Him as He is Gods Vicar and Minister, is in case of Suspicion of
Treason or Felony, where His ever-waking Intelligence and careful
Circumspections to keep Himself and People in safety, shall give Him an Alarm
of some Sedition, Rebellion, or Insurrection, and put on His Care and Diligence
to a timely Endeavor to crush or spoil some Cockatrice Eggs busily hatching, to
send to His Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, or in his absence
out of the Term, some Justice of Peace, for a Warrant to Arrest or Apprehend
the party offending or suspected; which our Laws and reasonable Customs of
England did never yet see or approve, and when such offenders are to be seized
as secretly as suddenly* Or what Law, History, or Record did ever make mention
of so unusual, undecent, and unfitting a course or method of Government? For
can any man that is Master of the least grain of Reason or Prudence, think it
safe for a Kingdom so to restrain, if it could be, a Sovereign Prince, when a
person in time of Pestilence, or otherwise, shall with a Plague Sore running
upon him, come into the presence of the King, who in case of Leprosy, when it
was more frequent than now it is, can for the preservation of His People from
the infection thereof* make His Writ de Leproso amovendo, command Register of
Writs 267.
the Leper to be removed to some other place, that He should have no power to
bid any of His Servants to cause him to be taken away, or put in prison; Or
that King James, when his Life was assaulted by the Assassinate which Earl
Gowrey had appointed to murder him, did transgress any Law of Scotland,
Nature, or Nations, when he did arrest and struggle with him, until the loyal
Sir John Ramsey came to his Rescue; Or that that prudent Prince after his
coming into England, did break any Law of England, Nature, or Nations, or not
perform the Office of a King, when by his own Authority he did, without sending
to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, or a Justice of Peace for his
Warrant, cause Sir Thomas Knivet and others, to apprehend Guydo Faux but some
minutes before the Match should have been secretly and undiscovered laid in
order to the firing of the Gunpowder and other Matterials, which were shortly
after to take fire for the accomplishment of the intended treason of him and
his wicked Accomplices, to destroy the King, Prince, Nobility, and the Chiefest
of his People assembled in Parliament, and all that were in, or near the Cities
of London and Westminster, by the Gunpowder Plot of blowing up the Houses of
Parliament? And whether a King may not in the like case of Contempt or Danger,
as well do it, as he may do where a Soldier pressed in the Kings Service, upon a
Certificate by the Captain into the Chancery, being the Watchtower or Treasury
of the Kings Justice, that he absented himself, send his Writ or Mandate to one
of his Sergeants at Arms to take him; which Sir Edward Coke says may be done
per Legem terrae, by the Law Coke 2 Part Institutes.
of the Land; and may upon a Certificate of an Abbot or Prior into the Chancery
do the like by his Writ to the Sheriff, to take a man professed in Religion
that is Vagrant, and allows it to be Lex Terrae, a Legal Process so to do in
honorem Religionis, in honor and respect to Religion; Br. 14. H. 9.8.
or may not as well imprison a man for a Contempt, as Discharge him? Or why He
may not Arrest, or cause any man to be Arrested for Felony or Treason, or but
suspicion thereof? when Sir Edward Coke Coke ^ Par. Institu^es. cap. 29. p. 52
is of opinion any man may do in the Kings Name upon a common Fame, or Voice;
or Arrest a man by warranty of Law and of his own Authority, which wounds
another dangerously, or keeps company with a notorious Thief, whereby he is
suspected; or if the King shall not upon necessity, or extraordinary occasions,
be enabled to do it for that supposed, rather than any reason at all, that he
ought not so to do, in regard that no man can have an Action against Him for
any wrong or injury done unto him by the King? How have our Laws and
reasonable Customs for many Centuries and Ages past submitted unto, and not at
all complained of the Kings Seizure of Lands, but suspected to be forfeited; or
of Lands aliened without License, or pardon of Alienation, and the like? Or why
should not our Kings have as much liberty as the holy King Edward the
Confessor might have had, if he would, to have commanded a Thief to be
apprehended for stealing in the Royal Lodgings, when he bad him only be gone,
lest Hugeline his Chamberlain should come in and take him? Or as legally as
King Edward the Third, and his Council, did commit one that was found armed in
his Palace, to the Marshalsea, whence Br. Tit. Contempt. 6. and 24. E. 3.
he could not be bayl'd or delivered, until the Kings Will and Pleasure should
be known? Or as it was adjudged in the thirty nineth year of the Reign of King
Henry the Sixth, when in an Action of Trespass, the Defendant justified the
doing thereof by the Command of the King, when he was neither Bailiff nor
Officer of the Kings, and it was adjudged by the Judges that he might so do
without any Deed or 39 H. 6.17 and Br. Tit. Monstrans de faits Tit. 79.
Writing showed for it? or if they should mistake in their Arrests or
Imprisonments of suspected Traitors or Felons, should not have as much liberty
as a Justice of Peace has in criminal matters? or as the Judges have in his
Courts of Justice in civil Actions, where the parties that mistake, or bring
their Actions where they should not, or Arrest one man in stead of another, are
only punished with Costs of Suit, or Actions of False Imprisonment, but not
the Judges or Justices of Peace; for howsoever some Flatterers, when King
Richard the Third having murdered his Nephews, and usurped the Crown, and sat
one day in the High Court of Chancery, had in some of the Pleadings or Causes
heard before him, alleged that the King could do no wrong; and some of our
Lawyers have since so much believed it, as they have reduced it into a kind of
Maxim, and given it a place in some of their Arguments and Reports; Yet
Bracton in Bract. l. 3. Tit. contra quem competit Assisa. and Stamfords
exposition of the Kings Prerogative, cap. 15. and Tit. Petition cap. 22.
the Reign of King Henry the Third, and Justice Stamford in the Reign of Queen
Mary, did believe the King might unwillingly by Himself, or His Officers or
Ministers, do wrong, and declared the Law to be both in Bractons and Stamfords
time, that in such Cases the Subjects where they have any matter of Complaint
or Grievance, need not want their legal Remedies by Traverse, Monstrans de
Droit, or Petition; the reason of the latter being, as Stamford says, because
the Subject has no other Remedy against the King, but to supplicate him by
Petition, for the Dignity sake of the Person. And a late Experience has told
us, how a Dispute betwixt our two Houses of Parliament, whether a Great Person
accused of Delinquency might be Arrested and put under Custody, before his
Charge or Accusation could be made ready, gave the Party opportunity to escape
into the Parts beyond the Seas, and the Disputants leisure and time enough to
agree of the matter; And it should be remote enough from any the suspicion of
Error or over-credulity, for any man to think an Arrest or Imprisonment, by
the immediate Command of the King in the case of Treason or Felony, or but
suspicion of either of them, not to be as legal as that of a Justice of Peace,
made by a Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, in his
Name, and by his Authority derived under him. And those who will take out Sir
Edward Coke's before mentioned Lessons, and enter themselves into that School,
and be ready to make Affidavit of those his pretended Axioms, may do well
before they do too greedily imbibe them, to remember that Maxim in our Law, as
well as the Caesarean, that Nem^ plus Juris in alium transfer potest quam
ipse habet, No man can give unto another a greater Power and Authority than he
has himself* and that Sir Edw. Coke himself has acknowledged, that a
Derivative cannot be greater than the Power and Br. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 1.
and ^.
Authority from whence it was derived; And to give themselves and others the
reason why the Kings of England should have a Comptroll and rectifying
Super-intendency by the Common Law, Judges own confessions over his Admiralty
and Ecclesiastical Courts, and not of his Common Law Courts, and other
Judicatories, or may not send his Prohibitions to Superior Courts where they
intermeddle beyond their Cognizance, as he does in the Admiralty and
Ecclesiastical Courts, and as he may do in all inferior Courts; and by what
Rule, Act of Parliament, or positive Law they are to do it in the one, and are
restrained in the other; or left at liberty in the one, and not in the other;
And whether he may not in Civil Actions, for some reasons of State, Justice, or
Equity do it, as well as in the Reign of King Henry the Third, after the making
of Magna Charta it was done, when Bracton takes it for a Rule, that in adven^u
Justitiariorum ad omnia placita ex Jurisdictione sibi delegata pertinent ad eos
audire querelas singulorum and Petitiones ut unicuique Justicia ^iat, that in
the Circuit of the Judges it belongs unto them by their Jurisdiction
delegated, to hear all men and their Complaints and Petitions, that Justice may
be done to every man; yet if any prosecuted or complained of without the Kings
Writ or Precept, injuste arctatus fuerit, shall be unjustly forced to answer
Subvenitur ei per ta^e brev. Domini Br. lib 3. Tract. de Corona. cap. 14 sect.
4.
Regis Rex Vicecom. salutem precipimus tibi quod non implacites, nec
implacitari permittas talem de libero tenemento suo in tali villa, sine
speciali Precepto nostro, vel Capitalis Justiciarii nostri; The King may
relieve him by such a Writ, viz. that is to say, The King sends greeting to
the Sheriff, We command you, that you do not implead, or suffer to be impleaded
such a one of his Freehold, in such a Town, without Our Writ, Precept, or
Command, or of Our Chief Justice.

Or as that King did, where an Appeal was brought in the County of York for a
Robbery, and removed per Preceptum nostrum, by the Kings command before his
Justices at Westminster, which Sr Ed. Coke says is always to be understood to
be of the Court of Common Pleas, and being heard, the Party appealed was
acquitted; and having been appealed for the same Fact in the County of Essex,
and after that Acquittal aforesaid outlawed in Essex* the King quoniam Error
prejudicare non debet veritati, to the end that Error might not prejudice
Truth, did, Consilio Magnatum, by the advice of his Great Men, pronounce that
Outlawry to be null and void.

And in another Case where the Justices Itinerant upon an Appeal brought for
the death of a man's brother, and he that was appealed being a timorous man, had
fled thereupon, so as by the command of the said Justices, he was afterward
outlawed, and the man that was said to have been killed, was found to be alive
and in health; the King seeing that there was no just cause of the Utlary, did
pardon it and the flight, and commanded that in a full County Court where he
was outlawed, the man said to be killed should be produced, and that then eum
inlagari faciat, and ad pacem Regis recipi, the Sheriff should in-law the
Defendant, and receive him to the Kings peace, and publicly proclaim that he
was received into the Kings grace and favor.

And if they will read Bracton quite through, and diligently observe and
compare one place with another, and that wherein he is positive and concludent,
they need not go far to seek how easy it is to mistake Reason, and over^run
and reject Truths, as the Rabbis and Proselites of the Rebellious Assembly,
called The Long Parliament, did not long ago do, by suffering their prejudice,
fancy, or sinister ends, to rove and catch a piece of that Ancient, Loyal, and
Learned Author, to furnish out their disloyal Arguments and Purposes, without
any further reading or enquiry into him, where they may see the contrary
asserted, and abundance of Confutation of those, and many other Errors they
were so much in love with, and are so willing to espouse.

The Authorities offered to prove the Opinion of Sir Edward Coke and the Judges
in that Case of Prohibitions in Michaelmas Term, in the fifteenth year of the
Reign of King James, beforementioned, yielding, if well examined, no support
to that debile fundamentum, weak and insufficient Thesis, or intended
Foundation; and will as unsafely be relied upon as those many Conclusions which
he has as to many things drawn from the counterfeit Modus tenendi Parlementum,
(abundantly Seld. Tittles of Honor Mr. Pryns Animadversions upon Sir Edward
Cokes 4 th part of the Institutes. p. 1.11. and 249.
proved to be so both by Mr. Seldom and Mr. Pryn) about the latter end of King
Henry the Sixth, and from his over much admired, and too often cited, but
suspected, the so called Mirror of Justice, written by Andrew Horn many
hundred years after the Reign of King Alfred, of much of the matters wherein
Asser Meneuensis, who lived in his Court, and wrote of his Actions; Brompton
and many of our old English Writers are altogether silent, and as little
satisfactory as the Resolution of himself in Trinity Term, in the fifth year of
the Reign of King James, concerning a Commission to inquire of Depopulations,
to be amongst other defects supposed to be therein, that the said Commission
was against Law; 1. because Cokes 12 Reports. Tri. 5 Jacobi.
it was in English, 2. because the Offenses inquirable were not mentioned in the
Commission, but in a Schedule annexed, the reason and authority whereof lies as
hidden and difficult, as the most dark and envelopped Riddles and Aenigma's of
Sphinx, and as unintelligible, as the most mystical Caballa of the opinionated
Rabbis, and as unlikely to be assisted by any, either Law, or right Reason, as
another Opinion or Hypothesis of Sir Edward Cokes, and others, That the King
cannot create a Manor; when those many thousand Manors in England have not with
their large Liberties and Privileges, been granted by Act of Parliament, but
by the Favor and Indulgence of our Kings, or by their tacit Permissions, where
any of those Manors have, as parcel of some others, or otherwise been only
upheld by Custom or Prescription.

All which, with many other of his Doctrines and Opinions, would not have been
welcomed or caressed by the former Ages, who well unstood the difference
betwixt the Edicta and Rescripta Principum, the Edicts and Legal Mandates of
Sovereign Princes, with the high esteem, respects and obedience is due unto
them, and the Responsa prudentum of their Commissionated Justices, and the
Reasonings and Dictates of those Disciples of refined Reason; and how wide also
is the difference betwixt Deliberation and things spoken of a sudden, betwixt
Arguments solemnly made both at the Bar and at the Bench, and that which
passes from them obiter or in transitu, hastily, and without any
premeditation, or in passage, or as circumstantial to some other matter, or
when it was not subjectum Argumenti, the subject or material part of the
Argument, but came in as foreign, or was not the principal Design thereof; or
was but as some of the Law Reports do mention other things to have been spoken
only ad mensam, as they sat at Dinner or Supper; or in their private
Conferences, or per Auditum, by Hearsay or Report of another coming in from a
Court, or Business at Law, where they that made the Report were not present;
neither were those Sons of Wisdom ignorant, that Laws were to be so subservient
to Government, as not to incumber the just means thereof, and the Power and
Authority which should protect and take care of it.

For although Kings and Princes ought in performance of their Oaths taken at
their Coronation, to make the Methods and Rules of their Governments, where
Justice and Reason shall persuade it to come up as near as they can Legum
suarum praescripto, to the mind and direction of their established and allowed
Laws, and reasonable Customs of the Kingdom, and moderate and guide their
Power, as Bracton says, to the right end for which it was ordained, yet the
Suprema Lex and Salus Populi, ne quid detrimenti Respublica capiat, the Supreme
Law to heed above all things, next to the will and commands of the Almighty
King of Kings, the safety of the People, and Weal Public, committed to their
charge, wherein their own is not a little concerned, being not to be neglected,
enjoins the care and observation of that great Principle in the Eternal Laws of
Nature and right Reason, that there ought to be in all Kings, Princes and
Governors such a Power and Means extraordinary, as may answer the purpose of
Government, procure Justice, relieve Necessities, and repel any the Incursions
of Dangers, which present Laws, or the greatest forecast could never provide,
or beforehand arm against, when Time, Necessities, or Hazards imminent, cannot
tarry for the popular or long deliberations or assent of a Multitude, who can
sooner bring upon themselves a ruining and fatal Discord, than procure any help
at present, and that to oblige Government to a close and pertinacious adhering
to Laws or Rules already established, which can yield them no relief, or at the
most none at present, may be as inconvenient and destructive, as to limit a
Captain, Master, or Pilot of a Ship going to Sea, what Orders and no other he
must observe, when Pirates or Enemies assaults unlooked for; the Furies of the
merciless Winds and Seas; or those many other Misfortunes of which the Seas do
produce as great a plenty as they do variety, shall rush or break in upon him,
and must of necessity require other helps or directions, and cannot always sail
by Card or Compass, or in sight of a conducting Pole Star, but most sometimes
for the preservation of himself, the Ship, and Passengers, lowr his Sayls, cut
his Cables, or Mainmast, or throw Goods overboard, to be recompensed by those
whose good and safety was procured by it.

Or might be as fatal as it would be to an Army, when a General or Commander of
it, shall be pinnion'd and fettered with Instructions or Authorities ill
calculated, and must not go beyond them, when their Cares, Arts, and
Stratagems, are not to be beforehand prescribed by Laws, Instructions, or
Rules of War, but are to be used and practiced as Occasions, Opportunities,
Advantages, or Disadvantages, Successes, Dangers, or Misfortunes shall advise.

And therefore if we look down from the hills of Time, into the valleys of the
Ages past, and take a view of the Laws and Constitutions of our Princes, the
Records and Monuments of their Justice, distributed by themselves, or the
Judges their Substitutes, the weight of the Reasons of their Judgments
therein, and the Obedience which the People have from Age to Age readily paid
unto them, they that will not wilfully sacrifice to a peevish Obstinacy, may
see cause enough for our Kings as well to make use of extraordinary Helps and
Remedies in order to Justice and the Weal Public, as their delegated Judges
have done, by that which they call Office and Discretion, or course of Court,
and Equity, of Statutes, in many Causes, too many to be here instanced, when
the Laws would too much streighten them, or not permit them to do that which
Justice would require or expect at their hands, and to believe that the no
unfaithful or unlearned Judges in the former Ages did not incroach upon the
Liberties of the People, or wanted a Warrant of right Reason, when they had
such a veneration and respect to the Prudence of diverse of our Princes, their
Reason and Necessities of State, and the preservation of the People, and in
doing of Justice; as in the sixth year of the Reign of King 6 R. 1. Rot. 6 in
recept Scaccarii.
Richard the First, Adam of Benningfield and Gundreda his Wife, having brought
a Writ of Dower against Robert Mallivell and Pavie his Wife, for seven Carves
of Land in Raveneston, with the Appurtenances, in the County of Nottingham, of
which the said Gundreda had a Fine levied unto her in the Court of King Henry
by Robert Mallivell, Father of the said Robert Mallivell, and thereof produced
the Chirograph, and alleged that the said Robert the Son had disseized them in
the War or Rebellion of Earl John, the Kings Brother, and was with him in the
War against the King at Kingeshage, and that by reason of the Seisin of the
said Robert by the said Earl John, the Land was taken into the Kings hands, as
Hugh Bardo witnessed; but the said Robert pleaded that he paid a Fine to the
King for it, and for that Land to have his Lands again; and for that produced
the Kings Letters to the Sheriff of Nottinghamshire, who attested the truth
thereof; Et Dominus Cancellarius dicit quod ipse accepit ab ore Domini Regis
quod ipse redderet Seisinam terrarum omnibus illis qui disseisiti fuerunt, per
Comitem Johannem, and dicit quod ratum habe^ur, quod ipsi disseisiti fuerunt
per Comitem Johannem, and inde consideratum est quod magis ratum habetur quod
Dominus Rex ore precipit quam quod per literas mandavit and quod Adam and
Gundreda habeant Seisinam suam; and the Lord Chancellor witnessed that he was
commanded by the King by word of mouth, that he should make Livery of their
Lands to all which were disseized by the said Earl John, (which would have
required a good Warrant in a matter concerning so many,) and said that it was
proved that they were disseized by the said Earl John; and thereupon the Court
delivered their Opinion, that what the King had done by word of mouth was more
to be approved and credited, than what he had commanded by his Letters. And our
Bracton, who ad vetera Judieia Bract. in Proemio de Legibus and
consuetudinibus, Angliae, and l. 1. c. 8. sect. 5.
perscrutanda, as he says, had used great diligence in the search and perusing
of the Old Records of the Kingdom, declares the Law to be in his time, That
non debet esse Major in Regno suo, there ought not to be any Superior unto him
in his Kingdom; si autem ab eo petatur ^um breve non ^urrat (contra ipsum)
locus erit supplicationi quod factum suum corrigat and emendet; but if he do
not Justice when as no Writ can be had against him, he is to be petitioned to
do it; quod quidem si non fecerit satis sufficit ei ad poenam quod Dominum
expectet ultorem nemo quidem de factis suis praesumet disputare, multo fortius
contra factum suum venire; which if he shall not do, it will be enough to leave
him to God for a punishment; for no man is to presume to question or dispute
his Actions, much more to contradict any thing which he does.

And since the Granting of the Great Charter of the Liberties of the People,
and those Bounds which Regal Majesty has been pleased to put to the Royal
Prerogative, it appears, That in the first 1 E. 1. coram Rege Trin. 5.
year of the Reign of King Edward the First, it was adjudged and declared in
the Court of Kings Bench, Quod non est voluntas Regis quod Cartae su^ concessae
scilicet de Pardonatione Vitae tempore praetirito per ministros ipsius Regis
disallocentur in prejudicium illorum quibus conceduntur; that it is not the
Kings pleasure that his Charters of Pardon for the time past, shall be
disallowed to the prejudice of those to whom they Hill. 3. E. 1. Rot. 1. and
Trin. 19. E. 1. coram Rege.
are granted.

In the third, and nineteenth year of that Kings Reign, it was declared and
allowed to be Law, That Justiciarius non habet Jurisdictionem cognoscendi in
aliqua loquela, nec capiend' aliquam Assisam, nisi per Dominum Regem, and ad
ipsius voluntatem, and si secus fecerit videtur Curiae quod de jure non
fecerit; That a Justice or Judge has no Jurisdiction in any Plea or Action,
nor to try or take any Assise, unless it be allowed or permitted by the King,
or by his Will and Pleasure; and if the Justice or Judge shall do otherwise,
the Court was of opinion that by Law he could not do it.

In the nineth year of the Reign of that King, it was adjudged, That neque
Barons quinque Portuum, neque aliqui alii in Regno possunt clamare talem
Libertatem quod non respondeant Domino Regi de contemptu sibi facto, ubi
Dominus Rex eos adjudicare Pas. 9 E. 1. coram Rege Kan^ Rot. ^6.
voluerit; Neither the Barons of the Cinque ports, nor any other in the Kingdom
can clame a Liberty not to be answerable to the King for any contempt where he
will Call them to account for it.

In the eighteenth year of his Reign in the Case betwixt the Bishop of Carlisle
and Isabell de Clifford, and Idonea 18. E. 1. coram Rege.
de Leybourne her Sister concerning the Advowson of a Church which he Claimed
by a Feoffment thereof made by King Richard the First, it was alleged to be
Law, That nemini liceat Cartas Regias, indicare nisi Regibus, That no man ought
to judge the Kings Charters but themselves.

In Hillary Term in the twentieth year of the Reign of that King, in the great
Case and Pleadingi betwixt the King and Gilbert de Clare Earl Hillary 20 E. 1.
coram Rege wallia Rot. 37.
of Gloucester and Hertford, and Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex,
for that the said Earls had upon a Controversy betwixt them for Certain Lands
in Brecknock, and in the Marches of Wales armed their Tenants, and with Banners
displayed, invaded each others Lands after the Kings prohibition, when by a
Commission granted to William Bishop of Ely, William de Valence and others, the
King therein declared, that although the said Earls should in the mean time
agree, yet if any thing should be attempted in prejudicium seu Contemptum vel
etiam laesionem Coronae suae and Dignitatis Regiae, vel contra pacem, etc. post
inhibitionem suam praedicto Com. Glou^ pro statu et Jure Regis per predict
Episcopum et sotios suos inde rei veritas inquireretur, to the prejudice, or in
Contempt or hurt of his Crown or Kingly Dignity, or against the Peace, after
the Inhibition made to the Earl of Gloucester as aforesaid, it should for the
State and Right of the King be inquired by the Bishop and the rest of the
Commissioners, to the end the truth thereof might be found out; it was in that
Plea or Proceedings declared for Law and not at that time denied, Quod pro
communi u^ilitate per Prerogativam suam in multis Casibus Rex est supra omnes
leges and consuetudines in Regno suo usitatas, that the King is by his
Prerogative in many Cases for common and public good above the Law or any
Customs used in the Realm; and when exception was taken by the Earl of
Gloucester to the Writ of Scire Facias, which he alleged, ought to be a
judicial Writ issuing out of a Process before had, and not out of the Chancery
as an original Writ Videtur, it seemed says the Record consilio Domini Regis
to the Kings Council (which in that Case were the Judges of the Court of Kings
Bench) quod ex quo incumbit Domino Regi specialiter pro conservatione pacis
suae et salvatione populi sibi Commissi, quam cito rumor de tam enormi
transgressione contra inhibitionem suam facta ad ipsum pervenerit in
continenter, debetur super hoc veritas inquiri per omnes vias, quibus citius
sine Juris offensa, and per breve illud propter exhibitionem celeris Justitiae
unicuique indigenti praestando festimus patet remedium, quam per aliquod aliud
breve adhuc in casu isto provisum sive formatum ad intollerabilia mala evitand.
and impediend. veluti homicidia, sacrilegia, incendia depraedationes, et alia
enormia que preter mala prius illata emersisse potuerunt a casu, nisi celerius
remedium apponeretur in facto predicto: That forasmuch as it specially
concerns the King for the keeping of the Peace and weal of his People
committed to his charge, as soon as ever he shall be informed of so great an
offense against, or contrary to his prohibition, the truth thereof ought to be
enquired by all the ways and means, by which without contradiction or
disturbance of the Law, it may soonest be done; and that by that Writ for the
more speedy doing of Justice to every on that needed it, there was a more
speedy remedy afforded than by any other in that Case already formed or
provided, to prevent and hinder such intolerable mischiefs, as Manslaughter,
Sacrilege, burning of Houses, Spoils, Depredations, or Plunder, and other
enormities; which besides the evils before Committed, might happen or ensue, if
a sudden remedy in such a case should not be applied: Et etiam quod Dominus Rex
qui est omnibus et Singulis de Regno suo Justitiae debtor non potuit in hoc
casu nisi Injuriam Coronae sue intulisset dissimulasse quin concessisset breve
per quod citius et celerius pervenire posset ad cognitionem veritatis rei pred.
^um petitum ^uerit; And likewise that the King, who to all and every of the
people of his Kingdom is a debtor of Justice, and ought to do it, could not in
this case unless he should do an injury to his Crown, dissemble or forbear the
Punishment thereof, or abstain from the granting of a Writ when it was
required, whereby he might the sooner come to the knowledge of the matter
aforesaid; and it was by the aforesaid Judges of the Kings Bench adjudged Quod
breve predictum in casu isto and in casibus consimilibus est necessarium et
rationabile, that the Writ aforesaid was in that Case and the like necessary
and reasonable: And as to what the Earl of Gloucester had alleged that it
ought to have been a Judicial Writ, videtur consilio Domini Regis; it seemed to
the Judges that Dominus Rex a quo omnes ministri sibi subjecti recordum habent
est superlativum et magis arduum recordum et supra omnes ministros su^s et
processus et record. rotulorum praecellens; the King under whom all his
ministers do derive their Authority to make their Records, has a more high and
superlative Record excelling that of all his Ministers (his Justices being by
Sir. Edward Cook Cook 2 par. Institutes.
so styled,) Et etiam antequam Dominus Rex inhibet circumspicit et considerat
Judicio interiori propter utilitatem communem ut evitetur deterius quod oriri
possit et subsequi ex malo incepto nisi inhibitio interveniret, et sic procedit
inhibitio ex praemeditato Judicio conscientiae Domini Regis propter bonum
pacis: And also that the King does before he makes his inhibition forecast and
consider within himself what may be done for the Weal public, to the end that
he may prevent a worser evil or mischief which might arise, or be the
consequence of an evil beginning, if he should not have made such an
inhibition; And therefore that Inhibition did proceed out of the Judgment and
dictates of the Conscience of the King for the Peace and welfare of his
Kingdom, Contra quod Judicium si quis praesumpserit attemptare quanto citius et
debitus possit habere processus ut super hoc convincatur veritas super
delinquentem in hoc casu tanto honorabilius est Regi Majestati et regno et
populo utilius et magis necessarium; which Judgment, if any shall resist, or
contradict, by how much speedier a due Process may be had for the Conviction of
the Offender, by so much the more Honorable it is for the Kings Majesty, and
the more profitable and necessary for the People and Kingdom: Per quod videtur
in hac part quod Inhibitio, procedit proprie et Judicio aquo predictum breve
quod vocatur. Scire facias debite sumi potest maxim, cum res supradict^
specialius in hoc casu tangat Dominum Regem Coronam et Dignitatem quam aliam
tertiam personam; By which in this Cause it appeared to the Judges, that the
Inhibition was duly and well granted, and had its Original from the Judgment
(of the King) from which the aforesaid Writ, which is called a Scire Facias,
was deduced, especially when the matters aforesaid, did more concern the King,
his Crown, and Dignity, than any third Person.

And it was the Opinion of the Judges of the Court of King's Bench, in that
before mentioned judgment, in the three and thirtith and four and thirtieth
year of the Reign of that King, in the Case betwixt the Prior and Mich. 3. and
34. E* 13 in Banco Regis Rot. 103.
Bishop of Durham, that any ordinance, award, or acknowledgement made in the
Kings presence, and by him affirmed, was to be more believed; and to have a
greater force, than a Fine levied before his Justices, conformable to the Civil
Law: which says that Principis dicto fides adhibenda plenissima si Officii
Farinacius d quaest^ 63. cap. 3. n 80 98 and 139.
ratione aliquis a se vel coram se actum vel gestum, esse verbo vel literis
attestatur; An unquestionable Faith, is to be given to what in the Office, or
Affairs of the King, shall be done by, or before Him, attested by his Word or
Letters.

In Trinity Term, in the nineteenth year of the Reign of King Edward the
second, in a Writ of Trin. 19 E. 2. coram Rege Glouc. Rot. 174.
Novel Disseisin, brought by Isabella, the wife of Peter Crok, after the Kings
Writ of Prohibition to proceed; Rege inconsulto, obtained by the Bishop, for
that he pretended it to have been forfeited to the King, and granted unto him,
saving the Reversion, and She replying, and issue being joined, and two hundred
forty pound Damages given: and the King having afterward sent his Writ to
Proceed; and the Bishop bringing his Writ of Error, and Errors being assigned*
amongst which one was that the King understanding that the Judges had taken the
Assise, and given Judgment, had sent another Writ to Richard de la Rivere, one
of the Justices in the Commission, commanding him that Si ita esset, that if it
were so, he should send the Record and Process to the King; and that the said
Justices* post receptionem brevis predict nullam potestatem in hac part
habentes ad predictum breve Regium nihil considerantes Erronice, et minus rite
processerunt ad Judicium predict reddend. etc. After the Receipt of the Writ
aforesaid, had no Power in that behalf, but had erred, in not regarding the
Kings Writ, and proceeded illegally; unto which the said Isabella replying,
that after the taking of the Assise the King had sent his Writ; which was
enrolled in the Record that the Justices should Proceed, Cum omni celeritate
qua de Jure et secundum legem et consuetudinem Regni Angliae; with as much
speed, as by the Law and Customs of England, they might; Quibus recitatis et
before intellectis Record et brevibus predictis videtur Curiae quod ex quo
pretextu illius brevis eis directi de procedendo ad Judicium, etc. Quod est de
posteriori dato quam predictum breve de venire faciend. Recordum et Processus,
etc. Per quod breve de venire faciend. etc. Potestas Justic. eis extitit ablata
nec in eadem brevi de procedendo ulla mentio fuit de allegatione ipsius
Episcopi predicta nec de eo quod Dominus Rex, alias eis mandavit quod post
Captionem Assise, predict ad Judicium inde reddend. inconsulto Rege minime
procederent ad Judicium predict reddend. erronice et sine warranto
processerunt; Upon view, and due consideration of which Record, and Writs
aforesaid, it appeared to the Court, that the aforesaid Justices had by color
of the Writ of Procedendo, which was of a later Date than the Writ of Venire
Facias; to cause the Record and Proceedings to be brought before the King, and
that by that Writ of Venire Facias, the Power of Proceeding was taken from the
aforesaid Justices, nor in the said Writ of Procedendo, was any mention made of
the Bishops aforesaid Allegation, nor of the Kings former Command, that after
the taking of the Assise they should not without Advising with the King,
Proceed to Judgment; and that by such a giving of Judgment, they had
Proceeded Erroniously and without Warrant; whereupon and other the Errors
alleged, the Judgment was Reversed, and the Seisin of the Land adjudged to
the Bishop.

In the third year of the Reign of King Edward the third, the Bishop of
Winchester being Attached to Trin 3. E. 3. coram Rege. Suth. Rot. 9.
Answer the King; Quare decessit a Parlemento tent' apud novam Sarum absque
licencia Regis, and contra inhibitionem Regis, et in Regis contemptum:
Wherefore he departed from the Parliament Holden at New Salsbury without
License of the King, contrary to the Kings Inhibition, and in Contempt of the
King.

Episcopus dicit, quod ipse est unus de Paribus Regni, et Praelatis Regni, et
eis inest venire ad Parlementum Domini Regis summonit. Et pro voluntate Domini
Regis cum ipse placuerit; Et dicit, quod siquis eorum deliquerit, erga Dominum
Regem in part aliqua in aliquo Parlemento debet corrigi and emendari, and non
alibi in minor Cur' quam in Parlemento per quod non intendit quod Dominus Rex
velit in Cur' hic de hujusmodi transgressione and contempt' fact. in Parlemento
responderi, etc. To which the Bishop pleaded that he was one of the Peers and
Prelates of the Kingdom, and that they are to come to the Parliament of the
King when they are summoned, when he pleases, and that if any of them should
offend the King in any thing, the King ought to correct or call them to account
for it in Parliament, and not elsewhere in any lesser Court. Wherefore he hoped
that the King will for any such offense or contempt cause him to answer in
Parliament: To which the King's Attorney replied. Quod licet Regi de hujusmodi
transgressione sectam facere vel delinquentem punire in quacunque Curia sibi
placuerit, etc. Et Episcopus e contra ut prius ideo datus est dies. That by Law
the King may prosecute against a Delinquent in whatsoever Court he pleases;
which the Bishop denied as aforesaid, and therefore further day was given, etc.

King Edward the second, having by his Letters Patents granted to Maurice
Brownesword Mich. 5 E. 3. coram Rege.
Officium Custod. Vlnagij in Anglia and postea ipsum inde amovit et con^ulit
dictum Officium Nicholao Sherlock, unde Mauricius per petitionem Regi
porrectam, and in Bancum Regis missam petit, quod dictum Officium ei
restituatur. The Office of the Aulnage in England, and afterward displaced
him, and granted the said Office to Nicholas Sherlock, and Maurice Brownsword
having thereupon exhibited his Petition to the King, which prayed that the said
Office might be restored unto him, and the King having sent it to the Judges,
King Edward the third his Son notwithstanding in the fifth year of his reign,
misit breve suum Justic quod non vult ea irritari, quae Pater suus in hoc fecit
and praecepit quod supersedeant quousque aliud inde ordinaverit, etc. sent his
Writ to the Justices, declaring that he would not have that to be made void
which his Father had done, and commanded them to proceed no farther therein
until his further order.

In a Judgment given in the Court of Kings Bench in Easter Term, in the tenth
year Pas. 10 E. 3 ^oram Rege.
of the Reign of the aforesaid King, upon a Taxation or Assesment upon the
County of Hertford, for the wages of Hoblers and Footmen; It was declared, Quod
nihil renovandum seu emendand quod factum fuit per Regem, that nothing was to
be revoked or amended which was done by the King, and in the same Term and
year, Pas. 10 E. 3. coram Rege. Wilts. Rot. 50.
Super prolationem. Recordorum and Rotulorum Curiae, and al. Dominus Rex misit
breve suum Justic mandando quod nihil agerent in prejudicium s^u ex
hereditationem Domini Regis, sed quod supersederent in negotio praedicto nihil
inde faciendo inconsulto Rege, upon producing of the Records and Rolls of the
Court, the King sent his Writ to the Justices, commanding them that they should
do nothing in his prejudice or disherison, and that they should stay and
proceed no further without advising with him.

In Easter Term in the forty sixth year of the Reign of King Edward the third,
Pas. 46. E. 3. Glouc. Rot. 33. coram Rege.
Thomas Bishop of Durham was attached ad respondend. tam Domino Regi quam
Gulielmo sil. Henr' de Aslokey, quare i^ placito. erroris in utlagaria ad
sectam tam Katerine quae fuit Vxor Willi' de Kilkenny quam ad ^ectam D^i^ Ept'
infra libertatem Episcopat' Dunelm non misit Recordum ex Mandato Regis in
Bancum Regis, to answer the King as William the Son of Henry of Aslokey;
wherefore upon a Writ of Error brought to reverse an outlawry as well at the
Suit of Katherine which was the Wife of William of Kilkenny, as at the Suit of
the Bishop within the liberty of the Bishopric of Durham, he had not sent the
Records as the King had commanded, into the Court of Kings Bench, and upon a
second Writ commanding him to do it or to show cause, which was delivered at
his Castle of Auckland; and a third Writ of the like Tenor delivered to the
Bishop himself at Waltham Cross, spretis mandatis record. and processus non
misit, nec causam significavit quare id facere noluit, but disobeying the Kings
commands had neither sent the Records and Process, nor showed any cause why he
did it not. Episcopus dicit quod nulla brevia ei liberavit apud Dunelm' and
quod ad illud apud Waltham retornavit quod ipse est Comes Palatinus and Dominus
regalis cujusdam terrae vocat le Bishopric de Durham, and habet omnia Jura
regalia quae ad Comitem Palatinum and Dominium regalem pertinent per se Justic'
and Ministros suos ibidem excercenda ac Justic' suos proprios, viz. Coronatorem
and Cancellar and Cancellariam and brevia sua propria ibid^ de Cancellaria sua
emanantia and quod ministri Domini Regis ad aliqua officia sua exercenda ibidem
in aliquo ad omnia Com' placita se non intromittant realia et personalia quae
ad comitem Palatinum pertinent infra terram praed' and quod habet Justic. suos
ibidem et ad assignand' Justic' per Commissionem et ad Error' corrigend. per
ipsum Episco pum vel alios Justiciar suos tam ad sectam Domini Episcopi quam
aliorum, and praedi^tus Willielmus replicavit quod non esset consonum rationi
se ipsum de facto and prosecutione proprijs fore Judicem cum proprie ad Regiam
Majestatem in omnibus Causis ortis inter subditos Jurisdictio pertinet
dinoscere, et licet ad aliquam Personam per privilegium speciale de causa
cognoscere indultum fuit si substitutus in exhibitione Justitiae defecerit
Errorem per superiorem, et non per substitut' corrigi debet et super hoc dati
sunt dies de termino in terminum.

To which he pleaded that no Writs were delivered to him at Durham, and to that
which was delivered unto him at Waltham, he had returned that he is Count
Palatine and Lord of the Royalty of the Lands called the Bishopric of Durham,
and has all the Rights and Regalities which do belong unto a Count Palatine,
and that Royalty there to be exercised by him and his Ministers and Justices,
that is to say, has a Coroner Chancellor and Court of Chancery, and that the
Kings Officers do not in any thing intermeddle therein, and that the said
Bishop as Count Palatine has there likewise his Court and Justices of
Common Pleas, as well real as personal, and power to assign by Commission,
Justices to correct and reverse Errors committed by him or any of his Justices,
as well at his own Suit as others.

Unto which the said William replied, That it was not reason that he should be
Judge of his own Actions, when as properly it belonged to the Majesty of a King
to determine of all Causes betwixt his Subjects; And although he in favor
granted to some Person a special privilege to hear and determine Causes, yet
if any substituted by him do fail in the distribution of Justice, the Errors
shall be corrected by the Superior, and not by the Substitutes; whereupon
further days were given from Term, to Term.

Nor was the Duties of Subjects so worn out, but that so much respect was in
those better Times given to our Kings Royal Protections, granted to such as
were not employed by them, as the Laws and reasonable Customs o^ England did
allow the protected Persons in their Lands and Estates, to bring their Actions
against the Infringers or Disturbers thereof, as in the Case of Roger de
Limecote against 6 R. 1. Rot. 1. in dorso.
the Sheriff of Liecester, in the first year of the Reign of King Richard the
First, for disseising him of two Knights Fees; Nicholas Talbot against William
Prior of Dunstar, in the eight and thirtieth year of the Reign of King Edward
Hill. 38. E. 3. coram Rege Somer. rot 37. and ibid. Wilts. in dorso.
the Third; of Walter War against Gervase Wretchey, and John Parkey in the
same year, and of many others in the said Kings Reign; and no Pleas in Bar, or
alleging Illegality put into the same, but in others some collateral Pleas and
Defenses made by Releases, or the like.

For those Lovers of their Country, and honor of their Kings, did not think,
as some would fondly and untruly assert, that all the Royal Protections granted
by them, had at the first no better an Original or Foundation, than an
Imitation of the many Protections and Privileges granted by our Kings and
Princes, to Bishops, Monasteries, and Religious Houses, did not believe that
our Kings could not respite for a while the payment of moneys due unto any of
their Subjects, or do as much as amounted to it, when King Edward the Third in
his Wars with France, and great want of Moneys, did about Et Rot. Pat and Rot.
claus. 13. E. 3. m. 21.
the thirteenth year of his Reign, revoke diverse Assignations for the payment
of Moneys due unto private and particular persons, until he should be better
enabled to pay them. And it was about the twelfth Year of the Reign of King
James, in the Grand Case of Boltons Complaint against the Lord Chancellor
Ellesmeere adjudged in Parliament, That upon a Bill, called A Bill of
Conformity, exhibited in Chancery by a Debtor against his Creditors, for not
accepting of his Offer of as much satisfaction as he was able to give them; and
for refusing thereupon to permit him to enjoy his liberty, the Lord Chancellor,
or the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, might by Injunctions prohibit
and stay all Suits at the Common Law, commenced by him or any such refractory
Creditors.

For our Courts of Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, have in
their several subordinate Authorities, not seldom mitigated and reduced the
high and unreasonable Fines uncertain, demanded by diverse Lords of Manors of
their Copyhold Tenants for their Admissions, unto a more reasonable Rate of
two years improved Value, and enforced them to accept it. And Sir Edward Coke
in his Comment upon Magna Charta, would not bring into the meaning of the
Clause of Nulli negabimus, vel differemus Justiciam, That the Cokes Comment
upon Magna Charta. cap. 29.
King would not deny, or delay Justice such Protections as do appear in the
Register, and are warranted by the Books of Law. And although in the eighth
year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, it was in transitu, and by 8 H 6.19.
a. and b.
the way said by Cottesmore, a Judge in the Case concerning the Privileges of
the University of Oxford, That the King cannot grant that a man shall not
Implead, or have any Action against another; Yet it was at the same time
declared to be Law and right Reason by Babington a Judge, That to a Lord of a
Manor, Conusance of all Trespasses done within his Lordship, may be granted by
the King, and that a Plaintiff shall be bound to bring his Action accordingly;
and that in that Case the King has not fore-closed him of his Action; so as
our Novelists, and such as invent all the Oppositions they can against the just
and legal Authority of their Sovereigns, may do better to acknowledge, that
howsoever it was the opinion of some of the Judges in the Reign of King Henry
the Sixth, That if any should Arrest a man by the Kings Command, (when all men
Arrested are so by the Authority of the King and his Writs, or Process) an
Action of False Imprisonment might be brought against him that 16 H. 4.
Fitzherbert Tit. Monstrans des Fai^z.
obeyed the Kings Command, although it was done in the presence of the King;
Yet the whole Tenor and Meaning of that Case, and that sudden Opinion arguendo,
or by way of instance delivered thereupon, was no more, but that such a Command
ought to be attended with some Specialty, or cause showed.

And so little did the Judges of the Court of King's Bench in Trinity Term, in
the ninth year of the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, intend or think it fit to
subject to the humor of any froward or undutiful person, the important Affairs
and Service of the King; As William Reedhead and Nicholas Hobbesson Trin. 9 H.
5. Rot. 89.
Purveyors for the King, having taken forty Quarters of Malt for the Kings use,
for the Victualling of the Town of Harfleet in France, from William Atkin; he
brought his Action of Trespass against them for the taking away of fifty
quarters of Malt from him; Unto which, as touching the supposed Trespass, and
ten quarters of Malt, they pleaded Not Guilty, and took Issue thereupon: And as
to the forty quarters of Malt residue, pleaded and produced the Kings Letters
Patents, dated the twentieth of January, in the third year of his Reign, and
that he thereby did Assign them jointly or severally, to take a thousand
quarters of Malt for the Victualling of the said Town of Harfleet, wherever
it might be found, as well within Liberties as without, (the Lands of the
Church only excepted) upon reasonable payment by the King for the same; and to
provide sufficient Carriage by Land or Water to the City of London: And in
regard that they had notice, that the said William Atkin might well bear and
afford the same beyond his necessary Occasions, and did sell diverse quantities
of Malt in the Markets: The said William Reedhead and Nicholas at the time of
the pretended Trespass, did to the use of the King, as aforesaid, take the said
forty quarters of Malt, and charged the said William Atkin on the Kings behalf,
by virtue of the Kings said Letters Patents, that he should carry the same to
London, and deliver it to Robert Barbet, who should pay him as well for the
said forty quarters of Malt, as for the carriage thereof; which Robert Barbet
was assigned by the Kings Letters Patents to receive it for the use of the
King, and transport it to Harfleet, and to make full payment for the said
Victualling of the Town aforesaid; and that the said William Atkin did carry
the said Malt to the said Robert, and received of him full payment for twenty
quarters of the said Malt, and the carriage thereof* and that the said Robert
Barbet assigned the said William Atkin within six months after to be paid for
the said other twenty quarters at London; which forty quarters of Malt so taken
as aforesaid for the Kings use, came to his use at Harfleet aforesaid, unde non
intendunt quod Cur. hic in loquela predicta ad prosecutionem predicti Will.
ulterius versus eos procedere velit, ipso Domino Rege inconsul^o, and petunt
auxilum de ipso Rege quod eis per Cur Concessum est. Wherefore they hope that
the Court will no farther proceed in that Action until the Kings pleasure shall
be known, and do pray the Aid of the King therein, which by the Court was
granted unto them. Et super hoc dies dat. est partibus predictis coram Domino
Rege in statu quo usque, xv. scil. Michaelis ubicunque, etc. Et dictum est
prefato Willielmo quod interim sequatur penes Dominum Regem de licentia habend.
ad procedend. ulterius in loquela predicta si, etc. Et dies dat. ut supra usque
Oct. Hillarii, and inde per seperales dies and Terminos usque Octab. scil.
Michaelis. Whereupon Day was given unto the parties aforesaid, in the state or
manner as now it is, until fifteen days after Michaelmas; And the said William
Atkin was commanded, that in the mean time he should petition the King for
leave or license to proceed, if he would, in the Action; At which day, time was
further given to the parties aforesaid, in manner as aforesaid, until eight
days after St* Hillary; and the said Will. Atkin was commanded that he should
petition the King, if he would, for leave, as aforesaid; At which day and time,
day was given to the parties in manner as aforesaid, until Easter Term then
next following; and the said William Atkin commanded if he would, to petition
the King as aforesaid; At which time further day was given to the parties
aforesaid, until Trinity Term next following; and the said William Atkin
commanded to petition the King, as aforesaid; At which time further day was
given to the parties aforesaid, until eight days after Michaelmas; and the said
William Atkin was commanded to petition the King, as aforesaid; And no further
Proceedings were had thereupon, as appears by the Roll, where otherwise it
would have been entered.

Neither could our less contentious and turbulent Forefathers, probably be
willing to give lodging or entertainment to any such vain and unwarrantable
conceits, as do now too frequently attempt an invasion upon the Lex Regia of
their Sovereign, or necessary and legal Rules or Methods of Government, or the
very Attendance upon the Person of the King, and his many times indispensable
Affairs, in order to the good and safety of his People, or that upon License
demanded to prosecute any Action at Law against any of his Servants, it should
be any such delay of Justice, as to furnish out their supposed matters of
Grievance or Complaint, that a little time or respite should be given to any of
the Kings Servants, either to give satisfaction or answer the Action: When
Bracton in the Reign of our King Henry the Third, declared it to be no new or
evil Law or Custom of the Kingdom, that in the Kings Commissions to the
Justices Itinerant, or Assizes, there Bract. lib. 3. de Actionibus, cap. 11*
sect. 9.
was an Exception of Causes, wherein qui profecti sunt in servitio nostro,
those which were gone, or sent in the Kings service were concerned, or that
such a reasonable part of time or respite given, should nurse up or encourage
any disccontent; when the Judges in an Action depending in the Court of
Common Pleas, against one that was none of the Kings servants, or employed by
him, were in the Cases of an Essoyn, de male lecti, of sickness, to cause a
View to be had of the sick Person; and if really sick, to assign him a
reasonable time to arise and appear before them; or if he had been viewed, and
had malum transiens, an intermitting Disease; or if a Languor, or Languishing
were testified, and such an Essoin were cast before the Justices Itinerant in
their Circuits, where they had no power to receive any such Essoin, mittere
possint ad ipsum ut faciat Attornatum, they might send to him, which could not
be done suddenly, to make an Attorney to answer for him.

Or that our Kings should be able to Protect and Privilege such of the Clergy
as in former times were, as Clerks or Officers in Chancery employed in his
Service, as to send, notwithstanding the then great power of the Bishops, their
Diocesans, his Writs De non Residentia, of dispensing with their Non-residence
upon their Benefices, and command them, as has been before remembered, not to
be sequestered for their Absence whilst they were employed in their Service; or
if sequestered, to unsequester them; or if Fined by any Ecclesiastical or Church
Censures, that such Fines should not belevied; which was in those times not
Register of Writs, 58 b. and 59 a.
believed either by the Layety or the Clergy themselves to be illegal; And in
the later of the said Writs, that such a sequestration was in juris Coronae and
libertatis and privilegij praedictorum laesionem manifestam, to the prejudice
of the rights of the Crown, and violation of the liberty and privilege
aforesaid, and hujusmodi vijs and modis, quibus poterint praecanere and
libertatem, and privilegia sua praedicta manu tenere cupientes. And that they
were desirous by all the ways and means they could, to hinder such doings so
prejudicial unto them, and were resolved to maintain the Liberties and
Privileges of the Crown.

And not be able to protect his Household and domestic Servants, in whose daily
service and continual attendance, both our Kings and their Subjects were more
concerned than they could be by any the service or attendance of the Officers
or Clerks in the Court of Chancery.

Which the Lords in Parliament did so well understand to be a Right inherent
and due unto Royal Majesty, as in the three and fortieth year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, they did in the Case of William Huggen one of the Queens
Servants arrested upon an Execution, send the Gentleman Usher attending upon
their House to the Prison of the Fleet, to bring him before them, and upon view
of Precedents of some of their own Servants delivered 43. Eliz.
though none of any the Kings or Queens did in conformity to the reason thereof,
cause the Plaintiff upon the Defendants promise to pay him, to release him, and
the Undersheriff being committed to the Fleet, was three days after upon his
Petition discharged.

And in the first year of the Reign of King James, The 1* Jac.
Earl of Suffolk Lord Chamberlain of the Kings House, did procure Nicholas
Reading, one of his Majesty's Servants arrested by an Execution, at the Suit of
Sir Edward Hales, to be brought before the Lords in Parliament by a Writ of
Habeas Corpus, and so by the Plaintiffs consent released, the Order mentioning
that such an Arrest was contrary to the honor and privilege of that Court.

Or that not only the Judges of the superior Courts and the Justices of Peace
can as they have done it anciently and commonly, imprison men for Contempts of
them or their written Orders or verbal Commands, without which they power could
not Tueri Jurisdictionem, uphold that Authority which the King had given them;
but the Constables of every Parish in London, whose Offices and Authority at
the first were (says the judicious and learned Lambard) but as the fingers to
the hands, or body Lambard ^irenarch. et tract. de officio Constabularij*
of the Constable of England, a great Officer of the King and his Crown, can in
their Night-watches command better men than themselves to the Compters or
London Prisons, there to lodge the remainder of the night among the debauched
or unruly sort of people, called Rats, or Night-walkers but for angring his
worship, or not believing that he is a Prince of the Night, the Kings Image,
and none of the smaller parcels of mortality, and shall have so much connivence
at his no seldom committed Follies, as no other Habeas Corpus shall be granted
to the injured person, thn a submissive paying of his Fees of imprisonment, and
procuring himself as well as he can to be discharged by the greater discretion
of the Lord Mayor, or an Alderman, before whom he is the next morning to be
brought, with his, not to be discerned Fault or offenses, and if he should seek
afterward to be recompensed for such an affront, is to expect as little favor
as may be for himself, and as much as may be for his adversary.

And that the King under whose Power and Authority they acted, should not be
able by his own immediate command or the Warrant of some of the great Officers
of his Crown or Household, to punish by imprisonment, any contempts committed
against himself and his sovereign power, by the arresting of his domestic and
household Servants without License, who are near unto his person, and employed
in his hourly or daily service or attendance or that his power and Authority
should not be efficacious or valid in his own case or immediate concernment,
and should be valid and sufficient to punish such as either contemned or abused
his Justices and Servants extraordinary (who are more remote from his person)
in the administration of his Justice.

As when Eustace de Parles and his 21 E. 1
brother were by King Edward the first, in the one and twentieth year of his
Reign, committed to the Tower of London, for abusing and striking in
Westminster Hall William de Bereford, one of his Justices of his Court of
Common Pleas. And King Edward the third by his Justices and Authority, 21. E. 1.
punished the Bailiffs of Ipswich by the Forfeiture and Loss of their places,
seized the Liberties of the Town, and delivered the Custody thereof to another,
Mich. 18. E. 3. coram Rege. Rot. 162.
during the Kings pleasure* and made the Bailiffs of the Town to deliver in
Court their Staves of Office, for that they had suffered an unruly multitude to
feast and revel with certain Malefactors, condemned by the Justices of Assize,
and after their departure made a Mock game of them in sitting upon the
Tribunal, and Fining them and their Clerks.

Or that any should think it reasonable, or no disservice of the King, or his
not to be encumbered Affairs, to arrest any of his Household Servants without a
License first obtained.

And shall at the same time decry or declaim against the Arresting of a Judge
sitting in his delegated Court of Justice, or traveling in the Circuit, by and
under the Kings Commission, at the Suit of any private person; or the Arresting
and Imprisonment of an Admiral or Vice Admiral going to Sea, or a Commander or
Governor of a Castle, Fort, or Garrison, upon the like occasion, and think it
reasonable that the King in reference to the Weal-publique, in those his
affairs and concernments should by privilege protect, and shelter them.

A right understanding whereof, and of that which has been before alleged,
and the reasons supporting those Judgments of the not ignorant or unworthy, but
very learned, grave, and upright Judges, in those former Ages and Times, and of
the Duties, Honor, and Respects, which were and ought to be paid to the
Sovereignty, just and necessary means of Government assented unto by our Laws,
and reasonable Customs of England, and in praxi and observantia junioris Aevi,
in the practice and course of Law in the succeeding Ages, not denied by any
positive or well interpreted Law, may grant a Proeibition, and give a Checque
or Restraint to those opinions so of late hatched* and hugged against too many
of the Actions of Authority, in order to Government, and the Weal-publique; the
necessity of preventing Evils before they happen, or diverting, abating, or
lessening them after they are happened, and invite them to forsake their
overmuch adoration of Sir Edware Cokes aforesaid Errors, and believe Sir Thomas
Ridley a Doctor of the civil Laws, and no stranger to our Common-Lawes, who no
longer ago than the beginning of the Reign of King James, in his Book entitled
A view of the Civil Eccl^siastical, and Temporal Laws of this Land, said, that
it was an ordinary Complaint as well in the Temporal, as the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Courts, that our Laws Sir Thom. Ridleys view of the civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws. 210*211.
were far otherwise interpreted than they were in former Ages, and declared
that the King by communicating his Authority to his Judges to expound his
Laws, does not thereby abdicate the same from himself, but may assume it again
unto himself, when and as often as he pleases.

And was long before that so believed to be consistent with our Magna Charta,
the doing of Justice to his people, and the dernier resort or ultimate Appeal
(as Saint Paul did unto Caesar) and so desirable by those that could have
remedy no where else, as Reginald Basset having great Suites with William de
Harecourt, Thomas de Astley, and other Knights that held of the Honor of
Leicester, Rot. pat. 11, and 12. Johannis.
did in the eleventh year of the Reign of King John give as an oblation, two
Palfreys to the King, that the Cause might be heard before him, wherein he got
the better, as appears by a Fine of 200 Marks the next year after paid into
the Exchequer by the said Thomas de Astley pro falso clamore, for not
proceeding in his Suit or Claim against him.

For certainly in that great and most prudent Judgment and Justice of Solomon,
in the Case of the true and false Mother claiming the child, when al Israel
Reg. cap. v. 27, and 28 3.
heard of the judgment which the King had judged, and they feared the King, for
they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment: that so justly
admired piece of Justice was as well and legally done in his House, or Chamber,
as if it had been done by him in the Sanhedrim, or any of his Courts of Justice

In the evidencing whereof, although the Arguments by me used, and the
Authorities cited may to the more learned, and lesser part of the people seem
to be too many, needless, or superfluous, yet they may to others appear to be
as profitable as necessary to undeceive or antidote all such who having a Magna
Charta of their Fancies, do metamorphose all they can our better Magna Charta,
and make their disobedience conveniences or interest, the Standard and Rule of
their obedience, and may be more and more mislead or infected by the Errors of
the opinions delivered for Law in the Case before recited of the Prohibitions,
and to wean them from those dangerous Antimonarchical Doctrines, which they had
sucked in the late times of confusion, when our Laws and right Reason
attending them, and even Truth it self were by an usurped power, false
authority, and ^ mechanic and ignorant part of the people, lead by a
rebellious party, persecuted, banished, or affrighted.

Wherefore they who do delight to oppose, and cavil Regal Authority, by
gleaning all the objections which they can either frame or hear of, and put the
Law upon a Rack or Torture, to wring and wrest out of it any thing that may
help to accommodate their distempered and unruly Fancyes, may think they are in
the Road, and Highway of Wisdom, and Applause; but will in the end whilst they
forget the duty of Subjects to their King, and the Commands of God, to honor
and obey him, find themselves to be more than a little deceived, and to be far
enough out of it, and might do better to hasten out of the sinful ways they
walked in, and the unsafety of the Paths they have trod and traveled in, and
help to still and put to silence, rather than increase and foment those
causeless complaints wherewith too many of our Nation surfeiting upon
happiness, do too much affright and afflict themselves and others, in their
opposing the just privileges and protection of the Kings Servants.

And remember that although there are few evils, or not to be justified matters
of Fact, as well as those which have been good and virtuous, which have not
left some Vestigia records or precedents to after Ages; and it has not been
unfitly said, that Exempla illustra^t non probant, that Examples may illustrate
but not prove; yet the precedents and examples which are founded and built upon
Law, Right, Reason, and Truth (as these by us alleged on the part of the Kings
Servants have been) are to be heeded and harkened unto, and the contrary
rejected.

That the instances and examples brought by me out of the Civil and Cesarean
Laws, ought to oblige as they do with many other Nations, propter aequitatem,
in regard of the Equity and reasonableness thereof, and more especially, when
ex jure gentium and naturali ratione, by the Law of Nations and Nature they are
in the particulars by me endeavored here to be asserted, not only by them but
our Common Laws and reasonable Customs of England to be justified and
maintained.

And that it is and should be the Interest of all the good people of England,
to preserve the Honor of the King, and that the Bonds of gratitude in a return
of what they have in their Liberties and Privileges received of him, and his
Royal Progenitors, should persuade them not to deny unto him those just Rights
which by Law do belong unto Him and his Servants.

CHAP. XXI.
That a care of the Honor and Reverence due unto the King, has been accounted
and is and ought to be the Interest of all the People of England, and that the
Servants and retinue of a Sovereign Prinee, who has given and permitted to his
Subjects so many large Liberties, Immunities, Exemptions and Privileges,
should not want those Exemptions, Immunities, Customs and Privileges which are
so justly claimed by them.

FOR every man who has not bound himself more than as an Apprentice to a
Spirit or Custom of contradiction of Authority, and made himself a slave to
wickedness and a Companion of those that speak evil of Dignities, may confess
that it is and should be every man's Interest to observe the fifth Commandment
of God, in that Sacred and dreadfully pronounced Decalogue, to Honor and
reverence the King and common Parent, and that St. Peter has so conjoined the
Fear of God and Honor of the King, as that the one cannot be without the other,
and it is obvious to every man's understanding, that where there is Honor there
seldom wants obedience, and where there is an obedience, Honor most commonly
does bear it Company, so that if the Law of God, Nature and Nations, and the
municipal Laws and Customs of all the Countries, Kingdoms and Commonwealths of
the World, where Reason has got any admittance, have submitted unto and
acknowledged a Majesty, and more especial Honor to be due unto their Supreme
and Sovereign* and si Majestas quasi major status dicitur quis non fatebitur
majorem Johannes Redin de Majestate principis 25.
statum esse Regis in suo regno, and if Majesty is so called in regard of a
greater State and Degree, who will not acknowledge that a King is greater than
any in his Kingdom? and certae sunt says Besoldus affectiones quae
superioritatem concomitantur sine quibus neque regnum salvum and Besoldus de
jure Majestatis ca. 1. 2*
incolume neque regia vis and dignitas elucescere possit, there being certain
properties or qualities requisite to a Superiority without which neither a
Kingdom can be in any safety, nor the Kingly Honor and Dignity can manifest
or show it self.

And if Judges and Magistrates have a kind of participation thereof, imparted
unto them by their Sovereign, majore ratione regum eos constituentium hisque
fascibus ^tque Majestate Johannes Redin de Majestate principis. 26.
decorantium Regia Majestas nuncupabitur with greater reason Kings who adorned
them with those Ensigns or resemblances as it were of Regality and bestowed it
upon them, are not to want or be without it, the Majesty of Kings being so much
appointed and approved by God himself, as he made Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and
their Children and favorers, Number c. 16.
the dire examples of his wrath and punishment, but for murmuring against Moses
and Aaron and saying they took too much upon them, and so imprinted a reverence
and esteem of Kings in the hearts and minds of mankind as Joab, King David's
general of his Army having fought against Raab of the Children of Ammon, 2 Samuel
12. v. 27, and 28.
would not when he was ready to do it, until he had invited David to come and
have the Honor of taking it least that City should be afterward called by the
name of Joab that took it; And Nebucadrezzar King of Babylon during the
Captivity of Jehoiakim King of Judah, could attribute so much to the Rights of
Majesty in Kings, as he spoke kindly unto him and set his Throne above the
Thrones of the Kings Jer. 52. v. 31, 32.
who were with him in Babylon.

Wherein certainly the sad hearted people of Israel in Captivity with him did
take it to be their Duty as well as their Interest, to rejoice in that parcel
of Humanity and Honor which was done unto him, when as long before the Palatia
or Curiae Palaces of their Kings were so highly Honored by them, as the 122
Psalm of the Kingly Prophet David, exhorted that people to Pray that Peace
might be within the Walls and Prosperity within her Palaces: The Glory and
Honor of Solomon, was accounted to be no less than the Interest, Delight and
Joy of the people of Israel when after his Feast, upon the Dedication of the
Temple and his Sacrifice of 1 Reg ca. 8. v. 66.
the Peace offerings, they Blessed the King and went unto their Tents, joyful
and glad of heart for all the goodness that the Lo^d had done for David his
Servant, and for Israel his people.

The Romans so experimented the Honor of their Emperors living or dead, to be
the great Interest of their people, as they that fled to their Statues, were
protected Salmutius Comment. in Pancirollum.
from their Pursuers, whether it were in Civil matters or criminal.

The Germans, their Successors in that Empire, took it ill in the Reign of
their Charles the fifth Emperor, who was likewise King of Spain, that the
Spanish Grandees or other of that Nobility, did give so much Honor as they
usually did to their Princes and Emperors (cases of Treason only excepted.)

And it was believed to be so much an Interest of our English true hearted
Ancestors to be as careful as they were Jealous of the Honor of their Kings.

As when Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury would in the Reign of King William
Rufus, Eadmer. Hist. lib. 1. p. 26.27, and 28. Et Seldom m. praefat. ad ^undem
librum.
peevishly hold on his resolution of disparaging of it in going to Rome to the
Pope, for his Pall and confirmation; the great men and almost all the Nobility
of the Kingdom and the other Bishops Assembled in Parliament at Rockingham
Castle, concerning that obstinacy of Anselme; the Bishops and and many of the
Nobility declared unto that Archbishop then present that the whole Kingdom did
complain of him that he sought to take away the Honor of the King, his Crown
and Dignity, and delivered their opinions that Quicunque Regiae dignitatis
consuetudines tollit, coronam simul and regnum tollit unum quippe sine alio
decenter haberi non posse, whosoever took away any thing from the Kings
Regality and Dignity, took away at the same time both his Crown and Kingdom,
for the one could not Honorably subsist without the other.

King Edward the 3d by the advice of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in
the 13th year of his Reign did Ordain, 13 E. 3. ca. 43.
that in case the Keepers of the Privileges of the Hospitlers should incroach
upon the Kings Jurisdictions, and offend the Kings Dignity, they should beware
from thenceforth that they usurp not any Jurisdiction in prejudice of the King
and his Crown, and if they did, their Superiors should be charged for their
fact, as much as if they had been convict upon their proper Act.

In a Parliament holden in the two and fortieth year of the aforesaid Kings
Reign, it was declared by the Lords and Commons therein Assembled, that they
could not assent to any thing rot. Parl. 42 E. 3.
which tended to the disher^son of the King and his Crown, to which they were
sworn.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament in the 14th year of the Reign of King
Richard the second, did pray the King that the prerogative of him and his Crown
may be kept, and that all things Petit Parl. 14 R. 2.
done or attempted to the contrary, might be redressed, and that he might be as
free as any of his Progenitors ever were, and in the 15th year of his Reign did
in Parliament again require, that he would as lawfully as any of his
Progenitors enjoy his Prerogative.

Richard Earl of Arundell in the 17 year of the Reign of the rot. Parl. 17 R.
2. m. 11 and 12.
aforesaid unfortunate Prince, did complain that John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, who was then moulding the Sesign which his Son afterward
accomplished by usurpation of the Throne, did go Arm in Arm with the King, and
that it beseemed not the Dukes men to wear the same Color of Livery that the
Kings did.

By an Act of Parliament made in the third year of the Reign of King Henry the
7th the Officers or Tenants of the King 7 H, 7.
were not to be retained by Liveries with others.

And diverse of the great Nobility did in the Reign of King Henry the Eight,
make it one of their Articles against Cardinal Wolsey in Bakers Chronicle and
Cokes 4 th part of the Institutes.
Articles of high Treason, and great misdemeanors against Cardinal Wolsey the
great ingrosser of that Kings favor, and manager of his Authority, for that he
being suspected to have the French Pox, had stood and talked so near the King,
as to breath in his face,

The extent and verge of whose Royal house or Palace at White Hall, and the
Liberties and Privileges thereof, were so little desired to be lessened or
diminished, as the Parliament did in the 28th year of his Reign, 28 H. 8. ca.
11.
Ordain that the Park of St. James, and the street leading from Charing Cross
to the Sanctuary-gate at Westminster, and all the Houses, Buildings, Lands and
Tenements, on both sides of the same street, or way from the said Cross unto
Westminster Hall, situate lying and being betwixt the water of the Thames on
the East part, and the said Parkwall on the West part, and so forth thorough
all the s^ile, precincts and limits of the Kings old Palace of Westminster,
should be annexed and added to the said Palace of Whitehall, and that the said
Palace of Whitehall should have and enjoy within the limits and precincts
aforesaid, all such and like Prerogatives, Privileges, Liberties,
Praeheminencies and Jurisdictions, as to the Kings ancient Palace within the
Realm, have at any time heretofore belonged or of right appertains, and that
the said old Palace of Westminster, shall be reputed and taken as part and
parcel of the said Palace of Whitehall.

The Honor whereof and the rights and Privileges of those that serve and
attend him, whom every good Subject of England is bound to honor therein, might
deter and diswade those incivilities which are too often put upon them, and
if the Law, Religion, right reason, the custom of Nations and rights of Majesty
and Superiority did not forbid that golden Rule, mete-wand of Justice taught
and given to Mankind by the Blessed Redeemer of it, not to do that unto others
which which We would not hove done unto us, might put that rude and uncivil as
well as undutifull part of the Nation in remembrance, to do otherwise than they
have done.

When they that could be glad by the favor and indulgence of their Sovereigns,
to get and obtain Exemptions, free Customs, Privileges, Franchises and
Immunities, some of which were very unusual and extraordinary, Blunts Nomo
lexicon Carta Aethelstani Regis penes Carolum Fairfax Arungerum.
as that of King Aethelstane, granted to the men of Rippon in Yorkshire quod
homines Ripponenses sint credendi per suum yea and suum nay in omnibus querelis
and Curiis licet tangen. frod and freed mortel, the men of Rippon were to be
believed by their Yea and Nay in all Actions and Courts, although it should
concern breach of the Peace as far as a wound mortal, (being a Privilege
probably granted for some signal Service or fidelity) or that Immunity which
was granted by King John to Robert de Ros of Hamlake, rot. pat. 11. Johannis.
that he and all his Demesne Lands (which were then a little Territory or very
great) should be free from any Service to the County or Hundred Court.

And did so highly value and esteem them, and were so careful to preserve
them, as betwixt the 9th year of the Reign of King Henry the third, when the
Blessing of our magna Charta was procured, and the third year of the Reign of
King Henry the 6th there were no less in several Kings Reigns, many in one and
the same Kings Reign, and some with no more Intervals than one year succeeding
the other, 4 H. 4. ca. 1.
then 37 Grants or Confirmations of our Kings unto them of those their
Liberties and Franchises by their Acts of Pariament, in which that of the 4th
year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th granted that all corporations and
persons should enjoy their Liberties and Franchises, 3 H. 5 ca. 1.
and that of the third year of the Reign of King Henry the 5th that all
Pcrsons, Cities and Boroughs should not be disturbed in their Liberties and
Immunities, and from thence until the Petition of Right, granted and assented
unto by his late Mjesty King Charles the Martyr in the third year of his Reign,
either in regard of the bloody Troubles and discords betwixt the Royal and
Contending houses of Lancaster and York, change of the line of Lancaster into
that of York, uniting of them both in King Henry the seventh, dissolution and
confiscation of the Abbeys, Monasteries and Religious houses, and alteration of
Religion by King Henry the Eight, tosses and reverse of that in the Reign of
Queen Mary, Troubles and Care of Queen Elizabeth in the restoring of the
Protestant Religion, incertainty of her Successor, the comfort and content in
the Peace, Plenty and Tranquillity which her Subjects lived in under her
Government; and the uniting of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland by King
James her right Heir and Successor.

Or in respect of the abundance of Security which the people of England
believed they had by those very many Grants and Confirmations by Acts of
Parliament, and very many more by the Grants and Confirmations of our Kings
without Acts of Parliament, with their prescriptions, Customs, and long
uninterrupted usages, did not Trouble themselves or the Supreme Authority for a
Corroboration of that which they had so long enjoyed, and had reason to believe
that there could be very little added unto it.

Would now think they should have a great deal of wrong if upon a Quo Warranto
brought against them to know by what Warrant they do Claim or use them, they
might not be permitted to justify or have them allowed; when some of their
Ancestors in the 52 year of the Reign of King Henry the third 52 H. 3. ^a. 14.
being exempted from impanelling in Assizes, Juries and Enquests, stood so much
upon it as they refused to be Sworn in great Assizes, Perambulations, Attaints,
or as Witnesses to Deeds, Writings or Covenants, until an Act of Parliament in
that year was made by that King, which he willed to be held of all his Subjects
as well high as low, that where their Oaths be so requisite that without them
Justice could not be Ministered, as in great Assizes, Attaints or
Perambulations; or where they be named as Witnesses, they should be Sworn with
a saving to them at another time their foresaid Liberties and Exemptions.

And should not be so ungrateful and unreasonable to deny that unto the King,
which they would not be willing should be denied unto themselves, in those
multitudes of Privileges and Exemptions, which he and his Royal Progenitors
and Predecessors have so liberally granted or indulgently permitted unto them.

Nor should the men of London envy or repine at those just Privileges of the
Kings Servants, under which many a Shopkeeper and Tradesman, who in their
former prosperity, lustily barked against it, have been glad afterward in
their adversity a procured title of being the Kings Servant, to shelter
themselves until they could weather out their Troubles, and pacify the too
often uncompassionate assaults of their Creditors, and if they could not get
into that Asilum or place of more mercy, would make themselves the supposed
maenial Servants of some of the Members of Parliament, whose Privileges are
but built upon the Kings service in his, and the Weal Publicks, great concerns,
and affairs.

And of that King who has so lately restored and granted unto the Metropolis
of London, (too many of whose Citizens can be so undutifully fool^sh as to
Imagine that they are yet sitting by the waters of B^bylon, and cannot sing the
Songs of Sion, unless they may have a liberty to Arrest or Imprison his
Servants, when, where and as often as they please without a Complaint first
made, and license obtained for it,) and unto all the Cities, Buroughs,
Corporations, Societies, Guilds and Fraternities, and all the people of England
that were against him and his Royal Father in the late horrid Rebellion, all
their Privileges and Franchises which were thereby lost and forfeited and
devolved again into the Crown, from whence they had their first Original and
Being, and might by their every years Forfeitures since of too many of them, by
misusers or non-users, take the advantage thereof.

And those of the better sort which have received the Honor of Knighthood, and
do enjoy the Dignity and respects thereof, and in their Title of Knight or
Cniht, according to the Saxon and High and Low Dutch Languages, Spelman glossar
in voce Thanus.
do bear the signification of a Servant or attendant in Military affairs, and
so Uriah in the preface to the seven Paenitential Psalms in King Henry the
8ths Primer is called King David's Knight and Servant and our Knights, were as
Sir Henry Spelman Saxon breve Seldom Titles of Honor 2 part ca 5. 33.
has informed us, anciently reckoned amongst the Famulos Thanos and Ministr^s
Regis amongst the Kings special and more remarkable Servants, and do or should
enjoy the Privileges, not to be Decenners or Tithing men Kitchen 33.
that they and their eldest sons should be exempted from being cited to appear
in the Court Leets or Hundreds, are as says Camden called Equites aurati,
because anciently it was lawful only for them to Guild and beautify their
Armor and Caparisons for their Horses with Gold, and by the Statute made in the
8th year of the Reign of King Henry the 5th 8 H. 5.
concerning only what things may be Gilded, and what laid on with Silver,
Knights Spurs, and all the Apparel which pertains to a Baron, and above that
Estate are allowed unto that noble Order, when all others under the Penalty of
10 times the value are prohibited.

Were not says the Lord Chancellor Egerton by the course of the Court of
Star Chamber, Hudsons Treatise of the Court of Star Chamber Ms. 188.
to be examined upon any Interrogatories which might disparage them; those that
are to be chosen for every County, which should be the Worthiest and Wisest men
to be in the House of Commons in Parliament are to be milites gladiis cincti,
Knights in Assizes of 13 E. 1. ca. 30.
novel disseisin mort d'ancester attaint grand assise or in Writs of right, two
of the discreetest Knights of the Shire, where the Justices shall come shall be
associated unto them three are to be in Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, to
hear and determine forcible Entries rnd Outrages done in their County, no man
but a Knight was capable to be a Coroner, anciently an eminent Officer of the
Crown and Realm of England, a plaint from a base and inferior Court, could not
be removed but by the Testimony of four Knights; an Infant holding Lands by
Knight Service made a Knight, was anciently as to his person out of wardship or
pupillage, a Knight inhabitant or resorting to any City or Town Corporate,
wherein is Conusance of criminal Pleas is not to be impannel'd in any Jury, for
the Trial of any Capital crime, when the Sheriff had received Tallies of the
Kings Debtors, although he was an Officer of Trust, and whose Return or Answer
was much credited, yet was not his Certificate into the Kings Exchequer of that
Faith or Credit in the case aforesaid, New Statute of the Exchequer or Statute
of Ruithland 10 E. 1. Countee de Salops case, Cokes Reports and 7 E. 3.29. Vide
a Writ sent by the King to the Justices of both Benches called the Statute of
Carlisle 15 E. 2.
except the same were Fortified with one part of a Chirograph or Indenture
Sealed, and the hands of two Knights Testifying the same, no Constable or
Castelaine was to distraine a Knight for Castleguard, or to Execute that
Service in his own Person, because he is Privileged to do it by the body of
another, and the like in Service of War, in regard of the Dignity of
Knighthood, in every Commission to take the acknowledgment of a Fine to be
levied of Lands, a Knight ought to be one of the Commissioners in grand Assise
and Writs de fa^so judicio four Knights are to be Impannelled, and not a less
number in a Writ de perambulatione facienda, and are so much valued and
Entrusted above others, as in Trials and Issues at Law where any of the
Nobility or any Bishop is a party, one Knight is to be of the Jury, and are so
more than many others Privileged as their Armor and Horses, as has been
before remembered are not to be taken in Execution, there being so great an
Honor appropriate and fixed to the degree of Knighthood, as by the Law of
Nations, where their Knights are not also without many and great Privileges,
an English Knight is not to be denied that Honor, Place and Reverence in all
Foreign Kingdoms and Places, where they shall have occasion to reside and
Travel, and are by other Nations as well as ours so much esteemed as they are
not whilst they are Knights, not to suffer any ignominous punishment, Seldom
tit. honor. ca. 5. 48.
and therefore S. Giles Mompesson, and Sir Francis Michell Knights, in the
later end of the Reign of King James, were degraded before they under went the
Infamy inflicted upon them.

And so much were our Knights respected by our Laws, as Hakelinus filius Joscii
Quatribusches was in the time of King Henry the 2d fined 100 l. then a great
Sum of Money for striking a Knight, and Moses de Cantebridgia 40 Marks,
because he was present when the Knight was compelled to Swear that he would not
complain of the Injury done unto him; Seldom tit. honor 783, and 784.833. ca.
5. 37.
Sir Francis Tyas a Knight, in the Reign of King Edward the first recovered
five pounds Damages in Wakefeild Court in Yorkshire aagainst one German Mercer,
for Arresting the Horse of one William Lepton that was his Esquire, and
causing him to be unattended, the Court Roll mentioning it to be ad d^decus and
dampnum praedicti Francisci quia fuit sine Armigero to the disgrace and damage
of the said Sir Francis, because he wanted the Service of his Esquire, and a
Ribauld or Clown that should without cause strike a Knight, was as Britton
says, Britton ca. de Appell de Maihem.
to be punish^d by the loss of his hand that did it, and every man should owe
so much to their benefactors as not to deny the King those regards and respects
which are due unto him, when the contempt or misusage of them cannot have any
better effect than a dishonor of the King himself, or be without a Reflection
upon their Master, and a disparagement to his Regal Authority, which all the
Histories and Bodin de repub. lib. 6.
Monuments of former times, have loudly Proclaimed to be dangerous both to King
and people, and do not seldom happen when Majesty is either contemned or
neglected.

They who have no other to fly unto for help in in case of a denial of their
own Privileges, and can by his Favor and Justice procure a Writ of secta ad
Curiam when a man refuses to perform his Suit either to the County or Court
Baron, F.N. B. 158.
or de secta ad molendinum against one that refuses to Grind his Corn at the
Lords Mill, quare obstruxit against one who having a liberty to pass through
his Neighbors ground, cannot do it by the owners threatening to hinder it,
Register of Writs 153.
essendi quietum de thelonio, in the case of Citizens and Burgesses of any City
or Town, who have a Charter or prescription to exempt them from Toll through
the whole Realm, Fleta lib. 4. ca 26.
a Writ de fine Annullando to annull a Fine levied of Lands in ancient Demesne,
to the prejudice of the Lord, Fitz. Herberts not. Bre. 226.
and for those that are Summoned to the Sheriffs, turn out of their own Hundred
Register of Writs 15. b.
a Writ de liberate allocanda, Ibid. 174.
for a Citizen or Burgess, to have his Privilege allowed when he is impleaded
contrary thereunto, Ibid. 262.
and a Writ de Consu^tudinibus and servitiis, F. N. B. 151. and Register of
Writs 159.
a Writ of right close against a Tenant which deforceth his Lord of the
Services due unto him, and a Writ to exempt a man from the view of Frank pledge
when he is not there resident, although all men are obliged thereunto by reason
of their Lands, not their habitation, Register of Writs 147. Bracton lib. 2.
ca. 26. 8.
and as Bracton says, a view of Frank pledge is res quasi Sacra quia solam
personam Regis respicit and introducta sit pro pace and utilitate Regis, as it
were a Sacred matter or thing in regard it takes care of the Kings person, and
was introduced for his Peace and Profit, should by the rule of gratitude if
there were nothing of right or duty to persuade it, not tell how to obstruct
that so ancient Claim of Privilege of the Kings Servants, when it will ever be
as Consonant to Law and right Reason for the Kings Servants not to be disturbed
or prejudiced in their duties and attendance upon the King, as it is for any
others.

Of his people and Subjects being not his Servants, when by a Statute made at
Gloucester in the 30th year of the Reign of King Edward the first, Statute of
Gloucester, 30 E^ 1.
the King himself as that Act of Parliament mentions, providing for the
Wealth of the Realm, and the more full Administration of Justice, as to the
Office of a King belongs the discreet men of the Realm, as well of high as
low degree being called thither, it was provided and ordained, that when men
were to claim or show their Liberties within a time of 40 days prefixed, and
were before the King (that is to say in his Court of King's Bench, where himself
is by Law supposed to sit) they should not be in default before any Justices in
the Circuits, for the King of his especial grace has granted, that he will
save that party harmless, and if the same party be impleaded upon such manner
of Liberties before one or two of the aforesaid Justices, the same Justices
before whom the Party is impleaded, shall save him harmless before the other
Justices, and so shall the King also before him, when it shall appear by the
Justices, that so it was in Plea before them, and if the aforesaid Party be
before the King, so that he cannot the same day be before the said Justices in
their Circuits, the King shall save that party harmless before the aforesaid
Justices in their Circuits, for the day whereas he was before the King.

And not at all agreeable to reason that the Franchises and Liberties granted
by our Kings to the Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, Durham, the Cinque
ports, the City of Gloucester, with the Barton or little Territory so called,
annexed unto it, the large extent of the Liberty of the Bishop of Ely, that of
ten Hundreds to the Bishop of Winchester in or near Somersetshire, Seven
Hundreds in or near Gloucestershire Claimed by Sir Robert Atkins Knight of the
Bath, the large extents and compass of the Liberties and Soke of D^ncaster in
the County of York, and of Sheffeild, Rotherham and Hallomshire in the same
County, Grantham and its large Soke and Liberties, in the County of Lincoln,
Tindall in Hexamshire in the County of Northumberland, and many an hundred more
of Liberties and Franchises not here specified, exclusive to all others
intermedling therein, should by the power of the Kings Grants or Allowance, and
a just reverence and respect of their Neighbors and Tenants, have and enjoy a
Privilege and Civility, not to have their Servants Arrested or Imprisoned
without complaint first made to their Lords or Masters, or leave asked, upon
any of the Writs, Process, or Warrants of their own Liberties or Courts, before
they suffer their Bailiffs or Officers to Arrest any of their Servants, or upon
the Warrants or Process of any other the Kings Courts, until a Writ of non
omittas propter aliquam libertatem, claimed by them shall be after a not
Execution of the first be awarded, either or both, of which may give a
sufficient or large respite for the parties Prosecuted to satisfy, pacify, or
prolong the patience of an eager or furious Creditor, and that the King who
gave and indulged those Liberties, should not be able to deserve or command a
like License in the Case of any of his own Servants to be demanded of him,
either upon a Process made out by the owner, or his Substitutes of the same
Liberties, or any other Warrant or Process directed to the Owner or his
Subordinates of that Liberty.

Or should not have as much Privilege for his Servants Blunts Nomo Lexicon and
Cokes institution of Courts.
as the Miners in the Peak-hills in Derbyshire, or those of the Stanneries in
Devonshire and Cornwall, not to be Sued or Prosecuted out of their Berghmote or
Court of Stanneries, or disturbed in their Works or business.

Or that his Servants should not as well deserve their Privileges to be
continued unto them, as the Kings Tenants in ancient Demesne, who upon the only
reason and account that they were once the Kings Tenants, and did Plow and Sow
his Lands, for the maintenance and Provision of his Household and Family, are
not yet by the Tenure of those Lands of which there are very many Manors and
great quantities in England, Trin. 9 H. 6. rot. 20.
Ousted of those their Immunities or denied them, but the very Tenants at Will,
who are as they say here to day and gone to morrow, do claim them and are not
in any of the Kings Courts of Justice debarred of those exemptions, although
those Manors and Lands are very well known to have been long ago Granted away
and Aliened by the King or his Royal Progenitors, and since passed from one
Owner to another for many Generations, the effect by an Indulgence, Permission
or Custom contrary to the general and every where approved Rule or Maxim, that
cessante causa tollitur effc^tus the cause or reason of the thing ceasing, the
effect should cease continuing after the Cause ceased, in so much as many do
now enjoy those Privileges, who are no Tenants of the King, neither have any
thing to do with his most Honorable Household, or have any Relation thereunto.

For if all the depths of Reason and Humane Understanding were Sounded,
Searched and dived into by the Sons of men, all the Ingenuity of Mankind will
never be able to find or assign a Cause or Reason why the House of Commons in
Parliament have heretofore Petitioned our Kings for a Freedom from Arrests or
Imprisonment, or to Punish any the Offenders therein, Elsings modus tenendi
Parlementum. 144, 145, 146 and Mr. Pryns Animadver^ions upon Cokes 4th part of
the Institutes
if they had any doubt of his want of a legal Power and Authority therein, to
grant it or why the business or Service of the King concerning himself or the
Weal Public, should so operate or deserve to be a Cause to Privilege
themselves, their Estates, or Maenial Servants from Arrest or disturbance, and
such a Privilege in Parliament in the time of an Adjournment, which has
sometimes continued for several Months, should be allowed and thought
reasonable when their business which was the cause of it, was all that time in
suspense or abayance, and that the King who granted and allowed those
Privileges, should not enjoy the like for his own Servants, who are daily
busied in the Safety, Honor and attendance of his Person, and the great
Affairs of the Kingdom, and that such a Cause should produce that effect for
them and their Servants, and the King who desires but the like effect or
production from one and the same Cause, should not enjoy it for his own
Servants, and that ^adem ratio should not in the Kings Case as well as in the
Case of any of his Subjects, produce and be a Cause of the like Law or Liberty,
who does not claim the Hearing of those causes where the Plaintiffs are not his
Servants, as the King of France, who by his Commissions of Commitimus, Impowers
a Court, to hear and determine Causes and concernments of his Servants, but
only that they should ask leave before they proceed against them in any of his
Courts of Justice which the Plaintiffs shall make choice of.

Shall the General or Commander of the Armies or Guards, Forts or Garrisons of
the King, and the Admiral of a Navy or Ships, have a power not to permit any
of their Officers or Soldiers to be Arrested or Imprisoned, without License
first obtained, and shall the Servants of the King in the att^ndance upon his
Sacred Person in the Watch and Care of them and the Public Welfare, as well in
the time of War and Peace, which not seldom disapoints the horrid effects of a
people-tormenting War not have a like Privilege.

Are the superior Courts of Justice not blamed when the Judges thereof by the
Kings Authority, Mich. 38 H. 6.12. and Pass 38 H. 6.
can supersede Actions in Inferior Courts many times, but upon the pretense of
Actions depending in their Superior Courts, as to reverse an Utlary or the
like in eundo and redeundo, Trin. 25 E. 1. coram Rege Oxon 22.9. H 6.11 E. 4 6
E. 6. Dier 71.
when it is not every day, or all days, or but some hours business, or can the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, Privilege the Sergeants at Law, and
forbid that they should be Sued in any other Court, when they do plead at other
Courts as well as in the Court of Common Pleas, and are so numerous as if one
by an Arrest or Impriment, should not be able to move or plead his Clients
business; the Client having all the Writings in his own or his Attorneys
custody, may have and retain another Sergeant at Law, who can as well
understand his business to look unto it, and not only protect them, but the
Clerks of the Sergeants at Law; Mich. 3. Car. prim. Crok^ 1. part 84, and 85*
and in the Vacation, and at their Chambers (far distant from Westminster Hall)
when the business of the Law, and Courts of Justice are laid to sleep, and take
their rest, and that the Justices of that and other the Superior Courts can by
the Kings and not their own immediate Authority, Privilege, In veter. and novo
libr. intration. tit. Privileg. and Brook tit. Privilege. 40.
Prothonotaries, and all other Officers and Clerks of their several Courts, and
their Clerks, when they have or may have other Clerks to do their business.

And the Warden of the Fleet, Cryers and Tipstaves, in times of Vacation, and
as there shall be occasion, Unattach Goods, and discharge Bonds and Sureties
given for Appearance, when there cannot be any just cause or necessity until
the Term ensuing for their attendance and Privileges, and keep from Arrest by
the Inferior Courts their Attorneys, who are no Members of their Superior
Courts, and even the Attorneys Clarks, And not only allow that Privilege to
the immediate Officers of their Courts, but extend it unto their Clarks that
are subservient unto them, and not deny it, as has been before remembered unto
a Filacers horskeeper.

Their Writs of Privilege in the Kings name, declaring and publishing that
such breaches of Privilege are in nostri ^ontemptum and curiae nostrae, in
Contempt of the King and his Court, that such Privileged person eundo and
redeundo in going and coming to his Courts o^ Justice, is and ought to be sub
protectione nostra under the Kings protection, and tam ex Regia dignitate quam
ex antiqua consuetudine as well in regard of his Dignity, vet. lib. intration.
tit. Privilege.
as by ancient Custom is to be Ptiviledged.

Did Justice Vernon one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the
time of Vacation, when a man indebted, having to an Action given special Bail
before him, at his Chamber in Serjeants-Inne in Chancery Lane, and coming out
of the Gate, was Waylaid and Arrested by some Sergeants at Mace, or Catchpoles
of London, and Arrested upon some other man's Action, lay down, made an Outcry,
and refused to be their Prisoner, of which the Judge being informed, commanded
the Catchpoles and Prisoner to be brought to his Chamber, where they being
something Surly, and refusing to deliver him, he threw of his Gown, and taking
one of them by the shoulder, (whereof I was an eye Witness) did so shake him,
and threaten to commit him and his fellow Catchpoles, as he enforced them to
release the Prisoner, and suffer him to escape; And shall not the King who is
the Constituent Principle, and primum incipiens; the only cause, suppo^t and
maintenance, as well as giver of all Immunities, Exemptions, Franchises and
Privileges of the Kingdom: Not be able to do as much as those unto whom he
has granted and permitted it, and protect and Privilege his Domestic
Servants or men employed by him, but like an old Isaac over liberal to a
Craving Jacob: have nothing in reserve of Privileges or Favors for his
Servants, who have attended our David when he was in all his Troubles, and
deserved better than many a participation of his Blessings, or shall his
Subjects like the Sullen and Selfish Nabal, have so little regard of him or his
Servants that do help to guard their flocks, as to receive his Benefits, and
make notwithstanding their grumbling Ingratitude and refractory Humors, the
only Retorn or acknowledgment of them.

Has he and his Royal Progenitors and Predecessors, as the Grecian Monarchs
and Commonwealths anciently used to do (from whence the Romans after they had
shut their Temple of Janus, Kippingus de antiquitatibus Roman lib. 2. ca. 4,
and made their Military Glories impart some of their Honor to the more Civil
Employments, and gown also learned it) taken such a care to protect, Honor,
and Privilege his Ministers of Justice and their subordinate Officers in the
Courts thereof, whilst they officiate in his Service therein

Did the Wisdom of our King and Parliament in the 32d year of the Reign of King
Henry the 8th 32 H. 8. ca. 40.
think it no inconvenience, but a benefit to the people, that the greater and
more necessary concerns, should give may to the lesser, when they Ordained
(which has been ever since duly observed) that the Physicians in London should
have a Privilege not to keep Watch or Ward, nor to be chosen or bear the
Office of Constable, or to bear any Office in the City of London or Suburbs,
and any such Election to be void, in all which the Weal Public was not a
little concerned: 32 H. 8. ca. 42.
And the Barber Chirurgions are likewise by an Act of Parliament made in the
same Parliament, exempt from bearing of Armor, or to be put in any Watches or
Enquests, which the Weal Public, without that Privilege could not otherwise
have dispensed with.

Could Cromwell, that accomplishment of wickedness and Hypocrisy, and Mr.
Shepherd whom he had hired Shepherds Office of a Justice of Peace, Constable,
etc.
to clip and misuse our Laws upon a pretense of reformation of them, allow in
their model thereof, that the Servants of his miscalled Protectorship should
not be compelled to serve upon Juries at Assizes or Sessions, or to bear the
Office of a Constable or Church Warden; And shall the Kings Servants that are
continually employed in the Attendance, Preservation, Safe^y and well being of
his Person and people, being matters of the greatest concernment; be excluded,
or thought not worthy of the like.

Could the Archbishopric and many of the Successive Archbishops of York, enjoy
a liberty of Fridstoll and Frithstow Frid in the Saxon, signifying Peace, and
stol seeds Cathedrae and Stow locus Blounts Nomo Lexicon
Cathedra quietudinis and pacis, a Seat, Chair, or place of Peace, which had
this Inscription, Haec seeds lapidea Freedstoll dicitur pacis Cathedra ad quam
reus fugiendo perveniens omnimodam habet securitatem, this Seat or Chair of
Stone, is called Freedstoll or the Chair of Peace, to which any Offender
flying, is to have all manner of Refuge and Security, an Immunity granted unto
the Church of St. Peter's in York, and confirmed by King Henry the 7th in the
fifth year of his Reign.

And there is in Glossopdale in the County of Darby a place upon a Hill or
large Heath, some distance from the Town, yet known by the name of the Abbots
Chair, which probably might have been endowed with the like Immunity.

Or shall a Priest or person propter Privilegium Clericale in regard of his
being in holy Orders, not be distreined when he has no lay Fee, or upon an
Attachment, refuses to find Pledges, because he has no lay Fee, or has one
in the Prebend, and the Ordinary, nor the Sheriff, although he has a Warrant;
to enter the Liberty without the ordinary or Bishop, and the Bishop himself
cannot do it sine speciali praecepto Regis cum Canonicus adeo libere teneat
prebendam suam de Ecclesia sicut ipse Episcopus Baroniam and canon^ci sunt,
quasi unum corpus per se in Ecclesia without a special Precept or Warrant from
the King, for that a Canon or Prebend does as freely hold his prebendary of the
Church as the Bishop does his Barony, and the Canons are, and do make a Body or
Corporation by themselves in the Church.

Does the King grant and allow Cognizance of Pleas or Causes to so many of his
Subjects within their Franchises and Liberties, with Fossis and furcis, power
to punish or hang in Crim^nal matters, and shall he not have so much Cognizance
of the matters and concernments of his household and maenial Servants, as to
have leave asked before they be Arrested or disturbed in his Service which is
the only cause of the Privilege which he grants and allows to his Courts of
Justice, and the Officers and Servants thereof.

Or can any man think it reasonable that the Bishop of E^y Hillar. 47 E. 3.
coram Rege Cant. rot 39.
should have Cognizance of Pleas arising in his Bishopric, and the Territories
thereof, or the Magistrates of the City of Salisbury Hillar. 38 E. 3. coram.
Rege rot. 22 Wilts in Dors.
to have the like, and supersede Actions and Pleas depending in the Court of
King's Bench, or the Lord Mayor of London, have and enjoy the privilege of not
having any Attachment awarded against him out of the high Court of Chancery; as
in the case of Sr. John Robinson Knight, whilst he was Lord Mayor of London,
and exercised that Annual office as the Kings Lieutenant or special Servant; or
that Mr. John Abdy an Alderman of London in Anno Dom. 1640 being the 16th year
of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, should by the Judges of the Court of
King's Bench be allowed a Privilege not to bear the Office of a Constable in
Essex Crokes Reports 16. Car. 585. Alderman Abdye^ Case.
where he was many times resident at his Country House within the Leet or
manor of Sir William Hicks Knight, where by the Custom of that place every
inhabitant or resiant was from house to house yearly by turns to execute that
office, and upon a writ granted him directed to the Lord of the Manor or his
Steward, to discharge him because he being an Alderman of London, ought to be
there resident the greatest part of the year, and if absent may be fined, all
the Justices of that Court delivered their opinion that he ought to be
discharged b^ his privilege, as Attorneys attending in Courts of Justice, are
of such offices of Constabl^s and other offices in the parish. And although it
was said that the Alderman might execute the office of Constable by deputy, and
his personal Attendance was not requisite by the Custom of the Manor, yet
that exception was not allowed.

Or that Mr. Bacon A Barrester at Law of Grayes-Inn, should in Trinity Term in
Anno 1655. ( h) by aforesaid Court upon view of the presidents in Francklin;
Banco Regisinter Bacon and Ramsey in Termino Trin. 1665 460.
and Sir William Butlers Case and Bear and Jones his Case of the Midle-Temple,
have a privilege allowed unto him, in respect of his Barrestership and
necessary attendance upon the Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall, to lay a
transitory, Action at Law in Middlesex, when it was before laid in
Northumberland, and that it should not be reasonable for the King to allow his
servants their aforesaid privileges; much more necessary and conducing to the
weal public.

May not the King as well Claim and enjoy a privilege for his servants and
their freedom, from arrest without first obtaining his license, or within his
virge of twelve miles compass or circumference of his Court (which certainly
was at the first intended by Law for more purposes then for the Jurisdiction of
the Marshals or Marshalsea Court; and may probably be believed to have been
anciently used for an Asylum, or place of peace or freedom from such kind of
violences as arresting the Kings household servants without the Kings license)

As the Universitie of Oxford does by the grants of our Kings and their several
acts of parliament in its large boundaries or precincts; and the University of
Cambridge, the like within their Colleges, Halls and Precincts, for the better
observation whereof in Oxford, every Sheriff of the County of Oxford at his
admission into his office, is to take an oath Vide Book of Oaths 227 Printed
in Anno 1649.
that the Masters of the said Universites and their servants from Jnjuries and
violences; he shall keep and defend by all his Strength and power; and the
peace in the said University as much as in him is. And give Council and help
to the Chancellor and Scholars of the same University, to punish the
disturbers and breakers of the peace there, after the privileges and Statutes
of the University at all times when it shall be needful; and put his help with
all his Strength to defend the privileges liberties and Customs of the said
University; and give the like oath unto his Undersheriffes and other his
ministers when he shall come to the Town and Castle of Oxford, in the presence
of any who shall be deputed by the said University; unto the which things the
King will that his said Ministers shall be arcted and compelled: The like Oath
being to be taken by the Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington for the
conversation of the rights and privileges of the University of Cambridge.

Do the Jnns of Court or houses of law, which for some Ages or Centuries past
were appropriate and set apart for the Study of the Common laws of England,
and other necessary parts of learning and endowments, proper and fit to bear
the sons of our Nobility and Gentry company, Besoldus de Jure Academiarum.
within their houses and precincts claim and enjoy as they ought to do
according to the law of Nations, and the privileges of all the Universities
and places of Study in the Christian world. A just and legal privilege of a
freedom from any Arrest or disturbance, by the officers of any Subordinate
Magistrate in matters not Capital or more then ordinary criminal; And the Inner
and Middle-Temples, and Lincolns-Jnn being besides entitled to the like
Exemption and privilege by a particular Immunity and Exemption, rot. pat. 49.
and 53 H. 3. 22 E. 1. War. and Mid. in quo War an^. and Assis. rot. 16. in
dors. inter placita Coronae Assis. and quo Warrant 14 E. 2. rot. 91. tres
Pasch. and rot. claus. ejusdem Annim. 3.
granted anciently by some of our Kings of England, long before they were
Societies of law to the Owners and Proprietors of the Manor of the New Temple
then so called (the old one being before situate in or near Holborn, and as
well as the new one sometimes part of the possessions of the Knights Templers)
now containing the Inner and most part of the Middle Temple, and likewise the
outer Temple without Temple Bar, extending it self as far as to part of Essex
house garden, and into New-street, now called Chancery Lane, and Ficket or
Fickelscroft now Lincoln's Inn fields upon part whereof Lincoln's Inn was built.

To be held sub eadem forma in the same manner as the honor or Earldom of
Leicester and the Lands thereunto belonging, were anciently holden with an
Exemption or privilege: that no Justices, Escheators, Bailiffs, or other
Ministers or Officers of the King should enter or intermeddle therein; of which
the Successors and Owners and those as honorable, as useful Collegiate
nurseries of law and learning; although they do not as our Universities and
those which are in the parts beyond the Seas, claim a conusance in causes and
controversies at law, wherein their Scholars, Students and officers are
concerned, have been so careful to preserve those their Ancient and necessary
privileges, as they have upon any the least violation or attempt; to bereave
them thereof, sallied out like so many young Lions, and appeared to be the
stout Propugnators and defenders thereof, rescued such as have been Arrested
within their Liberties, whether any or none of the Society beaten, and pumped
the Catchpoles, Sergeants at Mace, or Bailiffs, ignominiously shaved their
heads and beards, Anointed them with the costly Oil or Syrrup of their houses
of Offices or Jakes, and at the Temple for a farewell, thrown them into the
Thames.

Do all men that have Liberties and Privileges appertaining to their Estates
or Persons, or any Offices or Places which they hold? Summon the best of their
Cares and Industry to maintain them, and shall it be a crime or disgrace to the
Kings Servants, either to be entitled unto, or endeavor to Assert them.

Shall it be deemed just Legal and Rational that the City of London should be
so careful of their Customs and Liberties, granted, not only by King Hen^y the
first, but confirmed by diverse Kings and Queens of England, and many of their
Acts of Parliament, as no longer ago Vide The Act of Common Council and the
Oath of a Freeman^ of London.
than in the year of our Lord 1669. to Claim in their Act or common Council,
that no Citizen is to be compelled to plead without the Walls of their City,
and their Freemen are bound by Oath as well as by many Acts of Common Council
of that City, not to Sue one another out of the City where they may have
remedy in their own Courts, and to maintain the Franchises and Liberties
thereof, and that the Warrant of leuetur quaerela for the removing of any
Action or Plaint, depending in any of the Sheriffs Courts of that City, into
the Mayors Court, brought by a Sergeant at Mace and Ministers of the Mayors
Court, shall not be refused, or shall it be taken or believed to be
inconvenient for that City or their Freemen to be drawn or enforced to Plead,
or be Prosecuted out of their own Courts.

And shall it not be as reasonable for the King in the case of his own Household
and Domestic Servants, to protect them from being disturbed in his Service by
any Arrests, without his License.

Does every Sheriff of England and Wales at his admission into his Office,
swear that as far as h^ can or may, he shall truly keep the Kings Rights, and
all that belongs unto the Crown, and shall not assent to decrease, lessen,
diminish or conceal any of the Kings Rights or his Franchises, and whenever
he shall have knowledge that the Kings Rights, or the Rights of his Crown be
withdrawn, be it in Land Rent, Franchises or Suits, or any other thing, he
shall do his power to make them to be restored to the King again, and if he may
not do it, shall certify the King or some of his Council thereof, and can any
Sheriff of England and Wales, without the acknowledgment of a gross ignorance,
with any safety of their Oaths or Consciences, knowingly Arrest or cause to be
Arrested any of the Kings Servants, against the Will of his or their Sovereign.

Does a Custom or civility so far prevail with the Sheriffs of London and their
Clarks, as when any Action is entered against any Alderman of the City, or the
Sword Bearer or other Officer of the Lord Mayor, they will not Arrest an
Alderman, man, or take away the Lord Mayors Sword Bearer from before him,
until they have given them a civil and private notice thereof; whereby to
prevent the disgrace, or give them time to provide against it, or procure a
Truce or quiet. And shall the Servants of their Masters Master (if they were
not more justly than they entitled to their Ancient and Legal Privileges) not
be so much respected, which his late Majesty thought to be as undecent as
Inconvenient, when upon some disrespects showed by some of that City in their
endeavors to enforce upon some of his Servants the Office of Constable or
Churchwarden, he demanding of the Lord Mayor of London, whom he had caused to
Attend him upon that Complaint and Occasion; what was the Reason the Lord
Mayors Officers were not to be put upon such Offices? and was answered with a
Reason given, because they were to attend him: Replied; do not you think that
to be a Reason as much or more in my case as your own?

Must Westminster, the Abbey or Church whereof was first founded by King Lucius
a British King, upon a piece of Land so incult, as it was called Thorney or
the Island of Thorns, Dugdales Monasticon. 1. Tome 55.
then accounted to be two miles distant from London (measured it may be unto
Ludgate) and after the better building and enlarging thereof by King Edward the
Confessor honored, as it has been ever since Regum nostrorum sepultura and
Regalium repositorium, with the usual and designed place of the Burial of our
Kings, and the Custody and keeping of the Royal Vestments and Ornaments used at
their Coronations: an Honorable Office and Trust now Claimed and enjoyed by
the Dean of that Collegiate Church, confess and acknowledge that by the happy
Neighborhood of our Kings Royal Palace near adjoining, together with their
High Court of Chancery, Courts of Justice and Exchequer, the receipt of their
once great and largely extended revenue attending therein, help and succor of
the Royal Household and Hospitality, and those Crumbs of Comfort Meat and Drink,
and Provisions not used, fragments, broken meat, offall, and wast of the Wine
and Food, which daily came from the many plentifully furnished Tables, and
expense of Victuals of the Kings house Servants and retinue: Fed and Nourrished
many of her Families, by which and many Privileges granted unto her by our
Kings, is now from a shrub, come to be as one of the Cedars of our Lebanon, and
augmented and increased from a few scattered Cottages, Sheds, Booths, and Tents
about the Abbey, and the Kings house and Palace to a Village, from a Village to
a Town, and from a Town to a City with a Pomerium Fauzburgs or Suburbs so
large, as it stretches it self from Tutlefields in a continued Building and
Streets to Temple-Barre and the Inns of Court, and in many other places is so
contiguously joined to London, as it makes her self to be as it were her
younger sister; And must she not blush at the same time that any of her
Inhabitants should Exercise or be guilty of so foul an Ingratitude, as to
Arrest without License any of the Servants of the King, whose Royal Progenitors
and Predecessors have nursed and brought her to that perfection.

And has London like the Members of the body natural, found herself as to her
retayling Trade to be the better when it was nearer to the head and heart, and
did therefore so follow the warmth and hopes of Gain and increase of Trade and
Employment thereby, as she has swelled her Suburbs bigger than her self; As
although her Foreign Trade is brought unto her from the Sea and Eastward; yet
she has immensly built her self (as the ingenious Mr. Grant one of her
Citizens has of late observed) Westwards, to be as near as she could unto her
Kings Palace, and his Courts of Justice, which not only daily receives the
feet of many of the people of the Nation, but of Strangers coming as far as
ever the Sheban Queen did to Solomon.

Can any of her Citizens be so stupid or ingratefully ignorant, as not to
understand that that great City and the Commerce and Gain thereof which is now
so highly valued by them, is and has been by the Neighbor residence of our
Kings and Princes and their Courts of Justice, so greatly as it appears to be
enlarged and multiplied in their Inhabitants, Riches, variety and Excellency of
her Artificers, Magnificence, State and Beauty of her Churches and Buildings;
And has so much extended her Trade and Merchandise both by Land and Sea
through all the Circuit and Travails of the Sun, and to the utmost parts of
the Earth, as her multitude of Ships at Sea, and a floating Forest (as it
were) of them daily or weekly going out and returning home upon the River of
Thames, has made her one of the greatest Emporiums in the World, and Glorious
in the midst of many Waters, in so much as she has by her strength and Honor
at Sea and her Might and Interest at Land, Hanged the Shield and Helmet in her;
set forth her Comelines, and made her self not only the Mistress of the Trade
of our Isles at home, but of our many growing rich Plantations in America.

And can that City of London, the magazine of Mechanic Arts and multitudes of
People as it is at this day, and takes her self to be not a little honored by
being called the Emperial Chamber of our Kings of England: Have so little
acquaintance with the Dictates of reason and gratitude or a care of their own
Interest, as to forget the Founders and Cause of that their Plenty and
Happiness, and upon every little occasion of a Debt or money owing them, to
Worry, take by the Throat, Arrest and Imprison any of the Kings Servants with
the Pay me what thou owe me when more than half of it (and much of it
unjustly) was gained of the Debtor, and at the same time refuse to pay unto the
King, the Master of that Servant the debt of Gratitude, Duty, Honor,
Reverence, good Manners and Civility which they owed unto him, either of which
would have showed them the way to complain unto him of such and indebted or ill
dealing Servant, and Petition for his leave or License to Arrest or outlaw him
before they do it.

When they that do so much and undutifully undervalue his Courts, Servants and
Royal residence and Neighborhood, may be assured by the Annalls and Histories
of England, that their Predecessors in the Reign of King Richard the 2d when
their Foreign and home Trade was not the Tenth of what it is now, as the small
Revenue of the Customs in the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth will
manifest, when the highest improvement of her Care and Carmardens discovery,
could bring her Customs and Profits by Merchandise but to 50000 l. per annum,
were so sensible of that Kings removal of his Court from London, displeasure
and Indignation, heightened by a Riot committed upon the Servants and house of
the Bishop of Salisbury Lord Treasurer, for that one of the Bishops Servants
had taken a horse loaf, out of a Bakers Basket as he passed along the Streets,
Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle. 159.
for which notwithstanding the Mayor and Aldermen had appeased the Tumult, the
Liberties of the City were seized into the Kings hands, the Mayor Committed to
the Castle of Windsor, and the Aldermen and some other substantial Citizens, to
other Castles, a Warden appointed to Govern the City, as they deemed
themselves in a lost and ruining Condition, until by the special Suit of the
Duke of Gloucester, they had procured the King upon the Payment of Ten thousand
pounds, and many rich gifts presented to him and the Queen to return to London,
where with great joy they received him with four hundred men on Horsback clad
all in one Livery.

And by a sad experience if they have a mind to taste it, and the King should
not continue and make it to be as his Chamber, Court or Palace, but remove his
Courts, his Servants, and Courts of Justice, as King Edward the first did to
York for Seven years together, during his Wars with Scotland; would too late
repent the misusage of the Founders and cause of their happiness, and
acknowledge the Night and Shades to be long and cold, when their Sun should
remove his Walk or Tropic to enlighten and refresh another part of the World.

And would find themselves to be mistaken in their Account as well as Opinion,
if they should fancy that nothing can hurt their Trade, unless the River of
Thames should be carried away from them, and may in time be so well Acquainted
with the Error of those conceits, as to confess that they were built upon a
very Tottering and failing Condition, when they shall, like men either of any
retrospect to the Ages or Times past, or prospect of what is coming or may
surely happen, but consider that in all the Reigns of our British, Saxon or
Danish Kings, or of those of the Norman Race until the Reign of King Edward
the third, the Neighborhood of their Thames brought them so little advantage,
as it was rather an Embrio than an Emporium or noted Town of Trade, that from
thence to the Erecting and Encouragement of the Staple, Towns and Cities of
Trade, whereof Westminster was one: By King Edward the third for the Advance of
our Clothing and Woollen Manufacture, which in a short time after by the Wars of
Fran^e or some other intervenient obstruction, dwindled into a desuetude, and
London and her Blackwell-hall made to be the Mistress of that once flowrishing
Trade, the quieting of Wales and the Commerce with it, after the Reign of King
Henry the 4th, the uniting of the Houses of York and Lancaster, by King Henry
the 7th, the opening of the Passages to the East and West Indies Grants of many
Fairs and Markets, which have been since made, the Trade of London, which was
not before much more than in its Bloom and Blossom, is by the Power, Alliance,
Leagues and Interest of our Kings and Foreign Princes, and the many Immunities
and Privileges procured by them for our Merchants, with France, Spain,
Portugal, Burgundy, and the Netherlands, the Russia, or Moscovie Hause or
Hamburgh, East and West India Trade, with those of the English Colonies; as
Virginia, Bermudus, Barbados, St. Christophers, New England, Maryland, Mevis
and Siranam, since arrived to that height or perfecton, which has like Tirus;
Enlarged Her Borders, and made her the Merchant of many Isles, and to be as the
Ocean, into which all the Rivers of the Land do run, and hasten to pay their
Tribute; And in the greatest of her Pride and Glory, should not be to learn
that the Scheld could not after that the Heiresse of Burgundy had transferred
her Court and residence into Spain. That great and Famous Town of Trade was
made a place of desolation and a wonder of what she was, and that the residence
and Court of the French Kings, has made Paris, though an Inland City, far
didistant from the Sea, and washed only by the River Seyne, not much acquainted
with Ships or Navigation, to be called domicilium Regis and caput regni, the
Head and Chief of all the Towns and Cities of France, le Roy ayant son domicile
and ou les Princes and Pairs de France and autres officiers de la Couronne
doivent estre a la su^te du Roy Levet recu^il d' Aucuns notables arrests en le
Parliament de Paris ca. 17.
the King having there his House or Palace, and the Princes and Peers of France
and other Officers of the Crown, who ought to attend the Court of the King.

Do the Merchants of London who Trade into Spain, Russia, and many other parts
of the World, by the Care, Power, and Protection of our Kings and Princes, and
their chargeable Embassies to Foreign Princes and States, enjoy a Privilege
and Freedom Vid. Privileges Granted by Philip the 4th King of Spain in Anno
1645.
from Arrests of their Persons or Estates, without a Complaint first made to
their Consuls, or Remedy endeavored to be obtained by Application unto them,
and to have their Causes and Actions tried before a Judge, Conservator of their
own Privileges.

Do our Kings allow and cause those Consuls to Solicit and take a care to
maintain and defend those Privileges, and Authorize their Ambassadors,
residing in the Courts of any Kings, Princes or Republics to make it to be a
part of their business to be assistant unto them.

Have the Magistrates of the City of London, for more than 500 years together
at their coming to the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, at some of their greatest
Festivals and Solemnities in every year until our late times of Confusion, in
a grateful remembrance of his Favors, walk round about and visit the
Gravestone or Burial place of William Bishop of London, who procured some
Liberties to be Granted by William the Conqueror, to their City, being not the
half of those of a greater Consequence and Profit, which have been since
Granted unto them by King Henry the first, King Richard the first, King John,
King Henry the third, King Edward the third, King Richard the second, King
Edward the 6th, and diverse others of our Kings and Princes, who gave unto them
many more and greater Favors and Privileges, as the Shrevalty of Middlesex,
Liberty to choose every year their Mayor, free Warren, in a great Circuit about
the City, that every Sheriff should have two Clarks and two Sergeants, and the
City have a Common Seal, that the Mayor should be Escheator and Justice of Gaol
Delivery at Newgate; that the Sergeants of the Mayor and Sheriffs should bear
Maces of Silver and Guilt, with the Kings Arms Engraven upon them, the Aldermen
should continue during their lives, and not be removed without special Cause,
with the grant of the Borough of Southwark, and Conservation of the River of
Thames, cum multis aliis, etc. and many more, some of which were before recited.

Will not all those Benefits, their Being, their Happiness, and the continuance
of those blessings with their Trades at home and abroad, be enough to put them
in mind to show a kindness, respects and Civility due unto the Kings Servants,
and not to drown those many Favors, Honors and Privileges received from him
and his Royal Progenitors and Predecessors in the dead Sea, of a base and
unworthy Ingratitude, or imitate Jesurun, who like an Heyser waxing fat, kicked
against the cause of it?

Or can they upon any Foundation or ground of Reason or probability, think that
if our Kings should not continue and make London to be as his Chamber, Court or
Palace, but remove himself, his Court and Servants to York, Hull, Oxford or
Bristoll, the Inhabitants thereof would not gladly pay him a greater Tribute of
Duty and Thankfulness than the not Arresting his Servanrs without license first
obtained, and would be no loosers but greater Gainers by it.

Do the Might and greatness of Princes, and their power to give aids and
Assistance, where Alliance, Interest or Leagues do require it, or to retalliate
Wrongs or Injuries done and received, persuade a Privilege and Civility to the
Persons and Goods of the Ambassadors and their Servants, and retinue of one
another, although not bound thereunto by any Laws or Rules of Subjection or
Allegiance.

And shall not a just fear, Duty and Reverence of Subjects to their Kings and
Princes, Civility, good Manners, Gratitude, Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
Fear and Command of God, and a daily protection by the Kings Power, Laws and
Justice of themselves and their Estates, Honor, Reputation, and all that can
be of value unto them from Foreign and Domestic dangers, wrongs or
oppressions, invite them to a forbearance of that Barbarous and undutifull way
of Arresting any of his Servants without a complaint first made or license
procured to do it?

Or how can such a one or any of his Children, without shame or confusion of
Face, beg, or hope for Mercy or Pardon from the King for manslaughter, or some
other offense, mischance or forfeiture, when but a week or a little before they
have had so small a care of their Duty, and respect unto him, or their many
Obligations, as to disturb his Service and necessary Affairs, and disparage his
Servants, and do all they can to ruin and undo them by an Arrest or
Imprisonment without license?

When at the same time they would readily subscribe to the reasonableness of
the Kings delivering and freeing from Arrest the Lord Mayor of London, and
punishing those that should do it; If for permitting in the Strand or any other
place out of his Liberty that the Cities Sword the Ensign or Mark of Honor
given unto it within its proper Jurisdiction to be carried up, he should be
Arrested, or if he or any of the Sheriffs or Aldermen should in their Passage
to Whitehall to attend the King when he commanded them, be Arrested upon any
other Action.

Will not a Tenant to a Lord of a Manor who receives not so great a protection
from him* nor has so great a need of him, as every Subject has of the Kings
Grace and Favor, be thought by all his Neighbors to be more than a little out
of his Wits that should adventure his displeasure by Arresting the Steward of
his Court, Valet de Chamber, Coachman, Butler, Brewer, Hors-keeper or any of
his Servants without leave or license, or denial of Justice upon his Complaint
first had?

And will they not be deemed to be more Mad, that shall so far forget
themselves and their duty to the King, as to Arrest without license any of the
Servants of their Sovereign, which is the only Rock of defense and Succor
which they have to flee unto in all their distresses, or for Mercy, which is
not seldom needed upon any Offenses, or transgressions against him or his
Laws. May not the King punish Contempts and breaches of Privileges, as well as
those that do subordinately Act by the Authority of Him and His Laws, or not
cause as much to be done in Order to the pro^ervation of their Authority and
Jurisdictions, as they usually do unto any that should disturb the necessity
and duty of their places: Or may not the King as supreme Magistrate, cause any
that shall transgress the limits of their obedience in Arresting his Servants
without license to be Arrested or Imprisoned, for such an affront or contempt
of Majesty and the Supreme Power, when it has been ordinarily done and
justified by some Lords of Manors and Liberties, in the Case of Sheriffs and
Bailiffs, presuming to Arrest any man within their Liberty without a Writ of
non Omittas propter aliquam libertatem, or special Warrant where the Lord of
the Manor has neglected to do it? Or must the King when any wrong or injury
shall be done to his Servants, suffer such contempt to be remedyless, and only
say, why do you do so? who when he does cause the undutifulness and
unmannerliness of such Offenders to be punished by a few days gentle restraint,
cannot with any truth or Reason be said to have given away their Debts, when at
the most it is but a small delay, and does many times occasion them to be
sooner and less chargeably paid, than it would be with an Action or Suit, and
the many Animosities, Vexations and Heats which do usually attend Actions or
Suits at Law?

Did our Magna Charta prohibit or give away any of the Liberties and
Privileges of the King and his Servan^s, which are necessary for the Support
and just means of Government, and that high Authority with which God and the
Law have entrusted him?

Can the King by his Writ cause a man or his Cattle or Goods to be Arrested and
taken in Withernam until the person of a man or his Cattle or goods wrongfully
Arrested, be delivered or freed from restraint? Rot. claus H. 3. and 11 H. 4
15. Mich 8 H. 5, in Banco Regis rot. 15.
and shall it not be as lawful for the King, by Arresting or Imprisoning the
Party that did or procured it, to enforce the delivery of a Servant wrongfully
or unduly Arrested without his leave or license first obtained.

Is the Kings Service the only cause of the Privilege of Parliament, so
operative and powerful in its effects, as a Member of the house of Commons
newly elected, is so entitled to his Privilege, Cokes 4th part of the
Institutes and M. S. penes virum Cl. Johannem Berkenhead Equitem Aurat.
as before his admission or Oath taken, the Infringers thereof have been
severely punished, as it was upon great debate and Examination, adjudged in
Parliament in the Case of William Johnson a Burgess of Parliament, in the
first year of the Reign of Queen Mary, and the like for Arresting upon an
Execution, Sir Richard Fitzherbert Knight a Member of Parliament in the 34th
year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and that kind of Privilege so Watched
and Guarded, and in all its parts and circumstances so taken care of, and
inviolably kept: As it may not be renounced or quitted by any one Member
without a breach of Privilege to all the rest; nor is any leave to be given
upon Petition, or any the most urgent necessities of a Plaintiff or Creditor to
molest or Imprison any of them or their Servants during the Session of
Parliament, and the time of Privilege allowed them before and after them.

And cannot the people of England be well content and think themselves to be in
a better Condition, when in the Case of the Privilege of the Kings Servants,
they may in the time of Parliament or without, have license upon a reasonable
time prefixed for satisfaction, to take their course and proceed at Law against
them.

Shall the Valleys rejoice in their Springs and pleasant Fountains, and the
Spring or Fountain it self that distributeth those living and refreshing Waters
have no part thereof? Has the Chamberlain of the Lord Mayor or City of London,
Power to commit a Freeman of that City to Ward; So that he do Immediately send
word to the Lord Mayor thereof, and the cause why he is so punished; Stows
Survey of London tit. ancient Laws and Customs of the City of London.
from which the Lord Mayor may not release him but by the Chamberlains assent.
And shall it not be lawful for the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings most
Honorable Household by and under the Kings Supreme Authority, to Imprison or
punish any who in Contempt of Sovereignty and Majesty, shall without license
first procured, Arrest any of his Servants?

For certainly it is and should be the Interest of the people of England, not
to deny so great a principle of Nature, and so clear a part of the Reason of
all Mankind, or to give unto Caesar that which so justly belongs unto him, by
the Laws of God, Nature, Nations, Laws of England, Custom and prescription,
Right of Superiority, Oaths of Allegiance and supremacy, Et quod ubique, quod
semper, and ad omnibus, and which, every where, always, and of all men (except
by our late rude and levelling part of the people) have neither been repined at
or maligned: And it will not be for the Interest of the people of England to
oppose their Prejudices, Fancies, Humors and Opiniastretes, to the Rights of
the King and his Servants, but it is, and will be the Interest of the King to
preserve the Rights of Majesty, Superiority and just means of Government, and
to punish the violaters and Contemners thereof, and the Interest of all his
good people to wish and desire it.

FINIS.

