HAPPY MERCHANDISE OR WISDOMS Excellency darkly discovered, OR Rather greatly
obscured by Words without knowledge By CHARLES PHELPES.

WISDOM is better then Rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not
to be compared to it. Proverb. 8. 11. At AMSTERDAM, Printed by Steven Swart,
Bookseller at the Crowned Bible, near the Exchange.

THe great design of men generally is to exercise themselves unto that which
may be gainful, and profitable unto them, and to that end many men take a
great deal of pains, and weary themselves, and adventure themselves into many
dangers, that they may increase to themselves: and because their Wisdom is
folishness, and their knowledge bruitishness, therefore they labor for such
riches as will not truly in rich them nor make them happy in the account of
God, if they find the life of their hands; and for such also as are uncertain
both as to the getting and keeping, Prove. 23. 4. 5. Now then, that the Ho:
Ghost may take us off from laboring for that which will not satisfy, he here
commends to us a better, and enduring substance. Which is of infinite and
eternal worth and value, that we might not for lying vanities forsake our own
mercies: And commends to us the excellency of the Merchandise it self, or
way of getting it: That we might labor, not for that meat which perished, but
for this which indureth unto everlasting life, which the son of man will give
unto us. O that we may all so considerer it, that, ceasing from our own
Wisdom, we may get Wisdom, this Wisdom of God, which is the principal
thing, and with all our gettings get understanding, that we may, at last,
inherit glory, when shame shall be the promotion of fools.

Proverb. 3. 13, 14. Happy [is] the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that
gets (or draws out) understanding: For the Merchandise of it is better
then the Merchandise of silver; and the gain thereof then fine gold.
THis Book of the Proverbs of Solomon though in many places thereof, it
seems not to have such dependence and connection as other places of the
scripture of truth, yet is fitly disposed; and the Proverbs therein are orderly
placed, for because the preacher was wise. He gave good heed, and sought out,
and set in order many Proverbs, Eccles. 12. 9. yea indeed these words of the
wise, though spoken by Solomon, yet came not by his will, but he spoke as he
was moved by the Ho: Ghost. 2 Petr. 1. 20, 21. and they are all given from one
shepherd, even from Jesus Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, and God in
him Eccles. 12. 9. 11. Who is the God of order, and not of confusion. And
therefore if we see not that wise order and disposing of them, its meet for us
to take shame to our selves, and judge our selves: and to cry to him who
puts Wisdom into the inward parts, and gives understanding to the heart,
to teach us what we see not: and to open our eyes to behold wondrous thing out
of his law, Job 38. 36. and 34. 31, 32.

And the Principal end of writing the Proverbs, was, to know Wisdom, to make
it known, and that we might know it, and know that it is the principal thing
Prove. 1. 1, 2. and 4. 7. and there sore in the nine first chapters of it, there
is a large commendation of Wisdom, and declaration, and discovery of its
excellency, with manifold intimations that we may be made partakers of it; and
directions how we may find, and get it; and there fore many invitations to get
it; and affirmations, and demonstrations of the blessedness of him that has,
and retains it; and of the misery, and wretchedness of him that refuses it:
with many warnings and cautions to take heed of the evil man and woman, even
of all evil persons and spirits, who would hinder us, or call us off from
seeking it, that we might have fellowship with them in eating of their bread of
deceit, and in their unfruitful works of darkness: all which words of the
wise are pleasant and profitable. For this holy man, as directed by that one
shopherd, sought to find out acceptable words, words of delight; and that
which was Written was upright, even words of truth. And these words of the wise
are as goads, to prick and provoke us, that when may not be slothful, but
diligent followers after Wisdom: and as nails fastened by the masters of
assemblies (in a sure place) which are given from one shepherd; upon which we
may lean and depend; and have our trust in the Lord according to them; that
our faith may not stand in the Wisdom of men, but in the power of God Eccles.
12. 10, 11.

And these words we have proposed to considerer, and speak unto, are added to
that instruction set down, us. 11. 12. My son, despise not the chastening of
the Lord; neither be weary of his correction; or saint not when thou art
rebuked of him, Hebr. 12. 5. for whom the Lord loves he corrects etc. To
signify to us, either.

1. That the end of God in all his chastenings and corrections of us, while it
is the day of his grace and patience, is to drive out of us that foolishness
that is bound up in our hearts, Prove. 22. 15. and to awaken us, and engage us
to apply our hearts to Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 7, 12. for the rod and reproof give
Wisdom, Prove. 29. 15. he does not correct and chasten us for his pleasure
simply, but for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness, even of
Christ, who is made Wisdom, and righteousness, and holiness etc. Hebr. 12. 5,
10. Lament. 3. 33. and therefore it is unseemly for us to despise, and set
light by Gods chastenings, or faint when rebuked of him; because he has such a
gracious end therein, that we might seek, and find Wisdom, and apply our
hearts to Gods understanding. Or.

2. He does hereby direct us unto, and commend unto us, that excellent means,
and thing, where by we may be helped and strengthened neither to despise Gods
chastenings, nor faint when he rebukes us, namely, this sound Wisdom and
understanding, which is profitable in and under all afflictions, and unto all
things to direct us, Eccles. 10. 10. and so it is as if he should say: that you
may behave your selves comely, and laudably under Gods afflicting hand, so as
not to err on the one hand, or on the other, needful it is to get Wisdom,
and an happy man he is that gets understanding. For this will show unto us,
that he never corrects but when our need requires it, and to seal our
instruction: that we might not set light by his chastenings: and this acquaints
us with his grace in Christ, and gracious end and intention in all his
debatings with us, that we might not be weary, or faint in our minds: for it
is out of love, and for our good that he takes this pains with us, and is now
judging of us and this considered, is proper and powerful to teach and help
us to rejoice in the tribulations he is ordering. Hence when the Apostle James
exhorts, and instructs the beleivers, to count it all joy when they fall into
diverse temptations etc. he adds, if any of you lack Wisdom let him ask of
God, Jam. 1. 2, 5. intimating to us, that Wisdom will instruct, and strengthen
us to carry our selves evenly under trialls and temptations, and help us to
rejoice in that which seems to be grievous so the Apostle, to the end the
colossians might be strengthened to all patience, and long suffering with
joyfullness, prays, that they might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will
in all Wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might Walk worthy of the
Lord in all conditions, unto all pleasing, Colos. 1. Colos. 1. 9, 11. this
Wisdom will help us to judge well of God at all times, and of his dealings
with us when he writes bitter things against us: needful therefore it is that
we seek and search for this that we may not slight, nor sink under the
corrections he is ordering. Or.

3. He adds this affirmation of the happiness of the man that finds
Wisdom, etc. after the former admonition, to signify to us, that now when Gods
hand is lifted up, and he is judging us, it is high time to a wake out of
sleep, and to seek after this most excellent thing, that it may be well with
us: it is good, profitable, and needful at all times to get Wisdom; but then
especially so when his judgments are amongst us, and upon us: for if the
present opportunity be neglected, we may be deprived of another; and to the end
we may be kept from evil both now and for ever, hence the Apostle instructs
the beleivers to redeem the time from this motive, because the days are
evil; sinful, and full of afflictions, and judgments: wherefore, says he, be
ye not unwise but understanding. What the will of the Lord is Ephesians. 5. 15 -
17. So when Moses the man of God had been declaring and bewailing the manifold
afflictions himself and the people were under, saying, we are consumed by
thine anger, and by thy wrath we are troubled, thou have set our sins before
thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance, etc. He then prays, so
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom,
signifying to us thereby, that now especially our hearts should bestirred up,
and provoked to turn from our iniquities, and understand his truth; and to
take fast hold of instruction, and not let her go, to keep her for she is our
life, Psalm. 90. 7, 12. Daniell 9. 13. Or.

4. He now shows unto us wherein happiness consists, and who is the happy
man, to wit, he that finds Wisdom, that this may be a comfort to us in all
our afflictions, and in and under all Gods corrections, and rebukes, be they
never so heavy and grievous, and though there by God should strip us naked and
bare, and take away from us all this Worlds good, and we should be rendered
amongst men miserable, wretched creatures, and looked upon as most un happy
persons; yet this one thing, even Wisdom, will render us truly happy, and
blessed in the account of him that judges righteously, and of those that are
taught of him. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, o Lord, and teach
him out of thy law, Psalm. 94. 11, 12. Men in their vain thoughts think, that
they are accursed and miserable ones whom God chasteneth, tough there by he
give them Wisdom; but their thoughts are vain and foolish: such is the
excellency of this heavenly Wisdom and understanding, as that it alone will
make them truly happy that have it, though God in and by his judgments and
corrections should so impoverish them as that they should be as poor as was
Christ, who had not where on to lay his head: and suchalone is its excellency,
as that though a man should gain the whole World, and be without this pearl
of great price, he would be a poor, miserable, pitteous creature. This is good
for us now to consider, when God is pleading with us in rebukes in our nation
generally, by manifold afflictions and judgments, and in great decay of
trading: when men are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction
and sorrow, and God is staining the pride of our glory; yet this is a pearl of
such great price and worth, that it will indeed render happy,, and truly enrich
them that have and retain it, though they should be naked, and destitute of
daily food: Oh! that it were so considered by us, that we might with fervency
seek it, and give no sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eye-lidds till we
find it; and that for the sake thereof, we might count all other things but
loss and dung, that we might win, and be made partakers of it.

In the words themselves we have.

1. An affirmation of the happiness of the man that finds Wisdom, and of the
man that gets understanding, us. 13. 2. A General Demonstration, and
evidence of the happiness of such a man, and a commendation of the exercise it
self, laid down as a Motive, and argument to engage us to seek, that we may
find and get it, us. 14.
1. An affirmation of the happiness of the man that finds Wisdom, and
gets (or draws out) understanding, us. 13.

In which affirmation, we shall, God assisting.

1. Speak some what by way of explication. 2. Note some instructions contained
in this Affirmation.
1. By way of explication, and opening, we shall inquire into, and consider
these two things which are needful to be known by us.

1. What is this Wisdom and understanding here commended to us? 2. What is
this finding and getting it?
1. What is this Wisdom, and understanding here commended to us.

To that we may say, that by both expressions one and the same thing may be
meant, and signified, as appears, in that the Demonstration and motive is so
set down as to include and contain both in one word: As, the Merchandise of
it, namely, of Wisdom and understanding is better then the Merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof, as before, then fine gold she (speaking of both
as of one person) is more precious then Rubies, etc. so Chap. 4. 5, 9. and 8.
1, 4. and by this Wisdom and understanding is not meant ours, that which we
have naturally in us, or that which we may attain unto by art, or by our own
labor and industry: and so it is not the Wisdom of this World, or of the
princes of this World, not humane learning, nor the arts and sciences of this
World, such as Rhetoric, Logic, Philosophy, which are science falsely so
called: and which, though in high esteem among men yet, will not render a man
happy: nay those that had no other Wisdom came to naught, 1 Corinthians. 2. 6. He
who here commends to us this Wisdom and understanding, warns, and
admonishes us elsewhere to cease from our own Wisdom, Prove. 23. 4. and not
to lean to our own understanding, Prove. 3. 5. and to beware of Philosophy,
and vain deceit, etc. Colos. 2. 8. and tells some, that their Wisdom and
knowledge had perverted them, Isay. 47. 10. and it is his purpose to destroy
the Wisdom of the wise, and to bring to naught the understanding of the
prudent, and them that lean to and rely on it 1 Corinthians. 1. 19, 21. and 2. 6.
and those led of God came not with excellency of speech, or of Wisdom,
declaring the testimony of God; for the Wisdom of words makes the cross of
Christ of none effect, 1 Corinthians. 2. 1. and 1. 17. this Wisdom is foolishness
with God, and it is so far from helping us to understand, and know Gods name,
or his sons name, as that it is an hindrance thereto; and therefore that we may
be wise, it is needful that we become fools, and lay aside, and cease from our
Wisdom and understanding. But the Wisdom and understanding here commended to
us, and that which will render us happy in the enjoyment of it, is, the Wisdom
that is from a bove, which is first pure then peace able, etc. Jam. 3. 17. even
the Wisdom of God, and not that of our own: according to that, my son, attend
unto my Wisdom; and bow thine ear unto my understanding, Prove. 5. 1. and so
hereby is meant and signified to us.

1. Jesus Christ the Son of God, in whom dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily in whom dwells the father, and on whom rests the holy Spirit.
And he is so called.

1. As he is the Son of God by divine and eternal generation: so where as in
one place it is said; the Lord by Wisdom founded the earth; by understanding
has he established the heavens; in another it is said, he created all things by
Jesus Christ. Compare Prove. 3. 19. with Ephesians. 3. 11. Hebr. 1. 2. and of this
Wisdom, even of Christ in this consideration of him, it is said by himself,
the Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I
was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was: when
there were no depths I was brought forth, when there were no fontaines
abounding with water, etc. Prove. 8. 23, 32.

2. And he is so called, and may be comfortably viewed by us as Wisdom, as he
was abased for us, and took our nature upon him when we had sinned, and
departed from God, and as he was crucified for us, and by the grace of God
tasted death for every man, and is raised again, according to the scriptures:
so Christ is the Wisdom of God, and power of God 1 Corinthians. 1. 22, 24. so when
the Apostle says, that he came not with excellency of speech, or of Wisdom
declaring the testimony of God, that the beleivers faith might not stand in the
Wisdom of men, but in the power of God: He adds; howbeit we speak Wisdom
among them that are perfect; yet not the Wisdom of this world, nor of the
princes of this world that come to naught: But we speak the Wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our
glory; which none of the princes of this world knew, for had they known, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Where it appears, that Jesus
Christ the Lord of glory, is the Wisdom which they preached, 1 Corinthians. 2. 1,
8. with 2 Corinthians. 4. 5. and so this excellent one calls himself Wisdom and
understanding, Prove. 8. 12, 14. compare Matthew. 23. 34. with Luc. 11. 49. and he
is called Wisdom and understanding.

1. Because he is the great clear, and comfortable evidence, and manifestation
of the Wisdom of God: here it is brightly discovered, and may cheerfully be
viewed in the cross of Christ Jesus. He did by Wisdom make the heavens, and
give a being to all things; and in his works of creation it may be seen by us:
but this invention of his is a greater and clearer discovery of his infinite
Wisdom, and unsearchable understanding: For in his first creating us there was
nothing contrary to his work: But unto his showing mercy to us where we were
fallen, there was somewhat in the way stood cross, and contrary; his justice
which was provoked by us must be satisfied, his truth fulfilled; his law which
we had transgressed, must be answered; and his wrath appeased: our sin must be
purged away our death died, overcome, and abolished; and all creatures were
insufficient for these things; no man could redeem his brother by any means,
nor give to God a ransom for his own soul, Psalm. 49. 6, 7. righteousness
could not come by the law, Galat. 2. 21. not could any creature in heaven or
earth divise a means for the helpfullness of us: this Wisdom was hid from the
eyes of all living, Job 28. 12, 22. this passed the understanding of men and
Angels, Philip. 4. 7. but herein appeared the manifold and unsearchable
Wisdom of God, who in the exercise thereof has devised a means that his
banished should not be utterly expelled from him, 2 Samuel 14. 14. Without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, 1 Timot. 3. 16. there is hidden and wonderful Wisdom
contained therein; that the creator should become a creature; that the word
that was God should be made flesh; that the everlasting father should thus
become a son, and the mighty God a child, yea that he who was the holy one of
God yea holiness it self, should be made sin for us; that God should lay down
his life for us; and all this to so gracions an end, not to condemn the world,
but that through him the world might besaved here in was admirable, and
unsearchable Wisdom; and here in we may clearly, and comfortably see, that
the creator of the ends of the earth faints not, nor is weary, there is no
searching of his understanding, that so when we walk in darkness and see no
light, we might trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon our God, Isay. 40.
27, 29. hence he as our savior is said to be the only wise God, Jude 25.
hence also the Apostle, when he had said, this is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, persently adds; Now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God be honor, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 15, 17. He has herein evidenced
himself to be the alone, and only wise God, in finding out such a way for the
delivering us from so great a death, and curse, and from the hand of all our
enemies; and for the treasuring up all the fullness of forgiveness, grace, and
spirit in Christ, that we sinful creatures of mankind, might be brought back
to God.

2. Christ Jesus is also said to be Wisdom and understanding, because he is
become the treasury, fountain, and storehouse of it; he is the beginning, the
first borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence:
for it has pleased the father that in him should all fullness dwell, in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Colos. 1. 18, 19. and 2. 9. In
him are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 2. 3. so he who
calls himself Wisdom says, counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am (or
have) understanding, etc. Prove. 8. 12, 14. Solomon, who set in order these
Proverbs, was a wise man, yea, in his time, Wiser then all men: God gave him
wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness, or wideness of heart,
even as the sand that is on the sea shore, 1 King. 4. 29, 31. but behold a
greater then Solomon is here, Matthew. 12. 42. for he was taught, and directed to
seek out, and set in order these Proverbs by Christ Jesus that one shepherd,
Eccles. 12. 9, 11. God has not given unto him the spirit by measure, but has
given all things, and so all Wisdom into his hand, Joh. 3. 34, 35. On him
rests the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of Wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might; the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord; and he is quick of understanding, Isay. 11. 1, 2, 3. and 42. 1. and 61.
1. He knows the father, and the mind, and counsels of the father, as is
signified, in that when John wept much because no man was found worthy to open,
and to read the book of Gods counsels, and purposes; one of the elders said
unto him, weep not, behold the lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David
(even the lamb who was slain, and who has seven eyes, which are the seven
spirits of God) has prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals
thereof; and the four beasts, and twenty and four elders in the new song they
sang, confess, that the lamb which was slain was worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof, jea and an innumerable company of Angels confirm
it, and say, worthy is the lamb that was slain to receive Wisdom, Revel* 5.
1. 5. 9, 12, and he is quick of understanding, and knows us, and what our
needs and wants are, and how to supply them; he knows how to teach us sinners;
to make wise us simple ones, to speak a word in due season to the weary, to
open the eyes of the blind; to bring forth the prisoners out of the pit; to
heal the broken hearted; to forgive the guilty, wash the polluted, and perfect
what soever concerns us. And he knows the plots and designs of our enemies,
and adversaries, and how to disappoint, and defeat them, that their hands may,
not perform their enterprises: yea he knows all things, all things are naked
and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Joh. 21. 17. Hebr. 4.
13, 14. and this unsearchable Wisdom and understandidg he has to improve for
our good as the savior of all men, especially of them that believe; and to
dispense to us according to our needs and capacities: and his willingness to
improve it for us, and communicate it to us is abundantly evidenced in the
great abasement where to he so willingly humbled himself for mankind that he
might obtain all things pertaining to life and godliness into himself for us.
Oh! let us rejoice in him, and not glory in our own Wisdom: for he is made of
God for us Wisdom; that, according as it is written, he that glories may
glory in the Lord, 1 Corinthians. 1. 29, 31.

3. He also in the Object of Wisdom and understanding, in knowing whom we may
be made truly wise, and furnished with sound Wisdom, and see and know things
for our good; so [Wisdome] many times signifies, the Object of Wisdom; or
that which is to be known, and in the understanding where of we shall be
rendered wise indeed, Prove. 1. 2. and 5. 1. In coming unto, and knowing Jesus
Christ, we may know the father, so as to believe, and hope in, and love him; no
man knows the father but the son, and he to whomsoever the son will reveal
him: come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden (ye that run to the
wise and prudent, and read many books, and tire your selves herewith, and yet
meet not with what you seek for) I will give you rest, says our savior,
Matthew. 11. 25, 28. He is the image of the invisible God, in seeing whom we may
see the father also; and whosoever comes unto and follows him shall not
abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life; he will show them the
father, and give them the knowledge of him; and this is life eternal, that
they know him the only true God, Joh. 8. 12. and 12. 44, 46. and 14. 6, 10.
and 17. 3. Colos. 1. 15. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
has shined the light of the knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus
Christ; even the glory of his Wisdom, power, truth, holiness, and justice, 2 Corinthians* 4. 4, 6. yea and he gives such a gracious and amiable discovery of the
father to us, that there through we might be encouraged to come unto, and
believe in him, and put our trust under the shadow of his Wings. For here in we
may see that he is the God of love, the God of all grace: we may in the cross
of Christ see Gods secret will, even what his will toward man was, when
secret; this Christ has revealed: God is love, charity it self, he is so
essentially, and was so toward mankind when they had sinned against, and
departed from him: And in this he has manifested himself to be love, and
manifested his love to us, which was hid in himself, because he sent his only
begotten son into the World, to be the savior of it: 1 John 4. 8, 9, 10, 14,
16. Joh. 3. 16. in Christ our savior appears, that his will, which was
secret, was good will, and not evil will toward mankind, Luc. 2. 10, 14.
Christ has revealed the father who was hidden from us, and reavealed his
thoughts and heart; and in him we may see, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all; that God will have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. And in him we may know our selves so as
to be humbled and abased in fight of our own vileness and wretchedness, and to
loath our selves, and have pride hidden from us: for says the Apostle, we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and he died for all, 2
Corint. 5. 14, 15. In that Christ died for all by the grace of God, herein it
appears that we were all dead, condemned to die, and deserved to have died
that death which he tasted for every man, and to have Perished in it for ever:
We were accursed creatures, and helpless in our misery, as is evident, in that
he has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, Psalm.
49. 6, 7. Galat. 3. 13. yea in that he died for our sake that he might obtain
eternal redemption; and in him dwells all fullness; He is made of God
Wisdom and righteousness, herein appears that we were destitute of all good,
empty creatures, Job 11. 12. that we have no Wisdom in us naturally; no light
in our understandings, no freedom of will to any thing that is spiritually
good, no affection, desire, or inclination to the things that belong to our
peace; no spark of Gods image left in us, but we are destitute thereof, and
inclined to all that is evil; all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God. While we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly: While we were yet sinners (neither righteous, nor good) Christ died
for us, Romans 5. 6, 8. In him we may behold the vileness of sin so as to abhor
it, and that it may be an abomination to our souls; in that God has so
punished and condemned it in the person of Christ Jesus, who knew no sin, Romans
8. 3. He was wounded, or tormented for our transgressions, bruised for our
iniquities: such was the odiousness of sin to God, as that when it was but
imputed to his son, he spared him not: but it pleased the lord to bruise him,
he has put him to grief* Were this considered by us, it would be powerful to
cause us to say, how shall we live any longer in sin for which our savior
suffered so great and in expressible sorrows? Esa. 53. 4, 10. Romans 8. 32. and
6. 1, 2, 3. and 4. 25. 1 Petr. 3. 18. As Well as also in Christ we may perceive
the greatness of the sin of not beleiving on Christ, who, by the grace of God
tasted death for every man; and is raised again, and is become such a good
foundation and object of faith, that men's faith and hope* might be in God, Joh.
16. 8, 9. 1 Petr. 2. 6, 7, 8. he that beleiveth not God has made him a liar,
because he beleiveth not the record that God gave of his son: and this is the
record, that God has given to us eternal life: he that beleiveth not that God
has given to him eternal life in Christ Jesus, has made God a liar, and is
therefore condemned, and the wrath of God abides on him while he abides in un
belief, 1 John 5. 10, 11. Joh. 3. 16, 18, 36. if Christ died for the fewest of
mankind only, it would be no sin in the greatest part for whom he died not,
not to believe on Christ: Yea they would believe a lie in so doing: but this is
an ungodly conception, for Christ died for all, and rose again, that all men
through him might believe, Joh. 1. 7. and 17. 21, 23.

In Christ also we may see the unprofitableness of our works of righteousness,
that we might not have Confidence therein, Joh. 16. 10. Corint. 1. 29, 30. if
righteousness could have come by the law, by the Works or sacrifices there of,
then Christ died in vain Galat. 2. 21. hence the Apostle, though he was
Concerning the righteousness of the law blameless, yet, what things were gain
to him, the Privileges, and works of the flesh, those he counted loss for
Christ. Yea doubt less, says he, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, etc. Philip. 3. 4. 9. 't Is he, and
he only, that has brought in everlasting righteousness through his personal
abasement and sufferings: even the righteousness of God without the law, which
was witnessed by the law and the Prophets; but is now manifested by the faith
of Christ to be unto all; and upon all them that believe, for there is no
difference. Dan. 9. 26. Romans 3. 21. 22.

In Christ we may see death, even the first death, which was the wages of our
first departure from God, so as not to fear it, nor any afflictions,
weaknesses, sicknesses, which are fore runners, and branches of it; and which
God is now ordering to us while it is called to day: For Jesus Christ our
Savior has by the grace of God tasted this death for every man, and has
overcome and abolished it, taken out the sting, and destructive nature out of
it, so as that now there is no hurt in it, nothing in it to separate us from te
love of God, or keep us out of heaven; nor shall any man perish therein for
ever, but all shall in due time be raised out of it, by him who died for all,
and rose again: Christ has in overcoming this death made it a shadow, it is
not the lively image of what sometimes it was. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Gal. 3. 13. Psalm.
23. 4. Yea not only so, but he the great God and our Savior has turned our
curses into blessings; and the afflictions, and corrections he is ordering are
ordered to a gracious end, as is before shown.

In Christ also, this havenly Wisdom, we may see life, even our natural life,
how it is procured for us, and by what means we have a comfortable enjoyment
of it and of Gods mercies, even by Christ, who gave his flesh for the life of
the World. Joh. 6. 51. in him is life, and the life is the light of men. Joh.
1. 4. Had he not laid down his life for us, we could have had no comfortable
enjoyment of our lives, or of Gods creatures, but had been always, and
altogether accursed and miserable, and all our life time through fear of death
subject to the bondage of Satan. Hebr. 2. 14. 15. But he has redeemed us from
the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, cursed is
every one that hangs on a tree. Gal. 3. 13. and 4. 4 with Romans 3. 19. And
here we may also see to what end our lives are preserved, and continued; that
to us to live might be Christ: He died for all that they which live might not
hence forth live to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again,
this was the very end of Christ's suffering for us in the flesh, that we might
thereby cease from sin; and through his grace that brings salvation to all men
might live, not to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, 2 Corinthians 5. 15. 1
Petr. 4, 1, 3. 1 John 4. 9.

In this Wisdom we may know who are borne of God, and so made of the elect and
chosen generation; even all such, and only such (who are of years of
capacity, and where the gospel is plainly declared) as come unto, and believe
on him. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know (as included in the knowledge
of him) that every one that does righteousness is borne of him, 1 John 2. 29.
To Christ coming, the living stone, disallowed indeed of men (yea of the
builders, land leaders of the people) but chosen of God and precious; ye also
as lively stones are built up a spiritual house. Ye are an elect, and chosen
generation, a royal priesthood (though not owned by men as Gods clergy) aen
holy nation a peculiar people, etc. Which in tim past were not a people, but
now are the people of God, which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained
mercy, 1 Petr. 2. 4, 5, 9, 10. And here we may also see who are rejected, and
reprobated of God: not any man in a personal consideration, or before he was
borne; but those that disallow, and reject Christ Jesus, and persist in
refusing, and rejecting him till the day of grace and patience be ended, 1
Petr. 2. 6, 7, 8. Whosoever shall fall on this stone (though they be builders)
shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder,
Matthew. 21. 42 - 44. God so infinitely loves his son, the son of his love, that
whosoever kisseth him not, but refuses him, and will not have him to reign
over them, his wrath will be kindled against them, and they shall be destroyed
with an everlasting destruction, Psalm. 2. 10 - 12. Joh. 3. 36.

In knowing Christ, the Wisdom of God, we may come to have an useful
understanding and knowledge of all the scriptures of truth, otherwise not; he
is the interpreter, and opener of them to us in his cross and testimony hence
our savior intimately instructs the Jews, in searching the scriptures, to
come unto him; and faults, and reproves them for not coming unto him in them,
that they might have life, even the light of live, Joh. 5. 39, 40. our savior,
in showing unto his disciples in the scriptures the things Concerning himself,
thereby opened the scriptures to their understandings; and their understandings
into the schriptures: and unless we come unto, and know Christ Jesus, we shall
remain ignorant of the scriptures though we read them, and hear the voices of
the Prophets and Apostles read to us: if we come not to Christ as the rest, we
shall have the word of the Lord to our selves precept upon precept, line upon
line, here a little, and there a little: and not see the harmony, and agreement
of the scriptures, nor receive the use fullness of them, Luke 24. 25, 27, 32,
44, 46. Isay. 28. 12, 13.

Yea in a word, they that seek the Lord to know him, win him, and be found in
him, understand all things, Prove. 28. 5. the knowledge of this one, this
excellent object of Wisdom, is that which will make us wise to salvation:
hence the Apostle determined to know nothing else save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Corint. 2. 2. and to the end Timothy might have an understanding
in all things, he exhorts him to remember, that Jesus Christ of the seed of
David was raised from the dead according to his gospel, 2 Timothy 2. 7, 8. and
the way whereby the Ho: Ghost teaches all things, and leads into all truth,
is to glorify Christ, and take of his things and show unto us, Joh. 14. 26. and
16. 13, 14. oh that this were seriously, and heartily considered by us; that
our hearts may be fixedly set to know Christ in and unto all things! Philip. 3.
8 - 10.

4. And he is called Wisdom, because he is the giver and dispenser of it: the
Lord gives Wisdom, Prove. 2. 6. hence tho Apostle prays for Timothy, that
the Lord would give him an understanding in all things: even the Lord Jesus, 2 Timothy 2. 7. this is his gift; God has given him power over all flesh, that he
might give eternal life to as many as the father has given him: and this is
life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent, Joh. 17. 2, 3. And himself says to his disciples, I will give you
a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be abele to gainsay,
nor resist, Luke 21. 15. Ephesians. 4. 7.

2. By Wisdom and understanding is meant also, the gospel of Christ, which
holy men of God have declared, as they were moved by the Ho: Ghost; even the
gospel as testified by the Prophets, in whom the spirit of Christ did signify
before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow, 1 Petr.
1. 11. and as the same gospel is now reported to us by the Apostles, with the
Ho: Ghost sent down from heaven, us. 12. Which is recorded, and preserved to
us in the records of it, in the scriptures of truth, through the greatness of
God? goodness, and wonderfulness of his working; the sum and first things
whereof, are, that Christ died for our sins, even for the sins of Jews and
Gentiles according to the scriptures; and was buried; and rose again the third
day, according to the scriptures, 1 Corint. 15. 1 - 4. Romans 1. 1 - 4. this is
called the word of Wisdom, 1 Corint. 12. 8. and the gospel, or preaching of
the cross, is said to be the Wisdom of God, 1 Corint. 1. 17, 18 - 23, 24.
Prove. 5. 1. and 7. 1 - 4, 5. and this is called Wisdom and understanding.

1. Because Christ, who is Wisdom, and understanding, is herein evidently set
forth unto us before our eyes, even the eyes of our understanding Galat. 3. 1.
here, though now we see him not as the first trusters in Christ did yet, we may
see him in the evidence, and demonstration of the spirit, and so in this word
of faith, which is the evidence of things not seen; As Moses, by faith, saw him
that was invsible, Hebr. 11. 1, 13, 27. in which gospel we may look upon
things that are not seen, 2 Corint. 4. 18. So here we may see the great
sufferings, and Wonderful a basement of Christ; and for whom he tasted death,
and was raised again, even for all mankind; Hebr. 2. 9. and here in this
glass, we may with open face behold the glory of the Lord, 2 Corint. 3. 18. and
therefore because this gospel testifies of Christ, and discovers him to us
who is Wisdom, and understanding, therefore his name is named upon it.

2. Because here in, especially as now preached according to the revelation of
the mystery, God has a bounded in all wisdom, and prudence unto the first
trusters in Christ, and by them to us, having made known to us the mystery of
his will, etc. Ephesians. 1. 8. 9. herein the manifold Wisdom of God is made
known, that all men may see it in this gracious and blessed means which he
has devised, that his banished be not utterly expelled from him: Which is
discovered to us in this Wisome, Ephesians. 3. 9. 10. here in God has wrltten to
us excellent things in counsels and knowledge; and in this gospel are hid all
the treasures of Wisdom, and knowledge, Prove. 22. 17 - 20. Colos. 2. 3.

3. And this may be called Wisdom, and understanding, because here by God
makes wise the simple: and still and further gives Wisdom to the Wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding, Psalm. 19. 7. and 119. 129, 130. and
verses 98, 99, 100. the God of our Lord Jesus Christ does give the spirit of
Wisdom and revelation in the knowledge, or gospel, of Christ, and hereby
opens the eyes of the understanding, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. with this gospel Paul
was sent to open the eyes of Jews and Gentiles; and to turn them from
darkness to light, Act. 26. 18. And in preaching this gospel Christ, preaches
recovery of sight to the blind, and opens their eyes, Isay. 42. 1, 6, 7. and
61. 1. Luke 4. 18. Oh that therefore we may bow down our ears, and hear
these words of the wise (in which Christ is discovered to us and the manifold
Wisdom of God made known; and by which he gives Wisdom) and may apply our
hearts unto his knowledge, for it is a pleasant thing, if we keep them with in
us, Prove. 22. 17, 18. In receiving these words, and hiding these commandments,
the old and new commandment, with us; we shall be helped so to behold the
excellency, and comeliness of Christ, the Wisdom of God, as to incline our
ears unto Wisdom, and apply our heart unto understanding; and to cry after
knowledge, and lift up our voice for understanding, etc. Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

3. By Wisdom and understanding may be also meant, that gracious gift of
Christ and God in him, which he gives to men preventingly; and gives, and
makes them partakers of who turn at his reproves, in the light and strength
of his grace; even the opening of the mind, or eye of the soul, to know Jesus
Christ, and God in him, and all things in such manner, and to such end as the
spirit makes discovery of them, in the words, not of man's Wisdom, but which
the Holy Ghost has taught, and teaches; Comparing spiritual things with
spiritual, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. 1 John 5. 20. even Wisdom in the knowledge of
Christ; and such knowledge and understanding, as that there by we are led to
fear God, and depart from evil: unto man he said, the fear of the Lord that
is Wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, Job 28. 28. the fear of
the Lord is the beginning, or, principal part of Wisdom: A good understanding
have all they that do, Psalm. 111. 10. Prove. 1. 7. and 9, 10. the fear of the
Lord is the instruction of Wisdom, that which wisdom instructs us unto, even
to worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus; to serve God with
reverence and godly fear; and to depart from iniquity, Prove. 15. 33. and the
fear of the Lord is to hate evil, even pride, and arrogance, and the evil
way, and the froward mouth; Which things Wisdom hates, Prove. 8. 12, 13. and
therefore where as in the text, it is said, happy is the man that finds
Wisdom: the same happiness is assured unto, and affirmed of him that
confesses and forsakes his sins, Prove. 28. 13, 14. He is a fool that
sporteth with, and makes a mock at sin; Whatever Notionall understanding he may
have, he is destitute of blessed Wisdom: but a man of understanding has
wisdom; he fears, and departs from evil, Prove. 10. 23. and 14. 9, 15, 16.

This then is the Wisdom and understanding commended to us; Jesus Christ, and
the word of his grace; and that Wisdom which he gives, and knowledge, and
understanding which comes out of his mouth; even such Wisdom, and
understanding of him as thereby we are led highly to prize, come unto, believe
in, and love him, and the father in him: and to hate, disrespect, and reject,
whatsoever is hated, rejected, and disesteemed by him.

2. We have in the next place to consider what is, this [ finding, and getting,
or drawing out] here spoken of, and what supposed herein, and needful hereto.
In General, by finding Wisdom may be meant, a knowing, and understanding what
this sound wisdom is; and where it is, and is to be had by us, as it is here
distinguished from getting: indeed where either of the expressions are
mentioned alone, there it may mean what is here contained in both; but here,
they being both used distinctly, there maybe, and is to be a distinct
consideration of them: and so by finding is signified, as is said, a knowing
it, and knowing the place of it, where it is to be had by us: and then by
getting, or drawing out, may be meant a futher business, to wit, a being made
partaker of this excellent commodity, an obtaining it, or getting it into our
possession and hearts; an imbracement, retaining, keeping, and holding it fast,
as presently afterward is said; happy is every one that retains her, even
this Wisdom and understanding. It is a laying hold of it, taking fast hold of
it, and not letting it go, a keeping it as our life, Prove. 3. 18. and 4. 13.
there may be a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom and he have no heart
to it, no love or affection to, or courage for it; and thereby he deprives
himself of the happiness here assured, Prove. 17. 16. but this exercise of
finding and gettig is the same with that commended in the Wise merchant by our
savior, in his parable, Matthew. 13. 45, 46. The kingdom of heaven is like unto
a merchant man seeking goodly pearls; who when he had found one pearl of
great price, he went, and sold all that he had, and bought it: he first found
it, and saw, and knew where it was, and was to be had; and then he did not
content himself that he had found Wisdom simply, but he got it, and parted
with all sor it. Now then more particularly here may be supposed in the
exercise here commended to us.

1. That this Wisdom and understanding is not ours, or in us naturally, it is
to be found and gotten; to which afterward. 2. And that this excellent pearl
is hid: in him are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 2. 3.
it is a treasure hid in a field, Malach. 13. 44. and to be searched for as hid
treasure, Prove. 2* 4. And to our finding of it is requisite.
1. An hearing where it is, an hearing the words of wisdom, a diligent
hearing, or hearing in hearing, as Wisdom is lifting up her voice, and
preventing us with an hearing capacity, which she is doing in due time: for
naturally we are deaf, and until prevented by Christ we cannot hear: but the
son of God in due time is causing us when dead, to hear his voice, that we
might hear in hearing and live, Joh. 5. 25. and when he is thus speaking to
us, and opening our ears then he requires us in the capacity afforded from him
to hear, Prove. 20. 12. So Wisdom and understanding says; hear, for I will
speak of excellent things; and hearken unto me o ye children; hear
instruction and be wise, Prove. 8. 6, 32, 34. this is the one and first thing
needful unto our finding, and getting wisdom, to hear the word of Christ,
Luc. 10. 39, 42. Not to hear any thing, or any word; we are exhorted to cease
to here the instructions that cause to err from the words of knowledge, Prove.
19. 27. and to take heed what we hear, Mark. 4. 24. but we are to hear Jesus,
and God in him, as speaking to us by the holy Prophets and Apostles, in the
scriptures of truth; and to this oftentimes are we called upon, even to hear
the words of the wise fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given
from one shepherd, Eccles. 12. 10, 11. Prove. 19. 20. and 22 17. Isay. 55. 1, 3.
Act. 3. 22, 23. As Well as also.

2. It is requisite as we hear, to seek for this excellent commodity, and
search after it with our hearts, yea with our whole hearts, as we have the
excellency, and amiableness of it discovered to us: such an applying, or
causing our heart to come unto this Wisdom as commended, and the commendation
heard, is requisite, as, that we cry after Wisdom, and lift up our voice for
understanding; that we seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid
treasures, even with greatest desire, and diligence; and as those that judge
happiness does only consist in having this treasure, and without which we are
undone, and miserable for ever, Prove. 2. 1, 4. and so searching for it, in all
the scriptures of truth, which are the veins, as it were, where this
enriching, and happy treasure may be had, Joh. 5. 39. and in all ordinances;
and in the assemblies of Gods people; Prove. 8. 34. and in so doing we shall
find it.

3. And to our getting is requisite, a selling all that we have when we have
found it; and buying, or getting it into our hearts, and possession: according
to that; buy the truth, and sell it not: Wisdom, instruction and
understanding, Prove. 23. 23. Matthew. 13. 44, 46. here lies the stick with many
persons, and too much with us all; we would have wisdom if we might part with
nothing for it, but keep our own things still; but this connot be: if any man
come unto me says our savior, and hate not father, and mother, wife, and
children; brethren, and sisters: yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple and whosoever he be of you (speaking to his disciples, and the
multitudes) that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple, Luke
14. 26, 27, 33. We are all too much like the young man who would feign have in
herited eternal life; when our savior told him, and said unto him, One thing
thou lackest; go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor and
thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come, and take up thy cross, and follow
me: he was sad at that saing, and went away grieved, for he had great
possessions, Mark. 10. 17, 22. So it is too much with us, if we might keep our
own things and have wisdom too; if we could carry on these two designs, to
serve God and Mammon; and could have Christ, and love the world also, then we
could be content; and this would please us; but this cannot be we must deny our
selves, our brutish lusts and desires; as well as also our wisdom,
righteousness, love of the world, and the things thereof, the honor, praise
esteem friendship, and fellowship thereof; and take up our cross and follow
him: yea the that loves father, or mother more then him, is not worthy of him;
and he that loves son or daughter more then him, is not worthy of him; and he
that takes not his cross, and follows after him, is not worthy of him,
Matthew. 10. 37, 39. and 16. 24. we must sell all that we have, all must be
parted with, that we may win Christ, and be found in him: not as if our things
were so worthy, as that we might deserve there by this heavenly wisdom; nor
are we to part with them as a valuable consideration; for all the things we can
desire are not to be compared to this pearl: but our things will hinder us
from having, and obtaining Wisdom, if we let them, not go; therefore though
we have no Worth, nor wortiness, yet we must buy wisdom, though without money
and price; for no man can serve two masters; we must part with our sins and
idols, or otherwise we cannot get this Wisdom, and understanding.

And if we take in the reading in the Margin; happy is the man that draws our
understanding, hereby may be meant.

1. A drawing it out for our own use, and benefit; and so diligence, and
labor of the inward man especially, is to be used and exercised, and hereby
the Ho: Ghost may have reference to the drawing out water out of a well, or
deep place; and it is like that, Isay. 12. 3. therefore with joy shall ye draw
water out of the wells of salvation: namely, out of the doctrine of the
Prophets, and Apostles false teachers are said to be wells without water, there
is nothing in them, or in their doctrine to refresh, and satisfy, 2 Petr. 2.
17. but these teachers sent of God, and who are even Gods mouth to us, have
water in their word and doctrine; and we are therefore to search thereinto for
Wisdom and understanding, and draw it out, when we find it, Act. 17. 11. Or
to draw it out as out of a vessel, Joh. 2, 8. 2 Corinthians. 4. 7. and so
secondarily out of their words woe have believed on Christ through the Prophets,
and Apostles words, and have the word of reconciliation put into their hearts
and mouths, Prove. 20. 5. And.

2. We are to draw out understanding for the good of others also, and to the
end we may be instruments for communicating it to others, as the like Phrase is
used, Isay. 58. 10. John. 2. 8. Thus have we spoken to the finding, and getting
Wisdom and understanding; what it is, what supposed herein, and needful
hereto, according to my weakness.

2. We come in the next place to note some instructions contained in this
affirmation of the happiness of the man that finds Wisdom, and gets, or
draws out understanding. As.

1. That men are naturally without this Wisdom and understanding. 2. That yet
men may find this Wisdom, and get, or draw out this understanding. 3. That
the present time is the apportunity of finding and getting. 4. He is and shall
be an happy man that finds, and getting this Wisdom and understanding.
1. That men are naturally without this Wisdom and understanding; even
destitute of Wisdom in the knowledge of Christ; they are without Christ, and
all spiritual understanding, Ephesians. 2. 12. A Wisdom indeed they have, but
such as is foolishness with God; they are wise to do evil, and to pursue
their drunken, unclean, covetous, ambitious, revengefull lusts; but to do good
they have no understanding, Jerem. 4* 22. every man is brutish by his
knowledge, Ierem 10. 14. God did indeed make man righteous at first, in his
own image, after his likeness; and put Wisdom into his inward parts; he was
created in knowledge, as the Apostle signifies, when he says, ye have put on
the new man, Which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created
him: renewing, is a restoring a Person or thing that is deformed to its first,
and primitive estate: there in then is intimated, that at first man was created
in knowledge; As Well as also it so appears in that it is said, that the
renewing in knowledge is after the image of him that created him; and so at
first man being created in or after his image, he was created in knowledge, and
understanding, Colos. 3. 10. But man not abiding in that honor in which he was
made, but aspiring to an equality with God, and desiring some higher wisdom,
and knowledge through his listening to the Lie of the tempter; Genes. 3. 5, 6.
Mist what he aspired unto, and lost what he had; and so man in honor not
abiding therein, understands not, but is like the beasts that perish, Psalm.
49. 12. 20. they are destiture of all true and sound Wisdom: that which they
have leads them to labor to be rich, Prove. 23. 4. Ezekiel* 28. 4, 5. and to
trust in their riches, and worship their gold and silver, Hose. 13. 2. and to
seek after greatness, and glory in this world, Isay. 10. 13, 14. and fills them
with enoyings and strifes against all that stands cross to their design, Jam.
3. 14, 16. but as with respect to his Wisdom that is from above, they are like
wild asses colts, Job 11. 12. In this consideration they are all (until, and
further then in lightened of God) simple and foolish ones. And this is true of
them all, even of those also that have the highest esteem of themselves: As,
young persons, they are usually highly conceited of themselves, but they are
simple, as is signified, in that the end of the Proverbs in making known
Wisdom is said to be, to give subtly to the simple, to the young man (who is
simple also) knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1. 4. and 7. 7, 8. and this is
true also of those that have much of the Wisdom of this World, who are great
scholars, and rich in that knowledge which is science falsely so called: their
wisdom is foolishness with God; and the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise
that they are vain, 1 Corinthians. 3. 18, 20. and it is also true of those that
are of the professed church; they are simple, and without understanding
naturally, Prove. 1. 21, 22. Romans 3. 1, 2, 9, 10, 11. Yea of all men, Job 32. 7,
9. hence Wisdom says to men, and the sons of Man, o ye simple understand
Wisdom, and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart, Prove. 8. 4, 5. and 30.
2, 3, 4. The natural man receveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts of God,
as if he had a secret pleasure in the destruction of the greatest part of man
kind. Ezech. 33. 10, 11. and though he speaks fair, and commands the gospel
to be preached to all, yet he has a secret will contrary to his revealed: We
need not be taught, and strengthened in such blasphemous thoughts, for they
naturally proceed out of our hearts. And thence also proceed evil, thoughts of
our selves; high esteems, and conceits of our selves, from whence we are
filled with pride. And evil thoughts of the world, as if the enjoyment of that
would render us truly happy; and hence proceeds covetousness: Yea and evil
thoughts of all things, thinking evilly, and calling light darkness, and
darkness light; every imagination of man's heart is only evil continually,
Genes. 6. 5. And hence we are choosing, loving, and affecting vain things that
cannot profit, nor help us, because they are vain, even any thing besides
this excellent Wisdom, to wit, Christ, and God in him. Mark. 7. 21, 22.

Use. 1. This consideration might be of usefullness to us, to hide pride from
us, for we are all naturally fools: And to cause us not to glory in Gods
presence, but be willing to become fools that we may be wise, in receiving
this heavenly Wisdom here commended to us. 1 Cor. 1. 29 - 31. and 3. 18, 19.

2. To admonisch us cease from man, for wherein is he to be accounted of. Isay.
2. 22. and not to have our faith standing in their Wisdom, we are such simple,
and foolish ones as that if men use good words, and fair speeches to us, and
have much of the Wisdom of this world, especially if also therewith they have
a form of godliness upon them to depend upon, and admire them, and receive
what they say, though they come in their own name; and to embrace their
interpretations of the scripture, though therein they consent not to wholesome
words, but cause divisions, and offenses contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostles Romans 16. 17, 18. and to glory in the Wisdom of man, whereas their
wisdom is foolishness with God: And were this considered by us as discovered
to us in the light and instructions of the gospel, it would take us off from
that idolatrous esteem we have of them, and their Wisdom. Matthew. 11. 25, 26.
1 Corinthians. 2. 1 - 5. and 3. 18 - 21.

3. To show unto us the great grace and love of God to us, in taking notice of
such simple foolish ones as we are with him, and in his account who judges
righteously; and in making a way for us that we might become wise: He has not
despised us in this sad condition into which we brought our selves, but has of
his goodness prepared for us; and is giving good counsel to us, in hearing
which we may be made wise: to such he calls, be ye of an understanding heart,
hear for I will speak of excellent things, Prove. 8. 4, 6, 7. Behold God is
mighty and despised not any, he is mighty in strengh and Wisdom; and yet
despises not us who are weak and simple, Job 36. 5. learn we of him.

4. To come to Christ in the testimony, that we may be made wise, Matthew. 11.
27, 28. and to move here to, consider the next instruction, viz.

2. That though men are naturally simple, and fools, yet through the grace of
our Lord Jesus, they may find this excellent Wisdom, and get, or draw out,
this understanding here commended to us, while it is called to day, and this is
intimated to us, in that the holy Ghost here affirms, and presently
evidenceth the blessedness, and happiness of the man that finds it; of the man
indefinitely; he had spoken before to the sons of Wisdom more directly, us.
11, 12. but here, happy is the Man, etc. and that men, any man, that is come to
years of capacity, may find, and get it in Gods opportunity, appears.

1. Because all the treasures of Wisdom, and knowledge are hid in Christ for
men, Colos. 2. 3. all things are delivered to him of the father; and on this
ground he inviteth, and calls all that labor, and are heavy laden, and are
seeking Wisdom were it is not to be found, to come unto him, Matthew. 11. 27,
28. Jesus Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, as is declared to us in the words
which the Holy Ghost has thought; took upon him the nature of mankind; and
therefore when he was borne, the Angel says, Behold I bring unto you good
tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people, Luke 2. 10, 11. and he had
the trespasses of the world imputed to him, even tho guilt of mankinds first
sin and sinfullnes; and he bare the sin of the world in his own body, 2 Corinthians. 5. 19, 21. Joh. 1. 29. And was delivered for their offenses, he died
for all, even for all that were dead; and by the grace of God tasted dead for
every man; and is raised again for their justification, Romans 4. 25. 2 Corinthians.
5. 14, 15. Hebr. 2. 9. and has redeemed all mankind in himself from the curse
of the law, and delivered them from the necessary slavery of satan, he is
ascended up on high, who descended first into the lower parts of the earth, and
has led captivity captive; and has received gifts of forgiveness, Wisdom,
and understanding for men, yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them, Galat. 3. 13. and 4. 4, 5. with, Romans 3. 19. Psalm. 68. 18.
God has prepared Wisdom for us, he has prepared his dinner, even a feast of
fat things for all people, his oxen and fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready, and prepared for Jews, and Gentiles, even for all men, Matthew. 22. 2, 4,
8. Isay. 25. 6. Job 28. 27. this is the record that God has given of his son,
that he has given to us mankind eternal life; and this life is in his son, 1 John 5. 10, 11. He is the second man, the last Adam, of whom the first was a
figure, Romans 5. 14. and as God did in blessing the first man bless us all in
him, and there create us in his own image, after his own likeness, even in
knowledge and understanding; so now there is blessing in this seed of the
woman, who has broke the head of the serpent, for all the families of the
earth; in him we are again created after the image of God in a more glorious
manner then ever we were in the first public man; he has by his blood
obtained eternal redemption for us, even a recovery of what we lost and
forfeited by our sinning against, and departure from God: in him there is
perfection, and compleatness for every man; and he is in our nature and for us
become Wisdom; and counsel is his, and sound Wisdom, he has understanding
and strength, 1 Corinthians. 15. 45. Hebr. 9. 12. Jam. 3. 9. Coloss. 1. 28. Prove.
8. 10, 14. Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewne out her seven
pillars, she has killed her killing, she has mingled her wine, she has also
furnished her table, she has made a rich and large provision and prepared for
all, even for all that are simple, and want understanding, before she sends
forth her maidens, and servants, and invites them to come into the house, and
to eat of her bread, Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 5. there are waters, wine, and milk
bread, good fatness, and whatsoever will give satisfaction, prepared for every
thirster; not only for gracious thirsters, such as thirst out of a former
taste of the sweetness and excellency of this provision, but also for such as
have no money; such as have no worth, or worthiness in them: such as labor for
that which is not bread; and spend their money for that which will not satisfy:
and this is certainly prepared for them before proclamation is made, and
invitation given unto them; and he that is athirst may come; and whosoever will
may take of the water of life freely; Isay. 55. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7. Revel. 22. 17.
this is a first and fundamental Demonstration that any man may find, and get
Wisdom and understanding, because it is prepared in Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all men, for every sinful soul of mankind; without
which it were altogether impossible for them to have this rich, and enriching
commodity. But.

2. Not only has he thus provided of his goodness for poor mankind; but also
he gives Wisdom to men, and brings it nigh unto them in due time; especially
to us upon whom the name of Christ is called; and unto, and amongst whom the
scriptures in the plain records of them are vouch safed, and preserved through
the wonderfullness of Gods goodness. God by his spirit calls, and cries to men,
and tells them where Wisdom is to be had; and gives unto them both some
discovery of this excellent object of Wisdom, in knowing when they might be
made wise: and some opening of the eye of the understanding, that they might
behold Christ Jesus as discovered, and live: Christ Jesus is found of them that
sought him not; and made manifest to them that asked not after him; and says,
behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by his name, Isay. 65.
1. with Rom* 10. 20. and he who is a just God and a savior, and there is none
besides him, says, look unto me all the ends of the earth, and be ye saved;
and he who thus speaks and calls is mighty to save, for he is God, and there is
none else, Isay. 45. 21, 22. Now he calls not to men to look unto him, or hear
what he says, until he first manifests himself unto them, and speaks of
excellent things; according to that, all ye inhabitants of the world, and
dwellers on the earth, se ye when (and not before) he lifts up an ensign on
the mountains (even Christ Jesus in the glorious gospel, and testimonies of
his goodness) and when he blows a trumpet (to proclaim and preach good news
to you) hear ye, Isay. 18. 3. with, Chap. 11. 10. and 40. 9. He that has
searched Wisdom out, and prepared it, does also declare it to us; and shows
forth its excellency, that we might be allured there with to get and obtain
Wisdom, Job 28. 27. God has glorified, and does in men's proper ages glorify
Christ Jesus by his spirit especially in the gospel as declared in the
scriptures of truth; and in the plain and faithful declaration thereof; that
men might run unto him from all other things, for all Wisdom, understanding,
righteousness and strength, Isay. 55. 5, 6, 7. And also in due time Christ is
opening the blind eyes of men, thath they might look unto him, and be
enlightened, and made wise by him; and that their faces may not be ashamed,
Isay. 42. 1, 6, 7. He is the true light that lights every man that comes
into the world; the light of the world, Joh. 1. 9. and 8. 12. and 12. 46. and
God in and by him gives to all men, liberally that whereby they may be made
partakers of Wisdom, Jam. 1. 5. And God in Christ by his spirit does both
discover unto men, and give unto them Wisdom, even the object of Wisdom; and
gives unto them some sight, and opening of the eye to behold it in and through
his testimonies in the holy scriptures, the Testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple; namely, both rendering Christ precious unto them; and
opening the eye of their souls that they might know Christ, and win him, Psalm.
19. 7, 8. the entrance of Gods words gives light to discover that, in knowing
whereof we may be wise indeed; and it gives understanding unto the simple,
Psalm. 119. 129, 130. My Father, says our savior, gives you the true bread
from heaven; in receiving and eating where of they should be made wise: but how
should they receive this heavenly bread? they, as all men are, were dead, and
without life in themselves, and had no will to it, nor strength to receive it:
to remove this discouragement our savior adds; the bread of God is he that
comes down from heaven; and gives life to he world, which has none
naturally: this bread of Wisdom is the most excellent bread, it is the bread
of God, living, quickening bread; it prevents them with life that have none,
as well as preserves them in life, even unto eternal life that eat it: but how
does this bread of God give live? our savior tells us, in the word in which it
is declared and commended to us: the words, says he, that I speak unto you
they are spirit, and they are life, Joh 6. 27, 32, 33, 35, 51, 63. the spirit
of Wisdom and revelation is given in the knowledge, and gospel of Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 17. Christ was anointed with the holy spirit to preach the gospel,
or glad tidings of and concerning himself; and therewith to preach recovery of
sight to the blind; to preach their eyes open; and to give light to them that
sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Luke 4. 18. and as he thus
prevents men with the discovery of the excellency of himself, and inlighteneth
their eyes, Prove. 29. 31. he then calls unto and upon them to look unto and
behold him; and to come unto him, to receive this instruction and Wisdom which
he is giving unto them ( for no man can receive any thing except it be given
him from above, Ioh. 3. 27.) and not silver, and knowledge rather then choice
gold, Prove. 8. 6, 10, 11. to get Wisdom, get understanding, and not forget it,
neither decline from the words of his mouth, in which Wisdom is brought, and
given to us, Prove. 4. 4, 8. and not only does Wisdom call and cry unto us,
but also she stretches fort her hand to help and strengthen us to receive it:
where the word of this king of kings is, there is power, Eccles. 8. 4. he is
not only opening men's eyes in and by his gospel, but also turning them from
darkness to light, and from the power of satan to God, that men might come unto
him, Prove. 1. 20, 24. Act. 26. 18. 22, 23. he is in and by his law and doctrine
converting the soul, wither men be converted or no; and yet to the end they
might be converted; and therefore calls upon them, be ye converted, not convert
your selves; be ye saved; be ye reconciled to God; be ye wise; be ye of an
understanding heart to signify to us, that God is not wanting to men, but is in
and with his calls, and by his gospel converting, saving, reconciling, and
making men wise, and of an understanding hearth: and therefore if they perish,
their destruction is of themselves, Psalm. 19. 7. Act. 3. 19, Isay. 45. 22. 2
Corint. 5. 19, 20, Prove. 8. 5. by all which it evidently appears, that men
may in due time find Wisdom, and get understanding.

3. It also appears that men may find, and get Wisdom, and understanding,
because he not only has prepared it for men in Christ, and is giving it unto
them in and with him; but also he has made and confirmed great and precious
promises, that in our seeking and searching for it as thus prevented, we shall
find it, and get it: from this motive and argument our savior exhorts; ask
and ye shall receive: seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened
unto you; for every one that asks receives; and he that seeks finds; and
to him that knocks it shall be opened, Matthew. 7. 7, 8, 11. To the same
purpose the Wisdom of God speaks; if thou criest after Wisdom, and liftest
up thy voice for understanding; if thou seek her as silver, and searchest
for her as for hid treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God. For the Lord gives Wisdom; out of his mouth
comes knowledge and understanding, Prove. 2. 1, 6. the same encouragement also
the Apostle James sets before the beleivers. Ifany of you lack Wisdom, let him
ask of God that gives liberally to all men, and upbraideth not; and it shall
begiven him, Jam. 1. 5. see also, Joh. 4. 10. and 6. 27. Prove. 8. 14, 17. many
promises of this nature are proposed to us, to the end we might seek, and get
Wisdom; and faithful is he that has promised, who also will do what he has
promised, according to the tenor thereof: and these promises are now confirmed
to us by the precious and incorruptible blood of Christ; for in him all the
promises of God are yea and Amen, 2 Corint. 1. 20. and he also who by his blood
has ratified, and sealed them is alive, and lives for evermore as the
mediator of the New Testament, to take away our iniquities, and give unto us
in his fathers way all things that pertain to life and godliness, so as none
that seek Wisdom, or any other good thing, shall be ashamed, Hebr. 9. 14, 15.
Psalm. 69. 6.

And this consideration, that men may, while called to day, find and get
Wisdom, and understanding, as is in part thus evidenced, may be useful to us,
and usefully considered by us.

1. To help us to cease to hear those instructions that cause to err from the
words of knowledge, Prove. 19. 27. namely, such instructions as whereby sinners
entice us to cast in our lot amongst them, and to walk in the way with them; to
run with them to the same excess of riot, in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
wine, revellings, banquettings, etc. Prove. 1. 10, 20. 1 Petr. 4. 1, 4. to have
fellow ship with them in their unfruitful works of darkness. As Well as also to
go from the presence of such foolish and false teachers as have not in them
the lip of knowledge, Prove. 14. 7. both of such as say, there is no
resurrection of the dead; and so by consequence that Christ is not raised
again: As those that say, that Christ is in every man, and that the light in
every man is Christ; and deny that Christ is raised again in that very
personal body in which he was crucified, and died for our sins according to
the scriptures; and was buried: these ungodly doctrines render it altogether
unprofitable for us to seek Wisdom, and impossible to get understanding: for
if Christ be not raised again in that body of his flesh in which he was
delivered for our offenses, we are yet in our sins, and the faith of beleivers
is vain; and the preaching of the Apostles is also vain; then they are found
false witnesses of God, then is the hope of the gospel vain; then let us eat
and drink for to morrow we dye; but those are ungodly, and anti* christian
sayings; for Christ is raised again, his soul was not left in hell, neither
did his flesh see corruption, 1 Corint. 15. 12, 20. take we heed of such false
witnesses as bring such profane and vain bablings. And also it may cause us to
beware of those false teachers who consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus; such as say, Christ did not taste death by the grace
of God for every man, nor is raised again for their justification; and so by
consequence there is no Wisdom or understanding prepared for the greatest part
of mankind; these are false witnesses also, who render it doubtful whither
Wisdom may be gotten or no; yea who say in their doctrines, that it is vain
for the greatest part of mankind to seek it, 2 Petr. 2. 1. Jude 3. Contrary to
what these ungodly ones say, Wisdom may be gotten; and he that gets Wisdom
loves his own soul: he that keeps understanding shall find good: And a
false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall perish.
Prove. 19. 5, 8, 9. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5.

2. To show unto us the folly and madness of those that seek not Wisdom, and
get not understanding; the greatness of their sin, and folly, and severity of
their judgment is manifested in what has been said; of Wisdom were not
prepared for them: or if they could not possibly be made partakers of it, they
would have some cloak and excuse; but now their sin is inexcusable; and it
greatly provokes the king of glory to anger, that when he has prepared his
dinner, his oxen and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, and they
invited, they then make light of it, and go their ways, one to his farm, and
another to his Merchandise, Matthew. 22. 4, 8. this is men's great folly, and that
which highly provokes God, that they hate knowledge, and will not choose the
fear of the Lord, when he is calling upon them, and stretching forth his hand
unto them; Prove. 1. 20, 29. Oh! that we may not be such fools, and so unwise,
but may understand what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5. 17. Prove. 1. 7.

3. To encourage and move us all to find Wisdom, and draw out understanding;
it is prepared for us, and declared and given to us that we might seek it; and
assurance given to us in his great and precious promises that in seeking it
early we shall find it; oh let us therefore get Wisdom, and with all our
gettings get understanding, Prove. 4. 6. seek we the Lord while he may be found,
and call upon him while he is near, Isay. 55. 6. and to provoke us hereto,
consider the next instruction, viz.

3. That the present time is Gods opportunity for finding Wisdom, and getting
understanding. Whence the Wisdom of God says, Now therefore hearken unto me o
ye children, Prove. 8. 32. we might branch this instruction into these two
parts, and show.

1. That the present time is the opportunity in which it is possible for us to
get Wisdom. 2. It is the opportunity in which it is good and needful for us
to get it.
1. The present time is the opportunity in which it is possible for us to get
Wisdom, therefore it is said, happy is the man that finds, and gets; as
signifying to us, that now while God is waiting upon us that he may be gracious
to us, and vouchsafing means, we may seek success fully; and that is all the
day long, while he is calling unto us. To him that in joined to all the living
there is hope, Eccles. 9. 4. While God hears Christ in his meditation for us,
and that is all the time he makes intercession, he vouchsafes some means to
us; and while he vouchsafes means, God succors Christ in his ministration,
and sends forth his spirit; and, behold now is the accepted time, behold now is
the day of salvation; now we may receive his grace so as to be saved thereby, 2
Corint. 6. 1, 2. While God is exercising longsuffering to us, it is to a
gracious end, and out of love to us, because he is not willing that any man
should perish, but that all should come to repentance; and hence the beleivers
are instructed to account, that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation, not
destruction, 2 Petr. 3. 9, 15. Wisdom is crying, and calling unto simple ones
that love their simplicity; and to scorners that delight in scorning; and to
fools that hate knowledge, and have done so for a long time, to turn at her
reproves, with assurance, in so doing, she will pour forth her spirith, and
make known her words unto them: and while she calls, she stretches forth
her hand to help them to turn, Prove. 1. 20, 24. yea though men have forgotten
him days without number, and so provoked him, as that he has put them away,
and they have sold themselves for their iniquities, yet while Christ calls unto
them by his gospel, or any means, his hand is not shortened that he cannot
redeem, but he has power still to deliver, and is stretching it forth to that
end and purpose, Isay. 50. 1, 2. and 65. 1, 2. and though we have long despised
Wisdom, yet to day, while it is called to day, we may seek and find Wisdom:
the end of Christ's dying for all, was, that they which live, and are still
joined to all the living, might not hence forth live to themselves, but to him
who died for them, and rose again, 2 Corint. 5. 15. Eccles. 9. 10. and this
consideration may comfort us, and cause us to lift up the hands that hang
down, and to strengthen the feeble knees: for though we have been such fools
as hitherto to despise Wisdom, and hate knowledge, yet while God is calling
us, and continuing means to us, and especially his servants to preach the
gospel, it is still a time of finding, and getting Wisdom; and he that so
hears and learnes of the father as to come to Christ, he will in no wise cast
out, but will receive him graciously, pardoning his iniquities, Joh. 6. 37. And
it might be powerful also to awaken us to seek the Lord, to seek Wisdom, and
righteousness while he is exercising patience, and forbearance to us, and
crying to us to turn at his reproves; and to stir us up hereto, the next
branch of the instruction is good to be considered by us, viz.

2. The present time is the opportunity in which it is good and needful for us
to seek and get Wisdom and understanding: Wherefore as the Ho: Ghost says, to
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Hebr. 3. 7, 8, 14, 15.
and 4. 7. strive now to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you,
says our savior, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able: When once the
master of the house is risen up, and has shut too the door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us.
Then all pleadings and arguments will be in vain; he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not whence you are, Luke 13. 24, 27. gather your selves therefore
together, yea gather together, before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before
the day of the Lords anger come upon you, Zephan. 2. 1, 2.

Objection. If any one should say, I am young, and strong, and the evil day
will not yet prevent, nor overtake me: I may now rejoice in my youth, and let
my heart cheer me; I may now seek after the world, and love the lust of the
flesh, mine ease and pleasure: Or the lust of the eye, in laboring to be rich,
and laying up for my self and mine: Or the pride of life. I may hereafter
apply my heart to Wisdom; I know not yet how to be so serious; it will be time
enough for that when old age comes.

Answer. 1. To this I may say, this Objection savours of great ignorance, and
folly, and want of consideration of the worth, and invaluable price of Wisdom:
did we seriously consider that Wisdom is the principal thing; and that all
the things we may, or can desire are not to be compared to her; as God is
discovering the excellency of it, and opening our eyes to behold it; and that
it is prepared for us, and may be found and gotten by us; it would be powerful
with us to seek it early, to seek first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, to cry after it, and be restless in our spirits for it,
and with all our gettings, and in all opportunities to seek after this one
thing that is so profitable unto all things, Prove. 3. 15, 16, 17. and 4. 1, 8.
and 8. 1. 6. 10, 11, 17. And therefore also.

2. It is safe good, and needful to seek it in the present opportunity, and
dangerous to neglect that* For.

1. If thou should live to old age, it may be more difficult then to find
Wisdom then now because.

1. When old age comes, then our naturally capacities and powers will be much
weakened and impaired; and afflictions, and weaknesses are ordinarily so many,
and so flowing in upon us like the waves of the sea, one in the neck of
another, the clouds returning after the rain, that then we shall be more out
of capacity to seek and get Wisdom, hence when the preacher had, by way of
severe reproof to such an Objector, said: rejoice o young man in they youth,
and let thy heart cheer the in the days of thy youth; and walk in the ways
of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for
all these things God will bring thee into judgment, etc. He adds: Remember now
thy creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the
years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them While the sun
or the light, or the Moon, or the Star be not darkened, nor the clouds return
after the rain, etc. Eccles. 11. 9, 10. and 12. 1, 7. it will then be more
hard to hear, and seek after Wisdom, when we are pressed down, and burdened
with manifold pains, sicknesses, weaknesses; and when also our natural
strength is weakened; As is signified in what is said of the Israelites, when
God sent them word by the hand of Moses that he would bring them out from.
Under the burdens of the Egyptians; and rid them out of their bondage etc. yet
they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, Exodus 6. 2, 9.

2. Then also it will ^e more hard, and difficult, to get understanding,
because they have been accustomed to do evil: When it has been men's manner
from their youth to neglect Wisdom, and despise instruction, and to seek
after, and set their hearts upon the world, and the things thereof, this
renders it more difficult with them to leave their old ways, and practices,
and cause their hearts to come to Wisdom, according to that: Can the Ethiopian
change his skin? Or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil, Jerem. 13. 23. Indeed with God all things are
possible; nor do I speak this to discourage them that are old; but to awaken
the young, and others before they are older, to break of their sins, and
forsake their unrighteous ways and thoughts, and turn unto him who delights
in mercy, and who will multiply to pardon. Nor does the Holy. Ghost use that
saying fore mentioned Jerem. 13. 23. to signify, that it is impossible for them
to learn to do well, as he is giving grace unto them; for he; verse 27. thus
still expostulates with them; will thou not be made clean? When shall it once
be? As intimating, that God was yet waiting upon them, and cleansing them from
the evil they had been accustoming themselves unto: but he speaks it, to the
end he might engage them to consider their ways, and turn unto him: but
continuance in evil makes it more difficult with us to depart there from, and
to forsake our old lovers and companions, and to incline our hearts to Gods
understanding, which we have so long despised, and set light by. What one is
wont to do, becomes at last, after a sort, necessary for him to do. As,
whereas in Matthew. 27. 15. it is said, Pilate was wont to release unto the
people a prisoner; it is thus rendered; Luke 23. 17. of necessity he must
release unto them one at the feast. As on the one hand, the holy spirit says,
train up a child in the way in which he should go; and when he is old he will
not depart there from, Prove. 22. 6. so on the other hand we may say, when we
have been training up our selves in the days of our youth, and strength in the
ways in which we should not go, it becomes more hard with us to depart
therefrom when we are old, 2 Petr. 2. 14. let this be considered by us.

3. Yea God may put an end to our harvest time, I mean, to those choice, and
advantageous opportunites which yet in mercy he is cotinuing to us, if we
continue in hating knowledge; and for such wickedness; and then it will be more
difficult to seek Wisdom: He may send a famine, not of bread, or a thirst for
water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: And men may wander from sea to
sea, and from the north even unto the east, and run to and fro to seek the word
of the Lord, and not find it: and in that day the fair virgins, and young men
(who may have too much neglected the present opportunites) shall faint for
thirst, Amos 8. 11, 13. Go then to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider herways,
and be wise; which having no guide, overseer, or ruler provides her meat in the
summer, and gathers her food in the harvest, how long will thou sleep, o
sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep; so shall thy poverty come as
one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man, Prove. 6. 6, 11. and 10. 5.
O! if God should send such a famine upon us, as we have by our iniquities
deserved, that we may not then have cause to bewail it with the Prophet, and
say; the harvest is past, the summer ended, and we are not saved, Jerem. 8. 18,
20.

4. Yea God may deprive us of all means, and leave striving with us; or
deprive us of capacity, that no man can be an instrument of good to us, for our
manifold, and long continued in provocations of him, if we should defer
seeking Wisdom till the evil days come: He is not tied, or engaged to us to
wait our leisure or pleasure: and though he is rich in mercy, and abundant in
goodness, yet it is dangerous to despise the riches of his goodness,
forbearance, and long suffering, Romans 2. 4, 5. his spirit shall not always
strive with men, Genes. 6. 3. and if we should provoke him to leave striving,
woe will be unto us; No man can come to Christ, except the father who has sent
Christ draw him, Joh. 6. 44. do we then provoke the Lord to anger? are we
stronger then he? Who ever hardened his heart against him, and prospered? oh
that we may then be admonished to walk while we have the light, lest darkness
come upon us; and while we have the light to believe in the light that we may
be the children of the light, Joh. 12. 35, 36. Nay.

2. Suppose thou should live to old age, and that then through the grace of
God that brings salvation to all men, thine heart should be turned to the Lord;
yet it is much better now; and the present time is the most excellent
opportunity for getting Wisdom; because.

1. The sooner we apply our hearth to find and get, and walk in Wisdom, the
more truly joyous and comfortable will be our life here in the flesh, to be
spiritually minded in life and peace. Romans 8. 6. Wisdom is sweet to the soul;
life to the soul, and health to all the flesh, it does good like a medicine.
Prove. 24. 14. and 3. 21 - 24. and 4. 20. 21. and whatever afflictions such meet
withal as are found in this exercise; Whatever troubles they have in the
flesh, and as to the outward man, yet they have a mercy heart, and thereby a
continual feast. Prove. 19, 8. and 15. 13 - 15. When they have tribulation in
the World, they have peace in Christ who has overcome the World; and such
peace guards their hearts as passes all understanding. Joh. 16. 33. in
beleiving God fills them with joy and peace, and such joy as astranger
intermedleth not with. Romans 15. 13. Prove. 14. 8 - 10. Yea when they are in
heaviness through manifold temptations, yet beleiving what Christ has done, and
the hope set before them; and so in Christ; They rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory. 1 Petr. 1. 6 - 8. Whereas the laughter of those fools that
despice Wisdom is but like the crackling of thorns under a pot; it makes a
great show, but is gone presently, it is but for a moment, it vanishes away in
an instant. All the things men rejoice and trust in, besides the name of the
Lord, and our God; Whither they be the more gross lusts of the flesh, such as
surfeiting, drunkness, uncleaness, ease and pleasure: or the desires of the
mind, as covetousness, pride, the honor of this World, the friendships, and
praise of men; Wisdom, or our own works of righteousness, etc. they are all
but sparks of our own kindling, they are as soon out as in; There is no
abiding comfort in them; And even in the laughter thereby occasioned the heart
is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Eccles. 5. 6. Isay. 50.
10. 11. Prove. 14. 13. A dreadful sound is in their ears many times, trouble
and anguish takes hold of them in Gods awakenings of them; and when they are
recovered out of the snare of Satan, oh what shame is then upon them for their
former evil ways; They were unfruitful to them while they walked in them,
and now appear exceeding shame full to them, when they reflect upon them:
according to that, what fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? Romans 6. 21. Oh how are they then filled with grife and sorrow, both
for their own personal evils, and for the injury they have done to others!
They will then mourn at the last and say, how have I hated instruction? And
mine heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor
inclined mine ear to them that instructed me I was almost in all evil in the
midst of the congregation, the great congregation, to which the Scriptures in
the records of them are vouch safed, and amongst which continued, and read
every Sabbath, and upon which the name of Christ is called: and in the midst of
the assembly of the upright, that have been taught of God as the truth is in
Jesus, and love him, and without hidden things of dishonesty hold forth the
word of life, and speak often thereof one to another in their frequent
assemblings of themselves together; Which aggravates the evil of any, that
have such advantages, to despise Wisdom. Prove. 5. 11 - 13. with Psalm. 111. 1.
but contrariwise, the sooner we search for Wisdom, and seek for understanding,
the more comfortable will our lives be here; hence that; come ye children,
hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning
and instruction of Wisdom: What man is he that will love life, and see good
days? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile: depart
from evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it; for the eyes of the Lord are
upon the richteous, etc. Psalm. 34. 11, 15. with, 1 Petr. 3. 9, 14.

2. And the earlier we seek Wisdom, it will probably tend to more happiness,
or a greater degree of glory afterward: men that delay the applying their
hearts to understanding till the evil days come, they cannot have such
opportunity for exalting Wisdom to others, and so doing them good, as those
that heartily embrace it in their more youthful days; and therefore not so
much fruit will abound to their account in the day of the Lord. They that are
wise will shine as the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as
the stars for ever andever, Dan. 12. 3. But.

3. It is needful for us to seek and get Wisdom and understanding in the
present time, and dangerous to neglect it; because our times are not in our
own hands, but in the Lords; and we cannot boast our selves of the morrow, for
we know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1. In Gods hand is the soul
of every living thing, and the breath of all manking. Job 12. 10. and how many
does he cut off in their full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet, whose
breasts are full of milk, and their bones moistened, with Marrow? Job 21. 22 -
24. and if he cut of, or shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him?
Job 9. 12. 13 and 11. 10. and 12. 14. There is no man has power over the
Spirit to retain the Spirit; neither has he power in the day of death; and
there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those
that are given to it. Eccles. 8. 8. And in the grave there is no work nor
device, nor knowledge, nor Wisdom. Eccles. 9. 10. no hoping for Gods truth.
Isay 38. 18. None to preach the Gospel, or to Commemorate Gods praises. Psalm.
6. 5. and 88. 11, 12. and 115, 17, 18. And besides all this, the state of man
is then fixed for ever when theydye; there is then a great gulf fixed, so that
there is no passing from one place, or state, to another no not forever; But as
the tree falls so it lies, whither toward the south, or toward the north: In
the place where the tree falls there it shall be. Luke 16. 26. Eccles. 11.
3. Let us consider this according to what the Apostle James says: Go to now,
ye that say, to day, or to morrow, we will go into such a city, and continue
there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain: Whereas you know not what will
be on the morrow; for what is your life? It is even a vapor that appears for
a little time, and then vanishes away. Therefore (because our lives are so
uncertain and brittle) to him that knows to do good, and does it not (in
the present season) to him it is sin. Jam. 4. 13. 17. All that has been said
does in some measure show, that it is good and needful for us to search
diligently for Wisdom, and understanding in the present opportunity: And it
may be of usefullness to us.

1. To show unto us who are fools indeed, even such as procrastinate, and
delay their seeking Wisdom; such as know not, or take no notice of their time.
Eccles. 8. 5 - 7. They are more brutish herein then many creatures that have
no understanding: The stork in the heaven knows her appointed times and the
swallow, and the turtle, and the crane, observe the time of their oming: but my
people, says the Lord know not the judgment of the Lord: how do ye say we
are Wise? Jerem. 8. 7, 9. such are instructed to go to the Ant, and consider
her ways; though she be without the understanding that men have, yet she
provideth her meat in the summer, in the proper season; Whereas sluggards, Whom
God teaches more then the beasts of the earth, and makes wiser then the
fowls of heaven, observe not the proper time. Job 35. 11. Nay herein also men
are preferred before, or have greater advantages then the ants, that weak
people; they have no ruler, overseer, arguide; whereas generally we have some
parent, or yoke fellow, or relation, or faitfull friend, to Counsel and
provoke us to do whatever our hand finds to do, with our might. Prove. 6. 6
- 10. Eccles. 9. 10.

2. It may exhort us all, not to have fellowship with men in their unfruitful
works of darkness; but to redeem the time, especially when the days are
evil, that we may understand what the will of the Lord is. Ephesians. 5. 11 - 17.
and with David, to think on our ways* and turn our feet to Gods testimonies;
to make haste, and not delay to keep Gods commandments Psalm. 119. 59, 60. And
to engage us hereto, consider the last instruction noted in this Affirmation;
Viz.

4. He is, and shall be an happy man that finds Wisdom, and gets
understanding: The translatours have put in [is] and read, happy is the man;
but it is more full, left out, and read; Happy the man that finds Wisdom,
etc. namely, happy now and for ever. Happiness is a deliverance from evil, and
an enjoyment of all good, according to that. Psalm. 84. 11, 12. the Lord God is
a sun and shield, and will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly: Blessed (happy, as is evident in the former
verse) is the man that is in such a case: so here. He that is and shall be thus
happy, is such an one as finds Wisdom, etc. Not that has found simply; but
to him that by patient continuance in welldoing seeks for glory, etc. Romans 2.
7. to such as always abide in this exercise, and are not weary of welldoing;
he that indureth to the end the same shall be saved. Gal. 6. 9. Matthew. 10. 22.
Otherwise all will be in vain. Men may have run well in former times, and yet
by some means be hindered from Obeying the truth: They may draw back, after
they have begun well; and then during such neglect of, or departure from this
exercise, Gods soul shall have no pleasure in them. Gal. 3. 1 - 3. and 5. 7.
Hebr. 10. 38. When the righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and
commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked
man does, shall he live? Shall he be happy? All his righteousness that he has
done shall not be mentioned; in his trespass that he has trespassed; and in
his sin that he has sinned in them shall he dye. Ezekiel. 18. 24. But she is a
tree of life to all that lay hold on her, and happy is every one that retains
her. He that gets Wisdom loves his own soul, he that keeps
understanding shall find good. Prove. 3. 18. and 19. 8. Happy is such an one,
and it shall be well with him for ever. Psalm. 128. 1, 2. like to those sayings
of our Savior; He that beleiveth on him shall not perish, but have everlasting
life. Joh. 3. 15, 16, 18, 36. He that comes to me shall never hunger; he that
abides in me shall bring forth fruit; but if a man abide not in him, he is
cast forth as a branch, and whitereth, and men gather them, and they are cast
into the fire and burned. Joh. 6. 35. and 15. 1. 8. such an one then is the
subject of this happiness, even every one that comes unto, and abides in
Christ. And every such an one is pronounced happy, not by the men of the World,
the World knows not, owneth not, approves them not, but looks upon them as
miserable ones; But by Wisdom, who is infinite in love, as manifested in that
she has built her house, and furnished her table, and invites all to hear, to
come and be wise; and loves them with peculiar manner of love that from the
discovery of her love, love her, and seek her early. Prove. 18. 17. and 9. 1 -
5. and she is infinite in power, as evidenced in that she made the heavens, and
has grapled with and overcome all our enemies; and all power is given to her;
and therefore not only says, happy; But makes happy with her word; he is
blessed whom she blesses, and shall be blessed, for ever. 1 Chronicles. 17. 27. Yea
and she is faithful, the opening of her lips are right things; for her mouth
speaks truth, and wickedness is an abomination to her lips; all the words of
her mouth are in righteousness, etc. Prove. 8. 6 - 10. all which are powerful
motives to listen to, and receive her instruction, and take fast hold thereon.
And what the happiness, and blessedness of every such an one as finds
Wisdom, and gets understanding is, and shall be, we shall give some account of
in speaking to the gain thereof.

Thus though with, much weakness, I have spoken to the affirmation of the Ho:
Ghost, which was the first thing proposed to be considered in the beginning:
and now come to speak to the second. Viz.

2. We have also in the words, a general demonstration, and evidence of the
happiness of such a man as finds Wisdom, and gets understanding. And a
commendation of the exercise of finding, and getting; Laid down as a motive
and argument to engage us to seek, that we may find and get it. For the
Merchandise of it is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof then fine gold. Verse. 14.

In which Demonstration, and Commendation is signified to us in general.

1. That that which renders a man happy in the account of Wisdom, is somewhat
that is more excellent then silver, or gold, or any thing included therein, or
to be had, and enjoyed thereby; therefore it is not said, happier, or happiest,
is the man, but positively, happy the man, For the Merchandise of Wisdom is
better, etc. it must be somewhat better then gold and silver, that will make a
man happy. Though money answers all things here. Eccles. 10. 19. Yet it will
not make a man truly happy; nor all the things besides this excellent Wisdom
we can desire. Prove. 3. 15. a man may be, and is, an unhappy, miserable piteous
creature, though he should gain the whole world if he be without Wisdom, for
he will lose his own soul. Matthew. 16. 26, 27. Prove. 19. 8. Silver and gold is
so far from making a man happy, and blessed indeed, that the abundance of it
which he possesses will not make the natural life comfortable, nor continue
it. Luke 12. 15. Deuteronomy. 30. 20. It is Christ Jesus, the Wisdom that is from
above, in whom there is blessing for all the nations, and families of the
earth; in whom are treasured up all spiritual blessings in heavenly things*
Genes. 22. 18. Act. 3. 25. Ephesians. 1. 3. and he that has and finds him is
blessed indeed, and shall be blessed. Prove. 8. 33. 34. Israel, who have the God
of Jeshurun for their help, who are justified, and glory in the Lord, are an
happy people, and there is none like unto them herein, namely, none besides
them happy: though others may have an abundance of the World in their
possessions, yet he that beleiveth not the son shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him. Deuteronomy. 33. 26-29. Joh. 3. 36. Prove. 29 18. Psalm.
144* 15* and 146. 5. there is, as before is said, blessing in Christ for all
nations, that which will make a man happy; but this is only received in
receiving him, which any man may do while God is calling, and stretching forth
his hand; but though a man had all the silver and gold in the World, yet if he
sins against this Wisdom, and hates her, he wrongs his own soul, and
loves death; And is therefore a most miserable man; such an one is opposed to
the blessed and happy man. Prove. 8. 36. with verse. 34. And this consideration
might be useful to us.

1. To show unto us the folly of such as labor for silver and gold, as if
happiness consisted therein; and account themselves, and others happy in the
enjoyment of it; The covetous man blesses himself, but the Lord abhors
him. Psalm. 10. 3. indeed, our Wisdom which is earthly, leads us to labor to
be rich in those uncertain, and deceitful riches, as if they would render us
blessed in the possessing of them: Prove. 23. 4. and causes them that have the
riches of this World to say, blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; as is they
were therefore happy; or as if this were an undoubted evidence of Gods peculiar
love to them, Zach. 11. 5. but they are miserably Mistaken; he that had such an
a bundance of this Worlds good that he wanted room where to bestow it, was yet
but a fool; and so is every one that lays up treasure for himself, and is
not rich toward God, Luke 12. 16, 20.

2. It may help us to take heed, and beware of covetousness, and not to love
the World, nor the things that are in the World; for whosoever so does, the
love of the father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15, 17. why should we set our
affections upon, and lust after those things in which happiness consists not?
this argument the Apostle uses to take off the beleivers from covetousness. If
ye then be risen with Christ seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God; set your affection on things above, not on
things on the earth; for ye are dead, and your life (your happiness) is hid,
(not in the things on the earth, but) with Christ in God. When Christ who is
our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory; Mortify
therefore your members on the earth. Covetousness, Colos. 3. 1, 3, 5.

3. It may make us sober in our exercise about the things of this world; and
let the Moderation of our mind be known to all men, in all these things,
Philip. 4. 5. and especially seeing the end of all things is at hand, it may
cause us to be sober, that we may watch unto prayer, and attend upon the Lord
without distraction, for the things here below will not make us happy, 1 Petr.
4. 7. 1 Corint. 7. 29, 35. the things here below may cumber and distract us,
but one thing is needful for us to be fervently sought after by us, even this
sound Wisdom, and excellent understanding. Luke 10. 39-42.

4. Seeing silver and gold will not make us happy, and that Wisdom will only
do so, even this heavenly Wisdom, it may engage us to get Wisdom; and with
all our gettings to get understanding.

2. In this Demonstration, and Commendation, is also in general signified to
us; that the way of the Ho: Ghost for taking us of from those things that are
uncertain, and unprofitable, is, to set better things before us; He does noth
simply forbid us to love the World and things that are in, and of the World;
But to redeem us from them, and from our vain conversation, he proposes to,
and sets before us the precious blood of Christ, and what thereby he has
effected and obtained, and is become, that he might out bid all other things. 1
Petr. 1. 18, 19. Wisdom had before admonished us not to lean to our own
understanding. Verse. 5. Now that she might prevail with us to receive that
admonition, and cease from our own Wisdom, she here proposes to us a
Wisdom, and understanding that is infinitely better, more rich, and enriching.
So when the Apostle had been crying down the Wisdom of the wise, and
understanding of the prudent, that no flesh might glory in Gods presence, but
be willing to become fools, he says, Christ is made of God Wisdom. And,
says he, how be it, though we come not with excellency of speech, or of
Wisdom, but have shown that God has made foolishness the Wisdom of this
World, Yet we preach Wisdom, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 17 - 31. and 2. 1 - 8. to the end
that we might in beholding, and considering that better, and more precious, and
profitable Wisdom, part with and cease from our own, which is brutish, and
not only unprofitable, but hurtful. In like manner, that we might be broken
off from our covetousness, from affecting, and lusting after the riches of this
World; and from seeking after the honor of this World; the Wisdom of God
assures us, that riches and honor are, with her, yea durable riches, and
righteousness; that her fruit is better then gold, yea then fine gold, and her
revenue then choice silver. That in her left hand are riches and honor; that
we might hearken unto her, and be crucified to the World, and come unto her to
be enriched by her; and in a patient continuance in Weldoing seek for glory,
honor, and immortality; That honor which has immortality joined with it,
which the honor we may receive from men has not, Prove. 8. 10, 18, 20. and 3.
16. Romans 2. 7. so to take us off from rejoicing, or trusting in our own works
of righteousness, Christ Jesus by his spirit sets before us the righteousness
of God without the law; or without the works, or sacrifices thereof, even that
righteousness which is manifested by the faith of Christ to be for and unto
all, and upon all them that believe; that we might count all our own
righteousnesses as filthy rags, and as loss and dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, that we might win him and be found in him, Romans 3. 20, 22.
Gal. 2. 15, 16, 21. Philip. 3. 7, 9. Hebr. 10. 32, 34. Prove. 16. 16. and 8. 18.

1. This consideration then shows unto us, the willingness, and cordiallness
of Christ, that we might be partakers of him, and of that excellent provision
treasured up in him for all mankind. 2. It shows the bruitishness of those men
who spend their money for that which is not bread, and labor for that which
satisfies not; seeing God has prepared for us, and sets before us that which
is good and fatness, and which will give to us real satisfaction, and render
us truly happy. Isay. 55. 1 - 3. O that we may none of us by following lying
vanities forsake our own mercies. Jonah. 2. 8.
More particularly in this Demonstration and evidence of the happiness of the
man that finds Wisdom, and gets understanding; and commendation of the
exercise therabout, is signified to us.

1. That to the end we may find, and get Wisdom, as referring to the former
verse; and have the gain of it, as referring to the latter end of this verse;
We must first use Merchandise. 2. That the Merchandise of Wisdom is better
then the Merchandise of silver; and the gain thereof then fine gold.
1. That to the end we may find, and get Wisdom, and have the gain of it, we
must first use Merchandise. This excellent, and beneficial treasure is
prepared for us, and declared to us, without and before any thing be required
of us, as is before shown: But that we may partake of it, and its benefit
somewhat is required of us as God is enabling us. There is first good prepared
for men, and showed to them, before any thing be required of them. Mica. 6. 8.
But then there are commandments given to us by the Lord Jesus. The husbandman
must first labor, says the Apostle, before he be partaker of the fruit;
Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee an understanding in all things. 2 Timothy 2. 5 - 7. Hence our Savior says, Labor not for the meat that perishes,
but for that which indureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man will
give unto you, (in thus exercising your selves) Joh. 6. 27 - 29. It is in this
also, and most certainly true; The diligent hand makes rich; and the soul of
the diligent shall be made fat; but the soul of the sluggard desiretb, and
has nothing, the idle soul shall suffer hunger. Prove. 10. 4, 5. and 13. 4.
and 19. 15. and 20. 4. Hence such precepts are given to us. Prove. 4. 5, 7, and
6. 6, 11. In this instruction then we shall briefly inquire and consider.

1. What is this Merchandise here commended to us? 2. Why it is called, and
compared to Merchandise?
1. What is this Merchandise here commended to us, and what is needful hereto?
to this we have spoken already, and shall therefore briefly say.

1. There is contained in it, and needful to it, an hearing, and learning of
the father, that we may know where it is, and is to be had by us, and the
excellency of it, that we may seek it, and in the right place; how shall we
believe on him of whom we have not heard? Romans 10. 14, 17, 18. that the soul
be without knowledge it is not good, and we canoot know unless we hear and
learn of God; naturally we are ignorant, and know not Gods name, or his Sons
name, but every word of God is pure, Prove. 30. 4, 5. let every man therefore be
swift to hear the word of truth; and to hear in hearing: to learn of Christ
to know him, who is made known to us in the holy scriptures and in his
ordinances, and in the assemblies of his people, let us then bow down our
ears; and hear the words of the wise, Jam. 1. 18, 19. Prove. 22. 19. and 8.
33. and 19. 2.

2. There is diligence, and industry, especially of the soul, to be used, and
exercised, that we may get, and be made partakers of it; to wit, an exercising
our selves in the law of the Lord day and night; as is said of the virtuous and
wise Woman; she girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms;
when she perceives her Merchandise is good; her candle goes not out by night,
Prove. 31. 17, 18. so there is requisite hereto, and contained herein, a
diligent seeking, and serious searching for, and earnest drawing out this sound
Wisdom; and a safe laying it up, and keeping it, when we have found it, and
thereto reading, and searching the Scriptures of truth, meditating therein,
praying unto God to open our eyes, and give us Wisdom; and as we find his
words to eat them, that they may be the joy and rejoicing of our hearts. Matthew.
13. 45. Joh. 6. 27. Matthew. 6. 33. Prove. 8. 17, 18.

2. Now this spiritual exercise may be called, and compared to Merchandise.

1. To signify to us, that this excellent commodity of Wisdom, and
understanding is not in our selves, as is before noted; we must seek it
elsewhere, even without us in Christ Jesus, as declared to us in the gospel.
As those things that merchants seek after, they have them not of their own,
but the merchants ships bring their commodites from a far, Prove. 31. 14. so
this Wisdom is above, and far of from us; and the tidings of it is good
news from a far country. Prove. 25. 25. in us, that is, in our flesh,
dwells no good thing; we have no sound wisdom, or understanding in us; there
is none* that understands. Romans 3. 10, 11. and 7. 18. but these treasures are
hid in Christ; and yet they are brought nigh to us in the word of faith; and in
the preaching of it they are in our mouths, and in our hearts, that we might
receive them; they are brought to us in the Scriptures, and in the
opportunities we have to hear the gospel, as commodities, are brought nigh to
men in a mart, or market: But we are without this Wisdom naturally, and from
our first bith. Those are ungodly, and antichristian spirits who say, the true
light, Christ, is in every man; for Christ is in heaven, and no otherwise had
but in receiving him, even in beleiving on his name. Joh. 1. 12. and he that
hears, and learneth of the Father comes unto him; and therefore he is
naturally at a distance from him. John 6. 45.

2. It is called, and compared to Merchandise, to instruct us, that we must
part with somewhat, that we may have this excellent pearl, as also before is
said. Commodities are sold to, and therefore must be bought by the Merchants,
before they have them, or somewhat must be parted with by the Merchant for
them. Prove. 31. 24. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man seeking
goodly pearls (a good heart, good frames, and qualifications) who when he had
found one pearl of great price (Christ in the gospel in whom dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in whom is all good) he went and sold all
that he had (all his former riches righteousness, confidences, hopes for
Heaven, marks, signs, etc. and bought it. Matthew. 13. 45, 46. Indeed, herein
also is a difference between the earthly and heavenly Merchandise: The
Merchants of this World part with somewhat usually that is in some measure
worthy, or judged worthy of the commodity; But we have no worth, nor
worthiness, and therefore can parth with, nothing which may in the least be of
like value with Wisdom: And therefore he that has no money is invited to buy,
and to buy without money and price. Isay. 55. 1. Yet we must buy Wisdom, and
understanding. Prove. 23. 23, and to that end we must forsake all that we have.
Luke 14. 33.

3. This spiritual exercise is likened to Merchandise also, because as in the
earthly Merchandise a man meets with many troubles, and storms; Their trading
being much upon the sea; and they being placed near the sea. Ezekiel. 27. 3. They
meet with many boisterous winds, and troublesome seas, which many times do
affright them, and threaten danger to them: So also in seeking after this sound
Wisdom, Many are the afflictions of the righteous. Psalm. 34. 17 - 19. They
have many contrary winds of evil doctrines annoying them, and hindering them
in this pursuit, and endeavoring to corrupt them, and draw them off from
listening to Wisdom, and seeking, and getting understanding. Prove. 9. 1 - 6.
13 - 17. They are endeavoring to toss them to and fro. Ephesians. 4. 14. that they
might drive them back, or cause them to come into their pretended harbor,
which will not indeed secure them. Gal. 5. 7. Prove. 7. 1 - 18. and many storms
they meet with from violent dealars, and profane ones; many frowns and
flatteries, many scoffs, reproaches, and derisions; many threats, and actual
troubles, and bodily persecutions also; imprisonments, spoilings of their
goods, loss of liberty, name, yea and life also, when their enemies have
permissive commission given to them. Matthew. 10. 38, 39. So that, as it is
needful for us in coming unto, and following Christ Jesus to deny our selves,
and sell all that we have; So also it is needful to take up our cross daily,
and follow him. Luke 14. 26, 27. Matthew. 16. 24. Such as use this Merchandise
must exspect to meet with manifold storms and tempests; The floods of the
ungodly lift up, they lift up their voice, they lift up their Waves. Psalm. 18.
4, 5. and 93. 3, 4. They shall be hated of all men, and suffer Persecution, who
will live godly in Christ Jesus. Matthew. 10. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 12, 13. Yea and their
Lord and Master will be more abundantly trying, correcting, and chastening
them, not to discourage them in their way, but to purify them, and try them,
and make them white to the time of the end: The rain will descend, upon them,
and the floods beat, and the winds blow: and it is good, and needful for them
to know this, who resolve to exercise themselves in this Merchandise, that when
persecutions and afflictions arise for the gospel sake, they may not be
offended, or count it strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some strong
thing happened unto them. Luke 14. 25, 26-33. 1 Peter 4. 12. Matthew. 7. 24, 25.

4. This is Merchandise, because gain is aimed at, and may lawfully be
proposed by us: Those that use Merchandise in this World do it to this end,
that they may enrich themselves by their traffic, and trading. Ezekiel. 27. 12.
and 28. 5. in all labor there is profit aimed at, and sought after. Prove. 14.
23. and indeed this is the great thing the Merchants of the earth propose to
themselves, that they may enrich themselves; and therefore they willingly
adventure, and endure many storms, and go through much foul weather. Revelat.
18. 11 - 17. 23. So also those that trade for, and in this heavenly commodity,
may have respect to the recompense of the reward, to that gain which is better
then that of fine gold: the hope of this is that which causes them to labor,
and suffer reproach; and forgetting the things that are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things that are before, to press toward the mark, for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Philip. 3. 13, 14. This is
the motive the faithful and true witness uses, to engage those who were
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, to listen to his
counsel, and buy his commodities, because they were gainful, to wit, gold
tried in the fire wherewith they might be made rich, and white raiment, etc.
Revelat. 3. 17, 18. and because of this gain proposed, they who are
spiritual, and heavenly Merchants, are strengthened to bear up against all
storms, and to hoise up their sails in all foul weather, and not to faint,
but set their faces like a flint, knowing that their light affliction which is
but for a moment, works for them a far more exceeding eternal weight of
glory, While they look not on the things that are seen, but on the things which
are not seen. 2 Corinthians. 4. 16 - 18. They do not so observe the wind as to be
discouraged, but the gain being so sweet, and delightful, it causes them to
trade, that they might get more knowledge of Christ, and God in him, more
acquaintance with him, and conformity to him; that they might add to their
faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly
kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity; and that their pound might gain
five or ten pound; and that at last they might be made partakers of the hope of
eternal life, Luke 19. 15, 18. this makes them lanch out into the deep amidst
the waves, and billows of the sea, and to fear no weather, because they know
they shall reap in joy; and at last partake of that glory which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive;
this hope saves them, and strengthens them with patience to wait, and with
resolution to hold on their way, and not to fear what flesh can do unto them;
and this gain makes them willing to count as loss those things that formerly
were gainful to them; and to sell, and part with all, that by any means they
may attain the resurrection of the dead: no storms, or blasts they must
endure, and pass through; no goodly things they must forgo, and part with; no
flatteries and inticements they meet withal, move them, while the eye is fixed
on this great gain: but he that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
even as he is pure, Act. 20. 19, 24. 1 John. 3. 1, 3.

5. This exercise may be compared to merchandise, because we should seek after
this heavenly Wisdom, that we might impart it to others: thus it is with the
merchants of the earth; they adventure for commodities, and buy them, that they
may sell, and get gain, as before: and here in merchants are differenced from
many other buyers; many others buy for themselves, and their own use only; or
for their own families: But Merchants buy not commodities for themselves, and
their families only, but that they may sell to others, to any that will buy of
them; and this is part of their trade and traffic. Ezekiel. 27. 33, 34. So those
wise, and spiritual Merchants should seek and get Wisdom and understanding,
not for themselves, or their families only, though especially they are to seek
their good; and to teach and instruct their Children diligently; and to talk
unto them when they sit in the house, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 4 - 9. But they are also to
impart Wisdom to others; I say not, sell it, however not in such a sense as to
part with it, and let in go; the Ho: Ghost has instructed us to buy the
truth, and not sell it, Prove. 23. 23. but to disperse it, as instruments in the
hand of God, to others: this is the exercise of wise men, and hereby they still
grow richer, according to that, in the house of the righteous is much treasure;
the lips of the wise disperse knowledge (hereby they are more filled with
treasure, to him that has shall be given) but the heart of the foolish does
not so, Prove. 15. 6, 7. this is the way for merchants to grow rich, to disperse
their commodities to others; and hereby shall the wise merchant increase
knowledge; the more he scatters, the more he increases; the liberal soul
shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered also himself, Prove.
11. 24 - 26. Christ's disciples are the light of the World; and are instructed
to shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, holding forth
the word of life in word and conversation, Philip. 2. 14 - 16. this liberty and
authority he has given them, who taught them their trade, and committed to
them his goods, and gave them ability to traffic therewith; I mean, he who
is king of saints, who is their judge, to plead their cause, and right their
wrongs, and justify them when thy are unjustly condemned; Who is also their
Lawgiver, and Statute-maker; Whose laws they ought to observe, and according
to whose statutes they are to act, and by which to be judged: And who is their
king, to save them from all evil, and enemies; and to help them as the needs
of their matters require, Isay. 33. 22. And if any of them should forbear to
exalt, and promote Wisdom to others, because they are forbidden by men; or
because danger threatens them; or on what account soever they hide their
talents, it will tend to their great damage, if not to their utter undoing;
from him that has not shall be taken away that which he has; those who are
unprofitable servants shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping, and gnashing of teeth, Luke 19. 26. Matthew. 13. 12. and 25. 29, 30.
their Apostle, and the Bishop of their souls, has instructed them, to exhort
one another daily; and as they have received the gift, so to minister, as good
stewards, etc. Hebr. 3. 1, 13. 1 Petr* 4. 10. with Chap. 5. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11,
12. and those that are indeed Wise merchants are found in this exercise, to
invite others to this excellent commodity: the spirit and the bride say come:
and let him that hears say, come; and whosoever will let him come, and take
of the water of life freely, Isay. 55. 1. Revel. 22. 16, 17. the very end
wherefore they are brought into so near a relation to Christ, and have this
treasure committed to them, is, that they might show forth the praises of him
who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, and call others
into Wisdom's house, that they in eatingh her bread may be wise also, 1 Petr.
2. 4 - 9. Prove. 9. 1 - 6. with 2 Corint. 11. 2. and Revel. 14. 4.

6. And this may be compared to merchandise, because this spiritual exercise
of theirs should be their trade, as it were, their daily and continual
employment. As the merchandise of the merchants of the earth is their trade,
their continued practice: other men may sometimes buy what the merchant does,
but they are not therefore reckoned, or accounted merchants; but they are
accounted, and are such, who continue to buy and sell, that they may get gain,
Ezekiel. 27. 13 - 24. so they are wise merchants who with all their gettings get
understanding, Prove. 4. 7. and they are said to use merchandise because they
trade in, and with this heavenly riches: So he that had received the five
talents, went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents; and
likewise he that had received the two, etc. Matthew. 25. 16, 17. To the same
purpose it is said in another Parable, that a certain Noble man delivered ten
pounds to his ten servants, and said unto them, Occupy till I come; this was to
be their continual work and employment. And when he was returned, he called
unto him his servants to whom he had given the money, that he might know how
much every man had gained by trading, Luke 19. 12 - 15. this spiritual
merchandise is not an hearing sometimes, and seeking sometimes Wisdom, but the
making it ones business; and happy are such servants whom their Lord when he
comes shall find so doing; according to that, blessed is the man that hears
me (not that has heard for a little season, but continues so doing) watching
daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors, Prove. 8. 34. happy are
those servants who run to and fro that they may, grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ; Who follow on to know, that
they may know the Lord, win him, and be found in him; and who are showing forth
God's righteousness, and his salvation all the day; and walking in the strength
of the Lord God, making mention of his righteousness, even of his only, Psalm.
71. 14 - 24. In such like respects, this finding Wisdom, and getting
understanding, may be called, and compared to merchandise.

2. We come in the next place to show.

1. That the merchandise of Wisdom, and understanding, is better then the
merchandise of silver. 2. And the gain there of then fine gold.
1. The merchandise of Wisdom, and understanding is better then the
merchandise of silver. And this appears.

1. Because the commodity that is here traded for, even this excellent Wisdom,
and understanding, is better, infinitely better, unspeakably, yea inconceivably
more excellent then silver and gold: She is more precious then rubies, and all
the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her, Prove. 3. 15. They
are accounted amongst men the best merchants of the earth, who trade for, and
in, the most rich, and excellent wares; and their merchandise is esteemed more
excellent then the merchandise of those that traffic in mean, and
inconsiderable things: Now therefore the merchandise of the wise merchant must
needs be most excellent, because he seeks after a pearl of great, yea of the
greatest price. How much better is it to get Wisdom then gold! and to get
understanding rather to be chosen then silver, Prove. 16. 16. Man knows not the
price thereof, the price it cost, or the worth of this heavenly riches it
cannot be gotten for gold neither shall silver be weighed for the price
thereof. It cannot be valued with the gold of ophir with the precious Onyx, or
the sapphire; the gold and the crystal cannot equal it; and the exchange of
it shall not be for jewels of fine gold: No mention shall be made of coral,
or of Pearls, for the price of Wisdom is above rubies. The topaz of Ethiopia
shall not equal it neither shall it be valued with pure gold. Job. 28. 13-19.
Wisdom, even Christ Jesus, is the principal thing: And the law of his mouth
is better then thousands of gold and silver. Prove. 4. 6. Ps. 119. 72, 127.
There is gold, and a multitude of Rubies, but the lips of knowledge are a
Precious jewel, Prove. 28. 15. Yea this Pearl is better then that which many
zealous, and religious Merchants, are seeking after: They are seeking goodly
pearls, they are seeking first some brokenes of heart, some love to God and
men; some marks, and frames, that from thence they may conclude Christ died for
them, and God loves them; they are seeking after some knowledge of God, zeal
for God, hatred of sin, and victory over their corruptions, as it were by the
Work, of the law, and before they dare come to Christ; and to this end they
labor, and are heavy laden, and weary themselves in vain, and to no purpose.
But this is a pearl of great price, even Christ as declared in the gospel, in
and with whom God gives all things; here he gives wisdom, and understanding to
us, hereby he quickens to a lively hope; by him he gives repentance, and
forgiveness of sins, here he gives the manifestation of his love to us before
we love him; he is the fountain of all grace and truth: Hence the Wise
merchant who was seeking goodly pearls, when he found this one pearl of great
price, went and sold all that he had and bought it, Matthew. 13. 45, 46. Philip.
3. 4, 9. Christ is made of God Wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption: Yea he is all in the new creation, that we might come unto him,
and of his fullness receive, grace for grace. 1 Corinthians. 1. 30. Colos. 3. 11. O
that we did in deed know his excellency, and comeliness! That we might receive
his instruction and not silver: And knowledge rather then choice gold. For
Wisdom is better then rubies, and all the things that may (Possibly, and
lawfully) be desired, are not to be compared to it. Prove. 8. 10, 11.

2. The merchandise or exercise, in seeking, getting, and drawing out this
Wisdom and understanding is better then the merchandise of silver. For

1. It is more honorable in the sight of God and all good men; The merchandise
of the earth is in esteem among men; and those that use it are some of them,
princes, and the honorable of the earth. Isay. 23. 8. 2 Chronicles. 8. 27, 28.
Revel. 18. 23. But this is more honorable, not in the sight and account of
fools, but in the judgment of him who is perfect in knowledge, and of those
who are taught of, and led by him truly God has no high account of the riches
of this World, nor of those that labor for them. Will he esteem thy riches?
no not gold, nor all the forces of strength. Job. 36. 19 Prove. 23. 4. But those
that honor him, who prefer him above all other things, and hear Christ
Jesus (for he that honors not the son, honors not the father that has sent
him) he will honor, he will greatly, and highly esteem them, both now and
here after: And those that despise him, and love their gold or silver, or
children above him, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Hence we have this
motive proposed, to engage and prevail with us to get Wisdom, and
understanding, she shall bring thee to honor (not only hereafter but) when
thou do embrace her Prove. 4. 5-8. the way of life is above to the wise it is
above any other way, that he may depart from hell beneath, Prove. 15. 24. the
conversation of such is in heaven; and they are minding, and trading for, and
in heavenly things, Philip. 3. 19, 20. and as high as heaven is above the
earth, so answerably the exercise of those that are seeking after, and dwelling
in heaven, is higher then the Merchandise of those who seek gold and silver:
and indeed to be the servant of Christ in this exercise is the highest honor,
and most honorable service, and exercise; if any man serve me, says Christ,
him shall my father honor he that waits on this master shall be honored,
Joh. 12. 26. He that has my commandments, my word, and gospel, and keeps
them, says our savior, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall
be loved of my father: and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto
him, as I will not do to the World, and those that trade for that only; and
my father and I will come unto him; and not only give him a short visit, but
we will make our abode with him. What an honor is this to have the favor of
and fellowship with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ? and this honor
have all his saints* who are exercising themselves in this heavenly
merchandise, Joh. 14. 21-23. and those that are led by Wisdom honor them that
fear the Lord Ps. 15. 4. and are instructed to hold them in reputation, and
very highly to esteem them in Love, for their works sake, who are sanctifide
and made meet for their masters use, and prepared to every good work, Phil. 2.
29. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11, 12, 13.

2. This heavenly exercise is better then the Merchandise of silver, because it
is more pleasing to God: men may laudably serve God in any work of his
providence he gives them to be exercised in; and may, while they are so
exercised, with the blessing of God become rich; though when that is the
highest end aimed at, it is displeasing, and abominable to God, Prove. 23. 4.
Luke 16. 15. but still to cry after Wisdom, and lift up the voice for
understanding, this exercise is better in the eyes of God then to seek silver,
or the riches of this World. So much is signified to us in what is said of
Solomon who wrote this book of the Proverbs. When the Lord in vision had
bidden him to ask what he should give him, Solomon desired Wisdom and
knowledge; and a wise and understanding heart. And the speech pleased the Lord
that Solomon had asked this thing: And God said unto him, because thou have
asked this thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, neither have
asked riches for thy self nor the life of thine enemies; but have asked for
thy self understanding, behold I have done according to thy Word, 1 King. 3.
5, 12. 2 Chronicles. 1. 7, 12. our savior instructs us first to seek the kingdom
of God; and rather to seek that then any of the things of the world: and the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. For he that in these things serves Christ, is well pleasing
to God, and approved of men, Matthew. 6. 33. Luke 12. 30, 31. with Romans 14. 17,
18. God has no pleasure in fools, that are destitute of, and lightly esteem
this excellent Wisdom, Eccles. 5. 4. but there is joy in heaven: and it even
rejoices the heart of our heavenly father when we retain his words, and there
through get Wisdom, and understanding: it makes his heart, as it were, glad,
Prove. 10. 1. and 27. 11. Whosoever loves Wisdom rejoices his father, Prove. 29.
3. hence that; my son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even
mine; yea my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things, Prove. 23.
15, 16.

3. This spiritual merchandise is better then the merchandise of silver,
because it is more pleasurable delightful, and joyous to us, while we sek
this Wisdom with the whole heart. The Ho: Ghost does hereby evidence and
demonstrate that the Merchandise of Wisdom and understanding is better then
the Merchandise of silver, because her ways are ways of pleasantness; and all
her paths are peace, Prove. 3. 14, 17. My son says Wisdom, eat thou honey
because it is good and the honeycomb which is sweet to thy taste. So shall the
knowledge of Wisdom be unto thy soul when thou have found it; then there
shall be a reward, etc. Prove. 24. 13, 14. The words of Wisdom are pleasant
Words, even as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul and health to the bones: yea
they are admirably sweet, sweeter then honey, and the honeycomb, Prove. 16. 24.
Psalm. 19, 10. and 119. 103. Prove. 2. 10. Whatever pleasure and delight men
find in the earthly merchandise yet it falls short of that they partake of who
trade for Wisdom; there is no fullness of joy in the former; nor is it sweet
and delightful to the most noble part of man, the soul; that may be sad and
sorrowful enough in the midst of all their outward joy, and delight: for the
World, about which they are exercised, and all the things thereof, are broken
Cisternes that can hold no water. But the God of hope fills the soul with joy
and peace in beleiving; and with such joy as a stranger intermedleth not with.
Prove. 14. 10. Romans 15. 13. 1 Petr. 1. 8. while the heart is exercised in a
beleiving mind fullness, and consideration of the precious blood of Christ; and
of what there by he has effected and obtained in to himself, and is become;
and of the grace of God as herein commended; and of all the treasures of
Wisdom and knowledge which are hid in this mystery; it causes them to rejoice
always in the Lord, and to joy in the God of their salvation, and though they
are as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, Habak. 3. 15, 18. Phil. 3. 1, 3. and
4. 4. 2 Corint. 6. 10. this is life to the soul, and health to all the flesh,
and the more they are thus exercised, the more they increase in understanding,
and thereby they increase joy in the Lord, who is the only true object of joy.
Isay 29, 19. For God gives to a man that is good before him, Wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy but to the sinner (that wanders out of, or erres from the
way of understanding) travel, to gather, and to heap up, that hemay give to
him that is good before God, Eccles. 2. 26.

4. The merchandise of Wisdom, and understanding is better then the
merchandise of silver, because it is a more sure and certain way of finding,
none shall fail of it who seek it as men seek silver, and search for it as for
hid treasure: men may seek for the treasures and riches of this World, and not
find them; they are uncertain riches; there is an uncertainty in getting,
as well as in keeping. 1 Timothy 6. 17. though many times the diligent hand makes
rich, and they meet with profit and increase who are industrious, and diligent
in their business, and however if they be skillful, therein also; yet this is
not always so. I returned, says the preacher, and saw under the sun, that
the race is not to the swift; nor the battle to the strong; neither yet bread
to the Wise; nor yet riches to men of understanding; nor yet favor to men of
skill, but time and chance happens to them all, Eccles. 9. 11. men may in
vain, and to no profit, rise up early; and sit up late, and eat the bread of
carefullness, Psalm. 127. 2. there is a great uncertainty in getting and
retaining this unrighteous Mammon, especially by merchandise, the merchants
ships may be broken in going for commodities; or sink, and be cast away when
they are full and returning, 2 Chronicles. 20. 36, 37. Or trading may fail and
decay: Or those to whom they sell and adventure their commodities may break,
or cheat and deceive them: or moth and rust may corrupt, and thieves break
through and steal: and however God has not engaged his word that those that
seek silver and gold Shall certainly find what they aim at, and seek after.
But in seeking Wisdom with the whole heart we shall be sure to find it; for
God who cannot lie has so promised, as has been said; and these promises are,
confirmed with the precious blood of Jesus, who in the virtue thereof is raised
again, and is the Mediator of the New Testament that the called may receive
the promise of the eternal inheritance, Hebr. 9, 15. 2 Corint. 1. 20. Matthew.
26. 28. hence our savior exhorts, ask and it shall be given you; seek and
ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you for every one that asks
receives; and he that seeks finds; and to him that knocks is shall be
opened. If earthly fathers, who are evil, give good gifts to their children;
how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit, the spirit of
Wisdom and revelation, to them that ask him, Luk, 11. 9-13. Ephesians. 1. 17.
Prove. 2. 1-6. Jam. 1. 5, 6. the Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to
the soul that seeks him; even herein he is good; he will give himself unto
them to be their Wisdom and inheritance, and with himself all things that
pertain to life and godliness according to that; ye shall call upon me and
pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me, and find me
when jou search for me with all your heart; and I will be found of you says
the Lord, Lament. 3. 25. with Jer. 29. 12-14. and in dispersing this heavenly
Wisdom it shall certainly tend to the enriching of them: according to that be
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: in due time we shall reap if we
faint not. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Galat. 6. 9, 10. What an encouragement is this for us
to seek Wisdom, to get up, and be doing, when there is a certainty of
finding? and what a shame will it be for us to neglect the opportunities put
into our hands? are the merchants of the earth so diligent in seeking perishing
substance, when also there is so great an uncertainty of finding? and shall we
be so bruitich and foolish as to have no heart to seek durable riches and
righteousness, when there is a certainty of finding in seeking in the due
opportunity? those that seek Wisdom early shall find her. Prove. 8. 17. O! let
us not be slothful, but diligent followers of them who through faith and
patience inherit the promises.

5, The merchandise of Wisdom and understanding is the most excellent
merchandise, because it is most safe, and secure from dangers and fears: those
that occupy themselves in the earthly merchandise are exposed to manifold
fears, lest they should lose their commodities: yea and if they adventure upon
the seas, they are in danger of losing their lives: For many times God
commands, and raises up the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof; they mount up to heaven, they go down again to the dephts, their
soul is melted because of trouble; they reele to fro, and stagger like a
drunken man, and all their Wisdom is swallo wed up, Psalm. 107. 25-27. yea and
many times they lose their lives also by storms, or robbers, etc. And if they
grow rich they are in daily danger, and fear, lest thieves should break in
upon them, and spoil thein, or kill them; and this fear has torment and
occasions much disquietment to them. But whosoever hearkneth to Wisdom shall dwell
safely; and shall be quiet from the fear of evil. Prove. 1. 20-33. This is a
motive laid down by Wisdom to engage us to trade in this excellent commodity,
to keep sound wisdom and discretion. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely,
and thy foot shall not stumble: When thou lie down thou shall not be afraid;
Yea thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. Be not afraid of sudden
fear, for the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from
being taken, Prove. 3. 21-26. Indeed the wise merchants as men, and sons of
Adam, are subject to like passions and infirmities as others, and so to sear
and be afraid of danger: but this wisdom strengthens the wise against the
fear of evil, more then ten mighty men which are in the city. A wise man is
strong, yea a man of knowledge increases strength, Eccles. 7. 19. and 9.
16-18. Prove. 24. 5. the love of God known, and heartly believed casts out
continually that fear which has torment, and makes men bold as a lion, 1 John
4. 18. Prove. 28. 1. these wise merchants know, that that good part and portion
they trade in, and make choice of, shall never be taken away, Luke 10. 42. and
that he that sees the son and beleiveth in him shall never perish, but have
everlasting life. God preserves their souls, and none can pluck them out of
his hand, who is greater then all; and though in this Merchandise, and for
Christ sake they hate, and may lose their lives in this World, they shall keep
them unto life eternal. He that beleiveth in Christ, though he were dead yet
shall he live, and be that lives and beleiveth shall never dye, Joh. 12. 25,
26. and 11. 25, 26. the name of the Lord is astrong tower, and they run
thereinto and are safe, and set on high from evil, and from the fear of
evil: So that they can glorify God in the fires, and not fear any evil
though they walk in the valley of the shadow of death. Wisdom loves those that
love her: and the beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety, the Lord shall
cover them all the day long. Prove. 8. 17. with Deuter. 33. 12.

6. The trading for heavenly Wisdom is the best Merchandise, because it is the
most easy way, easier then the Merchandise of silver and gold, this is the
Motive and argumens Christ, the Wisdom of God uses, to prevail with us to
come unto him, and learn of him, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light.
Matthew. 11. 28-30. It may not so appear to our Wisdom, but may seem very
difficult; Yea it is a great mystery in it self; but it is made easy, and is
declared so to be by him who is truth it self; and if our right eye cause us
to offend, let us pluck it out, and become fools, that we may believe him.
Amongst men every one cannot be a Merchant of the earth: Some whatever Masters
and instructers they have, yet they want capacity to learn this mystery of
Merchandise; and others, because of the difficulty of the employment, though
they may do well while they are before the Masters eye, and under his care,
and instruction, yet when they trade for them selves they may be to seek, and
through their unskilfullness be un fit for it, because there are so many
intricacies in it through the rising and falling of commodities, and by reason
of deceitful men they may meet with, etc. And others though they have capacity
enough, yet may be so poor as that they cannoth carry an end their trade; or
such heavy customs and impositions may be laid upon their goods, that they
know not how to pay them and subsist. But any man may through the grace of
Christ be a wise Merchant, to trade for, and in heavenly Wisdom, as before is
shown. There is a wise and gracious Master to teach them, even Christ Jesus
the Wisdom of God; and he calls, o ye simple understand Wisdom, and ye
fools be ye of an understanding heart: Hear, for I will speak of excellent
things; Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the
way. And though they have no capacity naturally, but are all fools, yet the
Spirit is put upon him, and he will bring forth, and give judgment, capacity,
and discretion to them that have none; which no eartly Merchant can do to his
apprentice. God has given him for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind
eyes, and unstop the deaf ears. Psalm. 25. 8. Isay. 42. 1-7. He is even eyes
in his testimony to the blind; and though they are dull of hearing and
learning, though they are unteachable, and untractable, yet he is meek and
lowly in heart, and will not strive, nor cry, nor cause his voice to be heard
in the streets: A bruised reed will he not break, and the dimly burning week
will he not quench Matthew. 11. 29. Isay. 42. 2, 3. Hence he calls hear ye
deaf, and look ye blind that you may see, and not be discouraged because of
your natural incapacity. Who is blind as my servant? Or deaf as my messenger
that I sent? Who is blind (through charity) as he that is perfect? And blind as
the Lords servant? Seeing many things (that might provoke him to cast us off,
and forbear to instruct us) but he observes them not, opening the ears, but
he hears not. Isay. 42. 18-20. with verse. 1. And then he that comes to him,
he will never cast out from under his care and instruction, but will still
guide them with his counsel and eye, until he receive them to glory: The time
of their apprenticeship to him is all their life time, they are still the Lords
servants, though free from all men. And the way of Wisdom is made easy, and
plain, as declared in the testimony of Jesus; the rules, orders, and statutes
not changeable, as Merchants here may be, but abide the same at all times: The
way of the righteous is made plain, and raised up as a causey, so as way
faring men, though fools shall not err therein. Prove. 15. 19. Isay. 35. 8.
Nor is this heavenly commodity so dear as that they may not get, and obtain
it, but they may have it without money, and without price, even freely. Isay.
55. 1. And though it must be bought, yet every man has that to buy it withal;
and in parting with all he has, shall be made a partaker of it. Luke 14. 33.
Nor will he lay such burdens, and impositions upon any as to discourage them;
his commandments are not greivons. 1 John 5. 3. this Merchandise is made easy
by their gracious and wise Lord, who is the head, Master, and orderer of the
seekers; and who is also the commodity to be soughtafter, and enjoyed by them.
Though there are excellent things containd in Wisdom, yet they are all plain
to him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge, through
Wisdoms instruction. Prove. 8. 4-10. Hence when our hevenly Father calls upon
us, and provokes us to get Wisdom, to get understanding, etc. that we might
not say, this trade is so hard I cannot attain it, he signifies, that he
makes, it easy by his words; and therefore says, instead of murmuring and
questioning; hear, o my son, and receive my sayings: I have taught thee in the
way of Wisdom, I have ledd thee in the right paths (in the way of Wisdom are
right paths, there are no turnings in it either to the right hand, or to the
left; no thorns, snares, or stumbling blocks in it) when thou go (therein)
thy steps shall not be straightened (there is room enough) and when thou runnest
thou shall not stumble, etc. Prove. 4. 5-11. 27. with Jerem. 31. 9. and they
that walk herein shall find it an easy way; their soul shall dwell at ease,
whatever troubles they have in the outward man, Psalm. 25. 13. Whereas those
that exercise themselves in the earthly merchandise meet with, not only much
weariness to the flesh, but also much vexation of spirit, Eccles. 2. 17, 18,
22, 23, 26. a scorner that hates instruction and reproof seeks Wisdom, and
finds it not, but knowledge is easy to him that understands; Prove. 14. 6. with
chap 15. 12. and 9. 7, 8.

7. This spiritual merchandise is better then that of silver, because it is
more clean and free from pollution: there is much pollution and corruption
cleaving to the earthly merchandise through our lust to the riches of this
World, 2 Peter. 1. 4. the thing they trade in and for is called unrighteous
Mammon, because too often unrighteousness is used and exercised in trading for
it, Luke 16. 11. and the merchants of the earth do very frequently pollute and
defile themselves in their trade and traffic; according to that; He is a
merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand, be loves to oppress, and
deceive. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance;
in all my labors they shall find no iniquity in me, etc. Hose. 12. 7, 8.
there is many times much evil and fraud found with them in burying, much false
speaking, lying, and deceit: the getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a
vanity tossed to and fro, from one to another, of them that seek death, Prove.
21. 6. When they are buying then they discommend, disparage, and dispraise the
wares they are about, that they may beat down the price of them, and have them
at a cheap rate. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer; but when he is
gone his way then he boasts: praises the commodities which before he
undervalued, and boasts what a good bargain he has gotten, Prove. 20. 14.
and thus, and other ways they go beyond, overreach, and defraud others, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. and many times in their Merchandising, they, to the end they may
have a commodity worth the buying, have fellowship with others in their
unfruitful works of darkness, keeping company with fwearers, drunkards, and
profane ones, and too much loving their manners, according to what is said of
Tyrus. By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee
with violence, and thou have sinned, thou have defiled thy sanctuaries by the
multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic, Ezekiel. 28.
15-18. And in selling, many times, there is much pollution found with men,
boasting of, and overvaluing their wares, as supposing gain to be godliness,
and that all is honestly come by that is that way gotten, which is a great
evil, and too commonly found with men in their trading, 1 Timothy 6. 5. Amos 8.
5. Or if men be free from those gross evils in their buying and selling, yet
many times their hearts go after their covetousness, and they love the world,
and the things thereof, and, if riches increase set their hearts upon them; and
are highminded, or trust in those uncertain riches, which things are an
abomination in the sight of God, 1 John 2. 15, 16. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Ephesians. 5. 5.
Psalm. 62. 10. But the trading for and in this heavenly merchandise, is free
from such pollutions: This wisdom that is from above, Christ as declared in
the gospel, is first pure, Jam. 3. 17. and the fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of Wisdom unto man, and the instruction of Wisdom, this is clean,
Psalm. 19. 9. with Prove. 1. 7. and 15. 33. the fear of the Lord is to hate
evil, pride, and arrogance, and the evil way, and froward mouth, Prove. 8. 14.
they are, fools that count it a sport to do mischief, and make a mock at
sin, but a man of understanding has wisdom, which will preserve him from such
folly, and from all evil, Prove. 10. 23. and 14. 8, 9. Wisdom and the way of
getting Wisdom, is clean; and in walking therein we shall be kept from every
path of the destroyer, in all our conversation: we may, and shall escape the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Peter. 2. 20. this Wisdom is an excellent preservative, to preserve
us from the evil of the world, that we may not have fellowship with men in
their unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them; to keep us from
deceiving, and defrauding others in our buying and selling, and in all our
exercise about the affairs of this life; to preserve us from covetousness,
pride, desires of vainglory, and from every evil way: it is pure and
purifying; and an excellent Antidote to keep us from all the infection of sin:
to deliver us from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks froward
things (and not the words of wisdom, in which there is nothing froward, Prove.
8. 8.) who leave the paths of uprightness (the way of wisdom) to walk in the
ways of darkness: who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of
the wicked; whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths: And to
deliver us from the strange Woman, even from the woman which flattereth with
her lips on this account, because this treasure of heavenly wisdom is so pure
and clean, and will preserve us from evil, the Ho: Ghost instructs us to seek
it. Get Wisdom, get understanding, forget it not, neither decline from the
words of my mouth, forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love her and
she shall keep thee, Prove. 4. 5 - 7. and 2. 10 - 19. and 5. 1 - 4. and 7. 4, 5.
and 9. 5, 6. Ephesians. 5. 11 - 17. Colos. 4. 5, 6.

8. The merchandise of Wisdom is more excellent then that of silver, because
it is more profitable and beneficial; but this leads us to the next thing to
be considered by us. What has been said unto this instruction, to wit. That
the Merchandise of Wisdom and understanding is better then the Merchandise of
Silver, both because Wisdom, which is the thing to be sought after is more
excellent, yea infinitely, and incomparably better then silver and gold; and
the refore also the way of seeking and getting it is, answerably better, more
honorable, pleasing to God pleasant to the wise Merchant; certain safe easy
clean, and profitable; may be of usefullness to us.

1. To show onto us the ignorance and folly of the most part of men, who in
their esteems, and practices prefer the things that are in the World, before
this heavenly, rich, and most enriching commodity: such are fools in the
account of Wisdom, though they are looked upon as, and accounted wise men in
the World: They are fools that despise Wisdom and instruction. Prove. 1. 2, 7.
fools they are that hate knowledge, as all do who love, and serve the World;
for no Man can serve two Masters: either he will love the one and hate the
other; or cleave to the one and forsake the other: Ye (says Christ) cannot
serve God and Mammon. Prove. 1. 22. with Matthew. 6. 24. He that has the World
for his Master; that serves, and is ruled by, and obeys it, cannot serve
Christ as his Lord, for these two are contrary the one to the other: No man can
love the World and the Father; if any man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him. 1 John 2. 15. It is no man's evil to serve God in any
work of his providence he gives us to be exercised in; nay it is an evil which
the Ho: Ghost does reprove, and condemn, to be idle, and slothful in
business: But this is men's folly, that they make the World, and the things
thereof the Maine thing to be sought after, and gotten by them; that they can
watch, and look every one for his gain from his quarter; that they can rise
early, and sit up late, and run, and labor for, and lay hold on every
opportunity, and endure hardness, and not matter shame, or danger, so they may
but get and increase their earthly substance: and mean time when a price is
put into their hands for getting Wisdom, they have no heart thereto; they can
neglect opportunities for getting this spiritual commodity, and then cry,
there is a lion in the way, I shall be slain in the streets: they are not
valiant for the truth upon the earth, Jerem. 9. 3. but are fearful, and afraid
of sufferings, shame, and reproach for Christ's sake; ashamed of him and his
words in an evil and adulterous generation: What will become of such in the
end? Christ will be ashamed of such, when he comes in his own glory, and in
the glory of his father, and in the glory of his holy Angels, Luke 9. 23 - 16.
with Mark. 8. 34 - 38. this is that which is greatly provoking to God, he was
wroth with those who, when they were invited to come into Wisdoms house, and
eat of her provision, made light of the invitation, and went, one to his farm,
another to his merchandise; Yea protests that none of them shall taste of his
supper, Matthew. 22. 4-7. with Luke 14. 16-24. oh that we may so consider it,
that we may walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the
time, (for-getting Wisdom) because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5. 15 - 17.

2. And let us all be exhorted, seeing Wisdom is the principal thing to get
it; and with all our gettings to get understanding. And to move hereto consider
further.

The gain of Wisdom and understanding is better then that of fine gold, of
the choicest, and most refined gold; and so better then the gain of all
earthly riches; though the gain of gold if it be honestly gotten, and to a
good end labored for, that we may honor the Lord with our substance, and with
the first fruits of our increase, and live to him that died for us, and rose
again, is good; Yet the gain of spiritual Wisdom is better, and more to be
desired then gold, yea then much fine gold; and better then all the gainful
things here below; and so have wise men accounted it. Philip. 3. 7, 8, 9. It is
admirably, and inexpressibly better. Prove. 16. 16. it is profitable unto all
things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come, as is said of godliness: And indeed this Wisdom, and Godliness are the
same: The root and foundation of Godliness is, God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit; the means and medium for making it known, and
manifesting it, and giving, and dispensing it, is, the gospel, especially as
preached by the Apostles: The exercising our selves to godliness is, beleiving
with the heart on Christ as delivered to death for our offenses, and raised
again for our justification, and glorified, as this ts declared to us in the
gospel. 1 Timothy 4. 8. with Chapt. 3. 16.

1. The gain of it is better now, by it there is profit to them that see the
sun. Eccles. 7. 11. For

1. It gives all things that pertain to life; and gives life to them that get
it, even spiritual, and eternal life* now by faith, and a first fruits of the
Spirit, and all contained therein, which silver and gold cannot do: Wisdom is
a defense, and money is a defense, but the excellency of knowledge is, that
Wisdom gives life to them that have it. Eccles. 7. 12. hereby the Holy Ghost
does evidence that the gain of Wisdom is better then fine gold; and therefore
proposes it as a motive to move and prevail with us to seek and get it; She
is a tree of life to all that lay hold on her. Prove. 3. 17. And this is
contained in the blessedness they meet with, and partake of, that seek and
find her; Whosoever finds her finds life. Prove. 8. 32. 35. As

1. It gives unto those that find Wisdom, the forgiveness of sins; by Christ
all that believe, are justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses. Act. 13. 39. And this forgiveness of sins is
included in eternal life; and therefore eternal life is opposed to
condemnation; and in having that a man passes from death to life. Joh. 5. 25.
and being justified from their sins by the blood of Christ, much more shall
they be saved from wrath, even from the wrath of God, through him. Romans 5. 9.
Hereinits gain is greatly preferred before fine gold, and all the riches of
this World; riches profit not in a day of wrath, but righteousness delivers
from death Prove. 10. 2. and 11. 4. Neither men's silver, nor their gold shall be
able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath. Zephan. 1. 18. their riches
will not procure them a pardon from God (though they may from the Man of sin)
nor deliver them from his anger, and the dreadful, and direful effects
thereof; their money will not obtain the remission of their sins when they come
to dye; nor give them peace with God; nor will this deliver in the day of
wrath: But men shall then cast their idols of silver and gold to which they
have given their loves and worship, to the moles, and to the bats, to go into
the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of
the Lord; they shall then cast their silver into the streets, and their gold
shall be removed, or, shall be as uncleaness; their silver, and their gold
shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath. Isay. 2. 19 -
21. Ezeck. 7. 19. But this is the gain of Wisdom: In finding and winning
Christ, a man also receives remission of sins, and deliverance from Gods wrath,
and the fears thereof; So as being justified by faith, he has peace with God
through our Lord Jesus. Romans 4. 25, and 5. 1. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name whosoever beleiveth in him shall receive the
remission of sins. Act. 10. 43. 1 John 5. 11, 12. And oh what a blessed
privilege is this! It is even the sum of all blessedness: Even as David
describes the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works, saying, blessed in the Man whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sin is eovered, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. with Romans 4. 5 - 7. And it is also the
inlett unto all Salvation; He gives the knowledge and enjoyment of salvation
through the forgiveness of sins Luke 1. 77. Psalm. 103. 1 - 3. Herethorow they
receive salvation, and deliverance from his anger, the power whereof who
knows! Psalm. 90. 11, 12. The wrath of this King of Kings is as messengers of
death, but a wise man will pacify it. How? not by fine gold; but to this end,
how much better is it to get Wisdom then gold? Prove. 16. 14-16.

2. It gives to men the Spirit of life, even, that living, quickening Spirit
which is Wisdoms Spirit; this money will not get, or give: It was an heinous,
provoking iniquity in Simon Magus, to offer money for the Holy Spirit: and
therefore Peter said unto him, They money perish with thee, because thou have
thought the gift of God may be purchased with money, etc. Act. 8. 18 - 21, 22,
23. But now this is the promise that Wisdom has promised the simple ones, who
love their simplicity, and scorners that delight in scorning, and fools that
hate knowledge, that in turning at her reproofs, she will pour out her Spirit
unto them; and says, Behold, consider, and mark this, for this is a wonderful
enriching gift of God. Prove. 1. 20 - 23. This Spirit is given by Wisdom; it is
upon, and rests upon Christ Jesus, even the spirit of wisdom and
understanding; and it is given as a spirit of Wisdom, and revelation in the
knowledge of Christ, Isay. 11. 2, 3. with Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. and by this spirit,
wisdom does make known her words, Prove. 1. 23. and therethorow glorify
herself; for it is the work of his spirit to bear witness of Christ, to
glorify him, and take of his things, and show unto us, that we might run unto
him; and that our hearts might be enamoured on him, and united unto him, and
rejoice in him, Joh. 15. 26. and 16. 14. and through his glorifying Christ, and
showing unto men the excellency, and preciousness of the flesh and blood of
Christ Jesus, this holy spirit does quicken them to a lively hope by the
resurrection of Christ from the dead, who by the grace of God tasted death for
every man: it is the spirit that quickneth, 1 Petr. 1. 3. with Joh. 6. 35 - 63.
and this hope in Christ makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy spirit: for while we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungoodly, Romans 5. 5, 6. But thereby
we are saved from being weary, and fainting in our minds by reason of any
afflictions, or adversity we meet withal; and from our sins and idols, Romans
8. 24, 25. 1 John 3. 3. and this hope is an anckor of the soul, both sure,
that which will not break: and steadfast, standing fast in Christ the rock, and
therefore will not slip, or deceive us; and which enters into that within the
vail, whither the forerunner is for us entered, Jesus, made an highpriest after
the order of Melchisedec, Hebr. 6. 18 - 20. this spirit of Wisdom is an
excellent gift of God; it is the spirit of truth, to guide into all truth; it
is the comforter, to comfort us in all our tribulations: it is the spirit of
life, to inliven, and quicken us: it is the spirit of Wisdom, to open our
blind eyes, and still, and continually to give Wisdom to the wise: It is the
spirit of adoption, and freedom, whereby we cry Abba Father; it is the spirit
of the fear of the Lord, to teach, and help us to reverence, and stand in awe
of God, and to depart from iniquity: It is the spirit, where by we may abound
in hope of the mercy of Christ, and God in him, unto eternal life; and
therefore it is set down as that in which all good things are contained
compare. Matt. 7. 11. with Luke 11. 13. And it is so excellent in its gifts,
influences, and operations, in bearing witness of the blood of Christ, and what
he is become therethorow; and of the water or free love of God commended
everlastingly therein. 1 John 5. 6. Well may it be said, the gain of Wisdom is
better then fine gold.

3. It gives unto us the favor of God in which is life. Psalm. 30. 5. Yea whose
loving kindness is better then life. Psalm. 63. 3. They are loved with peculiar
manner of love that love Wisdom. Prove. 8. 17. Christ's Father will love them,
and Christ will love them, and will manifest himself unto them. Joh. 14. 21.
23. Prove. 3. 1 - 4. This is a motive set down by Wisdom to engage us to seek
her; and an evidence of the blessedness of him that finds her. Whosoever finds
her. -- Shall obtain favor of the Lord. Prove. 8. 32 - 35. The Kings favor is
toward a wise servant, but his wrath is upon him that causes shame, that
despises Wisdom and is a fool. Prove. 14. 35. The favor of God is a
wonderfully gainful, profitable, and desirable thing; and therefore the
servants of God have prayed that they might be favored with the favor he
bears unto his people, because of the blessed advantage thereof. Psalm. 106.
4, 5. And have entreated that with their whole heart. Psalm. 119. 58. this is
infinitely better, and more to be desired then the favor of great men, and
princes, for that is deceitful; and it is better, and rather to be chosen then
silver and gold. Prove. 22. 1. In the light of the Kings countenance is life;
and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain, to refresh, and revive, and
fructify the soul, and to make it like a watered garden: But how may we be
made partakers of it? Money will not procure, or give it: If a man would give
all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned. Cant.
8. 7. But this good understanding gives favor. Prove. 13. 15, and it may be
had in getting Wisdom, and hereby the Holy Ghost evidenceth intimately that
the gain of Wisdom is better then fine gold, when he says; How much better
is it to get Wisdom then gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen
then silver. Prove. 16, 15, 16. O! blessed are the people that know the joyful
sound, They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance: In thy name
shall they rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted:
For thou art the glory of their strength; and in thy favor our horn shall be
exalted. Psalm. 89. 15 - 17. Many there are that entreat the favor of the
prince, and every man is a friend to him that gives gifts; But he that gets
Wisdom loves his own soul, he that keeps understanding shall find good;
he shall find the favor of, and fellow ship with God, which is as far above
the favor and friendship of the kings and princes of the earth, as himself is
above them, unto whom none of the princes, or kings of the earth may be
likened, or compared; and before whom all nations are as nothing, and they are
counted to him less then nothing, and vanity, Prove. 19. 6, 8. and 3. 3, 4.
Isay. 40 15, 18.

2. The gain of Wisdom is better then fine gold, because as it gives all
things that pertain to life; so also it gives all things that pertain to
godliness, 2 Petr. 1. 3. it is profitable to direct us thereto, that we may
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh, Eccles. 10. 10. and that we may be imitators, and followers of
God as dear children. The fear of the Lord is the instruction of Wisdom,
that which Wisdom instructs us to, Prove. 15. 33. it teaches us to reverence
him, to give to him the honor due unto his name; to trust in him, Prove. 22.
17, 20. to depart from evil, Job 28. 28. to pray unto him, Eccles. 5. 1. to
speak profitably unto men: Prove. 15. 2. to seek and increase knowledge, Prove.
18. 15. and 21. 11. to rebuke others when need requires, Prove. 25 12. Eccles.
7. 5. to know when to speak, and when to be silent, Prove. 17. 27, 28. yea it is
profitable to direct, us in all our conversation, that we may give none offense
in any thing to the Jew, or Gentile, or to the church of God, but that we may
do all things that God in all things may be glorified, and the good of men,
and especial good of beleivers may be pursued, and promoted hence the Apostle
prays, and desires for the beleivers, that they might be filled with the
knowledge of Gods will in all Wisdom, and spiritual understanding, that they
might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruit full in every good
work, and increasing with the increase of God; and that they might be sincere,
and without offense til the day of Christ, Philip. 1. 9, 11. Colos. 1. 9, 11.
and have instructed them to walk in Wisdom toward them that are without; as
intimating, that this would teach them how to walk, and please God, and so help
them to order their conversation that he might be glorified in all things
through Jesus Christ, Colos. 4. 5, 6.

3. The gain of Wisdom is better then fine gold, because in seeking, and
getting that we shall have all other things appertaining to the natural life,
which are good, and needful for us: such meat, drink, clothes, health,
deliverance from trouble, continuance of life, as he sees good for us who is
perfect in knowledge, and infinite in goodness, according to what our savior
says; take no thought saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or
where withal shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek) for your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these
things: But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6. 31, 33. there are many things
that gold will not give which appertain to this present natural life; it will
not give a man health in sickness; it will not make the life comfortable, but
by occasion thereof, many times it is more full of disquietment, and vexation
of spirit: it will not defend a man from danger; but they that have it, and
have much of it are the more exposed to danger: it will not deliver from the
fear of evil, but rather it occasioneth fear to a man: nor can a man thereby
add one cubit to his age; a man's life consists not in the abundance of the
things which he possesses, Luke 12. 15. But they that seek this Wisdom shall
not want any good thing, Psalm. 34. 8, 10. and 84. 10, 11. it is so acceptable
to God that men seek this excellent, and heavenly, commodity that he will with
hold no good thing from such as are so exercised, 1 Timothy 6. 5, 6, 8. and 4. 4,
8. it did so please the Lord that Solomon asked of him Wisdom, and
understanding, that he not only gave that unto him, and a wise and
understanding heart; but he also gave unto him that which he did not ask to
wit, riches, and wealth, and honor, 1 King. 3. 5. 13. 2 Chronicles. 1. 7, 12.
riches and honor are in Wisdoms left hand to dispense thereof as is good, to
those that seek her, and therefore she invites us to trade for her, Prove 3. 13.
16. and 8. 18. and God has made provision in his great, and precious promises,
and given us assurance, that with Christ he will also freely give us all
things, Romans 8. 32. and all things are theirs who are Christ's, the world, life,
death, things present, and things to come, 1 Corinthians. 3. 21, 23. how might this
provoke and encourage us to get Wisdom and understanding, and assure us, that
the gain of it is excellent; and so help us to have our conversation without
covetousness, and be content with such things as we have, for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; so that we may boldly say, the Lord is
my helper, and I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, Hebr. 13. 5, 6.

2. And the gain of Wisdom and understanding is better then that of fine gold
hereafter, infinitely better a man's life, as before is said consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses, and much less eternal life: but
they that seek and get Wisdom shall inherit glory, and such glory as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive;
this is contained in the motives that the Wisdom of God makes use of, to
provoke us to get Wisdom, and with all our gettings to get understanding: she
shall give to thine head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she
deliver to thee, Prove. 4. 5, 9. and that which shows the excellency of its
gain completely, is, that this salvation, glory, and happiness shall be enjoyed
by such for ever and ever. When the Ho: Ghost gives us a particular evidence of
the excellency, and gainfullness of Wisdom, he says, length of days is in
her right hand, as the most excellent thing, Prove. 3. 13. 16. even length of
days for ever and ever Psalm. 21. 4. this compleats its preciousness, and
demonstrates its gainfullness, and evidenceth the happiness of those that trade
for it, and find it; Whatever glory, and blessedness were set before us
hereafter to prevail with us, and engage us to seek Wisdom; if we might have
in finding her deliverance from all evil, and the favor of God, and
fellowship with him, and so the enjoyment of all desirable, and conceivable
good, yea of all good proposed to us, yet it there were an end to such
enjoyment, it would not be so truly gainful, nor so desirably precious: but in
the enjoyment of her there will be fullness of joy, and pleasures in her right
hand for evermore. Herein indeed its gain appears evidently to be better then
fine gold; riches are not for ever, nor does the crown endure to all
generations, Prove. 27. 24. but to them who by patient continuance in welldoing
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, will the Lord give eternal life,
and possess them of an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
passes not away, reserved in the heavens for them; for the things that are not
seen are eternal, 2 Corinthians. 4. 16, 18. Romans 2. 7. they shall be saved in the
Lord with an everlasting salvation, and shall not be ashamed, nor confounded
world with out end this, wisely considered, imbitters the things, of this
world, and weanes the heart from them, and crucifies them to the soul; the
world passes away, and the lust thereof, both the object of it, as gold, and
silver, etc. Which are corruptible; and the act also; but he that does the will
of God, in seeking Wisdom, abides for ever: there will be an enjoyment of its
gain to all eternity, and of the blessedness of those that have and retain
her, there shall be no end: here is a commodity worthy our trading for, because
it is so infinitely, and eternally gainful: that which other merchants trade
for will come to an end; the merchandise of gold and silver, and precious
stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and
all sweet wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of
most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble, and cinnamon, and
odours, and ointments, and frankincenfe, and wine, and oil, and fine flower,
and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, etc. shall all
depart away; and the merchants of these things shall weep, and wail because
these riches shall come to naught, Revel 18. 11, 23. But herein it will appear
that the Merchandise of Wisdom is better then silver, and the gain thereof
then fine gold; and that they are wise and happy merchants that trade for, and
in this heavenly commodity, because it has the promise of the life to come; by
this Wisdom their days shall be multiplied to all eternity, and the years of
their life shall be increased, Prove. 9. 10, 12 and 4. 9, 10.

Let all then be of usefullness to us.

1. Te take us of from listening to Satan, the God of this world, whose work it
is to glorify the things of this world, that we might love them, and set our
hearts upon them, and for the sake thereof neglect, and despise this Wisdom
and to take us of from admiring, and being bewitched with Mystery Babylon, or
her merchandise, Revel. 18. and to help us to cease from our own Wisdom,
Prove. 23. 4. for all the gold and silver, and precious stones of this world
will not make us happy; and if we should get never so much of this world, yet
what will be our hope, though we have gained, when God takes away aur soul?
Job 27. 8. Mark 8. 36, 37, 38.

2. And seeing there is such a pearl of great price prepared for us, and
proposed to us, and which may be enjoyed by us in seeking for it, even a
treasure to be desired, Prove. 21. 20. O! let us incline our ear, and come unto
Christ, let us hear that our souls may live, Isay. 55. this is a treasure
will make us happy in the enjoyment; the merchandise of it is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold; she is more
precious then rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to be
compared to her: let us then seek her as silver, and search for her as for
hidden treasure; and redeem the time, and watch for and in all opportunities,
that we may get Wisdom, and with all our gettings get understanding,
considering above all, that this gain is everlasting. Hence the Wisdom of God
calls upon us to seek for her: Riches and honor are with me, yea durable
riches, ad righteousness I was set up from everlasting now therefore hearken
unto me, O ye children (ye sons and daughters of men) for blessed are they that
keep my ways: hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it not blessed is the
man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my
doors; for whosoever finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord:
But whosoever sins against me wrongeth his own soul; all they that hate me
love death, Prove. 8. 18, 36. O Lord, open our eyes to see, and make us willing
to behold the excellency of Wisdom, that we may cry after her, and sell all we
have for the excellency of her, that we may win her, and retain her, that at
last we may know and completely enjoy the happy gain thereof, in being
delivered for ever from sorrow, and sadness, and having everlasting joy upon
our heads.

Amen. Amen. February 25. 1669 / 70. Coppied out June 25. 1670.
FIN.

