Miscellanea Parliamentaria: CONTAINING PRESIDENTS

1. Of Freedom from Arrests. 2. Of Censures.
1. Upon such as have wrote Books to the dishonor of the Lords or Commons, or
to alter the Constitution of the Government. 2. Upon Members for Misdemeanors.
3. Upon persons not Members, for Contempts and Misdemeanors. 4. For
Misdemeanors in Elections.
Besides other Presidents and Orders of a various Nature, both of the House of
Lords and Commons.

With an APPENDIX, Containing several Instances wherein the Kings of England
have consulted and advised with their Parliaments, 1. In Marriages. 2. Peace
and War. 3. Leagues.


And other Weighty Affairs of the Kingdom.

By William Petyt of the Inner Temple, Esquire

London, Printed by N. Thompson, for T. Basset at the George, and J. Wickins at
the White Heart in Fleetstreet. 1680.

TO William Williams Esquire SPEAKER OF THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF Commons, The AUTHOR
Humbly Dedicates these his Miscellanea Parliamentaria.

THE CONTENTS.
FErrers Case. Page 1.. 1. Some few Presidents against such as have Wrote Books
to the Dishonor of the Lords and Commons, and the Subversion of the
Government. Pa. 12.. 2. Some Presidents, wherein the House of Commons have for
Misdemeanors turned out and discharged their Members. Pa. 90.. Some Presidents
for punishing Persons that were no Members, for Contempts and Misdemeanors.
Pa. 96.. 4. Some Presidents for punishing Misdemeanors in Elections. Pa. 111..
Some Miscellaneous Presidents and Orders, both of the House of Lords and
Commons, p. 137.
An Appendix.
Or, A Collection of some few Records and Presidents (out of many other of the
like Nature) whereby it appears, That the Kings of England were pleased to
consult and advise with their Parliaments, de arduis negotiis Regni, of the
weighty and difficult Affairs of the Kingdom. p. 221

THE PREFACE.
I Have seen, Apud Foxum vol. 2. col. 3. and 4
says Stephen Gardener, (who was Dr. of Laws, Bishop of Winchester, The Bishop
of Winchester's Letter to the Duke of Somerset, Protector to E. 6.
and after Lord Chancellor of England,) the Council much astonished, when the
King would have done somewhat against an Act of Parliament, It was made then a
great matter. The Lord Cromwell had once put in the Kings (our late Sovereign
Lords) Head, Plutatchus lib. cum Principibus Philosophos debere disputare. Qui
semper corrumpunt principes, Reges ac Tyrannos, nempe Delatores Criminatores,
and Adulatores, ab omnibus exiguntur, puniunturque ut qui non in unum Calicem
lethale venenum mittant, sed in fontem publicitus scatentem, and quo vident
omnes uti. Quemadmodum non uno supplicio dignus est, qui fontem publicum, unde
bibant omnes, veneno infecit ita nocentissimus est, qui principis animum pravis
infecerit opinionibus, quae mox in tot hominum permiciem redundent. Nam si
capite plectitur, qui principis monetam vitiarit, quanto dignior est eo
supplicio, qui principis ingenium corruperit.
to take upon Him to have His Will and Pleasure regarded for a Law, for that,
he said, was to be a very King, and thereupon I was called for at
Hampton Court; and as the Lord Cromwell was very Stout; come on my Lord of
Winchester, (quoth he,) for that conceit he had whatsoever he talked with me,
he knew ever as much as I* Greek, or Latin, and all.

Answer the King here, (quoth he) but speak plainly and directly, and shrink
not man: Is not that (quoth he,) that pleases the King, a Law? Have ye not the
Civil-Law therein? (quoth he) Quod principi placuit, and so forth, (quoth he,)
I have somewhat forgotten it now: I stood still, and wondered in my Mind, to
what Conclusion this should tend; The King saw me musing, and with earnest
gentleness said, Answer him whether it be so or no? I would not answer my Lord
Cromwell, but delivered my Speech to the King, and told him, I had read indeed
of Kings that had their Will always received for a Law; Osorius lib. 5. de
Regis institutione, Occurrit alia adulatorum turba prudentiae nomine commendata
qui utse in gratiam Regum iusinuent illis persuadent eos esse supra leges (and
post aliqua.) Nunquam in Regnis and Civitatibus homines scelerati defuerunt,
nec hodie desunt qui principes erroribus turbulentis iuficiant, quibus illi
quidem annumerandi sunt, qui cum se jure consultos existimari velint Regibus
persuadent illos omnino solutos esse legibus:
but I told him the Form of his Reign, to make the Laws his Will, was more sure
and quiet, and by this Form of Government ye be established (quoth I,) and it
is agreeable with the Nature of your People; If ye begin a new manner of
Policy, how it will frame no man can tell, and how this frames ye can tell,
and would never advise your Grace to leave a certain for an uncertain. The King
turned his Back, and left the matter after; till the Lord Cromwell turned the
Cat in the Pan, before Company, when he was angry with me, and charged me as
though I had played his part. This Tale is true, and not without purpose to be
remembered.

So far the Bishops Letter.

And from it, and other passages in History, I shall raise four Observations.

That it was a general Rule and Principle in most great Ministers of State;
Observe. 1.
or, as the old Word was, Minions to flatter and poison Princes minds with
Absolute and Despotical Power; not for the Honor, or good of the Crown, for
that can never be; but for their particular Advantages, that Themselves might
Reign, and be Sovereigns over their Masters; And indeed, not only of our own
Country, but of others: Historians are full of the sad and woeful Effects
thereof in most Ages; which makes me frequently revolve the melancholy
Contemplation of Cardan; Cardan lib. de utilitate ex adversis capiend^ cap. de
Principis Incommodis, p. 288.


Inter fures scurras adulatores, constitutus est princeps a furibus bona
diripiuntur, a scurris mores corrumpuntuh, and ut quisque melior est ex aula
abigitur, ab adulatoribus veritas, summum inter mortales bonum, ablegatur, unde
miseri principes propter has larvas, in Cimmeriis ignorantiae tenebris perpetuo
vivunt. O miseram principum sortem, qui nunquam norunt, quali in statu res suae
positae sint, adeo vero aures principum emollitae sunt, ut ad veritatis nomen
tanquam ad Nili cataractas obsurdescant.

This pessima gens humani generis always abhorred a Parliament; Observe. 2.
and the reason thereof is demonstrative, because they well knew they should
then be called to an impartial and strict account, and be punished according to
their demerit: as de facto it appears, in the Cases of the Lord Cromwell, after
Earl of Essex, and the Protector, the Duke of Somerset, (mentioned in the
Bishop's Letter,) that they were questioned in Parliament; although possibly
the proceedings therein against them were managed with too much Violence and
artifice, by the malice and policy of their Enemies.

And no man, in all points, can justify the acts of all Councels, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil.

The first was attainted of High Treason, Rot. Parl. 32. H 8. Act 60. The
Attainder of the L. Cromwell
in the Parliament, 32. H. 8. amongst other Crimes.

1. For Usurping upon the Kingly Estate, Power, Authority, and Office. 2. For
having the Nobles of the Realm in great disdain, derision and detestation. 3.
And further also, being a person of poor and low degree, as few were within the
Realm pretended to have so great a stroke about the King, that he let it not,
to say, publish and declare,
That he was sure of the King; A dangerous Boast of any one Minister.
which was detestable and to be abhorred amongst all good Subjects in a
Christian Realm, that any Subject should enterprise to take upon him so to
speak of his Sovereign, Liege, Lord, and King.

The second was in the Parliament, Actus Parl.
3 and 4 E. 6. An 3, and 4. E. 6. no. 31.
Fined and Ransomed amongst other Offenses. An Act touching the Fine and
Ransom of the Duke of Somerset.


1. For desiring the Rule, Authority and Government of the King and Realm by
himself only, and getting the Protectorship. 2. That by his own Authority he
did stay and let Justice, and subverted the Laws as well by Letters, Patents,
as by his other Commandments. 3. He rebuked, checked and taunted as well
privately as openly, diverse of the Privy Counsel, for showing and declaring
their advices and opinions against his purpose in weighty Affairs, telling them
they were unworthy to sit in Council: That he needed not to open matters to
them, and that he would be otherwise advised thereafter; and if they agreed not
with his Opinion, he would put them out, and take in others at his Pleasure. 4.
That he had held, against the Kings Laws, in his own House a Court of Requests,
and forced diverse to answer for their Free-holds and Goods, to the subversion
of the Law. 5. That he had, without Advice of the Counsel, disposed of Offices
for Money. 6. That he would not suffer New Haven and Blackness to be furnished
with Men and Victuals, although advertized of their defects; whereby the French
King was comforted and encouraged to invade and win them, to the dishonor of
the Realm. 7. And whereas the Privy-Counsel had out of their Love and Zeal for
the King and Realm, consulted at London to come to the Duke, to move him
charitably to amend, and reform his Doings and Mis-government; he caused to be
declared, (by Letters in diverse places,) the Lords to be High-Traytors, to the
great disturbance of the Realm; And further declared, That the Lords
endeavored to destroy the King, to the intent to make Sedition and Discord
between the King and Lords. 8. The Duke, at Hampton Court and Windsor, declared
these Speeches, The Counsel at London do intend to kill me; But if I die, the
King shall die with me; and if they famish me, they shall famish the King; and
so conveyed the King suddenly in the Night to Windsor, whereby he got a
Disease, 9. He assembled great numbers in Arms, and after, minding to fly to
Jersey or Wales, laid Posthorses about, and Men for the same Intent.
All which Offenses and Crimes the said Duke acknowledged, and submitted
himself to the King: After which passed the Act; A remarkable Instance how
Dangerous it is for one single Minister to have a Monopoly of the King.
That for his said Offenses and Crimes he should forfeit a great many Manors,
which the Crown had given him:

To bring it to the Relation made by the Bishop, not without purpose to be
remembered how dangerous a thing it was to break the Law, or an Act of
Parliament. The Bishop thus further expresses in the same Letter.

Now whether the King may command against an Act of Parliament, Observe. 3.
and what danger they may fall in that break a Law with the King's consent,
Apud Foxum, vol. 2 d. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, his Letter to the
D. of Somerset, Protector to E. 6.
I dare say no man alive at this day has had more experience with the Judges
and Lawyers then I; First I had experience in my old Master the Cardinal, who
ohtained his Legacy by our late Sovereign Lord's request at Rome, and in his
sight and knowledge, occupied the same with his 2 Crosses and Maces born before
him many years; yet because it was against the Laws of the Realm, the Judges
concluded it the Offense of the praemunire; which conclusion I bare away, and
take it for a Law of the Realm, because the Lawyers so said, but my reason
digested it not. The Lawyers, for confirmation of their doings, brought in a
Case of the Lord Tiptoft, as I remember, a jolly Civilian; he was Chancellor to
the King, who (because in the execution of the King's Commission he had
offended the Laws of the Realm*) he suffered on Tower Hill,) they brought in
Examples of many Judges that had Fines set on their Heads in like Case, for
doing against the Law of the Realm by the King's Commandment, and then was
brought in the Judges Oath, not to stay any Process or Judgment for any
Commandment from the King's Majesty: And one Article against my Lord Cardinal
was, Coke 4. Inst so. 89. Ld. Herbert Hist. of H. 8. fo.
That he had granted Injunctions to stay the Common- Law, and upon that
occasion Magua Charta was spoken of, and it was made a great matter, the stay
of the Common Law; and this I learned in that Case, sithence that time being of
the Counsel, when many Proclamations were devised against the Carriers out of
Corn; at such time as the Transgressors should be punished, the Judges would
answer it might not be by the Laws; whereupon ensued the Act of Proclamation,
Rast. Stat. 31. H. 8. cap. 8.
in the passing of which Act many siberal Words were spoken, and a plain
Proviso, That by Authority of the Act for Proclamation, nothing should be made
contrary to an Act of Parliament, or Common Law.

When the Bishop of Exeter and his Chancellor were by one Body brought in a
praemunire, (which my Lord Privy Seal cannot forget) I reasoned with the Lord
Audley, then Chancellor, so far, as he bad me hold my peace, for fear of
entering into a praemunire my self; whereupon I stayed, but concluded it seemed
to me strange, that a man authorized by the King, (as since the King's Majesty
has taken upon Him the Supremacy, every Bishop is such a one,) could fall in a
praemunire, after I had reasoned the matter once in the Parliament House, where
was free Speech without danger, and there the Lord Audley, to satisfy me
familiarly (because I was in some secret estimation, as he then knew,) Thou art
a good fellow, Bishop, quoth he, (which was the manner of his familiar Speech)
look the Act of Supremacy, and there the King's doings be restrained to
spiritual Jurisdictions: And in another Act it is provided, That no spiritual
Law shall have place contrary to a common Law, or Act of Parliament; And if
this were not, (quoth he) you Bishops would enter in with the King, and, by
means of his Supremacy, order the Laity as ye listed; but we will provide
(quoth he,) that praemunire shall ever hang over your Heads, and so we Laymen
shall be sure to enjoy our Inheritance, by the Common Laws, and Acts of
Parliament.

My fourth Observation is this,

It had been well for the Protector to have remembered the good and wholesome
Advice the Bishop gave him: Observe. 4.
that great Man had not lost his Head; for being indicted in Michaelmas-Term,
5. E. 6. upon a Statute made 3 and 4 of that King, Rastal's 3, and 4. E. 6. cap
5
For the punishment of unlawful Assemblies, and raising of the Kings Subjects:
And one of the main points in the indictment, was that Felonice he designed to
take and imprision John Earl of Warwick, being one of the Privy Council; Coke
3. Inst. fo. 12.
of which he was found guilty by his Peers, and after suffered Death thereupon.

To conclude whose sad Fate, I shall add the Preamble of an Act of Parliament,
more memorable, because in a Subsidy Act; yet common in that, and former, and
succeeding Ages, as may appear. For instances, Rot. Parl. 4. H. 8. and by
Rastals Statutes, 35. H. 8. cap. 12, 27. 2, and 3. E. 6. cap. 26. 5. Eliz. cap.
27. 8. Eliz. cap. 18. 23. Eliz. cap. 15. 29. Eliz. cap. 8. 31. Eliz. cap. 15.
35. Eliz. cap. 13. 39. Eliz. cap. 27. 43. Eliz. cap. 18. and 3. Jacobi, cap.
26. wherein the State of the Kingdom, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and the
Transactions of Foreign Affairs are Historically set down, and taken notice of
by the Parliament, and inserted into the Preambles of those Acts.

An ACT for the Grant of a Subsidy, and two Fifteens and Tenths, granted to the
King's Majesty, by the Temporality.
WE the Kings Highness's most Faithful and Obedient Subjects, Rastals Stat. 7.
Ed. 6. cap. 12.
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled; Considering, and
certainly perceiving, by diverse means, the earnest Good Will and Purpose that
our said Sovereign Lord has to preserve, maintain and continue Us, his Natural
Subjects, in this most Fortunate Peace, whereunto, after many Storms and
Tempests of the Wars, His Majesty has, by the Goodness of God restored Us; Do
also, notwithstanding his Majesty's great Care, and politic Means used for the
recovery thereof, easily perceive how hard it shall be for His Highness to
continue and keep us therein, during the time of this troublesome state of
Christendom, being, as it were, lamentably cut, and torn in pieces, and
Factions of War, except his Highness be restored to a further Estate and
Furniture of Treasure, meet for the Defense of these His Realms, Dominions; And
Subjects, and like to other Princes; having such large Realms, Dominions and
People; the lack and want whereof, (as we know) shall chiefly redound to all
our Losses and Detriments, which must be defended and preserved by the Puissant
Power and Might of our Sovereign Lord and Head, not by the multitude of our
private Riches and Strength at Home.

So also have We seen, of late years, plainly before Our Eyes, and felt in a
great part of Our sorrowful hearts, the very Principal, Chief, and first Causes
of this lack, during the time of the woeful mis-governance of this Noble Realm,
and other the King's Dominions, by the late Protector, Duke of Somerset (to
whom Almighty God grant his Mercy,) who first of his insatiate ambition,
contrary to the advices of all Wise and Good Counselors, having gotten into
his hands the sole Governance of the most Sacred Person of our Sovereign Lord,
and consequently, the Protectorship of all his Highness's Realms and Dominious,
immediately to lay a fit Foundation for his unhappy and unskilful Government,
brought the King's Majesty (whom he took by pretense to Govern, being left by
His Highness's Father, of most Famous Memory, in tender Years, (but yet in
Peace) suddenly into open Hostility and Wars against two puissant Realms at
once, considering neither the Ability to begin, nor means to continue them;
wherein, following always his own singularity, by stirring and increasing of
new Quarrels and Causes of War, by unadvised Invasions, by desperate
Enterprises and Uoyages, by sumptuous, endless, vain Fortifications, both in
Foreign Realms, and in the Seas, by bringing into the Realm of costly, and
great numbers of Strangers, Men of War, and such other innumerable vain
Devices, he did not only Exhaust, and utterly Waste the King's Majesty's
Treasures and Revenues of His Crown, and of Us His Highness's Subjects, but
also endangered His Majesty's Credit beyond the Seas with diverse strange
Merchants, by taking up, and borrowing great Sums of Money, growing from time
to time more and more indurable: which Gate of Misery being so wide open, We
all know, and the best part of Us felt, what a heap of Calamities fell upon all
the Realm immediately; Yea, and to this day what Prests and Memory thereof
remains not wholly yet filled up.

First, the King's Majesty's Treasure of all sorts wasted, the great substance
of the Moneys melted, and altered in base Coin, for the serving of the Charge
of these Wars, the Laws and ancient Policies of this noble Realm dissolved and
unjoyned, and by Examples thereof, the whole state of Ireland endangered, with
Factions and Rebellions, wherein no small Sums of Treasure were also wasted in
Armies and Fortifications, part whereof remains unto this day of necessity. In
the midst of all these miseries, by the suffering of the said late Protector,
rose up a monstrous and dangerous Rebellion of the lewd numbers, and baser
multitudes against their Heads; the withstanding and happy stay whereof,
although it came through the mercifulness of God, by the labor and fortitude
of others, worthy eternal Praise, subduing the headless raging people in sundry
parts of the Realm, delivering Us, the King's Majesty's Natural Subjects, out
of our unnatural Subjection to him that ruled Us with disorder, And finally,
restoring the Royal Person of the King's Highness to the Freedom of His
Princely Estate, and consequently to an Honorable Peace with his Enemies.

Yet could not, hitherto, the great Breach and Ruin of the King's Majesty's
Estate, touching his Treasure, be repaired or re-enforced; which consequently
followed upon the first Foundations broken; although in other points of the
decay (thanked be God) the King's Majesty's own mavelous Intelligence, with
the Industry of good Conncellors, has notably supplied, and amended the
defaults.

And as these former Errors brought His Majesty into utter wastes of His own
Treasure and Riches into the Expenses of Our Subsidies, granted for the same
Wars, though nothing answerable to the Expense of the same; Finally, into
notable and immeasurable Charges beyond the Seas, Provisions of Money taken up
in time of Wars; so yet, to the increase of this former sore, We remember and
perceive also, that there were very great Charges left by the late King of
famous Memory, by reason of his Wars, to be discharged, as well beyond Sea
toward strangers, as on this side toward his own Subjects; which of their
nature beyond the Seas for lack of payment did grow excessively, besides the
late evident great Charge and Loss sustained by the Kings Majesty for the only
Profit of His public Weal, in the reducing of part of His Coin from a notable
baseness unto a fine Standard; by the which His Majesty lacks a great private
Gain in his Mints, being now worth no Revenue at all, but rather chargable; and
the rest of which Coin we trust He will shortly reduce to like fineness.

All which things We His Majesty's Faithful, and natural Loving Subjects,
weighing with Our selves, and considering diverse great weighty matters hereupon
depending, for the preservation of this Ancient, Noble, and Imperial Crown.

Albeit We see manifestly before Our Eyes, Our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty
disposed of His good Nature rather daily to diminish the Revenue of His Crown,
lately angmented by His Father of most famous Memory, toward the unburthening
of His great intolerable Weights and Charges, lying and growing in strangers
hands beyond the Seas, then to call upon us His natural Subjects and People;
like as we daily hear and know that all other most Christian Princes do, in
Causes of less Importance, and like His Majesty's noble Progenitors, have
always done in such Cases heretofore.

Yet for the preservation of Our selves and Our Posterity in this Peace and
Wealth whereunto We have by the great Charges of Our Sovereign Lord been
blessed, brought, for the maintenance and upholding of the Crown and Dignity
Imperial of this Noble Realm, in Honor and Might against all Attempts of
Foreign and Ancient Enemies, for the Restoration of this decayed House of the
Commonwealth, having suffered violation and ruin, by exile of Justice in the
former time of the aforesaid evil Governance. For the comforting and
encouraging of our most Christian King in His blessed and famous Purposes and
Proceedings, to the establishing both of true Christian Religion, in this His
Church of England and Ireland, and of a Christian Policy in the civil State of
the same, etc. and after they granted the Subsidies.

It is far from my thoughts to delight in raking into the misfortunes of any,
much less of great men; but in all Ages it has been allowed to publish the
Memoirs of ill men, to the intent to deter Posterity from acting and committing
such Crimes and Offenses, which we find were severely punished both by God and
Men.

And whoever will take the pains to run over the ancient Historians and Records
of the Kingdom, will find that the Troubles in Richard the 1st's time, the
Barons Wars, the Confusions in E. 2 d's time, the woeful Distractions in the
Reign of R. 2. and H. 6. had their source and rise from one grand Cause, the
extravigant and insufferable Dominion and Power of Minions or Favorites, with
their Partisans, which K. James rightly calls Pests and Vipers of a
Commonwealth; who, notwithstanding their spetious glosses and pretenses of
Loyalty to the Crown, rather then suffer themselves to be questioned and
punished by Law for their Arbitrary and Illegal Acts, Resolved to run the
hazard of; and see the ruin and destruction both of Prince and People.

My Lord Bacon, Out of a Paper in the hands of my good Friend Mr. John Rawley,
a Worthy Citizen of London, Nephew and Executor to Dr. Rawley, first and last
Chaplain to the L. Bacon.
after he was Sentenced in Parliament, meeting with Sir Lionel Cranfield, after
Earl of Middlesex, whom King James had then newly made Lord Treasurer. My Lord
Bacon, having first congratulated his advancement to so Eminent a Place of
Honor and Trust, told him, between jest and earnest, That he would recommend
to his Lordship, and in him to all other great Officers of the Crown, one
considerable Rule to be carefully observed, which was, to

Remember A Parliament will come. My Lord Bacons Memento.


I do not believe that his Lordship had the Spirit of Divination; But certain
it is, that two years after, in the Parliament 21. and 22. of that King, the
Commons Impeached the Earl; for what, and what the Judgment was thereupon,
hear the Record.

Message sent to the Commons by Mr. Sergeant Crew, Ex Journali Domus Procerum,
Annis 21, and 22. Jacobi Regis.
and Mr. Attorney General, viz.
That the Lords are now ready to give Judgment against the Lord Treasurer, if
they, with their Speaker will come, and demand the same.

Answered,

They will attend presently:

The Lords being all in their Robes, the Lord Treasurer was brought to the Bar
by the Gentleman Usher and the Sergeant at Arms, his Lordship made low
obeisance, and kneeled, until the Lord Keeper willed him to stand up.

The Commons with their Speaker came and the Sergeant attendant on the Speaker
presently put down his Mace. The Speaker in their Name, to this Effect, viz.

The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in this Parliament assembled, heretofore
transmitted unto Your Lordships several Offenses against the Right Honorable
Lionel Earl of Middlesex, Lord High Treasurer of England, for Bribery,
Extortion, Oppressions, and other grievous Misdemeanors, committed by his
Lordship.

And now the Commons, by me their Speaker, demand Judgment against him for the
same.

The Lord Keeper Answered.

The High-Court of Parliament does adjudge,

1. That Lionel Earl of Middlesex, now Lord Treasurer of England, shall lose
all his Offices which he holds in this Kingdom; and shall be made for ever
incapable of any Office, Place or Employment in the State, and Commonwealth. 2.
And that he shall be Imprisoned in the Tower of London during the Kings
pleasure. 3. And that he shall pay unto our Sovereign Lord the King the Fine of
50000 l. 4. And that he shall never sit in Parliament more. 5. And that he
shall never come within the Verge of the Court.
Ordered, 14 Maii 16 24
That the Kings Council draw a Bill (and present the same to the House,) to
make the Lands of the Earl of Middlesex liable unto his Debts, unto the Fine to
the King, unto Accounts to the King hereafter, and to Restitution to such whom
he had wronged, This Bill after passed unto a Law.
as shall be allowed of by the House.

So that the familiar saying of my Lord Coke is very remarkable; That no
Subject, (though never so Potent and Subtle,) ever confronted or justled with
the Law of England, but the same Law in the end infallibly broke his Neck.

THE CASE OF George Ferrers, Esquire
IN the Lent Season, Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 34
H. 8. An. Dom. 1542. Breach of Privilege.
whilst the Parliament yet continued, one George Ferrers Gent. Servant to the
King, being elect a Burgess for the Town of Plymouth, in the County of Devon,
in going to the Parliament House was Arrested in London by a Process out of the
King's Bench, Ferrers arrested going to the Parl. house.
at the Suit of one White, for the sum of two hundred Marks, or thereabouts,
wherein he was late aforecondemned as a Surety for the Debt of one Welden of
Salisbury; which Arrest being signified by Sir Thomas Moyle Knight. then Speaker of
the Parliament, and to the Knights and Burgesses there, order was taken that
the Sergeant of the Parliament, The Sergeant of the Parliament sent to the
Compter for him.
called S. J. should forthwith repair to the Compter in Breadstreet, whither
the said Ferrers was carried, and there to demand delivery of the Prisoner. And
demands the Prisoner.
The Sergeant, as he had in charge, went to the Compter, and declared to the
Clerks there, what he had in commandment: But they and other Officers of the
City were so far from obeying the said Commandment, But the Officers deny him.
as after many stout words, they forcibly resisted the said Sergeant, And
assault the Sergeant.
whereof ensued a Fray within the Comptergates, between the said Ferrers and
the said Officers, not without hurt of either part; so that the Sergeant was
driven to defend himself with his Mace of Arms, Breaks the Crown of the Mace,
and strikes down his Man.
and had the Crown thereof broken by bearing off a stroke, and his Man stricken
down. During this Brawl the Sheriffs of London, Complains of it to the
Sheriffs, and demands the Prisoner.
called Rowland Hill and H. Suckley, came thither, to whom the Sergeant
complained of this injury, and required of them the delivery of the said
Burgess as before: but they bearing with their Officers, Who contemptuously
reject the same.
made little account either of his Complaint, or of his Message, rejecting the
same contemptuously, with much proud language: So as the Sergeant was forced to
return without the Prisoner, The Sergeant returns and acquaints the House.
and finding the Speaker and all the Knights and Burgesses set in their places,
declared unto them the whole Cause as it fell out; who took the same in so ill
part, Who highly resent it.
that They all together (of whom there was not a few as well of the Kings
Privy-Councel, as also of his Privy-Chamber) would sit no longer without their
Burgess, but rose up wholly, and repaired to the Upper House, where the whole
case was declared by the mouth of the Speaker, It was ordinary for either
House, upon emergent occasions, to give an account to each other, as in the
time of R. 2. H. 6. H. 8. E. 6. and Queen Mary, the great Officers of State, as
the Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. went down to the House of Commons to give them
particular accounts.
before Sir T. Audley Knight. then Lord Chancellor of England, and all the Lords
and Judges there assembled; who judging the Contempt to be very great, referred
the punishment thereof to the Order of the Common House. They returning to
their places again, upon new debate of the Case, took order that their Sergeant
should eftsoon repair to the Sheriffs of London, and require delivery of the
said Burgess, without any Writ or Warrant had for the same, but only as before.
The Ld. Chancellor in Parliament offers the Commons a Writ to deliver their
Burgess, but they refuse it, as being clear of opinion, that all their
Commandments and Acts were to be done and executed by their Sergeant, without
Writ.
Albeit the Lord Chancellor offered there to grant a Writ, which they of the
Common House refused, being in a clear opinion that all Commandments and other
Acts proceeding from the Nether House, were to be done and executed by their
Sergeant, without Writ, only by show of his Mace, which was his warrant. But
before the Sergeants return into London, the Sheriffs having intelligence how
heinously the matter was taken, became somewhat more mild; so as upon the said
second demand, they delivered the Prisoner without any denial. But the Sergeant
having then further in commandment from those of the Nether House, charged the
said Sheriffs to appear personally on the morrow by eight of the Clock, The
Sheriffs ordered to appear, and bring with them the Clerks of the Compter.
before the Speaker in the Nether House, and to bring thither the Clerks of the
Compter, and such other of their Officers as were parties to the said affray;
and in like manner to take into his custody the said White, which wittingly
procured the said Arrest, in contempt of the Privilege of the Parliament.
Which Commandment being done by the said Sergeant accordingly, And accordingly
they did.
on the morrow the two Sheriffs, with one of the Clerks of the Compter, (which
was the chief occasion of the said affray) together with the said White,
appeared in the Common House, where the Speaker charging them with their
Contempt and misdemeanour aforesaid, Who are charged by the Speaker.
they were compelled to make immediate Answer, Being not admitted to any
Council.
without being admitted to any Council: albeit Sir To. Cholmley, then Recorder
of London, and other the Council of the City there present, offered to speak in
the Cause, which were all put to silence, and none suffered to speak but the
parties themselves. Whereupon in conclusion the said Sheriffs, The Sheriffs
committed to the Tower.
and the same White, were committed to the Tower of London, and the said Clerk
(which was the occasion of the Fray) to a place there called Little Ease, The
Clerk to Little Ease, and the Sergeants to Newgate.
and the Officer of London which did the Arrest, called Tailor, with four
Officers, to Newgate, where they remained from the 28. until the 31. of March,
All at last delivered upon the humble suit of the Mayor, and other their
Friends.
and then they were delivered, not without humble suit made by the Mayor of
London, and other their Friends. And forasmuch as the said Ferrers being in
Execution upon a Condemnation of Debt, and set at large by Privilege of
Parliament, was not by Law to be brought again into Execution, and so the party
without remedy for his Debt, as well against him, as his principal debtor;
after long debate of the same, by the space of nine or ten days together, at
last they resolved upon an Act of Parliament to be made, and to revive the
Execution of the said Debt against the said Welden, which was principal debtor,
and to discharge the said Ferrers. But before this came to pass, the Common
House was divided upon the Question, but in the conclusion the Act passed for
the said Ferrers, who won by 14. Voices. The King takes notice of the
proceedings.
The King then being advertized of all this proceeding, called immediately
before him the Lord Chancellor of England, and his Judges, with the Speaker of
the Parliament, and other the gravest persons of the Nether House, to whom he
declared his opinion to this effect: First commending their wisdom in
maintaining the Privileges of their House, The King in the presence of the
Chancellor and Judges, with whom he had consulted before of this matter,
commends and approves the proccedings of the Commons.
(which he would not have to be infringed in any point) alleged that he being
Head of the Parliament, and attending in his own person upon the Business
thereof, ought in reason to have Privilege for Him and all his Servants,
attending there upon Him; so that if the said Ferrers had been no Burgess, but
only his Servant, that in respect thereof he was to have the Privilege as well
as any other: Here the King from the mouth of the Lord Chancellor, declares the
ancient privilege of the Commons, even for their menial Servants, and gives an
instance in the Cook of the Temple.
For I understand (quoth he) that you not only for your own persons, but also
for your necessary Servants, even to your Cooks and Horse-keepers, enjoy the
said Privilege: in as much as my Lord Chancellor here present has informed
us, that he being Speaker of the Parliament, the Cook of the Temple was
Arrested in London, and in Execution upon a Statute of the Staple: And
forasmuch as the said Cook, during the Parliament, served the Speaker in that
Office, he was taken out of Execution by the Privilege of the Parliament. And
further, we be informed by our Judges, that we at no time stand so highly in
our Estate Royal, as in the time of Parliament; The King Head, and the Lords
and Commons Members of the High Court of Parliament, in which he stands highest
in his Royal Estate.
wherein We as Head, and You as Members, are conjoined and knittogether into
one Body politic: so as whatsoever offense or injury (during that time) is
offered to the meanest Members of the House, it is to be judged as done against
Our Person, The Court of Parliament.
and the whole Court of Parliament: which Prerogative of the Court is so great
(as our learned Council informs us) as all Acts and Processes coming out of
any other Inferior Courts, Nota, All Acts and Processes coming out of any
inferior Court, must cease and give place to the Highest.
must for the time cease and give place to the Highest. And touching the party,
it was a great presumption in him, knowing our Servant to be one of this House,
and being warned thereof before, would nevertheless prosecute this matter out
of time, and therefore was well worthy to have lost his Debt, which I would not
wish, and therefore do commend your Equity, that having lost the same by Law,
have restored him to the same against him who was his Debtor: and this may be a
good example to others, not to attempt any thing against the Privilege of this
Court, but to take the time better. Whereupon Sir Edward Mountague, then Lord
Chapter Justice, Sir Edward Mountague Chief Justice of England, who we cannot
believe to be misconusant of the ancient proceedings in Parliament, and of the
Privilege of the House of Commons, together with the rest of the Judges, by
Reasons which wanted not Authorities, confirmed what the King had said.
very gravely declared his opinion, confirming by diverse reasons all the King
had said, which was assented unto by all the residue, none speaking to the
contrary. The Act indeed passed not the Higher House, for the Lords had not
time to consider of it, by reason of the Dissolution of the Parliament.

Because this Case has been diversely reported, as is commonly alleged, as a
President for the Privilege of the Parliament, I have endeavored my self to
learn the truth thereof, and to set it forth with the whole circumstances at
large, according to their instructions who ought best both to know and remember
it.

4. Ed. VI. Eight years after the Case of Ferrers, Journal Dom. Com. 4. Ed. VI.
Withrington having made an Assault upon Brandling, Burgess for Newcastle; the
Parl. being near an end, the Com. sent Withring: to the Council.

Die Jov. 7. Apr. an. praedict. The Bill for Mr. Brandling's Complaint, sent
from the Lords of the Privy Council again, to be ordered by this House
according to the Ancient Custom of this House: Whereupon the Bill was read in
the presence of Henry Witherington, who was sent to the Lords from this place;
who confessed that he began the Fray upon Mr. Brandling: whereupon the said Henry
is committed to the Tower of London.

Some few Presidents against such as have wrote Books to the dishonor of the
Lords and Commons, and Subversion of the Government.
The Case of Arthur Hall Esquire
UPon sundry Motions made by diverse of this House; Journ. Dom. Com. 14 Eliz. 17
Maii, Anno Dom. 1571. Misdemeanors of a Member of the House of Commons, for
sundry lewd speeches as well in the House, as abroad.
It was Ordered that Arthur Hall Esquire for sundry Lewd Speeches, used as well in
this House, as also abroad elsewhere, shall have warning by the Sergeant to be
here upon Monday next; and at the Bar to answer such things as He shall then
and there be charged with. And it was further Ordered, Ordered that those who
heard them, to put them in writing, and deliver them to the Speaker.
that all such Persons as have noted his words, either in this House, or
abroad, do forthwith assemble in the Chamber above, and put the words in
writing; and afterward deliver them to Mr. Speaker, to the end he may charge
the said Hall upon Monday next.

This day Arthur Hall Esquire Mond. 19 Febr, Mr. Hall appears, and is cleared.
being brought by the Sergeant to the Bar, and charged by the House with Seven
several Articles, humbly submitted himself to the House, and humbly confessed
his folly, Humbly confesses his folly.
as well touching the said Articles; as also his other fond and unadvised
Speech at the Bar: And was upon the Question remitted, And is remitted by the
House.
with a good Exhortation given him by Mr. Speaker at large.

The Case of Smalley, Servant to Mr. Arthur Hall, Burgess for Grantham.
And the Case of Kirtleton, Hall's Schoolmaster.
MR. Lieutenant of the Tower, Journal. Dom. Comm. Anno 18. Eliz. 16. Feb. A. D
1575. Breach of Privilege, Confederacy, and Contempt.
Sir Nicholas Arnold, and Mr. Sergeant Lovelace, were appointed to examine the
Matter touching the Arrest of Mr. Hall's Servant, before Mr. Speaker, at his
Chamber this Afternoon.

Upon the Question, Friday 18. Feb.
and also upon the division of the House it was Ordered, that Edward Smalley
Yeoman, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire one of the Burgesses for Grantham, shall
have Privilege. Monday 27. Feb.


After sundry Reasons and Arguments, Smalley to be brought to the House by the
Mace, and not by Writ.
it was Resolved, that Edward Smalley, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire shall be
brought hither by the Sergeant, and set at liberty by the Warrant of the Mace,
and not by Writ.

Edward Smalley, Tuesday 28. Feb.
Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire being this day brought to the Bar in this House
by the Sergeant of the House, and accompanied with two Sergeants of London,
Smalley brought to the Bar, was presently delivered out of Execution.
was presently delivered of his Imprisonment and Execution, according to the
former Judgment of this House, and the said Sergeants of London discharged of
their said Prisoner; and immediately after that the said Sergeants of London
were sequestered out of this House, and the said Edward Smalley was committed to
the Charge of the Sergeant of this House; and thereupon the said Edward Smalley
was sequestered, till this House should be resolved upon some former Motions,
whether the said Edward Smalley did procure himself to be arrested upon the
said Execution, in the abusing and contempt of this House, or not.

1. Upon the Question it was Ordered, Wednesday 7. March post Meridiem.
that Mr. Hall be sequestered the House, Mr. Hall, Smalley's Master, withdraws.
while the Matter touching the supposed Contempt done to this House be argued
and debated.

Edward Smalley upon the Question was adjudged guilty of the Contempt, Smalley
adjudged guilty of a Contempt against the House, for fraudulently procuring
himself to be arrested.
and abusing of this House by fraudulent practice, of procuring himself to be
arrested upon the Execution, of his own assent and intention, to be discharged
as well of his Imprisonment, as of the said Execution.

Matthew Kirtleton, Kirtleton in confederacy with him.
Schoolmaster to Mr. Hall, was likewise upon another Question adjudged guilty
by this House of like Contempt, and abusing of this House, in confederacy and
practice with the said Smalley in the intentions aforesaid.

2. Upon another Question it was adjudged by the House, Smalley to be committed
to the Tower for his Misdemeanor and Contempt.
that the said Smalley be for his Misdemeanor and Contempt committed to the
Prison of the Tower.

3. Upon the like Question it was also adjudged by this House, The like
Judgment for Kirtleton.
that the said Kirtleton Schoolmaster, be also for his lewd Demeanor and
Contempt in abusing of this House, committed to the Prison of the Tower.

4. Upon another Question also it was Resolved, Both to be brought into the
House, to receive their Judgments.
that the Sergeant of this House be commanded to bring the said Edward Smalley,
and the said Matthew Kirtleton, Schoolmaster to Mr. Hall, into this House, to
morrow next in the forenoon, to hear and receive their said Judgments
accordingly.

5. And further, Mr. Hall's privity in the Matter to be referred to a further
Debate.
that the Matter wherein the said Arthur Hall is supposed to be touched, either
in the privity of the said Matter of Arrest, or in the abusing of the
Committees of this House, shall be deferred to be further dealt in till to
morrow.

The Bill against Arthur Hall Esquire Saturday 10, March.
Edward Smalley, and Matthew Kirtleton his Servant, was read the first time.

Edward Smalley, Servant unto Arthur Hall Esquire appearing in this House this day
at the Bar, it was pronounced unto him by Mr. Speaker, and in the Name, and by
the Appointment and Order of this House, for execution of the former Judgment
of this House awarded against him, The Speaker pronounced Judgment upon
Smalley.
That he the said Edward Smalley shall be forthwith committed Prisoner from
this House to the Tower of London, and there remain for one whole month next
ensuing from this present day; and further, after the same month expired, until
such time as good and sufficient assurance shall be had and made, for payment
of one hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be made unto
William Hewet, Administrator of the Goods, Chattels and Debts of Melchisedeck
Mallory Gent. deceased, upon the first day of the next Term, according to the
former Order in that behalf by this House made and set down, and also 40 s. for
the Serjeant's Fees; the notice of which assurance for the true payment of the
said one hundred pounds in form aforesaid, to be certified unto Mr. Lieutenant
of the Tower, by Mr. Recorder of London, before any delivery or setting at
liberty of the said Edward Smalley, to be in any wise had or made at any time
after the expiration of the said month as is aforesaid, and that he shall not
be delivered out of Prison before such notice certified, whether the same be
before the said first day of the next Term, or after.

The 2d. Case of Arther Hall Esquire a Member of Parliament.
UPon a Motion made unto this House by Mr. Norton, Saturd. 4. Feb. An. 23.
Eliz. Journ. Dom. Com.
in which he declared that some person of late had caused a Book to be set
forth in print, Mr. Hall's Charge for writing a Book derogatory to the
Authority, Power and State of the Commons House of Parliament.
not only greatly reproachful against some particular good Members of this
House of great credit, but also very much slanderous and derogatory to the
general authority, power and state of this House, and prejudicial to the
validity of the proceedings of the same, in making and establishing of Laws,
charging this House with drunkenness, as accompanied in their Councels with
Bacchus; and then also with Choler, as those which had never sailed to
Anticyra, and the proceedings of this House to be Opera tenebrarum. And
further, that by the circumstance of the residue of the discourse of the said
Book, he conjectured the same to be done and procured by Mr. Arthur Hall, one
of this House, and so prayed that thereupon the said Mr. Hall might be called
by this House to Answer, and the matter further to be duly examined, as the
weight thereof in due consideration of the gravity and wisdom of this House,
and of the authority, state and liberty of the same, Mr. Hall ordered to be
sent for by the Sergeant at Arms
requires. It is Resolved, That the said Mr. Hall be forthwith sent for by the
Sergeant at Arms attending upon this House, to make his appearance here in that
behalf accordingly.

And then immediately Mr. Secretary Wilson did thereupon signify unto this
House, that the said Mr. Hall had upon his Examination therein before the Lords
of the Council, heretofore confessed in the hearing of the said Mr. Secretary,
that he did cause the said Book to be printed indeed. Upon relation whereof,
and after some speech then also uttered unto this House by Mr. Chancellor of
the Exchequer, of the dangerous and lewd Contents of the said Book, the
Sergeant was forthwith by Order sent to apprehend the said Arthur Hall, and was
presently assisted for that purpose with Sir Thomas Scot and Sir Thomas Brown,
Two Knights, Members of the House, to assist the Sergeant.
by the appointment of this House.

A Commission was then also given by this whole House, A Commission to a
Committee to send for the Printer, and to examine the Matter.
unto Mr. Vice-chamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary
Wilson, Mr. Treasurer of the Chamber, Sir Henry Lee, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir
William Fitz-williams, and Sir Henry Gate, to send for the Printer of the said
Book, and to examine him touching the said matter, and afterward to make
Report thereof to this House accordingly. To report to the House, and to take
order for Hall's Apprehension.
And also to take order and advise further for the sending for, and
apprehending of the said Arthur Hall, if it should so fall out that he did
withdraw himself, or depart out of Town, before such time as the said Sergeant
could find him: with this further Resolution also, And if any Member should see
him, to stay him, and bring him to the House.
That any such Member of this House as should happen first to see him, or meet
him, might, and should in the name of the whole House stay him, and bring him
forth to answer the said matter forthwith before the whole House, with all
possible speed.

Mr. Secretary Wilson declaring the travel of the Committees in examining of
the Printer that did print Mr. Halls Book, Monday 6 Feb. Mr. Secretary Wilson
reports the Examination of Hall's Case from the Committee.
signified unto this House, that the said Printer (whose name is Henry
Bynnyman) upon his Examination before the Committees said, that one John Wells
a Scrivener in Fleetstreet, did deliver a Copy to him; and when the Book was
printed, he delivered one Book to Henry Shirland in Friday-street,
Linen-draper, to be sent to Mr. Hall; and that afterward about a year past, he
delivered to Mr. Hall six of the said Books, and one more to Mr. Halls man
shortly after; and said, that Mr. Hall promised to get him a privilege,
whereupon he adventured (he says) to print the Book: and says, that the Copy
was written by Wells the Scrivener, and that he received of the said Shirland
Linen-cloth to the value of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. for printing the said Book, and
that he staid of his own accord the publishing of the said Books, till he was
paid: whereas Mr. Hall was contented they should have been put to sale
prefently. Which Report so made by Mr. Treasurer, and withal that Mr. Hall and
the Printer were both then at the door, the said Mr. Hall Hall appears, and was
called to the Bar, where he was charged by the Speaker with his Offense.
was thereupon brought to the Bar, and being charged by Mr. Speaker in the
behalf of the whole House, with the setting forth of the said Book, containing
very lewd and slanderous reproach not only against some particular Members of
this House, but also against the general Estate and Authority of this whole
House.

Hall denied not the setting forth of the said Book, protesting the same to be
done by him without any malicious intent or meaning, either against the state
of this House, or against any Member of the same; praying this whole House (if
he had offended in so doing) they would remit and pardon him; affirming withal
very earnestly, that he never had any more then one of the said Books; and upon
due consideration had of his own rashness and folly therein, willed that all
the said Books should be suppressed. Then was Mr. Hall sequestered.

Henry Bynnyman the Printer was brought to the Bar, The Printer brought to the
Bar.
who affirmed in all things as Mr. Secretary Wilson before reported, and
further that he had 80 or 100 of the said Books; and was thereupon sequestered.

Henry Shirland was brought to the Bar, And Shirland, who was examined.
who there confessed, that Mr. Hall did write a Letter unto him, and sent the
said Book unto him, willing him to get it printed; and thereupon he delivered
the said Book to Bynnyman, to have it printed, Wells the Scrivener then being
present with him; and said further, that Mr. Hall had paid him again the 20
Nobles which he before had paid the Printer; and so he was then sequestered.

And the said Wells brought to (...) ^ar upon his Examination, And Wells, who
was also examined.
(...), that when he was Apprentice with one Mr. Dalton a Scrivener in
Heerstreet, the said Mr. Hall then lying about Paul's Wharfe, sent unto his
said Master to send one of his men unto him, and that thereupon his said Master
sent him unto the said Mr. Hall, who when he came, delivered unto him a Book in
written-hand, willing him to carry it home with him, and copy it out, and said,
that when he had showed it to his Master, his Master commanded him to write
part of it, and his fellows some other part of it, and his said Master (as he
remembers) did write the rest of it, but what his said Master had for the
writing of it, he knows not. And being further examined, says, that
yesterday last past he delivered one of the said Books to Sir Randal Brierton,
from the said Mr. Hall. And then the said John Wells was sequestered.

And afterward all the Privy-Councel being of this House, A Committee
appointed to examine further the whole Matter.
Mr. Knight-Marshal, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Sergeant Flowerdew, Mr.
Sergeant St. Leiger, Mr. Crumwell, Mr. Atkins, the Master of the Jewel-house,
Sir Thomas Scot, Sir Thomas Brown, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Beale, Mr. Norton,
and Mr. Alford, were added to the former Committees for the further proceeding
to Examination of the matter touching Mr. Hall, the Printer, the Scrivener, and
all other persons, parties or privy to the publishing of the said Book, set
forth in print by the means and procurement of the said Mr. Hall, and to meet
upon Wednesday next at two of the Clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Which done, M. Hall brought to the Bar again, and committed to the Sergeant to
attend the Committee.
Mr. Hall being brought to the Bar again, Mr. Speaker declares unto him, that
this House minds further to examine the particularities of the matter,
wherewith they have charged him, and do therefore order him to the Sergeants
ward, with this liberty, That upon Wednesday next in the afternoon, being
accompanied with the Sergeant, he may attend at the Exchequer Chamber upon the
Committees in the Cause: And was thereupon had out of the House.

Henry Bynnyman Bynnyman, Wells, and Shirland, ordered likewise to attend the
Committee.
the Printer, John Wells the Scrivener, and Henry Shirland Linen-draper, being
brought all three to the Bar, were by Mr. Speaker enjoined in the name of the
whole House, to give their attendance upon the said Committees at the time and
place aforesaid, and also at all times in the mean season thereof, if they
shall happen to be called by them, or any of them: And so were had out of the
House.

And further it is Ordered by this House, Dalton also ordered to attend
That Mr. Speaker do send the Sergeant for John Dalton, late Master of the said
John Wells, and to charge him also to attend upon the said Committees, at the
said time and place in like manner.

Mr. Vice-Chamberlain for himself and the residue of the Committees, Tuesd. 14
Feb. Another Report from the Committee against Hall, of new Contempts and
Crimes added to his former.
appointed to examine Mr. Hall, the Printer, the Scrivener, and all other
persons privy to the setting forth and publishing of the Book, declared, that
they had charged the said Mr. Hall with Contempt against this House the last
Session, in that being enjoined by this House to appear, he departed out of
Town, in contempt of the Court, and afterward testified the same his wilful
Contempt, by an unseemly Letter addressed by him to this House, and charged him
further with diverse Articles of great importance, selected by the said
Committees out of the said Book: As first, with publishing the Conferences of
this House abroad in Print, and that in a Libel, with a counterfeit Name of the
Author, and no Name of the Printer, and containing matter of Infamy of sundry
good particular Members of the House, and of the whole State of the House in
general, and also of the Power and Authority of this House; Mr. Hall charge
the House with Injustice.
affirming, that he knew of his own knowledge, that this House had de facto
judged and proceeded untruely.

And was further charged, That he had injuriously impeached the memory of the
late Speaker deceased; that he had impugned the Authority of this House, in
appointing Committees without his assent; and that in defacing the Credit of
the Body and Members of this House, Nota.
he practiced to deface the Authorities of the Laws and Proceedings in the
Parliament, and so to impair the ancient Order, touching the government of the
Realm, and Rights of this House, and the form of making Laws, whereby the
Subjects of the Realm are governed. And further was charged, That since his
being before the Lords of the Council for his said offense, and after that he
had received rebuke of them for the same, and had offered some form of a
submission, he had eftsoon again published the said Book; and that upon his
Examination in the House, he had denied the having any more than one of the
said Books, it was yet proved he had twelve or thirteen, and six of them he had
given away, since the time he was called before the said Lords of the Council.

Unto all which things, as the said Mr. Hall could make no reasonable answer or
denial, so Mr. Vice-chamberlain very excellently setting forth the natures and
qualities of the said offenses, in their several degrees, moved in the end that
Mr. Hall being without at the door, might be called in to Answer unto those
points before the whole House, and so thereupon to proceed to some end; and
therewithal persuading a due consideration of spending the time as much as
might be in matters of greatest moment, wherein much less has been done this
Session, then in any other these many years in like quantity of time: And
thereupon after diverse other motions and speeches had in the said matter, The
Printer brought to the Bar again, and re-examined.
the Printer was brought to the Bar, and being examined, avowed that Mr. Hall
after that he had been before the Lords of the Council, came to him and told
him, that he had answered the matter for the Books before the Council, and that
therefore the Printer might deliver the said Books abroad. And also whereas the
said Printer wished unto the said Mr. Hall, since his last committing, that all
the said Books had been burned before he meddled with them; Mr. Hall should say
to him again, He would not for 100 l. And then being sequestered.

Mr. Hall Mr. Hall at the Bar, and recharged by Mr. Speaker.
was brought to the Bar, where after some reverence done by him, though not yet
in such humble and lowly wise as the state of one in that place to be charged
and accused, requires; whereof being admonished by Mr. Speaker, and further by
him charged with sundry of the said parts collected out of the said Book,
Submits, refuses to answer, acknowledges his Error, prays pardon, and is
sequestered.
he submitted himself to the House, refusing to make any answer or defense at
all in the matter, but acknowledging his Error, prayed pardon of the whole
House with all his heart; and that done, was sequestered.

After which, upon sundry Motions Sundry motions for a proportionable
punishment.
and Arguments had touching the quality and nature of his fault, and of some
proportionable forms of punishment for the same, as Imprisonment, Fine,
banishment from the fellowship of this House, and an utter Condemnation and
Retractation of the said Book, it was upon the Question, Resolved Resolved,
nemine contradicente Hall to be committed to Prison.
by the whole House without any one Negative voice:

1. That he should be committed to Prison.

2. And upon another Question likewise Resolved, That he should be committed to
the Prison of the Tower, And that Prison to be the Tower
as the Prison proper to this House.

3. And upon another Question, it was in like manner Resolved, That he should
remain in the said Prison of the Tower by the space of 6. months. There to
remain for six months.


4. And so much longer as until himself should willingly make a Retractation of
the said Book, And from thence, till he made a retractation of his Book.
to the satisfaction of this House, or of such order as this House shall take
for the same, during the continuance of this present Parliament.

5. And upon another Question is was also in like manner Resolved, To be fined
to the Queen.
That a Fine should be assessed by this House to the Queens Majesty's use, upon
the said Mr. Hall for his said offense.

6. And that Fine to be 500 Marks.
And upon another Question also it was Resolved in like manner, That the said
Fine should be 500 Marks.

7. To be severed and cut off from being a Member of the House.
And upon another Question also it was likewise Resolved, That the said Mr.
Hall should presently be severed and cut off from being a Member of this House
any more, during the continuance of this present Parliament. And the Speaker to
issue a Warrant for a new Writ.
And that Mr. Speaker, by authority of this House, should direct a Warrant from
this House to the Clerk of the Crown-Office in the Chancery, for the awarding
of the Queens Majesty's Writ to the Sheriff of the said County of Lincoln, for
a new Burgess to be returned into this present Parliament for the said Borough
of Grantham, in the lieu and stead of the said Arthur Hall, so as before
disabled any longer to be a Member of this House.

8. His Book and slanderous Libel to be adjudged utterly false and erroneous.
And upon another Question it was also in like manner Resolved, That the said
Book and scandalous Libel should, and shall be holden, deemed, taken and
adjudged to be utterly false and erroneous. And that the same shall be
publicly testified, And that to be publicly testified and affirmed by Order
of the House.
affirmed and set forth to be false, seditious and erroneous, in such sort,
order and degree as by this House shall be, during this Session of Parliament,
further determined in that behalf,

Which done, the said Mr. Hall was brought in again to the Bar, Hall brought to
the Bar to receive his Judgment, which Mr. Speaker delivered accordingly.
unto whom Mr. Speaker in the name of the whole House, pronounced the said
Judgment in form aforesaid, and so the Sergeant was commanded to take charge of
him, and convey him to the said Prison of the Tower, and to deliver him to Mr.
Lieutenant of the Tower, by Warrant from this House to be directed and signed
by Mr. Speaker for that purpose. Which done, and the said Mr. Hall had away by
the Sergeant, it was agreed (upon a motion made by the Speaker) that the whole
course and form of the said proceedings and Judgment of this House against the
said Mr. Hall, should be afterward orderly digested and set down in due form,
to be first read in this House, and then so entered by the Clerk as the residue
of the Orders and proceedings of this House, in other Cases, are used to be
done. And so it was afterward drawn into form, read unto the House, and entered
by the Clerk accordingly, in haec verba: (viz.)

Whereas it was informed unto this House, The Proceedings against Hall drawn
up, read and agreed to by the House.
upon Saturday being the fourth day of this present February, That Arthur Hall
of Grantham in the County of Lincoln Esquire, had sithence the last Session of
this Parliament, set forth in print and published a Book, dedicated unto Sir
Henry Knyvet Knight, a good Member of this House, without his privity, liking
or allowance, in part tending greatly to the slander and reproach not only of
Sir Robert Bell Knight, deceased, late Speaker of this Parliament, and of
sundry particular Members of this House, but also of the proceeding of this
House in the same last Session of Parliament, in a Cause that concerned the
said Arthur Hall, and one Smalley his man; and that there was also contained a
long discourse tending to the diminishment of the ancient Authority of this
House; and that thereupon by Order of this House, the said Arthur Hall was sent
for by the Sergeant of this House, to appear on Monday following, which he did
accordingly: whereupon being called to the Bar, and charged by the Speaker with
the Information given against him, he confessed the making and setting forth
thereof: whereupon the said Arthur Hall being sequestered, the House did
presently appoint diverse Committees to take a more particular Examination of
the said Cause, and of all such as had been doers therein; which Examination
being finished by the said Committees, they informed this House that they had
charged the said Arthur Hall with Contempt against this House the said last
Session, in that being enjoined by this House to appear there at a time by this
House prefixed, departed out of the Town in contempt of the Court, and
afterward testified and asserted the same his wilful contempt, by an unseemly
Letter addressed by him to this House; and charged him also with publishing the
Conferences of this House, abroad out of the House, and that also in print, in
manner of a Libel, with a counterfeit name of the Author, and without any name
of the Printer: in which Book or Libel was contained matter of reproach and
infamy to sundry good Members of this House in particular, and of the whole
state of the House in general, reproaching and embasing what in him lay, the
Power and Authority of this House; and untruly reporting the Orders of this
House, affirming amongst other great reproaches, that he knew of his own
knowledge that this House had judged and proceeded untruly; and further charged
him, that he had therein also injuriously impeached the memory of the late
Speaker deceased, affirming that the Orders of this House were not by him truly
delivered or set down, but altered and changed.

And not herewith satisfied, Rot. Pat. 48 H. 3. m. 6. dorso. Forma pacis inter
Regem and Barons. The Articles of Peace a Domino Rege and Domino Edwardo,
Praelatis and Proceribus omnibus, and Communitate tota regni Angliae communiter
and concorditer approbat. were sealed by the Bishops of Lincoln and Ely, Earl
of Norf. Earl of Oxon. Humphrey Bohun, William de Monte Canisio, and Major.
London. in Parliamento London. mense Junii, Anno Dom. 1264. de consensu,
voluntate and praecepto Domini Regis, necnon Praelatorum, Baronum, ac etiam
Communitatis tunc ibidem praesentium. And not only so, but that Record tells
us, Quod quaedam ordinatio facta in Parliamento London. habito circa festum
Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae prox' praeteritum, pro pace Regni
conservanda.
has in some part thereof contained a false and slanderous discourse against
the Antiquity and Authority of the Commons House, or Third Estate of the
Parliament; wherein he has falsely sought, as much as in him is, to impugn,
deface, blemish and diminish the Power, Antiquity and Authority of this House,
and the Interest that it has always, and in all ages had, to the great
impeachment of the ancient order and government of this Realm, the rights of
this House, and the form of making Laws. And that since his being before the
Lords of the Council for his said offense, Pultons Stat. 24 H. 8. c. 12. It is
unanimously declared, adjudged and confirmed, That the King, his noble
Progenitors, and the Nobility and Commons of the said Realm, at diverse and
sundry Parliaments as well in the time of King E. 1. R. 2. H. 4. and other
noble Kings of this Realm, made sundry Ordinances, Laws, Statutes and
Provisions for the entire and sure conservation of the Prerogative, Liberties
and Preheminences of the said Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of the
Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal of the same, to keep it from the annoyance
as well from the Sea of Rome, as from the Authority of other Foreign
Potentates, attempting the diminution and violation thereof, as often and from
time to time as any such annoyance and attempt might be known or espied.
and after he had received rebuke of them for the same, and had offered some
form of submission in that behalf, he had eftsoons again published the said
Book; and that upon his Examination in this House, he had denied the having of
any more then one of the said Books, yet it was proved he had 12. or 13. of
them, and 6. of them since the time he was called before the Lords of the
Council: and that he had by his Letters given order to have -- of those Books
printed, which was done accordingly; and that he had caused one of the said
Books, sithence this Session of Parliament, to be sent to Sir Randal Brewerton
Knight.

Unto all which, Ex vetusto MS. Staeturorum penes Johan' Peachy de Interior'
Templo Armig. King Edw. 2. and the whole Parliament, in the 15. year of his
Reign, when the Ordinances which had been made before that time, by certain
Prelates, Earls and Barons, by the consent of that King, and la Comunante de la
terre, were repealed, because in many things they restrained* the Power Royal
too much; yet in the Act of Repeal there is a salvo semper jure Regni sive
Parliamenti, for they unanimously agree and provide, Mes les chooses que sont
establer pur le state nostre Seigneur le Roy and ses heirs, and pur le state du
Roialme and du Peuple, soient tretez, accordez and establez en Parliament par
nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, and par l'assent des Prelatz, Comtz, Barons, and
tout le Commune du Roialme, auxi come ad estre accustumer ceo en arrear; That
those things which are for establishing the Estate of the King and his Heirs,
and for the Estate of the Realm, and the People thereof, shall be treated of,
accorded and established in Parliament by the King, and by the assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all the Commons of the Realm, as it had been
accustomed in times past.
as the said Arthur Hall could make no denial, or sufficient Answer, so the
said Committees setting forth the nature and qualities of the said Offenses in
their several degrees, moved in the end that the said Arthur Hall might be
called into the House, to answer unto those Points before the whole House, and
so thereupon to proceed to some speedy end, persuading therewithal a due
consideration to be had of spending the time as much as might be, in such
Matters of the Realm, for which this Parliament was chiefly called. Whereupon
after diverse other Motions and Speeches had in the said Matter, Rastals Stat.
Anno 38 E. 3. f. 124. the Statute of Provisors from Rome. And to the intent
that the said Ordinances and every of the same, for the ease, quietness and
wealth of the Commons, be the better sustained, executed and kept, and that all
those which have offended, or shall offend against these Ordinances, by
prosecutions, accusations, denunciations, citations, or other Process, made or
to be made out of the said Realm, or within, or otherwise against any manner of
person of the said Realm, be the more covenable, and speedily brought in
answer, to receive right according to their desert. The King, the Prelates,
Dukes, Earls, Barons, Nobles, and other Commons, Clerks, and Lay People, be
bound by this present Ordinance to aid, comfort, and to counsel the one and the
other, and as often as shall need, and by all the best means that may be made
of word and of deed, to impeach such offenders, and resist their deeds and
enterprises, and without suffering them to inhabit, abide, or pass by the
Seignories, Possessions, Lands, Jurisdictions, or Places, and be bound to keep
and defend the one and the other from all damage, villainy, and reproof, as
they should do their own persons, and for their deed and business, and by such
manner, and as far forth as such Prosecutions or Process were made or attempted
against them in especial general, or in common.
the said Printer was brought to the Bar, and being examined, avowed, that
Arthur Hall after he had been before the Lords of the Council, came to him, and
told him, that he had answered the Matter for the said Books before the
Council; and that therefore the said Printer might deliver the said Books
abroad; affirming also, that whereas the said Henry Bynnyman the Printer,
sithence this Session of Parliament, Rot Parl. 21 R. 2. n. 27. Pur le Pape
s'accorderent touts les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes en le Parliament. That
Pope Urban was true and lawful Pope, and that the Livings of all Cardinals,
Rebels to Holy Father, and all others their coadjutors, fautors and adherents,
and all other Enemies of the King and his Realm, shall be seized into the hands
of the King, and the King to be answered of the profits thereof; and whosoever
shall procure or obtain any Provision or other Instrument from any other Pope
then the said Urban, shall be out of the Kings Protection.
and since his last committing, wishing unto the said Arthur Hall, that all the
said Books had been burned before he meddled with them; that Arthur Hall should
say to him again, he would not so for 100 l. And then he being sequestered,
Arthur Hall was brought to the Bar, where after some mean reverence by him
done, though not in such humble and lowly wise, as the state of one in that
place to be charged and accused, required; whereof being admonished by the
Speaker, and further by him charged, as well with the said parts collected out
of the said Book, as with other his Misdemeanors and Contempts aforesaid, he
in some sort submitted himself to the House, acknowledging in part the Matters
wherewith he was charged, and in some other parts denied the same, but not
making any good defense in the Matter, Certain Priests en Angleterre avoient
offend en diverse points en temps R. 2. durant le division de la Papacy, les
fueront per Act del Parliament deprives de leur Benefices. 21 H. 7. fo. 34.
but acknowledging in part his Errors, imputing it for the most part to his
misprision, and that in other parts the Matters were gathered otherwise than he
meant; and thereupon he prayed pardon of the House, and that done, was
sequestered.

After which, upon sundry Motions and Arguments had touching the nature and
quality of his Faults, Rot. Parl. 2 H. 5. par. 2. number. 10. An Act of Parliament
made 2 H. 5. agrees and confirms, that it was ever the liberty and freedom of
the Commons of England, that no Statute or Law could be made, unless they gave
thereto their assent; and the Reason was convincing and certain, which the King
and his Council, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls and Barons in
Parliament, agreed to, and never in the least questioned or doubted of, that
the Commons of the Land have ever been a Member of Parliament, and were as well
Assenters as Petitioners. The Record is thus; That so as it has ever be their
liberte and freedom, that there should no Statute, ne Law, be made, of less then
they yaffe thereto there assent, considering that the Common of your Land, the
which that is and ever has be a Membre of your Parliament, ben as well
Assenters as Petitioners.
and of some proportionable forms of such punishment for such grievous
Offenses, it was upon the Question Resolved and Ordered by the whole House,
without any one negative Voice, that he should be committed to Prison. Rot.
Parl. 3 H. 5. n. 11. Nostre Seigneur le Roy per avys and assent des Seigneurs
and Communes, Enact. That during the Schism at Rome, all Bishops and other
persons of Holy Church, shall be consecrated by the Metropolitan, upon the
Kings Writ, without further excuse or delay.


And upon another Question likewise Resolved and Ordered, that he should be
committed to the Prison of the Tower, as the Prison usual for Offenders to be
committed unto by this House.

And upon another Question it was in like manner Resolved and Ordered, that he
should remain in the said Prison of the Tower by the space of 6 months, and so
much longer, as until himself should willingly make a particular Revocation or
Retraction under his Hand in writing, Pultons Stat, 24 H, 8. c. 12. It was
enacted by Authority of Parliament, That all Archbishops and Bishops of this
Realm, or of any the Kings Dominions, consecrated, and at this present time
taken and reputed for Archbishops and Bishops, may by Authority of this present
Parliament, and not by virtue of any provision, or other foreign Authority,
License, Faculty, or Dispensation, keep, enjoy and retain their Archbishopricks
and Bishoprics, in as large and ample manner, as if they had been promoted,
elected, confirmed and consecrated, according to the due course of the Laws of
this Realm; and that every Archbishop and Bishop of this Realm, and of other
the King's Dominions, may minister, use and exercise all and every thing and
things, pertaining to the Office or Order of an Archbishop and Bishop, with all
tokens in Signs and Ceremonies thereunto lawfully belonging.
of the said Errors and Slanders contained in the said Book, Rastals Stat 25 H.
8. c. 12. It is declared both by the Lords and Commons, That your Royal
Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons representing the
whole state of your Realm, in this your most High Court of Parliament, have
full power and authority not only to dispense, but also authorize some elect
person or persons to dispense with those and all other Humane Laws of this your
Realm, and with every one of them, as the quality of the persons and matter
shall require; and also the said Laws and every of them to abrogate, adnul,
amplify or diminish, as shall be seen unto your Majesty, and the Nobles and
Commons of your Realm, present in your Parliament, meet and convenient for the
wealth of your Realm, as by diverse good and wholesome Acts of Parliament, made
and established as well in your time, as in the time of your most noble
Progenitors, it may plainly and evidently appear.
to the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order as this House shall take
for the same, during the continuance of this present Session of Parliament.

And upon another Question it was also in like manner Resolved and Ordered,
that a Fine should be assessed by this House to the Queens Majesty's use upon
the said Arthur Hall, for his said Offense.

And upon another Question it was Resolved and Ordered in like manner, that the
said Fine should be 500 Marks.

And upon another like Question it was likewise Resolved and Ordered, that the
said Arthur Hall should presently be removed, Pultons Stat. An. 2 and 3 E. 6.
cap. 21. All Laws prohibiting Spiritual persons to marry, who by Gods Law may
marry, shall be void.
severed and cut off, from being any longer a Member of this House, during the
continuance of this present Parliament; and that the Speaker by Authority from
this House, should direct a Warrant from this House to the Clerk of the
Crown-Office in the Chancery, Be it therefore enacted by our Sovereign Lord the
King, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, that all
and every Law and Laws positive, Canons, Constitutions, and Ordinances
heretofore made by Authority of Man only, which do prohibit or forbid marriage
to any Ecctesiastical or Spiritual person or persons, of what estate, condition
or degree they be, or by what name or names soever they be called, which by
Gods Law may lawfully marry, in all and every Article, Branch and Sentence,
concerning only the prohibition for the marriage of the persons aforesaid,
shall be utterly void and of none effect; and that all manner of forfeitures,
pains and penalties, crimes or actions, which were in the said Laws contained,
and of the same did follow, concerning the prohibition for the marriage of the
persons aforesaid, be clearly and utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect,
to all intents, constructions and purposes, as well concerning marriage
heretofore made by any of the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual persons aforesaid, as
also such which hereafter shall be duly and lawfully had, celebrate and made,
betwixt the persons which by the Laws of God may lawfully marry.
for the awarding of the Queens Majesty's Writ, to the Sheriff of the said
County of Lincoln, Lastly, Knighton one of our best and most exactest
Historians, tells posterity the ancient ends of calling Parliaments, in the
Speeches made by Tho. de Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, the Kings Uncle, and
Tho. de Arundel Bishop of Ely, to King Richard 2d. at Eltham, in the 12th. year
of his Reign, in the name of the whole Parliament then sitting at Westminster,
wherein the said Delegates do put that King in mind, Quod ex antiquo Statuto
and Consuetudine laudabili and approbata, etc. (says the Historian) That by
ancient Statute and Custom laudable and approved, which no man could deny, the
King may once in the year convene his Lords and Commons to his Court of
Parliament, as to the highest Court of the whole Realm. [ In qua omnis equitas
relucere deberet absque qualibet scrupulositate vel nota, tanquam Sol in
ascensu meridiei, ubi pauperes and divites pro refrigerio tranquilitatis and
pacis, and repulsione injuriarum refugium infallibile querere possent, ac etiam
Errata Regni reformare, and de statu and gubernatione Regis and Regni cum
sapientiori Concilio tractare, ut Inimici Regis and Regni intrinseci, and
hosts extrinseci destruantur and repellantur, qualiter quoque onera
incumbentia Regi and Regno levius ad Ediam Communitatis suportari poterunt.] In
which Court (say they) all equity ought to shine forth, without the least Cloud
or shadow, like the Sun in his Meridian glory, where poor and rich refreshed
with peace and ease of their oppressions, may always find infallible and sure
refuge and succor; the grievances of the Kingdom redressed, and the state of
the King and government of the Realm debated with wiser Counsels, the Domestic
and Foreign Enemies of the King and Kingdom destroyed and repelled, and to
consider how the charges and burdens of both may be sustained with more ease
to the people.
for a new Burgess to be returned into this present Parliament, for the said
Borough of Grantham, in the lieu and stead of the said Arthur Hall, so as
before disabled any longer to be a Member of this House.

And upon another Question it was also in like manner Resolved and Ordered,
that the said Book or Libel was and should be holden, deemed, and taken and
adjudged, to be for so much as does concern the Errors aforesaid, condemned.

Which done, the said Arthur Hall was brought in again to the Bar, unto whom
the Speaker in the Name of the whole House, pronounced the said Judgment in
form aforesaid; and so the Sergeant commanded to take charge of him, and convey
him to the said Prison of the Tower, and to deliver him to the Lieutenant of
the Tower by Warrant from this House, to be directed and signed by the said
Speaker for that purpose.

Whereas by a former Order of this House, Saturday the 18. of March. A further
Order against Mr. Hall.
Arthur Hall Esquire was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, there to remain
by the space of 6 months, and so much longer, as until himself should willingly
make a general Revocation or Retractation under his Hand in writing, of certain
Errors and Slanders, contained in a certain Book set forth in Print, and
published in part, greatly tending to the slander and reproach of Sir Robert
Bell Knight. deceased, late Speaker of this present Parliament, and of sundry other
particular Members of this House, and also of the Power, Antiquity and
Authority of this House, to the satisfaction of this House, or of such Order as
this House should take for the same, during the continuance of this present
Session of Parliament, as by the same Order made and set down by this House,
upon Tuesday being the 14th. day of February foregoing, in this present Session
of Parliament, more at large does and may appear. And where also the said
Arthur Hall has ever since the said Order taken, remained in the said Prison
of the Tower, and yet still does, and has not at all made any Revocation or
Retraction of the said Slanders, Errors and Untruths, to the satisfaction of
the said House, according to the said Order; Hall's Retractation to be referred
to a certain Committee.
It is now therefore Ordered and Resolved by this House, that the further
allowance of such Revocation or Retractation to be hereafter made as aforesaid,
shall be referred unto the Right Honorable Sir Francis Knolls Knt. one of her
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Treasurer of her Highness's most
Honorable Household; Sir James Croft Knt. one other of her Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, and Comptroller of her Majesty's said most Honorable
Household; Sir Christopher Hatton Knt. one other of her Highness's said most
Honorable Privy Council, and Vice-Chamberlain to her Majesty; Sir Francis
Walsingham Knt. and Thomas Wilson Esquire her Highness's two principal Secretaries;
Sir Walter Mildmay Knt. one of her Highness' said most Honorable Privy
Council, and Chancellor of her Highness's Court of Exchequer; and Sir Ralph
Sadler Knt. one other of her Highness said most Honorable Privy Council, and
Chancellor of her Highness's Duchy of Lancaster, being all Members of this
House, or unto any three of them, The Committee to Report Hall's Retractation
at the next Session of Parliament.
to be by them or any three of them further Declared and Reported over unto
this House, in the next Session of Parliament to be holden after the end of
this said Session accordingly.

The 3d. Case of Arthur Hall Esquire
ON Saturday the 12th. day of December, Anno 27 Eliz. Jour. Dom. Com. Saturday
12 December. Contempt in a Member.
notice being given to the House, of one Mr. Hall, a Member of the same, that
had not attended all this Parliament, it was Ordered, The Sergeant to give
warning to Mr. Hall tu attend the House.
that the Sergeant should give him warning to attend upon Monday next.

The Business of Mr. Arthur Hall, of which the House had been informed upon
their first Meeting this Morning, was before the rising of the House referred
to Mr. Wolley, Mr. Crumwel, Mr. Diggs, and Mr. Sands, to peruse the Order
touching the same, against Monday next, being the day appointed by the House
for the said Mr. Hall to appear before them.

The 4th. Case touching Arthur Hall Esquire
ON Monday the 21. day of November, Monday the 21 November, Anno 29 Eliz. An.
Dom. 1586
(to which day the Parliament had been on Friday the 18th. day of the said
Month foregoing last adjourned) Mr. Markham, Mr. Markham's Complaint against
Mr. Hall.
a Burgess for the Borough of Grantham in the County of Lincoln, showed on the
behalf of the Inhabitants of the said Borough, That Mr. Arthur Hall having
been in some former Parliaments returned a Burgess for the said Borough, and
in some of the said Parliaments, for certain Causes the House then moving, That
he being for ever disabled to be a Member of the House, had notwithstanding
brought his Writ against the Inhabitants of Grantham for his Wages
disabled for ever afterward to be any Member of this House at all, has of
late brought a Writ against the Inhabitants of the said Borough for his Wages,
(amongst other times) in attendance at the late Session of Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the 27th. year of her Highness's Reign, during which time, as
also a great part of some other of the said former Parliaments, he did not
serve in the said House, but was for some Causes as aforesaid disabled to be
any Member of this House, and was also then committed Prisoner to the Tower of
London, and so prays the Advice and Order of this honorable House therein;
Who pray the advice and order of the House.
unto the Censure and Order whereof, the said Inhabitants do in most humble and
dutiful wise submit themselves, and so showed the said Writ, which was then
read by the Clerk; after the reading whereof, and some Speeches had touching
the former Proceedings in this House against the said Mr. Hall, as well in
disabling him to be any more a Member of this House, as also touching his said
Imprisonment, the Matter was referred to further Consideration, after search of
the Presidents and Entries of this House heretofore had and made in the course
of the said Cause.

On Friday the 2d. day of December, Friday the 2d. of December.
upon a Motion this day renewed on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the
Borough of Grantham, in the County of Lincoln, touching a Writ brought against
them by Arthur Hall Esquire whereby he demands Wages of the said Inhabitants, for
his Service done for them in attendance at sundry Parliaments, being elected
and returned one of the Burgesses of the said Borough in the same Parliaments;
For as much as it is alleged, that the said Arthur Hall has been heretofore
disabled by this House, to be at any time afterward a Member of this House;
and also that in some Sessions of the same Parliaments, he has neither been
free of the Corporation of the said Borough, and in some other also has not
given any attendance in Parliament at all: It is Ordered, that the Examination
of the state of the Cause be committed to the Right Honorable Sir Walter
Mildmay Knight. one of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Referred to a
Committee.
Chancellor of her Highness's Court of Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler Knight. one
other of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Chancellor of her
Highness's Duchy of Lancaster, Thomas Crumwel, Robert Markham, and Robert
Wroth Esquires; to the end, that after due Examination thereof by them had, (if
it shall so seem good to them) they do thereupon move the Lord Chancellor on
the behalf of this House, With directions if they think good, to move the Lord
Chancellor to stay the granting of further Process against the Borough.
to stay the granting out of any Attachment or other Process against the said
Inhabitants for the said Wages, at the Suit of the said Arthur Hall, and the
said Committees also to signify their Proceedings therein to this House, at
the next Sitting thereof accordingly.

An Order delivered by Mr. Crumwel, Entered by the Consent of the House.
WHereas upon Complaint made to this House, Tuesday the 21. of March.
upon Monday the 21. day of November, in the first Meeting of this present
Parliament, on the behalf of the Borough of Grantham, in the County of
Lincoln, against Arthur Hall Gent. That the said Arthur Hall had commenced Suit
against them, for Wages by him demanded of the said Borough, as one of the
Burgesses of the Parliament, in the Sessions of Parliament holden in the 13.
14. 18. and 23. years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majecty,
wherein it was alleged, that the said Borough ought not to be charged, as
well in respect of the negligent attendance of the said Mr. Hall at the said
Sessions of Parliament, and some other Offenses by him committed at some of the
said Sessions, as also in respect that he had made promise not to require any
such Wages. The Examination of the said Cause, on the 2d. day of December, in
the last Session of this Parliament, by Order of this House, was committed unto
Sir Ralph Sadler Knight. Chancellor of the Duchy, Sir Walter Mildmay Knight.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Thomas Crumwel, Robert Markham, and Robert Wroth
Esqs. This day Report was made by the said Committees, that not having time
during the last Session of Parliament, to examine the Circumstances of the
Cause, they had in the mean season by their Letters advertised my Lord
Chancellor, that the said Cause was committed unto them, and humbly requested
his Lordship, The Ld. Chancellor, at the request of the Committee, stays
further Process against Grantham.
to stay the issuing forth of any further Process against the said Borough,
until this Session of Parliament (or Meeting) which accordingly his Lordship
had very honorably performed; and the said Committees did further declare,
that having, during this Session of Parliament (or Meeting) sent for Mr. Hall,
declared unto him the effect of the Complaint against him; they had desired him
to remit the said Wages which he had demanded of the said Borough, whom they
found very conformable to condescend to such their Request; and that the said
Mr. Hall then alleged and affirmed unto them, that if the Citizens of the said
Borough would have made suit unto him, he would upon such their own suit then
remitted the same; so was he very willing to do any thing which might be
grateful to this House, Mr. Hall frankly remits his Wages to the Borough of
Grantham.
and did freely and frankly remit the same; which being well liked of by this
House, it was by them this day Ordered, that the same should be entered
accordingly.

. 1. Mr. Arthur Hall's Case stated.
I. Ex Journ. Dom. Com.
ANno 23 Eliz. 1580. Mr. Arthur Hall, Burgess for Grantham, for writing a Book
derogatory to the Authority, Power and State of the Commons House of
Parliament, had Judgment, nemine contradicente.

1. Judgment.
To be imprisoned in the Tower for 6 months, and from thence till he had made a
Retractation of his Book.

2. The like President An. 3 Car. 1. Vid. Journ. Dom. Com.
To be severed and cut off from being a Member of that or any future Parliament.

3. A Fine of 500 Marks to the Queen.

4. His Book and slanderous Libel adjudged utterly false and erroneous.

II. Journ. Dom. Proc. and Com. The Bishop of Bristol's Case.
Anno 1 Jacobi, 1603. The Bishop of Bristol publishing a Book, tending to make
division and strife, wrong and dishonor, both to the Lower House, and the
Lords themselves, was complained of by the Commons to the Lords.

The Earl of Salisbury at a Conference between the two Houses, rebuked the
Bishop, That any man should presume to see more than a Parliament could; the
Bishop made his Recantation:

1. That he had erred.

2. That he was sorry for it.

3. If it were to do again, he would not do it.

4. But protested, it was done of ignorance and not of malice.

III. Ex Journ. Dom. Proc. and Com. 7 Jac. The Case of Dr. Cowell.
Anno 7 Jacobi, 1609. Dr. Cowell, Professor of the Civil Law at Cambridge, writ
a Book called the Interpreter, rashly, dangerously, and perniciously asserting
certain Heads, to the overthrow and destruction of Parliaments, and the
fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom.

He was complained of by the Commons to the Lords, Men despise and reproach
those things whereof they are ignorant. It is a desperate and dangerous matter
for Civilians and Canonists, (I speak what I know, and not without just cause)
to write either of our Common Laws of England, which they profess not, or
against them, which they know not. But their Pages are so full of palpable
Errors, and gross Mistakings as these new Authors are out of our Charity, and
their Books out of our Judgment, cast away unanswered. Coke lib. 10. Lectori.
as equally wounded, who resolved to censure his Errors and boldness: but upon
the interposition of the King, who declared that the man had mistaken the
Fundamental Points and Constitutions of Parliaments, promised to condemn the
Doctrines of the Book as absurd, and him that maintained the Positions, they
proceeded no further.

His Principles, with the evident Inferences from them, were these:

1. That the King was solutus a Legibus, and not bound by his Coronation Oath.

2. That it was not ex necessitate that the King should call a Parliament to
make Laws, but might do that by his absolute power; for Voluntas Regis (with
him) was Lex populi.

3. That it was a favor to admit the consent of his Subjects, in giving of
Subsidies.

4. The Doctor draws his Arguments from the Imperial Laws of the Roman
Emperors; an Argument which may be urged with as great reason, and upon as good
authority, for the reduction of the state of the Clergy of England, to the
Polity and Laws in the time of those Emperors; as also to make the Laws and
Customs of Rome and Constantinople, to be binding and obligatory to the Cities
of London and York.

IV. Blackwood's Case. Jour. Dom. Com.
In the same Parliament, Mr. Hoskins a Member of the Commons, produced several
other Treatises containing as much as Dr. Cowell's Book, all sold impune;
amongst the rest there was one Blackwood's Book, which concluded, That we are
all Slaves by reason of the Conquest. Nota.


Upon these pernicious and false principles, our more modern Authors have
without control published to the World, these, and many more dangerous
positions, against the very being and honor of Parliaments, and destructive to
the ancient fundamental Laws, Privileges, and Customs of this Realm.

POSITIONS.

1. E contra Vide the ancient Rights of the Commons of England asserted, or a
discourse, proving by Records and the best Historians, that the Commons of
England were ever an essential part of Parliament.
That originally the Parliament consisted only of such as it pleased the King
to call, none having Right to come else.

2. That all the Subject has, is the Kings: and he may lawfully at his
pleasure take it from us, in regard he has as much Right to all our Lands and
Goods, as to any Revenue of the Crown.

3. That the Saxon Kings made Laws by the advice of the Bishops, and Wise men,
The Power of Kings, in particular of the Kings of England, learnedly asserted
by Sir Robert Filmer Knight. fol. 1. Printed An. Dom. 1680.
which were no other then the Privy-Councel.

4. That the Laws, Ordinances, Letters Patents, Privileges and Grants of
Princes, have no force but during their life, if they be not ratified by the
express consent, or at least by the sufferance of the Prince following, who had
knowledge thereof.

What then becomes of the Peerage of England? what of the Bishops, Deans,
Prebends, and other dignified Clergy? what of the Charters of all Corporations?
what of hereditary Offices? and what of Offices and Places for life? and
lastly, what becomes of the Charters and Privileges of the two most famous
Universities* of England, Cambridge and Oxford?

5. That Taxes and Subsidies were raised and paid without any gift of the
Commons, or of any Parliament, in the Saxon times; for instance, Danegelt.

6. For it was matter of Grace for the King to call the Commons to Parliament.
Yet afterward the Commons were called and made a House by the Bishops, in the
times of the Barons War, the better to curb them; yet were they never called to
consult, but only to consent.

7. Yet others deny that, and affirm that the Commons had their first birth and
beginning by Rebellion, Anno 49 H. 3. and that too after the Battle of Jews,
when the Barons had the King and Prince Edward in their power as prisoners, and
exercised Regal Authority in his Name. He reigned 57. years.

8. But this is not agreed by some, for they say, ab ingressu of William the
First, ad excessum H. 3. they cannot find one word of the Plebs or Commons
being any part of Parliament; hence another infers, that the opinion is most
like, who think, That the Commons giving their assent to making of Laws, began
about the time of E. 1.

9. The Legislative power is wholly in the King, for the Statutes of most
antiquity (according to the phrase of penning) may seem to be the mere will and
pleasure of the King, assisted with his Council, neither Lords nor Commons
being named: witness, inter al. the Statute of Magna Charta, 9 H. 3. etc.

10. Nor did the Commons take into consideration matters of Religion, which was
only the place and function of the Lords Spiritual and Divines to determine,
and not at all appertaing to the Laity: semper exclusis Dominis Temporalibus,
and Communitate Regni.

11. As for the Privileges of the House of Commons pretended to, there is none
to be found full, and firm, but only their being freed from Arrests, and that
hardly.

12. They are not called to be any part of the Common Council, by the Writ of
Summons.

13. Nor to consult de arduis Regni negotiis, of the difficult business of the
Kingdom.

14. For the Writ says, That the King would have conference and treat with the
Great men and Peers, but not a word of treaty and conference with the Commons.

15. Their duty being only ad faciend. and consentiend. to perform and consent
to such things as should be Ordained by the Common Council of the Kingdom.

16. Nor is there so much mention in the Writ, as a power in the Commons to
dissent. [No more is there in the Lords Writ, what then?]

17. Until H. 7's time the Commons were often petitioning, but never petitioned
to, and then directed to the Right Worshipful Commons.

18. That until the time of E. 6. (who was an Infant) for that I suppose was
the pretended foundation of the notion, it was punctually expressed in every
Kings Laws, that the Statutes were made by the King alone: and then there began
a dangerous alteration in the phrasing and wording of Acts of Parliament, to
the disadvantage of the Crown, and invading the Prerogative.

19. Lastly, for it would be tedious to trouble the Reader with all their
absurdities, Chimaera's, and false Inferences and Notions with which they have
stuffed their Books, and imbroiled the Kingdom, by imposing upon the
understanding of many of the Clergy and Gentry in the Nation; They boldly
assert, that the Kings Prerogative is a pre-eminence in cases of necessity, (of
which he is the proper and sole Judge) above and before the Law of property and
inheritance.

And so farewell all Parliaments; and by consequence, farewell all Laws.

It is God alone who subsists by himself; the Right of Crowns and Kingdoms, and
all other things, exist in mutual dependence and relation. The Sovereignty,
Honors, Lives, Liberties and Estates of all, are under the guard of the Law,
which when invaded by fraud or wit, or destroyed by force, a dismal confusion
quickly veils the face of Heaven, and brings with it horrid darkness, misery
and desolation; Rapine, plunder and cheating, both private and public, will be
allowed and protected; continual Rebellions, unjust Proscriptions, villainous
Accusations and Whippings, illegal and lasting Imprisonments and Confiscations,
dismal Dungeons, tormenting Racks and Questions, Arbitrary and Martial Law,
Murders, inhumane Assassinations, and base and servile Flatteries, multiplied
by Revenge, Ambition, and insatiable Avarice, will become the Common Law of the
Land.

All these and myriads more will be enacted for Law, by force or fraud.

All which that wise King James well understood, who says, That not only the
Royal Prerogative, King James's first Speech to his first Parliament in
England. Pulton's Stat. 1 Jac. cap. 2. fol. 1157.
but the Peoples security of Lands, Livings and Privileges, were preserved and
maintained by the ancient fundamental Laws, Privileges and Customs of this
Realm, and that by the abolishing or altering of them, it was impossible but
that present confusion will fall upon the whole state nnd frame of this Kingdom.

And his late Majesty of ever blessed memory, King Charles the I. Declaration
to all his loving Subjects, published with the Advice of his Privy Council.
Exact Collections of Declarations, page 28, 29.
was of the same mind and opinion, when he said, The Law is the Inheritance of
every Subject, and the only security he can have for his Life or Estate, and
the which being neglected or dis-esteemed, (under what specious show soever) a
great measure of infelicity, if not an irreparable confusion, must without
doubt fall upon them.

But to return back.

V. Journ. Dom. Com. Dr. Manwaring's Case.
Anno 3 Caroli primi, Dr. Manwaring was impeached in Parliament by the Commons,
Juratores praesentant quod Richardus Empson nuper de London miles nuper
Consiliarius excellentissimi Principis Henrici nuper Regis Angl. 17. die Maii
Anno Regni dicti nuper Regis 12. and diversis vicibus antea and postea apud
London in Parochia sanctae Brigettae in Warda de Farrington extra, Deum prae
oculis non habens, sed ut filius diabolicus subtiliter imaginans honorem,
dignitatem, and prosperitatem dicti nuper Regis, ac prosperitatem Regni sui
Angliae minime valere, sed ut ipse magis singulares favores dicti nuper Regis
adhiberet, unde magnat. fieri potuisset, ac totum Regnum Angliae, secundum ejus
voluntatem gubernaret falso deceptive and proditorie legem Angliae, subvertens
diversos ligeos ipsius nuper Regis, ex sua falsa covina, and subtili ingenio,
contra communem legem Regni Angliae. Anderson's 1. Rep. fol. 156.
for preaching and printing several Sermons, with a wicked and malicious
intention to seduce and misguide the Conscience of the King, touching the
observation of the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom, and the Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects thereof, and to incense his Royal Displeasure against
his Subjects, and to scandalize, subvert and impeach ^he good Laws and
Government of this Realm, and the Authority of the High Court of Parliament, to
alien his Royal Heart from his People, and to cause Jealousies, Seditions and
Divisions in the Kingdom: Whereupon he had Judgment,

1. Vide Rushworth' s Collections, fo. Judgment against the Doctor.
To be imprisoned during pleasure of the House of Lords.

2. Was fined a 1000 l. to the King.

3. Journ. Dom. Procerum.
To make such submission and acknowledgment of his Offenses in writing, both
there and at the Bar of the Commons House.

4. Suspended for the term of 3 years, from exercising the Ministry.

5. For ever disabled to preach at Court.

6. That he should be for ever disabled to have any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or
Secular Office.

7. That his said Books were worthy to be burnt; and that for the better
effecting of that, his Majesty was to be moved to grant a Proclamation to call
them in, to be burnt in London, and both the Universities, and to prohibit
their Reprinting.

This was the Judgment of the Lords.

The Doctor made his submission upon his knees, first at the Bar of the House
of Lords, and after on his knees, at the Bar of the House of Commons: His
Submission was this,

I do here in all sorrow of heart and true repentance, The Doctor's Submission.
acknowledge those many Errors and Indiscretions which I have committed, in
preaching and publishing those two Sermons of mine I call Religion and
Allegiance, Ex Agupeto Diacono. Assentatores a Regibus tanquam pestis vitandi
12. nam non utilia consulunt, sed quae placent 22. 31. sic Diogenes rogatus
quaenam bellua perniciosissime morderet ex feris inquitobtrectator ex cicuribus
vero adulator.
and my great fault in falling upon this Theme again, and handling the same
rashly, scandalously and unadvisedly, in mine own Parish Church in St. Giles in
the Fields, the 4th. of May last past; I do humbly acknowledge those three
Sermons of mine, to be full of many dangerous passages and inferences, and
scandalous aspersions, in most parts of the same.

And I do humbly acknowledge the Justice of this Honorable House, in that
Sentence and Judgment passed upon me for my great offense; and I do from the
bottom of my heart crave pardon of God, the King, this Honorable House, the
Church, and the Commonwealth in general, and those worthy Persons reflected
upon by me in particular, for these great Errors and Offenses.

Roger Manwaring.

After all which, The Lords order the Bishop of London to suspend the Doctor.
the Lords ordered the Bishop of London to suspend him, according to the Clause
expressed in the part of the Judgment against him.

The Doctor after got a Pardon, and was made a Bishop, which occasioned great
Disturbances in the House of Commons, in 4 Car. 1.

The Charge and Articles against the Doctor, drawn out of his own Books.
Article I.
1. That his Majesty is not bound to keep and observe the good Laws and Customs
of the Realm, concerning the Right and Liberty of the Subject, to be exempted
from all Loans, Taxes, and other Aids laid upon them, without common Consent in
Parliament.

2. That his Majesty's Will and command in imposing any charges upon his
Subjects, without such consent, does so far bind them in their consciences,
that they cannot refuse the same without peril of eternal damnation.

Article II.
1. That these Refusers had offended against the Law of God.

2. Against the Supreme Authority.

3. By so doing were become guilty of impiety, disloyalty, rebellion,
disobedience, and liable to many other Taxes.

Article III.
1. That Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of Aids and
Subsidies.

2. That the slow proceedings of such Assemblies, are not fit to supply the
urgent necessity of the State.

3. That Parliaments are apt to produce sundry impediments to the just designs
of Princes, and to give them occasion of displeasure and discontent.

It was a saying of Themistius in his Consular Oration to Jovinian the Emperor,
that Some Bishops did not worship God, but the Imperial purple.

This Dr. as I said before, after this so solemn a Judgment, did in the time of
Prorogation, between 3 and 4 Car. 1. get a Pardon, and not only so, but the
Bishopric of St. David's; which occasioned great debates and disturbances in
the Parliament when they reassembled again, the power and validity of his
Pardon being brought in question, and several times argued: but the dissolution
of the Parliament put an end to the dispute for that time.

But in the Parliament before the Long Parliament of 1640. the Lords highly
resented it, as may appear by following proceedings.

This day was read the Declaration of the House of Commons made tertio Caroli
Regis, Journ. Dom. Proc. die Sabbathi, 18 die April. 16 Car. 1
against Dr. Manwaring, since Lord Bishop of St. David's, and likewise the
Sentence pronounced against him by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the High
Court of Parliament, which is committed to the consideration of the Lords of
the Grand Committee for Privileges; and it was moved, that what can be
alleged on the Lord Bishop of St. David's part, either by Pardon, License, or
otherwise, that it may be produced and seen at the sitting of the Lords
Committees, for theirfull and clear understanding, and better expedition in the
business.

Having taken into consideration the business concerning Dr. 21 April. 1640.
Manwaring, it was ordered, that upon Monday next the Records be brought into
the House, that the House may determine the Cause touching Dr. Manwaring.

The business appointed this day concerning Dr. Manwaring, 27 April. 1640
is referred until to morrow morning, viz. 28 Aprilis.

The Lord Keeper by command from his Majesty was to let their Lordships know,
28 April 1640.
that his Majesty had understood that there was some question concerning Doctor
Manwaring now Bishop of Saint David's, and that his Majesty had given command
that the said Dr. Manwaring shall not come and fit in Parliament, nor send any
Proxy to the Parliament: thereupon it was ordered to be entered so.

And between that and the next Parl. as I am informed, he died.

VI. Anno 3 Caroli primi, Dr. Mountague was complained of in the House of
Commons, Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1. Dr. Mountague's Case.
for writing and publishing several Tenants, tending to The Dr. Writ and
Published several Tenants, tending to Arminianism and Popery.
Arminianism and Popery, and that he had committed a contempt against the House.

Lord Brook (friend to Sir Phillip Sidney) in his Alaham.
Heli the Priest, who teaching from without, Corrupted Faith, bound under Laws
of might, Not feeling God, but blowing him about, In every shape and likeness
but the right.

We are to desire to conform our selves to former Parliaments; this Cause began
here, 21. Jac. and then it was commended to the Archbishop; But after it was so
far from cure, that another Book of Appeal came out, and the Parliament, 1
Caroli sent to the Archbishop to know what he had done; who said he had given
Mountague Admonition, and yet he Printed that second Book without his consent,
Had done a contempt to the Commons and distrubed the Nation, 1 Car. Voted.
and so it was then debated; and the House Voted that he had done a contempt to
the House of Commons, and that it disturbed the Church and Commonwealth.

Since that they find that Book was countenanced, 2 Car. resolved by that
Parliament that he had Sown Sedition,
and defended by Bishops, and others.

At the last Parliament the House again took it into consideration, And
endeavored to reconcile us to Rome.
and Voted that Mountague had sowed Sedition, and Endeavored to Reconcile us
to Rome. Articles against Mountague.


Now it was thought good that an addition should be made to the Articles
against Richard Mountague Clerk.

First, That he about 21. Jac. Printed a Book called a Gag for the Puritan, and
about the 22. Jac, the Treaty of the Invocation of Saints, and 1 Caroli, an
Appeal to Caesar, in every of which he affirmed diverse Opinions, contrary to
the Articles of Religion, and by his so doing, has broke the Laws, and
disturbed the Peace of the Church.

He said that the Church of Rome, had ever remained firm in their Doctrine, and
that the Sacrifice of Masses, etc.

And also that contrary to his Duty and Allegiance, under the name of Puritans,
he had laid vile Aspersions on diverse conformable Persons.

And also he labors to draw Men to Popery, by subtle and secret ways.

His Appeal has diverse passages that are contumelious to his Majesty's Father
King James, and to diverse Worthy and Learned Divines.

For all which the ommons Pray he may be Punished, for thus disturbing the
Peace of the Church and State.

Two cautions are observed; first, we meddle not with Inferences and
Collections, but with immediate contradictions to the Articles of Religion, and
the Book of Homilies; also he is not charged with opinions contrary to the
Divines of England.

He recites the Articles as if we may depart away from grace the word (away) is
not in the Articles.

Also the Articles do not say that Men justified may fall away from that State;
As for the Homilies, for the word ( away) he puts in fall away.

Also he seems to make difference between the Church in foreign Parts, and the
Church of England.

As for his charge of Sedition, it is clear by dividing the Kingdom under the
name of Puritans, laboring to bring his Majesty in jealousy with (...)
Subjects, and to stir up others in hatred against such.

First, he lays the name of Puritans upon the Kings Subjects, that are dutiful
and honest Subjects. In truth at the first this word was given to them that
severed themselves from the Church; but he says there are Puritans in heart,
and Puritans in Doctrine, as of Predestination and Reprobation.

Also this division and aspersion is new, and under this name he comprehends
some of our Bishops.

Also he labors to bring those persons into dislike with his Majesty, as
dangerous persons; he says they are a potent Faction, that Authority is a mote
in their eye, and they are cunning and active men. And he concludes, Domine
Imperator defend me gladio, and ego te defendam calamo.

Also he labors to bring them in scorn; in his Appeal, they hold the Cross of
Christ in as great despite as Julian.

Also he withdraws the Subjects from their Religion to Popery, and he
introduces those mischiefs that the Law seeks to prevent. By the Law 1 Eliz.
and other Statutes, it is Treason to withdraw any from the Religion
established; but he cunningly infuseth Popery.

He says, the points of Controversy between Us and the Papists, are
Arbitrary, and that we and they assent in some Opinions, as in the point of
Free Will; that their Opinions and ours are all one; and for the point of real
Presence, for which so many have suffered death, he says, that they jangle
without cause.

Also it was desired, that those Absurdities and Consequences we lay upon the
Papists, for the point of Free Will, may be spared, and that they are Bugbears,
etc.

And for converting men to Popery, he speaks favorably of the Pope; that he is
the first and greatest Bishop, and fit to determine Controversies; and that the
Pope is not Antichrist, he spends a whole Chapter in that; and that the Romish
Church is part of the Catholic Church, we mention in our Creed; and for Popish
Ceremonies, he commends and approves Pictures in Churches; and so for the Cross
he says, Caro signetur ut anima.

Also he labors to reconcile Papists and Us; whereas if we offer Composition,
we lose or part with somewhat. Also he lays Scandals on us, and our Doctrine,
that there is no certainty in our points of difference, and that our Divines
themselves differ.

Also he favors those Practices that have been used by the King's Enemies: A
Spaniard says, Nothing is better for the ruin of the English, Campanella de
Monar. Hispan.
than to establish a Faction amongst them, which he labors to effect.

His Tenants Dishonorable to K. James, who was diligent to prevent
Arminianism; now he labors to discredit the Synod at Dort. Also K. James in
his learned Works proves the Pope to be Antichrist; but Mountague said, he
never had a probable Argument thereof.

Also he puts Disgraces on Protestant Divines, that Calvin, Perkins, and Beza,
are Dictators; and that Beza does Puritanize; and Dr. Whitacre, that he was a
man of their side.

His profaneness in speaking of Preaching, and other Exercises of Religion; in
preaching in Pulpits they brawl, etc. and Conferences after Sermons, he calls
them Prophetical Determinations, and to chew the Cud as after Lectures, Bible-
bearers, etc.

It was Ordered, That the Articles be presented to the Lords, and that
Mountague be transmitted to the Lords.

After which, the Parliament was Prorogued to the 4th. year of that King's
Reign, where the Commons were upon him again, and questioned a Pardon he had
got in the time of Prorogation; but shortly after the Parliament was dissolved.

2. Some Presidents wherein the House of Commons have for misdemeanors turned
out and discharged their Members.
I. ANno 27 Eliz, Jour. Dom. Com. Anno. 27 Eliz. Dr. Parry's Case.
Dr. Parry for several misdemeanors and crimes, was disabled to be any longer a
Member in the House.

II. An. 18 Jac. Journ. Dom. Com. 18 Jac. Sir Giles Mompesson's Case.
Sir Giles Mompesson for being a Monopolist, and for other great and
insufferable crimes by him committed, to the abuse of his Majesty, and grievous
oppression of the Subjects, was

1. Turned out of the House.

2. Committed to the Tower.

And after Impeached before the Lords, who gave Judgment upon him:

1. Journ. Dom. Proc. 18 Jac. The Lords Judgment againw him.
To be degraded of the Order of Knighthood.

2. To stand perpetually in the degree of a person Outlawed for Misdemeanors
and Trespasses.

3. His Testimony never to be received in any Court, nor to be of any
Inquisition or Jury.

4. To be excepted out of all general pardons.

5. That he should be imprisoned during his life.

6. Not to approach within 12. miles of the Courts of the King or Prince, nor
at the Kings high Court usually held at Westminster.

7. That the King should have the profits of his Land for life, and all his
Goods and Chattels, and should be Fined at 10000 l.

8. He was also disabled to hold or receive any Office under the King, or for
the Commonwealth.

9. And lastly, ever to be held an Infamous person.

III. And in the Parliament 19 Jacobi, Sir John Bennet Knight, Journ. Dom. Com.
19 Jac. Sir John Bennet' s Case. Illos extollimus, qui fraudibus ac dolis
divites facti sunt, eos patres legum, Justitiae fontes, sapientiaeque thesauros
appellantes, O inconcussa Dei justitia, quamdiu haec pateris? ab horum igitur
scholis, in quibus non sat scio an de veritatis inventione, an potius de lucri
spe major sit disceptatio, prodeunt Judices, Praesides, atque Ministri, manibus
tenacibus, oculis impudicis, effrenata libidine, lapideis cordibus, ficta
gravitate, lingua melliflua, sed dentibus virulentis, and breviter auri
insatiabili fame. Cardan, libro de utilitate ex adversis capienda. Cap. de
Temporum and Magistratuum pravitate, p. 649.
one of the Members of the House, having been accused for Corruption, in
receiving diverse Bribes in the execution of his judicial place of Judge of the
Prerogative Court of Canterbury: All which was proved to the full satisfaction
of the House.

Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament,

1. That a Warrant should issue under Mr. Speakers hand, directed to the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, for the safe keeping of the said Sir John
Bennet, until they shall receive other directions from the Lords; to whom the
Commons had resolved to prefer an Impeachment against him.

2. That he be put out, and no longer to continue a Member thereof.

3. That a Warrant be made for a Writ for a new choice for the University of
Oxford.

IV. In the same Parliament, Journ. Dom. Com. 19 Jac. Sir Robert Floid's Case.
the Commons House of Parliament for that Sir Robert Floyd had been a projector
of a Patent for a Monopoly, being a general grievance both in the original
creation, and in the execution:

Resolved una voce, Turned out for being a Monopolist.
That the said Sir Robert Floyd was a person unworthy to continue a Member of
this House, and adjudged him presently to be put out.

V. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1. Mr. John Barbour's Case.
Anno 3 Car. 1. Mr. John Harbor a Lawyer, and Recorder of the City of Wells,
for subscribing a Warrant for the quartering of Soldiers; though he pleaded
fear; yet because he would rather not lose his Place than do Justice, he was
thought unfit to make Laws, that violates the Laws, his fault being aggravated
by his profession; he had done well to have remembered 11 R. 2. when Belknap
amongst other Judges gave his Opinion for fear, unwilling to lose his Cushion;
when he came home he could not sleep, but said, I deserve three H. H. H. a
Hurdle, a Halter, and a Hangman. 1 H. 4. a Law was made, that fear, much less
Ambition or Avarice, should be no good Plea, there being no hope of a Coward.
This may serve as an Almanac for the Meridian of England. This Example will
prove more and try more than 20 points of Doctrine; it will strike fear,
circumspecta agatis:

Mr. Harbor was called in to answer for himself, and after withdrew, and
Ordered,

1. That Mr. Harbor The Order of the Commons against Harbor.
be suspended the House, and sequestered, till the pleasure of the House be
known.

2. That a Committee examine the Cause, and that no motion be made till that be
done.

3. And the Order was signified to Mr. Harbor by the Sergeant.

3. Some Presidents for punishing persons that were no Members of the House,
for contempts and misdemeanors.
I. Journ. Dom. Com. 4 E. 6. Criketost's Case.
ANno 4 E. 6. Criketost for confederating in the escape of one Flood, was
committed to the Tower, and afterward discharged paying his Fees.

II. Journ Dom. Com. 1 Jac. Complaint that a Yeoman of the Guard who kept the
door of the Lobby of the Upper House, against several of the Members of the
House of Commons.
Complaint was made by Sir Herbert Croft, of Bryan Tash a Yeoman of his
Majesty's Guard, for keeping out of the doors of the Upper House; and Sir
Herbert himself, and some others of the Commons offering to come in, he
repulsed them, and shut the door upon them, with these uncivil and contemptible
terms, Goodman Burgess you come not here.

The Question moved in this was, that for so great contempt, whether the House
of it self should proceed to punish, or Address themselves to the proper
Officcr the Lord Chamberlain, Captain of the Guard, etc. And so was left for
this day.

A President of the like contempt by a Gentleman Usher, remembered to have been
questioned in this House in a Parliament in her Majesty's time.

This day the contempt of the Yeoman of the Guard was again remembered, 22
Marti. 1603
and propounded as meet to be left to the examination and report of the
Committee for Returns and Privileges. But herein an Honorable person, and a
special Member of the House, interposed his advice, that there might be some
moderate course taken with respect to his Majesty's Service, and to the eminent
and honorable Officers whom it might concern: which induced the House thus far
to be pleased, that the Offender the next day should appear and answer his
contempt at the Bar, with caution and on purpose (which the House did then
utter) that if he seemed to understand his own offense, and be sorry for it,
and would submit himself to the pleasure and mercy of the House, praying pardon
and favor, they would remit and discharge him; and the Sergeant was commanded
to attend the said Order for his appearance.

Bryan Tash a Yeoman of the Guard, for his contempt to the House, being in the
custody of the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, upon his submission and
confession of his fault, Tash brought to the Bar, submits, and is pardoned,
paying Fees.
Mr. Speaker pronounced his pardon and dismission, paying the ordinary Fees to
the Clerk and Sergeant; and in the name of the House gave him advice and
warning, for his better care and carriage hereafter, upon any the like
occasions, in the course of his Service and Attendance.

III. Journ. Dom. Com. 18. Jac. Sir Francis Mitchell's Case.
Anno 18 Jac. The Commons House of Parliament adjudged Sir Francis Mitchell, a
Lawyer, to be prisoner in the Tower, for his many misdemeanors in and about the
procuring of a Patent concerning the Forfeitures of Recognizances, Committed to
the Tower.
and of Alehouse-keepers; and further ordered, that a Sergeant at Arms should
forthwith take him into his custody, and that at two of the clock that
Afternoon, Carried on foot through London-streets.
should carry him on foot through London-streets unto the Tower, there to be
delivered to the Lieutenant.

After which the Commons impeached him before the Lords; After impeached by the
Commons before the Lords.
who having examined his arbitrary acts, great crimes, and intolerable
villainies, by Imprisonments and the ruin of many Families, all proved, as may
be seen in the Lords Journal.

The Lords agreed of the Sentence of Sir Francis Mitchell, Journ. Dom. Proc. 18
Jac. The Lords send to the Commons.
sent a Message unto the House of Commons, that the Lords have proceeded
against Sir Francis Mitchell upon the complaint of the Commons, and they have
found him guilty of many exerbitant offenses, That they are ready to give
Judgment against Mitchell, if they would come and demand it.
and are ready to give Judgment against him, if they with their Speaker will
come to demand it.

Answered, They will come accordingly with all convenient speed.

In the mean time the Lords put on their Robes.

The Commons being come, and the Speaker at the Bar, after low obeisance he
said,

There was heretofore related unto your Lordships by the House of Commons, The
Commons by their Speaker demand Judgment against Sir Francis Mitchell.
a complaint of many griivances against Sir Giles Mompesson, and Sir Francis
Mitchell, for many offenses committed by them, committed against the King and
the Commonwealth: your Lordships have proceeded with Mompesson, and given
Judgment also against him; understanding you are ready to pronounce Judgment
also against the said Sir Francis Mitchell, I the Speaker, in the name of the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, do demand
and pray that Judgment be given against him the said Sir Francis Mitchell,
according to his demerits.

The Lord Chief Justice The Lord Chief Justice pronounces the Judgment.
pronounced the Judgment, in haec verba. Mr. Speaker, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal have taken into due consideration the great care and pains taken by
the Commons, to inform their Lordships of the great Complaints, and the
qualities and natures thereof, presented unto them against the said Sir Francis
Mitchell, and others; whereof their Lordships being well prepared by them to
the true understanding of the same, and thereupon have proceeded to the perfect
discovery thereof, by examination of diverse Witnesses upon Oath, do find
thereby Sir Francis Mitchell clearly guilty of many great crimes and offenses
against his Majesty and the Commonwealth, and have tesolved at this time to
proceed to Judgment against him for the same: And therefore the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal of this great and high Court of Parliament, do award and adjudge,

1. The Judgment of the Lords against Sir Francis Mitchell.
That the said Sir Francis shall stand and be from henceforth degraded of the
Order of Knighthood, with reservation of the dignity of his now Wife and
Children, and the ceremony of degradation to be performed by direction of this
Court, There was a Clause in Patents of Monopolies, whereby power was given to
imprison, and hundreds were committed by color thereof to Finsbury Gaol, and
the Fleet.
to the Earl Marshals Court.

2. That he shall be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure in Finsbury Gaol, in
the same Chamber there which he provided for others; the Tower where he now
remains, being a Prison too worthy for him.

3. That he shall undergo a Fine of 1000 l.

4. That he shall be disabled to hold or receive any Office under the King, or
for the Commonwealth.

IV. Anno 18 Jac. Journ. Dom. Proc. 18 Jac. Fowls, Geldard and others
committed.
The Commons after a Conference with the Lords, referred the Bailment of
Matthias Fowls, George Geldard, and other Prisoners, who had been infamous
Agents for Mompesson and Mitchell, and by them transmitted to the Lords, (the
Parliament being to be adjourned for some time) the opinion of the Commons was,
that the Gaol was the best Bail for them.

V. Anno 20 Jac. Journ. Dom. Com. 20 Jac. Dr. Harris's Case.
Dr. Harris, Minister of Blechingley, who had misbehaved himself by Preaching,
and otherwise with respect to Election of Members of Parliament there, and
being complained of in the House, and referred to a Committee; the Committee
was clearly satisfied that it was a high and great Offense; they are of opinion
he should be called to the Bar as a Delinquent, to be admonished, and to
confess his fault there and in the Country, and in the Pulpit of the
Parish Church, To recant in the Pulpit.
on Sunday seven-night before the Sermon.

The Doctor was brought to the Bar, and kneeled; the House agreed with the
Committee, and Mr. Speaker pronounced Judgment upon him accordingly.

VI. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1. Mr. Burgess, a Minister, his Case.
Anno 3 Car. 1. Mr. Burgess, a Minister in Oxfordshire, who had abused his
Function in the duty of Catechizing, by making an Interlude full of blasphemous
Speeches; and also in a Sermon, which was made only to traduce the Puritans,
was sent for by a Messenger; being brought to the Committee, refused to answer,
for which he was committed:

1. To the Tower.

2. After petitioned for his deliverance, and humbly submitted; whereupon he
was delivered out of the Tower.

VII. Journ. Dom. Com. The Case of Sir William Wray, M. Langton, Mr. John
Trelawnie, and Mr. Edward Trelawnie.
In the same Parliament, Sir William Wray, Mr. Langton, Mr. John Trelawnie, and
Mr. Edward Trelawnie, being Deputy-Lievtenants of the County of Cornwall,
assumed to themselves a power to make whom they only pleased, Knights of the
Shire, defamed Sir John Elliot, and Mr. Corriton, who stood to be chosen, sent
up and down the Country Letters for the Trained-bands to appear at the day of
Election, menaced the Country, under the title of his Majesty's pleasure.

It was Ordered,

1. The Judgment of the Commons.
That Mr. Langton and Mr. John Trelawnie be committed to the Tower, for their
Offense done to the House, there to remain during the pleasure of the House,
and that they make a submissive acknowledgment of their Offenses.

2. And Sir William Wray, and Mr. Edward Trelawnie, be committed to the
Sergeant, and so to remain till they make their Recognition in the House.

After all which, The Commons House of Parliament adjudge them.
the Question was, whether the Gentlemen should make the Recognition at the
Assizes in Cornwall, or no: And it was Ordered,

That the Recognition and Submission should be made in the Country; To make
submission in the Country at the Assizes.
and a Committee was appointed to draw the Recognition, and they were sent to
the Tower.

The four Gentlemen were called in to the Bar, and the Speaker pronounced the
Judgment upon them, all that while they kneeled.

VIII. Journ. Dom. Com. 3. Car. 1.
Anno 3 Car. 1. Sir Thomas Wentworth reports the Business, concerning the
Toll granted to Levet for -- Bridges in Yorkshire, Levet, for executing a
Patent in time of Prorogation, which was adjudged a Grievance by the House in
the last Session, ordered to be sent for by the Sergeant at Arms.
to him and his Heirs, to be holden in Soccage of East-Greenwich, at 20 s.
Rent, with power to seize Goods, etc.

No Grant hereof till 10 Jac. nor any fruit thereof till 15 Jac. the Bridge
anciently in good repair, some particularly bound to repair it.

This Patent adjudged by the Committee a Grievance to the Subject, both in the
original Creation and Execution.

Upon Question so adjudged here: Journ, Dom. Com. 4. Car. 1. The Parliament
prorogued.
Ordered upon Question,

That Levet, that has peremptorily exercised a Patent, here condemned the last
Session, for taking Toll at -- Bridges in Yorkshire, shall be sent for by the
Sergeant at Arms attending upon this House.

IX. Anno 4 Car. Journ. Dom. Com. 4 Car. 1. The Officers of the Custom-house.
1. Mr. Rolls a Merchant, and a Member of the House, informed the House that
his Goods were seized by the Customers for refusing to pay the Customs by them
demanded, although he told them he would pay what was adjudged to be due by Law.

It was ordered, that the Officers of the Custom-house should be sent for.

X. Journ. Dom. Com. 4 Car. 1. The Case of Acton, Sheriff of London, for
contempt in prevaricating in his Testimony.
Sir John Elliot reported from the Committee for the Examination of the
Merchants business, That the Committee finding Acton Sheriff of London in
prevarications and contradictions, in his Examination, which being conceived to
be a contempt to the House, he desires he might be sent for to answer his
contempt.

Mr. Goodwyn. The Sheriff acknowledges his error, and humbly desires so much
favor, that he may once again be called before the Committee, and if he give
not full content by his answer, he will refer himself to the wisdom and justice
of the House.

Sir Walter Earl seconded this motion, so did Alderman Moulson, Secretary Cook,
Chancellor of the Duchy, and some others: but this offense being declared to
be so great and gross, and that the Committee had given him so many times to
recollect himself, and he being so great an Officer of so great a City, had all
the favor that might be, and yet rejected the same, and carried himself in a
very scornful manner.

Wherefore it was ordered he should be sent for unto the House as a Delinquent
to morrow morning. Ordered to be sent for.


Sheriff Acton was called to the Bar, Tuesd. 10 Feb. Appears, and called to the
Bar.
as a Delinquent upon his knees, and said, If he has erred, it was through
want of memory, or through ignorance, for he intended not the least dislike or
distaste to any Member of the House; and withdraws.

Mr. Long. I shall move that he be sent to the Tower.

Mr. His Crime with others aggravated.
Littleton. You see the affronts by Books, by Preaching, by Rumors; by being
served with Process, these scorns are daily put upon us, that we are become but
a mere scarecrow; the neglect of our duty is the cause of this, it is high
time to remedy this, or it is in vain to sit here.

The Sheriff is again called to the Bar on his knees, Sentenced to the Tower.
and sentenced to the Tower.

XI. Journ. Dom. Com. 4 Car. 26 Jan. The Case of Lewis.
A Petition was preferred against one Lewis, who said* about the 25th. of
December, The Devil take the Parliament: which was avowed by two witnesses. And
although it was spoken out of Parliament, yet it was resolved to be an offense
to the Parliament: And it was ordered he should be sent for.

4. Some Presidents for punishing of Misdemeanors in Elections.
I. IN the Parliament of the 18. Journ. Dom. Com. 18 Jac. The Case of the Mayor
of Winchelsey.
of King James, the Mayor of Winchelsey, for misbehaving of himself at the
Election of Parliament Men for that Town, and making a false Return. It was
Resolved upon the Question.

1. Judgment against the Mayor.
That the Mayor of Winchelsey had committed a Contempt and Misdemeanour against
this House, and therefore shall stand committed to the Sergeant till Saturday
morning, then making his Submission here at the Bar, to be discharged of any
further punishment here.

2. But to make his Acknowledgment in the Town before the new Election.

II. Journ. Dom. Com. 20 Jac. The Case of the Mayor of Arundel for Misdemeanour.
Anno 20 Jac. Upon the Report of Mr. Glanvile, concerning the Borough of
Arundel, because the Mayor had misbehaved himself in the Election, by putting
the Town to a great deal of Charge, not giving a due and general warning, but
packt a number of Electors: It was Resolved,

1. The Mayor not being in Town, a Warrant be sent for him.

2. Judgment. To pay the Charge, to be set down by 3 Members.
Resolved upon another Question, that Mr. Alford, Mr. Bing, and Mr. Lathorn,
shall set down the Charges.

III. Jou^n Dom. Com 21 Jac. The Case of Ingry the under Sheriff of
Cambridgeshire
Anno 21 Jac. Mr. Glanvile reports the Misdemeanour of the Undersheriff of
Cambridgshire, who refused the Pole, declaring, Sir Thomas Steward promised him
to defend him against Sir John Cutts, and told him, he should have no wrong nor
damage.

Resolved upon the Question,

That this Undersheriff shall be committed to the Serjeant's Custody till
Thursday next. Judgment.


Resolved also upon the Question, That making his Submission at the Bar, and
acknowledging his offense, he shall be discharged from any further punishment
in this place.

Resolved also upon a third Question, To make a submission at the Sessions.
That the Undersheriff shall make a further Submission openly at the next
Quarter Sessions to be holden in the County, and acknowledge his faults.

Edward Ingry brought to the Bar, and kneeling upon his knees, Mr. Speaker
denounced upon him the Judgment of the House.

IV. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 and 4 Car. 1. Tuesd. Apr. 29. The Case of the Sheriffs
of York, and others touching the Election of Sir Thomas Savile.
Mr. Hackwell reports from the Committee about the Sheriffs of York, and
others, for the Election of Sir Thomas Savill.

The two Sheriffs, and two Aldermen are Delinquents; one of the Sheriffs, and
one of the Aldermen are most faulty: Sheriff Thompson had committed two
offenses; First, his hasty and precipitate Judgment of the Election, to prevent
the Election of Hoy: Secondly, in denying the Poll, being required. First, his
hasty and precipitate Judgment, was done without acquainting his fellow
Sheriff, and it was within a quarter of an hour after the reading of the Writ,
and half an hour after nine a clock; and while he was doing of it, he was
admonished, and told that he could not answer it, and that he might defer it;
yet he did obstinately proceed, and answered them frowardly, and said he would
do it, and that he would justify it. His excuse was thus: that it was indeed
suddenly done, but it was done so formerly. But to that it was replied, That
never before above two were in Election. Secondly, he answered, That it was not
of his own head, but some Aldermen advised it; but that was Alderman Cooper, a
Delinquent for that offense. For the other offense, in denying the Poll after
it was demanded, and that was before he had pronounced any Judgment; but he was
willing that Robinson should have the Poll, for he knew he could not carry it:
but he refused Hoy, and he was required ten times, but gave no answer at all.
His behavior before the Committee was impudent, and he would answer nothing
directly. The Committee found this man to be an engaged man, Nota.
and that he was promised to be saved harmless. For Alderman Henlow, he
procured the Company of Tailors two days before the Election, and published Sir
John Savill's Letters, and pressed it, and upon some he pressed it so much,
that they should elect Sir Thomas Savill, and said the Parliament will not
hold. He dealt with the Sheriffs also, and told them diverse words of Sir John
Savill, that he would take it very ill; and, said he, if you will choose Sir
Thomas Savill, you shall be saved harmless. Also he endeavored to procure a
Certificate, that Sir Thomas Savill was duly elected; when any refused, he said
they were factious Fellows, and otherwise threatened. The Committee censured
Sheriff Thompson, and this Alderman Henlow, First, that they should stand
committed to the Sergeant during pleasure. Secondly, that they should
acknowledge their offenses at the Bar in the full House, and pay all due Fees
before they be discharged. Also they should defray all the charges of the
Witnesses of Alderman Hoy, to be assessed by four of the Committee. Nota.
And that they should make acknowledgement of their fault before the Court of
Aldermen at York; and that the Mayor should certify their submission to the
House.

As for Alderman Cooper, he assembled the Company of Merchants, and read Sir
John Savill's Letter for the Election of his Son, and also he at the Election
persuaded the Sheriff to give Judgment. Sheriff Atkins was only passive, and
did not refuse to join with the other Sheriff. As for the point of charges
given to the Witnesses of Hoy, it was doubtful and objected against by some,
whether it lay in our power: But it was replied, That in every Court it is
necessary to have power to impose Fines, and why we should want power for
offenses that lie in our cognizance, is not to be questioned; else the party
that is duly elected, and that justifies the free Election, and maintains the
freedom and liberty of the Commonwealth, shall be more punished then the
Delinquent: Also we have power to imprison, which is more then a Fine: Also we
have as much as the Lords House, in those things that lie in our Jurisdiction.
13 Eliz. 10 Maii, The Mayor of Westbury in Wiltshire took 4 l. for a Return;
Mr. Long fined 20 l. and ordered to bring in a Bond made him for a greater sum.
23 Eliz. 5 Januar. Mr. Arthur Fall writ a Book to the dishonor of this House;
It was ordered, that the Sergeant should go to apprehend him, assisted by two
Knights of this House. 14 Febr. he was brought to the Bar, and sent to the
Tower, and fined 500 Marks, and expelled the House, and kept in the Tower six
months. 23 Eliz. 18 Martii, a Fine was assessed on every one that was absent
without leave. 6 H. 8. cap. 16. our Clerks Book is termed a Record. 21 Jac. the
Election of the Burgess of Arundel in Sussex; and there it was ordered, that
the Witnesses charges should be born: And then there was 10 l. paid down by
one, a Member of this House. 12 Jac. a Servant of Justice Whitlock's was
Arrested by one Lock and Moon, Nota.
who were enjoined to ride both on Horseback, with their faces to the Horses
tails: And Mr. Hackwell said, he himself self saw the execution of it in
Cheapside.

3 Jacobi, Sir Robert Philips.
the Baron of Walton's Solicitor, being his Servant, was Arrested; he claimed
the privilege, and the party that caused the Arrest was Fined, and it was left
to the Speaker to moderate the Fine. 18 Jacobi, certain Constables of York, for
Misdemeanors, were sent for up, and one was acquitted, and had 5 l. given him
for his charges. At the last Parliament, Sir George Hastings Knight. was elected
Knight of Leicestershire, and was Arrested by the Sheriff at his Election, and
complained here, and his Witnesses were ordered to have their costs paid them.

Ordered that Thompson and Henlow pay the charges of Witnesses, The Sheriff to
pay the charges of the Witnesses, to be set down by four Witnesses.
brought up about the proof of the said Election, and that they shall not be
discharged from the Sergeant till they pay their Fees; and four Gentlemen of
the House are to moderate and set down the charges in certain. And it is
ordered, that they shall be committed to the Sergeant, till they make their
submission at the Bar, and acknowledge their faults on their knees, and read a
submission. As for the submission to be made at York, it was through great
favor remitted by the House.

To all which I shall add the ensuing President.

Lunae 4 Junii, 19 Jacobi.
7. Committment of Davenport to the Tower, for misinforming the House of
Commons, as a Witness.
The Commons House of Parliament has this day adjudged Randolph Davenport Esquire
for his offense in mis-informing the same House, in a Cause wherein he was
produced as a Witness, to be committed prisoner to the Tower, for the space of
one whole month, and then to be discharged paying his Fees. These are therefore
in the behalf of the said House of Commons, to require and charge you to
receive the said Randolph Davenport into your custody, within the Prison of the
Tower, under your charge, and him therein safely to detain and keep, for the
space of one whole month, and then to discharge him, paying his Fees; and this
shall be your Warrant in this behalf. Given under my hand this 4th. of June,
1621.

To Sir Allen Apsley Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower.
An Act to secure the Debt of Simpson, Anno primo Regis Jacobi, Number. 42. penes
Joh. Brown, Ar. Cler. Parliamentor.
and others, and save harmless the Warden of the Fleet, in Sir Thomas Shirley's
Case.
Soit bail aux Seigniours.
A cest Bille ov Esquire les Amendments annexes, les Seigniours ont assentus.
HUmbly pray the Commons of this present Parliament, That whereas Thomas
Shirley Knight. which came by your Highness's Commandment to this your present
Parliament, being elected and returned a Burgess for the Borough of Steyning,
in your Highness's County of Sussex, was upon the 15th. day of March last past,
arrested by the Sheriffs of London, at the Suit of one Giles Simpson, first
upon an Action of Debt, and afterward laid and detained in Execution upon a
Recognizance, of the nature of the Statute Staple of 3000 l. in the Prison,
commonly called the Compter in the Poultrey in London, at the Suit of the said
Simpson, and from thence by Habeas Corpus was removed to your Majesty's Prison
of the Fleet, where for a time he was detained in Execution, as well upon the
said Recognizance, as to answer to two Actions of Debt, one of 2000 l. at the
Suit of William Beecher, the other of 3000 l. also at his Suit, and to answer
one other Action of Debt of 300 l. at the Suit of one John King, Nota.
contrary to the Liberties, Privileges and Freedom, accustomed and due to the
Commons of your Highness's Parliament, who have ever used to enjoy the freedom
in coming and returning from the Parliament, and sitting there without
restraint and molestation, and it concerns your Commons greatly to have this
Freedom and Privilege inviolably observed: Yet to the end that no Person be
prejudiced or damnified hereby, May it please your Highness, by the Assent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, it may be Ordained and Enacted,
That the said Sheriffs of London, the now Warden of the Fleet, and all others,
that have had the said Thomas in Custody, since the said first Arrest, their
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, may not, nor shall in any wise be
hurt, endamaged, or grieved, because of dismissing at large of the said Thomas
Shirley, saving always to the said Giles Simpson, and other the Persons
aforesaid, at whose Suit the said Thomas is detained in Prison, his, their, and
every of their Executions and Suits, at all time and times, after the end of
this present Session of Parliament, to be taken out and prosecuted, as if the
said Thomas had never been arrested, or taken in Execution, and as if such
Actions had never been brought or sued against him, saving also to your
Majesty's said Commons, called now to this your Parliament, and their
Successors, their whole Liberties, Franchises and Privileges, in all ample
manner and form, as your Highness's said Commons at any time before this day
have had, used and enjoyed, and ought to have, use and enjoy, this present Act
and Petition in any wise notwithstanding. Soit fait come and est desire.

The Petition exhibited to his Majesty, Anno 3 Car. 1. Pult. Stat. fol. 1433.
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this present Parliament assembled,
concerning diverse Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, with the Kings
Majesty's Royal Answer thereunto in full Parliament.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
HUmbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, That whereas it is Declared and
Enacted by a Statute made in the time of the Reign of K. Edward the I commonly
called, 34 E. 1.
Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo: No Tallage or Aid to be laid or levied
without Authority of Parliament.
That no Tallage or Aid shall be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in
this Realm, without the good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of
this Realm. And by Authority of Parliament holden in the 25. year of the Reign
of K. Edward the III. it is Declared and Enacted, 1 E. 3. 6.
That from thenceforth no person should be compelled to make any Loans to the
King against his will, because such Loans were against Reason, and the
Franchise of the Land. 11 R. 2. 9.
And by other Laws of this Realm it is provided, 1 R. 3. 2.
That none should be charged by any Charge or Imposition called a Benevolence,
nor by such like Charge, by which the Statutes beforementioned, and other the
good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this
freedom, That they should not be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage,
Aid, or other like Charge, not set by common consent in Parliament.

Yet nevertheless of late diverse Commissions directed to sundry Commissioners
in several Counties, with Instructions, have issued, by means whereof your
People have been in diverse Places assembled, and required to lend certain sums
of Money unto your Majesty; and many of them upon their refusal so to do, have
had an Oath administered unto them, not warrantable by the Laws or Statutes of
this Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance, and
give attendance before your Privy Council, and in other Places; and others of
them have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry other ways molested
and disquieted; and diverse other Charges have been laid and levied upon your
People in several Counties, by Lord- Lievtenants, Deputy- Lieutenants,
Commissioners for Musters, Justices of Peace, and others, by Command or
Direction from your Majesty, or your Privy Council, against the Laws and free
Customs of the Realm.

And where also by the Statute called the Great Charter of the Liberties of
England, 9 H. 3. 29.
it is declared and Enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or imprisoned, or be
disseised of his Freehold or Liberties, or his free Customs, or be Outlawed or
Exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or
by the Law of the Land.

And in the 28th. 28 E. 3. 3.
year of the Reign of K. Edward the III. it was Declared and Enacted by
Authority of Parliament, That no man, of what Estate or Condition that he be,
should be put out of his Land or Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor
disinherited, nor put to death, without being brought to answer by due process
of Law.

Nevertheless against the tenor of the said Statutes, 37 E. 3. 18.
and other the good Laws and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, 38 E
3. 8.
diverse of your Subjects have of late 42 E. 3. 3.
been imprisoned without any cause 17 R. 2. 6.
showed; and when for their deliverance they were brought before your Justices,
by your Majesty's Writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the
Court shall order, and their Keepers commanded to certify the causes of their
detainer, no cause was certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's
special Command, signified by the Lords of your Privy Council, and yet were
returned back to several Prisons, without being charged with any thing, to
which they might make answer according to the Law.

And whereas of late great company of Soldiers and Mariners have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the Quartering Soldiers
against Law.
Inhabitants against their wills have been compelled to receive them into their
Houses, and there to suffer them to sojourn, against the Laws and Customs of
this Realm, and to the great grievance and vexation of the People.

And whereas also by Authority of Parliament, in the 25th. 25 E. 3. 9.
year of the Reign of K. Edward the III. it is Declared and Enacted, That no
man should be forejudged of Life or Limb, against the form of the great
Charter, and the Law of the Land; 9 H. 3. 29.
and by the said great Charter, 25 E. 3. ^4.
and other the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm, 28 E. 3. ^3.
no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws established in this your
Realm, either by the Customs of the same Realm, or by Acts of Parliament.

And whereas no Offender, Nota.
of what kind soever, is exempted from the Proceedings to be used, and
Punishments to be inflicted, by the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm;
nevertheless of late diverse Commissions under your Majesty's Great Seal have
issued forth, by which certain persons have been assigned and appointed
Commissioners, with Power and Authority to proceed within the Land, according
to the Justice of the Martial Law against such Soldiers and Mariners, Martial
Law in time of Peace, against the Laws and Statutes of England
or other dissolute persons joining with them, as should commit any Murder,
Robbery, Felony, Mutiny, or other Outrage or Misdemeanour whatsoever, and by
such summary Course and Order, as is agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used
in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the Trial and Condemnation of such
Offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death, according to the
Law Martial.

By pretext whereof, some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the
said Commissioners put to death, when and where if by the Laws and Statutes of
the Land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed.

And also sundry grievous Offenders, by color thereof claiming an exemption,
have escaped the Punishments due to them, by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers and Ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such Offenders, according to
the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said Offenders were
punishable only by Martial Law, and by Authority of such Commissions as
aforesaid, which Commissions and all other of like nature, are wholly and
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

They do therefore humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty, that no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like Charge, without common Consent by Act of Parliament; and that none be
called to make answer, or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be
confined, or otherwise molested or disquieted concerning the same, or for
refusal thereof; and that no Freeman in any such manner as is before mentioned,
be Imprisoned or Detained; And that your Majesty would be pleased to remove
the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your People may not be so burdened
in time to come; And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by Martial
Law, may be revoaked and adnulled; And that hereafter no Commissions of like
nature may issue forth to any Person or Persons whatsoever, to be executed as
aforesaid, least by color of them, any of your Majesty's Subjects be destroyed
or put to death, contrary to the Laws and Franchises of this Land.

All which they most Humbly Pray of your most Excellent Majesty, Nota.
as their Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm; And that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare that the awards,
doings, and proceedings, to the prejudice of your People, in any of the
premises, shall not be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example; and that
your Majesty would be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and
safety of your People, to declare your Royal Will and Pleasure, Nota.
That in the things aforesaid, all your Officers and Ministers shall serve you,
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as they tender the Honor of
your Majesty, and the Prosperity of this Kingdom.

Which Petition being read the 2d. of June, 1628. the King's Answer was thus
delivered unto it.

THe King wills that Right be done, according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due execution, that his Subjects may
have no cause to complain of any wrong or oppressions, contrary to their just
Rights and Liberties, Here the good King condemns the Law and Doctrine of Dr.
Cowell, Blackwood, Manwaring, Fulbeck, Sibthorpe, Alablaster, Filmer, and their
Transcribers and Disciples.
to the preservation whereof, he holds himself in Conscience as well obliged,
as of his Prerogative.

But this Answer not giving satisfaction, the King was again petitioned unto,
that he would give a full and satisfactory Answer to their Petition in full
Parliament.

Whereupon the King in Person, upon the 7th. of June, made this 2d. Answer.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe Answer I have already given you, was made with so good deliberation, and
approved by the Judgments of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined
but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to avoid all ambiguous
Interpretations, and to show you there is no doubleness in my meaning, I am
willing to please you in words as well as in substance; read your Petition, and
you shall have an Answer that I am sure will please you.

And then causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the Crown,
the Clerk of the Parliament read the King's Answer thereunto in these words:
Soit droit fait come est desire.

. 4. Several Miscellaneous Presidents and Orders both of the House of Lords and
Commons.
I. A standing Order of the Commons House of Parliament, touching Bills
delivered to the Speaker.
UPon Tuesday the 15th. Journ. Dom. Com. Parl. 1 Jac.
of this instant May, a Bill being offered to the Speaker of the Commons House
of Parliament, Mercurii 23 Maii, A. D. 1603
in his way coming toward the said House, A Bill is delivered to the Speaker
going to the House, purporting a Declaration of Treason by a Magistrate of the
Land, who Gives an Account of it to the House.
he received it, and brought it in; and being set in his Chair, after some time
did openly intimate the Head or Title of it, purporting a Declaration of
Treason, practiced by a Magistrate of this Land, concealing the Name of the
Man, and the Particulars of the Bill, adding, that for special Causes, he hoped
they would not meddle with it, or expect it should be read; nevertheless the
House inclined to have the Bill read; but upon the said Speaker's Motion and
better Consideration, Who forbear to read it at that time.
resolved to forbear it for that time, expecting the return and reading of it,
when Mr. Speaker should think meet to give the House satisfaction, as he
promised shortly to do. The next day (as was afterward informed) it pleased
his Majesty to send for the Bill; The King sends for the Bill.
and in respect it contained matter of personal Treason, (as was likewise
pretended) properly and only touching himself, his Majesty assumed unto himself
the Examination of the matter of the Bill, and retained it in his own keeping.

In all this time, The House expected an Account thereof from Mr. Speaker, and
after demands it.
the House for the more part expected an Account of the said Bill, which was
this day demanded and urged by sundry Members of this House; in which Debate
these Questions were handled: Questions handled thereupon.


1. Whether the House were possessed of the Bill.

2. What might be called possession of a Bill.

3. Whether it might deal with Treason.

4. Examine, commit, and proceed to Judgment upon Traitors, and with what kind
of Treason and Traitors.

5. And lastly, Whether a Speaker receiving a Bill, and reading the Title, may
deliver it to any, without special allowance and leave of the House.

Hereupon it was finally Resolved and Ordered, that for this time all Questions
should cease touching these matter, To cease with a caution and care of the
privilege of the House.
with this caution and care, proceeding from a tender regard of the privilege
of this House, that it should be precisely Registered, To be Registered as the
Judgment of the House, that no Speaker should deliver a Bill, whereof the House
was possessed without leave.
as the Judgment of the House, that no Speaker from henceforth, should deliver
a Bill, whereof the House stands possessed, to any whomsoever, without
allowance and leave as aforesaid, but that he had Power and might, either show
it or deliver a Copy; If it seems meet unto him.

Who by way of excuse, The Speakers excuse.
Answered that a Message was delivered unto him by a great Lord, from his
Majesty, commanding him to send the Bill unto him, and that he was warranted
by former Presidents, to show the Bill to the King when he was Commanded; As in
the Case of Mr. Morris, Mr. Wentworth, 25. Eliz.

Many Motions Motions by several Members.
ensued in this matter, by Mr. Solicitor, Sir Herbert Crofts, Sir Francis
Bacon, Mr. Brook, Mr. Wiseman, Sir William Fleetwood, Mr. Crewe, Mr. Martin,
Sir Henery Beaumont, Sir Maurice Berkley, Sir William Strowd, Mr. Yelverton,
Sir Thomas Hobby.

Much Exceptions against the Presidents, Injurious that any Speaker should
deliver a Bill to the King, without the privity of the House.

No Bill whereof the House is possessed to be delivered to the King, or any
other without notice and leave of the House.

We loose our privilege, if we loose our Bill.

Mr. Speaker to pray Access to the King himself, and in the name of the House,
to desire the Bill from his Majesty.

No possession of a Bill, except it be delivered to the Clerk to be Read.

If the Speaker Read Title in his Chair, (as he did in this Case) a possession.

Jones the Prisoner to be sent for hither, and to attend his discharge from the
House.

That the Prisoners Committed by us, cannot be taken from us and Committed by
any other.

An Order moved and Agreed, that no Bill whereof the House is clearly
possessed, No Bill of which the House is possessed, to be delivered without
notice and leave of the House.
be delivered to any before the House have notice, and give leave.

Admitted that a Copy may be delivered, or it may be showed to his Majesty.

II. Mr. Speaker declared to the House, Jur. Dom. Com. Die venris 27. February,
4 Jac. A. D. 1606. A Message from the King.
a Message from the King; The Message was to this effect. That his Majesty
having entered into a Princely Consideration, of the weight of the great Cause
in hand, as also of the great worth and sufficiency of those Gentlemen that
have Spoken and Dealt in it, The Union of England and Scotland.
he was to put them in mind, that the Writ of Summons that called them thither,
That the Writ called them to Consul. de arduis Regi.
was to consult de arduis Regi; That every Man did serve for a Town or a Shire,
that his attendance and service of the House was a great duty; Their attendance
a great duty.
and that the departure of any Member of this House was a greater contempt,
Departure a greater contempt than a Noblemans. Advises no Lawyer or other of
Note to depart.
than any Nobleman's departure, who served only for himself; that therefore he
wished and advised, that no Lawyer or other Member of Note might depart the
House, until this great Matter were brought to more ripeness and perfection;
and if the House would enter into course for the stay of them here, Would
assist the House for their stay or recalling.
or for the recalling of those that be absent, his Highness would assist them
by his Proclamation, or otherwise as they should conceive fittest.

It was hereupon moved, Motions and Debates upon the Message.
that many have Trials at the Assizes, who by their absence might receive
prejudice, if some course were not taken to prevent it. Propounded, that
Letters might be writ by Mr. Speaker, to the Justices of Assize, for stay of
Proceedings against any man that would require it; which was approved and
resolved by the House.

Mr. Speaker moves, Mr. Speaker's motions.
that a time might be appointed for the Calling of the House, and a punishment
agreed on for the absent.

Others, Others move.
that the House might first be Called, and then a punishment thought on.

That the House being Called, the Sergeant might be sent for those which were
found absent.

That a Law might be thought of to provide for this Mischief hereafter.

These Motions ended in these three Questions, 3 Questions made.
which by direction was made by Mr. Speaker, viz.

1. 1 Question.
Whether the House shall be Called.

2. 2 Question.
Whether the Sergeant shall be sent for such as are absent, having no
reasonable excuse.

3. 3 Question.
Whether the House shall be Called on Monday come seven-night in the afternoon.

Which were all resolved Resolves.
in the Affirmative, with this further direction, that the absent were to be
sent for, by the Order of the House, and by Warrant under Mr. Speaker's hand;
And upon the whole matter a Special order conceived; The Copy whereof was sent
to sundry Members that were absent, that they might be more sensible of the
reason and necessity of their Attendance.

The form of the Order Order.
was.
THis day Mr. Speaker delivered a Message from His Majesty, Veneris 27.
February.
importing a Consideration of the weight of the great The Union of England and
Scotland.
cause in hand, of the study and travel that has been taken in the
understanding and furtherance of some good Success therein, by sundry Members
of the House, and of the duty and necessity of the attendance of every Member,
Representing in his Voice and Person, a Shire, City, or at least a Town the
special use and service of the Lawyers of the House, the great contempt in
departure together, with his Highnes's gracious Offer of his Royal power and
Assistance, to be added to the Authority of the House, for the recalling or
punishing of any Member Deliuquent in this behalf; Whereupon the House entered
into dispute and deliberation, what course were fittest to be taken, as well
for the continuing of such Members as are here already Assembled; as for the
return and attendance of those absent, to partake of, and assist in the great
service in hand; And after many courses and new devises of Order propounded to
the House. It was at last Resolved upon three several Questions, First, that
the House should be called, Secondly, that upon the calling such as were found
to be absent, and had no just cause of Excuse, should with the privity and
direction of the House by Warrant under the hand of Mr. Speaker; And by the
Sergeant at Arms, Attendant upon the House, or by his Deputy, be immediately
sent for, and answer Fees and Entries to the Officers, as in Case of breach of
Privilege, or other Contempts to the House. Thirdly, and Lastly, That upon
Monday next come Sevenight in the afternoon of that day, the House shall be
called.

Mr. Die Martis 3. Martii. Mr. Hide departs without License and is sent for.
Hide the last day immediately upon the Kings Message, Pleading certain
businesses of his Clyents, and other his private occasions of profit and
necessity (as he pretended,) made known to the House, that he would go out of
Town, and so took his leave in open audience, without the Assent or Leave of
the House, which was taxed; And Mr. Speaker warranted to Write unto him, which
he did in this Form.

The Form of the Speaker's Letter to Mr. Hide.
AFter my very hearty Commendations, sithence your departure hence, there has
been Complaints made to the House, that you have gone without Leave and
Contrary to His Majesty's pleasure, signified, and the express Order of the
House; This bred great dispute, and it was in a manner Resolved, that you
should be presently sent for by the Sergeant, as being conceived to be a
president of ill example and contempt other Men's Cases Considered with yours,
which led me to interpose this motion to the House; That if you came not before
Monday next (the day appointed for calling of the House,) you might then be
proceeded withal as the Case did require; And my self offering to Write to you
for that purpose, they desisted and left it to my care; Nevertheless for many
Important reasons, wherewith I will acquaint you at your coming; I do advise
you, as also require you from the House, that you forthwith repair hither, and
attend the service in hand, which is now in the greatest heat and have of
proceeding; And so I commit you to God. Directed.

To my very Loving Friend, Laurence Hide, Esquire
It was also moved and resolved, Resolved that other Letters be writ to other
Members who were Lawyers.
That Mr. Speaker should Write another Letter to other Lawyers, being gone down
in the same Circuit, where Mr. Laurence Hide was, ( viz.) Mr. John Moore, Mr.
Giles Tooker, Mr. Edward Digs, and Mr. Nicholas Hide, which also he did to this
Effect.


The form of the Letter.
AFter my very hearty Commendations; The form of the Letter.
sithence your departure hence, there has been complaint made as well of your
absence, as of many others, which has moved the House to press some speedy
course for your return; and thereupon have commanded me forthwith to write unto
you, that you make your repair hither without excuse or delay, which I would
advise you to do, to prevent further question or danger, such as I would be
loath you should undergo, as now the case stands. And so I commend you to the
protection of the Almighty.

To my Loving Friends, Mr. Giles Tooker, Mr. John Moor, Mr. Edward Diggs, and
Nicholas Hide Esqs; Members of the Commons House of Parliament.

III. It is this day Ordered, Jurn. Dom. Com. 27. Jac. Vereris 27. Maii.
that a Committee of the whole House, shall this afternoon consider of a fit
and satisfactory Answer of the Kings Majesty's Letter sent this day to this
House; Order that a Committee. take into consideration misinformations given to
the King, concerning the proceedings of the House of Commons.
and also that they shall take into their Consideration such Misinformations,
as are suspected to have been given to his Majesty, concerning the Proceedings
of this House, this Parliament, and of all the Circumstances belonging to the
same.

IV. Jour. Par. Dom. Com. 18. 19. Jac. 15. Martii.
Sir Robert Phillips makes Report of two Informations brought, The Case of Dr.
Lamley, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peterburrough, and Dr. Cradock a Divine,
Chancellor to the Bishop of Durham.
the one against Dr. Lamley, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peterburrough, the
other against Dr. Cradock a Divine, and Chancellor to the Bishop of Durham.

Dr. Lamley is accused for extorting of unlawful Fees in Probate of Wills, Dr.
Lamely accused for Extortion and other Misdemeanors.
etc. 2. For vexing of men with impertinent, trivial, and idle Causes, wherein
men are forced to consume their time, and spend their Estates: As for receiving
Money on Holidays, he makes them pay 40 s. and upwards for a Discharge; the
like of opening half a Shop-window; it cost another that came to Church on
Christmas Day with a foul Band 54 s. and for ommitting of Penance, one Bushel
paid 100 Marks, and desired it might be employed to Charity; he said, Charity
began at home.

One having no Sermon in his own Parish, went to a Parish where there was a
Sermon; for this he was put to the Oath ex Officio, and paid 33 s.

V. As for Dr. Cradock, Dr. Cradock accused for Briberies and other
Misdemeanors.
Chancellor of Durham, I must consider him in three Capacities, and apply the
faults unto them severally.

First, He is Chancellor to the Bishop.

Secondly, He is a high-Commissioner.

Thirdly, He is a Justice of Peace.

1. As Chancellor, there are two Charges of misgoverning himself.

In refusing probate of Testaments, and granting Excommunications before
Citations.

He takes Bribes on both sides.

2. As a high-Commissioner of the Quorum, and so a principal man, sending out
his Process for Recusants; he took of one Collyer 20 l. for not appearing; of
another 10 l. to shuffle up a clandestine Marriage, etc.

Lastly, As a Justice of Peace, he took 100 l. for the discharging of a Priest;
Newton killed one, he compounded for 100 l.

One Allenson a Batchellor of Divinity, made one Hanton his Executor, within 10
days he granted Sequestration of the Testator's Goods; Dr. Cradock sent them
that took away his Will, opened his Desk, and took 6 or 7 Bags; and having
threatened them, the Doctor made 4 Sequestrators; the Bishop says, he would
seize the Goods of Gilbert Hanton, to the use of the Bishop of Durham; he came
as Justice of Peace, and committed Hanton to the Constable, to be forthcoming;
the Doctor broke open another Desk, and took 30 s. in money; he made his
Warrant, and sent Hanton to the Gaol; he laid a Fine upon him of 50 l. John
Widows came to Hanton, and mediateth to the Doctor, for his Son's
Imprisonment; he would give his Son 22 l. which he does; the Sessions indicted
him by the Oath of D. Soame, because they thought the Fine too unreasonable;
but the Doctor said, that the Lord of Durham would be angry with him.

One Clement gave the Doctor 50 l. and a Mare, to have an Administration
granted.

As he was a Commissioner, he took of one Conyers 20 l. of another 59 l. and of
two others 10 l. a piece, for Adultery; of another 8 l. As a Justice of Peace,
for not sending one to the Gaol, 100 l. For Recusancy, of one Tempest for a
Murder, 100 l. For Adultery, before the Party could free himself, 20 l.

Mr. Alford. The Oath Ex Officio in this manner; one having no Sermon, went to
another, and he made him pay 23 s. for the Oath, and for the same offense; and
he going to another Parish, imprisoned him.

Sir Edward Cook. No man speaks against the Jurisdiction, but the corruption of
Spiritual Courts, Qui tollit abusum, confirmat usum, For the Oath Ex Officio,
there is an Act of Parliament that they may give it, and Laymen may give it,
in some cases, not in all. And herein the ancient Common Law, agrees with the
Canon Law: in the 32 ( vel 31) Ed. 3. there was a complaint against Fees: 2 H.
4. there was a Law to reduce them to their ancient Fees, for now they exceeded:
For Cardinal Wolsey of his devotion and charity took for probate of my Lord
Compton's Will, 100 marks; hence came the Law of 21 H. 8. We have good Laws,
but they are like Swords shut up in their sheaths.

Sir Edward Bonstead he has a Petition of the Ministers of Northamptonshire,
the people have been ready to rise against the abuses in the Ecclesiastical
Courts.

Mr. Brook. Kelway, Fo. 184.
That the Convocation is not a part of the Higher House, neither the Bishops
any part of the Higher House, but are there as they have Temporal Baronies.

Mr. P ym. I would not have us send up to the Lords yet, till we have examined
them; for their guiltiness must be stamped here, before they go up to the Lords.

Mr. Noy. 8 H. 6. the Clergy and Bishops are not to be arrested going to the
Convocation-house; we cannot judge them, but complain of them.

Mr. Sherwin. It is a complaint, and we must examine him, so that our complaint
be certain, and not without great deliberation handled, that it may not be
otherwise proved.

Sir Nathaniel Rich. That if the Lords will not punish those, that we complain
of, we will enter into Judgment our selves, which is our ancient course.

The House would not send for the accused Doctors, because they were of the
Convocation:

1. To avoid offense to them of that Assembly.

2. Because of the Stat. Rastall's Stat. 8 H. 6. c. 1.
of 8 H. 6. which is thus: Forasmuch as the Prelates and Clergy of the Realm of
England, called to the Convocation, and their Servants and Familiars that come
with them to such Convocation, often times and commonly be arrested, molested
and inquieted; our said Sovereign Lord the King, willing graciously in this
behalf to provide for the security and quietness of the said Prelates and
Clergy, at the supplication of the same Prelates and Clergy, and of the assent
of Great men and Commons aforesaid, has ordained and statuted, that all the
Clergy from henceforth to be called to the Convocation by the Kings Writ, and
their Servants and Familiars, shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such
liberty or defense in coming, tarrying and going, as the Great men and
Commonalty of the Realm of England, called or to be called to the Kings
Parliament, do enjoy and were wont to enjoy, or in time to come ought to enjoy.

VI. Journ. Dom. Com. 19 Jac. Sabbathi 2 die Junii.
The Commons House of Parliament, in Confirmation of a former Declaration
therein made, Confirmation of the Order concerning all Patents adjudged
Grievances*
concerning the stay of all Suits, Payments, and other Proceedings, grounded
upon any Patent or Commission, condemned in the said House, as a general
Grievance or Inconvenience to the Subject, until further Order and Direction
given therein, has this day again upon the Question Resolved it to be fit,
that none of the Patents, Commissions, or other things condemned in this House
for general Grievances or Inconveniences to the Subject, shall be put in
execution, until the next access to Parliament.

VII. Journ. Dom. Com. Lunae 26 Martii.
It is thought fit by the Commons House of Parliament, Concerning all Patents
adjudged Grievance.
that all Suits, Payments, and other Proceedings, grounded upon any Patent or
Commission, condemned in the said House as a general Grievance or Inconvenience
to the Subject, should stay till further Order and Direction to be given
therein.

VIII. Journ. Dom. Com. Sabbathi 17 Martii. Order pro Churchill. March 21. Sr.
Robert Phillip's Reports from the Committee appointed to examine Keeling and
Churchill, who informed them of many Corruptions against the Lord Chancellor.
April 25. A Committee for regulating the Chancery, and to consider of
Churchill's false Orders, and the Faults of the rest of the Registers. Sir
Dudley Diggs says, that Churchill was Register, Councellor and Judge, referred
to the Committee.
It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that the Sergeant
at Arms attending this House, shall attach the Body of John Churchill, one of
the Deputy-Registers of the Chancery, and him shall take into his custody, and
bring him to this House upon Monday morning next, at 8 of the Clock; and the
said Sergeant is in the mean time to keep him so, as none be suffered to speak
with him, but in the hearing of the Sergeant.

IX. Anno 19 Jac. A Copy of the Petition remaining with William Goulds borough,
Esquire Clerk of the House of Commons.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, in this present Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of the
Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses of the Town of Northampton.

THat whereas your Petitioners have been, The Complaint of the Mayor, Bailiffs,
and Burgesses of Northampton, against Dr. Lamb, Chancellor to the Bishop of
Peterborough.
and still are every way conformable to the Kings Majesty's Laws
Ecclesiastical, yet have they for these many years been subject to the great
grievances of John Lamb, Doctor of the Laws, Chancellor to the Bishop of
Peterborough, who not only scandalizeth the Town in general, as factious,
rebellious, and refractory to his Majesty's Laws, but also countenanceth the
lewdest fellows in the Town, in their opposing of the Governors and
Government; and by himself and his Surrogates, Registers, Proctors and
Apparitors, and others whom he uses as Spies up and down the Town and Country,
cites men and women to his Courts, upon small or no just occasion, but only to
enrich himself and his Followers, keeping two Courts every fortnight for the
most part, and carrying them away from the usual place where they were wont to
be kept, (as being most convenient) unto other small Towns far remote; so that
his Majesty's Subjects are constrained to travel, some twenty, some four and
twenty miles and more, to their exceeding great trouble and charges, and to the
hazarding of their lives; many being driven by reason of their Courts being
kept so late in the night, by Candlelight, to travel home in the nightime
what weather soever be.

And he has made his own Brother Register, and keeps the Office and Records
in his own house, and there makes Acts, and alters them at his own pleasure,
and has the most part of the profits of the same to himself, as is reported,
his Brother only bearing the name of the Register, but the Chancellor's own men
for the most part supplying the Office; by reason whereof there is such pilling
and polling of the Town and Country continually, by exacting new Fees, and
extorting great sums of Money for Probates of Testaments, and Letters of
Administrations, and by causing men to prove Deeds of Gift in their Courts, and
to examine Titles of Lands, and to prove Wills there also, though they have
been proved above in the Prerogative Courts; and by constraining Widows to give
up Accounts of their Administration, seven or eight years after their Husbands
decease, taking five Nobles (at the least) of every one for the same; by
refusing of Wills fairly Engrossed, and causing the Registers men to write them
out again, and so putting the Country to a double charge.

As also by taking great sums of Money of diverse persons for Commuting of
Penance, and not bestowing it upon charitable uses; by Excommunicating of men
for being in the company of others, standing Excommunicated though they knew
not of it, and taking excessive Fees for the same; by citing men and women to
their Courts for trifles, and taking eleven groats Fee of every one, though
they clear themselves; by citing some to the Courts in the Churchwardens names,
without their consent or knowledge; by delaying of Causes in the same Courts,
especially about Assessments for the repair of Churches, that it has cost some
Parishes 20 l. 30 l. 40 l. some more, some less, before they could have an end
of it; by bringing men to their Courts only upon the Judges suspicion, and
there tendering the Oath Ex Officio, upon refusal whereof they have been
Excommunicate, whereupon some have been driven to Appeal, which has cost some
2 l. some 10 l. some more, to their great impoverishing; by citing men and
women to their Courts, for going to another Parish to hear Gods Word preached,
when they had no Sermon at their own Parish Church, and taking great Fees for
the same; by citing men to their Courts for opening their Shop-windows upon a
Holiday, though it has been Market Day, as it has been accustomed, and making
men do Penance, and pay Fees for the same; Nota est Cyclopum vivendi ratio,
quibus illa crudelis vox in Tragoedia attribuitur non ulla Numina expavesco
Coelitum, sed victimas, uni deorum maximo ventri offero, deos ignoro caeteros.
In Praef. ad Covarru. opera.
and some for taking Money, and delivering of Corn upon Holidays, and for
diverse other trivial matters, making men to spend some 20 s. 30 s. 40 s. 50 s.
some more, some less, to the great and general grievance of his Majesty's poor
Subjects: whereupon it is a general complaint, that it were far better for the
Country to give his Majesty an yearly Subsidy, then to be thus in continual
vexation by the said Doctor Lamb, and his Officers under him: in so much that
there were so many Petitions put up by the Country, to the Honorable Sir
Edward ^ook Knight, sitting as Judge in that Circuit, that the said Doctor Lamb
was bound to the good behavior for the same, and yet the grievances offered by
him are still continued.

May it therefore please your Honors, in tender consideration of the
premises, and in a feeling commiseration of the distressed Estate of the said
Town and Country by that means, to take such speedy course for their relief, as
to your Wisdoms shall seem most expedient: And they and the whole Country shall
ever be bound to praise God for your Honors, and to pray for your
prosperities, etc.

Math. Sillesby.

Thomas Martin's Grievance.
1. Thomas Martin, late of Northampton, being of the Parish of All Saints, was
presented into Dr. Lamb's Court by William Harrison, and Arthur Smith,
Churchwardens of St. Giles's Parish, both common Drunkards; one of them upon
Record, by the advice and practice of Mr. Stockwell the Proctor, upon a Fame,
that he having in his hand a Capons Rump, should ^ay, it would make as good a
Churchwarden as the Churchwarden of St. Giles's; Mr. Martin denies that he
spoke any such words, and could never have his Accuser come in; and if there
were any such Fame, themselves raised it in an Alehouse.

2. They presented him likewise upon another Fame, that the said Mr. Martin
should in the Church Porch of St. Giles's, violently thrust upon the Wife of
Humphry Hopkins, being with Child, to the danger of her life or the Child's.

The ground of this Presentment was this: Mr. Bird being presented to the
Viccaridge of St. Giles's, at his Induction there was an horrible Riot
committed in the Church, Nota.
by the means of Mr. Sibthorp. Dr. Sibthorp.
(as was supposed) against Mr. Bird, and one base ^ellow tript up Mr. Bird's
heels, and threatened to kill him, if he would not deliver up his Box of
Writings; Mr. Martin being Mayor was called for by the Constable to come to
prevent Murder, where he found the Church Porch full of the basest People of
the Parish, and going into the Church, perhaps some of his Officers might
thrust some out of his way; but the Woman protests, that he never did her
hurt, neither did she say so, neither, could they persuade her Husband to bring
an Action against him at the Common Law, though they often urged him thereto,
and so they took this course in the Spiritual Court; yet the Riotters were
never presented into the Spiritual Court, because they were Amici Curie.

Upon these Presentiments Mr. Martin was cited to appear at Rowell, 10 miles
from Northampton, 2 years after the pretended Offenses; but being detained
about the King's Service, retained a Proctor to appear for him; but the
Chancellor said, it was a matter of Office, and therefore would admit no
Proctor to appear for him, and presently excommunicated him; whereupon he was
forced to appeal, and since has used all the means he could to have an end of
this Business by some Friends, who wished him to yield to the Doctor, or else he
would weary him out; so that he was forced to give him 50 s. and paid also 3 s.
8 d. for his absolution, and yet can get no end of it to this day, but is in
danger to be called again, though it has cost him 10 l. already.

3. Also a Sister of the said Mr. Martins, dwelling at Leicester, and coming to
Northampton, was desirous to go to St. Giles's Church, to hear Mr. Bird preach,
and requested one of Mr. Martin's Prentices to accompany her to the Church,
which he did, and they both went thither, and there staid Divine Service and
Sermon: For this the Apprentice was cited to the Court, and there troubled from
one Court day to another, from Northampton to Rowell, 10 miles off, to the
great hindrance of his Master; and at length they enjoined him to pay 3 s. 8 d.
which for fear of Excommunication he was forced to borrow, and so to pay them:
And she was threatened by the Chancellor, that he would make her keep her
Brother's Parish- Church when she came to the Town.

4. And because Mr. Martin, and diverse other Townsmen, refused to give him
their Voices, to be one of the Burgesses of Parliament for Northampton, (which
he would fain have obtained both by fair means and threatenings) he presently
cited many to the Court, and there troubled them. And amongst the rest, the
said Mr. Martin, having about 3 years past, by the Consent of the Minister,
Churchwardens, and Parishioners, built a Seat in the Church for his Children
and Servants, for their better hearing of Divine Service and Sermons, was cited
before him about the said Seat; and the Chancellor took it away from him most
unjustly, (having cost him 3 l. building of it) and gave it to 3 of the
stubbornest Fellows in the Town, all opposers to Authority, and one of them for
his vicious life bound over to the Sessions, and put out of the Common-Counsel
of the Town for the same, and since presented into the Spiritual Court, for
Incontinency with 2 Women; and yet Mr. Middleton, one of the Surrogates, graced
him publicly in that Court, and said, he was thrust out of the Common Counsel
for his honesty.

Thomas Martin.
15 May, 19 Jac.
Whereas diverse Complaints have been made against John Lamb, Doctor The
Speaker's Order upon the Petition. Lamb, Doctor in the Civil Law.
in the Civil Laws, Chancellor to the Bishop of Peterborough, for diverse
Extortions, Oppressions, and Misdemeanors, by him and his under- Officers
committed, in the execution of the said Office in the said Diocese, and
elsewhere. And whereas also it is informed, that you whose Names are hereafter
set down, can testify mutually against the said John Lamb, These are therefore
by the direction, and on the behalf of the said House of Commons, to require
you and every of you, that you make your personal appearance at the said House
of Commons, the 29th. day of this instant Month of May, to testify your
knowledge in the premises: Thereof I require you not to fail, as you will
answer the contrary at your perils. Given under my Hand this 15th. day of May,
1621.

And it was further Ordered, that Robert Sibthorp, and Richard Stockwell,
should be sent for, as Delinquents.

X. Journ. Dom. Com. 21 Jac. 10 Martii.
Mr. Glandvile reports from the Committee of Privileges, the Election of
Monmouth, and by an Order from the Committee, The Case of Mr. Steward, a
Scotchman, elected to be a Member of Parliament, but rejected, because a
Denizen.
Monmouth was heard yesterday: And they received this morning a Petition, that
Mr. Walter Steward was returned, and that they think his Election not good:
They object against him, because a Scotchman, and not Naturalized. He forbore
to come into the House, till he had leave. The Case of one Lennis Monck, a
Denizen, returned and sat here; and so Sir Horace Palavicino. The Committee
delivered no opinion in it: Two Orders and two Petitions delivered in, to have
these heard in order as they come in.

Resolved that those which are already in, shall be proceeded in, in order as
the Petitions were delivered.

Mr. Glandvile thinks Mr. Steward ought not to sit here, because at the time of
his Election he was incapable of it; he that is made a Denizen, is not as an
Englishman, That but only personal.

Sir Dudley Diggs in that Parliament when Bacon Attorney was in question,
whether he ought to sit here or no, Overruled he ought not; yet in favor of
him he was suffered to sit here, and an express Order that never any other
Attorney after should. To do the like by this Gentleman.

Sir Edward Cook. No Alien Denizated ought to sit here: Tros Tiriusque mihi
nullo discrimine habetur. the other passed sub silentio. Some sit here that are
under age, and ought not to sit here, because not questioned.

Resolved that Mr. Steward has dealt very worthily in forbearing to come and
sit in this House. Veneris 28 Maii.


Mr. Glandvile goes on with his Report: Resolved upon Question, the Election of
Mr. Walter Steward being no natural born Subject, is void, and a Warrant to go
for a new Writ for Monmouth.

XI. Journ. Dom. Com. 21, 22 Jac Regis, Veneris 7 Aprilis.
Sir Robert Phillips reports from the Committee for Courts of Justice 3 Heads:
The Case of the Lady Darcy, against the Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England.
First, The Petition of the Lady Darcy; in it is a Recital of her Husband's
dying seized of the Manor of Sutton in Surrey; with the Advowson; a Grant was
made to her and another by the Court of Wards, of the Body and Estate of her
Son, The Lady and another were Grantees of an Heir by the Court of Wards Then
presented a Clerk to the Bishop of Lincoln, but refused, who presented another.
The Lady sues for a Writ of Quare impedit. The Cursitor denies it by Order of
the Bishop being Lord Keeper. Whereupon she complains to the Commons, who refer
it to a Committee. Debates in the Committee.
1 Aug. 21 Jacobi, the Incumbent died; so she presented her Clerk to the
Bishop; so the Lord Keeper, 3 September. presented Doctor Grant, the King's
Chaplain. She was advised to seek her ordinary Course by a Quare impedit, which
was denied by the Cursitor, who said, the Lord Keeper gave directions for it to
be sued to the King, desires of this Assembly to have relief; this Petition was
retained by the Committees, Parties on both sides appeared, and Council.

It came into question, whether an original Writ might be stayed; the Lawyers
vouched some Presidents for it in Chancery; the Committee concluded these were
not proper in the Cause, and not to be followed, desires an Accommodation of
this Business between the Lady and the Doctor; they gave a time, for yet they
are clearly of opinion, that the Lady had lost her Right, Proposals by D.
Grant, whom the Bishop and Lord Keeper had presented.
and to the Heir doubtful for him.

They received a Petition from Dr. Grant, who made four proffers: First, he
would willingly go to a Trial with this Lady, without taking advantage of lapse
of time: If that could not be, he would pass an Act of Parliament to set her in
statu quo: 3ly. would refer it to four Judges; to six Lawyers of this House, if
they should say the Right was hers, he would resign.

The Committee had an Answer from the Lord Keeper The Lord Keeper's Answer and
Excuse.
of two parts: First, for the denial of the Quare Impedit, not his purpose to
justify it, but to extenuate his proceedings therein. A Question there was
between the two Courts, and no good correspondency between the Judges; it was
presently after his coming into the place, neither corruption nor malice was in
his proceedings: he offered a Living equivalent of this, to the Lady: he would
satisfy the Lady by any means this House should direct, and would labor to
get Grant from his Majesty to sell to the Heir; he had never before, nor would
do the like; and returned thanks to the House, for their favorable
Interpretation of this his Error.

The Lady Darcy gave a Negative Answer to all; The Lady will stand and fall by
Judgment of the House.
she had appealed to the House, could find no better Judgment, and to this she
would stand.

The Committee Considerations in the Committee.
took two things into their consideration, the Ladies own particular, and the
public; For the first, they thought it the safest way to put in a Bill; she
was satisfied with this answer: For the second, the denial of the Writ, Who
delivered no Opinion, leaving all to the House.
diverse proposals made, but at last resolved to present it to the House without
any Opinion of theirs, touching the Offense and Error of the Lord Keeper, was
directed to report the whole Narrative to the House.

Mr. Brook said, Debates in the House by several Members thereof.
he had never any person in admiration for advantage, had read the Law, there
is a Market overt of the Law, the Common Pleas, and the Chancery, the Shop of
Justice, the Chancery, First, No doubt it is a great fault to deny an original
Writ in the Chancery, but not so much as to deny a Fine in the Common Pleas;
just Excuse, and the offer of Amendments, does much extenuate the Offense,
which is but singular; the Lord Keeper might do this, to vindicate his Right
from the Usurpation of the Court of Wards; it cannot stand with the Gravity of
this House to transmit it; a man for one single offense; this will be
admonition enough to him, Nota.
that it has been thus agitated in this House.

Sir James Parrot argued the offense of the Lord Keeper, in the denial of an
original Writ; some Excuses are alleged: First done within a short time after
he came in ignorantia Juris, in a Judge.

Another Excuse offered; a Contention between two Courts; this rather
aggravates than extenuates his offense; being his own Case, he ought not to
have stayed Justice; this thought a sole fault, yet a great fault; But he
thinks it not a sole fault.

He is informed, that there are more Faults of the like kind objected to the
Lord Keeper: Proposed,

To have that examined; then it will be a sole fault; two other Petitions
before the Committees before the Lord Keeper, of Mrs.' Thomas, and Sir Francis
Fuliambe; to have these two fully heard tomorrow, and then to grow to a
Resolution of this; in the mean time to have the Cursitor examined about the
other, whether another Quare impedit, or Ne admittas was not denied.

Sir Thomas Hobby moved to begin in order with the parts of the Reports: First,
To the Writ that which is amiss in the Inheritance, and then to consider of the
Faults, to have the Bill read.

Mr. Price alleged, no corruption nor ill intention appears in the Lord
Keeper; a difference between things evil in themselves, and evil by success;
the Lord Keeper came young to his Place, and from a strange speculation, and
found this President; therefore to have some course taken to right the Lady,
and to limit that vast Court.

Mr. Solicitor thinks the Answer of the Lord Keeper's very fair and
satisfactory, if it be rightly understood; and so the Debate went off.

XII. The Debate goes off. Journ. Dom. Com. 21 and 22. Jac. Regis, Veneris 7
Maii, 1624. The Case of the Bishop of Norwich, impeached by the Commons.
Sir Edward Cook reports from the Committee of Grievances, a Complaint against
the Bishop of Norwich; the charge is great and strange, consisting of four
parts.

First, The first head of his Charge*
the City of Norwich having 34 Parishes, he sent for the Preachers of the City,
and told them they had preaching enough, and the morning preaching needless,
wished them to cease the Mornings Exercise: this aggravated by diverse
Circumstances, a Letter written to him by the Metropolitan, about the Kings
pleasure for preaching after this his Inhibition; the Cathedral Church, the
Elbow of the City, not above 2000 can hear, yet all to come thither, The second
head.
above 20000 people in Norwich.

The second, Vide Rot. Parl. 17 E. 3. n. 59, 60 Vide Pult. Stat. 35 E. 1. fo.
92. Fox vol. 1. f. 501* Rot Par. 21 E. 3 n. 1. 63.
There came up Images and Crucifixes, counted Laymens Books, and the Lord
Bishop blessed those that set up those Ornaments; a Dove in the Font, The Stat.
of Provisors, 25 E. 3. Rast. f. 98 Rot. Par. 38 E. 3 Rot. Par. 47 E. 3 n. 30.
fluttering over the water to sanctify it. Rot. Parl. 18 E. 3. number. 32, 33,
34. the Commons dealt with the Provisors, they complained they had not
Spiritual food, Rot. Parl. 3. R. 2. n. 37.
for Cardinals put into Churches Rast. Stat. 16. R. 2. cap. 5.
Shoemakers and Tailors. 50 E. 3. called bonum Parliamentum, a complaint of the
Popes usurpation, Item, The King at the prayers of the Commons, showing to him
by Petition, how that Priests become very scant after the Pestilence, to the
great grievance and oppression of the People, has spoken to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the other Bishops, being in the arliament, to set thereupon a
Covenable remedy; which Archbishops and Bishops, at the motion of the King, and
of the great men, said in the same Parliament, that they have thereupon
ordained in certain; that is to say, That the pain of Parish Priests, by any
manner of color, receiving above 6 Marks, and other yearly singing, and not
intending the Cure of Saul's, taking above 5 Marks, without the Bishop's
dispensation, and suspension of their Office, if they within the Month make not
restitution, to the use of the Church in which they sing, of that that they
have above received. And the pain of People of holy Church, giving above 6
Marks or 5 Marks to Parish Priests, or other yearly singing, as before is said,
is to pay the double of that that they do excessively pay, to be converted to
the use of Alms, at the Arbitrament of the Diocesan of the Place; and all
manner of Priests, intending their proper Service, as yearly singing, shall
serve the Parishes, and be attending to the Cure of Souls, as he by the
Ordinaries of the Place, or by them to whom he attaineth, shall be required,
upon pain of suspension of their Office, which they shall incur upon the deed,
if they within the 20 days after that they shall be required, be not obedient
to such requests. And that no Priest, passing from one Diocese to another,
shall be received there to sing Divine Service, unless he show to the Diocesan
of the Place, Letters commendatory, of the Bishop in whose Diocese he last
before dwelled. Wherefore the King, by the Assent of the Great Men and Commons,
has ordained, That if any secular man of the Realm, pay any more than Five
Marks to any Priest yearly in Money, or in other things to the Value; or if he
pay to such Priest, retained to abide at his Table, above 2 Marks, for his
Gown, and his other Necessaries, (his Table accounted to 40 s.) and thereof be
attained, he shall pay to the King fully as much as he paid to the said Priest.
Rast. Stat. de Anno 36 E. 3. fol. 118. cap. 8.
not feeding the Flock; Rome called the Sinful City, and that all the Ill that
has befaln this Kingdom, has come from thence. 17 R. 2. number. 22. 11. H. 4.
and a great many more Presidents; so that this complaint is proper for this
place.

The third was, The 3d. head.
Extortion by orders of the Archbishop; and by their own Canons the Iees set
down, these very much exceeded.

4. Old Institutions now registered, The 4th. head.
which is very dangerous for disherisons. They have not heard his defense. 40
E: 3 inter Brevia, a complaint against the Bishop of Hereford for
Non-residency, not lying within his Diocese; all Bishops ought to be Resident,
unless they be in the Kings Service: where the People are not taught, the King
has but half Subjects; the readiest way to make Rebellions. The Committee
thought it worthy to be transmitted up to the Lords.

Resolved upon Question without a Negative, That this matter shall be
transmitted up to the Lords, Sir Edward Cook to do it, and a Message to be sent
to the Lords for a Conference about it.

The Commons desire their Lordships for a Conference, Die Sabbathi, viz. 8 die
Maii, 1624. Jour. Dom. Proc. Message from the Lower House, by Sir Coke, and
others
touching some Accusations against the Lord Bishop of Norwich, (unto which his
Lordship has not yet been heard) Humbly leaving the time and place to their
Lordship.

The Lords appointed the 15 th. Die Mercurii, 19 Maii.
of this Month to confer with the Commons, The Lords appoint a day for
Conference with the Commons.
touching their Complaint against the Lord Bishop of Norwich; being returned,
the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury, reparted the same to the House to this
effect, viz.

That the Commons had received of Complaint exhibited by the Citizens of
Norwich, The Archbishop of Canterbury reports the heads of the Conference.
against the said Lord Bishop, and to show that it was ordinary for the Commons
to complain of the Governors of the Church, Authorities for the Power and
Right of the Commons to meddle in this Cause.
diverse Records of Parliament; were cited, viz. Anno 25 E. 3. 17 R. 2. and 11
H. 4. all which were cited to satisfy tacit objectionis, for their meddling
with a cause of this nature.

That the charge against the Lord Bishop consisted of six parts. Their Charge
against the Bishop under six Heads. Preachers.


1. That he inhibited or dishartned Preachers on the Sabath day, in the
Forenoon.

2. That Images Images.
were set up in the Church, and one of the Hoey Ghost, fluttering over the
Font, and a Marble Tomb pulled down, and Images set down in the room, and the
Bishop blessed them that did it.

3. Prayer toward the East. Catechizing, and singing Psalms.
That he punished those that Prayed not toward the East.

4. That he punished a Minister for Chatechising his Family, and Singing of
Psalms. Nota.


5. That he used Extortion Extortion.
many ways.

6. That he did not enter Institutions Institutions not entered.
to the prejudice of Patrons.

For the first, The 1st. head concerning Preachers.
it was said that there was 34. Churches in Norwich, and in those Parishes 30
or 40000 People; That the Lord Bishop sent for the Preachers by Apparitor, and
told them there was no need of Preaching on Sunday in the Forenoon, except in
the Cathedral Church, where 2 or 3000 only could hear, many dwelling three
quarters of a Mile off, and many being old, and not able for their Age to come
so far.

That this Inhibition was, when the King had commanded more Preaching. That his
Lordship connived at Recusants: All which was to the disheartning of good
Professors.

It may be objected, his Lordship allowed of Catechizing, ergo no Preaching
necessary; but he commanded to ask bare Questions, and nothing else, ergo no
Instructions.

That this is done against the Canons of the Church; and that there is no
obedience without knowledge the outward man is not conformed, unless the inward
man be reformed, and cited the Canons. Quicunque contrist averit Doctorem
veritatis, peccat in Christum; and the Canon, 1 Jac. c. 45. for Command of
Preaching,

For the 2d. The 2d head touching Images.
touching the setting up of Images, it was said to be against Acts of
Parliament, against the Canons of the Convocation, the Book allowed in the
King's time of 28 H. 8. c. 30. against Images; Pilgrimages will follow, against
3 E 6. and the Homilies approved, Anno 1 Eliz. forbidding of Images in Churches.

The 3d. The 3d. head concerning Prayer toward the East.
for Prayer to the East, which Gratianus affirms, came by Tradition, part 1.
Decret. 11. and that it is Superstitious, Lingwood in his Gloss. Lib. 2. Title
de Feriis, non refert si versus orientem, etc.

That the Lord Bishop Excommunicated many, and enjoined Penance to diverse for
not Praying to the East, and some did their Penance, with a whith Rod in their
hand for proof, whereof it is under the Bishops hand.

The fourth, The 4th head touching Catechizing and singing Psalms.
one Peck a Minister Catechized his Family, and song Psalms, and his Neighbors
came in on the Sundays after Evening Prayer, and the Lord Bishop enjoined them
to do Penance, for this their resorting to Catechism, and singing of Psalms,
and to say, I confess my Error; which Acknowledgment is under the Bishops hand,
they which refused, were Excommunicated, and paid 7 l. charges.

5. The 5th. head touching Extortion.
Touching Extortions was shown, That in the Table of Fees, is set down, from
Institutions 24 s. 8 d. whereof to the Bishop 10 s. That this Lord Bishop is
Register also; and now his Lordship takes for Institutions 3 l. 5 s. and for
united Churches double, viz. 6 l. 10 s. and that Communibus Annis, there are
100 Iustitutions.

For admission into sacred Orders, nothing should be taken; if any, it is
Symony; yet the Lord Bishop has now taken 30 s. or 28 s. the Bishop and
Register being all one.

To serve Cure, 5 s. is due, his Lordship takes 6 s. 8 d.

To teach School, 3 s. 4 d. his Lordship takes 6 s. 8 d. and if of ability, 10
s.

For every Consignation of a Decree, 4 d. which comes to 3 l. per annum, for
which there should be nothing paid, no Consignation being in the Table, but
with another Hand set down in Archbishop Whitguift's Hand.

Sixthly, The 6th. head touching non-Registring of Institutions.
That the Institutions to Benefices are not registered, which overthrows
Patronages, if it be returned, Scrutatis Archivis non invenitur, when the Right
comes in question; yet the Fees are greater than before:

The Commons The Conclusion of the Commons.
concluded with these two Remembrances. The first, That they received this
Complaint before Easter last, yet they proceeded not in the Examination
thereof, till they received a Certificate of the Mayor of Norwich. The second
is, That there is a Law that none shall be punished for complaining in
Parliament.

This Report ended, The Bishop stood up and Answered the Charge of the Commons.
His Introduction.
the Lord Bishop of Norwich stood up in his place, and answered the same to
this effect, viz.

The Answer of the Lord Bishop of Norwich, to the Complaint of the Commons.
First, his Lordship confessed the Charges in the said Complaint to be so
great, and so grievous, that, were he guilty thereof, he would desire himself
to be punished: Which, whether he be guilty, or not, he will leave to their
Lordships most exact and severe Examinations; wherein he desired them not to
spare him, and he would ever acknowledge and commend their Justice and Honor.

His Lordship protested he was not way guilty of the first part of his
Accusation; If he were, then he was unworthy to bear the name of a Clergyman;
and showed the unworthiness of such as should dishearten Preachers from
Preaching the Word of God: His Lordship showed also, (desired first that he
might not be taxed with Ostentation,) his own Practice in Preaching, while he
was Vicar and Parson, That he Preached every Sabbath in the Morning, and
Catechized in the Afternoon, and that he continued the like in Chichester, when
he was Bishop there.

That in Norwich he never missed the public Place, and ever Preached there
against Popery, though he had been an unprofitable, yet he had not been an idle
Servant, which was now his only comfort.

As touching Preaching and non- Residents, he has been reckoned more than half
a Puritan. His Lordship remembered his manner of leaving his Service with the
late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that he might go to his Cure.

His Lordship wondered why he should be thought a Papist; he thought it might be
long of his Disputation, and his Sermon at Paul's Cross of Predestination
negative, unadvisedly preached by him, for which he was checked by the Lord
Archbishop Whitguift, and commanded to preach no more of it; and he never did;
though Dr. Abbot, Bishop of Sarum, has since declared in Print, that which he
then preached to be no Popery; That Popery is a fire that will never be quiet:
He has preached 100 Sermons since, and nothing of Popery can be imputed unto
him out of any of them.

That there be diverse Obstacles to keep his Lordship from Popery.
1. The Usurpation of the Pope of Rome. His Lordship affirmed, That no Power on
Earth can touch a Prince; and that therefore he abhorred the Usurpation of the
Pope over Princes.

2. Their Religion is dyed with Blood. The practick course of their Religion is
all by Juggling and feigned Miracles, of which his Lordship had written a Book
against them, which was never yet answered.

3. That he never spoke with Priest or Jesuit, nor ever invited a known
Recusant to his Table, for they never say Amen to our Prayers.

4. That their Equivocation is the last, worse than which nothing can be; his
Lordship held it much better to talk with the Devil, than with such. Then his
Lordship professed himself to be a true Member of this Church, and acknowledged
the Church of England to come nearest to the Primitive Church; that we fetch
not our Reformation from Wickliff, Hus and Luther, of later Times, but from the
first 400 years next after Christ.

1. His Lordships answer to the first head, Preachers.
As touching the first part of the Accusation:

His Lordship confessed, That 6 or 7 of the abler sort of Ministers in Norwich,
used to expound in their own Churches before the Sermon begun in the Cathedral
Churches, and many resorted from other Places to those Expositions, (for all
the Churches have not Preachers,) and in the Afternoon to their Sermons.

The Preachers themselves found fault with this, being willing to be rid of the
pains, as his Lordship thought; for they were to preach in the Afternoon, and
in the Weekdays, and showed him many Disorders therein, which they pretended;
as the cutting off part of the Prayers, or their beginning so early, that many
could not come to the Common Prayers, and the like; and they besought his
Lordship to remedy it, for that they being but stipendary men, were loath to do
it, for fear belike to lose their Stipends. Whereupon his Lordship sent for
them by an Officer, and willed them to omit those Expositions in the Forenoon;
and yet his Lordship has since taken order for the erecting of three Sermons,
in the most remote Places of the City from the Cathedral Church; and his
Lordship has erected many Lectures in several Places in the Country.

2. As touching the Images His answer to the second head, Images.
in the Church, what was done is done without his knowledge. It is meant by St.
Peter's Church, that his Lordship never saw that Church, till one Evening as he
came by; and being often before informed of much Cost done upon that Church, he
went in, and kneeled down to his Prayers, as his use is; and when he rose up,
perceiving that they had bestowed very great Cost, and not seeing or knowing at
all of any Image set up there, he said, God's Blessing on their hearts, that
had bestowed so much Cost on God's House.

3. As touching Prayer His answer to third head, Prayer toward the East.
to the East, he never enjoined it, nor heard of it till now.

4. For the 4th. His Answer to the 4th. head, Catechizing, and singing Psalms.
part of his Complaint, he perceives, That he has been sifted for the whole
course of his Life: That this Peck was sent to his Lordship by the Justices of
the Peace, for an Assembly late at night in his House, his Catechizing being
but a color to draw them thither: That this Peck had infected the Parish with
strange Opinions; as not to kneel when they came to Church; that the Name of
Jesus is no more than a common Name, and that it is Superstition to bow down at
the Name of Jesus. His Lordship further affirmed, That this Peck had been
formerly convicted for Nonconformity, Annis 1615, and 1617. and for Symony,
and Conventicles in his Neighbor's house, as appears by the Acts of the
Register, Fatetur.

And that Anno 1622. he was taken in his House with 22 of his Neighbors at a
Conventicle: That he was now bound over by a Justice, and so brought to his
Lordship, and his Sentence against Peck was only, That he should confess his
Fault.

The others mentioned in this part of the Charge, were punished for their
Opinions also, making no difference between an Alehouse and the Church, till
the Preacher be in the Pulpit. His Lordship said, He much confessed his fault,
that in the Penance he enjoined them, he caused them to confess their Errors,
omitting their resort to Conventicles, which he did at their own earnest suit.

5. His Answer to the 5th. head, Extortion.
His Lordship absolutely denied, That he improved any Fees, and affirmed, he
has not any of those Fees that are complained of, only the Fee for
Institution, which he took as his Predecessors did; if therein he has
committed any Error, Erravimus cum Patribus; and denied, that he ever had seen
that Table of Fees, which is spoken of by the Commons.

6. His Answer to the 6th. head, non-Registring Institutions.
His Lordship affirmed, That he had registered all the Institutions.

This was the Effect of the Lord Bishop's Answer; which being ended,

The Prince his Highness told his Lordship, That he had not answered touching
the Paraphrase of the Catechism taken away by him.

Whereupon his Lordship replied, That the Preachers used to choose a Text of
the Creed, etc. and to ask the Child some one Question, and then to debate very
long upon it, and never descend to the capacity of the Child: That his Lordship
did not forbid the Explanation, but willed, that it might be Catechistically.

Thus ended the Lord Bishop of Norwich his Answer The Conclusion of his Answer.
to the said Complaint.

It is this day Ordered, The Lords for want of time refer the Commons Complaint
to the High Commission Court to examine. And after report to the House. Which
will then judge thereof.
that in respect of the Streightness of time, that the Complaint of the Commons
against the Lord Bishop of Norwich, shall be referred unto the High Commission,
to be Exammined by them, and they to make Report thereof to the House.

And then the House will judge thereof.

XIII. Journ. Dom. Proc. 1 and 2 Car. 1. 10 Mart.
Timothy Pinckney who had Petitioned the Lords 21 Jac. to be relieved for a
Debt owing to him and others, The Proceedings of the Lords against the Bishop
of Lincoln, late Lord Keeper, for refusing to obey their Order.
from Sir John Kineday, and that Barn Elmes should be Sold for that purpose,
which the Lords then ordered; And appointed a Commission to Issue out of
Chancery, directed to certain Judges, to examine the pretenses of the
Creditors, and see them satisfied, he Complains now of the Bishop of Lincoln,
late Lord Keeper, for refusing to grant out such a Commission, and slighting
the Order.

The Committee had taken the Depositions of three Persons, who had been first
Sworn in the House; The Lords took into consideration this contempt of their
Order, heard the Depositions read, and appointed Sir Charles Caesar, and Sir
Robert Rich, to go and Examine one Kelwood, who was also present, when the said
Lord Keeper refused to obey the said Order; and Minister an Oath unto him, to
tell what he knows of any notice given to the Lord Keeper of the said Order,
and who was present

March the Second, Sir Chapter Caesar and Sir Robert Rich report the Examination of
Kellwood.
Upon Sir Charles Caesar, and Sir Robert Rich their Report, of their
Examination of George Kellwood, touching the Bishop of Lincoln, not obeying the
Order in the business of Pinckney, the Lords Order that the Deposition, after
they had heard it read, and the Depositions of the other three Persons formerly
taken to be sent to the Bishop The Lords order that the Bishop shall answer
under his Hand.
of Lincoln, who was to return an Answer, under his hand that day following.

March the 16 th. The Bishop sends his Answer.
The Bishop of Lincoln sent his Answer to Pinckney's Complaint, according to
the order of March the 2 d. in Writing, to this essect; First, in general
denied he should have Spoken any thing in contempt of their Lord ships Order in
Parliament 21 Jac. having always in his heart, born such a reverence to them,
for non Arbitramur quenquam dicere quod non sentiat, and for the particulars,
as he remembers, it being two years since, that there had been a mistake in the
Clerks entering it, according to the sense of the House, and Pinckney had then
concealed from their Lord-ships, a former Refference by the Parliament, and the
King himself, to the Lord Keeper, the Master of the Rolls, and some Judges, who
had made a Decree in it; And admit all were true, that is complained, yet he
had ommitted the time of the Complaint, of a verbal contempt, near two years
being past, and two sittings of Parliament, wherein he had been silent; Verbal
Injuries, according to the Civil Law, must be complained of within the year,
aliter remissae censentur: Contempts must be pressed the next Term, or sitting
of the Court, against which they are committed; Scandalous words against the
King, must be Complained of within three Months; Words of High Treason, are by
the Laws confined to be Complained of within 6 Months.

All Informations against any Penal Law, made, or to be made, must come within
the compass of one year, unless it be Ex part Regis, who has a year longer;
And it is impossible for any Man to give an Account, of every phrase he shall
use Twenty Months after the words Spoken, Lubricum tantum linguae non est ad
judicium trahendum, say the Civilians. And that his Heart did never conceive
the least Derogation of any Order of that most Honorable House, on the bare
intimation of any one Peer that sits in the same. One passage in his Answer,
was, That Kellwood, and especially Kennedy (a Man Condemned to Death in
Scotland for Forgery,) are Persons Infamed, and their Credits to be Examined
before they be admitted as Witnessess against a Peer of the Realm, and a Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, as he then was. At the end of the Paper was Written,
Recepi 5. Expedii 9 Martii 1625. John Lincoln.

This Answer was referred to the Committee The Bishop's Answer referred to a
Committee.
for Petitions, to consider what is fit to be done for the clearing of the
aspersion laid by the Bishop, on the Lords Sub-Committees appointed for the
Journal Book, and what for the relief of Pinckney; for those had certified it
to be a true Order; Notwithstanding he said it was mistaken by the Clerk, and
had not obeyed it.

The Committee Report, 17 Martii. The Committee report.
they find two defects in this Answer: 1. That he does not clearly acknowledge
his Contempt in not obeying the Order. 2. His Aspersing the Lords
Sub-Committees, And give their opinion, that the Bishop ought to acknowledge
his error and offense, to be forry, and ask pardon.
by saying, it was a mistaken Order, when they had certified it a true one.
Their Opinion is, That the Sub Committee be cleared, and the Bishop acknowledge
it a true Order, and signify to the House, that he is sorry he was so
mistaken, and thereby given just offense to the House, and to the Lords of the
Sub-Committee; then Acknowledge his Error, And so ordered by the House.
and ask their pardon, so Ordered.

May it please your most Honorable Lordships.
YOur Lordships having resolved the order touching Pinkney of the 28 of May
1624. Die Jovis, 23 Martii. The Bishop pursuant to all which obeys.
To be an Order of that Most Honorable House, Nota.
truly and justly entered; His Contempt in a former Parliament censured in this.
I do most willingly accknowledge as much, and am very sorry, that through a
weak memory, and information of some parties interessed, who pretendded to have
serached the Clerks Book the 29 of May 1624. And to have found there at that
day, no ground at all for any such Order; I have had in my thoughts some
scruples to the contrary, to the offending of the most Honorable House, or any
one of the Lords of the Sub-Committee, who (as I now understand) have
Subscribed the said Order; And I do Humbly desire your most Honorable
Lordships in General, and those Noble Lords in Particular, to Pardon the Error
I have herein committed, and I shall pray unto God to bless and prosper your
most Honorable Lordships.

John Lincoln.

Which Acknowledgment their Lordships all accepted in full satisfaction from
the said Lord Bishop.

XIV. Ordered, Journ. Dom. Proc. 3 Car. 1. Die Martis, 27 Maii. The Case of
Ensign Reynde, for Misdemeanour, and Contempt against the Parliament and the
Ld. Say
Ensign Reynde to be sent for, and brought up as a Prisoner before the Lords,
to answer a high Contempt against the Parliament: The Witnesses who have
informed thereof, are to be required to attend when Reynde comes.

Ordered, Die Veneris, 30 Maii, The Sergeant at Arms ordered to take him.
the Sergeant at Arms to make such and so many Deputies, for the apprehension
of Henry Reynde, as the Lord Say shall appoint, and his Captain to be warned to
bring him hither by a day.

These men were sworn touching the Information against Henry Reynde, Die
Martis, 30 Junii. Witnesses sworn against Reynde.
Ensign-Bearer to the Soldiers at Banbury, viz.

George Phillips. Obadiah Lord. John Hayns, John Hele.

And being examined, Who prove the insolent and opprobrious Speeches spoken by
Reynde.
did testify the insolent and opprobrious Speeches spoken by the said Ensign
Reynde, against a Peer of the Realm, and his contempt of this High Court of
Parliament.

The Lords considering that the said Reynde was by Order of this House, sent
for by the Sergeant the 27th. of May, and could not be found, but yet came
early one Morning to the Clerks Office, to understand whether any other cause
of Complaint was against him, save the Information of those opprobrious
Speeches.; and instantly departed, Reynde hides his Head.
and ever since hides his head.

Their Lordships Order.
Elvenston his Captain to be sent for, to be here to morrow Morning.

And the Duke of Buckingham The Duke of Buckingham promises he will cause him
to be sent for.
did declare his opinion, that the said Reynde deserved a severe censure; and
promised to the House, to lay all the Ports for him, and if he can be found, or
shall ever come into the Army, he will cause him to be sent, to receive such
censure as shall be agreed on against him.

Captain Elvenston being called before the Lords, Die Mercurii 4 Junii. The
Captain affirmed he had not seen Reynde.
did affirm that he had not seen his Ensign Henry Reynde this Fortnight, and
thinks he is not in Town; He was commanded to bring him to the House Is
commanded to bring him to the House when he finds him. Or inform the House.
whenever he shall find him, and so soon as he shall understand where he is,
to inform the House thereof.

The Lords taking into consideration, Die Lunae, 9 Junii. The Lords proceed to
censure Reynde.
that Henry Reynde will not be found, and Resolving to proceed to a censure
against him, for his Ignominious Speeches of the Parliament, and of the Lord
Say, they first voted and adjudged him unworthy to bear Arms hereafter, or to
be accounted a Soldier.

Then their Lordships propounded diverse other parts of a Censure against him,
but the Duke of Buckingham coming in before the Conclusion thereof, his Grace
told their Lordships, But the Duke informed the House he was found.
that the said Reynde is now found. Whereupon it was Ordered, the said Reynde
to be brought hither to morrow Morning.

The Duke of Buckingham excused himself, Journ. Dom. Proc. die Mercurii, 11
Junii.
for not bringing of Reynde to his answer according to his promise; The Duke
excuses himself, because Reynde shifts his Lodging.
for that he shifts his Lodging every night, but promised again to do his best
to bring him to morrow Morning.

Ordered, If Reynde do not appear here to morrow Morning, then to proceed
against him in the censure.

The Lords were put in mind of their Order yesterday, Die Jovis, 12 Junii,
1628. The Lords give Sentence against Reynde.
if Reynde were not brought this Morning, to proceed to sentence against him
notwithstanding. Whereupon the Duke of Buckingham signified unto their
Lordships, with what care and industry he had endeavored to bring the said
Reynde before their Lordships, but he is so apprehensive of their censure which
he deserves, that he cannot be found; Yet his Grace said, he doubted not but to
bring him to morrow Morning, and desired their Lordships to proceed
notwithstanding; now in their sentence against him, and with the more severity,
because he had so often deceived his Grace.

The sentence The Sentence.
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, against Henry
Reynde, Ensign-bearer to the Band of Soldiers Billetted in Banbury, for the
Ignominious Speeches, uttered by the said Reynde, against the said Lord Say and
Seal; And for his contempt of this High Court of Parliament; which sentence was
this day pronounced against him, by the Lord Keeper, (viz.)

1. He the said Henry Reynde is never to bear Arms Never to bear Arms.
hereafter, but is accounted unworthy to be a Soldier.

2. He is to be Imprisoned Imprisonment during pleasure. To stand under the
Pillory in Cheap Side and at Banbury.
during pleasure.

3. He is to stand under the Pillory, with Papers on his Head, showing his
Offense; at Cheapside, London, and at Banbury.

4. That he is to be Fined at 200 l. Fined 200 l.
unto the King.

5. He is to ask forgiveness here, To ask Pardon here, and at Banbury.
of all the Lords of Parliament in general, and of the Lord Say and his Son,
both here and at Banbury.

And it was then also Ordered by their Lordships, The Lord Keeper to move the
King for a Proclamation to apprehend him.
that the Lord Keeper should move his Majesty, for the House of Parliament, to
apprehend the said Reynde, with a promise of reward unto him that that shall
take him.

And it was then also Ordered, The Secretary to write into the Law Countries,
not to entertain Reyn^e.
that the Kings principal Secretary, shall Write unto his Majesty's Agent in
the Low Countries, that he signify this censure of the Lords, unto all the
Colonels and Captains there, and that his His Majesty's pleasure is, they give
no entertainment to the said Reynde.

And the Court of Star Chamber The Court of Star Chamber to see the Sentence
executed out of time of Parliament.
is to put this sentence in Execution against the said Reynde, if he shall
happen to be apprehended after this Session is ended, and out of time of
Parliament.

The Lord Say (who withdrew himself, when the Lords gave this Sentence) gave
their Lordships Humble thanks, for the sense they had of his Honor, and their
Noble zeal they had in preserving of it.

Ordered, Die Sabbathi, 14 Junii.
the Court of Star Chamber to put in Execution the Sentence against Reynde.

XV. Whereas George Gardener did lately stand in the Pillory, Journ. Dom. Proc.
1 and 2 Car. 2. 13 Jun. The Case of George Gardener, for counterfeiting
Protections.
by the Censure of the House, for counterfeiting of Protections, and selling
them; it was now informed, that he did not only in scorn thereof say, that he
would stand in all the Pillories in England for 2 s. per diem, but also gave
out threatening Speeches against the Lord Keeper; wherefore he was this day
brought to the Bar, and the Speeches proved against him.

It was Ordered, That he should stand in the Pillory here at Westminster with a
Paper on his Head, declaring his Offense, for scandalizing the Justice of this
House, and unjustly slandering the Lord Keeper, and to ride backward with the
same Paper to the Cross in Cheapside, and to stand in the Pillory there, and to
ride back to the Fleet in like manner.

And whereas George Buttrice and this George Gardener (Buttrice also having
bought a counterfeit Protection) have commenced Suits against one Henry Lane,
who first informed the Earl of Huntingdon thereof, whose Protections were
counterfeited and sold, the said Suits not being for just Debt, but for mere
vexation, as in the Petition of the said Henry Lane is contained.

It is Ordered, the said Gardener and Buttrice to stay all Suits against the
said Lane, for the Causes in the said Petition contained.

XVI. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Ca^. Friday, 9 May.
Sir Walter Earl Reports from the Committee about the Deduty-Lieutenants.

Sir William Welby, The Case of Sir William Welby a Deputy Lieutenant, for
raising Money, and illegal Commitments.
a Deputy- Lieutenant for Lincolnshire, is complained of, that he sent a
Warrant, as a Deputy. Lieutenant, to commit two Persons to Gaol, for refusing
to pay certain Taxes for military Affairs. Also one Mr. Norwood complains, that
it is the usual course of the said Sir William Welby, to raise great sums in
the Country in military Affairs, but it is for the Charges of himself and
others at Musters. Also he having two Sons Captains in the Country, he orders
that every Soldier pay their Captain 6 d. a day every time they muster; and
though these Causes were complained of the last Parliament, yet he does not
desist.

The Warrant was read.
For that I. S. His Warrant.
refuses to pay certain sums of Money for military Affairs; These are by
virtue of our Deputy- Lieutenancy to require you, to bring the Body of I. S.
etc. before me, or some other Deputy- Lieutenant.

I send you herewithal the Body of I. S. And Commitment.
for that he denies to pay military Charges; and also denies to enter Bond to
appear at the next Assizes for his said refusal.

It was Ordered, Sent for by the Sergeant.
that he be sent for by the Sergeant, and brought to the House.

Saturday the 10th. His Answer at the Bar.
of May, Sir William Welby was called in to answer. There was a Question,
whether he should come in a Delinquent, and kneel, or no; and it was Ordered,
that he should not kneel, only be asked by the Speaker, about the Warrants
exhibited touching the levying of Money for military Affairs: He said, he could
not deny them, but said, he never imprisoned any but those two, Palmer and
Sparks; and he said, that upon the meeting of Musters, he used to have his
Charges born by the County, and so it was ever used in that Country for 40
years; and as for 6 d. a piece, that is paid by every Soldier of the trained
Bands, unto the Captains of the Bands who are his Sons, he said, that it was
ever used to be done, but he never compelled any. And as to the rate of 1 d. an
Acre, he said, it was by virtue of an Order made at the Sessions in the
Country, and that he knew there was a Complaint of it the last Parliament.

After he went forth he was called in again, and told, that the House was not
satisfied with his Answer, and that it was the pleasure of the House, To attend
the Committee and House.
that he should attend the Committee from day to day, and this House also,
whenever he should be required.

XVII. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. Wednesday, 21 May.
A Complaint was made against the Mayor of Chichester, by one Mr. Higgons, who
complained, that a Lieutenant with four Soldiers came to his House, The Case
of the Mayor of Chichester.
and surprised him in his Study, and he sent for the Mayor to see the Kings
Peace kept; and the Mayor contrary to his duty, sent no aid; and at a Sessions
to enquire of a Riot, the Bench and the Hall was full of Captains and
Soldiers, so as he withdrew himself; and they Indicted him for Assaulting a
Soldier, and it was found.

Cox also complained against the Mayor there, who sent a Sergeant to them, to
demand Twenty Shillings by way of Loan; which being refused, six Soldiers were
sent to his House; so he was forced to lend the Money.

It was proved, the Money was Paid and Enforced; But it did not clearly appear,
that the Mayor enforced it, but there were Presumptions, the Captains and six
Soldiers came from the Mayors House; So there being no proof against the
Mayor* the Committee Ordered, that the Mayor be dismissed, till the Pleasure of
the House be further known.

A Collection of some few Records and Presidents, out of many others of the
like nature; Whereby it appears, that the Kings of England were pleased to
Consult and Advise with their Parliaments, de Arduis negotiis Regni, of the
weighty and difficult business of the Kingdom.
Vide the ancient Rights of the Commons of England asserted, etc. p. 13.
1. ANno 16. Johannis, Before the granting and confirming of Magna Charta in
his time, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, great Men and the Citizens and Burgesses
were at a Parliament at London, to give consilium and auxilium, Counsel and
Aid, for the Honor of the King, (being then personally in France, in War with
the French King,) their own, and the safety of the whole Kingdom. Inter
Communia 17 E. 3. penes Rememeratorem Domini Regis in Scaccario Recerda War. de
priore de Coventry at^ tach. pro transgressione.


2. Anno 29. H. 3. The King summoned a Parliament touching the Marriage of his
Daughter, where the Magnates and Communitates Regni, the great Men and Commons
of the Realm, spontanea and mera voluntate, granted a Subsidy to the King.

3. Ibid.
Anno 32 H. 3. The great Men and Commons of their free and mere Will gave a
Subsidy in Parliament to Marry the Kings Eldest Sister to Frederick the
Emperor.

4. Rot. Pat. 37 H. 3. m. 12 dorso.
Anno 37. at a Parliament then held at London, concerning the great Affairs of
the Kingdom, and Foreign parts, Magna Charta was confirmed, Rast. Stat. so. 15.
Rex Magnates and Communitas populi being present; and by their consent the
Grand Excommunication against the Infringers of Magna Charta was denounced.

5. Rot. Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 4.
Anno 42 H. 3. In the Parliament at Oxford several Ordinances were made for
Redress of Grievances, A la request de noz haus homes e prodes homes e de
Commune de notre Reaume, at the request of the high Men, the good and honest
Men, and of the Commons of the Realm.

6. Anno 48 Rot. Pat. 48. H. 3. m. 6. dor. Forma Pacis inter Regem and Barons.
H. 3. The Articles of Peace between the King, Prince and Prelates, Peers and
all the Commons of England were generally and unanimously approved of, at a
Parliament at London, De consensu voluntate and praecepto Domini, Regis, necnon
Praelatorum, Baronum ac etiam Communitatis tunc ibidem praesentium, By the
unanimous consent, will and command of the King, of the Prelates, Barons, and
also of the Commons, being there present.

7. 49 Rot. Pat. 49, H. 3. m 13. intus n. 54.
H. 3. The King complains that the Earl of Gloucester and others had
circumvented Prince Edward. Et ad partem suam, proh dolor proditoriae
attraxerunt proprii contemptu Sacramenti. Against the form of the Kings and
Princes Oath, of the Prelates, great Men, and Communitatis Regni unanimi
assensu and voluntate nuper London, provis.

8. Anno eodem, Rot. Claus. 49. H. 3 m. 11. dor. in Schedula
The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses were summoned to Parliament in the Utanes
of St. Hillary, nobiscum and cum Praelatis and Magnatibus nostris tractaturi
and Consilium suum impensuri, To treat and give their Counsel with the K.
Prelates, and great Men, touching the settling of the disturbed condition and
state of the Kingdom.

9. Anno 51. Rot. Pat. 51 H 3. m. 16. pro pace inter Regem and Com Gloucester
H. 3. The King, per le Conseil and lassentement le Richard Earl of Cornwall.
Rei de Alemaine, and de Countes, and de Barons and del Comman de laterre, By
the counsel and assent of the King of Almain, and of the Earls, and Barons, and
of the Commons of the Land, pardoned and released the Earl of Gloucester, and
all his Company, etc.

10. Ibid.
And the King in the same Parliament, per le Conseil and lassentement le Rei de
Alemaine and les Countes, and de Barons, and le Commons de laterre, By the
counsel and assent of the King of Almain, and of the Earls, Barons and the
Commons of the Land, pardoned and released the Londoners, etc.

11. Anno 54 Rot. Pat. 54. H. 3.
H. 3. The King and Prince having undertaken the Crusado for the Holy Land.
Quia tamen Praelatis Magnatibus and Communitati Regni non videtur expediens
neque ratum, that they should be both out of the Kingdom istis Temporibus. It
was agreed the Prince should go, and a Subsidy was granted to the Prince by
the Parliament.

12. Anno 11 Rot. Wall. 11 E. 1. m. 4. n. 2. dorso.
E. 1. Lewellin Prince of Wales being in Rebellion, the King undertakes the War
against him, de Consilio Prelatorum procerum and Rot. Claus. 28 H. 3. m. 8 dor.
Rex, etc. Sciatis quod de- Communi Consilio Regni nostri provisum est quod
erimus apud Novum Castrum super Tinam cum equis and armis die Sancti Petri
Advincula pro quibusdam transgressionibus quas Rex Scotiae Nobis fecit emendas
super eum conquerendas nisi etc.
magnatum necnon totius Communitatis ejusdem Regni, by the Counsel of the
Prelates, Peers, great Men, also of the whole Commons of the Kingdom.

13. Anno 28. Rot. Claus. 28. E. 1. 1m. 3. dor.
E. 1. The King in his Writ of Summons to Parliament, Rot. Claus. 24. E. 1. m.
4. d. de Parliamento tenendo, The French King having invaded Vascony by Fraud
and Wickedness The K. in his Summons to Parliament, says, Quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus approbetur sic and inuit evidenter ut communibus periculis per remedia
provisa communiter obvietur, for praevisa jacula minus ledant.
directed to the Sheriff of Cumberland, says, volentes cum Prelatis,
Commitibus, Baronibus and Magnatibus supradictis and cum aliis de Communitate
dicti Regni super hoc and quibusdam aliis arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni
tangentibus habere colloquium and tractatum, etc.

14. Plita Parliamentaria p. 318, 320.
Anno 35. E. 1. At the great Parliament held at Carlisle, the Record says,
that Knights, Citizens and Burgesses were summoned to the Parliament, Ad
tractand. etc. Super ordinatione and Stabibilitate terrae Scotiae, necnon aliis
negotiis dictum Regem and statum Regni sui spetialiter tangen. being the same
Words which were for the great Lords in their Summons.

15. Anno 9 E. 2. At the Parliament Inter memorand a Parliamenta, 9 E. 2. m. 18.
at Lincoln, the King in plein Parliament caused to be declared the causes of
the Summons thereof, Pro diversis and arduis negotiis ipsum and statum Regni,
and especially pro statu terrae suae Scotiae perimimicos suos pro part
occupata supplicans and injungens Praelatis proceribus and caeteris fidelibus
subditis suis ibidem existentibus ut sibi in praemissis consulerint and sibi
facerent auxilium oportunium, which they did.

An. 16 E. 2. A Marriage being propounded between Prince E. after E. 3. and the
Daughter of Charles of Valois. The King (not when he was under the power and
fear of the Barons, but after he had vanquished them, and had beheaded Thomas
Earl of Lancaster his Uncle, and was attended and guarded by his two great
Minions the Spencers,) declares in his Letter to Charles, thus Recorded.

De Matrimonio inter Edwardum Rot. Claus. 16. E. 2. m. 7. dor.
primogenitum Regis and filiam Caroli Comitis de Valois contrahendo.
AVdivimus and super eisdem deliberationem hujusmodi cum aliquibus de nostro
Consilio and tractatum-Verum quia tam nobis quam illis visum est non esse
expediens neque decens quod contractus hujusmodi absque Praelatori and Magnatum
Regni nostrim Consilio and assensu in Parliamento requirend. and firmaretur,
and vestrae sinceritati duximus intimand. quod cito post festum Sancti Mich.
prox. ventur. Parliamentum nostrum proponimus convocare and tunc de Commum
Consilio super dicto negotio ordinare curabimus quod vobis placitum nobisque
and Regno nostro utile fore videbimus and decorum dat. apud Thorp. juxta Ebor.
6. die Junii.

And King Edward further writes to Charles King of France and Navar about that
Marriage. Rot. Claus. 16. E. 2. m. 7. cor.
Set super eodem in prox. Parliamento nostro quod statim post festum Sancti
Mich. prox. futuri tenere proponimus deliberationem and tractatum pleniorem
habere intendimus and tunc inde taliter ordinare quod inde debebetis merito
contentari Dat, etc.

16. Anno 13. Rot. Par. 13. E. 3. pars. 1. m. 11.
E. 3. licet nuper de Consilio and assensu Praelatorum and procerum and
Communitatis Regni nostri nostrum assumentes passagium ultra mare, etc.

17. Anno 14 Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. pars 1. n. 2.
E. 3. It was proposed to the Grauntz and autres des Communes in Parliament, to
treat and ordain touching the War then with France, the keeping of the Peace of
the Land, and the marches of Scotland, and of the Sea.

18. Anno 17 Rot. Parl. 17. E. 3. n. 8,
E. 3. It was propounded in plein Parliament that the War was attempted and
begun by the common consent des Prelatz, Grantz and Communes, and that the King
would not treat of Peace without their assent, and thereupon it was commanded
to the Prelates and Grantz to assemble themselves in the Chamber Blanch to
treat, conclude and assent amongst themselves, whether the King should send
Ambassies to Rome, to show and propose his Title to France before the Pope; and
in the same manner it was charged the Knights of the Shire; and the Commons to
assemble in the Chamber depeint, Nota.
to treat, conclude and assent amongst them upon the same business, and to give
their Answer, and lour assent en dit Parliament.

20. In the Parliament 18. Rot. Parl. 18. E 3. n. 5. vide Rast. Stat. fo. 86.
E. 3. The King by his Chancellor prayed and charged the Prelates, Earls,
Barons and Commons, that they would consider touching the Articles of Truce
between the King and France, and that they would mettre leid and le Conseil
give their Aid and Counsel for the Salvation of the Rights and Honor of the
King, and de eux meismes, and of themselves.

21. Rot. Parl. 28. E. 3. n. 58.
Sir Bartholomew Burghurst the Kings Chamberlain declared in Parliament, That
there was a Treaty of Peace between the King and the French, and good hope of a
final Accord, but the King would not conclude sanz assent des Grantz and ses
Communs; Whereupon the Chamberlain required and demanded, on the behalf of the
King, whether they would assenter and accorder to the intended Peace.

To which the Commons d'unassent and d'unaccord. Answered, that what Issue the
King and Grantz should take in the said Treaty, should be agreeable to them:
Upon which Answer the Chamberlain said to the Commons, Then you will assent to
the Treaty of Peace perpetual, if it may be had; to which the Commons Answered,
Entierment and unement. oil oil, yes, yes; And thereupon it was commanded, that
Master Michel de Northburgh, Gardeyne of the Privy Seal, and Sire John de
Swinley Notair Papal, should make an Instrument public thereof.

22. Anno 43 Rot. Parl. 43. E. 3. n. 1.
E. 3. The Chancellor, in his Oration before the King, Lords and Commons, thus
expresses himself: Sires, the King in all his great business which concerned
himself and his Kingdom, de tout temps, has acted and done, by the counsel and
advice of his Grandz and Commons of his Realm, which he has found in all his
Affairs, Bons and Loyalz, good and faithful, for which he thanketh them, de
grant ever and volunte, and that it was not unknown to them that the King had
taken upon him the Claim and Right to the Realm of France, per lavis and
conseil de ses Grantz and Communes, by the advice and counsel of his great Men
and Commons

23. Rot. Claus. R. 2. n. 37. 7.
7 R. 2. The King called a Parliament, to consider of a Peace between him his
Kingdom, Lands, Dominions, and Subjects, ex una part, and magnificum principem
Robert of Scotland, and his Lands, Dominions, and Subjects, of the other part;
mediante consilio and assensu Praelatorum procerum magnatum and Communitatis
Regni Angliae, by the counsel and assent of the Prelates, Peers, and great Men
and Commons of the Kingdom of England.

I will pass over the rest of the several Authorities in this King's Reign, and
so of H. 4. except this one.

24. Ex Rot Parl. tenti apud Glouc. 20 die Octobris Anno Regni Regis H. 4. Post
Conquestum 9. m. 8. n. 21. Indempnitie des Seigneurs and Communes.
In the Parliament 9. H. 4. in that great Record called Indompnitie des
Seigneurs and Commune^, the King, by the advice and assent of the Lords,
willed, granted and declared that in that and all future Parliaments, it should
be lawful for the Lords to debate and commune amongst themselves, de Lestate du
Roiaume and la remedy a ce busoignable of the state of the Kingdom, and the
necessary Remedies; and it should be lawful likewise for the Commons on their
part to commune in the same manner.

25. Rot. Parl. 3. H. 5. pars 2.
Anno 3 H. 5. The Chancellor at the Re-assembly of the Parliament, declares,
(the King being present) the causes of their calling; which was, that Peace had
been offered him by his adversary of France; the which, without the assent and
good Counsel of the Estates of his Realm, he would not conclude; And that the
King of the Romans desiring Peace and Unity in the Church Universal, and also
between the Christian Realms, was come over hither with Propositions, which he
had not yet declared to the King, but in a short time would show them. Upon the
which, the King would take the Advice, de son tressage Conseil, of his most
wise Counsel.

26. Rot. Parl. 4 H. 5. n. 14.
Anno 4 H. 5. The League and Alliance between the King and Sigismund the
Emperor and King of the Romans was ratified and confirmed, La confirmation des
Alliances perentre le Roy and le Roy des Romans prisez and accordez
upon due and solemn Treaty thereof, by the common consent and assent of all
the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and toute autres Estates
Espiritualz and Temporalz, and other Estates Spiritual and Temporal, and also
of the Commons of this Realm, in the said Parliament assembled.

27. Anno 9. Rot. Parl. 9. H. 5. pars 1. n. 14.
H. 5. A Peace being concluded between Henry King of England, Approbatio pacis
inter Regem Angliae and Franciae nuper conclusae.
and Charles the French King, it was mutually agreed, that the Articles thereof
be ratified and confirmed per tres Status, of both Kingdoms; which being
approved, concluded accepted and allowed of, by the three Estates in France,
videlicet, Praelator. and cleri necnon Procerum and Nobilium, ac etiam civium
Burgensium civitatuum villarum and Communitatum dicti Regni. The Articles was
after mature deliberation confirmed per tres Status Regni, Angliae vid per
Praelatos and clerum nobiles and magnates necnon Communitates Regni ad
Parliamentum apud West. qui quantum ad eos and singulos eum pertinet
obsequituros and impleturos promiserunt.

28. Rot. Parl. 9. H. 5. n. 18. De potestate tractand de pace cum Dolphino, etc.
Anno 9 H. 6. It was ordained by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons
That the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester and my Lord Cardinal, and others of
the Kings Blood and of his Counsel, may treat of Peace with the Dauphin of
France, notwithstanding the Act formerly made to the contrary; which was, That
the King of England H. 5. or the French King should not enter or make any
Treaty of Peace, or of Accord with Charles the Dauphin, without the assent of
the three Estates of both Realms.

29 Anno 23. H. 6. Rot. Parl. 23. H. 6. n. 24.
Whereas by the Articles of Peace made between H. 5. and Charles the 6 th of
France, it was agreed there should be no Treaty or Accord made with the Dauphin
of France, without the assent of the three Estates of both Realms, which
Articles were afterward Enacted and Authorized here by Parliament; It was
Enacted by the assent of the Lords and Commons, that that Article should be
void, eryt, cassed adnulled and of none Force, and none to be impeacht for
advising and acting in the said Peace.

30. Rot. Parl. 25 H. 6. n. 1.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of England, declared the causes of
the Summons of the Parliament (the King present) and amongst others, that
between the Ambassadors of King H. and the French King; There was an
appointment de personali conventione of a personal meeting between the two
Kings in partibus transmarinis, which if it should happen ut speratur to
provide not only for the safe and secure preservation of the person of the
King, as well in his Conduct, ad dict as parts transmarinas, as in his being
there, but also for the safe and sure conservation of the Peace within the
Kingdom, and other his Dominions (during his absence) out of the Realm, and for
ordaining a provision thereof.

Tractatum and maturam deliberationem cum sano and salubri Consilio trium
Statuum dicti Regni necessario exigit and requirit; and after concludes his
Speech: Qualiter praefatus Rex ad tractandum and consulendum cum praefatis
proceribus and magnatibus supradictis and Communibus Regni sui hujusmodi
provisione saciend. and habend. Parliamentum suum predictum fecerat convocari:
Therefore the King had called his Parliament, to treat, consult and advise with
the Peers, and great Men and Commons of the Kingdom, how such provision may be
done and had.

31. Rot. Parl. 11. H. 7. n40. An Act concerning the Peace between the King of
England and the King of France
Anno 11. H. 7. The Articles of Truce and Peace between Charles the French
King, and King Henry, was agreed to be ratified, accepted, approved and
confirmed, per tres Status utriusque Regnorum videlicet per Praelatos, and
Clerum nobiles and Communitatem eorumdem Regnorum authoritate Parliamentorum;
Which was after done.

32. Jur. Dom. Proc Anno 3. H. 8. 15 die Parliamenti.
Anno 3 H. 8. Dominus Cancellarius ex mandato Regis ostendebat Dominis hic
praesentibus causas Secretiores hujus Parliamenti summonitionis primam
concernentem Regem Scotiae and multimodas injurias subditis Regni Angliae
illatas. Secundam, Et bellum inter Regem Castelli and Ducem Gildriae ejus
affinitatem and terram concernentem Dominum summum Pontificem, Tertiam, Et
dissensionem inter ipsum and Ludovicum Francorum Regem lectumque fuit per
Magistrum Rotulorum breve Apostolicum in vulgari translatione one continens
contumelias dampna and injurias Sanctae sedi Apostolicae and Romano Pontifici
per Ludovicum Gallorum Regem illatas.

Item dictus Dominus Cancellarius, cum Domino Thesaurario, and aliis Dominis in
Domum Communem descendebat cum premissis ostensur. etc.

33. Anno 21. H. 8. Lord Herbert's Hist. of H. 8. to. 303.
The Lords and Commons sent a Letter to the Pope, touching the dilatory
Proceedings, in the Divorce between the King and Queen Katherine before him; in
which Letter they declare, Causa Regiae Majestatis nostra cujusque propria est,
a Capite in Membra derivata, dolor ad omnes, atque injuria ex aequo pertinet,
omnes in ejus Majestate compatimur, in relation to the Safety and Succession of
the Crown; and that if his Holiness would not determine the cause, or defer it
any longer, they plainly tell him that,

Nostri nobis curam relictam, and aliunde nobis remedia conquiramus. Nota.

And they were as good as their words; Rast. Stat. 2. 5 H. 8. cap. 13.
For in the Parliament, 25 H. 8. an Act passed for declaring the establishment
of the Succession of the Kings most Royal Majesty in the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, wherein the Marriage between the King and the Lady Katherine, Nota.
was by authority of Parliameut definitively, clearly and absolutely, declared,
deemed and adjudged to be against the Laws of Almighty God, and also to be
accepted, reputed and taken of no value nor effect, but utterly void and
annihilated; and that the said Katherine should be from thenceforth called and
reputed, only Dowager to Prince Arthur, Nota
and not Queen of the Realm.

This Letter was Subscribed and Sealed by 2 Archcbishops, 2 Dukes, 3
Marquesses, 13 Earls, 4 Bishops, 25 Barons, 22 Abbots.

And Milites and Doctores in Parliamento, the Knights and Doctors in
Parliament, of the House of Commons, William Fitzwilliam being Speaker, was the
first that signed; And notwithstanding the Objection from the date thereof, in
time of Prorogation, it is very probable that it was agreed in Parliament, and
my Reasous are two, besides what appears by the Letter it self.

1. The Answer of the Pope to the Letter; is directed thus.

Venerabilibus fratribus Archieepiscopis and Episcopis, L. Herbert, fo. 307.
ac dilectis filiis Abbatibus Nobilibusque viris Ducibus, Marchionibus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, ac Doctoribus Parliamenti Regni Angliae.

2. Records and Histories tell us that Parliaments have several times sent
Letters to the Pope: Vide the ancient Rights of the Comm. of England asserted,
p. 111.
For Instances.

Anno 29 H. 3. 29 E. 1. 17. E. 3. Where the last, Rot Parl. 17. E. 3. n. 59,
60. Rot. Parl. 21. Es 3. n. 1 63.
though agreed to in full Parliament, yet was after Sealed, Souz les Seals,
des Grantz, and totes les Cominaltes, des Citees and Burghes d' Angleterre So
that as yet under submission I am of my Lord Herbert's opinion, That the Letter
or Declaration was by the Parliament.

34. Anno 28 Eliz. Inter Capita foederis arctioris amicitiae inter
potentissimos principes Elizabetham Angliae Reginam, and Jacobum ejus nominis
sextum Scotorum Regem, 5 Julii 1586. Ex Ms. penes meipsum.
Item conventum concordatum and conclusum estquod Rex Scotiae, quamprimum
vicesimum quintum suae aetatis, annum impleverit quam primum commode id facere
poterit per publicum Regni sui conventum dictum foedus approbabit and
confirmabit approbari and confirmari faciet and item Reginalis suae Majestatis
per proceres and alios Regni sui Angliae and Hiberniae, Status in Parliamento
idem faciat and praestabit] vel fieri and praestari procurabit. I have seen
several Records of Leagues ratified by the Scottish Parliament.

35 POstquam Rex per spatium trium Annorum and amplius in partibus transmarinis
remansisset and de partibus Vasconiae, Ex Cronico ab anno 1272. 1 E. 1. ad an
number 1317. 10. E. 2. Ms. mihi ostens. per Tho. Turner Armig. nuper defunct.
and Franciae in Angliam rediisset valde anxiatus and conturbatus fuit per
quotidianum clamorem tam Clericorum quam Laicorum petentium ab eo congruum
remedium apponi versus justiciarios and alios Ministros suos de multimodis
oppressionibus and gravaminibus contra bonas leges and consuetudines Regni
illis factis super quo Dominus Edwardus Rex per Regale scriptum Vicecomitibus
Angliae precipit, Anno Domini, 2289. Aunoque Regni Regis E. 1. 18. Certe scimus
quam plurimos little qui Judiciis sub E. 1. prae fuere viros quidem maximos and
aevo in illo Jurisconsultos celeberimos repetundarum and quod lites suas
fecerant aliosque preter Ministros forenses aliquot merito damnatos multis
exitio ac carcere punitos esse Seldeni ad Fletam dissertatio p. 548.
quod in omnibus comitatibus ciuitatibus and villis Mercatoriis public
Proclamari facerent quod omnes qui sese sentirent gravati venirent apud
Westmonasterium ad proximum Parliamentum and ibi querimonias suas monstrarent
ubi tam Majores quam Minores oportunum remedium and celerem Justitiam
rccuperent sicut Rex vinculo Juramenti die Coronationis suae astrictus fuit ac
jamjam a dest magnus dies and Judiciarius Justiciorum and aliorum Ministrorum
Consilii Regis quem nulla tergiversatione nullo munere nulla art vel ingenio
placitandi valent eludi Coadunatis itaque Clero and Populo and in magno Palatio
Westmonasterii consessis Archiepiscopis Cantuar. (vir magnae pietatis and
Columna quasi Sanctae Ecclesiae and Regni) surrexit in medio and ab. alto
ducens suspiria. Noverit Vniversitatis vestra (ait) quod convocati sumus de
magnis etarduis negotiis Regni (heu nimis perturbati and hiis diebus enormiter
mutilati) unanimiter fideliter and efficaciter simul cum Domino Rege ad
tractandum and ordinandum audivistis etiam universi querimonias gravissimas
super intollerabilibus injuriis and oppressionibus and quotidianis
desolationibustam Sanctae Ecclesiae quam Regni factis per hoc Iniquum Concilium
Vide Fleta cap. 17. p. 18, 19. Authoritas and Officium Ordinarii Concilii Regis.
Domini Regis contra Magnas Chartas tot toties and multoties emptas and
redemptas concessas and confirmatas per tot and talia juramenta Domini Regis
nunc and Dominorum Henrici and Johannis ac per terribiles fulminationes
Excommunicationis sententiae in transgressores Comunium libertatum Angliae quae
in Chartis predictis continentur corroboratas and cum spes preconcepta de
libertatibus illis observandis fideliter ab omnibus putaretur stabilis and
indubitata Rex Consiliis malorum ministrorum prevent us and seductus easdem
infringendo contravenire non formidavit credens decepitive pro munere absolvi a
transgressione quod esset manifestum Regni exterminium Aliud etiam nos omnes
angit intrinsecus quod Justiciarii subtiliter ex malicia sua ac per diversa
argumenta avaritiae and intollerabilis superbiae Regem contra fideles suos
multipliciter provocaverunt and incitaverunt, sanoque and salubri Consilio
ligeorum Angliae contrarium reddiderunt Consilia sua vana impudenter preponere
and affirmare non eruberunt seu formidavervnt ac si plus habiles essent ad
consulendam and conservandum Rempublicam quam tota universitas Regni in uum
collecta, Ita de illis possit vere dici, viri qui turbaverunt terram and
concusserunt Regnum sub fuco gravitatis totum populum graviter oppresserunt
Pretextuque solummodo exponendi veteres leges novas (non dicam leges) sed malas
consuetudines introduxerunt and vomuerunt; Ita quod per ignorantiam nonnullorum
ac per partialitatem aliorum qui vel per munera vel per timorem aliquorum
Potentum innodati fuerunt nulla fuit, stabilitas legum nec alicui de populo
Justiciam dignabantur exhibere Opera eorum sunt opera nequitiae and opus
iniquitatis in manibus pedes eorum ad malum currunt and festinant, ac viam
recti nescierunt quid dicam? Non est judicium in gressibus suis.

Quam plurimi liberi homines terrae nostrae fideles Domini Regis quafi viles
ultimaeservi conditionis diversis Carceribus sine culpa commiserunt ibidem
carcerandi quorum nonnulli in carcere fame maerore and vinculorum pondere
defecerunt, extorquerunt pro Arbitrio insuper infinitam pecuniam ab eisdem pro
redemptione sua crumenas aliorum ut suas impregnarent tam a divitibus quam
pauperibus exhauserunt ratione quorum incurriverunt odium inexorabile and
formidabiles imprecationes omnium quasi tale incomunicabile privelegium per
cartam detestabilem de non obstante obtinuerunt andper quisiverunt ut alege
Divina Humanaque (quasi ad libitum) immunes essent.

Gravamen insuper solitum adhuc sive aliquo modo saevit omnia sunt venalia si
non quasi furtiva proh dolor.

Quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri sacra fames. Ex ore meo contra vos (o
impii) tremibunda Caeli decreta iam auditis.

Agnitio vultus vestrorum accusat vos and peccatum vestrum quasi Sodoma
praedica vistis nec abscondistis vae animae vestrae vae qui condunt leges and
scribentes injustitiam scripserunt ut opprimerent in judicio pauperes and vim
facerent causae humilium populi ut essent viduae praeda eorum and pupillos
diriperent vae qui aedificant domum suam in justitia and caenacula sua non in
judicio, vae qui concupiverunt agros and violenter tulerunt and rapuerunt domos
and oppresserunt virum and domum ejus imo virum and Haereditatem suam vae
Judices qui sicut Lupi vespere non relinquebant ossa in mane Justus Judex
adducit Consiliarios in stultum finem and Judices in stuporem.

Mox ala voce justum judicium terrae recipietis. Vide Mat. Wect. An. 1289. p.
376. l. 13.


His auditis omnium aures tiniebant totaque Communitas ingemuerunt dicentes heu
nobis heu ubi est Angliae toties empta toties concessa toties scripta toties
jurata Libertas. Anno vero 1290. (18 E. 1) deprehensis omnibus Angliae
Justiciariis de repetundis (preter Jo. de Metingham and Eliam de Beckinghom
quos honoris ergo nominatos volui) judicio Parliamenti vindicatum est in alios
atque alios carcere, exilio and fortunarum omnium dispendio; in singulos mulcta
gravissima and amissione officii, Spelm. Gloss. part 1. fo. 416,


Alii de Criminalibus sese a visibus populi subtrahentes in locis secretis cum
amicis tacties latitaverunt alios protulernnt in medium unde merito fore omnes
ab officiis suis depositi and amoti unus a terra exulatus alii perpetuis
prisonis incarcerati aliique gravibus pecuniarum sulutionibus, just adjudicati
fuerunt.

36. LE Roi a touz ceux que cestes lettres verrount ou errount, Pro Rege Angl.
de diversis concessionibus ei per Regem Scotiae factis, Anno 8 E. 3. m. 29.
Rot. Scotiae.
saluz Sachez que come en les chooses parlees, tretees, and accordees and
affermees enter nous and nostre tresch foial and Coysn Si^e Edward per la grace
de Dieu Roi Descoce, tuschauntes nous and Lestate de nostre Roialme
Dengleterre, and le dit Roi Descoce, son Estat, and Lestat de son Roialme
Descoce, The Parliament of Scotland.
Le dit Roi Descoce, par assent des Prelates, Countes, Baronns, Chivalers, and
autres de son dit Roialme Descoce, eit reconuz and grauntez que le dic Roialme
Descoce, and les Isles appurtenances a y cele sount devient and tut temps pass
soleient estre tenus des Rois Dengleterre, per homage lige and foialte.

Et auxint eit reconuz and grauntez dentrer en nostre homage a lige and foyolte
come Souverain Seigneur des ditz Roialme Defcoce and Isles. Et auxint eit
obligez lui, ses Heirs and Successors, de fair a nous and a noz heirs hoar de
nostre Roialme Dengleterre, and de noz terres de Gales and Dirland, come en
Gascoigne and aillours, ounous and a uoz heirs overoms terres ou clameroms
droit ou autres nous voudront empescher par force sur noz terres, our sur
possession ou droit que nous clamerons certeins services. Cestassavoir le Roi
Descoce p^ tote sa vie, per le garnissement de sys moys les services de deux
centz homes darmes per un an a ses Custages and Dispens, and per ses heirs and
successors, per au tiel garnissement les services de cent homes darmes a lour
Custages and Dispens per un an. Et silui, ses heirs ou ses successors garniz
per nous and per noz heirs en la maniere avantdite, de fair les ditz services
fausissent de fair and parfaire mesmes les services, le dit Roi Descoce eit
obligez lui, ses heirs and ses successors, en deux centz mill livres
Desterlinges, a paier a nous and a noz heirs. Et auxint eit grauntez per lui,
ses heirs and ses successors, que sils fausissent de fair and parfaire les
ditz services; and le dit Roi Descoce ses heirs and ses successors, feussent
requis per nous ou per noz heirs de pair le deux centz mill livres, que apres
lespace de trois moys a totes les foitz, and apres ceo que le dit Roi Descoce,
ses heirs ou ses successors, fuissent issint requis per nous and noz heits, and
ils fausissent de fair le dit paiement, que nous and noz heirs peussons
franchement, and sanz countredit du dit Roi Descoce, ses heirs ou ses
successors, entrer le dit Roialme Descoce and totes les Cirees, Villes,
Chasteux, Manoirs, terres and tenements de le dit Roi Descoce, tenir and
gouverner per noz gentz, and tores manieres des issues and profits ent surdantz
lever, cuiller and tenir a nostre oeps, and al oeps de noz heirs, and tanque
nous soiums paiez des ditz deux centz mill livres pleinement.

Et austre ceo le dit Roi Descoce eit obligez lui, ses heirs and ses
successors, de assigner, doner and ^aire liverer a nous deux mill de terre,
eit done, grant and assign a nous le Chastell, la Dille, and la Count de
Berewyk, a la value que serra trove per extent a fair en la maniere avantdite,
and ceo que faudra des di^es deux mill livres de terre, il ferra assigner and
liveter a nous en lieux covenables and greables a nous sur la March Descoce,
and joignauntes a nostre Roialme Dengleterre, a avoir and tenir les ditz
Chastell, Dille and Countee, and les autres terres que le dit Roi nous
assignera a nous and a noz heirs, come annexes a nostre Roiale dignite, and a
nostre Roialme Dengleterre, and suertees del Roiale dignite, and de la Courone
Descoce, a touz jours come plus pleinement est contenuz en les lettres patentes
de le dit Roi Descoce de ceo faites.

Et auxint le dit Roi Descoce, par ses autres lettres patentes, pur autres
certeins causes notees en yeeles de mesme lassent, Nota.
eit grant and oblige lui and ses heirs, a nous and a noz heirs, de venir en
person od tot son poair, and a ses Custages and Despens, ad nostre corpse and
ad les corpse de noz heirs en nostre Roialme Dengleterre, and en noz terres de
Gales and Dirlande avantditz, en eid de nous and de noz heirs, country toutz
ceux que voudront guerrer nous and noz heirs, ou par force noz foitz empescher
es ditz Roialme and terres a totes les foitz que le dit Roi Descoce ou ses
heirs serrount requis parnous and nos heirs del garnissement de sys moys,
ficome endites lettres plus pleinement est contenuz.

Nous voillauntz oustier les enchesons dount debatz guerres ou contees
pourrount sourdre en temps a venir enter nous and noz heirs, and le dit Roi
Descoce and ses heirs, and purveer totes les chooses per queles pees and amor
soient nurriz and meintenuz enter nous, and a noz heirs and noz souzmys dune
part, and le dit Roi Descoce and ses heirs and ses souzmys dautre part, a touz
jours par assent des Prelatz, Countes and Barons, These Agreements Ratifyed by
the Parliam. of Eugland.
and la Communalte de nostre Roialme, assemblez a nostre Parliament somons a
Everwyk le Lundy proschein avaunt la feste de Saint Pierre en Cathedra, l'an de
grace selonc le course del Eglise de Rome mill tresrentz trentisme quart, and
de nostre regne oytisme, grauntoms, relessoms and quiteclamons, pur nous and
pur noz heirs, au dit Roi Descoce and a ses heirs, tot le cleym and le droit
(...) nous aviums ou avoms en le demeigne de tut le remenaunt de ditz Roialme
Descoce and Isles, outre les terres and chooses a nous grauntees and liverees,
and a liverer.

Et voloms and grantoms pur nous and pur noz heirs, que le dit Roi Descoce eit
and tiegne le demeigne de tut le remenaunt des ditz Roialme Descoce and Isles,
come susestdit a lui and ses heirs, entierement sanz autre subjection a nous ou
a noz heirs, pur mesme le demeigne de tut le remenaunt de Roialme Descoee and
des Isles come dessus est dit.

Horpris and sauve a nous and a noz heirs, totes les chooses grauntees a nous
and a noz heirs par le dit Roi Descoce, selone le purport des lettres patentes
le dit Roi Descoce a nous faites. Et eu tesmoignante de quele chose a cestes
noz lettres patentes avoms fait mettre nostre Grant Seal. Don a Everwyk eu
nostre dit Parliament, le premier jour de Marcz, l'an de grace and de nostre
regne susdit.

37. AQuel Lendemain que fuist Mardy, Rot. Parl. 7. R. 2. n. 2 Pronuociatio
Parliamen.
vindrent en parliament sibien les Prelatz, Seigneurs Temporelx, come les
Justices and autres du Conseil nostre dit Seigneur le Roi, en le Chamber de
peinte a Westminster. en presence du Roi mesme appellaz la ejns les Chivaleers des
Countees, les Barons des Cinque Ports, Citizens des Cities, and Burgheys des
Burghs per lour nosms, sicome les Viscounts lour avoient fait retourner, Mouns
Michael de la Poole Chivaler, Chanceller d'Angleterre, per Commandment nostre
Seigneur le Roi, avoit les parols de la pronunciation des causes de la summonce
de cest present Parliament.

Y did vous Messieurs Prelatz and Seigneurs Temporelx, and vous mes
Compaignons les Chivaleers, and outres de la Noble Comune d'Angleterre cy
presentz, deviez eutendre que combien que je ne soi^e dignes mes insufficient
de sce^^ and de tout autre bien touts voies pleust a nostre Seigneur le Roi,
n'adgairs de moy treer en son Chanceller, and sur ceo ore moy ad commandez
qu'ore en vos honouables presences, que vous doie deper suy exposer les causes
de la summonce de son present Parliament, and per tant purra clearment apparoir
que si haut busoigne come ceo est de arler si chargeant matire devant touts and
tiels si Nobles and Sages perfones que vouz estes, ne ferroit mye per
presumption ou surquindrere de moy mesmes einz solement per deux enchesons
reasonables.

L'une est, que longement and communement ad estre accustume deins mesme le
Roialme, que les Chancellers d'Angleterre devant moy si ouut faitz chescun en
son temps pronunciation deper le Roy de semblablez Parlements devant ore tenuz,
and ne verroie si pleust a Dieu que en mon temps defaute y fuist trovez en ma
person ne arrerisement de le stat de mon dit Office, si avaunt come je le
purroie maintenir en tout bien and honor.

La second est, que quoy je assume de present si grant charge sur moy devant
touts les autres Sages cy presentz, car le Roy nostre Seigneur Liege icy
present n'ad commander del fair que nostre saut a fyn force en ce, and en touts
autres ses Commandments tournir au profit de luy and de son Roialme.

Au Terce and issint ne ferroit eest chargeant busoigne en ascun manier si non
constreient per reason du mon Office, and commandment de mon Seigneur Liege
come dit est.

Et Seigneurs and Sires, la principal and primier cause per que nostre dit
Seigneur le Roy ad fait summondre son present Parliament, que touch le Roialme
Descoce, st est express and contenuee en les Briefs a vous faitz, de mesme la
summonce le quel est tiel: Nostre Seigneur le Roy apperceivant coment les
graunts trieves jadys prizes perentree les Roiaumes Dengleterre and Descoce, si
donient per la form dicelles finir and failer a cest prochein feste de la
Purification nostre Dame prochein venant. Et pur tant que home my feust
desgarnir en celle party al dit fyndes trieves pleaust a nostre dit Seigneur
le Roy, denvoir a la March Descoce le puissant and noble Seigneur son
treschier Uncle Oepaigne Duc de Lancaster cy present, aver autres Seigneurs and
Sages du Conseil le Roy, pur affaier and taster si leu purroit honorablement
avoir la pair ov Esquire les Escotes, ou auterment Prorogation dicelles trieus pur
un temps notable. Et si feuront ils en drte March Descoce, and ont avoient
parlance and tretee aver mesmes les Escotz, and finalement ont reportez a
nostre dit Seigneur le Roy relation and lettres del Adversaire Descoce,
contenantes quil envoirer oit suffizantes persons de son Roialme, avec po^ar
and authoritee suffisant deper luy a Londres, pur y treter de mesme la matire
and celle report fait a uostre dit Seigneur le Roy, pur ce que voirs est que
plusors, Nota.
de vouz estes inheritez des plusors Terres and Seigneuries deins le Roialme
d'Angleterre, appurtenautz a les Escotz d'auncientee, and auxi atez eu
challenge plusors terres and tenemeuts deins le Roialme Descoce* don't les
Escotz sont auxint de present inheritez. Et si paix se ferroit perentree les
Roialmes avendront ensi pur ce que plusors Translations des droitz a ycelles
Terres and Seigneuries d'ambez parts, serroieut faitz ou per cas mesmes les
droitz serroient surrendez de ceo and per celle cause and autres matieres
plusors incidente que ne veignont ore a memoire, mais pur especial pur tant
que le Roialme Descoce, si est tielment annexe d'auncientee a la Corone
d'Angleterre, luy quiel de temps Bruyt primer inhabiter d'prelles Roialmes, le
Roialme Descoce avantdir. Et le Roy d'yeelle pur le temps esteant aient este
continualment subjugatz and attendantz au Roy and al Roialme d'Angleterre, on
en possession, ou en challenge, sembloit de veritee que home ne poit sur tiel
haute and chargeante matiere finalment. Nota.
Treter and accorder aillours que en Parliament, ou si Paix ou Trieves ne se y
pnrroient prendre uncores la remedy pnr defendre estre purvenir eu Parliament,
and eins si nule autre matiere eusex davoir Parliament si est ce que a^ dit une
grant cause.

Une autre cause y ad per qne le Roy nostre Seigneur ad fait summoudre cest son
Parliament, est tiel, si einst avenist que Paix ou Trieves ne se preignent point
en Escoce, adonques la pluis perileuse guerre que nous pourroions avoir si est
tantost overt don't est molt grandement a douter per tout fair per temps bone
purveance en contre lour grant Orgoill fauxive and force aiant consideration
comment ils purront chescun jour entree n^e Roialme a terre Serke, sans
impediment de la Mere, ou de Eawe fresh, mes encores non pas soulement de fair
purveiance encoutree les ditz Escotes, eius d'autres partz envers trois de
pluis grandes Roialmes and Pais de Christianity, cest a dire France, Espagne.
Et ore de novell acrew le Pays de Flandres, avec touz jours Adherents and
Alliez, qui sont come inunmerables mortelx enemies a cest Petit Roialme
d'Angleterre, qne Dieu salve, touz partz environez per terre and per mere
envers quex, si Dieu de sa grace ny met remedy, and home de sa party ne face
ceo que en luy est de purveyance en resistance de lour malice vraisemblable est
que le greinder mischeife est hastivement a venir que, Dieu ne veule a cest
petit Roialme que unques mes ny aveuist. Et pur ceo que mischeife semble pur
les dits causes si dure and si proschein si est droit que home se have le pluis
tossed pur ordeiner de bone and effectual remedy quest principalment apres la
grace de Dieu d'avoir de quoy home purra venir a les dispenses que leu y font
mettre que comenca fyn force venir de la Comune defens demand Comune charge,
voirs est and certain que trois des pluis riches Rois Christiens ne purroient
endurer les charges de tantz and tiels guerres sans l'aide de lour Comune. Et
pur tant l'eu faut ordiner coment defendre. Et de quoy l'en avera despenses
necessares. Et quant a defens fair en cell party salvis meillour advis. Il
doit apparoir a chescom Sage que nostre Defens si est d'assailer les Enemies
per de horse nostre Royalme, car tiel assaut le semble estre reasonable,
profitable and honorable primerment si est nostre assaut reasonable per
Encheson que Nos sumes Actours, Demandours, and Challengers ou Appellours. Et
reason voet, que le demandent and challengour assail le defendour. Et non pas
e'converso. Secondment, nostre assault est prositable, car si nous attendismes
lour assaut deins nostre Roialme l'assemblee and chivachee de nostre host
envers lour host ferroit a nostre Roialm, l'un and l'autre est esteant en
perrel a tant de Damage come serroit lost des Enemies horspris prise de
prisoners and arsure des villes and mesons sicome vous Messers and Sires avez
mesmes venez estre fait des patties, deper dela and mieltz est and plus
profitable que nostre ost soit sustenez per les vitailles and Biens des Enemies
que de noz Biens proprez: Tiercement, il est plus honorable d'assailer que
Defender, car communement les Cowards n'assailant mye. Et per eschuer les
mischeifes de lor assaut d nn part ala vilinie que nous aurions si nons que
sumes Demandours and Challengours come dit est per Defaute del pursuit de
nostre droit que nous avous comencez devant ore feusons appellez maintenant ou
tenuz d'autres nos veisines que Dieu ne veulle per Cowards si avaunt come nous
purros eschiur leration per quoy tiel non enporterious car il nous fant fair un
yes deux chooses ou de pursuir nostre droit per fort main and assaut ou de
lesser hountensement. Et Seigneurs and Sires toutes voies vous ne Durez mye
aretter sur la person du Roy nostre Seigneur que cestes importables charges de
les guerres avantditz soient per luy inroduitz, ou per singuleritie de luy
comencez devant son temps combien sachez and Auxi avaunt la honorable Corone d'
Angleterre luy est descenduz per Succession de droit heritage auxy avaunt luy
ont eschuiz avec l'honour and profit de la Corone les chargeantz guerres and
Querreles dycelles davant son temps comencez come dit est.

Item une autre cause de la Somons de cest Parliament est tiel Cestassavoir
D'ordeigner que salve guard de la Paix deins le Royalme and I Obeisance due a
nostre Seignour le Roy de teuts ses Subjects soit mieltz faitz and gardez que
ce n'adestre fait devant cest heure, car le disobeizance and Rebellion que home
ad fait devan^ ore and que sont continuez de jour en autre envers les Petits
Ministers du Roy, come Discountz, Escheatours and les Coillours de les
Subsidies and autres tielz estoient sours and cause principale del Traiturous
Insurrection n'adgairs fait per la Comen Dengleterre deins mesme le Roialme la
quiel primerment estoit rebellion as dits petitz Ministers, and puis^ as
grantes Officers del Roialme and al drain au Roy mesmes combien les avez. Et si
avaunt come Rebellion si estoit and est le sours and comencement de mischief and
Trouboil deins le Roialme si est arremain verroie obeizance au Roy and fes
Ministers foundement de tut paix and quiet en mesme le Roialme sicome
clearment appiert per l'Obeizance que les Gentiles fierent au Roy en dit
insurrection and per cest causes devant ditz. Et per purveyances des remedies
besoignables en celle party and auxint per Ordinance fair per le salve gardes
Terres and Seigniories nostre dit Seigniour le Roy cybien de ceo come de la,
and per Remedy fair and purvoier a touts les leiges le Roy en ceo Parliament
s'ils ou ascun dieux lour vorront complendire de chose que ne poit estre
remediez forsque en Parliament ad nostre dit Seigneur le Roy fait sumondre ce
present Parliament. Nota
Et sil ad auxint ordeignez certains Prelatz, Seigneurs and Justices, Triours,
and certain Clerks de sa Chancellerie Receivours des Petitions come vorra
bailer avaunt en ceo Parliament per mannire come errez lire per le Cleric. de
Parliament en escript que sensuit de mot a mot.

Resceivours des Petitions Dengleterre, Ireland, Gales, and Escoce.
Sire John de Waltham. Sire Richard Ravenser. Sire Thomas Newenham. Sire John
de Freton.
Resceivours des Petitions de Gascoigne, and d'autres Terres and Pais deper de
la.
Sire Piers de Barton. Sire John Bouland. Sire Robert Muskham. Sire John
Scarle.
Et ceux que veullent bailler lours Bills les baillent avaunt per entrecy, and
la feste de Touseintz prochein venantz ycell mesme jour account.

Et sont assigner Triours des Petitions Dengleterre, Irlande, Gales, and Escoce.

Le Roy de Castill, de Leon, Duc de Lancaster. L'Archevesque de Canterbrie.
L'Evesque de Londres. L'Evesque de Wyncestre. L'Evesque de Elye. L'Evesque de
Salisbrie. L'Abbe de Saint Augustine de Canterbrie. L'Abbe de Waltham. Le Count
de Kent, Mar^all Dengleterre. Le Count de Arundell. Le Count de Warr'. Le Count
de Northumbr'. Le Seigneur de Nevill. Mouns. Richard de Scroope. Mouns. Guy de
Bryen. Mouns. Robert Trisilian. Mouns. Robert Belknapp.
Toutz ensemble ou 6 des Prelatz and Seigniors avantditz aumeins appellez a eux
Chanceller, Treasurer, Seneschal and Chamberleyne, and ay les Sergeantz nostre
Seignior le Roy, quant il busoignera and tendront lour place en le Chamber de
Chamberleyn apres de la Chamber de Peint.

Et sont assignez Triours des Petitions de Gascoigne, and d'autres Terres and
Pais de la mere and les Isles.

L'Evesque de Nichole. L'Evesque de Norwiz. L'Evesque de St. David. L'Evesque
de Excestre. L'Evesque de Hereford. L'Abbe de Westminster. L'Abbe de Glastingbrie. Le
Count de Cantebruy. Le Count de Buck. Conestable Dengleterre. Le Count de
Stafford. Le Count de Salisbrie. Le Seignior Fitzwater.
Le Prior de St. Johan Jerusalem en Engleterre.

Mouns. Johan de Cobham de Kent. Mouns. William Skipwith. Mouns. Roger
Fulthorp. Mouns. David Hannemer.
Touz ensemble ou quatre des Prelatz and Seigniors avantditz, appellez a eux
Chanceller, Treasurer, Seneschall, Chamberleyn, and les Sergeants le Roy, quant
il busoignera, and tendront lour place en la Chamber Marcolf.

Et la dite Cedule lue en dite Parliament mesme le Chanceller parlast
autrefoitz. Et dit Seigniors and Sires cy presents, qui aves la summonce de
cest Parliament, le Roy vous comande sur le pain qu'appeint, que aiantz due
consideration a les necessaires matires a vouz ore monstrez, Nota.
and a les importables mischeifes apparantz, and auxint a la grant necessitee
que le Roi ad ore de thresor, and d'avoir pur remedier ycelles mischeifes qu
eux sans grant fuison d'avoir ne poent jamais estre remediez vous Messieurs les
Prelatz and Seigniors Temporelx, per vous mesmes and vous Seigniors de la
Comune, Nota.
per vos mesmes veulliez Comuner diligeaument sur cest matires, and des
remedies busoignables a tout le haste que vouz purrez oustant de tout le
Communement d'autre matire collaterale quelconque en le moien temps, and vos
advisent pris reporter de temps en temps au Roy nostre Seigneur, ou fyu que les
matires necessaires touches and a toucherez soient a bone deliberation
Examinez, Tretez and Exploitez, and toute autre impertinent matire mys aderere
per le temps: Et le Parliament per tant myse a gratiouse and bone fine, que Dieu
grant. Et le Roy vouz comande trestouz, que vous retournez de jour en autre pur
treter and fair ce per quoy vous estes venuz, don't vous avez maintenant vostre
charge sans departer de cest Parliament per voie quelconque si eins ne soit que
vous ent averez especiale congie de nostre dit Seignior le Roy, sur le peril
avantdit.

Item fait a remembrer, que les Seigniours and Comunes en eest Parliament
assemblez, considerez les outrageouses charges que nostre Seignior le Roi port
parmy les guerres overts de toutes partz, and autrement granterent a nostre dit
Seignior le Roy une quinzisme avoir and receiver de eux per les form and
conditions en touts points comprise en un Cedule sur ce fait endentee and
liveree avaunt en Parliament par mesmes les Comunes, and nemye en autre maniere
par voie quelconque, and pria la dite Comune per especiale a nostre dit
Seigneur le Roy, que la dite Cedule quele ils ont fait come celle que pleinmrnt
contient la maniere de lour grant don't mesme la Comune y fist plein declaration
per bouche devant nostre dit Seignior le Roy en plein Parliament, st feust
entree en Roll de Parliament de mot a mot, and en null autre maniere per ascun
voie que le request lour estoit octroiez de quel Cedule issint leveree le
tenure sensuit de mot a mot.

38. Anno 28 E. 1. A Truce being concluded between the English and French, Anno
28 E. 1. A Truce between England and France.
by King Edward's Ambassadors, who therein had dishonourably agreed to include
the Scots; the Ambassadors, at the ensuing Parliament, were sharply rebuked and
corrected, not only by the King himself, the Prelates, and Nobles, but by the
Commons; But to take away exceptions, let the Record speak.

Treugae initae inter Angliae and Franciae Reges per eorum procuratores and
Nuncios, Ex Rot 29 E. 1 in Turri London.
Anno gratiae 1031. pro quibus dicti Nuncii Regis Angliae Reprehensi fuerunt
non solum per ipsum Regem and Praelatos and Nobiles, The Kings, Lords, and
Commons, reprehend the Ambassadors.
sed etiam Communitatem Regni praedicti; pro eo quod promiserunt Regem and
Gentes Scotiae includi in Treugis ex part Francorum Regis, ex part
confederationis prius initae inter Francorum and Scotorum Reges praedictos.

39. Anno 12 E. 2, A War being between England and France, De Treuga per Regem
Angliae illis de Franc. concessa. Rot. Pat. 12. F. 3. pars 1. m. 24.
the Pope sent two Cardinals to conclude a Truce between the two Crowns;
Whereupon King Edward declares, Nos pro eo quod Praelatis and Proceribus ac
Magnatibus Regni nostri necnon Confederatis nostris quorum interest inconsultis
dicte Treugae tunc assentire non poteramus Parliamentum nostrum apud
westmonast. in Crastino purificationis beat Mariae Virginis ultimo preterito
mandaverimus convocari ut tam ipsorum Praelatorum and Procerum, Nota.
ac Communitatum dicti Regni nostri quam Confederatorum nostrorum praedictorum
habere possemus de liberationem quid agendum foret consultius in hac part,
etc. And afterward, the Record says,

Nos Nota.
habita in dicto Parliamento cum Praelatis and Proceribus ac Communitatibus
Regni nostri praedictis necnon cum Nunciis ad nos de dictis confederatis
nostris accedentibus super hiis deliberatione pleniori licet consideratis
qualitate temporis jam currentis and facti circumstantiis nobis and ipsis visum
fuerit periculosum fore multipliciter and dampnosum aliquam cessationem seu
dilationem ulterius concedere, etc.

Had we had left us the Parliament Rolls of H. 3. E. 1. E 2. and some in E. 3.
which are destroyed or lost, Truth (to which all owe a submission) would have
more plainly appeared.

A QUERE touching the Parliament of Scotland.
WHat the Constituent parts of the Commune Consilium or Parliament of Scotland,
Rot. de Anno 29 E. 1. in Tur. London.
was in the time of our King E. 1. near 400 years since, (and why not the same
before) is (amongst other Authorities) proved as I conceive by a grand Record
in the Tower of London, which declares that the League between the Scotch and
French, was ratified and confirmed.

Inter ipsum Francorum Regem em una part and dictum Dominum Johannem de
Balliolo ac Prealatos and Nobiles ac Universitates and Communitates Civitatum
and Villarum dicti Regni Scotiae pro ipsis and eorum Haeredibus and
Successoribus ex altera. Et etiam ad includendum dictum Dominum Johannem and
caeteros omnes terrae Scotiae predictos in Treugis inter dictos Angliae and
Franciae Reges initis proipsis and eorum Heredibus subditis and confederatis ad
fines infrascriptos.

A Query may arise from this Record, If the Tenants in capite only, compounded
and made the Parliament of that Kingdom in former Ages, as some hold. The Query
is this.

Whether all Prelates, Noblemen, The Query.
Universities and Communities of Cities and Towns of Scotland, held of the
Scottish King in capite, Tempore E. 1.

For if they held of any other, or of him otherwise then in capite,

How could the Tenants in capite be the only Members of the Parliament,
according to the exact Enumeration of the constituent Parts mentioned and set
down in this great Record, which tells us, Nobilitas est duplex, Superior and
inferior. Co. 2. Inst. fo. 583 Nobiles minores sunt Equites sive Milites, and
qui vulgo generosi and Gentlemen dicuntur. Camden Brit. f. 123.
that the League was made

1. On the one part between the King of France;

2. On the other part between,

1. John Balliol, who was then King,

2. The Prelates,

3. The Nobles,

4. The Universities and Communities of the Cities and Towns of the Kingdom of
Scotland,

5. And that for themselves,

6. And for their Heirs and Successors.

The late proceedings touching Ship Money declared unlawful, and all Records
and Process concerning the same made void.
WHereas diverse Writs of late time, An. 17 Car. 1. cap. 14. Pultons Stat.
issued under the Oreat Seal of England, commonly called Ship-writs, for the
charging of the Port-Towns, Cities, Boroughs and Counties of this Realm,
respectively, to provide and furnish certain Ships for His Majesty's Service.
And whereas upon the Execution of the same Writs, and returns of Certioraries
thereupon made, and the sending of the same by Mittimus into the Court of
Exchequer, Process has been thence made against sundry Persons pretended to be
charged by way of Contribution, for the making up of certain Sums assessed for
the providing of the said Ships; And in especial, in Easter-Term, in the
thirteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, a Writ
of Scire facias was awarded out of the Court of Exchequer, to the then Sheriff
of Buckinghamshire, against John Hampden Esquire to appear, and show cause why he
would not be charged with a certain Sum so assessed upon him.

Upon whose Appearance and demurer to the Proceedings therein, the Barons of
the Exchequer adjourned the same Case in the Exchequer-Chamber, where it was
solemnly argued diverse days, and at length it was there agreed, by the greater
part of all Justices of the Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas, and of the
Barons of the Exchequer, there assembled, that the said John Hampden should be
charged with the said Sum, so aforesaid assessed on him. The main grounds and
reasons of the said Justices and Barons so agreed, being, Rex Angliae neque per
se aut Ministros suos subsidia aut alia quaevis onera imponit ligeis suis sine
assensu totius Regni sui in Parliamento suo expresso. Fortescue de laudibus
Legum Angliae, cap. 36. page 84. Philip de Commines, lib. 5. cap. 18. (of the
Cabal, or most secret Councels to two French Kings, and a man living about a
Century and half ago) tells us, Null Roy ne Seigneur sur terre ait pouvoir de
mettre un denier sur les Subjets sans ottroie and consentement de ceux qui
doivent payer sinon par Tyranne ou Violence. No King or Potentate upon Earth
(says he)* has power to levy one penny upon the poor Subject without consent
and permission, unless by downright Tyranny and Rapine.


That when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned and the
whole Kingdom in danger* then the King might by writ under the Great Seal of
England, command all the Subjects of this his Kingdom, at their charge to
provide and furnish such manner of Ships with Men, Victuals and Munition and
for such time as the King should think fit, for the defense and safeguard of
the Kingdom from such Danger and Peril; and that by Law the King might compel
the doing thereof, in case of refusal or refractoriness; and that the King is
the sole Judge both of the Danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented
and avoided.

According to which grounds and reasons, all the Justices of King's Bench and
Common Pleas, and the said Barons of the Exchequer, having been formerly
consulted with, by His Majesty's Command, had set their hands to an
extrajudicial Opinion, expressed to the same purpose, which Opinion, with their
Names thereunto, was also by His Majesty's Command, enrolled in the Courts of
Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer, and likewise entered among
the Remembrances of the Court of Star Chamber; And according to the said
agreement of the said Justices and Barons Judgment was given by the Barons of
the Exchequer, That the said John Hampden should be charged with the said Sum
so assessed on him; And whereas some other Actions and Process depend, and have
depended in the said Court of Exchequer, and in some other Courts against other
persons, for the like kind of Charge grounded upon the said Writs commonly
called Ship-Writs, Nota.
All which Writs and Proceedings as aforesaid, were utterly against the Law of
the Land.

Be it therefore Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty and
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, John Bodin in his
Book de Republica, l. 1. cap. 8. de jure Magistratus, fol. 96. A famous Lawyer
and Statesman of the French Nation, who after he had informed his Reader, that
the English are not chargeable by their Princes with Impositions, but by
consent of their three Estates, presently adds, Ego vero caeteris Regibus non
plus in eo genere quam Regibus Anglorum licere puto, cum nemo sit tam improbus
Tyrannus, qui aliena bona deripere sibi fase esse putet. For my part (says he)
it is my Judgment, that no other Prince whatsoever, may lawfully do any more in
this kind than the Kings of England may, seeing there can be no Tyrant so
wicked or impudent as to think, he may justly take away another man's Goods from
him, without his free leave and good will.
and by the Authority of the same, That the said Charge imposed upon the
Subjects, for the providing of Ships, commonly called Ship-meony, and the said
extrajudicial Opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs, and
every of them, and the said Agreement or Opinion of the greater part of the
said Justices and Barons, and the said Judgment given against the said John
Hampden, were, and are contrary to, and against the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, the right of Propeety, the Liberty of the Subjects, former Resolutions
in Parliamrnt, and the Petition of Right made in the the third year of the
Reign of His Majesty that now is.

And it is further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and every the particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of Right,
shall from henceforth be put in Execution accordingly, and shall be firmly and
strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are prayed and
expressed; And that all and every the Records and Remembrances of all and every
the Judgments, Inrollments, Entry and Proceedings as aforesaid, and and every
the Proceedings whatsoever upon, or by pretext or color of any of the said
Writs, commonly called Ship-Writs, and all and every the Dependents on any of
them, shall be deemed and adjudged, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes,
to be utterly void and disanulled, and that all and every the said Judgment,
Inrollments, Entries, Proceedings and Dependents of what kind soever, shall be
vacated and cancelled, in such Manner and Form as Records use to be that are
vacated.

FINIS.
By reason of the have and throng of the Press, the Reader is desired to
correct those
Errata in the Book.
pa. 85. ommons r. Commons, pa* 119: in Mar. for Witnesses r. Members, pa. 137.
for 4 r. 5: p. 185. in Mar. for Sir Cook r. Sir Edward Cook.

Errata in the Appendix.
pa. 3. l. 19. proditoriae r. proditorie, n. 29. in Mar. H 5 r. H. 6. n. 35.
the next p. l. 15. Archeipis r. Archiepo, l. 19. Universitatis r. Vniversitas,
p. 29. l. 4. for sive r. sine, l. 13. praedica vistis r. praedicavistis. p. 30.
l. 15. tacites r. tacit.

The Ancient Right of the Commons of England Asserted, or, a Discourse proving
by Records and the best Historians, that the Commons of England were ever an
Essential Part of Parliament.

By William Petyt of the Inner Temple, Esquire

JANI ANGLORUM Facies Nova: Or, several Monuments of Antiquity touching the
Great Councils of the Kingdom, and the Court of Kings immediate Tenants and
Officers from the first of William the first, to the forty ninth of Henry the
Third, Revived and Cleared.

Wherein, The sense of the Common Council of the Kingdom mentioned in King
John's Charter; and of the Laws Ecclesiastical, or Civil, concerning
Clergy-men's Voting in Capital Cases is submitted to the Judgment of the
Learned.


