AN Appendix TO THE AGREEMENT FOR THE PEOPLE.

Published for the satisfaction of Tender Consciences.

By A. P.

January 24. 1648.

Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.

LONDON, Printed for G. Calvert, and are sold at the East end of Paul's. 1648.

An APPENDIX To the AGREEMENT for the PEOPLE
BEfore I come to speak to the other Paper. I shall answer for my own. Whereas
some may be apt to object against it as needless, thus

1. Master Ashurst a Parliament man of known integrity, and of eminent repute
for Piety, in his Reasons against agreement with a Paper entitled The
Agreement of the Peopl has sufficiently done this work.

2. It is likely that many of those who have stuck to the Parliament, will be
forward of themselves to reject the new Module, when they see it coming from
those heads and hands, by which so many Members of Parliament have been
violently detained from the exercise of that trust wherein they have been
eminently active for the Peoples freedom.

3. It is not imaginable that the business will proceed to subscription,
seeing it is inconsistent with the Declaration of the Honorable House of
Commons, set up by their Command in the Parish meeting-places.

To the first Objection I answer, That though Master Ashurst has handled the
subject both as a Christian, and as a Statesman, with invincible Reasons; Yet
seeing that Price is not so common as it deserves to be, it may be the Lot of
this paper to come to such hands as miss of that, and so this may do some
good, though not so much as the other

To the second I answer, that the new Module coming from men who have done
much good service in another kind; and being penned with so much artifice, it
is probable some men of honest affections may be surprised into a subscription,
if they be not forewarned of the danger; for their sakes therefore have I
undertaken this.

To the third I answer, the provocations of this backsliding Kingdom are so
great, that we know not how far Providence may (in Gods just judgment,)
permit things to be swayed contrary to our apprehensions, as we have seen by
late and unexpected experience; it will therefore be wisdom to fear the
worst, and provide a timely remedy, which I desire to do in few words; not
meddling with those circumstances which make the new Module practicable, nor
many things which are material in it; my purpose not being to give an ample
answer, but to put in a sufficient caution against it; by showing that the main
things in it, and those that seem to be most intended by it, are such as (so
far as I can see, having compared them with the Law and the Testimony,)
cannot be subscribed unto by most of the Parliaments Partakers without Perjury;
nor by any subject of this Kingdom without sin. The things most considerable
in that agreement are two.

1. The alteration of the Civil Government from King, Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, to new Representees in stead of a Parliament.

2. The vast Toleration of heresy, schism, idolatry, and other sins
immediately against the God of glory. Upon these two branches I shall proceed.

That the new Module cannot be subscribed by most of the Parliaments friends
without Perjury, I argue thus. For any men to subscribe to things contrary to
their own Oaths, is perjury; but most of all the Parliaments friends have
taken the solemn League and Covenant, wherein they have sworn constantly to
endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest
uniformity in Religion and Form of Church-Governement, and to endeavor the
extirpation of superstition, heresy, schism, and to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, and the Kings Majesty's Authority, that the
world may bear witness with their consciences of their loyalty, and that they
have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just Power, and that
they shall with all faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all such as shall
be evil instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the
King from his people, or one Kingdom from another, that they may be brought to
condign punishment: therefore it is perjury for most of the Parliaments
friends to subscribe to the new Agreement, which gives Toleration to
superstition, heresy and schism, and which takes away Rights and Privileges
of the Parliament, and the Kings Authority, and divides the King from his
people, and obstructs uniformity in Religion and Form of Church Government,
and is likely to divide this Kingdom from one or both of the other. The Oath
of Allegiance and the Protestation which many of them also have taken, obliges
them expressly to some of the forementioned particulars, which are contrary to
the new Agreement. Let me therefore beseech all those which have taken either
the Oath of Allegiance, or the Protestation, or the Covenant in the fear of
God, to consider these texts of Scripture, Psalm. 15.1, 4. Lord, who shall dwell
in thy holy hill? he that swears to his own hurt and changes not, Eccles.
8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the
Oath of God, Ezekiel. 17.19. Thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely mine Oath
that he has despised and the Covenant that he has broken, even it will I
recompense upon his own head. This I hope will be sufficient to make every one
that fears an Oath, to take heed how he give it under his hand, that he is
resolved to break his Covenant.

Now in the next place I shall hold forth unto you that the new Agreement
cannot be subscribed by any Subject of this Kingdom without finne; in regard
of the two chief branches above mentioned, viz. The alteration of the Civil
Government, and the Toleration about matters of Religion.

Concerning the Civil part of the Agreement, I argue thus; It is sinful in any
subject to subscribe to that which is contrary to the duty of a subject; but to
alter the supreme Government of a State, is contrary to the duty of a Subject;
therefore it is finfull in any Subject to subscribe to alter the Supreme
Government. That it is contrary to the duty of a Subject to go about to alter
the Supreme Government of a Kingdom wherein he is a Subject, is evident in
many Scriptures, whereof I shall here produce a few, Prove. 24.21, 22. Fear
thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change,
for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?
Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher-powers, for there is
no power but of God, the Powers that be are of God; whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they thas resist
receive to themselves damnation, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves unto every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him.

Concerning the other branch in the Agreement about Religion; wherein there is
protection made for idolatry, heresy, and other the like abominations, I argue
thus; That whereby Provision is made to protect idolatry, heresy, or any the
like abominations is sinful; but by subscribing to the new Agreement about
Religion, Provision is made to protect idolatry, heresy, and the like
abominations: therefore subscribing to the new Agreement about Religion is
sinful. That to make Provision to protect idolatry, heresy, or any the like
abomination, is sinful, the Scripture abundantly shows; yet I shall now
produce only two or three witnesses, Zech. 13.2, 3. it shall come to pass in
that day, says the Lord of Hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols
out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will cause the
Prophets and the unclean Spirit to pass out of the land; and it shall come to
pass that when any shall yet prophecy, then his father and mother that
begat-him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live, for thou prophesiest lies
in the name of the Lord, and his father and his mother that beg at him, shall
thrust him through when he prophesies, Tit. 1.10, 11. there are many
deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, Rev. 2.20. I have a few things against thee,
because thou suffer that woman Iezebel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants, to eat things sacrificed to
idols.

Having thus showed you my grounds against subscribing this new Agreement; I
shall proceed to answer an Objection or Querie, and remove a double temptation.

The Objection which a democraticall spirit is apt to forge, runs thus. If that
Oath which we have taken, for the maintaining of the Parliaments Privileges,
and the King. Authority be to maintain an usurped power, and if we be
persuaded that the supreme power is seated in our selves, what hurt would it be
to lay aside our Covenant?

I answer, though this supposition be made up of fancy, rather then reality:
yet if there were as much truth in the supposition, as there is confidence in
some men about it: yet by no means may such an Oath or Covenant be broken;
though in humane probability, the flourishing or freedom of a Kingdom might
be attained thereby; and for this case I shall give you a parallel, Ezekiel.
17.12, 13, 14, 15. the King of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and has taken the
King thereof, and the Princes thereof, and has led them with him to Babylon,
and has taken of the Kings seed and made a Covenant with him, and has taken
an Oath of him, he has also taken the mighty of the land, that the Kingdom
might be base, that it might not lift up it self, but that by keeping of his
Covenant it might stand; but he rebelled against him in sending his
Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much People: shall
he prosper, shall he escape that death such things? or shall he break the
Covenant and be delivered?

The temptation to subscription, from this consideration, that this new Module
is commended to the People from an armed hand, though not in an armed way; may
be a snare two ways. 1. By way of humane confidence. 2. By way of humane fear.
1. Some who otherwise would not be induced to subscribe, may be allured by
thinking that if they do subscribe they shall have the more special protection
from the Army: 2. Some who otherwise could not be persuaded to subscribe, may
be wrought upon by fancying, that if they do not subscribe, they may be liable
to the displeasure of those, who have power to do them an ill turn. These
humane temptations might be answered by humane considerations; but I wave them;
having some pieces of armor of proof, and weapons that are not carnal, but
mighty through God; which I shall commend to every poor soul, that may be
assaulted with either of the forementioned temptations.

And first to that temptation of humane confidence, I shall return these
Scripture meditations, Isa. 31.3. Now the Egyptians are men and not God, and
their horses flesh and not spirit; when the Lord shall stretch out his hand,
both be that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and
they all shall fall together, Ezekiel. 17.17, 18. neither shall Pharaoh with his
mighty Army, and great company make for him in the war, by casting up mounts
and building up forts to cut off many Persons, Seeing he despised the Oath by
breaking the Covenant, (when lo he had given his hand,) and has done all these
things, he shall not escape.

To that other temptation of humane fear, I shall return these Scripture
considerations, Isa. 51.12, 13. I even I am he that comfort you; who art
thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of
man that shall be made as grass? and forgets the Lord thy Maker, that has
stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and have
feared continually every day because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he
were ready to destroy, and where is he fury of the Oppressor? Heb. 1.3.5, 6.
he has said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, so that we may boldly
say the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me.

Christian Reader, if by what thou have read, thou have gained any Resolution,
I have my aim; however I have discharged my conscience.

FINIS.

