NEEDFUL COUNSEL FOR Lukewarm Christians: BEING A CONSIDERATION OF Some part of
the Message sent to the ANGEL OF THE CHURCH in LAODICEA.

By CHARLES PHELPES, a Servant of Jesus Christ, in the Gospel of the Grace of
God to Mankind.

PROVE. 19. 20, 21. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be
wise in thy latter end.

There are many devices in a man's heart: nevertheless, the counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Southwood at the Starr, next to Sergeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane. 1672.

TO THE READER.
THough this Epistle (a part whereof is spoken to in the ensuing Treatise) was
directly and expressly sent to the Angel and Church in Laodicea; yet it also (as
well as the rest of the Messages, or Epistles) was spoken by the holy Spirit
unto the Churches in general; and therefore, every one that has an ear is
exhorted and called upon to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. Rev.
3. 22. And it is therefore of concernment for others, for all that have
received the Word of the beginning of Christ, to mind and consider what is
reproved and faulted in this Angel and Church; what is threatened to them; and
the counsel given by the Amen, to cure their distemper, and prevent the
judgment. --

It is possible that other Angels and Churches, and particular persons, who
have formerly been called to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
and who have received the word of God, as it is in truth the word of God, may
also suffer a decay of those things that have been wrought in them by the
glorious Gospel, and grow remiss, heartless, and indifferent, as it fared with
this Angel and Church, and as our Savior has premonished, that because
iniquity should abound, the love of many would wax cold. Matt. 24. 12. And
especially toward the time of the end he has foretold us there would be a
general security in such as are of his Churches and people, in such as profess
to wait for and attend his coming, as he signifies in that parable of his
mentioned. Matt. 25. 1-5. In which he says, not as in many other Parables, The
kingdom of Heaven is like, etc. But, Then shall the kingdom of Heaven be
likened (by those therein) unto Ten Virgins, -- which went forth to meet the
Bridegroom -- And while the Bridegroom tarried they all slumbred and slept:
They did not with zeal and fervency hear Christ, watching daily at at his
Gates, waiting at the posts of his doors, that they might find him, as his
grace instructs, and is operating in those that have it, and yield up
themselves to it. Prove. 8. 34. 35. But in too great a measure were grown
slothful, heartless, and secure: And surely this is written and recorded for
our admonition and warning, upon whom the ends of the world are come, to the
intent we might give such earnest and diligent heed to the things we have
heard, the word of Christ, which is as a fire, that our hearts might burn
within us, and be inflamed with love to him, and filled with such an high
prizing of him, and the unsearchable riches of him, as to sell and forgo all we
have for the excellency of him and them, that we may gain him, and be found in
him. Luke 24. 26, 27, 32. Jer. 23. 29. --

Seeing then that it is possible, and may so come to pass, that others, yea any
who have received the grace of God, may become Lukewarm, and neither hot, nor
cold, and may go backward and not forward. Jer. 7. 24. If they abid not in
Christ Jesus as they have received him; it is good and needful for us all to
examine our selves in the light of the Lord, and search our hearts and ways,
that we may see and discern what manner of persons we are; and what discovery
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ makes of us: Let us not rest
contented in any good thoughts we may have of our selves; For, not he that
commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends. 2 Cor. 10. 18.
Nor let us conclude that we are in a good condition, because others may think
well, and speak highly of us, that are our brethren and companions, for a man
may have a name among the Churches that he lives, and yet be dead. Rev. ^. ^.
But let every man prove, and approve his own work, and then shall he have his
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, not in another's good thought
or opinion of him. Gal. 6. 4. We may have run well in former times, we may have
run from all our own things unto Christ, and followed him through good report,
and bad report; and yet now be let and hindered from that fervent demeanor
and exercise our selves. Gal. 5. 7, 8. We may have been called unto Christ, and
called according to purpose, and yet again be removed from him that called us
into the grace of Christ. Gal. 1. 6. We may have gone after him in the
Wilderness, as it were, and yet now go far from him, and walk after vanity, and
become vain, and so grieve him, and his good spirit, by whom we have been
called to the knowledge of the truth. Jer. 2. 2-5. Let us not then be high
minded but fear Let us no^ say in^^ur hearts, our mountain is so settled that we
can never be moved; our hearts have been and are so upright with him, and close
cleaving to him, that we cannot depart from him; But let him that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10. 12. And come we to the light, that
our selves, and deeds may be made manifest and discovered. Joh. 3. 20, 21. That
if this loathsome iniquity of Lukewarmness be with us, we may cleanse our
selves therefrom, lest we provoke him, who is slow to anger, to abhor us, and
to sp(...) out of his mouth.

And be we well assured of this, that if once we entertain, and retain such
high and unsober thoughts of our selves, and of our seize and enjoyments,
as to say, We are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
so shut the door upon and against Christ Jesus; and suffer him to stand and
knock thereas; we shall but deceive our selves, if we imagine we are free from
this nauseous distemper; we may then be confident that blindness has happened
to us in some, yea in a great measure; and may upon sure grounds judge and
conclude our selves to be like to this Angel and Church, and fear he will deal
with us as he threatens to do to these, if we continue and persist in our high
thoughts of our selves; For Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty
Spirit before a fall. Prove. 16. 18. He will save the afflicted humbled people,
those who are poor in spirit, who have nothing to glory in before God, but the
Lord Jesus Christ, and him crucified; But his eyes are upon the haughty, that
he may bring them down. 2 Some. 22. 28. 1 Cor. 1. 29-31. Oh! Let us not lift up
our selves in our doings, knowledge, seize; for we have cause sufficient
to take shame to our selves that we are so barren and unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Nor let us think our selves, or
others to be any whit the better because of our thinking, or speaking highly of
our selves; but rather suspect our selves, and know, that this is an evidence,
and cause of our Lukewarmness: We may say, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we, and yet steal from, and defraud
others, and commit adultery, etc. Jer. 7. 4-10. We may boast that our hearts
are right, and cry, come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts, and depart from,
and destroy inferior Idols, and yet serve Golden ones. 2 Kings 10. 15, 16, 25.
29. We may speak one to another, and say, come I pray you, and hear what is the
word that comes forth out of the mouth of the Lord; and may come unto his
Servants and Prophets as the people comes, and sit before them as God's
people, and hear his words; and the word of his servants may be unto us as a
very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
Instrument; and yet we may not do what we hear, but our hearts may go after our
covetousness. Ezekiel. 33. 30-32. We may come into God's presence, and stand and
pray with our selves. (as being so holy that others may not come near us) God,
We thank thee we are not like other men; and yet those we separate from, may be
justified rather then we. Luke 18. 11-14. We may know we have knowledge, and
yet know nothing as we ought to know. 1 Cor. 8. 1-3. We may boast that we are
rich, and full; and yet be so carnal that God's servants cannot speak to us as
unto spiritual ones. 1 Cor. 4. 8. with chap. 3. 1-5. We may bestow all our
goods to feed the poor, and give our bodies to be burned, and yet not have
charity, and so it may profit us nothing. 1 Cor. 13. 3. We may plead that we
have prophesied in Christ's name, and in his name have cost out Devils, and in
his name done many wonderful works; and yet not be built upon the rock, which
is Christ, and so be rejected in conclusion. Matt. 7. 22-27. We may glory in
our building of Temples for God, and yet forget our maker; and count the great
things of his Law strange things to us. Isa 66. 1, 2, 3. Hos 8. 12-14. Oh! take
we heed of seeking our own glory, or boasting of our selves, or of any of our
own things before him; though we may be in any measure perfect, or so
graciously reputed, yet let us not know our own souls thereby. Job 9. 20, 21.
Though we be righteous, yet let us not lift up our heads. Job 10. 15. Though we
know nothing by our selves, yet know we, we are not thereby justified. 1 Cor.
4. 4. And be we well assured, that when we cry we are full, and come not
continually unto Christ as the only foundation of faith* fountain of grace and
truth, bread of life, god tried in the fire, robe of righteousness; great and
fundamental ^itness and evidence of God's love, we are lukewarm, and neither
cold nor hot, and deserve to be spued out of his mouth. --

And though in a right examining our selves in the glass of the perfect law of
liberty, we perceive it to be thus with us; and that we deserve to be abhorred
of him, and to be put away as dross; and he is rebuking and chastening us; yet
notwithstanding consider we, as many as he loves, he rebukes and chasteneth,
that we may not be discouraged, or fai^t in our sighing; but rather let us
anoint our eyes with eye salve that we may see the excellency of Jesus, of his
Cross, and of what he has thereby effected, and obtained into himself, and is
become; and the vanity and unprofitableness of all other things in comparison
of him, that we may be zealous, and h^t in spirit and demeanor, and so sake
all we have, that we may win him, and be made partakers of him, and of those
unsearchable and durable riches, and that everlasting righteousness in him, for
that is his end in all his counsels, calls, and admonitions; yea and in all his
rebukes and chastisements, while it is the day of his grace and patience: It is
in love to our souls that he does rebuke us and order afflictions to us, not
for his pleasure, but for (...) that we might be partake s of his holiness Heb.
12. 9-11. Joh. 5. 42-45. Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the
feeble knees, and make strait paths for our feet, and he will forgive our sins,
and turn again, and have compassion on us, for he is gracious, and ready to
repent him of the evil threatened by him, and deserved by us. Heb. 12. 10. 13.
Joel 2. 1.-12. 13. --

I shall add no more here (having spoken so largely in the following Treatise)
but to desire thee to consider what is said; and what agrees with the
Testimony of Christ, receive, and hold fast; and what swerveth therefrom
refuse and reject: And the Lord give us an understanding in all things; and
help us so heartily to embrace and retain the word of truth, that though now we
see not Christ we may love him above all, and believing in him, may rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory; receiving the end of our faith, even
the salvation of our souls, so he desires who is

thy Servant, in, and for the Lord Charles Phelpes.
Lyn. Sep. 15. 1671.
Needful Counsel, etc.
Rev. 3. 18. I Counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the Fire that thou
may be Rich; and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the
shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve,
that thou may see.
THE Words, we see, are a gracious, needful, and instructive Counsel given to
the Angel of the Church of Laodicea: In which let us consider.

1. The Person that counselleth[1] 2. The Person or Persons counseled [thee]
3. The counsel it self [I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire,
etc.]
1. The person counselling [1] Who is that? He is described to us verse. 14. and
gives such a descritpion of himself as in which he gives us to understand,
that he is excellent and comely for the escape of such as have fallen away by
their iniquities, and thereby brought themselves into a loathsome condition;
and deserve, and are threatened to be cast forth as abominable branches
persisting therein; though such have destroyed themselves, yet in him is help,
salvation, and recovery for them. --

Verse. 14. These things says the Amen] to wit, he in whom all the promises of
God are yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Ratified, Confirmed, Sealed, and so made
sure, even by his precious blood, which is the blood of the New Testament, and
everlasting Covenant, Matt. 26. 28. Heb. 10. 29. and 13. 20. and 9. 15, 16.
Those great and precious promises appertaining to Life and godliness, yea to
this life, and that to come, are not only assured by the word of God, and
confirmed by his Oath, which yet are two immutable things, in which it is
impossible for God to lie, and therefore might quicken and encourage lukewarm
ones to flee for refuge to lay hold on that hope set before them; but actually
made firm by the blood of the Testatour, who is also in the virtue thereof
raised, and as the forerunner entered into Heaven, and is the Mediator of the
New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions
under the first Testament, they which are called may receive the promise of the
eternal Inheritance: He Mediateth, and makes Intercession for the taking away
the iniquities of those that come to God by him; and that the contents of that
Covenant may be dispensed to them according to their needs and capacities: God
has promised, and Christ has actually said, and is, the Amen to them. Rev. 1.
18. Heb. 8. 6. and 9. 15. It may seem, in that Jesus Christ does first describe
himself by this title of the Amen, that these likewarme ones did not keep in
believing remembrance the promises, and the firmeness, and immutability of
them, and certainty of their performance according to the tenor of them, being
ratified by such precious blood, and ascertained by such a faithful and true
witness; and therefore they grew sluggish, remiss, and indifferent, and there
was a great abatement of their former fervency, either fearing they should be
left in sufferings, or not provided for, or dispensed unto according to their
wants; and therefore to recover them, he tells them his name is the Amen: The
consideration hereof is powerful to stir up to diligence, and to recover us
from our decays, to cause us that we shall not be slothful, but followers,
diligent followers, of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises. Heb. 6. 10, 20. To strengthen us to hold fast the profession of our
faith without wavering; and to consider one another to provoke to love and good
works, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together. Heb. 10. 22, 25. To
engage us to come out from amongst men, and to be separate, and not touch the
unclean thing, but to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. and 7.
1. if these exceeding great and precious promises given to the Apostles to
minister, and ministered by them in, and with the glorious Gospel be in us,
received and entertained by us, and abound; if they be suffered to dwell richly
in us, and to have their perfect work, so as we limit them not, nor hold them
in unrighteousness, they make us that we shall not be idle, or unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: They will provoke us to
flee from, and escape the corruption that is in the world through lust; and
besides, giving all diligence thereto, they will enable and stir us up to add
to our faith virtue (courage, zeal, resolution of spirit, magnanimity, to be as
bold as lions) and to virtue, knowledge (that we may use our fervor and zeal
aright, and that not about meat, and drink, and days, and places, and gestures,
in which the kingdom of God consists not; but in contending earnestly for
the faith once delivered to the saints) and to knowledge temperance (to have
sober thoughts of our selves, of our knowledge, virtue, parts, gifts,
seize; and to be temperate in our use of, and exercise about the things
of this world, in which there may be excess; and in our joys and griefs
thereabout) and to temperance, patience (patiently continuing in well doing, in
faith, in virtue, in knowledge, in temperance; etc. Patiently enduring whatever
reproaches and persecutions we may meet with in walking in Christ, and in the
exercise of those efficacies of his grace; and resting in the Lord, and waiting
patiently for him) and to patience, godliness (worshipping him in the spirit,
and rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and having no confidence in the flesh; and
imitating, and following him as dear children according to the light, and
instructions of his grace) and to godliness, brotherly kindness (loving the
brethren with delightful and peculiar manner of love, not pretending we are
right worshippers of God, while we are without brotherly kindness to those
borne of him; For every one that loves him that begat, loves them also that
are begotten of him: For if a man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he
is a liar; for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen and to brotherly kindness, charity (that free
manner of love which is exercised toward others, not because of somewhat
lovely and amiable in them, but from an higher reason, and motive, even from
the constraining operation of the love of God in Christ, and thence to have
fervent charity among our selves, and to love all men) To these things will
these precious promises, confirmed by such precious blood, enliven, and quicken
us, if they be suffered to dwell richly in us; for hereby we shall be made
partakers of the Divine nature, in union and fellowship with it, interest in
it, usefulness of it, and conformity to it. 2 Pet. 1. 4, 9. Oh exercise we our
selves to godliness (to Christ, who is the root and fundation of godliness) for
it is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and
of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8. with chapt. 3. 16. Oh! how effectual
were the promises with the Patriarchs in former times (when they were not so
confirmed as now) to make them forsake their Country, Kindred, and Fathers
house; To confess themselves strangers and pilgrims on the earth, etc. These
believed caused Abraham, the Father of the faithful, not to consider his own
body now dead, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's Womb -- but was strong in
faith, giving glory to God; and being fully persuaded that what God had
promised he was able also to perform; and therefore it was imputed to him for
righteousness: Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed
to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him who
has performed the promise made to the fathers, in raising Christ from the
dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification. Genesis 12. 1, 3. Heb. 11. 13, 16. Romans 4. 16, 25. with Act. 13.
32, 33. Heb. 11. 17, 19. The Apostle Paul, to recover the Galatians from their
wanderings, sets before them that Christ is the Amen, to him the promises are
made, and in him confirmed, and with him assured to those that receive him, so
as in being Christ's they are Abraham's seed, and Heits according to promise.
Gal. 3. 16, 17, 29. and 4. 28. and 5. 1. And so here, Christ declares himself
to be the Amen, To cure these of that Lukewarmeness they were polluted with;
and assures them, that in opening, and giving entertainment to him, he would
come to them, and sup with them, and they with him. And that he that overcomes
should sit with him on his Throne. Rev. 3. 14, 20, 21. Oh were this considered
by us, that God has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how would this make us confident that with him he will freely give us all
things also! How would this cause us to mount up with wings as Eagles, to run
and not be weary, to walk and not faint; and encourage and engage us to listen
to his counsel whom God has given for a Covenant to the people? For the Lord
God is a Sun and Shield, and will give Grace and Glory; and no good thing will
he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Romans 8. 32. Psalm. 84. 10, 12.

The Faithful and True Witness.] This may be an explication of the Amen, and
show us what is further meant by, and contained in that expression.

These two words [Faithful and True] may mean one and the same thing; or we may
say,

He is the faithful Witness in that work whereto the Father appointed him;
hence the Apostle instructs the Holy Brethren to consider the Apostle and
High Priest of our profession, who was faithful to him that appointed him,
namely, in that hard and difficult work of humbling himself, and becoming
obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, Heb. 2. 9, 18. and 3. 1, 2. He
is in his Cross a faithful witness of the greatness and sincerity of the
fathers affection to us. Isa. 55. 3, 4. Who is meant by the faithful Witness
here spoken of, may be plainly seen, and wherein is he so firstly and
fundamentally, Rev. 1. 5. Jesus Christ, the faithful Witness, and the first
begotten of the dead. And so,

1. As he died for our sins, by way of propitiation, and as the Peace maker, so
he is a faithful witness of the fathers love, and that he is not willing any
should perish; but that all should come to Repentance: He is the great sign,
and undoubted evidence of the heat and ardency of Gods love toward us poor
sinners, even toward every poor sinful Creature of Mankind, in that he, by the
Grace of God, tasted death for every man: in this was manifested the love of
God toward us; because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him; herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 9,
10. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. John 3.
16. This is the great sign of Gods love to us, and it is an evil and adulterous
thing to seek after any other, Mat. 12 39. The Jews require a sign, but we
Preach Christ crucified, Christ the power of God, the great witness and
manifestation of his power and goodness toward us. 1 Cor. 1. 22, 24. and he is
the faithful witness therein of the truth and faithfulness of the father in
performing his promises according to the tenor of them; for he that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely
give us all things also! Isa. 55. 3, 4. Romans 8. 32. Yea in what he has
suffered he is the faithful witness also of the freeness and ardency of his own
love toward us; his love was so fervent, as that many Waters could not quench
it, nor could the Floods drown it; it was strong as, yea, stronger then Death;
such his Grace, that he laid down his life for us, he died for all: and such
the preciousness of his Blood, that in the virtue thereof he is raised again,
has purged away our sins, made peace, slain the enmity, broken down the middle
wall of partition between God and Mankind, taken out of the way all that was in
it contrary to us, abolished death, and destroyed him that had the power of
death; that is, the Devil, and obtained into himself all Spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly things, and confirmed a new Testament, and everlasting Covenant. Oh
what a faithful witness is he of the greatness and fervency of his own and his
fathers love! and how powerful therefore is the view of him in his Cross, to
cure us of our lukewarmness! do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? is he not thy father that has bought thee? Oh how does this love
constrain us to love him, and to cleave to him with full purpose, to give him
our hearts, and let our Eyes observe his ways? and how does this encourage and
imbolden us to follow him fully, who has delivered us from our enemies, that
we might serve him without fear, and who is become the treasury of all Gods
fullness, that we might come with boldness to the Throne of his Grace, and hold
fast our profession? Yea, and to return to him when we have fallen by our
iniquities; for herein he shows us he has no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, and so not in the death and destruction of poor, wretched,
miserable, blind, naked, lukewarm ones: Oh fear not to come unto, and walk
before him, and be perfect, let not your hands be slack; by this ye are saved,
if ye keep in memory what at first was declared unto you, unless ye believe in
vain; viz. That Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and was
buried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures, 1
Cor. 15. 2. 4. O foolish Galatians (says the Apostle) who has bewitched you,
that ye should not obey the Truth (that ye should not continue in tunning well,
but grow remiss) before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth
crucified among you, Gal. 3. 1. with Chap. 5. 7. --

2. The faithful Witness and Martyr, as a Peace-preacher, who laid down his
life in Testimony to the Truth of that Gospel which he received from his
father, and declared to us: on this account he gave his back to the smiters,
and his Cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, he hid not his face from
shame and spitting, he set his face as a flint to endure whatever afflictions,
reproaches, persecutions, he might undergo for the truth, for which purpose he
was born, and to which end he came into the world, that he might bear witness
to the truth, John 18. 37. and to this he did bear witness to the death, and
sealed to the truth of that Gospel with his Blood; This the Apostle sets
before Timothy to encourage him to fight the good fight of faith, that Jesus
Christ witnessed a good confessiom before Pontius Pilate when he knew what
things he should suffer on that account, 1 Timothy 6. 12, 14. Away with this
luke-warmness, and let us come unto, and follow him whithersoever he goes,
enduring hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, who profess him to be our
Captain, the Captain of our Salvation, he has set us an example that we should
follow his steps, 2 Timothy 2. 1, 3, 8. The Apostle sets before us his being a
faithful Witness in both respects, viz. as a Peace maker and Peace-preacher, to
provoke us to fervency of Spirit, and demeanor: Let us, says he, (not
faintly, or fearfully go, but) run (and that not for a season only, but) with
Patience, the race set before us (as for our lives, and for a Crown, an
incorruptible Crown) looking unto Jesus, -- Who for the joy set before him
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is now set down on the right hand
of the Throne of God: For consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds, Heb: 12.
1, 3. --

And the true Witness] in his Testimony, in which he has declared what he has
done and the fathers love in him, and that he is the Amen, he is the truth it
self, and his word is the word of truth, Prove. 8. 6, 8. Psalm. 119. 160. 1 John
5. 20. The true light now shines, 1 John 2. 8. His word was always true, but
the truth of it is now made more apparent in the preaching of the Gospel
according to the revelation of the Mystery; his record is true concerning all
things; there is no lie of it; but he is a true witness in what he speaks of
God the Fatheir, himself, the work of the Spirit, Mankind, sin, righteousness,
judgment, life, death, and of what he is become, and has for us, Gold tried
in the fire, white raiment; and of the lothsomness of this luke-warmness to
him; these things he says, Who is holy, he who is true, Rev. 3. 7. He is true
and worthy to be listened unto, and believed by us in all his declarations,
promises, discoveries, requirings, instructions, reproofs, threats, etc. a
faithful and true witness, who will not lie, one who is faithful to the
interest of our Souls, Prove. 14. 5. a true Witness, who delivers Souls from
their transgressions, wanderings, luke-warmnesses, who has power to deliver
from sin, Satan, fears, evils, dangers, yea from the wrath to come; and is able
to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, Prove. 14. 25. 1 These. 1. 10.
Heb. 7. 25. Oh! hear the instruction, and hearken to the Counsel of this true
Witness, that you may be delivered; he that hearkeneth to Counsel is wise, that
you may be zealous and repent. --

The beginning of the Creation of God] He is before all things, and by him all
things consist, Col. 1. 17, 18. the beginning both of the first and old
Creation, and that both. --

1. In giving a being to it, when it fore-had none, it was Gods Creation, but
made by him; God Created all things by Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 3. 9. By him were all
things created visible and invisible; -- All things were created by him and for
him, Col. 1. 16. he is the creator of the ends of the Earth that sainteth not,
neither is weary, there is no searching of his understanding; he knows how,
and has understanding to help us, when we are faint, dead, dry, decaying, He
gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he incr^aseth
strength, Isa 40. 27, 29. Oh Lord God, says the Prophet, Behold thou have made
the Heaven and the Earth by thy great power, and stretched out Arm, and there
is nothing too hard for thee, Jer. 32. 17. What cannot he do that created all
things? (and All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing
made that was made, John 1. 1. 3.) he can restore heat and health, and heal us
of our wounds, and cure our loathsome distempers, when our bruise is incurable,
and wound grievous, and we have no healing Medicines, nor is there any to plead
our cause, that we may be bound up, Jer. 30. 12, 17.

2. And He is the maker of the Creation of God, when it was marred by man's
seeking out foolish inventions: The Earth and all the inhabitants thereof were
dissolved, he bears up the Pillars thereof. Psalm. 75. 3. He upholdeth all
things by the word of his power. Heb. 1. 3. the world was made by him,
preserved from perishing, and upheld when it was marred, spoiled, and dissolved
by the iniquity of Mankind. John 1. 10. and therefore, though you have
destroyed your selves, and deserved to be rejected, and cast off, and out from
his presence and favor for ever; yet in him is your help, neither is there
Salvation in any other. Acts 4. 12. Oh, turn again unto him from whom you have
revolted; He has made peace by the Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all
things to himself. Col. 1. 20.

And he is the beginning of the new Creation, through, and by means of his
personal abasement and sufferings, the Captain of our Salvation was made
perfect through sufferings. Heb. 2. 10. In him there is a complete Creation, he
is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he might
have the Preeminence; for it pleased the father that in him all the fullness
should dwell. Col. 1. 18, 19. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and in him we are complete (completely prepared for, and furnished with
all furniture) who is the head of all Principality and Power. Col. 2. 9, 10. In
him our Nature is restored again into the Image of God, after a more glorious
manner then ever it was made in the first public man, and so there is in him a
complete and perfect provision of all things that may tend to our being brought
back to God in our own persons, and so made new Creatures, as every one is that
is in him; because he died for all, and rose again. Jam. 3. 9 Ephesians. 2. 10. 2
Cor. 5. 14, 17. there is in him justification and acquittance from the guilt of
our first sin and sinfulness; So as all that have sinned, and are come short of
the Glory of God, are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus. Romans 4 25. and 3. 23, 24. and he has obtained
forgiveness of our personal sins, gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also,
healing of our diseases, decays deadnesses: Gold to enrich poor, wretched
miserable ones; White Raiment to cover our shameful nakedness, eye salve to
cure our blindness, and dimsightedness, Spirit to quicken and inliven us, and
to put heat into, and recover lukewarm ones: The last Adam was made a
quickening Spirit, to quicken those that are dead in trespasses and sins. 1
Cor. 15. 45. there is in him perfection for every man. Col. 1. 28. he has by
his Blood obtained eternal redemption, forgiveness of our sins for ever, by
that one offering of his body offered once for all, and the recovery of our
loss, even of all the Glory of God, of which we came short by sinning against
God, he has restored that which he took not away. Heb. 9. 12. so as that in
him there is helpfulness and Salvation for us, when we have rendered our selves
vile, and brought our selves into a loathsome condition; he is the fountain of
life, of living waters, of Grace and truth, the treasury and storehouse of all
Gods fullness for us, that he may dispense thereof to us according to our
various wants and capacities, and that of his fullness we may receive, and Grace
for Grace: indeed he is the beginning and end of this new Creation, the Author
and finisher of the faith, whose hands have laid the foundation, and whose
hands shall finish it, and he shall bring up the top-stone with shouting, and
crying Grace, Grace to it. Rev. 1. 8, 11. Zech. 4. 7, 9, Heb. 12. 2. --

This is the Counselor, the Counselor of peace, that gives this gracious and
useful Counsel, on him rests the Spirit of Counsel and might, and his name is
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting father, the Prince of
peace, one who died for us, and in his Cross and Testimony, the Amen, the
faithful and True wi^ness of of the fathers graciousness and faithfulness, and
him in whom all the promises are established and ascertained, and the beginning
of the Creation of God, one in whom is all help, and healing for us, Isa. 11.
2, 3. and 9. 6. Oh that we may hear his Counsel, and receive his instruction,
that we may be wise in the latter end! Prove. 8 14 and 19, 20.

2. We have next to consider, and speak to the person or persons counseled,
both whom, and what manner of Persons, this blessed Counselor, gives this
needful and good Counsel to. --

1. To whom, and that is directly and expressly to the Angel of the Church of
the Laodiceans (a Church still our Savior calls it, though it was so greatly
polluted, that it was threatened to be spued out of the mouth of Christ: And so
the Corinthians, to whom the Apostle writes, are called the Church of God at
Corinth, concerning whom, or some amongst them, the Apostle thus speaks. I
fear least when I come I shall not find you such as I would and that I shall be
found unto you such as you would not; least there be debates, envyings, wraths,
str^^es, backbitings, wisperings, swellings, tumults, and lest when I come
again my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have
sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness, and fornieation, and
lasciviousness which they have committed. 2 Cor. 1. 1. with Chap. 12. 20, 21.
see also Gal. 1. 2. Rev. 3. 1, 2. 2 These. 2. 4. To the Angel of this Church he
directly speaks) that is, to their Messenger or Messengers. Mal. 2. 7. Rev.
2. 24. to those that were over them in the Lord, and did, or should go before
them in the word of the Lord, Chap. 1. 20. and this Counsel is given to the
Angel in the first place.

Because by their office and furniture they are Ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God; and it is required of them that they be found
faithful in communicating to others, what is given and imparted to them for
their good, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. They are set to watch for the Souls of others, as
they that must give an account. Heb. 13. 17.

And to them first to signify, that they are first to rereceive from Christ
what they give and communicate to others; they also are to be swift to hear
slow to speak: that they may speak his words they are first to hear what he
speaks to them, and to eat his words, consider them, digest them, meditate on
them, Receive in their Heart all the words he speaks unto them in his
Testimony, and hear them with their ears, and then go and speak to his people,
and cause them to hear his words, that so they go not before they are sent, for
what have they worthy communicating, but what they receive? Ezekiel. 2. 7, 10. and
3. 1, 3, 10, 11, 17. Rev. 10. 9.

And to them; because they themselves might be polluted with this distemper,
and be lukewarm, and through their slothfulness and negligence, doing the work
of the Lord negligently, they might be some occasion of this distemper in the
Church, as our Savior signifies, that while the servants also slept, the
enemy came and sowed tares. Matt. 13. 25. And to them first might this Epistle
be sent, and counsel given, that they might judge and take shame to themselves,
and receive reproof, and be recovered; and when they themselves did repent, and
were converted, they might be instruments of returning, restoring, and
strengthening their brethren, as Luke 22. 32.

And yet also this counsel was given to the whole Church in Laodicea, as
appears, in that Jesus Christ gives instruction to John that what he saw he
should write in a book, and send it unto the Seven Churches which are in Asia,
unto Ephesus -- and unto Laodicea: Yea the instruction and counsel given to
this Church is needful to be minded, and considered by the residue of the
Churches; yea and to be heard by every one that has an Ear; as is signified
Rev. 3. 22. He that has an Ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches. --

2. And to what manner of persons this counsel is given, we may be helped to
see and understand in what follows. --

Verse. 15. I know thy works,] By [knowing] here, is not only meant, a seeing
and understanding what they were, and of what nature; for so he sees and
knows all things. Joh. 21. 17. Nor at all an owning and approving them:
Indeed the word [know] does many times signify, approve, as, the Lord knows
the way of the righteous; he owneth it, and will preserve it for ever, as
opposed to the perishing of the way of the ungodly. Psalm. 1. 6. And so the Lord
knows them that are his, that come unto, and abide upon the foundation of
God. 2 Timothy 2. 19. So 1 Cor. 8. 3. Joh. 10. 27. But in this sense, he did not
know their works, for their works were not perfect before him; as Rev. 3.

2. But hereby [know] is meant, I take notice off, and wistly observe thy
works; I consider them, and the nature and quality of them: In this sense it is
often to be taken both as with respect to God and men: So with respect to God,
and by him it is said, Hos. 13. 5. I did know thee in the Wilderness; namely,
he did then take notice of them, to provide for them, and take care of them;
and rebuke and chasten them as need was: So the Psalmist, it seems, uses
considering, and knowing, as words of a like signification, when he says, thou
have considered my trouble, thou have known my soul in adversities. Psalm. 31.
7. So with respect to men, As, not knowing (minding, considering, taking
notice) that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance. Romans 2. 4. So it
is used in this sense in the beginning of every of the messages to the
Churches: And in that he says, I know, I take notice of thy works, he
signifies.

1. That he does not pass sentence upon men, or their works, he does not
approve, or reprove, till first he considers their works; he takes notice of
them, and pondereth all their goings, before he justifies, or condemns.
Prove. 5. 21. Hence in every of the Epistles to the Seven Churches, after he
directs them, and gives a description of himself, he first says, I know thy
works, Rev. 2. 2, 9, 13, 19. chap. 3. 1, 8, 15. The Lord is a God of judgment,
and by him Actions are weighed. 1 Samuel 2. 3. So when the cry of Sodom was
great, and their sin grievous, he says, I will go down now, and see whether
they have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me, and
if not I will know, Genesis 18. 21. He is excellent in power, and in judgment, and
in plenty of justice, he will not afflict; men do therefore fear him. Job 37.
23, 24. And this is for instruction to us, that we should not reprove, or fault
another, till we consider what his works are, and know and take notice that
they are such as are condemnable by the light of the glorious Gospel; but to be
imitatours of Christ Jesus according to the instructions of his Grace, --

2. In that he says, I know thy works, he signifies his love to us, and care
of us; such is his love and kindness toward us that he considers our works,
that if they be not perfect before him, and in his sight, he may rebuke us, and
not suffer sin upon us. Levit. 19. 17. So great is his charity toward us that
he covers our sins, so as to seek and pursue our good; and such is his
charity, that it leads him to take notice of our works, that when need is he
may reprove us; and sanctify, and cleanse us with the washing of water by the
word. So when he declares his love and faithfulness toward Israel, he says,
I have been a rebuker of them all; and adds, I know, I take notice of
Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: -- They will not frame their doings to
turn unto the Lord. Hos. 5. 2, 4.

3. He herein gives us to understand whose works he knows especially, and
takes notice of; I know [thy] works; their works that have had means and
advantages. He knows not, in this sense men's works, till he preventeth them
with his goodness; he looks not to gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of
Thistles; he knows that in us, as of us dwells no good thing; and that our
works must needs be evil, and unprofitable before his Grace brings salvation
to men, as it does to all men in due time. Titus 2. 11. But when he has
vouchsafed some means, and afforded some light to men, then he looks down
from Heaven to see if there be any that understand, and seek after God. Psalm.
14. 2. He fashioneth men's hearts alike, and (then) he considers all their
works. Psalm. 33. 15. But especially when men are brought unto, and planted in
his Vineyard, then he pondereth what their doings are: He expects that there
should be some return from them suitable to the means used, pains taken, and
care exercised toward and about them. So he says, for instruction to us also,
Behold (mind this well, and give attention to it) these three years I come
seeking Fruit of this Fig Tree. Luke 13. 7. So when he tells us what he had
done to his Vineyard, that he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof,
and planted it with the choicest Vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it,
and also made a Wine Press therein, he adds, and he looked that it should
bring forth Grapes. Isa. 5. 1. 2. Matt. 21. 33, 37. He takes notice of them
especially, whether there be with them the work of faith, and labor of love;
he expects that that earth which is so enclosed, and ordered; and which
drinks in the rain that often comes upon it, should bring forth herbs meet for
him by whom it is dressed, even the work and labor of love, that it may
receive further blessing from God. Heb. 6. 7, 10. His eye is continually upon
his Church and Churches, as to preserve, and deliver them from evil, and to
dispense to them whatever may fit them for fruitfulness before him, that they
may show forth his praises who has called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light: So to observe what impression his Grace has upon them, how
it is received by them, and what it produces in them; or whether it be
received in vain; That so he may rebuke and chasten them, as he does, as many
as he loves. Rev. 3. 19. You only, says he, have I known of all the families
of the earth, therefore will I punish you for all your transgressions. Amos. 3.
2. Hence when John in vision saw Christ in the midst of the Seven Candlesticks,
he says, his eyes were as a flame of fire Rev. 1. 14. To denote unto us the
piercingness of them, and that he is very exact, and observant in his
inspections amongst the Churches, to see and take notice what their works are;
and to manifest the evil of what he does reprove amongst them; for answerable
to the greater privileges and advantages they have above others, accordingly
he does expect more from them; unto whom much is given, of them shall much be
required; and to whom men have committed much, of them they will ask the more.
Luke 12. 48.

4. And here he signifies what he knows, and takes notice of, thy [Works]
not their profession only: Men may profess to know God, trust in him. love him,
cleave to him, and yet in works deny him, being abominable, and disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate and void of judgment. Titus 1. 16. Men may say
they believe the Testimony of God concerning Christ, yea, they may be persuaded
of the goodness and truth of it; and have some love to it, and hold it forth as
their opinion, and plead for it against opposers; and yet not so receive the
love of the truth as to be saved thereby, or to suffer it to work effectually
in them, and to bring forth the work of faith, and labor of love, as it does
in those that heartily receive it, and suffer it to dwell richly in them. 1
These. 1. 3. and 2. 13. But what does is profit, my Brethren, says the Apostle,
though a man say he has faith, and have not works? Faith if it have not works
(its proper works) is dead, being alone. Jam 2. 14, 26. They are not men's
pretenses and professions simply, he takes notice of, but whether the word of
God be received by them as it is in truth the word of God, so as to work
effectually in them, to redeem them from their iniquities, and turn them to God
from Idols, and to fulfill in them the whole good pleasure of God's goodness,
and the work of faith with power: And were the faith, the word of faith,
believed with the heart, it would work by love, as from God's love as the
motive of it, so in the exercise of love toward Christ and God in him, so as to
part with all as loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ,
that they might win him, and be found in him; and toward men, and brethren.
Galat. 5. 6. And truly he is one who knows men's works, and without respect of
persons judges according thereto. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Men may appear to be somewhat
when they are nothing, and profess themselves to believe on the name of the
only begotten Son of God, whise notwithstanding they love darkness (their sins
and vanities) rather then light. Joh. 3. 18, 19. They may have a great many
leaves upon them, and make a fair face in the flesh, while yet their works may
not be upright before him: But these he takes notice off, as here he says, I
know thy works. --

But what did he observe in his taking notice of their works, and pondering
them?

Surely he saw that their works were not perfect before him, and thence says,
and observes. --

That thou art neither cold, nor hot.] Not cold, there was still some
profession of the faith with them, some seeking God, waiting upon him, and
approaching to him; they had not wholly lest off all professed worshipping
shipping of him, and calling upon his name, but still reckoned themselves
Christians; they might still read, and hear, and pray, and speak one to
another, and have some use of the ordinances of Christ among them, and have a
form of godliness; they had not wholly and professedly left off the thing that
was good, but there was some warmth with them still; and they might, and did
surely assemble themselves together, for they were yet reckoned by Christ a
Church of his, a Goldencandlestick, that did in some measure receive, and bear
forth the light; yea, there might appear with them a great deal of fervency in
their outward professions, and behaviors of themselves: They were not cold.

Nor hot.] Not zealous, verse. 19. Not fervent in spirit serving the Lord. Romans
12. 11. Their hearts did not burn within them. Luke 24. 32. They were not
inflamed with love to him, and the things of his kingdom: Or, as considering
the scope of the place, they were not hot, that is, they did not so value
Christ, and the things above where Christ sits at the right hand of God, the
things most excellent, that durable riches and righteousness in Christ, as to
buy them, with a relinquishing and selling all that they had; they did not so
highly value Jesus Christ that pearl of great price as to part with their sins
and idols, and to go on to count all but loss and dung, that they might be made
partakers of him, to hate Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and
Sisters, yea and their own lives also for the sake of Christ Jesus, and to take
up their cross and follow him. That this is here meant by [hot] appears, by
the counsel he gives them, I counsel thee to buy of me Gold etc. And by the
reason and end of his rebuking and chastening them, that they might be zealous
and that their zeal might be exercised and evidenced in receiving and obeying
that counsel, and so in buying. verse. 19. And by his call to them, and desire
of their attention; behold I stand at the door and knock. verse. 20. He was not
readily received, it seems, but the door was shut against him, and somewhat
else entertained in his room and stead; and he was fain to knock for admission
and entrance, and to stand there, till his head was filled with dew, and his
locks with the drops of the night, as Cant. 5. 2. While they gave their love to
others, and took in others instead of their husband, and embraced the bosom of
a Stranger: This was the heat they were destitute of, and in this sense they
were not hot; they did not forsake all things for Christ Jesus; they were as
silly doves without heart, professedly waiting upon God, but yet retaining sin
in their hands, or double mindedness in their hearts. Hos. 7. 11. Or they were
seeking their own things, their praise, honor, glory, name, or to establish a
righteousness to themselves; and though they might appear to be, and might be
zealous, yet not in a good matter. Gal. 4. 18. They were like to a man that
hearing of an excellent commodity at such a Mart, or Market, goes thereto; he
is not so cold as to stay at home, but takes so much pains as to go to the
place where it may be had, and looks upon it, and likes it, and hears
delightfully what is spoken in commendation of it, and takes delight in
approaching to it; but yet he is not so hot as to come up to the price of it,
though he may bid somewhat, and be willing to part with something; yet he has
not such an high estimate of, and affection to it, as to prefer it before all
other things, and to purchase it how dear soever it be: Truly such an one
though he be not cold, yet he is not hot; such a man is hot that is resolved to
have such a commodity whatever it cost him, that spares no pains or cost: In
such a sense they were not hot; they were not so cold as wholly to desist from
a professed waiting at Wisdom's posts, but they might come and sit before God
as his people, and hear his words; and it might be as a lovely and pleasant
song to hear what was spoken in the praise and commendation of that Gold tried
in the fire etc. But still their hearts went after their covetousness, or their
pride, and high thoughts of themselves; they conceited themselves to be rich
and increased with goods, and therefore did not forsake all that they had for
Christ; they did not so highly prize him, nor so ardently affect him as to
count, and go on to count, all other things as dung and dogs meat in comparison
of him. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. Oh let us search and try our hearts in the light of
God's testimony, and see if we also be not such manner of persons, such
Lukewarm ones, as these were to whom this counsel was given; the testimony of
Christ, the perfect law of liberty, is a faithful glass, that gives a true and
impartial discovery of all things and persons; it pierces even to the dividing
asunder of So^l and Spirit, and Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. Heb. 4. 12. Therein let us examine our
selves, and not trust to our own hearts, or lean to our own understandings, for
the heart is deceitful and desperately wicked above all things; and he that
trusts therein is a fool: Our wisdom, and understanding will pervert us, and
make us believe we are hot, when indeed we are but lukewarm: We may seem hot in
hearing, in praying, in conferring, in contending for the faith of the common
Salvation, in frequenting the assemblies of Gods people, in speaking one to
another, and to others: we may have a form of Knowledge, and appear zealous in
visiting other Societies of Gods people, and take much pains, and be at much
cost; yea, we may lavish Gold out of the Bag, and weigh Silver in the Balance;
and as the Apostle says in another case, give all our goods to feed the poor,
and for pious uses, and yet be but lukewarm still, and set up the stumbling
block of our iniquity before our eyes, and do all this to deck our Idol with;
we may not be hot notwithstanding all this, not willing to be redeemed from our
iniquities, or love to our Idols; and though we may appear fervent, yet not be
so in seeking and serving the Lord, but be seeking our own things, our own
name, praise, applause, the life of our own hands; we may be desirous of vain
Glory, or do these things to consume upon our lusts: Oh let us come to the
light of the Lord, and therein view our selves, our hearts and ways, and as
therein our Lukewarmness is discovered, let us cleanse our selves therefrom in
the light and strength of Gods Grace, which brings Salvation to all men. 2
Cor. 7. 1.

This is the iniquity, the provoking iniquity of those in Gods Church, in his
Vineyard, that they are not Hot; for though they cannot heat themselves, but
must be heated with a Cole from his Altar; yet unto, and in in their turning at
his reproofs, and letting go the things faulted, and discovered to be evil and
unprofitable He would pour out his Spirit to them, and make known his words,
which are as fire, and would even make their hearts burn within them, Prove. 1.
23. with Jer. 23. 29. Luke 24. 32. The light of Israel would be as a fire unto
them.

And this is that he expects from those in his Church, not only that they be
not Cold, but that they be Hot, not only that they hear, pray, assemble,
conferr, approach to him, and have a name among the Churches, that they live
(which they may have while they are dead) Rev. 3. 1. but that they have such an
estimate of Christ, and the things of him, as to count all other things but
vile and unprofitable in comparison of him; and so, that they be hot in buying
the truth with selling all that they have: such is the excellency of this
blessed Treasure presented before them, and commended to them; and such
advantages they have in the Church to see the Beauty and Glory of it, and to
hear of its preciousness in their assemblings together, and such their
fellowships together, that they might have heat begotten, preserved and
increased among them, Eccles. 4. 11. and therefore he expects from them that
they should be zealous, he may say to them as to his Vineyard of old, What
could have been done more to my Churches that I have not done in them, that
they might have counted all things as loss for my sake, even the things most
gainful, and been filled with zeal as hot as fire, in seeking the knowledge and
enjoyment of me, and promoting the things of my Kingdom, even with such zeal as
would have consumed them, and made them ready and willing to forsake and forget
all for me? and when notwithstanding all his goodness and graciousness to them,
they are still destitute of this heat, and ardency of affection to him, oh,
this incenseth him against them, and provokes him to anger, who is slow
thereto? and so much is signified to us in what follows.

I would thou were cold or Hot.] As if he should say, I cannot away with this
temper, or distemper of thine, as Ver. 16. it is very offensive and provoking
to me, and therefore I wish thou were rid of thy loathsome temper, and were
either Cold or Hot: It is somewhat like to what Elijah says to the Israelites,
why halt ye between two opinions? if God be God follow him, but if Baal then
follow him. 1 Kings 18. 21. Or like to the saying of Joshuah, If it seem evil
to you to serve the Lord (in sincerity and truth, with a putting away the Gods
which your fathers served) choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the
the Gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or
the Gods of the Amorites, in whose Lands ye dwell? Josh. 24. 14, 15. As if he
should say, do not make a show of serving the Lord, while together therewith
you do indeed serve your Idols: But either be hot in serving him only and
sincerely, and put away; and renounce your Idols; or else be Cold, and leave
off your professed waiting on him, and follow such other Gods as you shall
choose, this neutrality and indifferency is very displeasing and unbearable to
him in his Church and Vineyard; this Samaritanisme in which men fear the Lord,
and serve their own Gods, and indeed it is reputed by him as not fearing him at
all, 2 Kings 17. 32, 34. His Grace instructs moves, and strengthens us, to
love and cleave to him with all our Heart, Soul, Mind and strength, Mark 12.
29, 30. but when the heart is divided, then shall men befound faulty. Hos. 10.
12.

But here we might for our usefulness propose these two Questions.

Question 1. Whether seeing this faithful Counselor, wishes that they were
either Cold or Hot, it be alike to him which of them they were? or whether it
were all one to him whether they were Cold or Hot?

Answer. No surely, he is not indifferent herein, he would rather they were Hot
in buying the Truth, and giving hearty entertainment to him; and therefore he
counsels them, To buy of him Gold tried in the fire, that they might be
rich. Ver. 18. And therefore be rebukes them (sharply reproves them) and
chasteneth them, that they might be zealous and repent. Ver. 19. And therefore
he stands at the door and knocks, that they might open unto him, receive
him, and entertain him heartily. Ver. 20. Nor was it alike to the Prophet (when
he reproves the Israelites for halting between two opinions) whether they
followed God or Baal; for he earnestly desired that they might join to, and
heartily and sincerely follow the Lord God of Israel, and to that end Prays.
Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God,
and that thou have turned their heart back again. 1 Kings 18. 37. And the like
we may say of Joshuah, Chap. 24. 15. Christ is in the bosom of the father, and
knows his heart and thoughts, and has revealed that God is not willing that
any man should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3 9. and
still he is more unwilling that any of those little ones, that have tasted of
his graciousness, should perish; because he is the Savior of all men,
especially of them that believe, Mat. 18. 11. 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is acquainted
with, and is the faithful and true witness of, the sincerity and ardency of the
fathers love and compassion to all, while it is called to day, that he would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth; for God sent
him not into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. with John 3. 17. God has no pleasure, none at
all, neither secret nor revealed in the death of the wicked, but rather that
they should turn and live. Ezekiel. 11. 23, 32. and he and Christ Jesus are one;
and therefore the Amen, the faithful and true Witness is not indifferent
whether his Churches, and those in them be Cold or Hot; but he is one that has
pleasure in uprightness, and loves that those in his Church should cleave to
him with full purpose, and give him their hearts, and would that they should be
wholly and altogether his: to whose mind also the Apostle Paul was framed, when
Agrippa said, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. I would to God,
says he, that not only thou, but all that hear me, were both almost, and
altogether such as I am, and not so indifferent as he was. Acts 26. 29. And
this the Apostle also desired with understanding, as knowing Gods good will
toward all men was, that they should heartily receive the love of the truth:
had he been of the mind of some men, that God has a secret Will concurring
with the destruction of the greatest part of Mankind in a personal
consideration, he could never in faith have poured out such a wish to God for
all them that heard him; but knowing God is love, and that he has manifested
himself so to be in giving his Son by his Grace to taste death for every man;
from hence his hearts desire and prayer to God for them was, That they might be
saved from their iniquities and vanities, as Romans 10. 1. 3. And therefore thus
Christ Jesus speaks, to show (...) how abominable their present temper was to
him.

Question 2. Whether it be better for the Churches, or those therein to be Cold
then Lukewarm, it is better without Controversy to be Hot, and fervent in
Spirit, in seeking and serving the Lord, and diligently pursuing the things of
his Kingdom: but whether it be better for Lukewarm ones to be Cold?

Answer. Truly properly and fully it is not better to be Cold then Lukewarm,
for neither is good; but it is worse to be Lukewarm in Gods Vineyard, and more
abominable to him, and in his account, who judges righteously then to be Cold;
and so to be Cold is not so bad, in some respects as to be Lukewarm; For,

1. The iniquity of Lukewarmness in his Churches is more provoking in his
sight; because the Clouds do more abundantly Rain Rain upon them that come
into, and frequent the Assemblies of Gods people, then upon those who are Cold,
and come not amongst them, and they often drink in the Rain that comes upon
them; they have more advantages given to them then others, and more
opportunities to hear, and be acquainted with the excellency of Christ, and the
enriching nature of that Gold tried in the fire, and therein, and therewith to
see the vileness of their sins, and vanity of their Idols, wisdom, works of
Righteousness, high thoughts, and conceits of themselves, that they might turn
to God from all their Idols, and have their Hearts drawn off from all other
Objects, and united to Christ Jesus: hence those that are among his people, do
in their evils overpass the deeds of the wicked. Jer. 5. 21, 28. So it is said,
That Manasseh made Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to do worse then the
Heathen, not simply as to matter of fact, but worse; because the Lord spoke to
them and his people (by his Prophets) but they would not hear. 2 Chronicles. 33. 9,
10. Hence oftentimes this is declared as an aggravation of the iniquity of God
people, that they sin under such advantages, and in the enjoyment of such
nighness, means and opportunities: therefore the Lord says concerning the
Priests and Prophets: Yea in mine house have I found their wickedness, etc.
Jer. 23. 11. and 11. 14, 15. Isa. 66. 4. and answerable to the greatness of
their iniquity, as being thus aggravated, answerable will be their judgment, so
persisting; yea, and more swiftly will God proceed against them, especially now
when more clear light then formerly is vouchsafed: he that was grieved forty
years with his people in former times, was provoked after three years in
latter; because of the unfruitfulness of those in his Vineyard, to say, Cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground? So he here threatens he will spue them out
of his mouth, and accordingly he may have so done with this Church long since:
Thou Capernaum, says our Savior, that a^t exalted to Heaven, shall be brought
down to Hell; for if the might Works which have been done in thee had been done
in Sodom, it would have remained until this day; but I say unto you it shall be
more tolerable for the Land of Sodom at the day of Judgment, then for you.
Mat. 11. 20, 24. That Earth which (drinks in the Rain that o^t comes upon
it, and yet) bears Briars and Thorns, is rejected, and nigh unto Cursing,
whose end is to be burned. Heb. 6. 8.

2. It is worse to be Lukewarm in Gods Vineyard; then Cold; because those that
are Cold may sooner be made sensible of their Condition, and fall down under
reproofs, and be made to perceive the sadness of the state they abide in, or
have brought themselves into by their departure then Lukewarm ones; When
persons are Lukewarm they are ready to say. Aha we are warm, we have seen the
fire; blessed be the Lord for we are rich, and increased with Goods, and have
need of nothing, they are highly conceited of their good Condition, and think,
and say they are hot enough already, they are in a good temperate Condition,
and need not to come nearer the fire. See thou a man wise in his own Eyes,
there is more hope of a fool (of a brutish person that has no understanding)
then of him. Prove. 26. 12. Their good cannot so easily be sought and effected,
as the good of those may that are Cold, and who have outwardly left off their
former profession; for the Lukewarm ones are ready to fill their mouths with
Arguments, and to plead their own Innocence, and to stop their ears from
hearing faithful reproof; they have excuses at hand; they can presently say,
Wherefore are ye jealous of us? Or why find ye fault with us? What would you
have us to do? We are not Cold, we read, hear, pray in our families, frequent
Assemblies, use the Ordinances of Christ, and are called by his Name; they are
ready to thank God they are not like other men, or like to what they themselves
sometimes were, and not only justify themselves herewith before men, but
endeavor so to do before God also; they not only weary men but God also with
clearing themselves, and pleading for themselves, and take it ill at his hands,
and are even angry that he does not approve them, and hear their Prayers, and
grant their requests. So when the Lord sent the Prophet to reprove his people,
he acquainteth and tells them they were not Cold, and that they had this to
plead for themselves, and excuse themselves withal, that they might still hold
fast deceit, and refuse to return; and because hereby they were blunt, and
unapt to receive correction, and to turn at reproof, therefore the Prophet is
charged to put to the more strength. Cry aloud, says the Lord, (for their ears
are heavy; and they are very dull of hearing) spare not, lift up thy voice like
a Trumpet (that they may be afraid, and run together. Amos 3. 6. And show my
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. Yet (though they
are so greatly polluted, they are not quite cold, but are lukewarm, for) they
seek me daily, and delight to know my ways as a nation that did righteousness,
and forsook not the ordinance of their God; they ask of me the ordinances of
justice, they take delight in approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted, say
they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou
take no knowledge? When as notwithstanding all this professed waiting upon
God, and frequent approaching to him, they were not hot, they did not part with
the things reproved, but their hands were defiled with blood, and their fingers
with iniquity; their iniquities separated between them and God, and their sins
hid his face from them that he would not hear: And yet they thought they were
warm enough, and looked that God should accept them, and approve them: But
(says the Lord) their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works. Isa. 58. 1. 3. and 59. 1. 6. They were ready to
cry, they had built an house for Gods name, and the place of his rest; and had
kept his ordinance, and walked mournfully before him, and thought this would
have excused them, and obtained God's favor for them, though they were laden
with iniquity, and were serving their idols. Isa. 66. 1. 2. But when they are
quite cold they have not such things to say for themselves, but sooner fall
under reproof: As the Ninevites that had not God's name called upon them, nor
his word and ordinances amongst them, sooner humbled themselves before God then
the Jews, who had the Scriptures read amongst them every Sabbath Day, and
fasted, and prayed etc. Because they thought eternal life belonged to them, and
that they were already in a good and happy condition. Matt. 12. 41. And as our
Savior says to the Pharisees, Publicans and Harlots enter into the kingdom of
God before you: For John, says he, came unto you in the way of righteousness,
and ye believed him not, but the Publicans and the Harlots believed him. Matt.
21. 32, 33. Oh how hard is it for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God!
Now then, by how much the more; they are the more hardly admonished, and more
difficultly recovered then those that are cold, by so much the more is their
temper more sad; for they sport themselves with their own deceivings. --

3. The Lukewarm ones are worse then those that are cold, because by their
seeming to be religious, and to do their former works, they cause the name of
God, and his doctrine to be evil spoken of; and so do more injury to others;
suitable to what the Apostle says; Behold thou art called a Jew (and so we may
say a Christian) and restest in the law, and make thy boast of God (as if he
were thy God, thy Father, and thou had an interest in him) and know his
will, and approvest the things that are more excellent -- and art confident
that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of them which sit in
darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which have the form
of knowledge, and of the truth in the law: thou therefore which teach
another, teach thou not thyself? -- thou that make thy boast of the law,
through breaking of the law dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, (through such lukewarm ones, who
seem to be religious, and yet hold fast a lie in their right hand, and so their
religion is vain) Romans 2. 17, 24. When persons are grown quite cold, and come
not into the assemblies of God's peculiar people, there is not then such
occasion given to the adversary to speak reprochfully of the worthy name of
Christ, and his doctrine, as when men frequent those assemblies, and frequently
tread his courts, and appear to do their former works; when those that profess
to believe the Gospel of Christ, and are frequently amongst them that make
profession of it, and hold it forth to others; when such (I say) hold fast
deceit, and refuse to return, when such walk on in darkness, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, or of the mind, the mouths of others, by occasion of
them, is opened against Christ, and his Gospel, as if he were a Minister of
sin, and it a doctrine of licentiousness: Others among whom they live will be
ready to say, these are the men that pretend to have learned the truth as it is
in Jesus, and to have embraced the doctrine of Christ more sincerely then
others: They say they believe Christ died for all, and gave himself a ransom
for all; and they hear, and pray, and read, and usually go amongst such as
assemble themselves often and professedly to wait upon God, and to edify
themselves; but yet you may see, they are as much polluted as others, their
heart goes as much after its covetousnes as the hearts of any other; and they
are as proud and censorious, and highly conceited of themselves, and as
uncharitable and unmerciful as others; surely this doctrine teaches them to
live as they list, and assures them they shall have peace though they walk
after the imagination of their own hearts: This is a doctrine of looseness and
licentiousness, it is certainly an heresy, or otherwise it would have some
other manner of effi^^cy on these men that make a trade of hearing it, and
being amongst those that profess it: Oh how by occasion o^ such is the doctrine
according to godliness evil spoken of, and rep^^ched, as if it were a doctrine
of profaneness! How is God's name hereby polluted? Hence the Lord as one highly
displeased and provoked, thus speaks to his people in former times, who did
not servently and sincerely seek and serve him: As for you, O house of Israel,
thus says the Lord God, go ye, serve ye every one his own idols, and hereafter
also if ye will not hearken to me, (to obey my voice, and give glory to my
name) but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your
sacrifices. Ezekiel. 10. 39. As if he should say, you had better be quite cold
then thus lukewarm; did you wholly follow after your idols, and make no
profession of serving me, my name would not be so greatly polluted as now it
is, while you call upon me, and yet serve your own idols. Oh! this tends very
much to the blemishing of God's worthy name called upon us, and to the defiling
God's sanctuary, when persons are serving their idols, and sowing to the flesh,
and yet come the same day into his Sanctuary, and appear to take delight in
approaching to him, as if they were delivered to do those abominations; or as if
the grace of God heard, and in some sort received by them, gave them
encouragement to serve sin, or follow their vanities, from which indeed it
comes to redeem them, and to that purpose brings salvation to all men. Ezekiel.
23. 38, 39. Jer. 7. 9, 11. Titus. 2. 11, 12. Oh how loathsome, displeasing, and
provoking is this to him who has deserved so well at our hands, that we should
be for him only, and give him and none other our loves, and who loves truth
in the inward parts! he well knows not how to bear with, or endure such evil
and unkind requitals, or to away with such a loathsome temper, or frame, as is
that of Lukewarmness to him; and so much he gives us to understand in what
follows. --

Verse. 16. So then, because thou art Lukewarm, and neither Cold nor Hot, I will
Spue thee out of my Mouth. --

In this sharp rebuke and threatening, the faithful and true Witness signifies
to us the loathsomness, and unbearableness of this temper or distemper of
theirs unto himself: it was such, and so grievous to him, that he could not
away with it, though they were not Cold, but there was still some form of
Godliness, and profession of Religion upon them, they seemed to be Religious,
and made mention of the God of Israel, and called themselves of the Holy City,
and stayed themselves upon the God of Israel, yet this was not in truth nor in
righteousness, as Isa. 48. 1, 2. Their Religion was vain, and they more odious
in this Condition to him, then if they had been quite Cold; like to that, Isa.
1. 11, 16. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices to me, says the
Lord? I am full of the burnt Offerings of Rams. -- When ye come to appear
before me, who has required this at your hand to tread my Courts? bring no
more vain Oblations, In^ense is an abomina^ion to me, the new Moons and
Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniqui^y (or
grief) even the solemn meeting: Your new Moons and your appointed Feasts my
Soul ha^eth, they are a trouble to me, I am weary o bear them; and when you
spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when ye make many
Prayers I will no^ hear you, your hands are full of Blood: like whereto also is
that. Amos 5. 12, 21, 27. I know your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty
sins, etc. I hate, I despise your Feast-days, and I will not smell in your
solemn Assemblies; thou, bye offer me Burnt offerings, and your Meat
^ffe^ings, I will not accept them, neither will I regard ^he Feace-offering, of
your fat Beasts: Take thou away from me the noise of thy Songs; for I will not
hear the melody of ^^y Viols. -- For ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch
and Chiu. your Images: -- Therefore I will cause you to go into Captivity. This
was greatly provoking to him that they were so Lukewarm, and did not buy the
truth with a parting with their abominanations, and Idols: So here he
threatens he will spue them out of his mouth; because they were Lukewarm. A
Metaphor taken from Lukewarm meat, that is displeasing and bu^den some to the
Stomach; or rather from Lukewarm water that is loathsome and offensive, and
causes vomiting: and it is as if he should say, I will abhor you, and cast you
out, and you shall be cut off from my Congregation, I will not keep you in my
mouth to plead for you, or to speak a good word for you, but you shall be cut
off from among my people and Churches, your temper is so loathsome and grievous
to me, that it were more bearable to me if you did not tread my Courts at all;
you had better never profess to wait upon me, then under that profession to
hide, and keep close, and make provision for your sins and Idols. He that
kills an Ox is as if he slew a man, he that Sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut
off a Dogs neck, he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood,
he that burns incense as if he blessed an Idol; while men chase their own
ways, and their Soul delights in their abominations. Isa. 66 3. Ezekiel. 14. 3,
11. and therefore he threatens to abhor them, and vomit them out of his mouth,
unless they did receive timely admonition, and repent. Verse. 19. Lev. 18. 25,
28. In which he signifies.

1. That his Churches and people are especially in his mouth; as they are in
his heart to love them, and to delight in them, and in his hand to hide,
protect, and defend them from their enemies, and from all evil; so also in his
mouth, he takes up their names into his lips, and makes intercession for them
especially. Psalm. 16. 4 Heb. 7. 25. Yea, though they are Lukewarm, and are
thereby become offensive and loathsome in their temper, yet he does not
presently reject them, but pleads for them as his Church, and that they may
be so continued: He hates putting away from this nighness. Mal. 2. 16. He is
slow to anger, and it is his work, his strange work, his Act, his strange Act,
to cast such forth out of his house, and vomit them up; and therefore he says
not: I have spued thee out of my mouth, but I will do it; namely, if they did
still so persist and abide: He remembers for such the kindness of their youth,
the love of their espousals, when they have forsaken him the Fountain of living
Waters, and hewed to themselves broken Cisterns that can hold no water, and
when they have forgotten him days without number. Jer. 2. 2, 13, 32. This
Church of Laodicea was not always in this sad and abominable Condition; but it
was sometime hot and fervent; and was so taken with Christ, and his love and
loveliness, that the Apostle Paul did joyfully behold their order (in seeking
first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof*) and the stedfastness
of their faith, and therefore instructed them: As they had received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so they should walk in him; rooted and built up in him, and
stablished in the faith as they had been taught, etc. Col. 2. 6, 7. Christ was
so precious to them, that through their beholding, belief of, and and delight
in his preciousness, they were made a Church of his, and called out of the
State, Condition, and fellowship of the world into him, and unto fellowship
with him, and were bottomed and built upon him, and begotten by him to a lively
hope of his mercy, and this still Christ remembers; and for such he makes
intercession, though they are become unlovely, and unpleasant, till they are
put out of his house; yea, when they have fitted themselves for being cast out,
such is the graciousness of this faithful and true witness, that he interposeth
himself for them while, and as it may be for their good, that further patience
and forbearance may be exercised toward them, and further means used, that
they may in the light and strength of his Grace recover themselves, and turn
unto him from whom they have revolted, and backslidden; So when the Lord of the
Vineyard came three years seeking fruit on the Fig Tree that was planted in his
Vineyard, and found none, and was so greatly incensed, that he gave order to
cut it down, that it might no longer cumber the ground; this gracious
Vinedresser stepped in, and pleaded for it. Lord, let it alone this year also,
till I shall dig about it, and dung it (that it may bring forth fruit, and so
be still continued in that ground) Luke 13, 6, 8. So when he complains of,
and to his people. Thou have been weary of me, O Israel. -- Thou have not
honored me with thy Sacrifices; -- But thou have made me to serve with thy
sins, thou have wearied me with thine iniquities: Yet he adds. I, even I am
he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own name sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Isa. 43. 22, 25. Though they were not so fervent as to give
him no rest; though they did not weary him in crying after wisdom, and lifting
up their voice for understanding, as those that would take no denial, but
instead thereof were weary of him; yea, and found him so much unpleasant work,
as to weary him with their transgressions, in hiding, and covering them, and
washing and cleansing them from them, yet he continued to be gracious and
merciful to them; he knows not how presently to reject them, but when he
speaks against them, he does earnestly remember them still, and his bowels
are moved and stirred toward them; yea, when he threatens to give them up to
destruction: because they are bent to backsliding from him, and though called
to the most high, not at all exalt him; yet he cries out (as one full of good
bowels toward them. James 5. 11) How shall I give thee up? How shall I deliver
thee? (as one that well knows not how to do it) mine heart is turned within
me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger; -- For I am God and not man, the holy one in the midst of thee,
etc. And thus gracious is he toward such unworthy and backsliding ones for his
own goodness, and because he remembers the kindness of their youth. Hos. 11,
1, 9. Jer. 31. 18, 20. Nay, when he puts them away from their former
nighness to him, yet he does not presently give them a Bill of divorce; but is
calling unto them to return to him, and proclaiming his graciousness and
readiness to receive them again, and stretching forth his hand toward them,
though they have treacherously departed from him as a Wife from her Husband,
and played the Harlot with many lovers, taking in strangers into the Bed of
love instead of their Husband. Isa. 50. 1, 2. Jer. 3. 1, 20, 22. He is not
quick to vomit them out of his mouth, who are so unpleasant and loathsome to
him, that he well knows not how to keep them in; he cannot easily put them
from among the Children, or cast them out from being of his congregation; but
is still stretching out his hand to such rebellious ones, while it is called to
day, to draw and strengthen them to come to him, and embrace them in returning.
Isa. 65. 2, 4. Oh the infinite graciousness and kindness of this faithful and
true witness, and of the Father in him! Oh that we may never abuse such
goodness, or turn such grace into wantonness! That we may never despise the
riches of his patience, forbearance, and long-suffering toward us, but may so
know, consider, and take notice of his goodness, and of its tendency and
operation, that we may be zealous and repent: For if still our hearts be set in
us to do evil, and we continue in our provocations, because sentence is not
speedily executed, this will provoke him at last to execute what he threatens;
he will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on
still in their trespasses, neglecting, and lightly esteeming him who is the God
of Salvation, who has prepared for us, and is discovering, and exercising to
us such Salvation in and through Christ Jesus. Psalm. 68. 18, 21. And this
leads us to the next.

2. But though he be slow to anger, and of great kindness, and ready to repent
him of the evil threatened, yet in their still continuing in this distemper,
after such gracious counsel given. verse. 18. Such rebukes and chastisements
used. verse. 19. And such wonderful condescension and patience exercised. verse.
20. at last he will spue them out, and vomit them up as his Church, un-son
them, un-church them, cease to plead for them as his Church, cast them out of
his Vineyard into the field of the World; So, when he looked for Grapes, and
behold wild-grapes, he then says, and threatens, that he will take away the
hedge of the Vineyard, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and he will lay it waste, it shall not
be pruned, nor dug, but there shall come up briars and thorns; and he
threatens that he will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. Isa.
5. 1, 6. So the vine-dresser says, if after his digging about, and dunging the
fruitless fig tree, it bring forth fruit well; but if not, after that the Lord
should cut it down; He would not always intercede for it, if it still after
further means used remained barren and unfruitful. Luke 13. 9. He can take away
his kingdom, and remove the Candlestick out of his place. Matt. 21. 43, 44.
Rev. 2. 5. Behold Israel after the flesh, if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee; behold therefore the goodness
and severity of God, on them which fell, severity, but toward thee goodness,
if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off. Romans
11. 20, 23. He can cast them out of his house that are in it, and will do so,
if they persist in rebelling against him; and love them no more, but forsake
them, and cast them off for ever. Hos. 9. 15. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Of a truth, God
is no respecter of persons; he is not tied to any man's person, but Christ is
the Amen, to him are the promises made, and in him they are confirmed, and sure
to all the seed who are begotten and born of the spirit, and led by the spirit;
for as many as are led by the spirit of God they are the Sons of God; in him
all the promises of God are yea and Amen; and if we be Christ's, then are we
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise; But if a man (that has been
ingraffed into him) abide not in him, he is cast forth as a branch, and
withers, and men gather them, and they are cast into the fire, and burned.
Joh. 15. 1, 6. In abiding in him is safety, and security, none can pluck them
out of his hand, or mouth, that hear his voice, and follow him, as he is
drawing them, and working in them both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure: But beware of him, says God, and obey his voice, provoke him not,
for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name is in him; he will not
forgive if we sin against him, and serve other Gods, and continue so to do, but
will spue such at last out of his mouth, though he be long-suffering, and
plenteous in mercy and goodness: He that has an ear let him hear what the
spirit says to the Churches: For he can do the same to any particular person
that has an ear, if he grow lukewarm, and remiss, which he can do, and
threatens to do to such a Church: Oh that every one of us may consider that
our standing is by faith, that so we may not be high minded, but fear: The
Apostles had a good usefulness of considering the terror of the Lord, to
quicken them to diligence in seeking and serving the Lord; And the Apostle Paul
including himself with the Holy Brethren says, if we sin wilfully after the
knowledge of the truth received, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin; but
a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries: Oh consider this ye that forget God! Exodus 23. 20, 24.
Rev. 3. 16, 22. Romans 11. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 8, 11. 1 Cor 9. 27. Heb. 10. 26, 29.

Ver. 17. Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable (or
piteous) and poor, and blind, and naked. --

This Verse contains in it either,

1. An evidence and demonstration that they were Lukewarm, and is a declaration
of the cause and reason of their Lukewarmness; their high thoughts and conceits
of themselves made them so, And so there was more hope of a fool (of such as
were Cold) then of them. Prove. 26. 12. When men are highly conceited of
themselves, and think that they are already rich, this will make them grow
indifferent and remiss and slothful; and though they come daily, and sit before
God as his people, and seem to take delight in approaching to him, and remain in
the assemblies of his people, yet it will make them do what they do out of
Custom, and for fashion-sake, or in service to some Idol, and it will cause
them to be like a door that turns upon his hinges, it will keep them at a
stand; and though they go backward and forward like such a door, yet they will
at last be but where they were at first, they will not grow in Grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, it will hinder them from
being hot, from such a prizing of Christ as to hate all for his sake, that they
may win him, and be found in him. Prove. 26. 12, 16. The full Soul loatheth the
Honey-combe, and that causes a man also to wander from his place as a Bird
from her nest. Prove. 27. 7, 8. Thus it was with Israel of old, when they were
low and mean, and little in their own eyes, and in the day of their espousals;
oh then what fervency, and heat of Spirit, and demeanor was found with them!
they followed the Lord out of the Land of Egypt and through the Wilderness,
through a Land of deserts and pits, through a Land of drought, and so the
shadow of death, through a Land that no man passed through, and where no man
dwelt; but when they conceited themselves to be rich, and said they were Lords,
free persons, now no longer in bondage as when they were in Egypt; they were
now brought out of the house of Servants (a type of the state of the world) and
were become owners, grown rich, and increased with goods, now they were become
possessors, and had need of nothing, then their former fervency was gone, they
would come no more to him, but forsook him when he led them by the way, and
forgot him days without number, and trimmed their way to seek love elsewhere,
and yet wiped their mouths, and said, they were innocent, and therefore surely
his anger should turn away from them, and still flattered him with their lips,
and called him, My father, and the guide of my youth. Jer. 2. 7, 31, 35. Oh!
blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. Mat. 5. 6. But the full and rich he sends empty away. Luke 1. 53. The
Apostle Paul confesses, and acknowledges that he had not yet attained,
neither was already perfect, and therefore forgetting the things behind, and
reaching forth to the things before, he pressed toward the mark, for the prize
of the high calling of God in Jesus christ: he run as for his life, and did
strive as for an incorruptible Crown, he was fervent in Spirit, and labored
and indeavored, that whether present or absent, he might be accepted of the
Lord; and he instructs the believers who were perfect, upright-hearted, to be
like-minded with him, to reckon themselves to be imperfect as to attainment;
That so they also might run with patience the race set before them. Phil. 3.
12, 16. 1 Cor. 9. 24, 26.

Whereas on the other hand, when men begin to take notice of themselves, and to
think more highly of themselves then is meet, and of their knowledge and
seize, this cutteth off the feet, and makes persons to be Lukewarm, and
when a price is put into their hand for getting wisdom, they have no heart
thereto; this high thought of themselves, makes them sit loose from Christ,
and lightly to esteem the Rock of their Salvavation; and though it blow up men
like a Bladder, yet it does not build them up: according to that, we all know
we have knowledge (every one is too ready and forward to take notice of that)
knowledge (even the knowing and taking notice of our knowledge puffs up,
makes men appear high and full, but it is but with wind, but it edifieth not,
as Charity does, which is not puffed up. And when men are so puffed up by their
fleshly mind, it takes them off from an high estimate of Christ, and causes
them to wander from him, and not to hold the head, from which all the body by
joints and bands having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases
with the increase of God. Compare 1 Cor. 8. 1. with Chap. 13. 4. and Col. 2.
18, 19. It is much to be feared that we have also too high conceits of our
selves, and therefore though we are not quite Cold, yet such thoughts make us
Lukewarm; we are too apt to think we know all already, we have attained to
excellent Ornaments, and are pure in our own eyes: Oh that we may come to the
light of the Lord, and therein see and examine our selves, and if this iniquity
be found with us, put it far away; for this thinking of our selves more highly
then we ought, is that which is the cause of our loathsome temper; or

2. This Verse is a reason of Christ's threatening, and of that woe and judgment
threatened. Ver. 16. I will spue thee out of my mouth, because thou say I am
rich, etc. Oh! what a provocation to Christ is it, what a loathsome thing in his
sight, that such babes as we are should boast, as if we were come to a perfect
man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ! that we should
imagine and say, we have need of nothing, when so little a portion is known of
him by us, that we should think and say, we are whole, what need then have we
of a Physician? What need of a Mediator to intercede for us? We do by ^^^h like
thoughts and sayings, make the Cross of Christ, and Preaching of it,
foolishness to our selves, and render it a needless and undesirable thing; and
they do lead us to set light by, and undervalue Christ, and to give our hearts
unto, and take up our contentment in our seize and receipts, which are
indeed broken Cisterns which can hold no water, and which we make as Idols to
our selves, and incense him against us, who will not give honor to another,
nor his praise to graven Images, his name is jealous, and he cannot, he will
not endure it, that we should give our loves to, and take up our rest in any
thing besides himself, who was crucified for us, and in whom only there is rest
for our weary Spirios; His jealousy (when his love is abused or slighted) is
cruel as the Grave, the Coals thereof are Coals of fire, which has a most
vehement flame. Cant. 8. 6. He cannot bear it, that those that are espoused to
him should treacherously and adulterously depart from him, and cast their eyes
upon, and give entertainment to other lovers, and therefore when any do so that
have been called to the fellowship of himself, the fire of his jealousy is
kindled against them, and he (as here) threatens to cast them off. Woe (says
our Savior) to you that are rich: for ye have received your consolation: Woe
unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger. Luke 6. 24, 25. Manifold
afflictions shall come upon them, and they shall weep and howl for those
miseries that shall come upon them. James 5. 1. He that fills the hungry with
good things, does send the rich empty away. Luke 1. 53. Such he will abhor, and
vomit them out of his mouth as most loathsome persons to him: Oh! how sad and
calamitous is their condition who boast and witness of themselves that they are
pure, sinless, perfect, as to attainment; there is a Generation who are pure in
their own Eyes, though yet they are not washed from their filthiness; and oh
how lofty are their Eyes, and their Eyelids lifted up! they can witness their
enjoyment of all that is to be enjoyed, now in this day, that they have no sin
in them, and that they are perfect in themselves: Woe unto them, they have
their happiness now, their portion in this life; and those that are in any
measure like to them are loathsome to Christ, and the more loathsome and
abominable, the more they are like to them. It was displeasing to the Lord that
Job had such an overweening conceit of himself, of his knowledge, purity,
innocence (though he was destitute of such light, and advantages as are
afforded to us) and it brought forth evil fruit in him, even to condemn him
that was most just; and that good man when convinced of his evil, was ashamed
of himself, and confesses that he was vile, and professes he would lay his
hand upon his mouth. Once, says he, have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea
twice, but I will proceed no further, and when his eye saw God he did abhor
himself, and repented in dust and ashes. Job 40. 3, 5. and 42. 4, 6. This is a
becoming thing for us to be low in our own eyes, to take notice, and be
sensible of our vileness, bruitishness, shortness in every matter, and to
acknowledge that when we have done all that is commanded us, yet we are
unprofitable servants; to confess with him, That? we are more brutish then
man, and have not the understanding of a man, that we have neither learned
wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. Prove. 30. 2, 3. That we have yet
much wanting and lacking in our faith in him, love to him, and conformity to
his Image: To this man will he look, that (instead of boasting what he is, and
has done, and proclaiming his own goodness) is poor and of a contrite Spirit,
and trembles at his word, that has nothing to glory in but the Lord, Who of
God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. Isa. 66. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 31. But the proud, the rich, the full
he knows a far off: The foolish (such as are vainglorious boasters, who lift
up the Horn on high, and speak with a stiff neck, who commend themselves, and
their own mouths praise themselves, such) shall not stand in his sight. Psalm.
5. 5. with Psalm. 75. 4, 5. His eyes are upon the haughty, that he may bring
them down. 2 Samuel 22. 28. And their conceitedness is so unpleasing and
distastful to him, that he cannot away with them; but if they repent not, he
will at last spue them out of his mouth, he will not plead for them as his
Church, but cast them forth as an abominable branch, and then how will they be
exposed to all miseries, afflictions, and judgments whatsoever? Oh! consider we
this, that pride may be hidden from us, and that we may not be wise in our own
eyes, but viewing our selves in the Glass of the Lord's body, may take shame to
our selves; For pride goes before destruction, and an haughty Spirit before a
fall. Prove. 16. 18. and 18. 12. and 29. 23. Were we but comparing our selves
with that object that is proposed to us, and set before us in the glorious
Gospel, and viewing what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height
thereof, and considering that love of Christ which passes knowledge, that
Peace of God which passes all understanding, and seeing what treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid in Christ: oh what cause should we see to be
abased, and to bewail our dim-sightedness, and shortness of understanding, and
comprehending these things, and see cause to complain of, and acknowledge our
great incompleatness in our selves, and in conformity unto him; yea, to cry out
of our uncleanness, unlovingness, barrenness, leanness, and witheredness! If
the Apostle could confess of himself and his Brethren, that they saw in part,
and knew in part, and that their present knowledge was as far short of that
attainable, and hereafter to be enjoyed, as a Child's knowledge of the
understanding of a man, what cause have we rather to humble our selves, and
hide us in the dust, who are so far short of what they had attained to? 1 Cor.
13, 9, 12. Surely his Grace is vouchsafed to us to lay us low, and hide pride
from us, and break us off from our high thoughts of our selves, and though the
Spirit that dwells in us, as of us lusts to envy, and leads us to lift up
our selves: yet he gives more Grace, Grace abounding and exceeding the
corruption of our natural Spirit, that our lofty looks may be humbled, and our
haughty hearts bowed down; wherefore he says, God resists the proud, but
gives Grace to the humble. Jam. 4. 5, 6. Humble we our selves therefore under
the mighty hand of God, and suffer we those high thoughts of our selves to be
purged out of us, and mortified; or otherwise we shall never be servent in
Spirit in seeking the Lord, and yielding up our selves unto him: The Apostle
saw it needful and profitable to give this admonition to every one of the
believers, that they should not think more highly of themselves, or of their
parts, gifts, and seize, then they ought to think, but to think soberly,
and this he gives unto them through the Grace given to him, and to that end he
gives it, That they might present their bodies, as moved and strengthened by
the Mercies of God, a living Sacrifice to him, etc. And not be conformed to
this world, but be transformed according to the renewing of their mind, etc.
Romans 12. 1, 3. Implying, that if they had unsober thoughts of themselves, and
did think of themselves above what was meet, this would hinder them from an
hearty yielding up themselves to the Lord, as those alive from the dead, and
their members as instruments of righteousness unto holiness, they would
otherwise be apt to think and say, They had need of nothing, and so expose
themselves to wrath, as here: Because thou say I am rich, [rich in knowledge
and utterance, the unsober taking notice hereof is very hurtful, and
pernicious, and puffs up men, blows them up like a Bladder. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
And makes them grow careless and negligent when opportunities are afforded to
them for buying that Gold tried in the fire, and to despise, and set light by
those helps afforded them of God] And increased with goods [they intimate, that
time was when they were poor, and had nothing, but now they are enlarged, and
grown rich, and their substance is increased: Time was when they were in
bondage to the Law, or rudiments of this world, and were without Christ and God
in the world, but now they are the Temple of the Lord, the Church of Christ,
they are not like others, or like to what sometimes they themselves were, they
have now excellent ornaments, they have a great gift of prayer, and can enlarge
themselves therein, they can speak freely, and fluently for the truth, they can
plead, and contend earnestly for the faith of the common Salvation, and have so
much to say for it, and such strong and weighty Arguments, that they can
silence opposers, and so stop their mouths that they have nothing material to
say; they have much mortified their corruptions, subdued their lusts, cleansed
their ways, escaped the pollutions of the world, and have put on bowels of
mercy, kindness, meekness, long-suffering, temperance, sobriety, etc. They were
become like those that trusted in, and whose heart was lifted up because of
their beauty, and who made to themselves Images of God's fair lewels of his
Gold and Silver, which he gave them, Ezekiel. 16. 4. 19. and 28. 17] And have need
of rothing (or of no Man) [need of no Instruments, though they did not leave
off the assemblings of themselves together, but seemed to take delight in
approaching to God, yet they knew all already, that could be said to them they
needed nothing to be perfected in them, for they had nothing lacking, nothing
to be healed; for there was nothing lame in them, they needed no teaching, they
were such knowing persons, and had such great understanding, they had need of
no edification, they had attained already, they needed no reproof, they were
clean in their own eyes, and free from those evils that others might charge
them with, and fault them for; they were even saying, Blessed be the Lord, for
we are rich; God we thank thee, we are not like other men, we have all we
desire to have, we have need of nothing; this was not only their thought, but
their Language, they so said concerning themselves: But what account did the
faithful and true witness, who will not lie, give of them? For it is not be
that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.
18. Did he confirm their saying, and witness the same of them, which they said
of themselves? No, they were their own witnesses, he gives them to understand
that they were greatly mistaken, and deceived in that he saith] and know not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. What a
great mistake and error was here? Do those that are so highly conceited of
themselves think their case is so sad? No, these knew not, their high and
unsober thoughts of themselves blinded them, and made them worse then fools,
Prove. 26. 12. And their blindness, and ignorance was apparent, and their shame
and nakedness visible to such as had their eyes open; they were blind, and yet
they thought, and said they saw; and truly, ignorant persons usually are most
highly conceited of themselves, as the Apostle Paul signifies, when he says,
I would not have you ignorant, -- lest you be wise in your own conceits. Romans
11. 25. They thought themselves to be rich and full, and see how empty and poor
they were, while they thought themselves to be something (as men may do) when
they are nothing, they deceived themselves. Gal. 6. 3. And if any thinks he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. 1 Cor. 8. 3. The
fool regeth, and is confident (thinks himself to be in a good and happy
condition, that he has need of nothing, is so secure that he can never be
moved) but the wise man seareth (he is not high-minded, but fears, he is
always jealous of himself) and departs from evil. Prove. 14. 16. with Romans 11.
20. See also what a mistake was in the Corinthians, who were high minded, and
highly conceited of themselves: Now ye are full (says the Apostle) now ye are
rich (increased with goods) ye have reigned as Kings without us, etc. We are
fools for Christ's sake, ye are wise in Christ (ye can be his Disciples, and
followers of him, and yet are so wise, that you can keep your substance, and be
free from trials, reproaches, and persecutions; or, ye can declare the Testimony
of God succesfully, and yet make use of excellency of speech and wisdom) we are
weak, but ye are strong, ye are honorable (you have esteem and repute amongst
men) but we are despised, etc. But what manner of persons were these that had
such high thoughts of themselves? See what the same Apostle says of them. I
Brethren could not speak unto you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, as
unto Babes in Christ. -- I have fed you with Milk, and not with meat; for
hitherto ye were not able to bear, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are yet
(arnal; for whereas there is yet among you envying, and strise, and divisions,
are ye not Carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 4. 8, 10. with Chap. 3. 1, 4. As
there is that makes himself poor, and has great riches, who appears as one
that has nothing, and yet possesses all things; so there is that makes
himself rich, yet has nothing. Prove. 13. 7. Such a mistake there was with this
Church, and is with many that have high thoughts and conceits of themselves,
Herein they are like a dream of a night Vision, as when an hungry man dreameth,
and behold he eats, but he awaketh, and his Soul is hungry; or as when a
thirsty man dreameth, and behold he drinks, but he awaketh, and behold he is
faint, and his Soul has appetite. Isa. 29. 7, 8. To such a sad and loathsorn
condition may such bring themselves, who have believed on the name of the only
begotten Son of God, by turning their eye from Christ, and doting upon, and
admiring themselves, their knowledge, parts, gifts, receipts, seize: Oh,
that we may look into the perfect law of liberty, and concontinue therein, that
we may so behold our own vileness, sinfulness, shortness, and incompleatness in
our selves, that we may be low in our own eyes, and so preserved from this
lukewarmness, and quickened, and inflamed with love to Christ, to seek after the
knowledge and enjoyment of him, and for that cause to part with and forsake all
things; Yea, and with fervency to hold forth the profession of our Faith
without wavering, that we may overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and word of
our testimony, not loving our lives to the death; that none of the things we
may suffer, may move us, nor may we count our lives dear to our selves, that we
may finish our course with joy. --

These are the persons to whom this faithful and true witness whose name is,
Wonderful Counselor, speaks; and to whom he gives this useful and gracious
counsel. --

We have in the next place to consider, and speak unto. --

3. The counsel it self; I counsel thoe to buy of me Gold tried in the fire,
etc.

We may note in general from the person counselling, persons counseled, and
counsel it self given to them. --

1. That when men have sitted themselves for being spued out of Christ's mouth,
and brought themselves into such a condition that they deserve to be no longer
pleaded for by him as his Church, but to be vomited forth as loathsome, and he
threatens so to deal with them, yet while it is called to day, such is the
graciousness and mercisulness of this faithful and true witness; such is the
loathness and unwillingness of Christ and God in him to execute what he
threatens, that he is long-suffering to such unworthy, and ill-deserving ones,
and gives good and wholesome counsel to such, that they might hear it, and
receive it, that so the judgment threatened may not be executed upon them: He
had said, [I will spue thee out of my mouth,] but before he does so, he here
says [I do counsel thee (in the present time, to buy, etc.] So when the Lord
had been declaring the wonderful iniquity of his people in former times, and
commanded it to be recorded, and threatened judgment, desolating judgment, yet
before he executes the sentence he gives good advice to them. Now go (says
the Lord to the Prophet) write it before them in a table, and note it in a
book, that it may be for the time to come (the latter day, to warn and admonish
us) for ever and ever: That this is a rebellious people (though they fast, and
pray, and tread God's Courts) lying children, children that will not hear the
Law of the Lord; which say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophesy
not to us right things, speak smooth things, prophesy deceits. -- Therefore
this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in an
high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant; and he shall break it
as the breaking of the potters vessel that is broken in pieces (he shall divide
them and separate them one from another, and make such a breach amongst them,
as cannot be repaired by them again; Thus he threatens, and yet to these he
says.) In returning (to him from whom ye have deeply revolted) and rest, ye
shall be saved, (namely from the judgment deserved and threatened, or from the
evil of it.) In quietness and confidence shall be your strength; yea and though
they would not presently listen to this counsel, yet still he says; therefore
will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be
exalted that he may have mercy upon you, etc. Isa. 30. 8, 18. Thus also when
the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy had threatened sore judgments on his people for
their multiplied and heinous provocations, and commanded him once and again,
and a third time, not to make intercession for them, nor to lift up a cry, or
prayer for them, yet such was his unwillingness to destroy them, and such
testimony he gives of his willingness to receive them, in returning to him,
that their hands might not hang down, nor their knees be seeble, that he
acquainteth them with the end and intention of such threatenings, and gives
unto them good counsel. At what time I shall speak (says the Lord) concerning
a nation, and concerning a kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy; if that nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I
will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them: -- Now therefore go to,
speak to the men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem saying, thus says the
Lord, behold I frame evil, and devise a device against you, return ye now every
one from his evil way, and make your way and doings good. Jer. 7. 16. and 11.
14. and 14. 11. with chap. 18. 7, 11. To this also agrees that in the Prophet
Zephany: Where after God had pronounced great evil on them that swear by the
Lord, and that swear by Malcham, that halted between two Opinions, and were
lukewarm ones, not singly, sincerely, and fervently serving and glorifying the
Lord, that their goods should become a booty, and their houses a desolation;
that he would send a day of wrath, trouble, and distress, and their Silver and
Gold should not be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's wrath; yet
before he deals with them according to his threatenings, and their deservings,
he says, Gather your selves together, yea gather together, O nation not
desired; before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff,
before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord's
anger come upon you: Seek the Lord all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought
his judgments, seek righteousness, seek meekness; it may be you may be hid in
the day of the Lord's anger. Zephan. 1. 4, 18. and 2. 1, 3. See also, Jer. 36.
3. Hos. 9. 14, 17. and 11. 7, 8. with chap. 14. 1. 2. Joel 2. 1, 3. So in the
Epistles to other of these Churches; when he threatens to remove their
Candlestick out of its place, and to fight against them, yet he expressly, or
intimately counsels them to remember from whence they were fallen, to
repent, to do their first works, that there might be a turning away of the evil
pronounced. Rev. 2. 5, 16. his end, while it is called to day, in threatening
and lifting up his hand, is not firstly to execute the judgment threatened, for
that is his work, his strange work, but to awaken us out of our sleep, to make
us afraid, that we might run together unto him, prepare to meet him, and turn
to him that smites, and seek the Lord of hosts; and therefore he gives good
counsel to such as have greatly provoked him, and incensed him against them,
and deserve to be abhorred by him; and it is out of his pity and compassion
that he thus threatens before he punishes, and lifts up his hand before he
strikes, this is out of faithfulness, and not out of hatred to us, that we
might consider our selves, and ways, and fall down before him, and turn from
our iniquities, that we may understand his truth; and it is good and profitable
for us to take notice of this, and set our hearts to it; for many times when
God reproves us in his word; when he heweth us by his Prophets, and slays us
by the words of his lips, in setting our sins in order before us, or when he
lays his hand upon us, and his judgments are as the light that goes forth;
we have such evil thoughts of him, and are so jealous and distrustful of his
love to us, that we are ready to think and say, there is no hope, the case is
desperate, we have loved strangers, and after them we will go: he has
forgotten to be gracious, he has shut up his tender mercies in displeasure,
and will be no more fayourable to us: But now his gracious end in threatening
and childing of us, being known and considered by us, would be powerful to
encourage us to look toward his holy Temple, and come into his house in the
multitude of his mercies, when we say, we are cast out of his sight, and are in
deepest affliction, and he threatens to cut us off; as, Jonah. 2. 2, 4, 7. It
was not out of ill will, or hatred to this Church that he threatens to spue
them out of his mouth, but out of love and compassion to them; and therefore
verse. 19. he says, As many as I love, I rebuke (viz. sharply reprove when, and
as they need it) and chasten, be zealous, therefore and repent: Oh that we may
so set our hearts to, and diligently consider this, that at such a time as
this, when he is pronouncing evil, and threatening to break us in pieces, and
destroy his places of the assembly, we may return to him, from whom we have
wandered, with the whole heart, and not feignedly, and lift up our hearts with
our hands to God in the Heavens, who is gracious and merciful, and ready to
repent of the evil pronounced! Oh that we may yet turn unto him from all our
iniquities and idols, that he might turn again, and have compassion upon us,
and delight to do us good, and make us glad according to the days where in he
has afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.

2. In that he says, Thou art poor, and miserable, and wretched, and blind,
and naked; I counsel thee to buy, etc. He gives us to understand, that thosE
persons are truly and verily poor, that are with out, and distitute of this
Gold, that is to be bought of the faithful and true Witness, they are naked
indeed, and in the account of God, that have not this White raiment, whatever
they may have of this worlds goods, treasure, clothing or accomodations; these
do not truly, and indeed enrich, and cloth a man: Though a man had an house
full of that Gold and Silver that comes out of the Earth; yet alas, he may be
miserable enough for all this, it is Christ, and those treasures in him that
are the true riches, the true Mammon, which is substantial and durable, Luke
16. 9, 11. It is the Mammon of unrighteousness, uncertain riches, that which
perishes, and deceives, which our wisdom so highly esteems, and leads us
to set our hearts and affections on, and covet after greedily all the day long;
these riches below are not real substance, hence the Proverb says. Labor not
to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom: will thou setthine eyes upon that
which is not? (which has no real being, or sure continuance) for riche^
certainly make themselves wings, they flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven.
Proy. 23. 4, 5. It is that wisdom only that is from above, that causes those
that love her to inherit substance, and she will fill their Treasures Prove. 8.
10, 21. And so persons here may be blind, and naked indeed that are without
Christ, though they have never so much of Philosophy, of that Science which is
falsely so called; and though they are clothed with never so costly Apparel,
and glorious array, the wisdom which is from beneath, which is natural and
earthly, will not open the eyes of our understandings to know Gods name, or his
Sons name, this will not render us wise in the account of Christ, for the
Wisdom of this World is foolishness with God; nor can we cover the shame of our
nakedness in his sight: Let us then not lift up our selves by these things.
Jer. 9. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 31. But this more properly appertains to what
follows.

3. In that he councelleth these miserable ones to buy, he intimates to us,
that not only such as are sensible of their condition, are counseled, invited,
and called upon to come to Christ the fountain of living Waters, but such as
are insensible also, such as are poor, miserable, wretched, blind, naked, and
know it not; and this is generally true as with respect to Gods preventing men
with his Grace, that brings Salvation to all men; when he first calls to,
and counsels men in, and with his glorifying his Son unto them, they are
dead in trespasses and sins, they are deaf, and wretched, and blind, they know
not the sadness of their condition; hence he calls to such: Hear ye deaf, and
look ye blind that ye may see Isa. 42. 18. They are at first dead to whom the
Son of God sends forth his voice, destitute of all Spiritual li^e and light;
they are ignorant, and out of capacity by and wisdom or light of theirs to know
what their condition is. John 5. 25. And hence men generally have such a good
esteem of themselves, and of their condition, and ways, and think highly of
themselves; as the Jews, who though they did search the Scriptures, yet would
not come to Christ that they might have life, and therefore had not the love of
God in them; yet they thought themselves to be in a good Case, and that Eternal
life did appertain to them* John 5. 39, 40. And those that made mention of the
God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness: For they were obstinate,
and their neck as an Iron Sinew, and their brow Brass; yet they called
themselves of the holy City, and stayed themselves upon the God of Israel. Isa.
48. 1, 4. Yet to such as these he calls and gives good Counsel, to simple
ones, who know nothing; yea, who love (and that for a long time) their
simplicity, and to fools who hate knowledge. Prove. 1. 20, 23. He counsels
foolish ones who know not him, and therefore know not themselves; for he is the
light of the world, yea indeed all the Sons of Man are foolish and ignorant,
until, or further then they are enlightened by him: Hence that cry and call;
Unto you O men, I call, and my voice is to the Sons of Man; Oh ye simple
understand wisdom, and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart, to signify to
us, that the Children of men are simple, and fools, and yet are called upon,
and invited to come to Christ. Prove. 8. 4, 6. This may give us somewhat to
answer those that abuse the Scriptures, and pervert them to the hurt of
themselves, and others, when the Holy Ghost inviteth every thirster to come to
the waters, to buy and eat; this is only meant, say they, of such as are
sensible of their sad condition, and such as are gracious thirsters, which
hunger and thirst after righteousness, when as indeed it appears most
directly to be spoken to such as thirsted out of necessity only, and who were
seeking rest, and satisfying in vain things that could not profit them, and
therefore were reproved for so doing; and this I am sure is no gracious frame,
or qualification; for it is added, Why do ye spend Money for that which is not
Bread, and your labor or that, which satisfies not. Isa. 55. 1, 2. So when
our Savior says, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden; this
is spoken, say they, of such as labored for Christ, and were weary of, and
willing to part with their sins; when as such are hereby invited, who did seek
rest where it was not to be had, such as sought to know the father by the
wisdom of this world, and so failed of their expectation: Hence our Savior
calls them, all of them, to him, who knows the father, and none but he, and
him to whomsoever he will reveal him, and in coming to him he would give them
rest from their burdening and unprofitable labor. Mat. 11. 25, 29. And this is
suitable to what we have noted in this place; we see here, such are called upon,
and encouraged to buy and purchase, and good counsel is given to them, whose
case and condition was very bad and lamentable, and yet they knew it not, they
were insensible (...) of it, and thought otherwise and better of themselves
then was meet.

4. In that he gives such Council to these that were ignorant of their state,
he signifies to us, that the way to make men sensible of their condition, when
their case is wretched, and miserable, and they know it not, is to commend to
them, and lift up before them Christ, and those treasures in him, and to direct
them thereunto, and not at first to preach the Law, or otherwise to use it,
then according to the glorious Gospel: The Gospel of Christ is the Arm of the
Lord, in which his power is put forth, and Spirit given, to give light to them
that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; so Christ sath, The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me; because the Lord has anointed me to preach the Gospel to
the poor, -- (and therewith) to preach recovery of sight to the blind, to
preach their eyes open, in preaching the Gospel. Luke 4. 18. So our Savionr
says, The Holy Ghost shall reprove and convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment, in, and with glorifying Christ; this way he
should show unto them, and open their eyes to behold the sinfulness of their
sin, in not believing on Christ, and the vanity and unprofitableness of their
Idols, of their works of righteousness, judgment, etc. John 16. 8, 14. In like
manner also the Apostle Paul was sent with this Gospel, to open the eyes of
Jews and Gentiles, and so to show them what a sad condition they were in, how
well thoughted soever they were of themselves. Acts 26. 18, 23. Prove. 8. 4, 6.
Hence also the Gospel is called, The Word of Life. Phil. 2. 16. The Words of
Christ are Spirit and life to them that believe not. John 6. 63. The Testimony
of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple that know nothing. Psalm. 19. 7. and
119. 130. The Gospel is light, the Medium for discovering all things in their
right and proper Colors, and for giving sight to us also. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Surely
the lifting up Christ is the way to make men run unto him that were formerly
insensible of their sad condition without him, because they were ignorant of,
and unacquainted with his excellency. Isa. 5^. 5. Cant. 5. 8, 16. with Chap. 6.
1. In lifting him up, thereby the Spirit of God shows unto us, and convinces
us of our deadness, as the Apostle hereby judged and reasoned, and herein
showed all were dead, condemned to dye, and helpless in their misery, and
insensible of their condition, in that One dyed for all, and rose again. 2 Cor.
5. 14, 5.

Particularly from the Counsel it self, we may note these instructions.

1. That there is a rich treasury, and full and complete provision, answering
to the needs of those that are poor, etc. and know it not. 2. That this
provision may be had by such as are poor, etc. 3. That to the end they partake
of this provision, and preparation, it is needful for them to buy it, to buy
this Gold tried in the fire, etc. 4. That they may so value it as to buy it,
neeful it is that they are prevented, and strengthened by the Grace of God;
they anoint their Eyes with eye salve that they may see.
1. That there is a rich treasury, and full and complete provision answering to
the needs of those that are poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and
naked, and know it not, such an one as does answer to all their needs, and may
supply all their wants; here is Gold tried in the fire, to answer to their
wretchedness, miserableness and Poverty, white raiment, to cover their
nakedness, and Eye Salve to cure their blindness. --

Here God assisting, we shall consider in the first branch of the Counsel.

1. What is this Gold here commended and counseled to, and why called Gold? 2.
What is fignified by its being said, To be tried in the fire? 3. What imported
in the end and motive to buy it, That thou may be rich?
1. What is this Gold that is commended, and counseled, and why so called?

The Gold here commended and councelled to, is not natural Gold, or that most
excellent metal which is taken out of the Earth, and which is of such high
account amongst men; and so it is not of the riches of this world; for the
wretched, miserable poor, blind, naked, could not buy this in a natural sense,
such have it not, nor can they obtain it, or labor for it; nor have they any
thing to give in exchange for it, who are so miserably poor: Nor does the
faithful and true witness blame, rebuke, and chasten men that are poor, blind,
and naked, and destitute of this Gold, simply because they are without it, as
he does these for being poor; but he is the helper of such as are naturally
poor, and cares for them, and pityeth and compassionateth them, and
instructs others to be open-handed to them; nor does he give such serious
counsel to any of his Churches, to buy such a corruptible thing as is this
earthly Gold; nor need we be so earnestly counseled to labor for this
perishing thing; every one naturally is too much inclined to the world, and the
things thereof, from the least to the greatest every one is given to
covetousnes; but rather on the other hand we need to be admonished, and the
Wisdom of God does admonish us, not to labor to be rich, Prove. 23. 4. Yea a
man may indeed be poor and miserable enough in the account of this faithful and
gracious Counselor, though he had a sufficient quantity of natural Gold; yea,
though he had the whole World, and all the riches thereof: But here this
blessed Counselor speaks about Spiritual and Heavenly things, and commends
to us a better and more enduring substance then any this World affords, or
can be enjoyed in having and possessing the most pure Gold here below. -- And
so, --.

1. By Gold is here meant, the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is become the
Fountain of, and in whom are all durable riches and righteousness, all that may
truly enrich us. Prove. 8. 18. He is the beginning of the Creation of God, in
whom originally, fundamentally and completely there is a new Creation, and all
thereto appertaining; and so he is in a Spiritual consideration Gold. There is
indeed a great diffimilitude in the old and new Creation in this respect; the
things of the first are diverse and different one from another; there a man that
counsels is one thing, and Gold another, and White raiment a third; but in
the new, Christ is all. Col. 3. 11. All things are gathered together in one in
Christ. Ephesians. 1. 10. He is the faithful and gracious Counselor, who councelleth
us to buy Gold, and he is the person of whom it is to be bought; and he is the
Gold that is to be bought, even he himself as he is declared and brought to us
in the Glorious Gospel, which therefore is, and is called the riches of this
World. Romans 11. 11, 12. So he is not only said to be girded with fine Gold of
Uphaz, and to be girt about the Paps with a Golden Girdle, as in those visional
discoveries of him given to Daniel and John. Dan. 10. 5. Rev. 1. 13. And to
have a Crown of pure Gold on his head. Psalm. 21. 3. But also his head (his
infinite wisdom, and unsearchable judgment and understanding, and his
Authority, Rule, and Government) is said to be the most fine Gold, and his
hands (his works and doings appertaining to our redempt on, which were wrought
by him as the white and ruddy one) Gold Rings set with the Beril (wonderfully
rich, curious, and enriching) Cant. 5. 11, 14. And by virtue of their Interest
in, union with, and relation to him, the seven Churches are said to be Golden
Candlesticks, called Golden after him, and enriched by him that is Gold indeed:
Thus expressly Eliphaz calls him, speaking to Job. If thou return to the
Almighty thou shall be built up, -- Then thou shall lay up Gold as dust, and
the Gold of Ophir as the Stones of the Brook; Yea, the Almighty shall be thy
Gold, and thou shall have Silver of strength; for then shall thou have thy
delight in the Almighty. Job 22. 23, 26 So the Apostle says, that to him was
this Grace given; That he should preach among the Gentiles the ansearchable
riches of Christ; namely, either the unsearchable riches he has obtained for
us, and which are treasured up in him, or Christ himself who is unsearchable
riches. Ephesians. 3. 8. Thus also it is said, That in him are hid all the Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge. Col. 2. 3. In like manner also, in other Metaphors, he
as Preached and proclaimed in the Gospel is said to be a Pearl of great price,
and Treasure hid in a field. Mat. 13. 44, 46.

2. Now he in himself, and as declared to us in his Testimony is called and
compared to Gold, to signify to us in general his preciousness, and that he is
most enriching, as also is signified in the end laid down, and proposed to us
to buy it, That we may be rich: The Holy Ghost does frequently make use of the
most precious things of this world, and compare him thereto, to give us some
intimation of his excellency, though indeed none of them; yea, all of them
cannot sufficiently acquaint us with his worthiness, or set forth all his
praises; but for the helpfulness of us, and because of the infirmity of our
flesh, he uses such expressions, we being better skilled in the things here
below, that we might in a little measure by these be informed of his
preciousness and praise-worthiness, that our Souls might be broken off from the
things here below, and cleave to him, and we might seek for that in him which
is truly in him, and but appearingly and seemingly in natural and earthly
things; And here he uses this expression of gold, and particularly he is
called and compared to gold.

1. Because as Gold is taken out of the earth before it becomes so precious,
and enriching to us. Job. 28. 5, 6. So our Lord Jesus Christ fell into the
ground, and died, and was taken out of the earth, the heart of the earth, that
he might become enriching to us. Herein indeed there is a dissimilitude between
the natural gold, and this spiritual (as there are many between the old and new
creation, and things appertaining to both) the earth is the original place of
the former, but it is not so of the latter: Christ came down from Heaven, from
above; he was in the form of God, and was glorious with the father's own self
before the world was. Job. 3. 31. and 6. 38, 51. and 17. 5. he is (as to his
divine consideration) over all, God blessed for ever. Romans 9. 5. from
everlasting to everlasting he is God. Psalm. 90. 1, 2. But now, that he might
become unsearchable riches for us, it was absolutely necessary that he should
suffer, and rise again from the dead. Act. 17. 3. Luke 24. 26. ye know (says
the Apostle) the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who being rich (the proper and
only Lord and Heir of all things by divine and eternal generation) for your
sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might be enriched. 2 Cor. 8. 9.
So he faith of, and concerning himself; except a corn of wheat fall into the
ground and dye, it abides alone, but if it die it brings forth much fruit.
Joh. 12. 24. he might have remained alone in the enjoyment of his own glory,
and glorious perfection, though he had not fallen into the earth; but he could
not have brought us back to God, but we must have remained in our miserable
poverty for ever; he could not have been communicable riches to us, as we had
departed from God, and fallen by our iniquities, if he had not died for our
sins, and been buried; and if also he who was delivered for our offenses had
not been raised again, and taken out of the earth in that same body in which he
was put to death, and laid in a Sepulcher, he could not have been Gold for us,
we could not have been partakers of him, and of that glory in him: If Christ be
not raised again we are yet in our sins; preaching, and hearing, faith and hope
is vain, and they who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished; and we must be
banished from God for ever necessarily, and so continue poor, and miserable
everlastingly; But now Christ is risen from the dead, and so truth (substance,
and substantial riches) is sprung out of the earth, (in his resurrection) and
righteousness looks down from Heaven; and God gives us that which is good.
Psalm. 85. 10, 12. and in him bodily (even in that body which the father
prepared for him, and in which he bare our sins on the tree, and was taken from
Prison and from Judgment) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead; and in him
we are complete, completely provided for, and furnished with all that may truly
enrich us. Colos. 2. 9. 10. He is now ascended up on high and has led
captivity captive, and received gifts [in the man] for men, yea, for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them; He is ascended, and
gone up to a glorious place, and to a glorious state; in him it has pleased
all the fullness to dwell; But in that he ascended, what is it (what is
signified hereby, and imported to us herein as needful hereto) but that he also
first descended into the lower parts of the earth (into the womb of the Virgin,
and into a great abasement, into many sorrows and sufferings; he humbled
himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the cross; yea he went
down into the heart of the earth; his soul was in hell, and his flesh in the
grave, in the belly, or womb of the earth) He that descended is the same also
that ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things (with the
virtues and influences of his sufferings and sacrifice) and fulfill all things.
Psalm. 68. 18. with Ephesians. 4. 9, 10. It is through his falling into the earth
that he has exalted, and advanced our nature so highly, that he is in it
become the great God and our Savior, the Lord and Christ, the heir of all
things, and inheritour of God's holy mountain: Because he humbled himself,
therefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every name: And he
is gone up into Heaven, and and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
Authorities, and Powers being made subject to him. Heb. 9. 12. Philip. 2. 6, 9.
1 Pet. 3. 21, 22. The Captain of our salvation is become perfect for us through
suffering. Heb. 2. 10. The Lord did (in a wonderful and supernatural way)
create a new thing in the earth; and it is this fruit of the earth which is
excellent and comely for our escape. Jer. 31. 22. Isa. 4. 2. But this may be
further spoken to in what is said, and affirmed of this gold, to wit, that is
tried in the fire. --

2. He is called and compared to gold, because as natural Gold is the most
excellent metal which God has created, so this faithful and true witness is
the most excellent one, there is none to be compared to him: Gold is more
precious then Iron, Brass, Silver, or any other metal. Isa. 60. 17. Numb. 31.
22. So he is precious, excellent as the Cedars (namely, as the Cedars excel
other trees, so does he other persons and things) Cant. 5. 15. He is the
beginning, (the principal one, God's first born) the first begotten from the
dead, that in all things (and amongst all persons) he might have the
preeminence; for it has pleased the father that in him should all fullness
dwell. Psalm. 89. 27, Col. 1. 18, 19. He is White and Ruddy, the chiefest among
ten thousand. Cant. 5. 10. he is fairer then the children of men. Psalm. 45. 2.
Whatever beauty, or comely proportion they may have, their fairness is not to
be compared to his; he is fair with the beauty of holiness, and there is no
blemish, or spot in him, no sin in him, or wrinckle of sorrow and infirmity
upon him. 1 Pet. 1. 19. He is more excellent then the Angels, he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they; for unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son, this day have i begotten thee? All
the Angels of God are required to worship him: He who is raised from the dead
(even the man Christ Jesus) is set on the right hand of God in the Heavenly
places; far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come, and God has put all things under his feet; and given him to be head over
all things, etc. And therefore also in him we are complete, because he is the
head of all principality and power. Heb. 1. 4, 14. Ephesians. 1. 20, 22. Col. 2.
10. This man was counted worthy of more honor then Moses (who was the Mediator
of the first Testament) inasmuch as he who builds the house has more honor
then the house: Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a Servant, But
Christ (not as a servant, but) as a Son (not in, only, but) over his own house
(He is the Lord of it, and has dominion over it, and he only. Ephesians. 4. 5, 1
Cor. 8. 5, 6.) Heb. 3. 2, 6. and 10. 21. And he has obtained a more excellent
ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Testament,
established upon better promises. Heb. 8. 6. He is a more excellent High Priest
then was Aaron, or any of the high Priests under the Law: A more excellent
person, they, the Sons of men, he is Jesus the Son of God, Heb. 4. 14. they had
infirmity, but he is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, and made
higher then the Heavens. Heb. 7. 26, 28. they were made after the law of a
carnal commandment, but he after the power of an endless life. Heb. 7. 16, 17.
they were made Priests without an oath, but he with an oath. Heb. 7. 20, 21.
They were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of
death; But this man because he continues ever has an unchangeable Priesthood,
which passes not from him to any other (to no Vicar on earth) wherefore he is
able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, etc. Heb. 7. 24,
25. They ministered about a worldly sanctuary; but he is the Minister of the
sanctuary, and true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man. Heb. 9. 1.
and 8. 2. They offered up sacrifices which could never take away sin, for it
was not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats could take away sin; But
this man, when he had offered up one sacrifice for sins for ever (even himself,
his own body once for all) sat down on the right hand of God, (from ever
offering any more a propitiatory sacrifice) he needs not daily as the former
High Priests to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples, for this he did once when he offered up himself. Heb. 10. 1, 12. and
7. 27. They entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures
of the true, but he into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us; he is set on the right hand of the throne of majesty in the Heavens.
Heb. 8. 1. and 9. 24. He is more excellent then all Kings and Prophets in
former times; he is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. Heb.
1. 9. God has set this King upon his holy hill of Zion, and raised up him a
Prophet whom all are to hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto them;
and whosoever will not hear this Prophet shall be destroyed from among the
people. Acts 3. 22, 23. He is excellent in wisdom above all men (for God has
not given the spirit by measure unto him) yea he is greater therein then
Solomon, who was wiser then all men. 1 King. 4. 29, 31. with Matt. 12. 42. He
is more excellent then the mountains of Prey. Psalm. 76. 4. This man is more
precious then fine gold, even this man then the golden wedge of Ophir. Isa. 13.
12. Man knows not the price of this excellent one, this wisdom that is from
above, neither is it found in the land of the living -- it cannot be valued
with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the Sapphire: the gold and
the crystal cannot equal it; -- no mention shall be made of coral, or of
pearls, for the price of wisdom is above rubies; The Topaz of Ethiopia shall
not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure Gold. Job 28. 13, 19. He
that came down, and comes down from above, is above all, above all other
persons and things; Wisdom is better then rubies, and all the things that may
be desired are not to be compared to him. Job. 3. 31. Prove. 8. 10, 11. He is
more excellent then all the privileges of the flesh, and then all our works of
righteousness, zeal, devotions, frames, and qualifications; and therefore the
Apostle counted those things that were formerly gain to him, and in which was
his life, confidence and consolation loss for Christ,; yea, he went on to count
all things as loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, that
he might win him, etc. Phil. 3. 4. 9. Oh! happy is the man that finds Wisdom;
-- For she is more precious then Rubies; yea, all the things thou can desire
are not to be compared to her. Prove. 3. 13 15. There is none so excellent, none
so enriching as is this Spiritual and Heavenly Gold: He does more; yea,
inexpressibly more exceed all other persons and things, then natural Gold does
excel all other Metals whatsoever.

3. He is called and compared to Gold; because as Money answers all things in
having Gold, tried Gold, a man may have any thing here below. Eccles. 10. 19.
So it is most fully and completely true here, now by faith, and in some
spiritual first fruits, and shall be hereafter in the Harvest, and in a
completely satisfying, and glorious enjoyment: He that has Christ has all
things in such a manner as he has, and enjoye^ him; The father has so loved
the Son; because he fell into the ground, and died, and rose again in that his
own personal body, that he has given, and delivered all things unto him, and
filled him with all fullness; he is become a Fountain of Grace and Truth, a
Treasury of all forgiveness, Wisdom, Spirit, and Life; and in having, and being
made partakers of him, those Treasures in him are also by faith received: In
him we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins
according to the riches of Gods Grace. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. To him give all
the Prophets witness, That through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive the forgiveness of sins. Acts 10. 43. and 13. 39. In this beloved one,
and in having him, they are made accepted. Ephesians. 1. 6. And have righteousness
without works imputed to them, they are made the righteousness of God in him:
So the Apostle signifies, that in winning Christ, and being found in him, He
should have the righteousness which is through the says of Christ. Romans 3. 22.
and 4, 5, 6. and 10. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 8, 9. To as many as receive
him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe on his name. John 1. 12. They are the Children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. 26. And because in having him they are Sons, God has
given unto them, and sent forth into their Hearts the Spirit of his Son, Gal 4.
6. He that believes on me as the Scripture has said (says Christ) out of his
belly shall flow Rivers of living Waters: But this spoke he of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive: Hence Christ's being in the
believers, and the Spirit's being in them are used indifferently; to signify
in having him we may, and shall have the Spirit also; for it is given to him
without measure, and put upon him, and rests on him, to fit and furnish him
for the work the father has appointed him to do, and to dispense to us
according to our needs, conditions, and capacities John 7. 37, 39. Romans 8. 9,
11. John 3. 34. Isa 42. 1. and 61. 1. and 11, 1, 3. And in being made Sons they
have by virtue of their union with, and relation to Christ, right and title to,
and interest in that inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades
not away; If Sons then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Co heirs with Christ; and if
Christ's, then are they Abraham's seed and Heirs, according to Promise. Romans 8.
17. Gal. 3. 17. He that has the Son has life, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation. 1 John 5. 11. John 3. 36. He that has him is
a Subject of God's peculiar Love and Grace, loved with other manner of love
then any of those without him are loved withal; God will love him, and Christ
will love him, and manifest himself unto him: He that finds him finds life,
and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Prove. 8. 35. In having him we have the
promises, to Abraham and his Seed they were made, not to seeds as of many, but
to one, even Christ; they were originally made to him, and confirmed in him,
and established by his Blood; for he is the Amen; and secondarily in coming
unto, and believing in him to all believers: In being Christ's they are
Abraham's seed, and so the Promises are theirs. Gal. 3. 16, 17, 26, 29, Those
that are born of him are the Children of the Promise.. Rom 9. 7, 8. Yea, in
receiving him in the Testimony, they receive him also who sent him. Mat. 10.
40. They have fellowship with Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1. 9. And so his father is
their father, his Spirit is their Spirit, his Gospel their Gospel, his promises
their promises, his inheritance their inheritance, his servants their servants,
his Glory their Glory, his Brethren and Companions their Brethren and
Companions, his receivers their receivers, and his Enemies their Enemies: Yea,
as all things are delivered to him of the father, so by faith all things are
theirs, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas (whether those that had the Gospel
of the Circumcision committed to them, or the Gospel of the Uncircumcision; or,
whether such who as wise Master Builders laid the foundation, or such as built
thereupon) or the world (the men and things of the world) or life, (to be
maintained and continued as, and while it may be good for them) or death, (all
afflictions, trials, temptations, necessities, straits, poverty, persecutions,
yea death it self is gain to them) or things present, (those things now acted,
done and enjoyed) or things to come, (at the glorious appearing of the great
God and our Savior Jesus Christ) all is theirs, and they are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23. Even as in Earthly and natural Gold all the
things of this world are summarily included and infolded, as it were, and are
had in having it, a man may have such Food, Raiment, Physic, Habitation,
Honor, Friendship as he desires, so, and much more truly and completely may
it be said of, and applied to Jesus Christ as with respect to durable and
Heavenly things: In him God has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in
Heavenly things; yea, he himself is said to be the things themselves which are
in him; because they are infolded in him, and may be, and shall be certainly
had, and partaken of, in receiving and enjoying him: As to instance a little
particularly; as in him is redemption, so he is made of God to the believer
redemption. Ephesians. 1. 7. with 1 Cor 1. 30. As in him is life, God has given us
Eternal life, and this life is in his Son; So he is our life, he is the true
God and Eternal life. 1 John 5. 11. with Col. 3. 3, 4. and 1 John 5. 20. As in
him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom, so he is made of God to them that are
in him Wisdom, Christ is the Wisdom of God. Col. 2. 3. with 1 Cor. 1. 24. 30.
As in him is righteousness, so he is the righteousness of God, And his name is,
Jehovah our righteousness. Isa. 45. 24. with Romans 3. 21. Jer. 23. 6. As in him
is Salvation, Neither is there Salvation in any other; so he is the Salvation
of God, which he has prepared before the face of all people. Acts 4. 12. with
Luke 2. 30, 31. As in him is Peace, so he is our Peace, This man shall be the
Peace, etc. John 26. 33. with Ephesians. 2, 14. and Mica 5. 5. As in him, there is
Consolation, so he is Consolation, fit and proper to comfort any one in any
tribulations, and the Consolation of Israel. Phil. 2. 1. with Luke 2. 25. Yea
as in him is all fullness, so he is all. Col. 1. 19. with Chap. 3. 11. And hence
the Spouse rejoices in this, and declares this to be the sum and compleatment
of her blessedness and happiness; My beloved is mine, I am his. Cant. 2. 16.
and 6. 3. And the Psalmist cries out, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. Psalm. 73, 25. And the
Prophet, The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in him.
Lam. 3. 24. Yea, this word of the Lord (who in the last Ages was made flesh)
sets this as complete and satisfying consolation, and encouragement before
Abraham. Fear not Abraham, I am thy Shield and thy exceeding great reward. Genesis
15. 1. And indeed this is the sum of all blessedness now and hereafter, to have
him to be ours; Oh Blessed is every such an one who has the Lord for his God;
For the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, he will give Grace and Glory, etc.
Psalm. 33. 12. and 146. 5. and 84. 10, 11. Genesis 17. 7. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. Rev.
21. 3, 7. Yea, in having him, we shall not only have in and with him all things
that are Spiritual and Heavenly, but in seeking first his Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, all other things shall be added to us, which are good
and needful thereto; such meat, drink, and apparel, such food, and raiment, and
all accomodations as may conduce unto our seeking more to know him, win him,
and be found in him. Mat. 6. 33. Godliness (even God who was manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, who is the root and foundation of Godliness,
and receiving and having him) is profitable unto all things, having the promise
of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8. with Chap.
3. 16. And this is great encouragement to seek him, that we may be partakers of
him; For they that seek him shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 84. 8, 10. And
this affords good cause to have our conversation without covetousness, in
him, and in having him, we have all things, may do all things, bear, suffer,
endure, part with all things, as the Apostle says; I can do all things in
Christ that strengthens me. Phil. 4. 13. Oh! he is Gold indeed, that
answers all things; and therefore he may be first commended; and commend
himself to us under this expression of Gold in this place and elsewhere, to
instruct us, that in having and buying this Gold, we shall together herewith
have all other things, White raiment, Eye Salve, etc. Job 28. 12-20. Prove. 3.
31-15. and 8. 10, 11. and 16. 16. Col. 2. 3. Mat. 13. 44-46. Length of days is
in Wisdoms right hand (which is so enriching) and in her left hand riches and
honor; her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, she is
a Tree of Life to all that lay hold on her, and happy is every one that
retains her. Prove. 3. 15, 18. She leads in the way of righteousness, in the
midst of the paths of judgment, that she may cause those that love her to
inherit substance, and she will fill all their Treasures. Prove. 8. 18-19, 21.

4. He is called and compared to Gold; because as Gold, especially when tried,
is very delightful and desirable to the natural eye, the eye of the body, and
that with which the heart is affected, even so Jesus Christ is amiable to the
enlightened eye of the understanding, as he is displayed before us in the
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit; the riches of this world, and so Gold
which is the most excellent part of it, takes the eye, and delights the
heart; hence it is called, The lust of the eye. 1 John 2. 16. And the eye is
said to flee upon this, even as the Eagle or Hawk flees upon the prey, as if
the life did consist in the having and enjoying it (though indeed it does not.
Luke. 12. 15.) Prove. 23. 4, 5. Thus Achan confesses, That when he saw two
hundred shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold, then be coveted them. Josh. 7.
21. It drew his affection to, and desire after them: Gold and the riches of
this world are pleasing to the eye and affect hearts of men, and cause them to
love them, trust in, and glory in the enjoyment of them; hence because of the
vanity, emptiness and uncertainty of them, the Holy Ghost gives such frequent
admonitions, Not to set the Eye upon them, not to set the Heart upon them, not
to trust or glory in them, etc. Prove. 23 5. Psalm. 62. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Jet. 9.
23. And Holy men of God have prayed him to turn away their eyes from beholding
this Object of covetousness. Psalm. 119. 36, 37. Which intimates to us how
desirable this is in itself, and to us all naturally; but behold a more
excellent and pleasant Object: We may say in this respect, Jesus Christ may be
called Gold; because he is eminently, and most fully desirable, and taking to
the Soul, as he has been tried in the first; he is completely delightful, and
there is in him that which is powerful to draw the eye, and attract the heart
unto him, and cause men to lust after him; hence he is called The desire of all
Nations; because he is wholly and altogether desirable, and is, and has in him
eminently that which all Nations do desire, and cover after, viz. That which
may give rest and satisfying to them (though through their foolishness they are
seeking it in wrong Objects, even in that which is not) Hag. 2. 7. Thus when
the Spouse is describing the amiableness of her beloved, the first account she
gives of him particularly is, That his head is as the most sine Gold. Cant. 5.
11. To intimate, that in this respect he is very taking with, and delightful to
the Heart; He is a wonderful enamouring Object as he is lifted up by the Spirit
in the Testimony, and which is very powerful to cause men to run unto him;
because of the Lord his God, and for the Holy one of Israel; for he has
glorified him; hence we are so oftentimes called upon to be hold him: So the
father says. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul
delights. Isa. 42. 1-7. And Christ himself says. Look unto me and be ye
saved all the ends of the Earth. Isa. 45. 22. And again he says Behold me,
behold me, to a Nation that was not called by his name. Isa. 65. 1. And the
Work of the Spirit is to glorify Christ, and to lift him up as Moses lifted up
the Serpent in the Wilderness, that men might look to him; And that whosoever
looks to him, and believes in him, should not perish; but have everlasting
life. John 16. 14. and 3. 14. 15, And the work of the Spouse, of all chaste
ones, is to discover his love and loveliness, that men might come to Christ:
Thus when the Daughters of Jerusalem inquire of her; What is thy beloved more
then beloved, O thou fairest among Women? What is thy beloved more then
beloved, that thou do so charge us? She with much pleasure and contentment
answers. My beloved is White and Ruddy, the chiefest often thousands; -- He
is excellent as the Ceders, his mouth is most sweet; yea, he is altogether
lovely; this is my beloved, and this is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem.
And this discovery of him was so taking with them, that they also inquire
whither he was gone, that they might seek him with her; her work and business
is not to direct to her self, and mainly to insist upon the commendation of her
self, as does Mystery Babylon, both Mother and Daughters, who spend a great
deal of time, and use many Arguments to commend themselves, and to prove
themselves to be the true Catholic Church, and that there is none like to
them; Oh what contentions are there amongst them on this account! How greatly
do they strive which shall be accounted the truest and chiefest? Yea; she is so
far from this, that she says to the Daughters of Jerusalem; Look not upon me,
but as she delights to behold, and look upon her beloved, so also to praise
and commend him, and make mention of his desirableness, and praise-worthiness
to others, that they may enquire after, and direct their Eyes unto this
alluring Object, and she is greatly pleased, and in her Element, as it were,
when she is speaking of, and showing forth his praises to others; yea, this is
the end why they that believe are brought into, and made of his Church, and so
greatly piviledged, not that they might proclaim their own goodness, but that
they should make mention of his righteousness, and show forth his praises, who
has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light; which in time past
were not a people, but are now the people of God, Cant. 5. 9-16. and 6. 1. with
Chap. 1. 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. And his desirableness, and loveliness to the
eye, is signified in several descriptions, and declarations given of him, in
which he is like to, though infinitely exceeding Gold, even pleasant to behold;
So he is said to be beautiful, beauty and fairness are very delightful, and
desirable, the eye is affected therewith, and apt to lust thereafter; hence it
is said, The Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were fair, and they
took them to Wife. Genesis 6. 2. Upon this account, because beauty is so pleasing
to the eye. even Holy men for saving themselves, have polluted themselves; As
Abraham and Isaac, because their Wives were fair and beautiful. Genesis 12. 11-15.
and 26. 27. Esther 1. 11. And the Holy Ghost warns us, Not to lust after the
beauty of the Whorish Woman, to intimate to us, that beauty is very taking with
us. Prove. 6. 25. 2 Samuel 11. 2. But oh how great is his beauty! He is beautiful
even to admiration. Zech. 9. 17. Hence the Spouse says, Behold thou art fair,
my beloved, yea pleasant. Cant 1. 16. Hence also when the Spouse declares his
amiableness, she says first in general, My beloved is white and Ruddy; that is
to say, he is Immanuel, God with us in our Nature, and for us; he was over all,
God blessed for ever, and yet he took part with us of flesh and blood, and bare
our sins in that his own body which the father prepared for him, and died our
death, and is acquitted from our sins, and death for us, and is in our Nature
become fairer then the Children of Men. Cant. 5. 10. Psalm. 45. 2. Beautiful,
and comely with the beauty of holiness, Again he is called the Light, and
compared to the Sun. John 1. 9. Mal. 4. 2. Psalm. 84. 11. Truly the light is
sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun, Eccles. 11.
7. Oh! he inlightneth the eye, cheareth the Heart, comfort the Soul,
reviveth the drooping and broken Spirit, and manifests all things to us in
their right and proper Colors; He is the light of the World, the great
manifestation of God, and of all things to us. John 8, 12. This man is more
precious and delightful to behold and look upon then fine refined Gold. Isa.
13. 12. And who so looks into the perfect Law of liberty (in which his beauty
is evidently set forth before our eyes: Whosoever pryeth into this, peepeth wistly,
and consideringly, and stoopeth down here to behold it) and continues; it will
cause him to desire after, and delight in Christ; and, or ever he is aware, it
will make his Soul, and his soul will make him like the Chariots of Aminadab.
Jam.1. 25. It will make him sick of love, unsatisfied, restless, and diseased
till he more know him, yea till he fully, and completely enjoy and he made
partaker of him, he being the Object in whom is the light and health of his
countenance. Cant. 2. 3, 5. and 5. 8. Psalm. 42. 5, 11. and 43. 5. Oh that we
did more know the loveliness of this pleasant Object, this would make us desire
this one thing of the Lord, and seek after it, that we might dwell in the house
of the Lord all the days of our life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
inquire into his holy Temple. Psalm. 27. 4, 5. Joh. 4. 10. In such like respects
he is compared to Gold.

2. We have in the next place to inquire and consider, what is meant by this
expression, [tried in the fire] therein is signified.

1. The wonderful afflictions and sorrows which Christ endured and underwent
for us, and for our sakes; herein he was like gold thrown into the fire as that
signifies great and grievous pains, and sufferings: He was tormented (as in
the fire) for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquity, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him. Isa. 53. 5. He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief (even made up, as it were, of sorrows) and therefore he is eminently
and emphatically called, the afflicted one. Psalm. 22. 24. There was no sorrow
like unto that sorrow done unto him, wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the
day of his fierce anger. Herein he was like gold ried, he was cast into the
fire indeed, and it is but the shadow of it, as it were, woe pass through.

All Gods waves and billows went over him, his wrath lay hard upon him, and he
afflicted him with all his waves, Psalm. 88. 3, 16. hence he cried out, my soul
is exceeding sorrowful even unto death, before men laid hold on him. Ma^t. 26.
37. 38. Mark 14. 33, 34. Joh. 12. 27. The father left him to feel the weight of
our sins, and the fierceness of that fire we had kindled against our selves;
and this made him cry out and roar by reason of that horror that overwhelmed
him: So hot and great was the fire of God's wrath into which he was throne,
that his heart was like wax (before the fire) it was melted in the midst of his
bowels; and his strength dried up like a potsherd, and God brought him into the
dust of death, Psalm. 22. 1, 2,-14, 15. It plesed the Lord to bruise him, he put
him to grief; he made his soul an offering for our sins; he spared not his own
Son; but delivered him up for us all. Isa. 53. 10. Romans 8. 32. --

And he endured great things from the hands of men, he was a reproach of men and
despised of the people; reproach did break his heart, and he was full of
heaviness, wherewith his soul was even mel^ed. Psalm. 69. 20. with Psalm. 119.
28. They did despitefully use him, mock, deride, and scourge him, and with
wicked hands did crucify and slay him: The heathen did rage, and the people
imagined a vain thing; the King's of the earth stood up, and the rulers were
gathered together against him: Many Bulls compassed him, strong ones of Bashan
beset him round, they gaped upon him as a roaring, and a ravening Lion: Yea
dogs compassed him, the Assembly of the wicked enclosed him; and his own people
were the betrayers and murderers of him: Psalm. 2. 1. and 22. 6, 7, 12, 13-16.
Acts 7. 52.

And now also was the power of darkness; the Prince of this World came with the
fiery darts, and he (who had the power of death) did torment him. Luke 22. 53.
Joh. 14. 30. with Ephesians 6. 16. Christ was in an horrible pit, in a pit of
noise, the noise whereof caused horror; and in the miry clay; his soul was in
hell, and his body, or flesh in the grave; he tasted death by the grace of God
for every man; even that very death which every man should have died, he tasted
the whole of it, and endured the bitterness of it, and of all appertaining to
the first death and hell, Psalm. 40. 2. with Acts 2. 27 31. Heb. 2. 9. And so
exquisite were the torments he endured, that he offered up supplications and
prayers, with strong crying and tears; and cried so long that he was weary of
his crying; and prayed his Father to deliver him out of the mire, that he might
not sink, and that the deep might not swallow him up, nor the pit shut her
mouth upon him. Psalm. 69. 2-4-14, 15. The torment he endured made him fore
amazed, it even astonished him, and made him afraid; the sorrows of death
compassed him, and the pains of hell got hold on him, he found trouble and
sorrow. Mark. 14. 33. Heb. 5. 7. Psalm. 116. 3. and 18. 4. 5. Oh he was like
gold indeed, cast into, and tried in the fire, and herethrough was he made
perfect for us. --

2. Tried in the fire, signifies, that this gold was proved herein, and
appeared to be so right, and excellent, as that he could, and did endure, and
abide the fire; and therefore also is he called and compared to gold, because
it was one of those things, and the first named, that would abide the fire.
Numb. 31. 22, 23. He was proved to purpose herein, the Word of the Lord was
tried. Psalm. 18. 30. He is a tried stone, Isa. 28. 16. And he did not shrink
from, or perish in this fire, but endured to the end; his love and graciousness
was tried, and evidenced to be strong as death, yea stronger then the fire it
self, which had a most vehement flame: He in what he suffered and endured, is
the Amen, the Faithful and true witness and testifier of his sincere and ardent
affection to us: Though the fire he was thrown into was exceeding hot, yet his
love and charity toward us was so servent, as that it did exceed, and was
hotter than the fire it self; He for the joy set before him endured the cross,
despising the shame; he gave His back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them
that plucked off the Hair; He hid not his face from shame and spitting: He set
his face like a flint, as one that hardened himself against sorrow, (as Job 6.
10.) and even challenged his adversary that contended with him, to come near,
and try his strength against him: his love was so perfect, that there was no
fear in it, no fear that has torment. 1 John 4. 18. Isa. 50. 6-10. though he
knew the bitterness of the wrath, and fierceness of the fire he was to taste of,
and pass through; yet he was not discouraged; He did not fear in the days of
evil, when our iniquities that were imputed to, and were to be taken away by
him, did compass him about. Psalm. 49. 5. but he steadfastly set his face, and
established it, to bear all things, and endure all things, that were needful to
be born and endured, that we might not be expelled from God. Luke 9. 51. with
Ruth 1. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 13. 7. thus it appeared in his great agony, and day of
his distress, that he was proved indeed, and yet did, and was resolved to abide
the fire: Now, says he, is my soul troubled (exceedingly sorrowful, even unto
death, environed and encompassed about with sorrows and pangs) and what shall I
say? Father, save me from this hour (shall I desire this absolutely, as if he
should say, Shall I pray that the Cup might be removed, that I may not taste
it? No) but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father glorify thy name.
This he resolved to pray for and desire whatever he suffered and endured, that
his father would glorify his goodness, love, power, wisdom and faithfulness,
for the good of Mankind John 12 27, 28. Yea, this Sun of righteousness came
into the World as a Bridegroom comes out of his Chamber, and rejoiced as a
strong man to run a race. Psalm. 19. 5. Wherefore when he comes into the World,
he says, Lo I come to do thy Will, I delight to do thy Will, though he must in
doing it endure and undergo such great torments, sorrows and sufferings: Well
might he say, Lo, behold it; for his love was herein proved, and appeared to be
great even to admiration, such as may make us even astonished at it. Psalm. 40.
6-8. Heb. 10. 5-9. It appears he was tried in the fire, and did abide it, he
was Gold tried indeed, and this will still appear if we consider a little
particularly.

His love and faithfulness was tried in leaving such Glory, and so greatly
emptying himself, and making himself of no reputation: He, the Word, was with
God, yea was God, the proper Lord and Heir of all things by Divine and Eternal
Generation, by whom and for whom all things were Created visible and invisible,
who was over all, God blessed for ever; he was glorious with the fathers own
self, enjoying the Glory of God in Heaven. The Lord possessed him in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old, he was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, or ever the Earth was, then was he by him, one brought up
with him, and he was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. Prove. 8
22-30. Now for such an one to make himself of no reputation, for such an one to
come down from Heaven, and to abase and humble himself to the enduring such
sufferings and undergoing such shame and sorrows; Oh! here he was Gold tried in
the fire indeed; He being in the form of God, in the essential form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation.
Phil. 2. 6-8, Without controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness, God
became man, the Word was made flesh, the Lord became a Servant, he that was
rich became poor, he that was in Heaven descended, and came into the Earth, and
tabernacled among men. Oh! here was the trial of his love and faithfulness,
here he was proved to purpose, and yet did abide it, and was faithful to him
that appointed him, and loving and gracious to us, it is a great trial amongst
men, when one that is lifted up and advanced above his brethren, is put upon it
to part with, and lay aside that Glory; but his Glory was infinitely more
excellent, and his person inconceivably more worthy then that of any Earthly
King or Emperor, and yet he so humbled himself, and came down, and emptied
himself for us.

His love and faithfulness was tried, and he was Gold tried, in that he endured
all this from the hand of his father, as inflicted, or permitted and ordered by
him; it is a great probation, and touches the quick, when a most intimate
lover wounds with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one
(as Jer. 30. 14.) what he endured was from the hands of his father, who
infinitely loved him, in whose bosom he was, and with whom he was well pleased;
and yet by him he was cast into the fire, and did cheerfully and constantly
abide it; yea, he was angry with, and sharply reproved him that endeavored to
deliver him from this fire, or some part of it; The Cup which my father has
given me to drink, shall I not drink it? John 18. 10, 11. Here he was proved
indeed, and hence he cries out, Why have thou forsaken [Me?] me, whom thou
love so entirely, so inexpressibly, so inconceivably, the Son of thy love, of
whom thou have given such Testimony, That I am thy well beloved Son. Psalm. 22.
1. This was a trial of his confidence in his fathers love, and of his obedience
to him, and yet he did abide faithful, and never was jealous or distrustful of
his fathers affection, but in the midst of the fire, and when through the heat
of it he cries out and roareth, yet he cries out. Oh my Father, and my God my
God. Mat. 26. 42. and 27. 46. And though he was a Son, his only begotten Son,
his infinitely beloved, and delighted in, Son, yet he learned, and showed forth
obedience by the things which he suffered. Heb. 5. 9. --

His love and faithfulness was proved, in that he upon his own account had not
deserved any thing of affliction or trouble from his father; For he always did
those things that pleased him. John 8. 29. And God gave that Testimony of him,
That he was his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased; He knew no sin, he did
no sin, but was Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners; and yet that
he was so dealt withal, and so tormented, doubtless this was a great trial:
The Messiah was cut off, but not for himself, not for any fault of his, he had
deserved no such thing. Well might the Apostle say: The love of Christ passes
Knowledge. Dan. 9. 26. Ephesians. 3. 19. Oh how different is our carriage when we
are in trouble and affliction; we are apt to complain, and fret against God,
and to be discontented, when we indeed suffer justly, and would be rid off, and
delivered from the burden; though it is thank-worthy that a man takes it
patiently when he is corrected or buffeted for his faults. 1 Pet. 2. 20. Yet we
are apt to be murmuring and complaining when we bear the punishment of our own
sin, such unreasonable Creatures are we. Lam. 3. 39. But this man did nothing
worthy of death, or of bonds, and yet he endured willingly: But this was a
great trial, and this may be included also in that; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken [Me?] me? who never offended, or displeased thee at any time.
Psalm. 22. 1. On this account, and in this respect he was greatly tried, and yet
he did willingly and readily endure the fire, and offered himself to be thrown
thereinto; yea, he acknowledges, thou art Holy, though thou castest me into
the fire who am thine Holy one, O thou that inhabitest the Praises of Israel.
Psalm. 22. 1-3.

He was tried in enduring such great afflictions and sorrows for such persons
as he did, for such ungodly ones, who did not worship God, nor desire any mercy
from him; for such sinners, who had sin in us, and were greatly polluted and
defiled therewith, and therefore such as he could not delight in, or have
fellowship with; yea, for such as were enemies also unto him in our minds, and
haters of him: This was a great trial to suffer for such, to be cast into the
fire for such unclean ones, for such unworthy and ungrateful ones, who were not
only undesirous, and insensible of the favor, but full of enmity against him,
and haters of him that so testified his love toward us: Amongst men, scarcely
for a righteous man (who gives to every one that which appertains to him,
and requires from every man that which is due (...) himself) will one dye; yet
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye; yet this would be a
great trial, and it is but a peradventure, Whether any one would so do or no?
It is questionable whether any would lay down his life for a good man, that is
beneficial and bountiful, and full of good Works, and is not so exact and
rigorous as the righteous man, but gives to others what he is not at all
obliged to, and forgiveth, and remitteth what he might justly expect, demand or
receive from another: But oh, how was he proved, and yet did endure, and abide
faithful to the interest of our Souls? Greater love then this has no man, then
to lay down his life for his friends; but while we were yet without strength,
in due time Christ died for the ungodly; and herein he commends his love to
us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; yea, while we were
enemies, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them, but to him, and he willingly yielded up himself to become a
Sin-offering for us; he by the Grace of God tasted death for every man: This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into
the World to save sinners, the chief of sinners, such as were persecuters of
him, and blasphemers of his Name and Gospel: Oh great trial! Oh in^inite
unparalled Grace! John 15. 13. Romans 5. 8-10. Heb. 2. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 19-21. 1 Timothy
1. 13-15.

He was tried also in this, in that he not only endured such great affliction
for his enemies, even for every sinful Creature of Mankind; but in that also he
met with so much exercise, and occasion of grief from them, he suffered for
them and from them, he was despised and rejected of men (of those, for whose
^ake and good he came into the World) a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, and we hid as it were our faces from him (as persons ashamed of him, who
endured the Cross, despising the shame for us) he was despised, and we esteemed
him not: Surely he has born our grief, and carried our sorrows, yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted, (we thought and reckoned,
that all he underwent was laid upon him for his own proper and personal
transgressions and provocations) but he was wounded for our transgressions,
etc. Isa. 13. 2-6. Those for whom he suffered, were instruments of grievance to
him, not only did they lightly esteem him, so as to prefer a murderer before
him, but also Heavyly afflicted him; and this was a great trial, and was so
accounted and taken notice of by him, They rewarded me evil for good, says he,
to the spoiling of my Soul, or depriving me of my life, though when they were
sick, wi^h^ut strength, sick to death, I humbled my Soul for them, etc. Psalm.
35. 12-16. with Romans 5. 6. For my love they are my adversaries, And they have
rewarded evil for good, and hatred for my love, Psalm. 109. 3-5. Oh herein he
was proved, and found faithful, he did abide the fire, he was not discouraged
or hindered thereby, but gave his back to the smiters, for the smiters, and gave
himself to prayer for his persecuters, though he was oppressed (unjustly
proceeded against, and unworthily and despightfully entreated and used by them
whose good he aimed at, and pursued) and afflicted; Yet he opened not his
mouth, but was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep dumb before the
Shearers, so he opened not his mo^th against them. Isa. 53. 7. Yea, he prayed
and dyed for them, who with wicked hands did crucify and slay him, And being
raised again was sent, and did come to bless them, in turning every one of them
from their iniquities. Isa. 53. 12. Acts 3. 13, 14, 15-26. Yea, at that time
when he was numbered with transgressors, and hanged between two Thieves, and
most unmercifully and inhumanely entreated, mocked at, and reproached, then
said Jesus. Father forgive them. Luk 23. 34. Oh wonderful trial! Oh matchless
love!

He was greatly tried also in the greatness and depth of the abasement, whereto
he was abased for us, a small condiscension in such an excellent and glorious
person, for such unworthy ones would have been admirable: But as that would not
have sufficed for our recovery, so such was the cordialness of his love, and
servency of his affection to us, that he did not avoid or shrink from that
great abasement, whereto it was absolutely necessary he should humble himself,
that we might be redeemed from the curse of the Law, and our loss might be
again recovered for us, he laid not hold on the Nature of Angels, when many of
them had sinned, to keep them from falling, or to recover them; though that had
been wonderfully beneath him; but he was made a little lower then the Angels,
his own Creatures, in a Nature inferior to theirs; yea, he did not partake of
our Nature, as it was when first Created by God, but as it was become through
our seeking out foolish inventions, and was in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted, he partook with us of flesh and blood, of weakness and
mortality, and was subject to all our infirmities, to hunger, thirst,
weariness, painfulness, and was poor and needy, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, who was Lord of all, and was made in the likeness of men, (yea, of
sinful flesh) and being found in fashion as a man, he still and further humbled
himself, and became obedidient to death, even the death of the Cross, that
cruel, shameful and accursed death. Phil. 2. 6-8. He came down from Heaven, and
descended into the lower parts of the Earth, not only into the Womb of the
Virgin, but into greatest, and deepest afflictions, Sorrows and troubles,; yea,
his Soul was in Hell, and his Flesh in the Grave. Acts 2. 27-31.

He was tried, and found faithful, in that such was his power in himself, and
with the father, that he could have acquitted himself from those sufferings
which he endured from his enemies: He was not at first necessitated to
undertake for us; but his Grace and free love moved him thereto, and he could
afterward have confounded his foes, and that way, or otherwise have delivered
himself out of their hands, as he did do many times in the days of his personal
ministration, and some proof and demonstration he gave of his power to have
destroyed them; had he pleased; when they came to apprehend him; for when he
told the band of Men and Officers, who were sent to take him; that he was the
person they sought for, as soon as he had said unto them, I am he, they went
backward, and fell to the ground. John 18. 3-6. So when Peter drew out his
Sword out of its place, and smote off the ear of the High-Priest's Servant,
after our Savior had bid him put it up again, etc. He adds, Think thou
that I cannot now pray to my father, and he shall presently give me more then
twelve Legions of Angles, (as intimating, that such was his interest with his
father, that had he prayed he might have been rescued from their destruction
with a great and Heavenly Host of those Glorious Angels, and needed not Peter's
Sword to avenge his quarrel) but how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled
(in his breaking the head of the Serpent, and healing that first breach between
God and Manking, and doing, and becoming that whereby we might be brought back
to God) Mat. 26. 52-54. He was not forced to suffer what he did, but he might
have avoided all, had he so pleased, and this is a great trial of love and
patience: We may pretend to patience in sufferings when we cannot help our
selves, but if the power were in our hands, we should be apt presently to get
rid of the trouble; but though Christ was such a mighty one, yet he readily and
cheerfully undertook for us at first, and patiently endured to the last such an
hot fire; He was not a Passive simply, but Active and forward also, in all his
abasement; not only was he sent into the World, but he came, and came
rejoycingly, Lo I come, I delight to do thy Will. Psalm. 40. 6-8. Not only was
he made flesh, but he laid hold on the Seed of Abraham, in that body the father
prepared for him. Heb. 2. 16. Not only was he put to death, but he died, yea to
show his forwardness he breathed forth, and commended his Spirit into the hand
of his father before they died, who were crucified with him; and he so soon
died, that the Governor admired at it. Mark 15. 44. He emptied himself, and
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and he
(further) humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
Cross. Phil. 1. 7, 8. Oh that, that mind that was in Christ Jesus, where more
in us. Ver. 6. Here was a trial indeed, and herein was love inexpressible, love
incomparable.

He was tried in his obedience to his father, and in his love to us, and in his
power, in grapling with such, and so many and great enemies, in his so great
abasement, and in the day of his calamity, when the fathers wrath lay heavy
upon him: They prevented him in the day of his fog, when his God forsook him,
and hid his face from him. Psalm. 18. 18. They persecuted him whom God had
smit^en. Psalm. 69. 26. When he was weakest, and his Soul was exceeding
sorrowful even unto death, then was their hour and the power of darkness, then
his and our enemies appeared in their strength against him: He had all our
sins, even all the trespass(...)f the World upon him, He bare our sins in his
own body to the Tree; and this was so great a burden, that his heart even
failed, and these were such a multitude, that they were more then the hairs of
his head. Psalm. 40. 12. 1 Pet 2. 24. And these must be born and taken away,
there must be an abolishing of them, or else there could have been no
deliverance for us. Heb. 9. 26. He had our death to die and overcome, and this
was so great a death, as that we had perished in it for ever, had we died it
according to the first Sentence. 2 Cor. 1. 10. He had the Devil, who had the
power of death, and his Instruments, to grapple with and overcome; Satan thrust
sore at him that he might fall. Psalm. 118. 13. He had the Law, as it was
against us, to satisfy and endure the curse of, and so to blot out that
handwriting that was contrary to us; And Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
not one jot or title of the Law, till all be fulfilled. Mat. 5. 18. Here he was
proved to purpose in his love, power and patience; and herein he did abide the
fire, and made it evident and apparent, that God laid help upon one that was
mighty, and he gave a wonderful proof of his patience, and submission: For in
^aiting he waited for the Lord until he inclined his ear and heard him, and
brought him out of the horrible pit and miry clay. Psalm. 89. 19. and 40. 1, 2.
Here was a trial of his strength and here it appeared to be very strong; for
though all these compassed him about like Bees, yet they were extinct as the
fire of Thorns; for in the name of his God he has destroyed them. He has
made purgation of our sin. Heb. 1. 3. He has abolished our death. 2 Timothy 1.
10. He has (...) death destroyed him that had the power of death, that in the
Devil. Heb. 2. 14. He has led Captivity Captive, spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in himself. Psalm.
68. ^3. Col. 2. 15. He has overcome the World. John 16. 33. He has broken
down the middle wall of partition that was between God and Mankind; having
abolished in his flesh the enemity, the Law of Commandments in Ordinances.
Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Col. 2. 14. His own right hand, and his Holy Arm has gotten
him the Victory. Psalm. 98. 1. He has delivered us in himself from the hand of
all our Enemies, that we might serve God without fear of them. Luke 1. 74. And
he is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet. Sing Praises
to our God, sing Praises; Sing Praises to our King, sing Praises. Psalm. 47. 5,
6. and 68. 18.

Yea (to add no more to this) he was tried, and proved in the fire, in that all
he endured was of no real personal advantage to himself: He could not be added
to by it; but it was wholly for the sakes and good of others: This excellent
one, who is charity, did not seek his own things. 1 Cor. 13. 5. Oh! this was
Grace indeed, free love, no fore-worthiness of ours did move him to undertake
this difficult work, no future advantage to himself did strengthen and
encourage him to enter into, and abide in this fire to the last; but it was the
good and commodity of others, of us unworthy ones, of us unable ones to make
any retribution for such an admirable kindness; He that was rich for our sakes
became poor, that through his poverty (not he but) we might be enriched. 2 Cor.
8, 9. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are
healed. Isa, 53. 3-6. The Messiah was cut off, but not for himself. Dan. 9. 26.
He was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. Romans
4. 25. Christ once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. 1 Pet. 3. 18. He did not look on his own things, but the
things of others. Philip. 2. 5-8. He got no real addition of Glory, or
happiness to himself, by all his indurings, and therefore when he had finished
the work which the father gave him to do, enduring the Cross, and suffering the
curse, he then prays, and now, O Father glorify thou me with thine own self,
with the Glory I had with thee before the World was. John 17. 4, 5. He did
through sufferings enter into his own Glory, which was his before, but now he
entered into it in our Nature, and for us, That the World through him might be
saved. Luke 24. 25, 26. And God raised him from the dead, and gave him Glory,
that our Faith and Hope might be in God; and that so we might not perish, but
might have everlasting life. 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21. John 3. 14-17. Oh! in all this
was love, love without comparison, love beyond comprehension: Let us look upon
it, that we may be ashamed of our love, or rather bewail our want of love, and
not proclaim our goodness, and say; We are rich and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing: Is this the manner of man, thus to express love? Surely
we have let slip the view of, and departed from the consideration of his love,
while we are doting upon, and boasting of, and lifting up our selves by, and
glor(...)ing in our love: Oh! consider also how he has been tried, that we may
not complain of, or faint under our trials; But that we may run with patience
the race set before us, look we unto Jesus, who for the joy set before him
endured the Cross, despising the shame, etc. And consider diligently the
excellency of this Gold, and how it has been tried, that we may be zealous,
and buy it, whatever it cost us.

3. His being tried in the fire, does signify, that he was herein and
herethrough purified and refined, and came forth as Gold out of the fire, full
of luster, splendour, and glory. Job 23. 10. Indeed he never had any pollution
of his own, or any mixture of sin cleaving to him, he was the Holy one of God,
he knew no sin in partaking of our Nature; for he was made partaker of it by a
wonderful work of new Creation; so as that he, and he only partook not of the
filth, or pollution of our sin; he did indeed partake of our sorrows,
sufferings, afflictions; He was in all points tempted like unto us, yet without
sin, Heb. 4. 15. He had no sin of his own to answer for, he did no sin, neither
was guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. 2. 22. But yet he had our sins laid upon
him, and was by imputation spotted, as it were with our spots, and deformed
with our afflictions and wrinkles. --

Though he knew no sin, yet God made him to be sin for us, and imputed the
trespasses of the world unto him, the guilt of our natural, and necessary sin
and sinfulness; even the guilt of the disobedience of the first man Adam, in
which we all sinned, and from whence we are necessarily polluted and defiled;
and of all the unavoidable branches thereof, this was imputed to, and laid
upon, and accepted by him as his to answer for; and he his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the tree. 1 Pet. 2. 24. All we like sheep have gone
astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord laid on him the
iniquities of us all. Isa. 53. 6. and he confesses these as his own, when he
says; Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look
up, Psalm. 40. 12. and says to his father, my guiltiness is not hid from thee.
Psalm. 69. 5. he becoming our surety, and undertaking for us, all our debts were
charged upon him, and our trespasses were imputed to him, and he bare our sins
in his own body; and so by the imputation of the father, and by his own
gracious acceptance, our sins became his own sins. Heb. 7. 27. he is that Lamb
of God that did bear the sin of the world. John 1. 29.

But he was tried in the fire; therein and thereby was he purified from our
sins, from the guilt of them, and so he is pure. 1 John 3. 3. He was manifested
to take away our sins, and in him is no sin. 1 John 3. 5. He appeared once in
the end of the World to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, and is
without sin, and shall so appear the second time unto salvation, to all them
that look for him. Heb. 9. 26. 28. To this purpose the Apostle says, Without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, to wit, He was justified, acquitted, and discharged
from the guilt of our sins, in the spirit's raising him from the dead who died
for our sins, and was buried. 1 Timothy 3. 16. and He through the eternal spirit
has offered himself without spot to God. Heb. 9. 14. he having fully paid our
debt, and completely satisfied for our sins in his bearing the judgment of the
world, and being tormented for our transgressions, he is released by the father
and taken from Prison and from judgment; and has by himself made purgation of
our sins, and purged them from before the presence of God, made peace and
atonement for them, and redeemed us in himself from the curse of the law, and
through that redemption that is in him, all that have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God, are justified freely: inasmuch as he as our surety, and as
the public man and last Adam, is justified; and is through his personal
abasement and sufferings become a lamb without blemish, and without spot. Heb.
1. 3. and 7. 27. Col. 1. 20. Gal. 3. 13. Romans 3. 23, 24. and chap. 5. 18. 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. --

Yea, and also he partook of our infirmities, he partook with us of flesh and
blood, of weakness and mortality. Heb. 2. 14. he himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses. Matt. 8. 17. It behoved him in all things to be made
like to his brethren, the sons of men, such an one as they were become, as the
fruit of sin, as distinguished from sin it self. Heb. 2. 17. He was a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and was deformed, as it were, with that
reproach, shame, and dishonor, which appertained to us. Psalm. 69. 19, 20. and
was in that body subject to corruption (though he did not abide so long in
death as to see it) as is implied, in that the Apostle says, God raised him
from the dead now no more to return to corruption. Acts 13. 34. he partook of
our infirmities, sorrows, griefs, and had a mortal body, in which he was
crucified, and put to death, and died, and was buried; his visage was marred
more then any man's, and his form more then the sons of men. Isa. 52, 14. and
53. 2. He was covered over with the wrath of God for our sins, and by his
permission and ordering, he was covered over with shame from men; so as he had
no form, nor comeliness, no appearing beauty outwardly to make him desirable:
When his God forsook him, then he was a reproach of men, and despised of the
people: all they that saw him laughed him to scorn, they did shoot out the
lip, they did shake the head, saying, He trusted on the Lord that he would
deliver him, let him deliver him, if he delight in him. Psalm. 22. 6, -- 8. as
intimating, that though he made his boast of God, and said he was his Father,
yet he would not own him as his Son; and therefore said they, God has forsaken
him, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him. Psalm. 71. 10,
11. and how he was covered with reproaches, as if he had been a gluttonous
person, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, as if he had cast
out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; as if he was a deceiver of the
people; as if he was guilty of blasphemy against God, and of stirring up
sedition amongst the people, the Scriptures of the Evangelists abundantly show
to us. --

But in this respect also, he is tried in, and came purified out of the fire;
and has in himself overcome and abolished that death he died. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
and put off all mortaliry and weakness in his resurection; that mortal body of
his has put on immortality; his body that was so marred and without sorme, is
now become a glorious body; and he therein, and he only, is a spiritual man;
death in him is swallowed up into victory; and he is become the first fruits of
them that sleep; and his triumphing Song is, Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh
grave, or hell, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin (this he has
purged away) and the strength of sin is the law (this he has answered, and
satisfied, and has gotten himself the victory, and) thanks be to God which
gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15.
42-47-55-57. he has put off all weakness, grief, sorrow, pain, mortality, and
restored our nature in himself into the image of God in a more glorious manner,
then ever it was in the first creation, even into perfect righteousness,
integrity, immortality, and eternal life; and he is in our nature glorified
with the father's own self, with the glory he had with him before the world
was: Therein he is become eternal life for us who was delivered for our
offenses; and such glory and luster is upon that body, that it is above the
brightness of the sun at midday, such as we are not capable to behold, unless
wonderfully and miraculously strengthened: It was so glorious, as that the sight
of it struck Saul blind three days. Acts 26. 13. and 22. 11. and 9. 17. and
this seen in a vision by John, caused him to fall down at his feet as dead.
Rev. 1. 17. and when Daniel also saw him in vision, there remained no strength
in him, but his comeliness was turned into corruption, and he retained no
strength. Dan. 10. 5-8. and he was tried in, and came purified out of the fire
from all the wrath of God, and from all the reproaches, and shame, and dishonor
cast upon him by his enemies: God has actually testified of him that he is the
Son of his love, and that he is well pleased in him; of this he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead: He was declared
to be the Son of God with power, by the spirit of holiness in the resurrection
from the dead. Romans 1. 4. though they gathered together against him, and
unjustly condemned him, and said, and intimated that he was not the Son of God,
yet God did stand at his right (...)and to save him from the judges of his
soul. Psalm. 109. 30, 31. he wiped off, as it were, all that dirt, reproach, and
ignomy wherewith they covered him, and testified he delighted in him, in
sending from above, and taking him out of great waters. Psalm. 18. 16, 17. And
in setting him on his own right hand, and glorifying him in the Gospel. He is
purified in and through this fire, from all the guilt of our sins, and from all
the weakness and mortality of our Nature, and from all the hidings of Gods
face, and from all the calumnies, slanders, and dishonours of his enemies; yea,
from all trouble and grievance, and is now an inconceivably glorious one, full
of luster, and splendor: And this will be furher showed in what follows. --

4. This Gold is said to be tried, to denote and signify, that this work, this
trying work is over and past, though the virtue and glorious fruit of it
remains, and abides for ever: It is not said, Gold [trying] but [tried] in
(or out of) the fire; for (as before is said) he is acquitted of all our sins,
that were imputed to him, and has overcome, abolished, and got rid of all our
weakness and mortality, and all occasions of grief and trouble, and is not (as
some ungodly, and Antichristian Spirits affirm blasphemously) dying in some, or
in any, in every Age of the World: Those that so say make his sufferings and
Sacrifice like those directed to under the Law, they even count the blood of
the Covenant a common thing, like the blood of Bulls and Goats take away sin,
and therefore was daily offered; but herein his Blood and Sacrifice is
distinguished from, and infinitely preferred before all legal Blood and
Offerings, in that his is not to be itterated, or repeated; and so by
consequence he can suffer no more, as the Apostle intimates in the
dissimilitudes he makes between the former Priests, and their Offerings, which
they offered according to the Law, and our High Priest, and his Offering, when
he says. Nor yet that he should offer himself often as the High Priest enters
into the Holy place every year with blood of others; for then must he often
have suffered since the Foundation of the World (which to imagine and affirm is
the greatest, and firstborn of absurdities, as the Apostle does intimate) but
now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away sin, by the
Sacrifice of himself. Heb. 9. 25, 26. Christ being raised from the dead dies
no more, death has no more Dominion over him; For in that he died; he died
unto sin once, but in that he lives, he lives unto God. Romans 6. 9, 10. And
this Christ proposes unto John to strengthen him against his fears. He, says
John, laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not, -- I am he that lives,
and was dead, and behold (consider, and set thine heart unto this, give
attention hereto) I am alive for evermore, Amen: This is a true, and faithful
saying. Rev. 1. 17, 18. Were he always trying, always suffering and offering,
there could be no perfection by his Blood, if he were always dying in some, in
every Age, or always to be offered up a propitiatory Sacrifice, then would his
Blood and Sacrifice be like that Blood, and those Sacrifices under the Law,
which could not make the comers thereunto perfect; for the Law made nothing
perfect: But Christ has once, and but once, suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust. 1 Pet 3. 18. And by his own Blood he entered in once into the Holy
place, having obtained Eternal Redemption. Heb. 9. 12. And offered up one
Offering, that of his one body once for all, and this man when he had offered
up one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God, from
ever suffering any more, or offering any more Sacrifice, or Offering for sins,
Heb. 7. 27. and 10. 10-12. And has by his one Offering once offered, perfected
for ever them that are sanctified; whereof the Holy Ghost also is a Witness to
us. Heb. 10. 14, 15. And this Holy-Spirit convinces the World of
righteousness, evidenceth that Christ has completed righteousness, a perfect
righteousness in and by himself for us; and therein shows and demonstrateth
the unprofitableness of ours, in that he is gone to the father, and we see him
no more, no more coming down to suffer, or offer any new Offering, or to repeat
that Offering of his own body for us; nor has he given, or left behind him
instruction to any one who may pretend himself to be his Vicar, to offer him up
a propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of quick or dead. John 16. 10. Heb. 10.
10-14. In this Phrase then, or manner of speaking is implied, and intimated to
us, the preciousness of his personal abasement and sufferings, and herein is
evidenced that his Flesh is meat indeed, and his Blood is drink indeed, that we
might eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, and rejoice and glory in nothing,
save in the Cross of Christ; in that he is tried, not trying, but come out of,
and delivered from the fire, taken from prison and judgment, and is ascended up
where he was before. John 6. 54-62. And it is also a powerful admonition to us,
not to count it a common thing, not to despise or set light by it; for there
remains no more Sacrifice for sins, he can dye no more; so that, If this
Blood and Sacrifice be rejected, and trodden under foot, till the day of Grace
and patience be at an end, there remains nothing but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation. Heb. 10. 26-29. It was witnessed
of him who was dead, that he lives, and he was made a Priest after the power
of an endless life, and that by his Oath, who swear, and will not repent, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech; and so ever lives to
make intercession for them that come to God by him; And is therefore able to
save them to the uttermost. Heb. 7, 8. 16-25. Rev. 2. 8. This is Gold, not
trying, but tried, in (or out of) the fire, 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Romans
6. 3, 4.

5. In this Phrase and expression, in saying, Gold tried in the fire, is also
signified, that he is become Gold for us who was tried, even that same person,
in that same body; the same that was tried, the same is become Gold for us,
precious and enriching, even as it is with natural and earthly Gold, that
precious Metal of the Earth: The same substance that is cast in, the same
comes out again, and is Gold tried, only the Dross and mixture is taken out;
so it is here, this Spiritual and Heavenly Gold which was in the fire, and was
then Gold, the most precious one, even he, the same Jesus, who dyed for our
sins, and was buried, he in that very personal body is raised again, discharged
from the guilt of our sins, and free from the fruits thereof: God did not leave
his Soul (which was made an Offering for our sins. Isa. 53. 10) in Hell, nor
suffer his Flesh (in which he was put to death. 1 Pet. 3. 18) to see
corruption. Acts 2. 27-31. So the Apostle Peter says. Let all the house of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye crucified,
both Lord and Christ. Acts 2. 36. He that descended is the same also that
assended far above all Heavens, even into the presence of God, that he might
fill all things. Ephesians. 4. 8-10. The Stone which the builders set at naught,
and disallowed, the same is made the head of the Corner. 1 Pet. 2. 7. It is
even he, the same person, who was delivered for us, that is raised again, and
taken from prison and judgment; And in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, even in the body of his flesh. Col. 2. 9, 10. And this same
Jesus shall so come in like manner, As those men of Galilee saw him go into
Heaven. Acts 1. 9. 11. And herein is he preferred before David; He fell on
sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption, and his Sepulcher is
with us (says Peter) unto this day; but Christ, whom God raised again, saw no
corruption. Acts 13. 36, 37. and 2. 29-32. And Christ in those forty days
after his resurrection, in which he was seen of his Apostles, Showed himself
alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs. Acts 1. 2, 3. And showed
them his hands and his feet that were nailed to the Tree, and his side that was
pierced with a Spear of a Soldier, and his Disciples did see and look upon,
and handle his raised body, by which it appeared he was not a Spirit simply,
but has a body that has flesh and bones: And these infallible proofs are
given us, that we may know and be assured, That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God, and that believing in him we may have life through his name. Luke 24.
36-40-48. John 20. 19-31. And of this the Apostles are Witnesses, and have
testified, That he is the first born from the dead, brought forth out of the
heart, or Womb of the Earth, as Jonas was out of the Belly of the Whale. Mat.
12. 40. Col. 1. 18. Rev. 1. 5. And it is he, that person, that same Jesus that
is very Christ. Acts 9. 22. Anointed with the Holy Ghost; And in him, this
firstborn from the dead, it has pleased all the fullness to dwell, even all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and so he is become Gold for us, and has
the pre-eminence in all things. Col. 1. 18, 19. and 2. 9, 10. And has all
Dominion given unto him: Because he humbled himself, and became obedient to
death; even the death of the Cross, therefore has God highly exalted him, and
given him (who so humbled himself) a name above every name, that at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, etc. Philip. 2. 8, 9. And it is needful and good
for us to be rooted and grounded in the hearty persuasion and belief hereof,
that we may be saved, and preserved from those evil and Antichristian Spirits
that say, There is no resurrection of the dead, and so by consequence, that
Christ is not raised again, and then we are yet in our sins, and the Apostles
are found false Witnesses of God, and faith is vain, and those who are fallen
asleep in Christ are perished: But Christ is risen from the dead, and is become
Gold for us, even the same that was tried in the fire. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4-12-20.
And herein he answers to, nay, infinitely exceeds and goes beyond Gold,
that is the most incorruptible Metal, Yet it will perish though tried with
fire. 1 Pet. 1. 7. It may canker and rust. Jam. 5. 3. And is called a
corruptible thing. 1 Pet. 1. 18. But his Blood is said to be, and is precious,
as opposed to corruptible, of infinite value and worth, and highly to be
esteemed by us, because it is incorruptible. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And he himself,
in his own body in which he died for us, is in the virtue of his precious and
incorruptible Blood raised again, no more to return to corruption. Acts 13. 34.
And is become incorruptible Seed, even the Word of God, which by the Gospel is
preached unto us, he lives and abides for ever. 1 Pet. 1. 23-25. Isa. 40. 8.
And whosoever is born of this Seed shall live for ever, this man continues
ever, and therefore has an unchangeable Priesthood,; He was dead and is alive,
and lives for evermore, and whosoever believes on him, though he were dead,
yet shall he live; and he that lives and believes shall never dye. 1 John 2.
17. John 11. 25, 26. In such like respects he is said to be Gold tried in the
fire. --

3. In the next place let us consider what is imported to us in the end, why he
counsels this Angel to buy, which is also a powerful Motive and Argument
used to move us, to have such an high estimate of this Gold, as to buy it at
any rate: [That thou may be rich] To which I shall speak more briefly;
because what is intimated herein, has been noted formerly. In this end then is
signified unto us. --

1. That those that have not this Gold tried in the fire, they cannot indeed be
rich, or enriched with the true riches, but are poor miserable Creatures in the
eyes of him that judges righteously, though they have large possessions, much
Gold, and a multitude of Rubies: We may apply that saying of the Prophet to
them; Surely these are poor; -- For they know not the way of the Lord, nor the
judgment of their God. Jer. 5. 4. Alas all the substance here below will not
procure the love and favor of God, in which is life. Cant 8. 7. These riches
will not deliver from the stroke of Gods hand, or from the Testimonies of his
displeasure: Will he esteem thy riches? No, not Gold, etc. Job 36. 18, 19. They
profit not in the day of wrath or death. Zeph. 1. 18. Prove. 11. 4. They are
deceitful riches, they promise somewhat, or rather we promise to our selves
much contentment and blessedness in the enjoyment and possession of them, but
they are not, there is no substantial and durable good in them. That rich man
in the Parable, whose ground brought forth plentifully, so as he was careful
and thoughtful how to dispose of his fruits, not having room where to bestow
them; and therefore resolved to pull down his Barns, and build greater, and
there to dispose all his fruits, and his goods; Yet be was not rich toward (or
with) God, Luke 12. 16-21. And so more generally is it true with respect to the
enjoyment of these uncertain riches; though men bless themselves in the
possession of them, and think highly of themselves because of them, and others
account them in an happy and good condition; yet if they have no better then
these uncertain riches, if they have not a Right and Title to, and Interest by
says in a better, and enduring substance (which men only can have in having
Christ) they are in truth but miserable men, piteous persons, objects of p^ty,
however they lift up themselves hereby, and are praised and admired at, and
bowed down to by others: And as a man when he awaketh lightly esteems, and
despises his dream; because he then perceives there was no truth in it, it
was but a dream, though in his sleep he thought himself to be in a most
desirable and blessed condition, he fancied himself to be rich and full; and
needing nothing, but now perceives it is otherwise then he imagined; so when
the Lord awaketh he will despise their Image; namely, their prosperity in this
World, and those worldly riches, which are called an Image, either because men
bowe^own themselves to them, and worship them, and trust in them; or also and
rather in that place, because they are not, they have but the likeness of true
riches, and are no more the true riches then the dream of happiness is
happiness indeed; nor are they that are possessed of them any more enjoyers of
substance then one that imbraceth an Image or Picture, is of the party thereby
represented. Psalm. 73. 12-20. He does but embrace a shadow, a very lie, that
which will not satisfy: He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with
Silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase. Eccles. 5. 10. And this
might be useful to instruct and move us to take heed and beware of
covetousness, and to have our conversation without it, not to labor to be rich
in those riches, for they are not, and a man that has them; yea, though he had
all the riches of the World, is notwithstanding that* a poor, miserable,
wretched man. Prove. 23 4, 5. Luke 12. 15. And it shows us how lightly God
esteems these riches, in that he dispenses them to the men of the World, and
counts them but poor ones that have never such an abundance of them, and it
is powerful to admonish them that have them not to trust in these things; for
they will but deceive them when they are in greatest need, they will then, or
before, certainly make themselves wings, and flee away; nor lift up themselves
above others, because they are herein preferred before them; for they are in
truth as miserable as the poorest man in the world, notwithstanding these
riches; for this is but the wealth of the heathen, of uncircumcised ones. Zech.
14. 14. Yea, herein they are in a worse condition then those that are destitute
of these uncertain riches, in that through their idolatrous esteem hereof, and
trusting herein, they are hindered from seeking after the true riches, as is
signified by our Savior to his disciples. Matt. 19. 21-24. Verily I say unto
you (says Jesus) that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
Heaven: Again I say unto you, it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of
a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. Mark. 10. 23 24.

And the same also may be said of other things that are reputed, and called
riches, and in the having and enjoyment whereof, men think themselves to be
better then others: As the wisdom of this world, though a man be rich therein,
rich in knowledge and utterance, yet if he have not this gold tried in the fire,
he is but in a piteous condition; for the wisdom of this World is foolishness
with God; and the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain. 1
Cor. 3. 18, -- 20. Yea and though a man be concerning the righteousness of the
Law blameless, and endeavors to avoid all evil forbidden by the holy and
righteous law of God; and to do the things required thereby, and so to walk
blamelesly among men; and has this as his gain and riches, this will but
deceive him; for this is not the true riches, and so it will not profit him,
(...)nd therefore the Apostle for Christ did count all but dung and dogs-meat
that he might win Christ, Isa. 57. 12. Phil. 3. 4, -- 9. It is signified to be
an evil of a like nature, and as dangerous for a man to trust to his own
righteousness, as to turn from his righteousness, compare Ezekiel. 33. 13. with
chap. 18. 24. Nay, whatever a man has as his riches who yet has not Christ,
he is but a poor miserable man; whatever marks and signs he has, whatever good
works he has been doing, or exercising himself in and unto; though he should
give all his goods to feed the poor, and his body to be burnt: What visits,
good motions, visions, revelations, gifts, utterance, promises brought to his
remembrance, etc. Whatsoever he has, yet he that has not the Son, has not
life, has not forgiveness, has not the favor of God, and fellowship with
him. 1 John 5. 12. he has not father, promises, inheritance, he is but a poor
piteous man, how highly conceited soever he be of himself, and how highly
soever he be esteemed by others: The Father loves the Son, and has given all
things into his hand: He that has the Son, that believes on him as the
Scripture has said, has everlasting life; he that believes not the Son, and
so has him not, whatever frames, works, sufferings, knowledge, gifts, parts,
seize, visits, motions, soever he has, or pretende^^ to have, yet he
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abide^^ on him. Joh. 3. 16, -- 18. 36.
1 John 5. 10, 11, 12, 13. Acts 4. 12. Joh. 8. 24. They are poor, miserable
Angels and Churches, whatever outward order they are in, or whatever ordinances
they are under, or whatever face and appearance they have in the flesh; or how
great soever their boasts are of themselves, though they say they are rich, and
increased with goods, etc. who have not Christ as their beau^y, and glory,
excellency, and comeliness. Isa. 4. 2, -- 5. Cant. 5. 9, -- 16.

2. In this end and motive also is signified to us, that be we never so poor
and miserable as with respect to the riches, wisdom, righteousness, etc. of
this world; and though these riches here below, of what nature or kind soever
they be, will not truly enrich us, yet in buying, and being made partakers of
this Gold tried in the fire, we may be rich, truly rich, Christ is, and has
unsearchable riches. Ephesians. 3. 8. So that he that has him is with him made
partaker of the true, durable, and substantial riches, of those which perish
not, but endure unto everlasting life. Joh. 6. 27. Riches and honor are with
him, yea durable riches -- his fruit is better then Gold, yea then fine gold;
and therefore those that love him shall inherit substance, and he will fill all
their treasures. Prove. 8. 18, -- 21. He has riches of understanding, in him
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and they that receive and
retain him, their hearts are comforted with, and they are made partakers of the
riches of assurance of understanding. Col. 2. 1, -- 3. They are made partakers
of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, which knowledge has an
excellency in it above all other knowledge, it passes all knowledge, for
here-through they are filled with all the fullness of God. Phil. 3. 8. with
Ephesians. 3. 10. By this knowledge their Chambers (their upper and principal
parts, their minds, understandings, hearts, and souls) be filled with all
precious and pleasant riches. Prove. 24. 4. Christ is made of God to them
wisdom. 1 Cor. 1. 30. He has riches of mercy. Romans 9. 23. He is rich therein.
Ephesians. 2. 4. And they are blessed with this great blessedness, and enriched
with these great riches, who have and retain him, even the weakest in the
faith; their sins are forgiven them for his name sake, and they receive the
forgiveness of them through his name. 1 John 2. 12. Romans 4. 5. 7. He is rich in
mercy to all that through faith in his blood call upon him, they are justified
from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses:
Romans 10. 12. with Acts 10. 43. and 13. 38, 39. He has riches of grace, he is
full thereof. Joh. 1. 14. And of his fullness, they that receive him, receive,
and grace for grace. verse. 16. So as they are made sons of God, by grace they
obtain that favor of the Lord. Joh. 1. 12. And what admirable grace is this,
according to that; Behold what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us
(who were by nature the children of wrath even as others. Ephesians. 2. 3.) that we
should be called the sons of God. 1 John 3. 1. This is marvelous grace and
favor: and because they are sons, they have the spirit of grace given unto
them, even the spirit of God's Son, whereby they cry, Abba, Father. Gal. 4. 6.
They have the treasures of righteousness given unto them, Christ is made of God
to them righteousness, and they are made accepted in, and clothed upon with
him. Prove. 10. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 1. 6. And have liberty and freedom to
come with boldness to the throne of grace, that they may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. Heb. 4. 16. And they are heirs together of the
grace of life. 1 Pet. 3. 7. He is very rich and enriching, and evidenced so to
be, in that length of days is in his right hand: God has given to us eternal
life; and this life is in his Son; ^he that has the Son has life. Prove. 3.
14-16. 1 John 5. 11, 12. And this is so enriching that it is powerful to take
off our minds from the things here below; according to that, set your affection
on things above, and not on things on the earth; for ye are dead and your life
is hid with Christ in God: -- Mo^tify therefore your members that are upon the
earth. Col. 3. 1-3, 4. He has riches of Glory; God has set a Crown of pure
Gold on his head, and given him glory, and he shall appear in his glory; and
those that receive and have him are called to the obtaining of the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm. 21. 2. 3-5. Col. 3. 4. Titus 2. 13. 2 These. 2. 14. 1 John 3. 2. Yea, what shall we say? Though they that have him are as having
nothing, yet in enjoying him they are as possessing all things, now by faith,
some spiritual first fruits; and hereafter they shall possess, and be possessed
of them in a glorious enjoyment and fruition of them: In the fear and worship
of the Lord, are riches, honor, and life. Prove. 22. 4. This is the way then
for those that are wretched, and poor, and miserable, to become truly rich, in
buying this gold tried in the fire, for the Lamb has worthily received riches.
Rev. 5. 12. And with him God freely gives all things. Romans 8. 32. What a great
encouragement then, and motive to us all is this, to hearken unto, and come to
Christ, to seek him till we find him, which we shall do in seeking him in his
way? for that good name of his is rather to be sought after, and chosen, then
great riches, and his loving kindness rather then silver and gold. Prove. 22. 1.
How much better is it to get Wisdom then Gold? And to get understanding is
rather to be chosen then choice silver. Prove. 16. 16. Hence when the holy Ghost
says, the fruit of wisdom is better then gold, yea then much fine gold; he
afterward says; Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children, etc. Prove. 8.
16-20-32-34. As Well as also it is useful to admonish them that have those
riches here below not to despise the poor of this world that are in Christ, and
walk after the spirit, for they are truly rich: So much the Apostle James says
to them who did despise the poor, and lightly esteem them: Hearken my beloved
brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs
of the kingdom which he has promised to them that love him. Jam. 2. 5. They,
in having Christ Jesus, have in and with him in Heaven by faith a better, and
an enduring substance; better substance then that of this world, and that which
is enduring; whereas these riches below are uncertain. Heb. 10. 34. And they
are quickened to a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ from the dead to
an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and which sadeth not away, reserved
in Heaven for them who are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Yea, they that have the word of reconciliation
in their hearts, and have it fitted to their lips, how poor soever they are in
this world, yet they have a treasure in earthen vessels, by which they are
indebted to, and do enrich others also. Romans 1. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 4. 7. with
chapt. 6. 10. And this might therefore warn others, and especially those that
have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, not to despise these poor ones; for
how poor soever they are amongst men, and as with respect to the riches of this
world, yet Christ has loved them, and washed them from their sins in his own
blood; and has made them Kings and priests unto God, and they shall reign on
the earth. Rev. 1. 5, 6. and 5. 9, 10. Yea and the consideration hereof, that
those that have Christ, have in and with him unsearchable riches, is proper and
powerful to comfort such against those occasions of sadness and sorrow they
meet withal by reason of their poverty, Strairs, and necessities in this
World: blessed are such poor ones, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Luke 6. 0.
and to encourage them to rejoice in their King, to whom all things are
delivered of the Father; though they are as the filth and offscouring of all
things, and are like unto him in their outward condition who had not whereon to
lay his head; yet in being called unto the felloship of Christ, and made
partakers of him, and united unto him, all things are theirs; and in due time
they shall inherit the earth, yea they shall inherit all things, and reign for
ever and ever: This consideration the first and the last, who was dead and is
alive, proposes to, and sets before the Angel of the Church in Smyrna to
comfort him; I know thy tribulation, and thy poverty, but thou art rich. Rev.
2. 9. And the mindfulness hereof is powerful to preserve us from immoderate
sorrow; and they who do consider it in the greatest necessity are kept from
fainting; While they look not at the things that are seen, but at the things
not seen; for the things that are seen (both the good and the evil) are
temporal; but the things that are not seen are Eternal. 2 Cor. 4. 16-18. --

3. In that he says, That [thou] may be rich; it declares, and shows unto
us the great Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the father in him; it was
not, nor is, his own good and profit, this faithful and true witness aimethat,
but the profit and benefit of others, that they may be saved, to whom the
Apostle also was in some measure like-minded, and signifies, that he was
herein a follower of Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 33. and 11. 1. This was his end in all
he has done for us, and is become, even our advantage and benefit; such was
his Grace to us, that to this end he became poor, that through his poverty we
might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8, 9. He was made of a woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, even all Mankind, for they were under it.
Gal. 4. 4, 5. with Romans 3. 19. He who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He bare our sins
in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead to sin might live to
righteousness. 1 Pet. 2. 24. He died for all, that they which live might not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again. 2
Cor. 5. 15. He was raised again for our justification, even for the
justification of all those for whose offenses he was delivered, viz. of all
Mankind. Romans 4. 25. and 3. 23, 24. And God ha^h given him Glory, that our
faith and hope might be in God. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Christ once suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in
the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. 1 Pet. 3. 18. And that feast he has
prepared in himself, it is for all people. Isa. 25. 6. And so he is the same in
what he is now doing, as he was in what he has done. Heb. 13. 8. He seeks
not his own things; he proposes not, nor aims at any personal advantage to
himself; but it is our good, profit, and benefit which is in his eye: He is the
Mediator between God and Men, who appears in the presence of God for us,
making intercession for us, even for transgressors, and ever lives to make
intercession for them that come unto God by him, to take away their fins, and
procure Grace and Mercy for them. John 1. 29. Heb. 9. 15. 24. and 7. 25. 1 John
2. 2. He preaches the Gospel by his Spirit to our Spirits, and therein gives
us good counsel (as here) for our good, that we poor and miserable ones might
hear his Word, and listen to, and receive his counsel, and so be wise for our
selves. Prove 9. 12. Hence also he says: Hear Counsel, and receive instruction
that thou may be wise in thy latter end, even profitable to thy self, that
thou may be rich. Prove. 19. 20. with Job 22. 2. Here he counsels poor
wretched ones to buy Gold, that they may be rich, and White raiment that they
may be clothed, and that the shame of their nakedness appear not, and to
anoint their eyes with Eye Salve that they may see: It is our happiness he
aims at, and not his own; for though we receive his counsel it is no profit,
or advantage to him: Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be
profitable to himself? Is it any gain to him that thou make thy way perfect.
Job. 22. 2, 3. and 35. 7, 8. Yea, and when he rebukes and chasteneth, it is
for our profit, that we might be zealous and repent, and so be partakers of his
holiness. Rev. 3. 19. Heb. 12. 6-10. And the consideration hereof that he is
gracious, a free and cordial lover of us, that seeks not his own things, nor
aims at his own commodity, but ours, as is brightly and abundantly manifested
in his great abasement, and humbling of himself to death, even the death of the
Cross, may be useful to us, to encourage and move us to come with boldness to
his Throne; for it is a Throne of Grace, erected not for his own advantage, or
advancement, but for the good and benefit of poor, unworthy, undeserving,
ill-requiting, and ill-deserving ones. Heb. 4 15, 16. And to take and drink of
the Water of life, of which he is the Fountain; for we may take of it freely
without money and without price. Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 55 1, 2. And this might also
move and strengthen us to be followers of him as dear Children, as far as we
have ability and opportunity, and to that end to put on Charity, that we may
not seek our own things, but the good of others: To this the Apostle solemnly
exhorts the believers, setting Christ before them as the motive and example.
Phillip. 2. 1-6. 7. In lowliness of mind, says he, let each esteem other
better then himself; namely, let him think and judge that another is rather to
be eased, and spared then himself: If there be a burden to be born, or some
reproach or persecution to be endured, let him rather bear, endure, and undergo
it, then his brother should; let him not seek to deliver himself, and be
content that he is free, though it fall upon his Brother, but rather choose to
bear and endure it himself, that his brother may be eased and freed; and that
this is the meaning of the exhortation appears by what follows. Look not
every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others: Let
that mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of
God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no
reputation, -- and became obedient to death, the death of the Cross, not for
himself, but for us, and for our sakes; surely he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, the chastisement of our peace was upon him; it was our
good he designed, and not his own; and rather then we should suffer the curse
we had deserved, he endured the Cross, and suffered the curse, he bare our sins
in his own body on the Tree: How might this move and prevail with us, to bear
one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6. 2. Herein
perceive we the love of God, that he laid down his life for us, and we ought to
lay down our lives for the Brethren, even in the room and stead of them, and
for their good: But who so has the worlds good, and sees his brother have
need, and shuts his bowels from him, how dwells the love of God in him? My
Brethren let us not love in word, neither in Tongue, but in deed, and in truth.
1 John 3. 16, 17, 18.

4. In that he here commends himself to us under the name of Gold, and
proposes such an end to us, to move and persuade us to buy it, that we may be
rich; herein is intimated and signified to us his willingness, and cordial
desire that we should listen to him, receive and obey his gracious counsel,
embrace and close with him, and part with, and suffer the loss of all things
for the excellency of him; therefore does he so aptly, and enamouringly present
himself to us, and make use of such engaging, alluring Arguments and Motives,
he knows we all naturally love riches; our hearts are taken with Gold, and
our eyes set upon that, as a most desirable and delightful and desirable thing,
and which is very pleasant to behold; he knows we would fain be rich, and our
wisdom moves and leads us to desire so to be, and to labor to that end.
Prove. 23. 4 Now then he thus in the first place describes himself, and calls
himself, and commends himself to us, under the name of Gold tried in the
fire, and counsels us to buy it, that we may be truly and indeed enriched,
that we might be assured of his good will to us, and earnest desire that we
should listen to him, and that he may out-bid all other persons and things,
that we might be taken with, and enamoured on, and give our hearts and
affections unto him, he thus represents himself to us as such a delightful
and desirable Object, that we might receive his heavenly, and advantageous
counsel, and open unto, and give entertainment unto him; so when the Spirit of
error and delusion uses many alluring Arguments to persuade men to listen
unto, and embrace her, that she may seduce and destroy them, that she has
decked her bed with coverings of Tapistry, with carved works, with fine linen
of Egypt, that she has perfumed her self with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cynamon, and
thence inviteth, Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning, let us
solace our selves with loves: To the end none might listen thereto, and be
enticed, and deceived by her, the Wisdom of God calls also, and glorifieth
her self by her Spirit unto the Sons of men: Does not wisdom cry? and
understanding put forth her voice? she stands in the top of high places (that
her voice may be heard far and near) by the way in the places of the paths --
unto you O men, I call, and my voice is to the Sons of man, -- hear, for I will
speak of excellent things (such things as excel what the whorish woman
proposes and presents) and the opening of my lips shall be right things, --
receive my instruction, and not Silver, and Knowledge rather then choice Gold
(though those seducers and deceivers should set before you, and promise to you
Gold and Silver to corrupt you, yet my instruction is better) for Wisdom is
better then Rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not to be
compared to it: (yea and also) -- Riches and honor are with me, yea durable
riches; My fruit is better then Gold, yea then fine Gold, -- and those that
love me shall inherit substance, etc. Prove. 7. 10-27. and 8 1-21. So when
sinners (such as miss their way and mark) are inticeing, and saying, Come with
us, let us lay Wait for Blood. -- We shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil, cast in thy lot amongst us, that we might not
consent or embrace their evil counsel, though they set motives of profit before
us. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the Streets, she cries in
the chief places of concourse, in the openings of the Gates, in the City she
utters her words (in which she, shows how precious and enriching she is,
and how happy they are that listen to her, that whosoever finds her, finds
life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord) and says, Turn at my reproofs,
Behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you;
which are pure words as Gold tried in a Furnace of Earth purified seven times:
To the end we might hear and receive his counsel, that we might be wise for our
selves, and enriched by him. Prove. 1. 10-22. Psalm. 12. 6. His willingness that
we should be made partakers of himself, and his readiness to communicate and
impart this Gold, is signified to us in his thus commending it, and using such
Motives and Arguments, as are most taking with, and pleasing to, and desirable
of us; all which might provoke and persuade us to buy this Gold. But we shall
add no more to this first branch of the counsel.

In the the next place we come to the second branch, viz.

And White raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear. --

This is a further branch of the good and wholesome counsel given by the Amen,
the Faithful and true Witness the beginning of the Creation of God, who is the
Counselor of Peace, that gives this good counsel: In which consider we --

1. The thing further counseled unto by this excellent one, and that is, White
raiment. -- 2. The end why this Angel and Church is counseled to buy this
White raiment; That thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness
do not appear.
1. The thing which this Counselor further counsels this Angel and Church
to buy, and that is, White raiment, or Wh^te Garments.

They were not only wretched, miserable, poor, but naked also, and there is
that provided which answers to that part of their need, namely, a clothing
for their nakedness, a covering for their shame, that it might not appear.

That we may have some understanding, and usefulness of this branch of the
counsel, let us, God assisting, inquire into, and consider. --

1. What is this White raiment, here counseled unto? 2. Why this Raiment is
said to be White, and what is imported therein?
1. What is this White raiment here counseled unto?

In general we may say, it is such Raiment as is only to be had, and bought of
this Wonderful, Counselor, the Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, and not
such White raiment as is to be bought here below, by which some persons
distinguish themselves from others, and in which they glory, as if they were,
because of this, better then others, and what this white raiment here commended
to us, is, we may be helped to know and understand by the Holy Spirit in the
Scripture of Truth; namely, that it is righteousness, even the righteousnesses
of the Saints, according to what we find spoken. Rev. 19. 8. It was granted
unto her (the Lambs Wise) that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white; For the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints, viz. that wherewith
they are clothed and adorned: And so frequently in the Holy Scriptures,
righteousness, is compared to a Garment, clothing or covering, as where Job
says; I put on righteousness, and it clothed me. Job 29. 14. And again, let
thy Priests be clothed with righteousness. Psalm. 132. 9. So it is said, The
Lord has covered me with the robe of righteousness. Isa. 61. 10. And the
joining here Gold and Raiment together, aptly answers to that motive and
inducement given by the Holy Ghost, to persuade us to receive Wisdoms
instruction, viz. That with her are durable riches (Gold tried in the fire) and
righteousness, (white raiment) Prove. 8. 18-20. So that the White raiment here
commended to us, appears to be righteousness.

But this righteousness, which is the White raiment, is not (as after may be
shown) our own righteousness according to the law, or any works of
righteousness of ours; For by the deeds of the Law can no flesh living be
justified in the sight of God. Romans 3. 20.

But the White raiment here spoken of is. --

1. The righteousness of God without the Law, even that righteousness which
Christ has wrought by, and completed in himself for us, and is become
there-through; for this is his name, Jehovah our righteousness. Jer 23. 6. And
so Jesus Christ himself, through, and by means of that righteousness he has
wrought and completed for us in himself, is likened and compared to a Garment,
and believers are instructed to put him on, as Romans 13. 14 Put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ: And as many as are baptized into Christ, are said to have put on
Christ. Gal. 3. 27. And it is both taken for granted they have put on the new
man (Christ) and they are instructed still and further to put him on. Col. 3.
10. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. And they that follow after righteousness, are such as
seek the Lord for it, even the Lord of whom the righteousness of the Servants
of the Lord is. Isa. 54. 17. And in whom it is. Isa. 45. 24. And who is made of
God to them righteousness. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Yea, that righteousness which is come
by him, it is unto all that have sinned; and upon all that believe, as their
Ornament and Raiment. Romans 3. 21-23. And in the Prophet he is oftentimes
prophesied of under this Title, or expression of righteousness; As I bring near
my righteousness, it shall not be far off. Isa. 46. 13. And my righteousness is
near, and near to be revealed. Isa. 51. 5. and 56. 1. with Romans 3. 21, 22. And
Christ is, and in him appears the righteousness of God, and he is become
righteousness for us. --

1. In taking our Nature upon him, and therein being made sin and a curse for
us, and so by cying our death, even tasting death by the Grace of God for every
man; and so this righteousness is without the Law, without the works or
Sacrifices thereof, though Christ did no sin in the days of his flesh, but
always did those things that pleased the father, and observed the Law; yet that
could not be righteousness for us; but to the end he might prepare, and become
righteousness for us, he must have our sins laid upon him; and therefore God
made him, who knew no sin, to be sin for us (by imputing the trespasses of the
World to him) that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.
19-21. As well as also he must dye our death, according to that, If
righteousness come by the Law, then Christ died in vain. Gal. 2. 21. In which
is implied, that to the end he might bring in everlasting righteousness, he
must dye, and be cut off from the Land of the living. Dan. 9. 24-26.
righteousness, could not come by the Law; namely, by our keeping the Law of ten
words, or by any works of ours according thereto; for by the Law is the
knowledge of sin in all we do, in our best, as well as in our worst works: nay,
righteousness could not come by Christ's keeping and observing of it, though he
did always keep it, and never transgress it in thought, word or deed; for then
he died without any just or sufficient cause, he died in vain: And again,
righteousness could not come by the Law of the former Priesthood, or by any
gifts, Offerings or Sacrifices appointed by it; for then Christ died in vain:
It was not possible the b^ood of Bulls and Goats could take away-sin: Where ore
when he comes into the World, he says, Sacrifice and Offering thou would
not, but a body have thou prepared me: In burnt-offerings and Sac^ifices for
sin thou have had no pleasure, then said I, Lo I come to do thy will O God;
namely, to do that which the Law could not do, to take away sin, and bring in
righteousness. Heb. 10. 4-10. To this end he was the Lamb of God who was slain
for us; he was delivered for our offenses. And it was needful that Christ
should suffer for our sins, being put to death in the flesh, that this raiment
of righteousness might be prepared for us; for we had sinned against God in our
first father Adam, and were thereby become liable unto the judgment of God, and
had deserved death in an utter separation from the presence of God; and God,
who is a God of truth, and without iniquity, and to whom it is impossible to
lie, and therefore he cannot by any means in clearing clear the guilty, had
said and threatened; In the day thou eatest thereof, in dying thou shall dye.
Genesis 2. 17. And cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to
do them; namely, as is explicated by the Apostle, that continues not in all
things written in the Book of the Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. And
therefore man having sinned, and thereby fallen under curse and death, unless
the justice of God be satisfied, and his truth fulfilled, there can be no
righteousness for us, no accepting of us, no forgiveness of our sins, nor mercy
to be shown to us; For Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or
tittle of the Law shall pass till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 17, 18. Therefore
to the end that Christ might bring in, and become righteousness for us, God
laid on him the iniq^ities of us all, and he was wounded for our
transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was
upon him; he was made under the Law for us, that were under it, and God went to
Law with him, and executed the judgment of the World upon him. Joh. 12. 31.
And put him to death in the flesh for us; and he by the Grace of God tasted
death for every man; that is to say, he died the death of all, and tasted death
for every man in the room and stead of every man; he died that death which was
the due desert of every man, which they should have died, and which was the
Wages of their sinning against God; and this he did for every man, even for the
good and behoof of every man; So that we thus judge, says the Apostle, that if
one died for all, then were all dead; all have died that first death, not in
their own persons, but in the last Adam, who undertook for, and was the
representative of all Mankind. 2. Cor. 5. 14. And his death is as acceptable
with the father, and as virtuous and satisfactory, as if all had died in their
own persons, and infinitely more comfortable to us; for had that death been
died by us, we had perished in it for ever; But now by his stripes we are
healed, in whom mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have
kissed each other. Isa. 53. 5. Psalm. 85. 10. He has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, cursed is every one
that hangs on a Tree, that the blessing of Abraham (viz. righteousness and
life) might be in Christ Jesus for the Nations. Gal. 3. 13, 14. And there was a
necessity for Christ's so humbling himself, and becoming obedient to death,
even the death of the Cross; that righteousness might come by him; both because
God is a God of truth, and his word cannot be broken, and he is infinite in
holiness and purity, a God of such pure eyes that he cannot behold iniquity,
nor clear the guilty, unless he take vengeance on our sins, and until his
justice be satisfied, and truth fulfilled; which is all now done in Christ, in
whose flesh God condemned our sin. Romans 8. 3. As well as also Christ must needs
have suffered; because there is no other person or thing that could redeem us:
No man could redeem his Brother, nor give to God a ransom for his Soul, the
redemption of the Soul is so precious: No Offering appointed by the Law could
purge away our sin; God took no pleasure in them to any such end, thousands of
Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, would not have made our peace; Lebanon
was not sufficient to burn, nor the Beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt
Offering: All Nations before him are as nothing and they are counted to him
less then nothing, and vanity: Yea the Heavens were not clean in his sight to
this purpose, nor any of the Heavenly Spirits; but Christ must be abased and
dye or us, or else there could be no righteousness for us. Acts. 17. 3. Heb.
10. 4-12. Psalm 40. 6. 8. Isa. 40. 15-17. And that it was needful Christ should
suffer is signified to us, in that when he was in his great agony and distress,
and cried out, Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass, etc. Yet still it
was continued to him, and not removed from him; doubtless to instruct us, that
it was impossible the Cup should pass from him, and yet righteousness be
prepared for us, and mercy shown to us. Mat. 26. 39. This way then he has
prepared righteousness for us, and herein God appears to be just, and his
righteousness is herein declared, and shown forth. Romans 3. 25. As Well as also
we may hereinsee the vanity and unprofitableness of all our works of
righteousness, and of all we could do to prepare a clothing and covering for
our selves; and the solly and ignorance of those that think to make a garment
for the clothing themselves; or to make their peace with God by any of their
works, sacrifices, gifts, sufferings; Alas they are insufficient to this
purpose In the cross o Christ pride is hidden from us, and from all, that no
flesh might glory in his presence. 1 Cor. 1. 29, ^0, 31. And yet here also is a
lifting up for all, in that in which they are cast down, and good cause and
reason, though not to glory in our selves, yet to rejoice and glory in the
Lord; who died for us, that righteousness might come by him; and in the Father,
who raised up righteousness from the east. Isa 41. 2. And herein we may see the
infinite grace of God in the abasing his Son, and of Christ in so greatly
humoling himself for us; and be moved with thankfulnesS to lay aside our pride,
and stou^-heartedness, and submit, and humble our selves to receive, and accept
of this righteousness of God without the law. prepared, and completed by
Jesus, who died for our sins according to the Scriptures; and was buried; and
who also rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures: And this
leads us to a further consideration. --

2. He who died for our sins, is also raised again as the public man; and is
in our nature, and for us justified in the Spirit, even in the Spirits raising
him from the dead, acquitted from all our sins imputed to him; and so he is
raised for our justification, acquittance, and discharge. Romans 4. 25. 1 Timothy 3.
16. And in this God has evidenced and declared his righteousness in releasing
him, and taking him from prison and judgment, who had died our death, and paid
our debt; it was not possible he should be holden of death, because he had
fully satisfied his justice, and fulfilled his truth; and God has therefore in
raising him, evidenced and manifested his righteousness, and testified to all
men that he is welpleased in, and satisfied with his personal abasement, and
sufferings, in that he has raised him from the dead; He has declared him to
be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness by the
resurrection from the dead. Romans 1 4. And Christ, (not by the blood of bulls
and goats, but) by his own blood, in the virtue whereof he is raised, and has
offered himself, his raised body, a spotless sacrifice through the eternal
spirit unto God, which is an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor unto him; entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption, Heb. 9. 12-14. Ephesians. 1. 2. That is to say. --

He has finished the transgression, to wit, the transgression of the first
public man, in which we all sinned, and from whence we are necessarily
polluted; and made an end of sins; of the necessary branches thereof; he has
purged away the guilt of this sin and sinfulness from before the presence of
God; so as now the wrath of God from him, abides not on any man on that
account, nor is any man held out from God because of his natural and necessary
pollution simply: The father henceforth judges no man otherwise then by
Christ, but has committed all judgment to his Son. Heb. 1. 3. Dan. 9. 24.
Joh. 5. 22. And all that have sinned are justified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 3. 23, 24. He once appeared in the
end of the World, to put away, and abolish sin, by the sacrifice of himself: He
was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no sin; he has not failed
therein. Heb. 9. 26. 1 John 3. 5. Ezekiel. 18, 2, 3, 4.

He has obtained also the forgiveness of our personal sins, in which we sin
after the similitude of Adam's transgression; he has obtained power to make
reconciliation for the people. Heb. 2. 17. Dan. 9. 24. he has received gifts
for men yea for the rebellious also. Psalm. 68. 18. in him there is forgiveness,
and in his name it is preached unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, which
was even the slaughter house of the Prophets; and where our Lord was Crucified
Luke 24. 47. with chap. 13. 34. in him the Apostles had in their ministration
to declare redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of God's grace. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. This man, when
he had offered up one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand
of God, from ever offering up any new sacrifice, or repeating, or reiterating
the former. Heb. 10, 10-12. and 7. 27. --

He has also obtained a recovery of our loss; all have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God, in which, and unto which they were created: God made man
in his image, in a righteous and happy condition; but man in seeking out many
inventions thereby lost that image of God; and Adam begat children in his own
image. Genesis 1. 26, 27. Eccles. 7. 29. Genesis 5. 3. But now Jesus Christ, the
second man, has restored that which he took not away; he is the last Adam, in
whom mankind is again created in the image of God, after a more glorious manner
then in the first Adam; He has restored our nature in his person into the
image of God, into perfect innocence. 1 John 3. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 19. integrity,
righteousness, immortality, and eternal life. Jam. 3. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 10. 1 Job.
5. 10, 11. Isa 45. 24. in him it has pleased the father that all fullness
should dwell; and there is in him perfection for every man. Col. 1. 18, 19-28
and 2. 9, 10. And he is become a quickening spirit; and herein preferred before
the first man Adam, who was made a living Soul, and abiding in that condition
in which he was created, might have conveyed life to his posterity; but being
fallen could not quicken dead ones, neither himself, nor any of his posterity.
But Christ is a quickening Spirit, to quicken those that are dead in sins and
trespasses. 1 Cor. 15. 45. The living quickening bread that gives life unto
the dead world, and they that eat him, even they shall live by him. John 6.
33-35-51-57. All things are here ready and prepared for all men in him, he is
made of God wisdom and righteousness, etc. And this righteousness he has now
openly showed in the sight of the Heathen; and hence all the Earth is called
upon, and exhorted to make a joyful noise unto the Lord, to make a loud noise,
and rejoice and sing Praise. Psalm. 98. 1-5. Jesus Christ has recovered all our
loss into himself, and is glorified in our nature, with the Glory he had with
the father before the World was. John 17. 5.

And he has obtained the Inheritance of new Heavens, and a new Earth, of a
better and more glorious Inheritance then the first man had in the first
Creation, and an excellent Dominion over the works of God's hand; and so as
with respect to these two last branches, the Apostle shows to us, that
Christ, who by the Grace of God tasted death for every man, has obtained that
which the first Adam had, and lost. Compare Psalm. 8. 4-8. with Heb. 2. 6-9. And
there shall be in due time a restitution of all things, when God shall send us
Jesus who now is preached to us. Acts 3. 20, 21. The whole Creation shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, i^to the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God. Rom 8. 19-21. And all this is that righteousness which Christ has
prepared for us, and which they shall partake of that believe on him, as the
Scripture has said: In him there is the forgiveness of all our sins, yea he is
made of God to the believer redemption, which non imputation, or forgiveness of
sins is righteousness without works, whereby our sins are covered. Romans 4. 5,
6, 7. with Psalm. 32. 1, 2. And a robe of righteousness, in being clothed upon
wherewith, they are made accepted in the belo^ed Ephesians. 1. 6. Those that buy
this are righteous even as he is righteous. 1 John 3. 7. And Christ does
present them in the body of his flesh in which he was raised again from the
dead, Holy and unblameable, and unrebukeable in his sight Col. 1. 22. And as
found in him they are all fai^, and there is no spot in them, Cant. 4. 7.
Christ is become theirs, and they are clothed upon with him, and reckoned
after him; being buried with him in baptism, wherein also they are risen with
him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised Christ from the
dead. Col 2. 12. Ephess. 2. 5, 6. And they are begotten to a lively hope by the
resurrection of Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and
undesiled, and that fades not a^ay, reserved in the Heavens, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Christ is made of God to them righteousness. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And this the
righteousness they have to appear before God in, the best and first robe, even
Christ himself, and the righteousness he has wrought and obtained this the
Wedding Garment Luke 15. 22. Mat. 22. 11.

2. By this White raiment, or those White Garments, are meant the fruits of
this righteousness believed, and believed in. Jam. 3. 18. For this the Apostle
prays for the Phllippians, That their love might abound yet more and more in
all knowledge, -- That they might be sincere, and without offense, being filled
with the fruits of righteousness, which fruits) are by Jesus Christ (received
and believed in) unto the Glory and praise of God. Philip. 1. 9-11. And of
these fruits, there are some more inward, and some more outward. --

1. Those more inward and wrought in the Spirit of the mind by the Spirit in
the Testimony in glorifying Christ, and taking of his things, and showing unto
us, are Humility. This is compared to a Garment; Be ye all clothed with
Humility. 1 Pet. 5. 4. And this Garment these needed to buy of Christ; for they
were lifted up with high thoughts and conceits of themselves. They said, They
were rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing; they needed
therefore to buy, and to be clothed with this Garment, that their shame might
not appear; namely, to put on, and be clothed especially and firstly with all
humility of mind. Acts. 20. 19. To put on humbleness of mind. Col. 3. 12. And
needful it is for us all to be inwardly apparalled herewith, to have a low
esteem of our selves, of our knowledge, parts, gifts, seize; or otherwise
we shall sit loose from Christ, as they; We are Lords, we will come no more
unto thee. Jer. 2. 31. Those that are puffed up with their fleshly mind
(notwithstanding their voluntary humility) do not hold the head Jesus Christ,
but treacherously depart from him. Col. 2. 18, 19. Good therefore it is for us
all, and especially for the Angels. 1 Pet. 5. 1-5. To put on this, to judge our
selves unworthy Creatures, less then the least of God's mercies and favors.
Genesis 32* 10. The chief of sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15. The least of Saints. Ephesians. 3.
8. To count that we have not yet attained, neither are already perfect. Philip.
3. 12, 13. To say when we have done all that is commanded us, we are
unprofitable servants. Luke 17. 9, 10. To be nothing. 2 Cor. 12. 11. And
therefore to come to Christ as the only foundation of our faith, as he died for
sinners, ungodly ones and enemies, yea* as by the Grace of God he tasted death
for every man, and is raised again: as the reason of our hope, as the beginning
of our confidence: To come unto, and abide in him as the fountain of our light
and teaching, as our only Rabbi, and to learn the truth as it is taught in
Jesus: To put on him as our righteousness to appear before God in, whose
righteousness is prepared for all that have sinned: To feed upon him as our
bread, even on his flesh as given for the life of the world: To have our
approach to God by and through him as our only way, and to come in through that
low door opened for every poor sinful Creature of Mankind, to be comforted in
all our tribulations and sadnesses with Gods consolations, even with the
consolations of and in Christ, and not to have some secret thing with us to
comfort us. Job. 15. 11. with 2 Cor, 1. 3-5. To have our rejoicing in Christ
where all may rejoice with us, and to have no confidence in the flesh, in any
privileges thereof, or in any works of righteousness of our own. Philip. 3.
3-8. And to think soberly of our selves; yea, and this humility is also to be
exercised in all our words, and demeanor. Ephesians. 4. 2. And this humility is
the Spirit effecting, and bringing unto us, that it might be put on by us in
glorifying Christ, and commending unto us the freeness of Gods love in him;
showing that he has prepared righteousness for us, and imputes it to every
one that believes freely, without any works of ours; Where is boasting then?
It is excluded; By what Law? Of works? Nay, but by the Law of faith. Rom, 3.
21-28. And that he saved us from our ignorance of him, and enmity unto him,
according to the rule of his mercy; and so not by any works of righteousness of
ours: By Grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast. It is by Grace, as
the motive whereby he was moved to bring salvation to us as opposed to debt; he
was not indebted to us for any goodness of ours; or by any purpose, or promise
on his part necessitating him thereto; but it was freely by his Grace he saved
us, and by Grace as the Argument and motive wherewith he prevailed with us,
even through the discovery of the freeness and greatness of his love as
commended to us continually in this, that while we were yet sinners Christ died
for us. Ephesians. 2. 1-8. with Romans 4. 4. Tit. 3. 3-5. And so what ever the
believers have received, it is by Grace; for who makes thee to differ? and
what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory as if thou had not received it. 1 Cor. 4. 7. And so his
forgiving the sins of those that come to God by him, and cleansing them from
their filthiness, and giving unto them a new heart, and new Spirit, it is not
for their sakes, but for his own name sake, and were this known, and taken
notice of by them, it would cause them to be ashamed and confounded, and
powerfully hide pride from them, and cloth them with humility. Ezekiel. 36. 21-32.
And indeed, nothing does so powerfully work and tend to the humbling of us as
his Grace; and to this end he gives more Grace, Grace abounding our natural
pollution and corruption: wherefore he says, God resists the proud, but
gives Grace to the humble. Jam. 4. 5, 6. yea, and to the effecting this
humility in us, he proposes to us, and sets before us the humility of
Christ, That we might learn of him who was lowly (not in his outward carriage
only, but also) in heart, and in so doing we shall find rest to our Souls. Mat.
11. 29. Philip. 2. 4-6, 7. --

Zeal for God, to be clad therewith as with a Cloak. Isa. 49. 7. This was that
which this Angel and Church were much wanting in, and destitute of; they were
Lukewarm, and neither Cold nor Hot, as we have seen before: This was needful
therefore to be bought by them in and with humility, and unless that be put on,
this cannot be had by us; for while men have high thoughts of themselves, and
their seize, this disposes them to lukewarmness, and hinders them from
being zealous. Now that zeal that is to be bought of Christ, it is principally,
Fervency of Spirit in selling all that we have for Christ, that we may win him,
and be found in him, as before is shown. And fervency of Spirit in seeking
after the knowledge of him, and promoting the things of his Kingdom contending
earnestly and fervently for the faith of the common salvation; and not giving
place by subjection; no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel may
continue with us; and so highly valuing and prizing Christ and his Gospel, and
fervently loving him and it, as not to love our lives unto the death for his
sake, and his Gospels, but willingly to lay them down, and lose them, when
called thereunto: The zeal of Gods house did even eat up Christ; and such zeal
is to be bought of him as whereby we may not please our selves, but deny our
own wisdoms, wills, designs, affections, enterprises, yea, and forsake all that
we have, that we may be his Disciples, and follow him in the regeneration. Romans
12. 11. Luke 14. 26, 27-33. And this zeal he is effecting in us, especially and
principally by lifting up himself by his Spirit, and rendering himself more
precious then all the things of this world, then all our enjoyments, relations,
seize, lives, etc. that so we might run with the feet of our Souls, even
with hot and fervent affections unto him, from all other things; Because of the
Lord his God, and for the holy one of Israel, who has glorified him. Isa 55.
5. And that we might follow him whithersoever he goes. And laying aside every
weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, run with patience (in
enduring afflictions, and in a patient continuance in well-doing, and patiently
waiting for the Lord) the race set before us, looking off from all other things
unto Jesus. Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3. This is a needful and useful garment to be put
on by us in and with Humility, in putting on the new man, and in being clad
wherewith, we shall be Instruments of good to others and provoke very many to
seek and follow the Lord with us. 2 Cor. 9. 2. and especially needful for the
Angels of the Churches, that they may be ensamples to the flock, and fervently
seek their good. Colos. 4. 12, 13. And abundant need, and great cause have we
now to buy this of Christ in these last, and lukewarm times, in which iniquity
does abound, and the love of many wax Cold As was also soretold by our Savior.
Math. 24. 12. And to that end, that this Angel and Church might be zealous and
repent (change, and forsake their evil and high thoughts of themselves)
therefore out of love and faithfulness, the faithful and true witness did
rebuke and chasten them, Rev. 3. 19.

Bowels of mercy, kindness, etc. Are also to be put on by his Angels and
Churches; not only outward acts of mercy, but bowels of mercy, having an inward
affection to men, pitying, and compassionating the ignorant, and those that are
out of the way; and being kind also, in heartily desiring the good of them,
that they may be saved. Col. 3. 12. And these garments aptly follow, and are
joined with zeal; for when the love, and loveliness of Christ is so known,
believed, and considered by us, as to inflame our hearts with love to him,
together herewith also his love is so infused, and diffused into the heart by
the holy Spirit, as to fill us with love to all, and so with bowels of mercy,
pity, and compassion; and with an hearty kindness to them, and earnest desire,
and endeavor of their good: This fills with bowels toward all, yearning
toward them, and breathing for their good, that their eyes might be opened, and
that they might be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God; the love of Christ known and believed frames, and constrains hereto:
And so it frames us to be like-minded unto Christ, and God in him, to be
merciful as our father which is in Heaven is merciful. Luke 6. 36. And
especially his grace teaches, and strengthens the believers, in putting on
the new man, to put on as the elect of God holy, and beloved, bowels of mercy,
kindness, etc. one to another; exercised in a desire and endeavor of their
good especially, avoiding what is contrary to bowels of mercy, and kindness, as
judging one another, condemning one another; and in doing what springs
therefrom; as forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any have a
complaint against any, even as Christ freely forgave them, that they should do
likewise. Col. 3. 12, 13. with Luke 6. 36, 37. And as we have opportunity,
doing good to all men, especially to those that are of the household of Faith.
Gal. 6. 10. 1 John 3. 16, 17, 18. --

Meekness is also to be put on by them as a garment. Col. 3. 12. To this the
believing women are instructed; whose adorning, says the Apostle Peter, Let it
not be that outward. -- But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which
(though it be despised and laughed at by men, yea, by many that profess
godliness, yet) is in the sight of God of great price; for after this manner,
in the old time, the holy women also who trusted in God adorned themselves,
etc. 1 Pet. 3. 1-5. And this is joined with, and put as the consequent of
lowliness. Ephesians. 4. 2. And of humbleness of mind. Col. 3. 12. And meekness and
lowliness of heart were conjoined in our Savior. Matt. 11. 29. And unless we
so receive the grace of Christ as to be clothed with humbleness of mind, we
cannot adorn our selves with this garment of a meek and quiet spirit: for
pride and high thoughts of our selves will cause us to be soon angry, and fill
us with contention, strife, envying, confusion, and every evil work. Prove. 13.
10. Isa. 16. 6. And this is to be exercised in subjection unto those that God
has set over us. 1 Pet. 3. 3-5. And in quiet bearing injuries, afflictions,
reproaches, and persecutions for the Gospel's sake; and not endeavoring to
resist the evil, or leave our place of subjection. Psalm. 37, 7-11. In seeking
the restoring of those that are overtaken with a fault. Gal. 6. 1. In
instructing those that oppose themselves. 2 Timothy 2. 23, 24. In giving a reason
of the hope to him that asks us. 1 Pet. 3. 15. And in all our receiving the
ingrafted word with the instructions thereof, and the reproves of its
instruction, which are the way of life. Jam. 1. 21. And this is also a fruit of
the spirit, which he is effecting in those that believe, in glorifying Christ,
and discovering his excellency, and that excellent example he has lest us,
that we should follow his steps: It is the fruit of that wisdom that is from
above, even of Christ, and is therefore called, meekness of Wisdom. Jam. 3.
13-17. Gal. 5. 22. And is with the former to be put on by us, especially in
those last days in which evil men, and seducers are grown worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived; and especially the Angels are to be clothed
herewith: The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men,
apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing them that oppose themselves,
etc. 2 Timothy 2. 23, 24. --

Charity also is to be put on; Above all these things put on Charity, which is
the bond of perfectness. Col. 3. 14. Above all things have fervent charity
among your selves. 1 Pet. 4. 8. Let all your things be done with charity. 1
Cor. 16. 14. Charity is distinguished from brotherly kindness. 2 Pet. 1. 7.
Brotherly kindness has for its motive and object somewhat lovely, and amiable
in the party loved; but Charity is a free manner of love, fastening on, and
flowing forth toward the party loved, not because of any worth, or worthiness
in him, yea notwithstanding great unworthiness, and manisold evils be found in
him. Thus it is in God; God so infinitely loved, pityed, and compassionated the
world, that he gave his only begotten son. There was nothing of worth or
worthiness in the world to move him so to do, for all the world was become
guilty before God, and subject to his judgment. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin. Romans 3. 19. and 5. 12. All were become ungodly,
sinners, and enemies; and so, great unworthiness was found with them, yet he
loved them, and so loved them as to give his Son to be the Savior thereof;
because he himself is charity, the fountain and original of love. 1 John 4.
8-10. Thus also it is in a measure with those that have known and believed the
love that God has toward the world, and so are born of God: The charity they
are instructed to put on, It is such a manner of love as is toward another
without any goodness, or worthiness in the party loved; yea, notwithstanding
great unloveliness be found in him; and it is begotten and moved, and exercised
from an higher motive, and from a reason without him, namely, from the love of
Christ, and God in him. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 1 John 4. 7. I say unto you that hear,
That God is love, and how he has manifested it. Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, etc. Luke 6. 27. This being put on, and walked in the exercise
of, will cover the multitude of sins, so as still to be seeking the good of the
party loved. 1 Pet. 4. 8. And indeed in putting on charity, we put on all the
other garments before spoken of; and therefore above all things this is to be
put on by us: In putting this on we shall put on humility; for Charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up. 1 Cor. 13. 4. It takes no notice of its doing
or works, so as to be hindered from pursuing the good of another, but it leads
one to humble himself to that end, as it was eminently found in Christ, such
was his Charity; as that though he was rich, for our sakes he became poor: that
through his poverty we might be enriched. 2 Cor. 8. 9. He humbled himself and
became obedient to death, etc. Charity does not behave it self unseemly, as
those that want humility do, in proclaiming their own goodness, knowledge, etc.
Philip. 2. 3-7. In putting on this we shall put on zeal, and fervency in
looking upon, and endeavoring the good of others, that God in all things may
be glorified through Jesus Christ, and hence this is called fervent Charity. 1
Pet. 4. 8. And is so fervent and hot as that many waters cannot quench it,
neither can the floods drown it; it is even strong as death. And casts out
all fear that has torment in it. Cant. 8. 6, 7. 1 John 4. 18. In putting on
this we put on bowels of mercy, kindness, etc. it fills with bowels of pity,
and compassion toward others; Charity seeks not her own, but the profit of
others that they may be saved. Charity is kind. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Hence our
Savior first instructs his Disciples to love, and then to do good, to lend,
to be merciful, not to judge, not to condemn, to give, forgive, etc. As
signifying, love includes, and leads to all mercy and kindness, and acts of
it. Luke 6. 27-38. Charity opens the bowels of our compassion on sight of the
needs, and necessities of others. 1 John 3. 16-18. In putting on Charity we put
on also meekness and gentleness in bearing injuries, unkindnesses, and ill
requitals from others, and in being long-suffering toward them, and not
presently turning away from them though they be dull of hearing, unteachable,
untractable: yea, though they are froward, evil, and incensed against us, and
are enemies to us because we tell them the truth, and endeavor their good and
profit. Charity suffers long, and is kind all the while; it is not easily
provoked, thinks, projecteth, surmiseth no evil, it is even blind, and
leads those that are filled with it to demean themselves as blind ones. Who
so full of Charity as Christ? And who (says God) is blind as my servant, or
deaf as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind
as the Lords servant, seeing many things, but thou observest them not, etc.
Isa. 42. 19, 20. So also Charity bears all things, indureth all things, all
burdens cast upon it, and yet Charity never fails. 1 Cor. 13. 5-7, 8. All is
included in one word, Thou shall love, etc. Gal. 5. 13, 14. Romans 13. 8-10. --

2, And by the fruits of righteousness, and so by those White garments, are
meant, those more outward; the works and acts of love and mercy, exercised unto
others; so receiving and holding fast the Grace of God, as that in its
efficacies and outward works, it may be seen and beheld of all men. Acts 11.
23. Holding forth the word of life in word and conversation; as our Savior
instructs his Disciples. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing
your good works, may glorify your father which is in Heaven. Mat. 5. 16. This
is an Ornament which becomes such as profess godliness, even good works. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. And to that end the Grace of God moves, and instructs us to
cast off the works of darkness, such as rioting and drunkenness, chambring and
wantonness, strife and envying, which are the garments of darkness, proceeding
from our ignorance and blindness; these are to be cast off as an unclean,
filthy and dishonorable garment: and to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, in the
efficacies of his righteousness believed. Romans 13. 12-14. And so we are
instructed to put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, viz. to put off, and put away lying,
anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication, stealing, etc. and to
beclothed outwardly with love, peace, humility, mercy, temperance, sobriety;
and to have our speech always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, both which,
namely, good words and works, tend to adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior
in all things. Ephesians. 4. 22, -- 31. Col. 3. 5-8, 9. -- 15. and 4. 5, 6. Tit. 2.
10-12. And so by this White raiment is meant, the righteousness which Christ
has wrought and completed for all without them, and which he is become
through and by means of his personal abasement and sufferings, and the fruits
thereof, both those more inward and outward. --

2. Why this raiment is said to be White, and what is imported therein?

1. In general we may say, in this expression there is allusion and reference
unto the Garments that the Priests and Levites did wear, and were clothed with,
and in which they did then minister; which Moses, the Mediator of that old
Testament or Covenant, was appointed to make, or cause to be made. Exodus 28.
39-43. Levit. 16. 4-23-32. So it is said, the Levites, when they ministered,
were arrayed in white linen. 2 Chronicles. 5. 12. And now the Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law. Heb. 7. 12. We
have an High priest after a more excellent order then was Aaron's, even after
the order of Melchisedech; and he is King of righteousness, who has brought in
an everlasting righteousness, and who is clothed therewith as with a robe. Isa.
61. 10. And has it to confer upon, and cloth with, all that are born of him.
Heb. 7. 1, 2. 1 John. 2. 29. and 3. 7. This was he whom Daniel in vision saw,
That certain (or one) man, clohed in linen, in White raiment, whose Loins were
girded with fine Gold of Uphaz. Dan. 10. 5. with Rev. 1. 13. And the same he
speaks off again, Clothed in linen, which was upon the Waters of the River,
etc. Dan. 12. 6, 7. with Rev. 10. 6, 7. And he is girt about the Paps with a
Golden girdle. Righteousness is the Girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness the
Girdle of his Reins. Rev. 1. 13. with Isa. 11. 5. He is a more excellent
High Priest then any of the former, and answerably his raiment is more
excellent then theirs. Aaron had on, when he ministered the Linen Coat, Linen
Breeches, Linen Girdle, and Linen Mitre, outward Material, white Raiment; but
he has put on righteousness as his Garment, Girdle, Breast Plate, etc. And all
those that are born of, and come unto him, are made Priests, be they Jew or
Gentile, wise or unwise, male or female, bond or free. They are a Spiritual
Priesthood, to minister unto him, as all the males that were born of Aaron in
former times were Priests; so now Christ is actually in our nature glorified,
and become the father and begetter of Priests by a birth from above, and no
difference here between male and female; for they are all one in Christ. Gal.
3. 27. This privilege of being Priests is not confined or limited to a
mid-order of outward Officers, between and distinct from Bishops or Elders, and
Deacons; for there is no such order mentioned in the writings of the Apostles;
nor is it limited to any outward Church-chosen Officers whatsoever: Nay, men
are so far from being the only Priests because chosen by the professed Church,
that they are not therefore Priests at all. But all those that are born of
Christ the Everlasting father, and begetter of Priests, whether in, (...) or
out of outward Office in the Church, are an Holy Nation, and Gods Heritage, or
Clergy. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Yea, though those that were in former times born of Aaron,
and were of the Tribe of Levi, were outward and bodily Priests to offer bodily
Sacrifices, in which they were Types of Christ, and their Sacrifices, of his;
Yet all Israel might then in obeying his voice have been Spiritual Priests,
according to that. Exodus 19. 3-6. The Lord said to Moses, Thus shall thou say
to the house of Jacob, and tell the Children of Israel (and not of Levi and
Aaron only) You have seen what I did to the Egyptians, etc. Now therefore if ye
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
Treasure unto me above all people; for all the Earth is mine: And ye shall be
unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an Holy Nation: These are the Words which
thou shall speak unto unto the Children of Israel. And now, all that come unto
Christ the living Stone, disallowed indeed of men, yea, of the builders also,
but chosen of God and precious, they also as lively Stones are built up a
Spiritual house, an Holy Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. And there are none else
that are Priests of Gods owning, and approbation, though there are many others
that are called so; but all these, whether male or female in the flesh, that so
hear and learn of the father as to come unto Christ, are joined unto the Lord,
and so are Spiritual Levites, and made one Spirit with him, and partake of his
Spiritual Blessings by faith, and in a first fruits of the Spirit, according to
their needs and capacities, and they are Priests: And that they may minister
unto him and before men, he washes them in his own Blood. Thus in our Types
that the Priests might minister unto the Lord, they were to be washed. Exodus
29. 4. And when they came into the Tabernable, or unto the Altar, they were
always to wash. Exodus 30. 17-22. And therefore the Laver was set between the
Tent of the Congregation, and the Altar, that they might wash before they came
to the Altar. Exodus 40. 6, 7. 29-32. So Christ who is the Laver and Fountain of
living Waters through his Blood, washes those that come to, and believe on him
continually, even the weakest as well as the strongest. He forgiveth their
iniquities even of the little Children also, and they receive the remission of
them through the opening of his name. 1 John 2. 12. Acts 10. 43. He sprinkleth
their Hearts from an evil Conscience, and their Consciences from dead works,
and their Bodies with pure Water. He gave himself for his Church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word. Ephesians. 5. 25,
26. Heb. 10. 22. And as in our Types of old the Priests had peculiar Vestments,
white Garments prepapared for them, and put on, to minister in. Exodus 29. 5, 6.
and 40. 13, 14. So Christ clotheth his Priests also with more excellent
Raiment; He clotheth them with a robe of righteousness. Isa. 61. 10. Psalm. 132.
9. He is made of God to them righteousness. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And with the fruits
of his righteousness, as before. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10-14. And he
anointeth them, not with Materal Ointment, as the Priests in former times were.
Exodus 29. 6. and 30. 23-30. and 40. 9-13-15. But with the Spirit, and with some
useful gifts. 2 Cor. 1. 21. And so they are prepared to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ, as their High Priest and Altar. 1 Pet.
2. 5. Rev, 1. 5, 6. And the Sacrifices they offer are broken and contrite
hearts, broken off from all rejoicing in themselves, or confidence in the
flesh, and filled with abhorrency of, and sorrow for their sins. Isa. 66. 1-3.
Psalm. 51. 17. And Prayers unto God in the name of Christ, Psalm. 62. 8. and 50.
14, 15. and 141. 2. And the Sacrifices of Praise continually; that is, the
fruit of their lips, confessing to his name, and holding forth the Word of
life. Heb. 13. 15. Also to offer up their bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and
acceptable, as moved and strengthened by the mercies of God. Romans 12. 1. And to
do good and communicate; For with all such Sacrifices God is well pleased,
being offered by Christ as the Altar. Heb. 13. 15, 16. --

Or as this counsel is given directly and expressly to the Angel, that he should
buy White raiment; so there may be reference had to the Raiment the Angels,
those glorious Spirits, were wont to appear in; as it is said of that Angel
that rolled back the stone from the door of the Sepulcher wherein the body of
our Lord was laid, That his Raiment was white as Snow. Mat. 28. 2, 3. Mark. 16.
5 The like also is said of the Angels that spoke to Christ's Disciples, when he
was taken up into Heaven. Acts 1. 9, 10. And of that which appeared to
Cornelius. Acts 10. 3-30. See also Rev. 15. 6. --

And it is needful that the Angels of the Churches especially should be arrayed
with White raiment, and not with works of darkness, and in putting on Christ as
their righteousness, and the fruits of righteousness, they have those Garments,
as is before shown, and are therein in some measure like to Angels, meetly
apparalled to carry the glad tidings of the Gospel, and to be Instruments of of
good to others in word and conversation. Tit. 2. 2-8. Isa. 52. 7-11. 1 Timothy 3.
1-7. and 4. 12. Tit. 1. 6-9.

2. More particularly this Raiment is said to be White, to note the purity of
it; So those White Garments of the Priests in former times are said to be holy.
Thus is it is said, Aaron shall put on the holy linen Coat, and he shall have
the linen Breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen Girdle,
etc. These are the holy Garments. Lev. 16. 4-32. Ezekiel. 44. 16-19. So Clean and
White, and Pure and White are put together; to signify, that whiteness, and
cleanness or purity, do meet together here. Rev. 19. 8. and 15. 6. And so this
White Raiment is holy; the Priests in former times were so legally and
typically, but this is so in truth; they were clothed in white linen, but
Christ's Angels and Priests that minister unto him are clothed with
righteousness. Holiness becomes his house for ever. Psalm. 93. 5. The
righteousness of Christ, or Jehovah our righteousness, is holy; Christ is the
holy one. 1 John 2. 20. Without spot and blemish. 1 Pet. 1. 19. There is no
pollution in this righteousness of his; it is called the righteousness of God
without the Law, which he has prepared and accepted; and it must therefore
necessarily be pure and spotless. For he is a God of purer eyes, then to behold
evil. Habak. 1. 13. And the fruits of this righteousness as produced by Christ
are holy and pure; and though as put on, and worn by us there are mixtures
cleaving to them, yet Christ is daily cleansing them, and making them
acceptable and welpleasing to God. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 15, 16. And the
believers are instructed daily to cleanse themselves. 2 Cor. 7. 1. And when one
of the Elders demands, what are these that are arrayed in white robes; Himself
answers, These be they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their Robes, and made them White in the blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7. 9-13, 14.
And indeed this is white raiment, the purity and whiteness whereof is inward as
well as outward; it is white thoroughly, as in white linen, it is sincerely
pure, and this is completely true of the righteousness of God without the Law,
which Christ has brought in for us without us, and imputes to him, that
believes in him, and in a measure true of the fruits of righteousness; those
Garments are entirely pure and white, and not like those things which are so
outwardly only, but inwardly are black and uncomely, yea loathsome and
abominable some of them: The Apostle calls Ananias the High Priest, whited
Wall, he sAt to judge him according to the Law, and appeared righteous, when
as he was indeed and truly inwardly unrighteous. Acts 23. 1, -- 3. Our Savior
says of the Scribes and Pharisees, that they were like unto whited Sepulchers,
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones,
and of all uncleanness; even so they also appeared righteous unto men, but
within they were full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Mat. 23. 25, -- 28, But
whatever clothing they had, and how white soever it appeared to man on the
outside, they had not on this White Raiment here commended; for this is
thoroughly and entirely White; not like a whited Wall or Sepulcher, but white
as Snow. Mat. 28. 3. or Wool. Rev. 1. 14. --

3. This Raiment is white as the light. Mat. 17. 2. Shining and glistering.
Mark 9. 3. Luke 9. 29. Such as being bought by his Angels and Churches, and put
on, and found in, is powerful to give light to such as have their
understandings darkened; and to discover and Cure their errors and mistakes,
and so tends to the profit and benefit of those that are without, to open
their eyes, and Cure their ignorant thoughts and imaginations concerning the
disciples of Christ, and the Gospel professed by them. While men see them
clothed with, and appear before God only in the righteousness of another,
even of Christ, who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification; it preserves them from having idolatrous esteems of them, and
worshipping them; for herein they may see that they are sinners in themselves,
and men of like passions with others, and that they could not work
righteousness for themselves; nor have they any other righteousness to be
clothed with, and rejoice before God in, then that which is manifested by the
faith of Christ to be for all poor sinners as well as themselves. Act. 14 15.
Romans 3. 22. and hereby men may be convinced that the true and unfeigned
beelivers have nothing in themselves to glory in; but in their gloryings they
glory in the Lord, where others may glory with them, and be also encouraged to
come unto Christ Jesus for forgiveness, and righteousness: And while they put
on, and are clothed with the fruits of his righteousness, and show by a good
conversation their works with meekness of wisdom; it tends to stop the mouths
of such as are ready to say, that Christ is the minister of sin, and his Gospel
a(...) Doctrine, and ministry of unrighteousness, and gives men encouragement
to be licentious; for when they see that the Grace of God that brings
salvation to all men is so heartily received by them, as that thereby they deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long-suffering, etc. and walk soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world; this cutteth off occasion from them that desire
occasion, and makes them ashamed that falsely accuse the Gospel, and hearty
belivers; and is a powerful means for the winning them into Christ, who will
not be won by the word: Whereas on the contrary, when those that profess to be
Christ's disciples, receive his grace in vain, and walk dishonestly, they give
occasion to the adversaries of the truth to blaspheme the name of God, and his
Doctrine: Hence the Apostle Paul exhorts the believers to do all things,
which God in the Gospel is working in them, both to do and to will of good
pleasure, without murmuring and disputing, that they might ^e blameless and
harmless the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
nation; among whom shine ye as lights, etc. Philip. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. To the
same purpose the Apostle Peter beseeches the believers, as strangers and
pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts that war against the Soul, and to have
their conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against
them as evil doers, they may by the good works which they shall behold,
glorify God in the day of visitation. 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. Mat. 5. 15, 16. --

4. This Raiment is said to be white, to signify unto us, that it is raiment
of praise and beauty, of rejoicing and gladness; it betokens and occasioneth
joy and rejoicing, as opposed to that clothing, and those garments werewith
persons usually cover themselves when they are in heaviness, affliction, and
sadness, and when they have cause of sorrow and mourning: This appears to be
the meaning of the expression in Eccles. 9. 7, 8, 9. Go thy way, eat thy bread
with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry heart, for God has already accepted
thy work (even those works wrought in God, in Immanuel. Joh. 3. 21) let thy
Garments be always white (as a token of joy and mirth) and let thine head want
no Ointment, live joyfully, etc. And so on the contrary, when men are mournful,
they walk in black, as Mal. 3. 14. What profit is it that we have walked
mournfully, or in black? And indeed this raiment is beautiful and joyous, and
that which may cause putter on and wearer of it to rejoice at all times,
especially in that plenteousness of redemption in Christ through his blood,
even the forgiveness of sins, and in that everlasting righteousness which he
has brought in and completed, and which he gives to the buyer; Yea, when
they are in heaviness through manifold temptations, yet believing what Christ
has done, and is become, they rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.
1 Pet. 1. 6-8. Romans 15. 14. and 14. 17. This the Garment of praise for the
Spirit of heaviness, which Christ is appointed to give to them that mourn in
Zion. Isa. 61. 1-3-10. The beautiful Garments which Zion is called upon to put
on, and therefore to awake, awake, instead of those dirty, dusty dejected ones,
wherewith they were clothed in times of affliction and sadness; and in this
they may rejoice continually, in that righteousness of Christ which shall never
be abolished, but shall remain for ever and ever; and most fully shall they do
so, when they are made completely partakers of it. Isa. 52. 1, 2-7. with Chap.
51. 4-9. So much is imported in that vote and desire; Let thy Priests be
clothed with righteousness (with white ralment) and let thy Saints shout for
joy; that only joy inwardly, but outwardly also, express and testify it: Psalm.
132. 9-10. So when (in our types) the Levites were arrayed in white linen, their
work was with joyfulness to praise and thank the Lord, because he is good, for
his mercy endures for ever. 2. Chron. 5. 12, 13. And surely they have not o^
by faith, and in usefulness this white and and rejoicing ra^ment, that lie
under discouraging and disqu^ering sadness and heaviness, as if there were no
forgiveness in Christ for them; no robe of righteousness prepared to cover the
shame of their nakedness, and who are complaining, and judging, and speaking
hardly of the God of our righteousness, instead or praising him, and making
mention of his righteousness, even or his only, --

5. White raiment signifies, that raiment where with those that overcome are
clothed, and which God gives to them that run with patience the race set
before them, as a token of his approbation of them, and Testimony of his
well-pleasedness with them: So he that has the seven Spirits of God says, He
that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment. Rev, 3. 4, 5. And
it is said, White robes were given unto every one of them that were sla^n for
the word of God, and for the Testimony which they held. Rev. 6. 9-11. And they
also who came one of great t^^butation, who shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, or any hea^. Chap. 7.
9-7. And this is the raiment which the Lambs Wile has on for the consummation
of the Marriage with the Lamb; and with which his victorious Army shall be
arrayed. Chap. 19. 7, 8-11-14. And this is that White raiment this Church and
Angel is instructed to buy; And to seek glory, honor and immortality, by a
patient continuance in well-doing. Romans 2. 7. To them who forsake all for
Christ's sake, that they may win him, and follow him in the regeneration, God
now gives the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, and the raiment of
victorers by faith. 1 Cor. 15. 57. 1 John. 5. 4, 5. And will give it completely
in Spirit to them who are faithful unto the death; and in the first
resurrection they shall have it gloriously in Soul and body reunited. On such
like accounts this raiment is said to be white, and such manner of instructions
are contained in the expression --

2. We have in the next place to inquire into, and consider the end why this
Angel and Church is counseled to buy this white raiment, which is also a
Motive and Argument used to stir up to fervency in buying, viz. [that thou
may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear] in which
end is signified unto us. --

1. That those that have not this excellent and durable clothing here commended
and counseled to, even the righteousness of God by says, and the fruits
thereof; those that part not with, and suffer not the loss of all things for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, that they may win him, and be found
in him, they have a shameful nakedness upon them: This is true generally, as
with respect to all mankind, as they are and while they reman in their natural
estate and condition. God did indeed at first make man in his Image, after his
likeness, and gave him dominion over the works of his hands, in this lower part
of his Creation. Genesis 1. 26, 27. God made man, viz. Adam, and all mankind in
him upright. Eccles. 7. 29. He Created them in righteousness and holiness.
Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. He made him a little lower then the Angels, and
Crowned him with glory and honor; the Glory of God was upon him in that
righteousness, holiness, purity, innocence, and integrity that was upon him,
and in that dominion given to him. Psalm. 8. 5. Romans 3. 23. 1 Cor. 11. 7. The
Law of God was in his heart, and there was in him a natural bent and
inclination to love, and live to the Lord his God with all his Heart, Soul,
mind and strength, and to love his neighbor as himself And then while they
were in honor, and in this upright and honorable condition, though they were
naked, as with respect to any clothing, or covering from without, there was no
shame upon them, and they were not ashamed. Genesis 2. 25. But Adam, in listening
to the temptation and lie of the Serpent, was by him deceived; first in the
female, and then in the male, and eating of the forbidden fruit, and therein
seeking out many inventions to better his condition, and to be as Gods, to
attain to an higher state, and to have a self-sufficiency in himself, sinned
against God. And by this one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin,
and so death p^ssed upon all men, in whom all have sinned. Rom, 5 12. So he
brought shame upon himself, and all his posterity; and now he was ashamed and
afraid, because naked. Genesis 3. 10, 11. There is now a nakedness upon mankind
naturally; they are without, and destitute of that original clothing that was
upon them, that righteousness and uprightness. All have sinned and come short
of the glory of God, in which, and unto which they were Created. Romans 3. 23.
They are destitute of the understanding of a man as at first Created by God.
Every man is brutish by his Knowledge, and void of sound Wisdom. Job. 11. 12.
Prove. 8, 4, 5. and 30. 2, 3. There is none that understands. Jer. 10. 14.
They are destitute of the righteousness in which they were Created, of that
love to God, and one another: They have lost the Image of God in which they
were Created Rom, 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. Yea, and they have sinned, and are sinners;
and as they come into the World they are polluted and defiled: They are
conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity. Psalm. 51. 5. Who can being a clean
thing out of an unclean? not one Job. 14 4. and 15. 14 and 25. 4. And so they
are naturally inclined to all that is evil: Every imagination of the thought of
man's heart being only evil, and that continually. Out of the heart of man
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, blasphemies, an evil eye,
covetousness, pride, foolishness; and these things desile the man: Yea, he is
very abominable, drinking in iniquity like water; even as a thirsty man
drinks in water to cool his thirst, and refresh him, so man drinks in
iniquity; or as a Fish continually drinks in water. Job. 15. 16. Genesis 6. 5.
and 8. 21. Mat. 15. 19, 20. Mark 7. 20-23. And when they come to act, they do
abominable works, such as are shameful, and of which they are ashamed, when the
eyes of their understandings are opened, and they see things in their right and
proper colors. Psalm. 14. 1, 2. Romans 6. 21. As Well as also there is the guilt
of sin upon them, and they are by nature obnoxious to the wrath of God, and
liable to his judgment. Romans 3. 19. Ephesians. 2. 3 And the fruits of sin, in
weakness, shame, death, etc. A shameful nakedness is upon them in Soul and
body; from the Crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there is nothing upon
them but filthiness and uncleanness, sinfulness and misery. And this might hide
pride from us, and take us off from boasting in our birth and parentage, or in
any work of ours or in any thing natural to us, and help us to cease from man;
for whereof is he to be accounted? for we are all as an unclean thing, sinful
shameful Creatures. And it may also cause us to admire at the riches of Gods
Grace toward us, who prepared for us such excellent raiment for the covering
us, when we were in our blood, and so polluted a(...) defiled, at so dear a
rate and cost, as by the abasement of his only begotten Son, who therefore was
cut off, that he might obtain justification and forgiveness; and bring in
everlasting righteousness. --

Yea, and they remain and continue naked and destiture of all that is good, and
lie open to the storms of God's anger; and their nakedness is more shameful,
who, after means is vouchsased, and light extended, love darknessrather then
light, and believe not on the name of the only begotten Son of God; on such the
wrath of God abides, be they never to wise, rich, and honorable in this
world; and they shall (...) see life. Joh. 3. 18, 36. The Lord, after he had
affo(...) means to lead men to repentance, looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God:
They are all gone aside, they are together become filthy (stinking and
shameful) there is none that does good, no not one. Psalm. 14. 2, 3. Romans 3. 1,
2, 9-11. Their iniquity is greater then formerly it was, and their shame more
shameful, in that there is lewdness found with such in their filthiness; and
they refuse to be washed and cleansed, when God is purging them, and causing
the scum to swim aloft. Ezekiel. 24. 13. Romans 2. 4, 5. Hos. 11. 3-5. And this
exposes men to the wrath of God upon a new account, though yet, while it is
called to day, Jesus Christ the righteous is the propitiation and covering for
such like shameful evils, even for the sins of the whole world; so taking away
the sin of the world, that judgment may not be speedily executed, but that he
may procure, and exercise further patience, and extend further means, to open
their eyes, and to turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God. 1 John 2. 2. Joh. ^, 29. Act. 26. 18. --

Yea those Angels and Churches, who after the tastes of the graciousness, (...)
the Lord depart from him, have a shameful nakedness upon them; for in departing
from him they depart from their raiment, which will only cover the shame of
their nakedness, and cloth them, as afterward: Hence the Apostle severely
reproves the Galatians, and shows the greatness of their iniquity, in that
after they had known God, or rather were known of God, and were by him called
into the grace of Christ for all forgiveness and righteousness, That yet they
should listen to those witches that came amongst them, and by them be perverted
to seek to be justified by the law; and to perfect by the flesh what was begun
in the spirit. Gal. 1. 6-8. and 3. 1-4. and 4. 8. and 5. 1-8. Thus also his
Church in former times, did shamefully herein, and laid themselves naked and
open to God's displeasure on this account: Hence the Lord by way of complaint
thus expostulateth with them: O Generation, see ye the word of the Lord, have I
been a wilderness unto Israel? A land of darkness? Wherefore say my people, we
are Lords (we are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing) We
will come no more unto thee? Can a Maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her
attire? Yet my people have forgotten me (who was their clothing and ornament)
days without number. Jer. 2. 31, 32. with Isa. 6^. 10. Hos. 2. 2-7. Jer. 3.
20-25. Thus it was with this Angel and Church of Laodicea, who treacherously
departed from the Lord, as a Wife from her Husband, and entertained other
lovers besides him; and though he had stood at the door and knocked, yet they
turned a deaf ear to him: Hereby they became naked, destitute of their
clothing, and liable, and lying open to his wrath, so as he threatened to spue
them out of his mouth as a shameful thing. Rev. 3. 17-20. When once such
forsake the Lord, how naked, polluted, and shameful become they! from the sole
of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in them, but sin and
shame, wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; and it must needs be so when
they forsake the Lord the fountain of living waters, and robe of righteousness.
Isa. 1. 2-4-6. Jer. 13. 25-27. And all this therefore might be of usefulness to
us, and to God's people generally who have wandered from mountain to hill, and
forgotten their resting place, to return to him from whom we have revolted,
with whom is forgiveness of our sins, and healing of our backslidings; and to
buy of him this White raiment that we may be clothed, and that the shame of our
nakedness appear not; considering also (as is further signified to us in the
end here proposed to move and induce us to buy) That,

2. We cannot cloth our selves, nor cover the shame of our nakedness with any
garments of our own making, and preparing: Nor can we be clothed, so as the
shame of our nakedness appear not, with any other raiment then that which is to
be bought of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, etc.

Our outward bodily garments will not cover our shame from the eyes of him with
whom we have to do, unto whom all things are naked (though they may cover that
of the outward Man from men) nor from them who have the eyes of their
understandings opened in and by the knowledge of Christ; but still our vileness
and sinfulness will appear, notwithstanding them: The most rich, costly, and
neat array, yea, all the glory and splendor of the World, will not cover our
filth and uncomeliness, our sin and misery; but on the contrary, the shame of
our nakedness does more appear oftentimes through, and by means of this outward
clothing; and there it may be seen and read how we glory and pride our selves
in that which was the fruit of our sin: And therefore insobriety in apparel is
signified to be so far from covering our sinful shamefulness, as that it self
is shameful, and renders us more so: As where the Apostle exhorts the
believing Women to adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and
sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array. 1 Timothy
2. 9. As intimating, that insobriety in this outward clothing is immodest and
shameful: Yea, this does greatly provoke God to wrath, especially when his
judgments are in the earth, and God is calling to weeping and to mourning. See
how on this account God threatens to deal with the daughters of Zion (Women,
it seems, being through their weakness most insident to this vanity and evil;
and most frequently polluted herewith) Moreover the Lord says, Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton
eyes, walking, and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:
Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the
daughters of Zion, and will make naked their secret parts. In that day the Lord
will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet; and
their cauls (or net-works) and their round tires like the Moon; the chains, and
the bracclets, and the mufflers; the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs,
and the head bands, and the tablets, and the earrings: the rings, and nose
jewels, the changeable suits of apparel; and the mamles, and the wimples, and
the crisping pins, the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the
vailes: And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell, there shall be
stink; and in stead of a girdle a rent; and in stead of well set hair,
baldness, etc. Isa. 3. 16-26. And yet though this will not cover our shameful
nakedness, but is it self shameful The believers stand in need of being
admonished of insobriety in this outward and bodily array: And therefore the
Holy Ghost has given such like warnings by his servants, that they should not
fashion themselves according to their former lusts in their ignorance. 1 Pet.
1. 13, 14. And that the believing women should have a chaste conversation; and
not adorn themselves with that outward, of plaiting the hair, or wearing of
gold, or putting on of apparel. 1 Pet. 3. 1-4. For even believers themselves as
men and Sons of Adam, are apt to exceed in this outward clothing, and to glory
herein, as if this would hide their shame, and beautify them: And from their
too high esteem hereof they are ready to have the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons; to respect them who have a
gold ring, and goodly apparel; and mean time to despise such as have vile
raiment on them. Jam. 2. 1-6. And are therefore admonished not to love the
pride of life, in which is included, pride of Apparel; and not to be conformed
to this world, in the customs and fashions thereof; but transformed by the
renewing of their mind. 1 John 2. 15, 16. Romans 12. 1, 2. With this outward
array, and with the glory and splendor of this world is MYSTERY BABYLON
clothed; and would here by insinuate that she is the true Church of Christ; and
this is its outward ornament; and hereby she deceives many: This woman is
arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones:
And with this outwardly glorious woman the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication; and the inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk with the wine
of her fornication; for indeed this is the attire of an Harlot: But herewith
she thinks to cover the shame of her nakedness; and her daughter harlots
imitate this Mother of abominations. But this is not the raiment that his
Angels and Churches are to be clothed and covered with; that is to be bought of
him who is the Wonderful, Counselor. Rev. 17. 1-5. and 18. 3-7-9-17. Psalm.
45. 13, 14. --

Nor will our wisdom, or any excuses, or coverings thereby made, cover the
shame of our nakedness from the eyes of him before whom all things are naked,
and opened: We think, many times, this way to hide and conceal our sinfulness
and vileness, as Adam did at first: He covered his transgression by hiding his
iniquity in his bosom: Job. 31. 33. So we would hide and cover our shame, or
some part of it, by shameful coverings; and this many ways. -- As,

Sometimes by keeping silence, and not confessing our sin and sinfulness when
reproved. Psalm. 32. 3, 4. Prove. 28. 13. --

Sometimes men hide their sin and shame under their tongues, when though they
say, they have sinned, and are sinners, because this is generally acknowledged,
and therefore it is no shame so to confess; yet they confess not their proper
iniquity for which God is rebuking them; or they extenuate and excuse it. Job.
20. 12, 13.

Sometimes they seek to cover one sin with another, and add sin to sin, that
they may cover their shame: As sometimes, men seek to cover their adultery, or
uncleanness with murder, or with some other sin. 2 Samuel 11. 4-8-13-15. and 12.
12. Or to hide their theft by lying, or by swearing and forswearing, thinking
this way to clear themselves. Lev. 6. 2, 3. and 19. 11, 12. Prove. 30. 9. Yea
this way of lying is a general covering men have wherewith they think to cover
their other evils, not from men only, but from God also; to which Satan is
tempting men powerfully; and in, and walking in which they are very like to
Satan; for he uses lying in all his sinning at first, and always from the
beginning: When he speaks a lie he speaks of his own, for he is a liar and
the father of it. Jer. 2. 23, 35. Joh. 8. 44. And great need have we, every one
of us, to pray with David, remove from me the way of lying, and grant me thy
law graciously Psalm. 119. 29. Sometimes men think to cover their evils by
committing them in secret, and in the dark: The murderer in the night is as a
Thief: The eye also of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, none eye
shall see me; and disguiseth his face: In the dark they dig through houses --
they know not the light; for the morning is to them even as the shadow of
death; if one know them they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. Job.
24. 14-17. and 22. 12-17. Isa. 29. 15, 16. So those that persecute and murder
the innocent many times do it in the dark, or in secret, pretending that they
are enemies to them, not because they worship God, but because they are
deceivers, and malefactors, Ezekiel. 9. 9. Joh. 18. 30. and 19. 12. So those that
walk in abominable idolatry act it in the dark many times. Ezekiel. 8. 7-12. And
generally those gross lusts and evils are therefore called works of darkness,
because men commit and serve them in the dark. Romans 13. 12, 13. 1 These. 5. 7.
And hereby the workers of iniquity think to hide themselves, though they are
greatly mistaken and deceived: For there is no darkness or shadow of death
where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. Job 34. 21, 22. Sometimes
men think to cover their other evils with hypocrisy; feigning and pretending
themselves to be worshippers of God, and religious persons, that they may
continue in their sins unsuspected. Mal. 2. 13. Matt. 23. 14, 15. So those that
came to entangle our Savior in his talk, that they might deliver him to the
power and authority of the governor, feigned themselves just men. Luke 20.
20-23. And of Israel generally it is said, every one is an hypocrite, and an
evil deer; they thought to cover their evil doings with their hypocrifie. Isa.
9. 17. Sometimes, and too frequently, men think to hide their sin and shame, by
charging God foolishly therewith; Thus Adam sought to hide his iniquity by
laying it secretly upon God himself, as if he were the cause of it, Genesis 3. 12.
And men belly the holy one, and think this way to cover their transgressions,
either. --

1. By saying he is the author of their sin, and moves them to what is evil,
as too too many do, who say, all is of God, and therefore there is no sin; or
that God persuades, and inclines them to evil: Nay the holy Ghost sees it
needful to give this warning to the believers themselves: Let no man say when
he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man Jam. 1. 13. Oh what wickedness is in our hearts!
Rather then we will take shame to our selves, and acknowledge our evils, we are
naturally ready to condemn him who is most just, and to impute evil to him who
is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness; yea, who is of purer eyes then
to behold evil. Psalm. 5. 5, 6. Hab. 1. 13. Rather then cry guilty, we would
make him who is holy, and none is holy as he, like the Devil himself, who is
called, and is the tempter, and wicked one emphatically. -- Or,

2. Men would excuse themselves, and lay the fault upon God, by saying, God
does not seasonably give them grace; and if God would have given them grace,
they would have done better; like that wicked and slothful servant who said, he
was an austere master, reaping where he had not sown, and gathering where he
had not strown, Matt. 25. 24-26. So men would wipe their own mouths, and
secretly signify; they could not abstain from such, or such evils, they had no
power in themselves, and God withheld from them his grace; Whereas indeed the
grace of God in due time brings salvation to all men, in the receiving
whereof they might be kept from their iniquities; See what the holy Ghost says
to such an intimately evil charge. Mica. 2. 7. O thou who art named the house
of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straightened? Are these (thy evils, and
iniquities) his doings? as intimating, they are none of his doings, because his
spirit is not straightened, but he is graciously and seasonably calling unto them,
O do not this abominable thing which I hate! And while he calls he stretches
forth his hand, that men might lay hold on his strength, and be preserved from
that which causes shame. The spirit indeed which dwells in us lusts to
envy, and to all that is evil; but he gives more grace; grace abounding our
natural corruption, while he calls to us; wherefore he says, God resists
the proud, that receive not, or receive not to purpose, his grace, but gives
grace continually, and more abundantly to the humble, that turn at his
reproofs, and in the light and strength of his grace. Jam. 4. 5, 6.

Many such like coverings our wisdom leads us to make use of to hide the
shame of our nakedness withal; in which we do but add sin to sin, and think to
hide our shame with what is shameful; but alas none of these will avail us;
for Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering; Hell and
destruction are before the Lord, how much more then the hearts and ways of the
children of men? Job 26. 6. Prove. 15. 11. Job 34. 21. and 28. 11. Dan. 2. 22.
Jer. 16. 17. And he will hereafter bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Job
20. 12, 13. Yea, now while it is called to day, and for our good, while we make
it our work thus to cover our shame and sin, he will make it his work to
discover and reveal it. Psalm. 32. 2-5. 2 Samuel 12. 12.

Nor can any cover the shame of their nakedness, or wash away their filth by
any washings, sanctifyings and purifyings of their own: But though they wash
them with Nitre, and take to them much Soap, yet their iniquity is marked
before the Lord. Jer. 2. 20-22. Isa. 66. 17. Though they should wash themselves
with Snow water, and make themselves never so clean, yet God will plunge them
into the ditch again; their own clothes will make them to be abhorred: Their
coverings will but make them more shameful. Job. 9. 30, 31. He has declared
that our works, and our righteousness shall not profit us; our Webs shall not
become Garments, nor shall we be able to cover our selves with our own works.
Isa. 57. 12. and 59. 6. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in
the sight of God. Romans 3. 19, 20. This covering will appear too narrow to wrap
our selves in, when the Lord shall rise up as in Mount Perazim. Isa. 28. 13-15.
20, 21. We cannot make our Peace with God by any Sacrifices, or works of our
own; nor establish to our selves such a righteousness as will render us
acceptable before God: but those that sought after righteousness as it were by
the works of the Law, they attained not righteousness; they obtained not what
they sought after. Romans 9. 31-33. and 10. 2, 3. and 11. 7. Hence says the
Apostle. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles (not so
notoriously wicked as they) knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, (the word of faith heartily
believed) even we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ, and no^ by the works of the Law; for by the works of the
Law shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2. 15, 16. If righteousness could have
come by the Law, then Christ died in vain. Gal. 2. 21. Nor can any hide their
sin and shame by any outward professions and practices, by their being hearers
only of the word of truth, and making a trade of hearing, by their prophecyings
in Christ's name o^ casting out Devils, or doing many wonderful works in his
name, or by their eating and drinking in his presence, and using and observing
his ordinances. Those that would cover themselves with those things will appear
to be workers of iniquity, notwithstanding such like clothings of themselves;
for they cover themselves with a covering, but not of Gods Spirit, and so even
add sin to sin. Mat. 7. 22-24 Luke 13. 24-27. Isa. 30. 1. Oh! that we may all
so consider the unprofitableness and insufficiency of all our own works of
righteousness, and of our coverings of our selves, that we may cease from
confiding and trusting in them, and may seek the Lord, and in him seek
righteousness, in whom God has prepared it for us, and for all: And this
leads us to the next thing, viz.

3. This white raiment, that is to be bought of this gracious and faithful
Counselor, is that wherewith we may be clothed, so as the shame of our
nakedness may not appear. We cannot cloth our selves, nor cover the shame of
our own nakedness, as is before said: But there is excellent raiment prepared
for all men by him, who gave himself an Offering, and a Sacrifice for a sweet
smelling Savor to God. And so much might be typically signified by Gods
covering and clothing our first parents when they had sinned, and thought to
have hid their shame with fig leaves; like whereto are all our coverings, and
hidings of our shameful nakedness. Genesis 3. 7. The Lord God, after he, in
denouncing the curse on the Serpent, had promised, That the seed of the woman
should break the head of the Serpent. And after Adam in closing therewith, and
belief thereof, called his wives name Evah, clothed the man and the woman with
Coats of Skins; probably with the Skins of the beasts that were offered by
faith in Sacrifice, to type out, and point forth, that our clothing and
covering must be prepared and made by the Lamb of God, which he prepared
himself for a Burnt-Offering, and by his Sacrifice who is sacrificed for us,
and thereby indeed is white raiment prepared for us, and for all, as is before
shown. Genesis 3. 15-21, 22.

Now then in this instruction contained in the end proposed to move us to buy
this White raiment, viz. [that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear] is further signified unto us. --

1. That this raiment is proper and sufficient to cover the shame of our
nakedness so as it appear not; namely, the righteousness which Christ has
brought in, and completed through his personal abasement and sufferings, who
in the virtue thereof is raised again; and which he himself is become, and it
does cover their shame that have it, and put it on, even from the face of the
Lord, viz. there is contained herein the forgiveness of our sins, and blotting
them out, so as they shall no longer be remembered, or retained in Heaven, and
giving unto, and making them partakers of forgiveness by faith, that believe on
Christ; for this is the blessedness the believers on his name do receive. To
Christ give all the Prophets witness, as the sum and end of their Testimony,
that through his name whosoever believes in him, shall receive the forgiveness
of their sins. Acts. 10. 43. And by him all that believe are justified from all
things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Acts 13. 39.
If we (in belief of his goodness, and of the truth of his Testimony in
reproving, and discovering our vileness and sinfulness) confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all unrighteousness. 1 John 1. 7-9. And this forgiveness of
sins, as it is an imputing righteousness without works, so it is expressed by
covering sin; even as David describes the blessedness of the man to whom the
Lord imputes righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. with
Psalm. 32. 1, 2-5. To the same purpose also the Psalmist speaks, when he
acknowledges to the praise of Gods Grace, and as a ground of encouragement to
desire his further mercy. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou
have covered all their sins. Psalm. 25. 2. And indeed the righteousness of
Christ, which he has brought in and is become, is to this end a complete
clothing and covering for all our shame; inasmuch as there is contained therein
both an acquittance and justification from the guilt of our first sin and
sinfulness; as well as also plenteous redemption, even the forgiveness of men's
following and personal sins, in which they sin after the likeness and
similitude of Adams transgression; yea, and in him there is perfect innocence,
integrity, immortality, and eternal life; which the believer is now receiving
by faith, and in some first fruits of the Spirit; but the adoption, the
redemption of the body, and the Harvest of the Spirit, is to be waited for till
the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven; but even now; those that with the
heart believe in him; They are made by faith the righteousness of God in
Christ: Christ is made of God to them righteousness; their sins are forgiven
them for his name sake; he loves them and washes them therefrom in his own
Blood; and they are made accepted in the beloved: And he in the body of his
flesh through death does and will present them holy, unblameable and
unrebukeable in his sight, they continuing in the faith grounded and settled,
and not being moved from the hope of the Gospel. Col. 1. 22, 23. Oh infinite
Grace of God in Christ to sinners! Oh blessed and everlasting righteousness!
How might this move his Angels and Churches to buy this White raiment, this
blessed covering here commended to us, and set before us. Isa. 61. 10.

And the fruits of this righteousness believed, do cover the shame of our
nakedness from men: Hence that, Behold, I come as a Thief, blessed is he that
watches and keeps his Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.
Rev. 16. 15. --

2. This White raiment is that also wherewith we may be clothed; that is to
say, covered from the Rain, and Storm of Gods wrath, and from the evil of all
adversities and afflictions. This is one use of raiment, as to cover our
nakedness, so also to be a covering from the Storms, and Cold that otherwise
would annoy and hurt us, so it is here; Jesus Christ, who of God is made to the
believers righteousness, and who is become White raiment, does hide and secure
them from the evil of all judgments, wrath, and afflictions, etc. So when the
Psalmist had been saying. Thou have covered all the sins of thy people; he
adds. Thou have taken away all thy wrath. Psalm. 85. 2, 3. Riches profit not
in a day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death. The righteousness
of the upright shall deliver them; but the wicked shall fall by his own
wickedness. Prove. 10. 2. and 11. 4-6-8, The Branch of the Lord, and the fruit
of the Earth, is a place of refuge, and a Covert from Storm, and from Rain.
Isa. 4. 2-5. This man is an hiding place from the wind, and a Covert from the
Storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a
Storm against the Wall; and shall appear gloriously so to be when he shall
reign in righteousness. Isa, 25. 1-4. and 32. 1, 2. Being justified by Faith,
we have, by faith, Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, even
deliverance from his wrath, and from the fears and terrors thereof. Romans 5. 2.
and 15. 13. Oh blessed privilege! the wrath of God abides not on him, who
with the heart believes unto righteousness, so as to harm or hurt him; but
this White raiment covers, and clotheth him, so that when Gods judgments are
poured forth, and they occasion trembling to the outward man: Yet he can by
Faith and in Spirit rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his Salvation.
Habak. 3. 16-18. And whatever fatherly chastisements God be ordering to such an
one, yet it is in love and faithfulness, and to a gracious end, even for his
profit, that he may be made more a partaker of his holiness. Heb. 12. 6-11. And
such also shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of all evil.
Prove. 1. 33. Psalm. 91. So as when in the World they have tribulation, yet in
Christ, who has overcome the World, they shall have peace. Joh. 16. 33.
Philip. 4. 7. On this account Salvation and Righteousness may be so often put
together; as Psalm. 98. 2. Isa. 45. 8. and 46. 13. and 51. 5-8. and 56. 1. and
62. 1, etc. Yea, and Salvation and righteousness are put one for another; as
whereas in 2 Chronicles. 6. 41. It is thus voted and desired. Let thy Priests be
clothed with Salvation; it is thus rendered. Psalm, 132. 8, 9. Let thy Priests be
clothed with righteousness. And again, in answer to that Prayer and desire it
is said. I will cloth her Priests with Salvation. Ver. 16. I say, on this
account Righteousness and Salvation may be so often put together, and one put for
another, to signify, that this Raiment will save and secure us, as from our
sins, so from all storms, tempests, rain, judgments, afflictions; etc. I mean,
from the evil of them now, and hereafter fully and gloriously from them all.
Upon the wicked God shall rain snares, fire and brimstane, and an horrible
tempest, this the portion of their Cup; but it shall not be the portion of them
that are clothed with this Raiment of righteousness; For the righteous Lord
loves righteousness. Psalm. 11. 6, 7. This is armor on the right hand and on
the left, to defend them from evil that put it on. 2 Cor. 6. 7. And such are
instructed and strengthened not to fear the reproach of men, nor be afraid of
their revilings; because they shall perish, But this righteousness shall be for
ever, and this Salvation from generation to generation: And the work of this
righteousess ^^all be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. Isa. ^1. 6, 7, 8. and 32 17. Yea, and this White raiment is
not only proper and effectual to save and secure from Storms and Cold, but also
to warm and make not lukewarm ones, to make them fervent in Spirit, in seeking
and serving the Lord, and to cause them, forgetting the things that are behind,
and reaching forth to the things that are before to press toward the mark for
the prize of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ. Philip. 3. 6-9. 14, 15.

3. With this White raiment also his Angels and Churches may be clothed, that
is to say, Adorned: So Garments are used amongst men for Ornament; and it is
fully true of this White raiment, it is an excellent Ornament, and it does
greatly adorn and beautify those that put it on; those Garments are wonderfully
beautiful in themselves, and give an Ornament of Grace to the head of those
that buy them. Prove. 1. 9. and 4. 9. Isa. 52. 1. This is that which does
beautify them in the eyes of God, so as they are accepted of him, and delighted
in by him. So the Church acknowledges, That the Lord God had covered her with
righteousness as a Bridegroom de^^^eth himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride
adorneth her self with her Jewels. Isa. 61. 10. As intimating, this is an
excellent Ornament and Jewel. So the Prophet says; The Lord himself shall be
to them that come to Christ as the rest and foundation, a Diadem of beauty, and
as a comely Ornament, and adorning attire. Isa. 28. 5-12-16. Jer. 2. 31, 32.
This is that which makes his Church all glorious within. Psalm. 45. 13. This
inward adorning is in the sight of God of great price. 1 Pet. 3. 3. Yea, this
is a Kingly and Priestly Ornament, and therefore it is called a Robe; it is a
Garment for beauty and Glory: Hence it is said, The Lord God has covered me
with a Robe of righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself as a Priest with
Ornaments. Isa. 61. 10. and 4. 2. Exodus 18. 2-4, 2 King. 22. 10-30. Rev. 7.
9-13, 14. Christ has washed them from their sins in his own Blood, and has
made them Kings and Priests unto their God, and as such he is clothing them,
and they by faith are putting on this beautiful and glorious Raiment. Rev. 1.
6. and 5. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5-9.

And the fruits of this righteousness render them comely among men, so as being
clothed, and filled therewith, they have a good report of all men, as it is
said of Demetrius. 3 John. 12. Though yet they hate them, and hereby those that
speak evil of them as of evil doers, shall be occasioned to glorify God in the
day of visitation. 1 Pet. 2. 9-11, 12. --

And hereafter they shall be gloriously arrayed herewith, as with a Robe, and as
Kings shall reign with Christ on earth, they shall then inherit the Earth, and
delight themselves in the abundance of peace, then shall God bring forth their
Righteousness, their white raiment, as the light, and their judgment as the
noon day. Rev. 5. 10. and 20. 4-6. Psalm. 37. 6-11-22-29-34. Isa. 32. 1. Such
like instructions are contained in this end here proposed, to move and engage
us to buy this white raiment here commended to us. --

We should now come to speak to the third thing here counseled unto, to wit,
To anoint our eyes with eye salve; but to this in due time, God assisting --
This which has been said shall suffice for this first instruction; And we now
come to speak to the second -- Viz.

2. That Christ Jesus, and this preparation in him, may be had, and partaken
of, by those that are miserable, and wretched, and poor, and blind, and naked,
and know it not, while it is called to day; This is imported to us in this
counsel, in that he says, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, I
Counsel thee, etc. And this will further appear if we diligently mind and
consider these things. --

1. That the ground and cause of all, was for every sinful soul of mankind. 2.
The preparation is made ready in Christ, the last Adam, for all. 3. This is
discovered to all, and especially where the Scriptures are vouchsafed in due
time; and they are invited. 4. It may be had freely, without any worth or
worthiness.
1. The ground and cause of all this provision in Christ was for all men, for
every sinful soul of mankind, That is to say, Christ was made of a Woman made
under the Law, for the good of all; and to the end he might become a fountain
for all, according to their needs and capacities. Gal. 4. 4, 5. with Romans 3.
19. He came into the World, and was abased therein, and further, that he might
become the Savior of the world. Joh. 3. 17. and 4. 42. 1 John 4. 14. And this
was not whispered, or spoken in secret, or in the ear, by our Savior; but
publicly spoken, and loudly proclaimed by him, that we might know he was not
ashamed of reporting this good news; Jesus cried, and said, -- If any man hear
my words, and believe not, I judge him not (in this day of grace and patience)
for I came not to judge the world but to save the world. Joh. 12. 44-47. It was
in love, in infinite pity and compassion to the world of mankind, and so to
those that are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, that
God gave his only begotten Son; And therefore it is thus expressed by his Son,
and that disciple whom Jesus loved; God so loved the World, so infinitely, in
expressibly, yea inconceivably merciful, and kind was he, that he gave his only
begotten Son. Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 8-11-14. As to say,

1. Jesus Christ took upon him the nature of all men; and was, as the Son of
Abraham and David, and so the witness and evidence of the truth and mercy of
God to them, in whom God has showed himself to be a God keeping covenant and
mercy. Luke 1. 54, 55-68-75. Acts 13. 32, 33. So also the Son of Adam. Luke 3.
23-38. Yea, the Second man, who was foreordained of God, and interposed himself
for the good of mankind, while there was none in a personal being but one, even
the First man, in whose loins all were, and who was the representative of all
mankind, and so in his room became the Public man, for the good, recovery, and
bringing back of mankind to God, which had departed from him in the First man,
and so were justly banished from him in the righteous sentence of his Law. 1
Cor. 15. 47. Yea, He the Second man is the last Adam, of whom the first was the
figure, or type. 1 Cor. 15. 45. Romans 5. 14. And the truth falls not short of
the type in those things most materially intended thereby, but rather exceeds
it, as the Apostle gives us to understand. Romans 5. 15, 16. Heb. 9. 13, 14. And
hence when Christ was actually born, the Angel says, Behold I bring you good
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people; for to you (men, as
distinguished from, and opposed to us Angels. Heb. 2. 16.) is born this day a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord: And the multitude of the heavenly host
confirm, and set their seal to the truth hereof, praising God, and saying;
glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, goodwill (not evil will)
toward men. Luke 2. 10-14. Hence also he is so frequently called; the Son of
Man, yea, only so called when one person is spoken of (indeed when spoken to,
Ezekiel, and Daniel are so called; but he is never so called when spoken to,
but always when spoken off, or speaking of himself.) I say, He is so often
called the Son of Man, even of that kind or species of creatures; because he
partook of the nature of man, and undertook their cause, and was the Heir of
man's misery, to the end he might become their Savior: And by means of the
King's making a marriage for his only begotten Son, in which our nature was
married to the Divine nature in the person of the word the Son of God, all
things are ready and prepared for all mankind: Which does clearly intimate to
us, that he came into the world in a public capacity and condition, for the
good, and behoof of all men. Matt. 22. 1-4-8. Luke 14. 16-23. Isa. 25. 6.

2. And being made of a woman, he was therein, and by the will of God, made
under the Law; and had the guilt of our old sins, the wages whereof was the
first death, imputed to him, and laid upon him: When God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, he did not impute their trespasses to them;
But he made him, who knew no sin, to be sin for us who knew it, and were guilty
of it; and that to a gracious end, that we sinners might be made the
righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15-19-21. He is the Lamb of God, who
had imputed to him, and did bear in his own body to and on the tree, the sin of
the World; even the guilt of the disobedience of our first Father, in whom we
all sinned; and of all the necessary branches thereof; God caused them all to
meet on him, that he might put away, and abolish them by the sacrifice of
himself. Joh. 1. 29. with Romans 5. 12-14. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 53. 6. Heb. 9. 26.
Dan. 9. 24. --

3. And God went to law with him for them, and executed the judgment of the
world upon him. Joh. 12. 31. He was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for
our iniquities. Isa. 53. 5. God spared him not; but delivered him, and brought
him into the dust of death for our offenses; and he by the grace of God tasted
death for every one of that nature, in which he was for a little while made
inseriour to the Angels, even for every man without difference. Heb. 2. 9. And
gave himself aransom, and price of redemption to God for all men. 1 Timothy 2.
4-6. We thus judge, says the Apostle, That if one died for all, then were all
dead; and be died for all, even for all that were dead. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. And
such is the excellency and preciousness of his personal abasement and
sufferings, sustained by him in that body, which the father prepared for him,
wherein he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
cross, that he is in the virtue thereof raised again from the dead; and has
given himself an offering, and a sacrifice for a sweet smelling savor to God:
All which does demonstrate, and is a fundamental evidence, that this
preparation in Christ may be had by such as are wretched, and miserable, and
blind ones: For if Christ, who was delivered for our offenses, and died for our
sins; be not raised again; we are yet necessarily in our sins; and preaching,
faith, and hope are in vain, and to no purpose. --

2. Through and by means of his death, in the virtue whereof he is taken from
prison and from judgment, there is in Christ a perfect and complete provision
for mankind: There is in him, and he is become unsearchable riches; And he has
completed, and brought in everlasting righteousness, according to that motive
and argument laid down, and set before men, and the sons of man, to move them
to hear, and receive wisdom's instruction. Prove. 8. 18. with verse. 4-10. Rev.
5. 12. Truly there is a rich preparation and treasury of all spiritual
blessings prepared and treasured up in Christ for every sinful creature of
mankind without difference, or respect of persons. Isa. 25. 6. Luke 14. 12-21.
Col. 1. 28. Matt. 11. 27, 28. There is in him unsearchable riches for all; and
this was preached and proclaimed among the Gentiles. Ephesians. 3. 8. 9. And in him
there is forgiveness of sins, even of rebellious sins for all that need it,
while it is called to day; And this our Savior commanded his Apostles to
preach in his name unto all nations; yea, to begin at Jerusalem, which was a
bloody city, even the slaughter house of the Prophets, which killed the
Prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them; according to what the
Martyr Stephen says: Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted?
And they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the just one, of
whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers. Ezekiel. 22. 2-4. and 24. 6-9.
with chap. 7. 23. Act. 7. 52. Yet for such as these there is forgiveness of
sins in Christ, and through this man to be preached unto them. Matt. 23. 37.
Act. 1. 8. And God has caused righteousness to spring up before all nations.
Isa. 61. 11. He has provided and made ready this White raiment, even the
wedding garment for all; and it is contained in that provision prepared, in
which all things are ready: And therefore when the King demanded of the person
who was without it, friend, how came thou in hither not having a wedding
garment? The man was speechless, he had nothing to say by way of excuse for
himself; which he might have had, and needed not to have been speechless, if
there had been none prepared for him: But the invitation was, all things are
ready; and so righteousness, this white raiment which we are counseled to buy.
Matt. 22. 4-11-14. So it is said, the Jews, who were zealous of the law, and
established a righteousness to themselves according thereto, attained not
righteousness, because they submitted not, or humbled not themselves to accept
of God's righteousness, which is now manifested by the says of Christ to be
far and unto all without difference; even prepared for them in Christ Jesus.
Romans 3. 20-22. and 10. 2, 3. with Jam. 4. 6. 7. Yea Christ is become a rich
treasury and fountain, a blessed object, in whom there is prepared forgiveness,
healing, all riches, and clothing for those Angels and Churches of his that
after tastes of his graciousness have wandered from him, and lightly esteemed
him, and followed after other lovers, whose evil, and iniquity herein is more
highly displeasing and provoking to him, then the iniquity of others, that have
not known God, or rather been known, and owned of him, as they have been; And
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be
listed up, says our Savior. Joh. 3. 14. The Serpent of Brass was commanded to
be lifted up, and was set up by God's appointment for the healing of such as
were stung by the fiery serpents; because their soul lothed that Manna, which
at first they admited at, and was so welcome to them, and the sweetness and
goodness whereof they had ostentimes proved and tasted. Numb. 21. 5-9. with
Exodus 16. 15-31. Even so must the son of man be lifted up in preaching, as one
in whom there is durable riches and righteousness, forgiveness of their sins,
and healing of their diseases, and a covering for their shameful nakedness, who
have lightly esteemed the rock of their salvation; and of the rock that begat
them have been unmindful, and forgetful, after they have met with joy and peace
in believing. To such may be applied what Eliphaz says to Job: If ye return
(from your wanderings and revoltings) to the Almighty, ye shall be built up --
yea, the Almighty shall be your gold, and ye shall have silver of strength; for
then shall ye have your delight in the Almighty. Job 22. 23-26. And though such
have dealt very treacherously, and done very shamefully in forsaking their
resting place, yet there is forgiveness of their sins, and a robe to cover the
shame of their nakedness with him. Hos. 2. 5. and 14. 1-4. Isa. 1. 10-15-17.
And he is therefore exercising longsuffering, and rebuking and chastening, and
hedging up their ways with thorns, that they might not overtake their lovers,
but might be awakened to consider their ways, and turn from their evils unto
him their former Husband, that he may forgive them, which he will not do, while
they abide, and go on in crooked paths, in which whosoever walks shall know no
peace. Hos. 2. 5-7. Jer. 36. 3. Isa. 59. 8. Nay, though such have spoken, and
done evil things as they could, and have been insatiable, committing adultery
with many lovers, and have long continued therein, even forgotten their glory
and ornament days without number; yet still, while called to day, there is
forgiveness and healing with him for such, and on their returning to him in the
encouragement of his grace, he will take away all iniquity, and receive them
graciously. Jer. 3. 1-5-15. with chap. 2. 32. Because he is an infinite
fountain of living waters, and ready to pardon. Jer. 2. 13. Neh. 9. 17. Nay,
though for their Adulteries and neighings he has put them away, yet still
there is mercy with him for such as these; and Christ Jesus has power to
redeem, and deliver them from their sins, and from the wrath thereby procured.
Isa. 50. 1, 2-4. Oh! What encouragement is this for us all, not to continue in
sin because grace has abounded. Psalm. 130. 4. But to return to him against
whom we have sinned, and from whom we have revolted, that he may wash us, heal
our backslidings, enrich, cover, cloth, and adorn us with himself, and that
enriching treasure, and comely garment which is with him for us.

3. This excellent provision in Christ may be had by men; because he is
discovering it to all in due time, and inviting and strengthening them to come
and partake of it. Christ is a Testimony, and does testify to all in due
season what he has done for them, and is become, and has obtained into
himself, according to the means vouchsafed; he glorifieth himself by his Spirit
to them, that they might seek the Lord, the Lord himself to be their Gold and
Raiment, their riches and righteousness; he makes proclamation that there is
with him by means of his death, waters, wine and milk, bread, good, farness,
all that men need, and which may render them truly happy, and is calling them,
that they might run unto him because of the Lord his God, and for the holy one
of Israel, who has glorified him. Isa. 55. 1-5, 6, 7. He the mighty God, the
Lord, is calling from the rising of the Sun to the going down there ^f, even
the simple ones that love their simplicity, and scorners that delight in
scorning, and fools that hate Knowledge, and all tha^ labor and are heavy
laden, that tire themselves with their Idols, and seek rest where it is not to
be found, to turn at his reproofs, and come unto him. Psalm. 50. 1. Prove. 1.
20-23, 24. and 8. 1-11. Mat. 11. 27, 28. And greater means and advantage for
hearing and knowing his voice he affords us, that have the Scriptures in the
Records of them vouchsafed to, and continued amongst us; and more plainly he
calls and inviteth us, and more powerfully stretches forth his hand to us,
and uses most forcible Motives and Arguments to us, that he might persuade and
prevail with us to come to himself, this full and blessed Treasury. Romans 3. 1,
2. Psalm. 19. 7. and 147. 19, 20. He that gave instruction to men, that when
they make a feast they should call and invite the poor, the maimed, the lame,
the blind, has himself gone before them herein, and set them an example, that
they should follow his steps. As he has prepared a rich provision, and
satisfying feast for all people; So in due time he calls them also, and
inviteth them to it, even such as are poor, and maimed, and halt, and blind.
Luke 14. 12-21. Yea, and he calls to his Angels and Churches, to remember
from whence they are fallen, and to do their first works again, to return to
him from whom they have wandered and departed; with intimations that in so
doing he will still continue them as his Churches, and will blot out their
transgressions, and forgive them, and cover their shameful nakedness. Rev. 2.
5-16. and 3. 3. He proclaims his goodness, and readiness to pardon, to such
as have backslidden from him as a backsliding Heifer, and inviteth them
therefore to return to him. Jer. 3. 12, 13, 14-22. and 4. 1. As he preventeth
men at first with the discovery of his goodness, and manifests himself to
them that asked not after him. Isa. 65. 1. So also when men, after they have
been brought nigh unto him, and enriched by him, have played the prodigal, and
run away from, and forsaken him; yet he still remembers for them his mercy,
and remembers the kindness of their youth, and love of their espousals, and
seeks out his flock when they are scattered, and have scattered their ways to
strangers. He is such a gracious Shepherd, that he seeks that which was lost,
etc. Jer. 2. 2-4. Ezekiel. 34. 12-16. He is graciously calling unto, and inviting,
and alluring such to return unto him; in returning unto whom, he will give
himself unto them, and with himself all things. He who is the God of mercy does
prevent them, and remember them still when they have forgotten him, and
proclaims his goodness to them, and therewith inviteth them to return. He is
the Lord, he changes not, therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed; but
though they have gone away from his Ordinances, and have not kept them; yet he
says, Return unto me, and I will return unto you, etc Jer. 31. 18-20. Ezekiel.
18. 30-32. Mal. 3. 6. 7. And this shows unto us, the infinite graciousness of
Christ Jesus, and of the father in him; and his loathness that men should still
continue in their wanderings from him. Luke 15. 1-11. And it is therefore
powerful to purge out of us those evil and unbelieving thoughts that are in us:
We are apt and ready to say, When we have sinned, there is no hope, he will be
no more gracious to us. Jer. 2. 25. The consideration hereof, that he calls
us, might purge them out, and help us to be of good courage, and come unto him,
seeing he inviteth us to partake of his fullness; Even as when they said to the
blind man, be of good comfort, rise, he, the Savior, calls thee; he
presently casting away his garments, rose, and came to Jesus: So also it might
prevail with us, that seeing this gracious one calls us, and stands at the
door and knocks, to open, and come unto him, and part withal for the
excellency of him, That we may win him, and be made partakers of him. Mark. 10.
49, 50. Jer. 3. 22, 23, 24. 1 Samuel 12. 20. --

4. This provision in Christ may be had and enjoyed by us, because we may have
it freely, without any real worth, or worthiness; and otherwise we could not
have it. Alas these to whom this most gracious counselor here speaks, were
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and naked; they had nothing to give, or part
with that might in the least be compared unto, or valued with, this Gold tried
in the fire, and white raiment, and yet they are counseled to buy; and it is
intimated in the counsel that such may have it; and therefore it is supposed
and signified, that they may have it freely: This provision was freely
prepared, as with respect to us, all was of grace, and not of, or from any
merit of ours; we had deserved nothing of good from the hand of God; nay, we
had deserved to have been utterly expelled from the favor, and merciful
presence of God. 2 Samuel 14. 14. We were dead at Law, condemned to dye; and dead
in sins and trespasses, filthy and polluted ones, and altogether unable to help
our selves, as water spilt upon the ground that cannot be gathered up again. 2
Cor. 5. 14. But the God of all grace, without any goodness of ours to move him
thereto, and contrary to our deservings, so loved us, as to give his Son by his
grace, his free love, to taste death for every man. Heb. 2. 9. And in him, who
is raised again from the dead for our justification, all that have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, are justified freely by his grace through that
redemption in Christ Jesus. They are redeemed without money. Isa. 52. 3. Romans
3. 23, 24. And in Christ, before we know it, there is freely prepared the
forgiveness of our personal sins, in which we sin after the likeness of Adam's
transgression. The free gift is of many offenses unto justification. Romans 5.
15, 16. And a full fountain of grace and truth; yea, there God has freely
given to us all things. Joh. 1. 14-16. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Psalm. 68. 10. And
proclamation is made, and invitation given to men of this preparation freely;
and men are invited to come that have no money nor price, no goodness nor
worthiness of their own; yea, he that is a Thirst, and whosoever will, may
come, and take of the water of life freely, Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 18. and 21. 6.
Our Lord Jesus, in the last day, the great day of the feast of Tabernacles,
stood and cried (even with a loud voice, that all might hear) If any man thirst
(whether out of necessity, or from a former taste of his graciousness) let him
come unto me and drink: There was that in him prepared for any Thirster, that
might cool his thirst, refresh and comfort him; And it might be freely had by
any Thirster; by such an one as had no gracious frames, or qualifications. Joh.
7. 37. And to those that receive Christ Jesus, he gives with him all things
freely. Romans 8. 32. Yea, he is ready to forgive, and accept, and love freely,
such as he has been provoked with for their treacherous departing from him,
upon their returning again to him from whom they have revolted. As he says, I
will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely. Hos. 14. 1-4. He frankly
forgiveth them whose sins are many. Luke 7. 42-48. And this does evidence, that
this provision may be had; and is a great consolation to the poor, not only to
such as are naturally so, but to such as are so in a spiritual consideration,
to such as have no goodness, greeness, graces, who have nothing in themselves
to encourage them; yet such are invited, and may partake of this enriching,
satisfying, covering, and adorning preparation proposed to, and set before
them; and may therefore encourage such to come to the waters. How many are
there that are so poring upon their own unworthiness, and nothingness, as that
thereby they discourage and hinder themselves, and at last conclude there is no
hope for them? This consideration might encourage them, and cause them to lift
up the hands that hang down, and to come to this fountain of the grace of God.
Joh. 4. 10.

And this Instruction, as thus demonstrated, to wit. That Christ, and this
provision in him, may be had by such as are wretched, and miserable, and poor,
etc. Yea, by any sinful worthless creature of mankind, while God is exercising
longsuffering, and vouchsafing means, and striving with, and calling to them,
may be of usefulness to us. --

1. To take us off from listening unto, or entertaining those false witnesses
of God in Christ, who shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men; and even in
their Doctrines say, Christ died not for all men, nor by the grace of God
tasted death for every man, but only for the fewest of mankind; and so by
necessary consequence, there is nothing prepared in Christ for the greatest
part of mankind, No gold, no forgiveness, no righteousness, etc. When our
Savior inveigheth against the scribes and Pharisees, the first woe he
denounces upon them, in the hearing of the multitudes and his disciples, was,
because they shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men; which was indeed their
great evil, and cause of the following evils for which they are so sharply, and
severely rebuked. Matt. 23. 1-13. And at another time, when there were gathered
together an innumerable company of people, insomuch that they trod one upon
another; He said first of all to his disciples in their hearing; Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, their evil doctrine, which is hypocrisy. Luke 12. 1.
2 Pet. 2. 1. Oh! Let us also beware of such doctrines as deny the grace of God
in Christ to mankind, as declared in the Scriptures; and hold we fast those
wholesome words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is
according to godliness. As well as also it may take us off from others, who
though they plainly deny not that Christ died for all, and is raised again; or
that any man may in coming to him be enriched by him; yet they confess not
this, they speak it not out, nor make it the subject matter of what they say,
so to exalt Christ that men might run to him, but press men first to do such
and such duties, and then direct them to Christ, when they are thus and thus
qualified, like those teachers to whom God said, This is the rest wherewith you
may cause the weary to rest (even Christ as witnessed in the law, and by the
Prophets) and this is the refreshing; but they would not hear; but the word of
the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, etc. And hereby they caused God's
people to go astray, and to forget their resting place: Isa. 28. 12, 13-16.
Jer. 50. 6. Instead of directing men to Christ, and calling, and moving them to
come to this fountain, they press men to establish a righteousness to
themselves, and to be justified by the Law, or to perfect by the flesh what was
begun by the spirit; like those evil workers who came amongst the Galatians.
chap. 3. 1-4. and 5. 1-4. 1 John 4. 3.

2. Seeing this provision may be had, and had freely, by such; it shows unto
us the great and admirable grace of Christ, and of the Father in him, and that
he is not willing that any man should perish, but that all should come to
repentance and be saved. 2 Pet. 3. 9, 15. What could have been done more for
us, to assure us of his cordial affection to us, and hearty desire of our good?
as Isa. 5. 4. Herein he has manifested, That he is love, and manifested his
love to us, which was secret comparatively before; Because he sent his only
begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him. 1 John 4. 8, 9,
10. And has in him provided all things for us; it has pleased the Father that
in him should all fullness dwell, and in him is all compleatness for us. Col. 1.
19. and 2. 3, 9, 10. And calls and beseeches us to be reconciled, and to
receive his grace to purpose, and offers it freely to us, 2 Cor. 5. 19-21.
and 6. 1. Yea, and he spreads, and stretches out his hand all the day long
to rebellious ones, and draws them with cords of a man, with the bands of
love. What greater assurance can he give of his cordial love, and good will to
us, and that he would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the Truth? O that such Grace may not be despised, or abused by us. Isa. 65. 2,
3. Romans 10. 21. Hos. 11. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 2, 4-6, 7. Romans 2. 4. --

3. It may encourage us all to receive this Council, and buy of him this
enriching Gold, and White raiment, to come to him in whom is all fullness, in
whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. O! let us not say, we are
such unworthy ones, and have so evilly and shamefully requited him, that he
will be no more gracious to us; He knows us better then we know our selves;
He is greater then our hearts, and knows all things. And seeing he inviteth
us, let us not delay, or make excuses, or so give way to our discouragements as
to say, The case is desperate; but let us return to him from whom we have
departed by our iniquities: He knew these to whom he givith this gracious
counsel, who knew not themselves; and knew them to be piteous miserable ones;
and yet he gives this good counsel to them. Here he says, I know thy works,
and yet, I counsel thee to buy of me, etc. As also he tells his people in
former times; I knew thou art obstinate, and thy neck an Iron sinew, and thy
brow brass; -- I knew thou would deal very treacherously, and wast called a
transgressour from the womb; and yet how gracious was he to them, and still
calls upon them; hearken unto me, O Jacob. Isa. 48. 1-4-8-12. He is not
unacquainted with, or ignorant of our great unworthiness, and manifold
provocations of him, but he knows all our ways, and actions; yea, our secret
sins which have been acted in the dark, and with greatest secrecy; and yet he
calls us, and stretches forth his hand to us. Let it be so considered by us
that we may not so mind our wretchedness as to continue at a distance from him;
but receive we his counsel, and be wise, and not refuse it. How well did our
Savior take it, and how greatly pleased was he with the Woman of Canaan who
still believed and hoped in his mercy, and was not discouraged though he
intimately called her dog, and seemed to give her a repulse? She acknowledged
her self to be as bad as she was called; but she did not therefore conclude
there was no mercy for her; no, but considered what there was for such an one
as was as bad as she was called. Matt. 15. 22-28. The consideration of his
graciousness might make us willing also to come, such as we are, and to let go
all things for this rich and blessed commodity, for that is needful to our
partaking of it; And this leads us to the next Instruction. -- Viz. --

3. That to the end the wretched and miserable, etc. May have and partake of
this preparation and provision, needful it is to buy it; To buy this gold, and
white raiment; it may be had by us, as is in part shown in the former
instruction; but that it may be received and enjoyed by us, it is thus to be
had; it is be bought by us: therefore the Amen says, I counsel thee to buy of
me etc. -- here consider we.

1. What is this buying here counseled unto? 2. Why it is called and compared
to buying? 3. Show that it is needful to buy; and that in the present time and
opportunity; and then make some use.
1. What is this buying here called for, and counseled unto?

The buying this excellent provision, It is a getting it into our possession,
an having, or obtaining it: hence whereas in one place the Holy Ghost says,
get Wisdom, and withal thy gettings get understanding. In another place, He
says, buy wisdom and understanding. Compare Prove. 4. 5-7. with chap. 23. 23.
It is an having a property and right in, and title to it as ones own; againing
or possessing it. Phil. 3. 8, 9. Truly God has given us mankind eternal life,
and this life is in his Son, as in a fountain and treasury: and so as included
therein he has given us gold, white raiment, durable riches and righteousness:
And so it is every man's own by Christ's purchase, and God's gift in him. The
true riches, in that respect, are more ours, then the Mammon of unrighteousness
is. Luke 16. 10, 11. but yet no man has this life, or those riches, but he
that receives, has, and is possessed of Christ, in whom is this provision;
and with whom God gives, and in receiving whom men receive all things by
faith, and in some first fruits of the spirit. 1 John 5. 10-12. Rom 8. 32. 1
Cor. 1. 30. And those that by observing lying vanities forsake him, they
forsake their own mercy. Jonah 2. 8. it is indeed their own mercy, but they
have it not; but by this means deprive themselves of it: But the buying is an
obtaining, having, and receiving these excellent things here proposed to, and
set before us.

2. Why is this getting, receiving, and having this Gold and White raiment
called and compared to buying here, and elsewhere? To that we may answer -- 1.
Negatively. 2. Affirmatively. --

1. Negatively, Not as if we had any thing of real, or equivalent worth, or
value, to part with and give for this excellent provision here invited to. Thus
men usually buy commodities in this world, by parting with money, or some other
thing for them, which is, or is looked upon to be in some measure worthy that
they buy, and get a property in; but so it is not called buying here. And this
will in some measure appear if we consider these things. --

1. The things here commended to us are the principal, and most excellent
things, and no other thing is to be compared to them; this provision here
invited to is above all, above all the things we may, or can desire; and much
more above those we are possessed of. That which is said of Wisdom may be said
of this also; it is more precious then Rubies, and all the things we can desire
are not to be compared herewith: Man knows not the price thereof, neither is
it found in the land of the living. -- It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither
shall Silver be weighed for the price thereof; it cannot be valued with the
Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire, etc. Prove. 3. 13-15. and
8. 10, 11. and 16. 16. Joh. 3. 31. Jam. 3. 17. It is even the Lord himself, and
what is treasured up in him, and all nations are before him as nothing, and
they are counted to him less then nothing, and vanity: To whom then shall we
liken him? or what likeness shall we compare unto him? Isa. 40. 15-18-25. and
46. 5, 6. The world and all the things thereof; and all we enjoy, and are
possessed of, are not to be compared to this unsearchably rich treasure which
we are here counseled to buy. Cant 8. 7. --

2. And it also appears that by buying is not meant parting with any thing as
a valuable consideration, if we consider what manner of persons they are that
are counseled to buy; to wit, such as had no worth or worthiness in them, such
as were indigent worthless creatures; such as were wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked; and therefore such as could give nothing in
exchange for this excellent commodity, that might in the least be valuable
therewith, or comparable thereto; And elsewhere such are invited to buy that
have no money nor price. Isa. 55. 1, 2. Luke 14. 21.

3. And it further appears that this is not meant by buying, because it is
highly provoking to God to think that we can purchase the gift of God with any
thing we have as a valuable consideration: This was the great and heinous
iniquity of Simon Magus, to think that the gift of God might be purchased with
money: And therefore Peter said unto him, Thou have neither part nor lot in
this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Act. 8. 18-23.

2. But this is called, and compared to buying.

1. Because we must part with somewhat that we may be made partakers of Christ;
As in in buying any commodity a man must part with one thing for another; so
here, We must part with what we have, even all that we have of our own. We must
be like the wise Merchant, who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he
went and sold all that he had, and bought it. Matt. 13. 44-46. So must we do,
we must part with and forsake all we have, that we may have this Gold, and
white raiment; As to say, We must at first and always let go our Pride, and
high thoughts and conceits of our selves, and of our being in a good condition
already, and without Christ: This was the great and fundamental evil found with
these, as is before noted; they said they were rich, and increased with goods,
and had need of nothing; and hereby they grew remiss and lukewarm; and
therefore unless this evil and high conceit of themselves were abstained from,
and parted with by them, how could they with fervency seek the Lord? Hence this
faithful and gracious counselor instructs and admonishes them. Verse. 19.
Be zealous and repent; and the latter is needful to the former; And so it is as
if he should say, that you may with earnestness and intention of spirit seek to
know and be made partakers of Christ, and those durable riches in him; needful
it is that you repent, change your minds, let go your proud and lofty thoughts
and conceits of your selves, and of the goodness of your present condition,
that you may seek the Lord, the Lord himself, and that substantial preparation
in him; Forsake your unrighteous thoughts, without which you cannot return to
the Lord, with whom is plenteous redemption. Isa. 55. 1-6, 7. Wash your hearts
from wickedness, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within you? Jer. 4. 14.
This haughty concert of the goodness of their present condition, was that which
hindered the leaders of the people in ^or^e^ times from coming to Christ as the
rest. and refreshing and directing others thereto, because they thou ^^t the
evil should not overtake nor prevent them; They had made a covenant with Death,
and with Hell were they at agreement; they were not afraid of death or hell;
they were in an happy est^te already. Isa. 28. 12-15. and this hindered the Jews
from entertaining Christ and his Gospel; they thought they were whole already,
and that eternal life appertained to them; they had it in the Scriptures
assured to them; and they knew all already, and took it hainously that they
should be reproved, or faulted for any thing, or that the goodness of their
condition should be suspected; hence they came not to Christ that they might
have light, life, and righteousness. Matt. 9. 10-12. Joh. 5. 39, 40. and 9. 40,
41. Luke 11. 45. God does in due time give grace to us, that we might have our
high thoughts of our selves subdued, and that we might hate them. Oh! that it
may be received by us to such end and purpose. Jam. 4. 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 10. 4,
5. --

So also we must let go, and forsake our double mindedness, and halting between
two opinions. This Angel and Church were somewhat polluted herewith, they were
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot; they were not so cold, as to leave off all
professed waiting upon Christ, and use and observance of his ordinances; nor so
hot, as to be chastely and singly for him, to be for him, and for him only;
which is a very sad and nauseous distemper, and very loathsome and provoking to
Christ Jesus: and therefore needful it is that we cleanse our selves in the
light and strength of God's grace here-from. And indeed this is the consequent
of pride and high conceits of our selves, and of the goodness of our
conditions, and of our seize and enjoyments, as has been foreshewn; and
as also appears in Jam. 4. 5, 6-8. The grace of God that brings salvation
to all men, comes first to save us from our pride and high thoughts of our
selves; and then, and therewith, instruction is given to cleanse the heart from
cou^le-minde^ness. This double-mindedness as it is very (...) and dangerous, so
also it is very frequent and ordinary amongst many professors, who have a
great form of godline^s upon them. They have some appearance of love for the
grace of God in Christ to man-ward; and they will come to hear the Gospel in
and amongst the Societies of God's people, and seem to take delight therein:
And yet also they have love to, and an heart for those differing and contrary
doctrines which deny the grace of God to mankind; or confess it not, speak it
not out openly; and all are honest and godly men with them, both those that
declare and contend for the faith of the common salvation; and those that deny,
and contend against it; they have a soul, and a soul, two souls; one inclined
toward them that preach the Gospel of Christ; and another toward those that
bring another doctrine, and preach another Gospel; though these doctrines are
as far different from one another as Heaven and Earth, as some that are
enemies to the grace of God in Christ to every man, have said, and
acknowledged; yet these can love both, and commend both, and receive good from
both, as they pretend. Their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty.
Hos. 10. 2. Yea, this is that they call charity, to have a good opinion and
esteem of all that make a fair face in the flesh; though many of them preach
another Jesus, or Spirit, or Gospel, besides him whom the Apostles have
preached, or that the believers have received and accepted, when as indeed it
is not charity: For charity rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth; but it is the fruit of their instability, and want of fervent love to
Christ and his Gospel, which, were it in them, would cause them not to endure
evil doctrines, nor those that bring them. Rev. 2. 2-6. These persons are like
the waves of the sea, driven with the winds, and tossed, and unstable in all
their ways and walkings; ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth. Let not such persons think they shall receive any thing of the
Lord; though he gives liberally to all men, and upbraideth not for former, or
present unworthiness, yet this will deprive the soul of good, and hinder such
manner of men from receiving what God is giving liberally unto them. Jam. 1.
6-8. O that we may all cleanse our hearts herefrom in that fountain prepared
and opened in and through the blood of Christ! Christ being ascended up on
high, has in these last days especially given such excellent gifts to men,
that thereby we might know which are sound and wholesome words, and which are
evil and pernicious, that we might abhor the evil, and cleave to the good with
full purpose of heart; and might not henceforth be Children tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; that our hearts might
not be so simple as to be beguiled and deceived by the good words and fair
speeches of them that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Apostles
doctrine, but might be established with grace, and receive and abide in the
doctrine of Christ, in which whosoever abides he has both the Father and the
Son. And that if any man (how appearingly holy, or learned soever he be) bring
not this doctrine (whatever doctrine else he bring, if this be not the sum of
his message) we should not receive him into our house (give no entertainment to
him as a bringer of another doctrine) nor bid him, God speed (say not, the
blessing of the Lord be upon you, the Lord prosper you) for he that bids
such an one God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds: He is a sharer with him
in all the mischif he does to others, Be not therefore carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines; for it is a good thing the heart be established
with grace. Ephesians. 4 8-11 -- 14. Rom ^6. 17* 18. Heb. 13. 7, 8, 9. 2 John 9,
10, 11. 1 John 2. 24-26. Gal. 1. 6-9. 2 Cor. 11. 1-3, 4.

The wisdom of this world also, our own and others, must be ceased from, and
parted with, otherwise this will pervert us, and hinder us from coming unto,
and following after Jesus Christ. Isa. 47. 10. 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20. Hence that
instruction and admonition; Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean
not to thine own understanding; be not wise in th^^e own eyes, fear the Lord
and depart from evil; As intimating to us, that our own wisdom and
understanding will hinder us from trusting in him heartily, and fearing and
worshipping him. Prove. 3. 5-7. The preaching of Christ and him crucified, the
commending and proclaiming the excellency, and excellent ends and virtues of
his personal abasement and sufferings, and of what he has done and obtained
into himself, and is become. This is a sapless unsavory thing to our wisdom,
and to them that seek it, and follow after it; and our wisdom causes such to
depart from, or wander out of the way of understanding. Hence whereas the
Apostle in one verse says, The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish
foolishness; he says in another; The preaching of Christ crucified is to the
Greeks, who seek after wisdom foolishness, to signify to us, That those that
seek after the wisdom of this world they are such as perish as their sin, go
astray from the right way; and while they are so doing, the Cross of Christ,
and the preaching thereof is a foolish thing to them; they perceive no form or
comeliness, no beauty or excellency, no desirableness in his sufferings, or in
him who by means thereof is become the habitation of the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and in our nature. Compare. 1 Cor. 1 17, 18. with verse 22. 23. Col. 2.
9, 10. It is an unsavou^^ thing to our wisdom to be directed always unto
Christ, and to come unto him continually as the only foundation of faith,
reason of hope, fountain of light and teaching, answer of the conscience
toward God, matter of seeding, robe of righteousness: Our wisdom leads us
rather to do somewhat that we may have our life in, and acceptance by, and
dependence upon: And therefore that we may be wise in e^^^n the flesh of the
Son of Man which was given for the (...)e of the world, and drinking his blood,
in the discoveries, consolations, operations, teachings, requirings, and
admonitions thereof, needful it is for us to become fools, and to cease from
our own wisdom, that we may thus be made wise. 1 Cor. 3. 18. with Prove. 9. 4-6
12. Matt. 11. 25 -- 28. Romans 1. 20-22. or our wisdom will lead us to have our
fear toward God taught by the precepts of men; or to have our faith standing in
their wisdom. Isa. 29. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 2. 1-5. This is a great Idol in the
World, and too much set up in the Temple of God, to the polluting and defiling
it; and that which God is staining the pride of, and famishing now, in
glorifying and exalting Christ Jesus as the Wisdom of God; and that which he
will make lean, and wholly famish in due season: Oh! that it may now be so
considered by us, that we may cease therefrom, and so flee from idolatry. 1
Cor. 1. 19-30, 31. and 3. 17, 18. Zeph. 2. 11. Prove. 23. 4. --

We must also cease from, and sell our own righteousness, that of our own
working in our own wisdom and strength, even all confidence in, and dependence
upon that for life and acceptance; otherwise this will hinder us from heartily
embracing, and putting on this White raiment here commended to us: Possibly
this might cause Laodicea to be so Lukewarm, and so much to shut the door
against Christ, and deny, or refuse entertainment to him, though he had stood
at the door, and still did knock. verse. 20. and however certain it is, that not
only our righteousness and our works shall not profit us. Isa. 57. 12. But it
is hurtful also, and hinders from coming unto Christ, being confided in; it
fills men so with pride and boasting. Romans 3. 27. as that it leads men, not
only to despise and undervalue others, and to say to them, stand by thy self,
come not near unto me, for I am holier then thou. Luke 18. 9-11. Isa. 65. 5.
but also to reject, or not to accept of God's righteousness, which is prepared
in Christ for all, and manifested so to be in the doctrine of Christ. Romans 3.
20-22. So much the Apostle gives us to understand when he says; the Jews, who
had a Zeal of God, yet seeking to establish a righteousness to themselves, they
submitted not (humbled not themselves) to the righteousness of God. Romans 9.
30-33. and 10. 2, 3. with Jam. 4. 6, 7. and 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6. This was that which
was an impediment to the Pharisees, and hindered them from coming to Christ;
they thought and conceited themselves to be whole, and then they needed not a
Physician. Mark 2. 17. they had a righteousness, and appeared righteous before
men, and knowing themselves hereby, they were let from coming to Christ;
Yea, the Publicans and Harlots entered into the Kingdom ^f Heaven before them:
Nay, they were the greatest enemies, and most fierce opposers of Christ, and
his Gospel, of any persons whatsoever; and shut up the Kingdom of God against
others, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering others that were entering,
to enter. Matt. 5. 20. and 21. 33, 34. and ^3. 27, 28. with verse. 13. What a
great enemy was Saul, who had his life in his own works of righteousness, to
Christ and his Gospel? He verily thought he ought to do many things contrary to
the name of Jesus, and was exceedingly mad against the Gospel, and its
declarers: He was concerning zeal persecuting the Church, and concerning the
righteousness of the Law blameless: But after the kindness and love of God to
man ward appeared to him, he did count all but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, that he might gain him, and be found in him;
not having his own righteousness which was of the Law, but the righteousness
which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness of God by faith:
We must suffer the circumcising efficacy of the grace of God to cut off this
foreskin of the heart, or otherwise we shall not be of the circumcision; who
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh. Phil. 3. 1-4-7-9, 10. Matt. 13. 44. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 10-12. 1
Cor. 1. 29 -- 31. --

We must also abstain from, and mortify our desires of the praise, honor, and
glory of this World; and of their favor, friendship, and approbation; for this
is a very great hinderance from coming unto, and following after Jesus Christ;
from heartily believing in, and confessing him: How can ye believe, says our
Savior, which receive honor, or glory, one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only. Joh. 5. 40-44. While men are set for the
praise and reputation of men, and of them who have a form of godliness, denying
the power thereof, they dare not, they cannot singly cleave to the Lord, lest
they should displease, and lose their favor. This friendship of the World is
spiritual uncleanness, and enmity with God, as the Apostle signifies when he
says; Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the
world, of the profane ones, or of the Saints thereof, is enmity with God;
whosoever therefore will be a friend of the World, he is the enemy of God. Jam.
4. 4, 5. Truly if a man will be a Disciple and follower of Jesus Christ, He
shall be hated of all men; and have his name cast out as evil for the son of
man's sake: And that not only by profane ones, but by many that appear
righteous toward men; yea, by such as have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge: Therefore that a man may come after Jesus Christ, needful it is that
he go out of the Camp, bearing his reproach; and be willing to be made the filth
and offscouring of all things. Luke 6. 22, 23-26. Romans 8. 28, 29. with Isa.
52. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 9-13. Heb. 11. 24-26. and 13. 12. This desire of vain glory,
is inconsistent with walking in the Spirit; Hence the Apostle says, If we live
in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit; let us not be desirous of vain
glory. Gal. 5. 24-26. And this will hinder from confessing Christ, as it did
the rulers who believed on Christ, but did not confess him; for they loved the
praise and glory of men rather then the praise of God. Joh. 12. 42, 43. The
grace of God must be therefore so received as to cut off this lust and desire,
that we may cleave to the Lord with full purpose, and follow him in the
regeneration: He is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of
God. Romans 2. 29. --

We must also part with, abstain from, and mortify our covetousness, our love
of money, and the riches of this World; for this is a very hurtful and
pernicious affection and lust of the flesh; and is therefore to be mortified by
us, that we may seek Christ and those things that are above where he sits on
the right hand of God. Col. 3. 1-5. It is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a Needle, then for a man that loves and trusts in his riches to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mark. 10. 21-24, 25. If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. 1 John 2. 15-17. Money is also one of the
great Idols of the World; and the loving and lusting after that is the
worshipping of an Idol: Covetousness is idolatry, and the covetous man is an
Idolater. Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. Yea, this love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some have coveted after they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy 6. 9-11. Matt. 6. 24.
Needful therefore it is to be fled from us, that we may be made partakers of
Christ, and that rich and enriching provision that is prepared of God for us in
him. Luke 12. 15. Psalm. 119. 36, 37. --

Yea, we must mortify, and abstain from our inordinate affection to our nearest
and dearest relations, and to our natural lives also, that we may rightly come
unto, and be made partakers of, and follow after Jesus Christ, Col. 3. 5. So
much our Savior signifies, in what he speaks to the multitudes, by occasion
of the first bidden guests refusing to come to the Supper prepared for them,
when they were once and again invited: He turned, and said unto them; if any
man come unto me and (in coming) hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also (which is more
then all to us, and harder to be parted with. Job 2. 4.) he cannot be my
Disciple, etc. Luke 14. 24-27. He that loves Father or Mother more then Christ
is not worthy of him; and he that loves Son or Daughter more then him, is not
worthy of him: And he that takes not his Cross, and follows after him, is
not worthy of him. Matt. 10. 37-39. Luke 9. 59-62. Joh. 12, 25, 26. Those who
will indeed be joined to the Lord, and be spiritual Levites, and so be one
spirit with him, must be herein like to Levi of old; who said unto his Father
and Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor
know his own Children. Deuteronomy. 33. 8, 9. It Is needful to our partaking of, and
having fellowship with him in his riches and inheritance, that we be
like-minded, in a sense, with the Father; he has given unto Christ the
pre-eminence in all things, and amongst all persons; so also it is necessary
that we in our hearts, loves, and esteems should so honor him, as to prefer
him before our chiefest joy, and before our nearest, and most beloved friends,
enjoyments, and relations: And if we so honor him not, we shall be looked upon
as despisers of him, and such as set lightly by him; and shall also be lightly
esteemed of him. Col. 1. 18. Isa. 13. 11, 12. 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Yea, Not to enlarge any further hereto particularly, we must sell and part
with all that we have, as is before said, all our own things, that we may have
and obtain this gold tried in the fire; and this white raiment for clothing and
covering the shame of our nakedness: Our sins and idols must be let go, and
abstained from: We must forsake and bid farwell to all we have, that we may be
the Disciples of Christ. Luke 14. 26-33. We must sell all that we have, with
the wise man and merchant, that we may be made partakers of this Pearl of great
price, and treasure of invaluable worth. Matt. 13. 44-46. We must deny, and
renounce our selves daily, as Christ said to the People, and his Disciples
also, our wisdom, wills, designs, enterprises, affections and lusts; our own
righteousness, our confidences, consolations, hopes for Heaven; our pride and
desires of vain glory, our covetousness, intemperance, uncleanness, anger,
wrath, etc. We must lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness,
that we may receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save our
souls: We must cast off the works of darkness, that we may put on the armor of
light; and abstain from rioting and drunkeness, chambering and wantoness,
strife and envying, that we may put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Matt. 16. 24 --
26. Mark 8. 34-36. Luke 9. 23-25. Jam. 1. 21. Romans 13. 12-14. Titus 2. 11, 12.
1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. Col. 3. 1-5, 6-8-12. And this is the first Reason why this
winning Christ, and obtaining this durable riches and righteousness in him, is
called and compared to buying here and elsewhere; because we must part with,
and sell somewhat for him, and those excellent treasures in him, to wit, all
that we have. --

2. This gaining Christ, and that preparation in him, is also called and
compared to buying, because that which we must part with, though it be indeed
nothing worth, yet we have naturally a goodly, and high esteem thereof; it is
naturally highly valued by us, and of very great account with us, through our
blindness and ignorance: We are by nature and first birth empty, and void of
all spiritual understanding; though we would be wise, yet we are born like a
wild Asses Colt; hence we are ready to mistake, to call evil good, and good
evil; to put light for darkness, and darkness for light; To make an Idol of
Christ, and God in him, and to prefer broken Cisterns before the fountain of
living waters: We are strongly inclined to be highly esteeming, and valuing our
own things, which we must sell, and let go that we may have Christ, and those
unsearchable riches of him; especially such things as are commendable amongst
men, and which are the object of the desires of the mind; as to say
particularly: The wisdom of this world is of high account amongst men, and men
are apt to glory herein, as if it were some goodly thing: Though it is, and is
declared to be, foolishness with God; and every man by his knowledge is
brutish, and like a beast. 1 Cor. 3. 3. 19. Jer. 10. 14. and 51. 17. Yet this
is unto a man in his natural condition, as his right eye; this is that which he
is most tender of, and most highly prizeth; and he looks upon it as a most
useful and beneficial thing, both for knowing and finding out God in the wisdom
of God, and for glorifying him to others; though he is much mistaken herein. 1
Cor. 1. 21. Matt. 18. 9. And those that have more of it then others, and are
rich in this wisdom and knowledge, look upon themselves in the enjoyment hereof
as happy persons, yea, as the only blessed ones; and judge and give forth
others to be accursed. Joh. 7. 47 -- 49. And are ready to say as they did; the
law shall not perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the wise. Jer. 18. 18.
Doubtless (as is before said) this is one of the great Idols, and Gods of the
world; and too much, and too often, set up also in the temple of God, to the
polluting and defiling it; which men adore and worship, and lift up themselves
by, and make their boast of; and upon every occasion ask counsel of this stock,
and this staff declares to them. So also the works and doings of the flesh,
which are wrought by the wisdom and strength thereof, our own righteousness
according to the Law, this is highly esteemed amongst men; and men are apt to
confide herein, and think on this account eternal life appertains to them:
This is even their life, their riches, their gain; though in truth it be
nothing worth, for we are all as an unclean thing and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags. Isa. 64 6. Thus it was with the Apostle Paul when he had
his confidence in the flesh; he was alive once without the Law, he thought
himself to be in a very good and happy condition. Romans 7. 9. His own
righteousness which was of the Law was gain to him, before the righteousness of
God without the Law was believed and received by him. Phil. 3. 4-7-9. And thus
it was more generally with the Pharisees, they trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, and despised others. Luke 18. 9. And even so it is now: Those
who are seeking righteousness as it were by the works of the Law, and according
thereto have endeavored to avoid the evils thereby forbidden; and to do and
perform the things thereby required and enjoined; such as have a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge; and who are establishing a righteousness to
themselves, they have high and goodly esteems and conceits of of their own
works, zeal, appearing righteousness, and holiness; this is money and price in
their eye naturally, though it be filthy and unprofitable in the pure eyes of
God. So the riches of this world, which are the object of covetousness, are
highly accounted of amongst men, though they are uncertain riches, the Mammon
of unrighteousness, and not the true riches. Luke 16. 9-12. But such as perish;
and which while enjoyed render not a man any whit the more truly happy in the
account of God; yet how do men bless themselves hereby, and think highly of
themselves? and how do they trust herein as if they were therefore in the
favor of God! This Mammon is one of the Gods of the World also, which men,
while they are judging and acting as men, do give their loves unto, and place
their affections upon, and delight in; and in time of trouble cry thereto,
saying, Arise and save us. And so we might say of all the rest, but shall not
enlarge hereto any further particularly in this place. But in general we may
say; the body of sin is called flesh; and the affections and lusts thereof, our
members, such as fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupisence, and covetousness, etc. Because they are naturally so near and
dear to us, so greatly valued and highly prized by us, as our self, our life,
riches, goods, right eye, hand, foot, etc. Romans 6. 6. with Gal. 5. 17. Col. 3.
5. Matt. 18. 8, 9. Mark 9. 43, 45, 47. Therefore the parting with these that we
may obtain that durable riches and righteousness in Christ, is well called and
compared to Buying, because though they are really and in truth nothing worth,
yet we have such an over-high account of them, and such an indeared affection
to them naturally.

3. This winning Christ and that provision in him is called, and compared to
buying, because as in buying, earnestness and diligence is to be used and
exercised; and to that end there must be some high account of the commodity to
be bought, for it is worth, necessity, or usefulness, without which men will not
ordinarily be diligent. Thus it was with Jacob's Sons when they went down into
Egypt to buy Bread, what diligence and earnestness was found with them, in
going such a long journey to get provision for themselves; because they knew
they could not, in an ordinary way, subsist without it? Genesis 42. 2-10. And thus
also that we may partake of this gold, and white raiment, needful it is that we
so highly value them, as to be servent and zealous in seeking them.
Indifferency of Spirit was that which hindered this Angel and Church from
buying, they were lukewarm, and neither cold not hot; and unless this temper
were removed, they could not be made partakers of this heavenly commodity, as
is before said. So elsewhere the holy Ghost signifies, that diligence and
importunity is to be used, that we may get the wisdom that is from above. If,
says he, thou cryest after wisdom, and liftest up thy voice for understanding;
if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure: then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, etc.
Prove. 2. 1-6. On such like accounts, and for such like reasons, this gaining
Christ, and that most excellent provision in him, is called, and compared to
buying. And we shall add no more to this second particular, but come to the
next formerly proposed -- Viz.

3. To show that these heavenly commodities must be bought, and that in the
present time, and opportunity; and this may appear, in that this gracious
counselor, who is the Son of the Father in truth and love; and who has given
such an unquestionable evidence of his grace toward us in laying down his life
for us, gives this counsel to this Angel and Church; and gives it to the end
they might receive it, and in receiving it, mi^hr not be spued out of his
mouth, without which they should. We may be confident, he would not so
seriously give such counsel to such persons, were it not needful to be
received, and obeyed by them: But we may a little further demonstrate it in
some particulars -- As to say. --

1. This Gold tried in the fire, and White raiment, must be bought, that is, as
before is said, we must part with all we have for it, though never so
delightful to us, and desirable of us, our sins and idols; or else they will
hinder us from servently and diligently seeking after Christ, and that
salvation and provision in him, as is also before often intimated: For these
are contrary the one to the other. Gal. 5. 16, 17. For what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. When a
man's right hand is already filled with a lie, he must put that away, and let
it go, or otherwise how shall he receive and entertain the truth of God? Isa.
44. 20. If any man seem to be wise in this world, it is needful for him to
become a fool, that he may be made wise; to cease from his own wisdom, and
plack out this right eye, otherwise it will pervert him, and keep him out of
the way of understanding. 1 Cor 3. 18-20. Prove. 3. 5-7. and 23. 4. Isa. 47. 10.
A man must hate his own thoughts that he may love God's Law. Psalm. 119. 113.
For all our thoughts, imaginations, wisdom, and knowledge, is evil and brutish:
Yea, our wisdom is earthly, sensual, and devilish. Genesis 6. 5. Jam. 3. 15, 16.
Our high conceits of our selves, and of the goodness of our condition without
Christ, must be abstained from, or else, how shall we highly value him, and
those treasures in him, and earnestly seek to be made partakers thereof? When
we think we are in a safe and happy condition already, and are rich and full,
it will hinder us from seeking those spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus. Isa.
28. 12-15. Mark. 2. 17. Prove. 27. 7. While a man trusts, and confideth in his
own righteousness, and believes, and is confident that will be profitable unto
him, and render him accepted with God, this will keep him from submitting unto,
or accepting of the righteousness of God, which is through the faith of Christ;
and cause him to take offense at Christ; and stumble at that stumbling stone.
Romans 9. 31-33. and 10. 1-3. Matt. 21. 31, 32. In like manner, if the friendship
of this world be sought after, and delighted in by us, it will be an hindrance
to us from closing with, and cleaving unto Jesus Christ: The friendship of this
world is enmity with God, he therefore that will be a friend of this world is
the enemy of God. Jam. 4. 4. The love of the world and of the Father cannot
consist, and stand together. 1 John 2. 15. Also that a man may serve Christ
Jesus, it is needful that he take heed and beware of covetousness; for the love
of money is the root of all evil. No Servant can serve two Masters, for either
he will hate the one, and love the other; or hold to the one, and despise the
other; he cannot serve God and Mammon. Luke 16. 13. It is impossible for one
that trusts in his riches, and sets his heart thereon, to enter into the
kingdom of God. Mark. 10. 22-25. Drunkenness also, and uncleanness must be
mortified and abstained from, or else they will hinder from receiving, and
walking in Christ Jesus. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart.
Hos. 4. 14. Yea, any sin or idol loved, retained, and cherished, after light
vouchsafed, will lead a man to undervalue Christ, and his things; and hinder
from an hearty embracement of him, and earnest pursuit after him. Every one
that does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be discovered and reproved. Joh. 3. 19, 20. Job 24. 13. It is therefore
absolutely needful to our being made partakers of Christ, and those treasures
in him, to flee from what is reproved, and discovered to be evil, by the sight
of the Gospel; because the carnal mind, the body of sin, and it is members, is
enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
it be; so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Romans 8. 7. 8.
Hence the requirings and instructions of the grace of God are usually thus
given to us; To hate the evil, and love the good; to abhor what is evil, and
cleave to that which is good. Amos 5. 15. Romans 12. 9. To turn from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God. Acts 26. 18-20. 1 These. 1. 9. To
repent, and believe the Gospel. Mark 1. 15. Matt. 21. 32. To cease to do evil,
and learn to do well. Isa. 1. 16, 17. To forsake all that we have, that we may
be Christ's Disciples. Luke 14 26-33. To put off the old man, and put on the
new. Ephesians. 4. 22-24. Col. 3. 8-10. To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously, and godly Titus 2. 11, 12. and many more such
like expressions. All which show unto us, that it is needful for us to part
with all our own things as reproved and discovered to be evil, and vain; that
we may embrace, and give entertainment unto that which will render us truly
happy in the enjoyment; for our sins and idols are directly contrary unto, and
fill us with hatred and enmity against Christ Jesus, and those spiritual and
eternal blessings in him. Hence the Apostle says, that Christ Jesus, the
living stone, though (...) be (...)itely precious in himself, and in the eyes
of the Father, and precious to him that believes. (...)et (...) disallowed
indeed o^ men, yea, and of the builders also; Of all that are no more t^en men;
or judge, and act no otherwise then men, who favor the things of men: He is of
them disallowed, as opposed to chosen and precious; that is, he is refused and
^^probated of them, and looked upon as a vile one. Or, as the Prophet rendereth
it, to which it may seem the Apostle reser^eth; he is despised and rejected of
men, he has no form or comeliness in their eyes. 1 Pet. 2. 4. with Isa. 52 2,
3. It is therefore of necessity, to the end we receive him, and those enriching
excellencies in him, that we bay them, in selling all that we have, our sins
and vanities. --

2. That we may enjoy this gold and white raiment, needful it is that we sell
all that we have, and so buy them, because our sins and vanities, not only
indispose and hinder us from receiving Christ and his riches, and durable
clothing, and fill us with enmity there-against, and alienation therefrom; but
also our affectionate retaining, and cleaving with purpose to our sins and
idols, after the grace of God brings salvation to us, rendereth us unworthy
of him^; and we thereby provoke him to withhold himself, and what is
spiritually good, from us. Jer. 5. 25. He is not worthy of him who preserreth
any thing before him; so much our Savior says concerning those who, when they
were bidden, refused to come: The King of glory, when the feast was actually
prepared in Christ, sent forth his Servants, saying; tell them which are
bidden; Behold I have prepared my dinner, my Oxen and Fatlings are killed, and
all things are ready, come unto the feast: But they made light of it, and went
their ways, one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise; and another had
married a wife, and therefore his plea is, he cannot come; of these he says,
they which were bidden were not worthy: They acted most unseemly and foolishly,
in refusing such a blessed and rich feast, for such vain and unprofitable
things; their refusal was unsuitable to, and unworthy of such grace testified
and manifested to them; and thereby they deprived themselves of good, and so
provoked the King to anger, that he professes none of those unworthy refusers
shall taste of his provision. Matt. 22. 1-8. Luke 14. 16-24. He that loves
Father or Mother more then Christ is not worthy of him; and he that loves Son
or Daughter more then him, is not worthy of him; And be that takes not his
Cross and follows after him is not worthy of him. Matt. 10. 37, 38. God has
crowned his Son, who by his grace tasted death for every man, with glory and
honor; and has given unto him the preeminence in all things, and amongst all
persons: For it has pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell.
Col. 1. 18, 19. He is the chiefest of ten thousands; one whom God has
preferred before all persons in Heaven and Earth; and whom he has glorified
with his own self with the glory which he had with him before the world was. He
is more precious then Rubies, and all the things we can desire are not to be
compared unto him: He is more excellent and glorious then the mountains of
Prey: In him he has prepared for us all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge:
Sound wisdom is his, and in him; He has brought in everlasting righteousness;
and this is prepared of God for us in him: He has obtained for us durable
riches, unsearchable riches of grace and glory. God has given to us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son: Yea, in him are prepared all spiritual
blessings, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. And he as
become such an excellent one, and as thus furnished, is giving himself to us in
his Gospel, and with himself all things, that we might, for the excellency of
the knowledge of him, suffer the loss of all things, and count them but dung and
dogs-meat, that we might win him, and be sound in him. Now then, does not this
render a man unworthy of him, that shall prefer his own wisdom which is
brutish; his righteousness which is filthy; his works which are empty and
unprofitable; his glory which is vain; his Mammon which is false, and
uncertain; and his pleasures which are (...) and but for a little time to be
enjoyed: before him who is altogether lovely, only satisfying, and enriching;
and who rendereth, and makes them eternally happy and blessed that receive and
retain him? Do not such men by observing lying vanities, sorsake and deprive
themselves of their own mercy? Jona 2. 8. Are they not unworthy of him, and
worthy of the severest punishment, that trample under foot the Son of God; and
count the blood of the covenant a common and profane thing? Heb. 10. 29. Is not
their sin herein like unto, and yet much greater then was the sin of Esau, who
for one morsel of meat sold his birthwright? Heb. 12. 16, 17. Is not this
justly the condemnation, the cause of men's condemnation, that Christ the true
light has come; and men loved darkness rather then light? to wit, preferred
their sins and idols before Christ, in whom God has taken up all his well
pleasedness; and whom he has to loved that he has given all things into his
hand. Ioh. 3. 19, 35, 36. Is not men's iniquity herein like that of the Iows,
who would not have this man to reign over them, but rejected Christ, and
preserred a murderer before the Prince of life? Acts 3. 14, 15. And are not
they unmeet for, and unworthy of him, who, when called to the waters, wine,
milk, bread, that which is good, fatness, to a feast of fat things, refuse
this; because it must be bought, though without money and price; and yet
willingly spend and weigh money for that which is not bread; and labor for
that which satisfies not? Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Surely this is great unworthiness
and unthankfulness; a most foolish and unkind requital of his goodness, who in
his love and pity has redeemed us, and is now calling us to the enjoyment of
himself by his grace; and it must needs provoke the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ to anger, that men so lightly esteem the Son of his love, as to
prefer lies before him who is the truth; and empty appearances before the
substance: Yea, they shall all be damned persisting herein, who believe not the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 These. 2. 10-12. How shall they
escape who neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3. Them that honor him, who
give unto him the precedence and preeminence in all things, to whom the Father
has given it, he will honor: But those that despise him, who preser Wives, or
Children, or their own wisdom, or righteousness, or lives before him, shall be
lightly esteemed. Mark 10. 29, 30. 1 Samuel 2. 30. O Lord the hope of Israel,
says the Prophet, all that for sake thee shall be ashamed; and they that
depart from me, shall be written in the Earth (not in Heaven) because they have
for saken the Lord the fountain of living waters. Jer. 2. 10-13. and 17. 13.
and 18. 14, 15. Oh! That this may be so considered by us, that we may not
render our selves so foolish, and demean our selves so unworthily, as to love
other things rather then him, which is hatred of him! Joh. 3. 19, 20. But that
we may so consider his infinite and incomparable worthiness, that we may hate
all for his sake, that we may gain him, and be made partakers of him, and may
abide in him, that when he shall appear we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming. --

3. Yea, it is needful this Gold, and White raiment be bought in the present
time, and opportunity; therefore this gracious and faithful counselor
instructs us to do it in the present time; I Counsel thee to buy, etc.
Behold, now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation. 2 Cor. 6.
1, 2. Now is the Mart, as it were, in which these enriching commodities are set
to sale, and may be had and bought by us: And if the present opportunity be
neglected, and let slip by us, we may deprive our selves hereof, and be guilty
of the greatest folly and madness imaginable. They were truly called foolish
Virgins, and were so with a witness, who slumbred and slept when there was an
opportune season for buying; and afterward while they went to buy, the
Bridegroom came, and those that had formerly bought, and were ready, went in
with him; and the door was shut, and these foolish ones were excluded. Matt.
25. 6-12. What cause have we therefore to watch, and redeem the time, for we
know neither the day, nor the hour when the Son of man comes? Matt. 25. 13.
Certainly our lifetime is the only time allotted us for buying; In the grave
whither we are going, there is no work, nor device, nor wisdom, nor knowledge.
Eccles. 9. 10. The night is then come when no man can work; and our times are
in the hand of the Lord, and not in our own: There is no man has power over
the spirit to retain the spirit, and there is no discharge in that war; but
when he pleases, he can take away our breath, and then we return to our dust,
and in that day all our thoughts perish. Oh! that we may therefore seek the
Lord, and this gold and white raiment, while he and it may be found; and
whatever our hand finds to do, let us do it with our might. Isa. 55. 6.
Eccles. 9. 10. To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. Strive
now to enter in at the straight gate, for many shall seek to enter in* and
shall not be able. Luke 13. 24. Go to then ye that say, to morrow we will buy,
we will seek after those heavenly treasures when we have more convenient
season; Whereas you know not what shall be on the morrow; for what is your
life? It is even as a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away; but now hear counsel, this gracious and needful counsel, and be
wise, and refuse it not: And do like that wise man spoken of, Matt. 13. 44. The
kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field, the which when a man
has found he hides, and for joy thereof goes, and sells all that be has,
and (presently) buyeth that field: So let us do, Walk we circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise redeeming the opportunity, because the days are evil. Ephesians.
5. 15, 16. Let us in the present season, and perpetually while we are here in
this world, buy the truth, even Christ, and those unsearchable riches of him,
with a relinquishing, and parting with all that we have; though they are never
so gainful to us, or amiable and lovely in our eye; and in so doing we shall be
made parttakers of him who is infinitely better then all we have to sell for
his sake. --

And this whole instruction as thus spoken unto, and considered by us, viz.
That to the end we partake of Christ, and those enriching and heave(...)
treasures in him, it is needful we buy them, with selling all that we have,
though they appear never so goodlu and desirable; may be of usefulness to us.
--

1. To show unto us the Reason why the flock of Christ is such a little flock,
and so few heartily join themselves unto him; it is because they that will
receive him, and be his Disciples, must sell all that they have, which many
will not do: If men might have him and keep their sins and idols also, many
would flock unto him, and be followers of him. Yea, many there are who call
themselves, and are called Christians, who only cleave unto him by flatteries;
and are not indeed, and in truth united to him as their head, nor built on him
as their foundation, and so are not of his flock in a peculiar consideration:
But they are like those we read of, who would eat their own bread, and wear
their own apparel, only they would be called by his name, to take away their
reproach. Isa. 4. 1. The straitness of the gate is such that they are not
willing to pass through it; and this is that which makes it so strait: There
is room enough for any man to enter, but in entering he must leave all his own
things behind him, as has been said: And because of this, many unreasonably
take offense at Christ, and will not come unto him that they may have life.
Joh. 5. 39. 40. Wide is the gate, and broad is the way which leads unto
destruction; A man in walking therein may hold fast deceit, and follow after,
and serve his lusts and abominations, his surfeiting, drunkeness, uncleanness,
covetousness, hatred, malice, vainglory, his own righteousness, etc. And many
there be therefore which go in thereat; because strait is the gate, and narrow
is the nay which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Matt. 7. 13,
14. Yea, many there he that are willing to part with some things, yea, with
many things; but yet there is some proper evil, or way of iniquity which does
more easily beset them. Heb. 12. 1. And which is most delighted in by them,
which they still retain, and will not let go, and part with, that they may win
Christ, and be found in him. Herod heard John Baptist, knowing that he was a
just man, and an holy, and observed him; and when he heard him he did many
things, and heard him gladly. Mark 6. 20. But still he held fast his beloved
iniquity; he would not put away his Brother's wife, but because John told him,
it was not lawful for him to have her, he laid hold on John, and put him in
Prison, adding this above all his evils; and would have put him to death before
he did, but that he feared the multitude. Matt. 14. 2-10. Luke 3. 19, 20. The
young man that came to our Savior, and said unto him, Good Master, what good
thing shall I do that I may have eternal life; He had done many things also,
and it might have been thought he would not have stuck at the straitness of the
gate. But yet when our Savior says, One thing thou lackest yet, sell all that
thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and
come, and follow me; when he heard this he went away very sorrowful: for he had
great possessions. Matt. 19. 16-24. Mark 10. 17 -- 25. Luke 18. 18-27. So it is
with many others also; When the glad tidings of the Gospel are first declared
to them, they are ready to wonder at those gracious words; and they are unto
them as a lovely Song of one that can play well on an Instrument, and has a
pleasant voice; yea, possibly the Gospel may have some impression upon them;
and they are made willing to part with some evils thereby; and yet when this
Gospel shows them the necessity of parting with all reproved, and begins
to draw them out of their elements, they then forsake the Lord the fountain of
living waters. How zealous did those Jews appear to be who took shipping, and
followed Jesus, as if they had been regardless of their own outward affairs and
concerns! And how were they inquiring of Christ what they should do that they
might work the works of God, that they might have that meat which endures unto
everlasting life! And praying him, Lord, evermore give us the bread of life:
And yet when he told them what it was, because it did not answer their
expectation, but reproved them, and their other feeding, how many were offended
at Christ, and went back, and walked no more with him. Joh. 6. 24-34-66. This
is the condemnation, that lign is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, because their deeds were (and were discovered by the light
to be) evil: For every one that does evil hates the light neither comes he to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved and discovered. Joh. 3. 19, 20.
Let this be considered by us, that we miscarry not also after the examples of
others, which are recorded for our admonition. --

2. In that they that will have Christ, and the unsearchable riches and
righeousness of him, must buy them, with selling all that they have, this
shows unto us the mistake of many in their thoughts of the Doctrine of the
Gospel. How many are there that think and say, this Doctrine of the Gospel is a
smooth, easy Doctrine, a Doctrine of looseness, and licentiousness: If, say
they, Christ died for all, Then men may live as they list, and do whatsoever is
right in their own eyes, and yet they shall be saved. It seems by their thus
speaking they conclude, those that Christ died for may live as they list; And
so the Elect, as they call them, for whom only, they say, he died, may do
whatsoever is good in their own eyes. Oh miserable mistake! How ignorant are
such persons of this sound Doctrine, which is a Doctrine according to
godliness? This Doctrine indeed proclaims liberty to us, and calls us to
liberty, a gracious, and glorious liberty; only not to liberty for an occasion
to the flesh. Gal. 5. 1, 13. It proclaims unto us a liberty from sin, not to
sin: for this is a cursed liberty; and yet it is that which their Doctrines
make way for, who are enemies to the grace of God in Christ to the world of
mankind, while they would lay it upon and charge others with it. But herein
Christ's Gospel meets with no other use in the world then himself did while
he was here in his personal ministration. The zealous ones amongst the Jews did
falsely accuse Christ with being a vicious person; the men of that generation,
those who were the men of the times then, they said of the Son of Man, Behold a
gluttonous person, and a wine bibber, a friend of Publicanes and sinners: But
says he, Wisdom is justified of all her Children. All the Children of Christ
and the Gospel know, that this is but a slander. Luke 7. 31-35. Matt. 11.
16-19. There is no other Doctrine besides, that so shows the vileness of sin,
and necessity of our being washed therefrom in the blood of Christ, as does
this Doctrine of the Gospel: For the grace of God that brings Salvation to
all men, has appeared, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.
Titus 2. 11-14. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Romans 5. 18. with chap. 6. 1-3. But this
slander of theirs is the issue of their ignorance and prejudice; and what
better fruit can be expected from such evil and bitter roots?

3. This instruction may also show unto us the great evil of those that deny
that Christ has died for all, and by the grace of God tasted death for every
man; for these render it impossible for the greatest part of men to be made
partakers of that darable riches and righteousness in Christ. The Doctrine of
the Gospel makes the gate unto life strait enough, and yet no straiter then is
needful; But these shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither enter
in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering to enter. The little finger of
this Doctrine is heavier then the loins of the Gospel to the greatest part of
man kind. Nay, indeed as with respect to one part of men, there is no
straitness in the gate at all; and with reference to the other, and greatest
part, there is no gate open for them at all, were their doctrines as true, as
they are counted by many: But these herein are false witnesses of God, and like
the evil spies that brought an evil report upon the Land of Canaan, and thereby
discouraged the hearts of many of their brethren: Take we heed and beware of
those evil and pernicious doctrines that cause to err from the words of
knowledge, and way of truth. --

4. Seeing we cannot have these heavenly commodities without buying, in selling
all that we have; let us so seriously consider the excellency of them, that we
may be made willing to let go all things as lo^s and dung (...) for the
excellency of the knowledge of them, that we may be made partakers of them: For
the great and eternal worth, and excellency of these considered, will make this
yoke easy, ano this burden light. And this leads us to the last instruction
propounded to be considered by us. -- viz. --

4. That to the end the wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked
may buy this gold tried in the fire, and this white raiment here commended to
us; it is good and neeful for them that they anoint their eyes with eye salve
that they may see. --

This, though the last mentioned and counseled unto, is surely needful to the
former; for without knowledge the soul cannot be good. Prove. 19. 2. How should
any man so highly prize any commodity, as to part with all his substance for
it, that sees no worth or excellency in it? And how should Christ's Angels and
Churches part with all they have for those heavenly treasures, if they see no
beauty in them why they should desire them? There is no earnest desire after,
or high prizing of that which we are ignorant of, and see no worthiness in.

Now then in this Instruction here propounded, we shall speak unto these three
things contained therein, which may be usefully, and profitably considered by
us. -- As to say. --

1. That Christ's Angels and Churches may be blind, and ignorant of the
excellency of Christ, and those treasures in him. -- 2. That there is eye salve
prepared for such blind ones also, wherewith anointing their eyes they may see.
-- 3. That to the end they buy Christ, and that in him, it is neeful they
anoint their eyes herewith, that they may see. --
1. That Christ's Angels and Churches may so depart from him, as to become
blind and ignorant of the excellency of Christ, and of those treasures hid in
him: Thus it appears here in this place, in which our Lord says to the
Angel, Thou art blind; and counsels every one that has an ear, to hear what
the spirit says to the Churches; as intimating, this was spoken to them all
for their admonition; and that it might so befall them also, if they did not
look diligently lest they failed of, or fell from the grace of God. God's
people may become foolish, and not know him, they may be sottish children, and
have no understanding. Jer. 4. 22. Yea, the Pastors may become brutish, and
not seek the Lord. Jer. 10. 19-21. The blindness here spoken of is not the
being destitute of natural, or artificial wisdom, the wisdom of this world; for
this men may have, and yet be sufficiently blind in this consideration we have
to speal of, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. Where is the
wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. 3. 19. and chap. 1. 18-21. But
the blindness here spoken of is, a being without the wisdom that is from above,
a being destitute of spiritual understanding; And so this Angel was blind, if
not wholly, yet in a great measure; and in so great a measure as that our
Savior, the wisdom of God signifies that he was blind. Those that are
watchmen amongst God's people, and who have high conceits of themselves for
knowledge, and piety, may yet have their eyes blinded with darkness. His
watchmen, says the Lord, are blind; they are all ignorant; there may be blind
guides, blind leaders of the blind, and how sad is it when it is thus? Then
surely their leaders cause them to err, and they that are led of them are
destroyed? Isa 56. 10. and 3. 12. and 9. 16. Matt. 15. 14. and 23. 24. Jer. 2.
8. This Angel and Church might be in such a condition as the Apostle Peter
speaks of when he says, He that lacks these things (to wit, these great
and precious promises ministered in and with the Gospel; he in whom these are
not, and abound not, dwell not richly; so as he adds not to his faith virtue;
and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance
patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly-kindness; and
to brotherly-kindness charity; such an one) is blind, and cannot see afarr off;
he is poreblind: He may see some things near hand, but he is so blind he cannot
see these things afarr off; he cannot see within the vail; he cannot see into
Heaven where Christ is, nor those things above where he sits. Deuteronomy. 30. 11,
12. Col. 3. 1. Nor that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: And the reason of that blindness the Apostle
speaks of, and of this our Savior charge this Angel and Church with, and
reproves them for, may be one; to wit, the forgetting that they were purged
from their old sins; letting slip what they heard from the beginning, to wit,
that Christ died for the sins of Jews and Gentiles, and so of all men,
according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he rose again the
third day, according to the Scriptures: Whereby Christ purged our old sins, our
first sin, and sinfulness, and through the knowledge whereof he washed our
hearts from an evil conscience, and spoke peace to us and made us free: Had
they kept this in an hearty believing remembrance, they had been saved, and
preserved from this blindness; and they should have continued in the Son, and
in the Father: But receiving and entertaining a forgetfulness of this
purgation, and of the means whereby it was effected, this contracted blindness
to them. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4-8, 9. 1 Cor. 1^. 1-4. 1 John 2. 24-27. 2 John 6. And
this blindness of theirs appeared, and was evident in two things: (and wherever
these things are found, doubtless they are in some measure blind, and so in the
condition of this Angel and Church) That is to say,

1. They were grown lukewarm, as has been said, and did not so perceive the
preciousness of Christ as to be zealous and servent in seeking after him, that
they might win him, and be found in him: In letting slip the word of the
beginning of Christ, the vision of all, the God of this world had blinded their
minds, that they did not so discern the beauty and comeliness of Christ, as to
cry after the knowledge and enjoyment of him, and those spiritual and eternal
blessing in him; but they were grown remiss, and indifferent: Those that in
seeing see, and keep in their view the excellency of Christ, are far from this
distemper: To them that believe, he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6. As new born babes
desire the breast, so they earnestly desire after more acquaintance with,
enjoyment of, and conformity unto him. 1 Pet 2. 2-4. And they are even sick of
love, and restless in their spirits after him: As the heart pants after the
water brooks, so their souls pant after him; they are even consumed with
desire, and nothing will satisfy them but him: Whom have they in Heaven but he?
and there is none on earth they desire besides him. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. and 84. 1,
2. and 63. 1, 2. and 73. 25. Cant. 2. 3-5. Their soul follows hard after him,
and their zeal even consumes them, and leads them to long, and inwardly
breath after, and earnestly lust for him, who is the chiefest among Ten
thousands. Psalm. 63. 3-8. With their soul they desire him in the night, yea,
with their spirits within them they seek him early. Isa. 26. 7-9. But
contrarily, it is a certain evidence of blindness, when persons are grown so
heartless and indifferent, that they content themselves, without him; and deny,
or delay to give entertainment to him; when he stands at the door, and
knocks for admission, as it was with these. Rev. 3. 20. When men by observing
lying vanities forsake him, and will none of him; when they prefer their works,
riches, righteousness, lusts and vanities, before him, and those excellent
treasures in him, which only will truly enrich, clothe, satisfy, and adorn
them; it appears evidently to him who knows all things, and to those who
have their understandings opened, that ignorance and darkness has blinded
their eyes. Isa. 52. 13, 14, 15. So much the Apostle says concerning the
Galatians: O foolish Galations, says he, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth, etc. Gal. 3. 1. It was evident that they were become foolish and
blind, and that some person or persons had cast a mist before their eyes, in
that they were removed from Christ, and that grace in him; and did seek
righteousness, and sanctification elsewhere, and endeavored to perfect by the
flesh that which was begun by the spirit: When Christ was first displayed
before them, he was then so excellent in their eyes, that they turned unto him
from their sins and idols; they did run well; for they did run unto him for all
wisdom, righteousness, and strength, because of the Lord his God, and for the
Holy one of Israel, who had glorified him. Oh then what blessedness did they
meet with, and speak of, in Christ! But afterward letting slip the preaching
of the Cross, they turned again to weak and beggarly elements: And on this
account the Apostle calls them foolish ones, blind ones, and bewitched
persons; it appeared evidently their eyes were blinded, or otherwise they would
have kept their first esteem, and high prizing of Christ. Gal. 3. 1-5. and 4.
8, 9, 13-15. and 5. 7. with, Isa. 55. 1-5. So also it was too much with this
Angel and Church; they were blind, and it appeared that they were so, in that
they shut out Christ when he knocked for entrance, and undervalued him: And we
may safely conclude as with respect to our selves, and others, that blindness
has happened to us in a great measure, when our love to, and zeal for Christ
is gone, and we are grown lukewarm. --

2. It appeared also and was evident that they were blind, because together
with their low esteem of Christ, they had high thoughts, and conceits of
themselves, and of the goodness of their condition without him, and of their
knowledge, parts, gifts, righteousness, and integrity: They said they were
rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing; when as in truth it
was far otherwise with them; for they were wretched and miserable, etc. They
conceited they knew, and were ready to say they were wise, and the Law of the
Lord was with them, when as indeed they were brutish and foolish. Jer. 8. 7, 8.
This was an undoubted evidence of their blindness, and is so of any man's, when
he begins to be so well thoughted, and highly conceited of himself. Truly
those that walk in the light as God is in the light, they are helped to see,
and bewail their shortness in every thing; and while they hear songs, even
glory to the righteous, they are ready to cry out, our leanness, our leanness,
woe unto us, the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously with us; yea, the
treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously. Isa. 24. 16. They are ready
with shame to complain, that they are more brutish then man; and that they have
not the understanding of a man; that they have neither learned wisdom, nor
have the knowledge of the holy. Prove. 32: 2, 3. Job 26. 14. 1 Cor. 13. 19-12.
They are ready to consess and acknowledge, that they have not yet attained,
neither are already perfect (as to attainment) but they follow after, if that
they may apprehend that for which also they are apprehended of Christ Jesus:
They count not themselves to have apprehended, etc. Phil. 3. 11-16. Yea, the
nearer the light they come, the more they see their vileness, readiness to
halt, insufficiency to any thing that is good, uncleanness and pollution; so
that they even abhor themselves in dust, and ashes; and cry out as persons
undone, because of their great uncleanness, and manifold defilements: Their
comeliness is even turned into corruption, and they retain no strength at all.
2 Cor. 3. 5. Psalm. 38. 17-19. Job. 40. 4, 5. and 42. 5, 6. Isa. 6. 3-5. Dan.
10. 8-16, 17. Rev. 1. 17. As persons made sensible of their shortness of the
knowledge of him, and conformity unto him, they cry out; Open our eyes, give us
understanding, teach us thy law graciously; unite our hearts to fear thy name:
Wash us thoroughly from all our iniquities, etc. Psalm. 119. 18-20. 33. 34-37.
129, 130. and 130. 7, 8. and 86. 7. It is therefore an evidence without
controversy, of men's great blindness and ignorance, when they have such an
overweening conceit of themselves, and of their knowledge, fullness, and
sufficiency, of their goodness and uprightness, as had this Angel and Church.
Such persons are like to the Pharisees of old, who were very pure in their own
eyes, and had some kind of righteousness, and appeared righteous before men:
They had very high thoughts of themselves, as if they where whole, and knowing
persons, and needed nothing; hence some of them say, are we blind also? As if
it were an heinous thing to suppose so of them. Job. 9. 40. And one of them in
speaking to Christ says, Master, thus saying thou reprochest us also. As if it
were a reproach to them to be suspected as, or reproved for, being guilty of
such evils as were justly charged upon them. Luke 11. 44, 45. Thus also it is
with many persons that have had some understanding of the grace of God in
Christ to mankind; as they begin to lessen, and abate in their love to, and
esteem of Christ; so together here-with, they think unsoberly of themselves,
and are puffed up with conceits of their knowledge, integrity, and
upright-heartedness; when as indeed this is nothing else then the fruit and
evidence of their blindness and ignorance. Nay generally, such as deserve most
to be reproved and blamed; and who give too frequently occasion to the
adversary to speak reprochfully of that worthy name called upon them, they are
the forwardest in proclaiming their own goodness, and most tender of their
reputation, and most incensed against such as are seeking and pursuing their
good: As if the God of this world had blinded their minds, that they might the
more securely go on to their own destruction. And surely, as has been said,
such like goodly thoughts of themselves; as were found with this Angel and
Church, are an evident demonstration that they are blind; and professing
themselves to be full, and wise, they become still more foolish and brutish:
And expose themselves to that great judgment of being spued out of the mouth of
Christ. --

And this consideration that Christ's Angels and Churches may, after they have
been enlightened into the knowledge of the truth, become blind again, as it
sared with this Angel and Church, may be of usefulness to us all. --

1. To admonish us, not therefore to follow any as our guides, because they are
of the Church of Christ, yea, though they are Angels therein; for it is
possible, though their eyes have been opened, yet by letting slip what they
have heard, they may become blind again: And if the blind lead the blind, both
will fall into the ditch. Matt. 15. 14. Nay, it is certain they are blind if
they be grown lukewarm, and remiss, and sit loose from Christ, or shut him out;
and together herewith are lifted up with pride, and high thoughts of their
knowledge, fullness, seize: Concerning such it may be said; hearken not
to the words of these Prophets, they make you vain, they speak a vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. Jer. 23. 15, 16. When
once the vision of all is unto them as the words of a book that is sealed; and
they have no knowledge of, or delight in it: When Christ, who is therein
witnessed of, and lifted up, is disallowed, and slighted by them; and they
conceit themselves well enough without him; it is a certain evidence and sign
that they are blind, their eyes are covered and closed; and how should we then
safely follow them? Isa. 28. 12-16. and 29. 9-11. Let us remember them who have
spoken unto us the word of the Lord, and follow their faith unto whom Christ is
precious; and consider them, the end of whose conversation, in all they are
exercised unto, is Jesus Christ the same, yesterday, and today, and for ever.
Heb. 13. 7-9.

2. Seeing they may become blind who have been enlightened into the knowledge
of the truth; let us examine our selves; and search and try our hearts and
ways, whither it be not so with us: These things are written for our
instruction and learning, upon whom the ends of the world are come: Let us not
think we have ever the more a good understanding, because we think and say, we
are rich, but rather suspect our selves, if such a vain thought lodge within
us: For if any man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know: But if any man love God in Christ, if his heart cleave unto him
with full purpose the same is known and owned of him. 1 Cor. 8. 1-3. There is
indeed a great boast of knowledge in the world in these last days, and men have
high conceits of themselves, and of their riches and fullness; but, Oh that,
notwithstanding their crying up of their knowledge, and the goodness of their
condition, it appear not at last that they are blind, and foolish, and
destitute of love to Christ, and that gold and white raiment which he has to
sell! Yea, let us all be jealous of our selves; and let us not be highminded,
but fear: Doubtless if once we think we are Lords, and come not continually
unto Christ, we are not such persons as we conceive our selves to be, but
darkness has blinded our eyes: And if we be convinced it be thus with us; and
to the end we may know what condition we are in. --

3. Be we all exhorted to listen to the counsel here given unto us by this wise
and gracious counselor, to wit, let us anoint our eyes with Eye Salve, that
we may see: And that we may so do, is to be seen in the next place -- viz. --

2. That there is Eye Salve also prepared for them that are blind, wherewith
anointing their eyes they may see. We have seen before, that there is gold
tried in the fire, for those that are wretched, and miserable, and poor: And
white raiment for naked ones, wherewith they may be clothed, so as the shame of
their nakedness may not appear. And here is signified to us, that there is
Eye Salve also to be had, to cure and heal the blindness of the eyes. In
Christ, as declared in the testimony, there is all compleatness prepared for
us, for supplying all our wants, and healing all our diseases. Psalm. 103. 1-3.
Colos. 2. 3. 9, 10. In that feast which is prepared by means of the marraige of
our Nature to the Divine Nature, in the person of the word, the Son of God;
there is a complete provision for us poor, empty, miserable, diseased
creatures: And hitherto are invited, not only the poor, and the maimed, and the
halt, but the blind also: For therein there is cure and healing for them. Matt.
22. 1-4-8. Luke 14. 16-21. The father has so loved the Son, that he has given
all things into his hand, into his possession, and dispose, Joh. 3. 35. And
though it be mavelous in our eyes, and has been wondered at, that the blind
should receive their sight; yet it is easy with him unto whom all power is
given both in Heaven, and on earth. Matt. 15. 30, 31. and 28. 18. Though there
be no healing medicine among men, yet he can heal this disease also, no word is
impossible unto him. Jer. 30. 12-17.

But before we come to speak to this Instruction particularly, it may be useful
to consider and give Answer unto this Question, which may reasonably be
propounded. viz.

Quest. Why does the Amen, the faithful and true witness, counsel this Angel
and Church to buy of him Gold, and White raiment; and not also this Eye Salve?
Wherefore is the Phrase here altered? He had said. I counsel thee to buy, as
with respect to the two former particulars; and now the Phrase is changed, and
here he says, anoint thine eyes, etc. What may the Reason hereof be?

Answ. 1. In general we may say, doubtless there is good reason for it, though
it be hidden from me, who am such a babe, and so unskilful in these things: For
there is not the least word, variation, or change, made use of in the Scripture
by the Spirit of God, but it is so used and done in much wisdom, and upon
weighty accounts, all the words of whose mouth are in righteousness, and given
forth in judgment: And therefore oftentimes called judgment, and judgments.
Isa. 51. 4. Psalm. 105. 5. And hence I believe, though I may not see wherefore,
that there is good cause for the altering the manner of expression here in this
part of the counsel: And had I more anointed mine eyes with this eye salve, I
might have better seen the cause, so as to have been helpful to others, in
giving a satisfactory Answer hereto. But,

2. More particularly; I conceive, as has been intimated before, that though
this part of the counsel be placed last in the order of words, yet it is first
to be received and observed in order of nature; for how can we so highly value
this gold and white raiment, as to buy, in selling all that we have, unless we
first in some measure see the worth and value thereof? Now, therefore this
Eye Salve is brought unto us preventingly, and we are instructed to anoint our
eyes herewith, before it be required of us to buy: The eye must first be
opened, before we can turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God. Acts 26. 18. It cannot reasonably be expected from us, that we should
forsake all we have, or be saved from our sins and idols, until our eyes be
opened, and we see, and have found this treasure: Hence that call, Look unto
me, and be ye saved, to wit, from your iniquities and vanities; but first, look
unto me, says Isa. 45. 22. The kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid
in a field, the which when a man has found he hides; and for joy thereof
goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field: But first, before he
buyeth, in selling all that he has, he finds it, and discerns and
perceives the excellency of it, so as it causes joy unto him. Matt. 13.
44-46. Prove. 31. 16. So here; this Angel and Church is instructed without, and
before buying to anoint their eyes; and then, and to that end, that they buy
those unsearchable riches, and invaluable treasures of Christ Jesus, which are
here set before them, and the excellency whereof is propounded to them. --

Now then in speaking unto this Instruction, we shall inquire into and show. --

1. What are these eyes of theirs here spoken of, and which they are called
upon to anoint? -- 2. What is this Eye Salve here commended to them, wherewith
they should anoint their eyes? -- 3. What is this anointing the eyes which is
here called for, and counseled unto? -- 4. Show, That this is prepared for
them, and brought unto them, that they may anoint their eyes herewith. --
1. What are these eyes of theirs here spoken of, and which they are called
upon to anoint: --

To this we may say; Not their outward or bodily eyes: For here the holy Spirit
speaks of spiritual things, as has in some measure been shown. And it
appears their blindness was not upon the bodily eye, because they would then
have known it: But of these he says, thou know not that thou art blind.
They were insensible of their misery; which very rarely, if ever, persons are
of their outward blindness; unless such as are wholly bereaved of judgment: But
there are other eyes, to wit, those of the soul, the mind, or understanding of
a man; that faculty of the soul whereby a man may see, when it is opened, such
things as the bodily eye cannot discern: And of these inward eyes our Savior
here speaks: Their understandings were darkened. Ephesians. 4. 18. Their minds
were blinded. 2 Cor. 4. 4. and 3. 14. These eyes are called, the eyes of the
understanding. Ephesians. 1. 18. Of these eyes our Savior speaks, when he says
to his Disciples; perceive ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your hearts
yet hardened? Having eyes see ye not? -- How is it that you do not understand?
Mark 8. 17-21. -- And of these eyes the Apostle means, when he says to the
Galatians; who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before
whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth crucified, among you?
Gal. 3. 1. He was never crucified in the view of their bodily eyes, for he was
crucified at Jerusalem; but he was set forth crucified before the eyes of their
understanding in the glorious Gospel. These eyes may be sufficiently blind and
dark as with respect to spiritual things, though the bodily eye be never so
quicksighted; and though a man may be rich in the knowledge and sight of natural
or moral things: So it was with this Angel and Church; and therefore this
gracious and faithful Counselor instructs, and counsels them to anoint
their eyes, to wit, of the understanding, with this Eye Salve.

2. What is this Eye salve here spoken of, and commended to them, by this
faithful and true Witness?

This also is to be understood in a spiritual consideration; and hereby is not
meant the Wisdom of this world, or of the Princes of this world; for this will
not open the eyes of the blind into the knowledge of the Cross of Christ, and
the ends and virtues thereof, nor into the preaching thereof: But these things
are foolishness to them that seek after this wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 18-23. The
natural and animal man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him; nor can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And hence the Holy Ghost has instructed those that
are wise with this seeming wisdom, to become fools, that they might be wise, as
before, 1 Cor. 3. 18-20. and admonished the believers to beware of Philsophy,
Col. 2. 8, 9. And the Apostle avoided (...) use of it, in declaring the
testimony of God, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and Chapter 2. 1-5.

But by this Eye Salve is meant, the Word of Truth, the Gospel of our
Salvation, especially the first branch of it; in which is declared to us the
sufferings of Christ, and what he has thereby effected for us in himself, and
obtained into himself, and is become.

And that this is meant by the Eye Salve here commended to us, may appear.

1. By the name put upon it, and that by this same Apostle to whom this book of
the Revelation was sent and signified; it is by him called an action, and the
anointing: So the Apostle says to the believers; Ye have received an unction
from the Holy one, and ye know all things; That is, they had received the
truth, the word of truth, which appears to be the thing meant by that
expression; That which they had heard from the beginning, to wit, that Christ
died for our sins according to the Scriptures and was buried, and rose again
the third day, according to the Scriptures, 1 John 2. 20-24. with 1 Cor. 15. 1,
4. And so it is called the anointing; which is the very same thing, when he
says, The anointing ye have received of him abides in you; and ye need not
that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things,
and is truth, and is no lie, etc. 1 John 2. 27. And in this testimony of Jesus,
the Holy Spirit, which is the Oil wherewith Christ was anointed above his
fellows, is always present in the faithful declaration of it, Isa. 61. 1. Heb.
1. 9. Acts 10. 38. Yea, because this Gospel was given forth by the Spirit; and
because the Spirit is always present with it; therefore it is especially as now
revealed) both called the ministration of the Spirit, and the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.
6, 8. John 6. 63. Ephesians. 6. 17. John 7. 38, 39. and 3. 6. Acts 7. 11. --

2. It appears also, that by this Eye Salve is meant the Gospel of Christ, or
testimony of the Lord, because this is that which opens the eyes of the
understanding, that men may see; for which purpose, and to which end, this
Angel and Church is counseled to use this Eyesalve: So it is said, The
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; to wit, opening their
eyes, and revealing to them that object, in knowing which they may be made
wise: And the commandment of the Lord (the old and new Commandment, the Gospel
of Christ) is pure, enlightening the eyes, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. So much the Prophet
elsewhere also signifies, when he says, The entrance of thy words (namely,
the word of the beginning of Christ) gives light, (to discover all things) and
it gives understanding (to wit, capacity for seeing) unto the simple: It
gives both light and sight, without both which a man cannot see; though a man's
eyes be never so good, yet he cannot see in the dark. But this testimony of the
Lord is the medium for discovering all things; and this gives capacity for
discerning the things discovered also. So wonderful are the testimonies of the
Lord, especially in the first and fundamental things of them, Psalm. 119. 129,
130. So also the Apostle signifies, that the Spirit of wisdom and revelation
is given in the knowledge, or doctrine of Christ, both for opening the eyes of
the understanding, and for discovering and revealing Christ, and all things in
him, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Certainly, as the power of the Lord was present with
Christ to heal bodily diseases and infirmities, to cure the deaf and blind,
while he was here in his personal Ministration, Luke 5. 17. So also the hand
and power of the Lord, yea, his arm is put forth in and with this word, so as
the preaching of the Cross is the power of God for healing the diseases of the
Soul; for giving sight to the blind minds of men, Psalm. 107. 20. 1 Cor. 1. 17,
18, 23, 24. Hence it is said, That the Spirit of the Lord was upon Christ,
because the Lord anointed him to preach the Gospel to the poor, and therewith
to preach recovering of sight to the blind, Luke 4. 18. He is become a good
Physician, and he gives sight to the blind, by anointing them with that oil
that is in the name of the Lord. And the Apostle when he was sent to the
people, and to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness
to light, etc. was sent with this Eye Salve to preach the first and great
things of Gods Law to them; and so much he gives us to understand, I continue,
says he, to this day, witnessing both to small and great; saying none other
thing, then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come to pass.
That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise
from the dead, and should show light unto the people, and to the Gentiles, Acts
26 17, 18-23. To the same purpose also he speaks to the Ephesians, Chapter 3.
8, 9. Unto me is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see; to wit, in thus
preaching: Thereby he made them see, that they might see. This was the
Eye Salve which is here commended unto us. Ignorant are they of the
wonderfulness of the testimony of the Lord, and of its excellent usefulness for
converting and restoring the Soul, That call it the letter, and a dead letter,
as if it were meet for nothing: When as indeed it is the power of God for
saving men from their blindness, and ignorance, and from all their iniquities
and idols; and they prove and experiment it so to be, that with the heart
believe it: Hence it is called, not only the Gospel of our salvation, but the
salvation of God also, Ephesians. 1. 13. Acts 28. 28. And as Christ is called the
Light, both because he discovers all things to us faithfully, and opens the
eyes of the blind; So also the commandment is said to be a lamp, and the law
light; because hereby all things are manifested; and this gives understanding:
Yea, herewith Christ is present unto the end of the world; and hereby he gives
light to them that are in darkness, John 1. 6-9. with Prove. 6. 23. Isa. 42.
1-7. Jesus Christ, in showing unto his Apostles in the Scripture the things
concerning himself; to wit, that he has suffered and risen again from the dead
the third day; then, and thereby opened unto them the Scriptures; and opened
their understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.
25-27, 32, 44, 45-47. This then is the Eye Salve wherewith they should anoint
their eyes, to wit, the testimony of Jesus, (especially in the first things of
it) which is the spirit of prophecy, Rev. 19. 10. and the unction whereby they
might* (...) all things, 1 John 2. 20, 21.

3. What is this anointing the eyes here called for, and counseled unto?

Surely hereby is meant, a receiving this Testimony of Jesus, and retaining it
in the midst of the heart; Or, as having reference to the Metaphor, a putting
it upon the eye, and suffering it there to abide, and enter in, and take place;
not resisting, or putting it away. Herein is implied, that this Eye Salve is
brought nigh in due time unto men; yea, to such also as have suffered a decay
of those things wrought in them by the glorious Gospel: The word is nigh thee,
says the Apostle, in thy mouth, and in thine heart; that is the word of faith
which we preach. It Is brought nigh to men in the preaching of it, that it might
be received and entertained by them, Romans 10. 8. Now that which is here
required, is, that they should anoint their eyes herewith, that they should
embrace it, and not put it away from them: This was the great evil found with
the Jews, when the Apostles preached the Gospel to them; and that which caused
them to turn to the Gentiles, That when the word of God was spoken to them,
they put it away from them, and would none of it: Had they entertained it, it
would have opened their blind eyes; but they refused it, and rejected this word
of salvation sent to them, Acts 13. 45, 46. The contrary hereto was required of
this Angel and Church; Namely, that they would receive, and let that abide in
them, which they had heard at the beginning; As 1 John 2. 20, 21-24. John 9.
11-15. Luke 9. 44. As Salve will not cure any bodily infirmity or distemper,
unless it be laid upon it, and applied thereto: So also it is needful, to the
end our spiritual blindness may be removed and cured, that this Eye Salve, the
testimony of Jesus, be received and kept by us, and laid to our eyes, as it
were, and suffered there to abide; according to what the Proverb says: My son,
attend to my words, incline thine ear unto my sayings; let them not depart from
thine eyes, (but apply them thereto as Salve) keep them in the midst of thine
heart; for they are life unto those that find them, and medicine to all their
flesh, Prove. 4. 20-22. and 3. 21-23. And so certainly that which is contained
in this counsel, that they should anoint their eyes, is like unto that; My son,
keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee; keep my commandments, and
live, and my law as the apple of thine eyes: Bind them upon thy fingers, write
them upon the table of thine heart, etc. Prove. 7. 1-4. John 14. 21-24. 1 John
2. 4, 5. The anointing then here called for, and counseled unto, is an
embracing and keeping upon the eyes those things they had heard from the
beginning in the Gospel of Christ; which would heal and cure their blind eyes,
and help them to see and behold that which at present they were ignorant of,
and unacquianted with, Revel. 3. 3. 1 Corinthians. 15. 2, 3, 4 --

4. We come in the next place to show, that this Eyesalve is prepared for the
blind, and brought nigh unto them in due time, that they might anoint their
eyes herewith, that they may see. This Gospel has been witnessed and preached
from the beginning; The Spirit of Christ in the Prophets did testify
beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet.
1, 9-11. And therewith God was converting and restoring the soul from its
wanderings and diseases, Psalm. 19. 7. But now the mystery is so opened, as in
former times it was not. The mystery which was kept secret since the world
began, is now revealed, and made manifest; and by the Scriptures of the
Prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to
all nations for the obedience of faith, Romans 16. 25, 26. And this Gospel, as
thus revealed, is in the Scriptures of truth preserved amongst his Angels and
Churches, through the wonderfulness of Gods working, whereby they have great
advantage given unto them, Romans 3. 1, 2. This is committed to them, and they
are betrusted with it, in the records thereof, that thereby they might anoint
their eyes, and might shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of
life, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Phil. 2, 15, 16. And in due time God is bringing this nigh
unto them, and giving it unto them, that it might be received. This
commandment, this word of faith, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far
off: It is not in Heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do is? Neither is it
beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea, that we may
hear it, and do it? But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in
thine heart, that is the word of faith which we preach, says the Apostle.
Deuteronomy. 30. 11-14. with Romans 10. 8, 14-21. It is given unto the blind in due
season, as is intimated, in that the Wisdom of God says, Receive my sayings,
Prove. 4. 10. Receive my instruction, Prove. 8. 4-10. and 19, 20. For a man can
receive nothing, except it be given him from above, John 3. 27. As God has
written unto us excellent things in counsels, and knowledge, even the great
things of his Law; so in due time he is showing them unto men, to them that
have the Name of Christ called upon them especially; and bringing nigh unto
them, and strengthening them to receive and embrace them; that the eyes of their
understandings might be enlightened thereinto, and thereby, into all things
needful to be known and understood by them: Yea, and this Eye Salve may be had
freely in its preventing operations; not only without money and price, without
worth and worthiness; for so the Gold and White Raiment may be had, as has
been shown; but also without buying. And we are not instructed, as before is
said, to buy this Eye Salve, to part with any thing, before we anoint our eyes;
but we are counseled to receive, and apply this to our eyes freely, that we
may see: And then, and so to buy those unvaluable treasures here commended to
us.

And this instruction may be useful to us.

1. To show unto us the sinfulness and provoking nature of their sin, and
justness and severity of their punishment; who close their eyes, or remain
blind, when such Salve is prepared for them, and brought nigh unto them in due
season: Such have no cloak for their sins, but are willingly ignorant, who
reject or despise this remedy provided for them of God. And how shall they
escape, that neglect so great salvation? If there were no Salve prepared for
the blind, or if it were not brought nigh unto them, or might not be had
freely, men might have some excuse; they might say, Alas, we are blind, and how
then should we seek for healing? and poor and miserable, and how then should we
buy it? But what will they now have to say, who perish for lack of knowledge,
especially where the Scriptures are vouchsafed? If they shall be inexcusable,
unto whom the Word and Oracles of God have not been afforded, nor committed,
Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. How much rather inexcusable will they be, and of how much
sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall they be counted worthy, who remain in
blindness and ignorance, unto whom he has given and showed his word, and
afforded more choice advantage and means? Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Romans 3. 1; 2. For
the hurt of the daughter of my people, I am hurt, says the Prophet, I am
black, astonishment has taken hold on me: Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there
no Physician there? Why then is not the hurt of the daughter of my people
recovered? Jer. 8. 20-22. Great is their sin, and terrible will be their
judgment so persisting, that hate knowledge, and will not choose the fear of the
Lord: Or after their eyes have been opened, wink therewith, and close them, and
will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, nor make use of this Medicine
prepared, lest they should see with their eyes, -- and understand with their
heart, and be converted, and Christ should heal them, Matthew 13. 13-15. Prove. 1.
20-29. Isa. 27. 11. Oh that we may none of us be guilty of such like folly and
madness as this is! --

2. In that this Eye Salve is prepared and brought unto the blind; and to such
of them also as are become blind after their eyes have been opened; we may
herein perceive and see, that God has no pleasure in the destruction of such:
He would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: And
much rather unwilling is he, that those little ones should return unto, and
remain in blindness, who have known God, or rather been known of him, 1 Timothy 2.
4-6. Matt. 18. 11. He has every way of his goodness provided for us miserable
and helpless ones, that we might not remain in our miserable condition, but
might be brought back to God, Psalm. 68. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18. There is a Medicine
prepared, and in due time brought nigh unto us, and which may be had freely by
us, to the end we might be healed and cured: For this gracious Counselor has
no pleasure, none at all in our misery and destruction, while it is called to
day: For he came not to judge the world, but to save the world. And in him we
may see the Father, and be assured that he is not willing that any man should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, John 12. 44-47. 2 Pet. 3. 9,
15. Therefore he has not only provided durable riches, that we might be
enriched thereby, 2 Cor. 8. 9. and durable clothing, that we might be covered
and adorned therewith, Romans 13. 12-14. but Eye Salve also, for giving sight
unto us, Isa. 42. 1-6-7. And may not he then say to us, as he did to his people
in former times? Judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard; what could have
been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it? Isa. 5. 3, 4. May he
not appeal to us, and say, What iniquity have you found in me? Have I been a
wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? Jer. 2. 5-31. May we not herein
read, and be assured of his gracious heart toward us, and know that he has no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, though he be rebuking and threatening
of them? Ezekiel. 18. 32. Rev. 3. 19. Oh that we may never despise such
testimonies of Love, and riches of goodness, but that we may thereby be led to
repentance; and moved and prevailed with thankfully to accept of his abundant
grace, Romans 2. 4, 5.

3. It may also be useful unto us to persuade, and prevail with us, to suffer
the word of exhortation, and to anoint our eyes with this Eye Salve, that we
may see. Let us not by observing lying vanities forsake our own mercy; but be
we exhorted to receive and keep our fathers commandment, and forsake we not the
law of our mother; but let us bind them continually upon our heart (like a
Salve to a Sore) and ^ye them about our neck, that they may lead us, and guide
us; for the commandment is a lamp, and the law light, Prove. 6. ^0-23. He is a
gracious Counselor, who gives to us this good counsel; one who has given
intallible proof of the truth and sincerity of his love to us, in that he laid
down his life for us, that he might take it up again: And who is desirous of
our good, and would not that we should continue in our blindness and ignorance;
and has therefore prepared for us, and is bringing nigh to us this Eye Salve,
that we might make use of it, that we might embrace it, and our hearts might
retain his words, that we might live. Consider we the easiness of his Yoke, and
lightness of his Burden which he puts upon us. His Commandment herein is not
grievous; he does not require we should purge away our sin by Sacrifice, or
make our peace with God by any wisdom or strength of ours: He calls not upon
us to get and provide for our selves Eye Salve, or to go and seek it we know
not where. We might then say, Alas, we are blind and poor, how should we do
such things! But behold the easiness of his requirings; he only says, Anoint
thine eyes with Eye Salve; apply it, and let it not depart from thine eyes. If
he had commanded us some hard thing, there had been reason sufficient for us to
have done it, if possible; because our good is so much concerned herein, and
ours only: For it does not adventage him at all; how much rather when he
says, Anoint and see, Micah 6. 6-8. Matthew. 11. 28 -- 30. 1 John 5. 3. 2 King.
5. 13. Let us then hear his counsel, and receive his instruction, that we may
be wise in the latter end, Prove. 4. 1-5. and 19. 20. Or otherwise we must needs
be, and remain in a miserable condition. And this will further appear in the
last Particular; viz. --

3. That to the end Christ's Angels and Churches may win him, and those heavenly
Treasures hid in him, it is needful, That they anoint their eyes with this
Eye Salve, that they may see. This is intimated to us in the counsel here
given; and in the end of it. And indeed this branch of the counsel may give
answer unto, and remove a doubt, that may be, and arise in our jealous hearts,
on the hearing of this counsel given to such wretched piteous persons as these
were: For they might be ready to say, --

Question. How may we be persuaded to believe the contents of this Counsel?
This Counselor threatens to spue us out of his mouth, and tells us that we
are poor miserable creatures; and speaks as if he were highly offended with
us, and greatly incensed against us: How can we then believe that he should in
earnest propose to us such enriching gold, and such excellent raiment, as is
here commended to us? Whence should such grace be to such unworthy ill
deserving ones as we are? It is possible that that which he here calls upon
us to buy, is nothing else but counterfeit, and not so excellent as he would
persuade us it is; how shall we know whether this be right gold, or such
excellent raiment, as it is signified to be?

Answer. To give answer to such a jealousy, and suspicious thought, this may
be added; or however it is proper to purge it out of us. It is indeed admirable
grace, excellent loving kindness, such as cannot be expressed or conceived; and
it may well be mavelous in our eyes, if it be duly considered by us, Psalm.
36. 7. But yet to the end we might be assured of, and satisfied in the goodness
and reality of the Treasures here commended to us; before he requires us to
buy, he first, in order of nature, wills us to anoint our eyes with this
Eye Salve, that we may see. He might upon his own authority, as being our Lord,
have commanded us to buy, and to have depended wholly upon his word for what he
says, without seeing with our eyes; but he condescendeth to us in a more
gracious way, and instructs us to open our eyes that we might be satisfied.
And in some sort, though not fully, he deals with us as he did with Thomas,
when he was so slow of heart to believe; yea, resolved not to believe that
Christ was raised again, except he saw such things as might remove all
doubtfulness out of him; our Savior was then pleased to give him such an
evident demonstration, and infallible proof of the truth of what he was
doubtful concerning, that he cries out, as one abundantly convinced of his
former evil; My Lord, and my God: So in some sort he deals here; though he
presents not himself to our bodily eyes, yet he counsels us to anoint the
eyes of our understanding, that we may see, and might no longer have any
doubtfulness remain in us, John 1. 39-46.

In this Instruction then let us consider these two things which are needful to
be spoken to. --

1. What is that we should anoint our eyes for, that we may see? 2. Why is it
needful to anoint our eyes herewith, that we may see?
1. What is that we should anoint our eyes for, that we may see? What is it
that is needful to be seen by us? To this we may say, it is needful to our
buying those excellent Treasures, to see --

1. The Lord Jesus Christ himself, and that durable riches and righteousness in
him; and the means whereby he is become such a rich treasury and storehouse of
all the fullness of grace and truth, that of his fullness we might receive, and
grace for grace; to wit, his humbling himself, and becoming obedient to death,
the death of the cross; for all this is the price of his blood, and procurement
of his sufferings for us. This is needful for us to see, even those heavenly
and blessed commodities that are here to be bought by his Angels and Churches;
It is but a reasonable thing we should see what we are invited to buy in
parting with all for; And Christ, and the unsearchable riches of him are
discovered to us in, and by this eyesalve, the testimony of Jesus, and we are
thereby enabled to behold them. As well as also, here is shown unto us the
abasement of Christ, where-through he has obtained all things into his hand
for us; here we may see the great sufferings he endured for us; so the Apostle
signifies, that in this Gospel, Jesus Christ was evidently set forth
crucified, before their eyes, the eyes of their souls. Gal. 3. 1. So the Author
(...) the Hebrews says, we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the
Angels, that by the grace of God he should taste death for every man. Heb. 2. 9.
Here we may see, that he who was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, made himself of no reputation, and was made flesh. Joh.
1. 14. That he bare our sins in his own body. 1 Pet. 2. 24. And the great
sorrows and sufferings which he endured for our sakes, how he was tormented for
our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities; how his soul was in hell, and
his flesh in the grave; that he endured such great sorrows, that there was no
sorrow like unto his sorrow, wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the day of his
fierce wrath. Lam. 1. 12. Here we may also see the preciousness of his
sufferings and blood, whereby he has redeemed us from the curse of the Law;
and obtained into himself eternal life, eternal redemption, a full, and
complete treasury of all things that pertain to life and godliness; and his
beauty and glory, his excellency and comeliness is here presented to us, that
it might be seen by us: Here we may see Jesus, who was made a little while
inferior to the Angels, crowned with glory and honor. Heb. 2. 9. Here with
open face, as in a glass, we may behold the glory of the Lord. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Here we may see that he is become a good foundation of faith, a rich fountain
of all spiritual and eternal blessings; wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption; That he is more precious then rubies, and that
all the things we can desire are not to be compared unto him. Prove. 3. 15. That
he is more glorious and excellent then the mountains of Prey. Psalm. 76 4. That
he is more precious then gold, yea, then the golden wedge of Ophir. Isa. 13.
12. That God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name.
Phil. 2. 7-9 That he has given him the preeminence in all things, and amongst
all persons. Col. 1. 18, 19. That the Father so loves him, that he has given
all things into his hand; so as he that looks up to, and believes in him,
has everlasting life. Joh. 3. 35, 36. Matt. 11. 27, 28. Here we may see, that
he is the chiefest of ten thousands; that he is altogether lovely, and that
none are to be compared unto him. Cant. 5. 11-16. And this we are called upon
to see, and behold, as declared to us in his testimonies, and especially in the
testimony of his mouth. The Father calls upon us to behold his Servant, and
Son: Behold, says he, my Servant whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul is
well pleased, I have put my spirit upon him. Isa. 42. 1. Matt. 12. 18. And,
Behold the man whose name is the Branch. Zech. 6. 12. Behold I have given him
for a witness to the people, etc. Isa. 55. 1-4, 5. Jesus Christ calls upon us
also to behold himself: Look unto me, says he, all the ends of the Earth, and
be ye saved. Isa. 45. 22, 23. with Romans 14. 9-11, 12. And says, Behold me,
Behold me, unto a nation that was not called by his name. Isa. 65. 1. and 55.
5. It is also the work of the holy Spirit to lift up the Son of Man, as Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, as a complete object in whom is
prepared all helpfulness and healing for every stung creature, that men might
look unto, and believe in him. Joh. 3. 5, 9-9-14-16. It is his work and office
to bear witness of his blood, and the love of God as therein commended
everlastingly; and to glorify Christ, and take of his things, and show unto us;
of his sufferings, and the glory which there-through he has received. 1 John
5. 6. Joh. 16. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1. 11. Yea, as the father, word, and holy Ghost,
are one, one in essence, and being; so one also in their testimony; and this is
the record, that God has given unto us (mankind) eternal life; and this life
is in his Son. 1 John 5. 7, 11. Yea, he is the sum and subject matter of the
testimony of all those holy men by whom God has spoken unto us from the
beginning of the world, to the end we might see and behold him: To him give all
the Prophets witness. Act. 10. 43. Of this horn of salvation God spoke by the
mouth of his holy Prophets that have been since the world began. Luke 1. 69,
70. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Acts 3. 22-25. and 26. 23. Joh. 5. 39. The Baptist was a
man sent from God to bear witness of him as the light, the fountain, in whom is
all the fullness of grace and truth; and he says, Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World. Joh. 1. 6, 7-15, 16. 29, 33-36. The Apostles
also were witnesses of him. Joh. 15. 27. Yea, the fullest and clearest
witnesses of him; they saw, and did testify, that the Father sent the Son, the
Savior of the World. 1 John 4. 14. They preached not themselves, but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, and therewith Jesus the Lord. 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. 2
Cor. 4. 5. To them was this grace given, and Apostleship, fo obedience to the
faith among all nations. Romans 1. 5. and 16. 25, 26. To them was this grace
given, to preach the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all men see,
etc. Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. It evidently appears therefore, that it was needful they
should anoint their eyes with this eye salve, that they might see this blessed
object, that has been, and is so constantly, and unanimonsly witnessed of, and
directed unto by God, and all those that have been taught and led of him. All
agree in one concerning him, to the end we might see and believe in him, who
has so testified his love toward us as to lay down his life for us, that he
might become our Savior; and who is through and by means of his blood exalted
and glorified; and become the habitation of all the fullness of the God head;
the fountain of life, the fountain of living waters, the Sun of righteousness,
the treasury of wisdom and knowledge: Yea, all that the Father has is his.
Col. 2. 3. 9. Psalm. 36. 8, 9. Mal 4. 2. Joh. 16. 14, 15. And that this is the
object which they are called upon, and counseled to see and behold; and to
that end to anoint their eyes with this eye salve, appears from the scope of
the place we are speaking unto: For here the faithful counselor had been
commending unto them, and counselling them to buy gold tried in the fire, that
they might be rich; and white raiment, that they might be clothed, and that the
shame of their nakedness might not appear. And now he adds, anoint -- that
thou may see, to wit, this gold, and how it has been tried, and the
excellency of it; and this white raiment, etc. And this is a glass which
discovers all things to us: Here we may look upon those things which cannot
be seen with the bodily eye. 2 Cor. 4. 18. As Moses by faith saw him that is
invisible: Heb. 11. 27. And in some sense as Abraham saw the day of Christ, and
was glad. Joh. 8. 56. So may we behold and see in this word of faith (which is
the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11. 1.) the preciousness of the blood of
Jesus Christ, and his excellency and fitness for us, and for our helpfulness,
by means thereof. --

2. To the end we may buy this gold, and white raiment, and thereto sell all
that we have; needful it is to anoint our eyes with this eye salve that we may
see; namely, that we may see the vileness, and odiousness of our sins, which
are to be abhorred by us; And the emptiness and unprofitableness of our idols,
which we are to abstain from, that we may have these excellent and durable
commodities here commended to us; for while we are ignorant hereof, we shall be
ready to think that we part with, is better then that which is commended to,
and set before us: While we remain in our blindness, we are ready and apt to
mistake; and to call evil good, and good evil; and to set our hearts upon that
which will not profit; yea, to cleave unto that which will destroy us in
conclusion if it be not parted with, and fled from: While persons are in
darkness, they are under the power of Satan, and led captive by him at his
pleasure. Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 5-8. So much the Apostle signifies concerning
the Gentiles that remained in darkness, when he says; they have their
understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart; who being
past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness; as if nothing were pleasurable unto them, but what
is abominable. Ephesians. 4. 17-19. So the Apostle speaking of the believing
Gentiles says, that in times past (namely when they were darkness) they walked
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of
the Air, the spirit that now works (rulingly, and prevailingly) in the
children of disobedience. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. with chap. 5. 8. But to this we may
add more afterward. Now therefore it is needful that we see our sins, and
vanities, that we may be willing to part with, and relinquish them: and with
this eye salve in the testimony of Christ we may see: Therein all things that
are reproved, are made manifest by the light; the light does faithfully
discover them in their right and proper colors, to the end we might stand up
from them, and might flee from our iniquities and idols. Ephesians. 5. 11-14. And
indeed the holy Spirit, that breaths in this testimony, does in, and with
glorifying Christ, and discovering the transcendent excellency of him, show
unto us also the sinfulness of sin; and the emptiness of all those objects in
which naturally we are seeking rest; and on which we are placing our
affections; that we might turn from our vanities unto him, who is worthy to be
cleaved unto by us. So when the Lord by the Prophet says, Behold they are all
vanity, their works are nothing, their molten images are wind and confusion; He
then adds, Behold my Servant whom I uphold, etc. Isa. 41. 27-29. and 42. 1.
The holy Spirit in glorifying Christ, and taking of his things, and showing
unto us, does therein, and therewith convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment; and teaches the believers all things, and
leads them into all truth. Joh. 16. 8-14. In bearing witness of Christ, and
in his testimony, the holy Spirit shows unto us the odiousness of our sins,
that we might see, and behold it, that we might abhort and abominate them; in
that God has taken such vengeance on them in the person of his son, who knew
no sin: Though God testified of him that he was his beloved Son, in whom he was
well pleased, yet when but the guilt of our sin was imputed to him, he spared
him not, but condemned our sin in his flesh: It pleased the Lord to bruife him,
He did put him to grief. Isa. 61. 2. Romans 8. 3-32. Isa. 53. 10. This seen and
beheld by us, would help us to abhor it, and say, How shall we that are dead
to sin, live any longer therein? Romans 6. 1-3. And here may we also see the
necessity of our being washed here-from, in that he is become such a fountain
through his blood for cleansing us. Zech. 3. 1. And it was his very end in
being manifest, that he might take away our sins. 1 John 3. 5. He bare our sins
in his own body on the tree (not that we might live any longer thereto, but)
that we being dead to sin, might live to righteousness. 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. and
chap. 2. 24. And in his cross and testimony, we may also see the vanity of our
idols, and our vileness in serving them; that we might turn therefrom to God,
to serve the living and true God. 1 These. 1. 9, 10. Here we may see the
brutishness of our wisdom. Now is the Judgment of this world, says our
Savior: Here you may take a view, and have a discovery of it, in that those
that were Princes of the World for wisdom, crucified the Lord of glory; and
were also, before his hour was come, the greatest enemies to him; and thought
that their taking him out of the way, and killing him, would much have tended
to their security, when as, on the contrary, it brought, and hastened
destruction upon them. Joh. 12. 31. 1 Cor. 2. 8. Joh. 11. 47, 48. With Matt.
21. 39-41. Joh. 7. 45-49. Here may we see the unprofitableness of our works of
righteousness; in that he only could, and has brought in by his death, and
resurrection, everlasting righteousness; and there was no other way for the
completing it for us; for if righteousness could have come by the law, or by
any other way whatsoever, then Christ has died in vain. Gal. 2. 21. The Holy
Ghost, says our Savior, shall convince the world of righteousness; namely, he
shall show and evidence the unprofitableness of all our works of righteousness;
and of all righteousness according to the law; and that righteousness could not
come by the works or sacrifices thereof; in that he is gone to the Father, and
we see him no more: He comes no more down to suffer, or offer sacrifice, but
his sacrifice is accepted of God, so as he has set him down on his own right
hand. John 16. 10. with. Hebr. 10. 1. 2. 11. 12. and he has prepared
righteousness for all men, without the law, as has been said. Romans 3. 20-22.
here we may also see the vanity and helplesness of the riches of this world; in
that we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold: They
that trust in their riches, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
wealth; none of them can by any means redeem his Brother, nor give to God a
ransom for his own soul. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Psalm. 49. 6, 7. Here also we may see
the emptiness, and worthlesness of all the glory and honor of this world, in
that our Lord Jesus neither had, nor would accept of it: But he was rejected
and despised of men, a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the
people: All they that saw him laughed him to scorn, they did shoot out the lip,
they did shake the head. Joh. 6. 15. Isa. 53. 2-4. Psalm. 22. 6, 7, 8. Nor had
he, nor did he seek for, the favor and friendship of this world, but the world
hated him, because he testified of it, that the works thereof were evil. Joh.
7. 7. and 15. 18-20. --

Yea, in and by this one thing, by this unction, we may know all things that
are needful to be known by us, and see them in their right colors: Hence the
Apostle determined to know nothing in and unto all things, but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. 1 Cor. 2. 2. And it is needful we should know the vileness
of our sins, and the vanity and unprofitableness of all those objects on which
naturally we are placeing our affections; and in which we have been seeking
rest, and satisfaction to our spirits. --

3. It was needful for them to see themselves, and to see what manner of
condition they were in; and what manner of persons they were: And to this end,
that they might see this, needful it was they should anoint their eyes with
this Eye Salve, that they might behold themselves, and know what state they
were in: They were at present very much mistaken; they thought their condition
was very good, and that they were so happy that they needed nothing, but this
was the fruit of their blindness and ignorance; for had they viewed themselves
in the Testimony of Jesus, they might have perceived it was far otherwise with
them. And indeed this is generally the fruit of men's blindness; they are many
times pure in their own eyes, who are not washed from their filthiness. Prove.
30. 12, 13. Such fools are men, that all their own ways are clean in their own
eyes. Prove. 16. 2. And they who have not the love of God in them, yet think
that eternal life appertains to them. Joh. 5. 39-42. It is therefore a very
ignorant and false saying of those men, who tell us, that what the Apostle
speaks of the believing Jews before the Gospel was received by them, to wit,
that they were the children of wrath by nature even as others. Ephesians. 2. 3. Is
only meant and spoken of what they were in their own apprehension and
imagination: For they who are furthest off from the light do least of all know
themselves: And are most ready to be highly thoughted of themselves, while yet
they are most miserable: Who were more confident of the goodness of their
condition, then were the Pharisees: who yet generally were furthest off from
the kingdom of God, further off then were the Pulicans and Harlots. Matt. 21.
31, 32. and chap. 23. Yea, the Apostle Paul, who includes himself in the
former saying, as one who was by nature a Child of wrath even as others; yet
did not think so, when he was foolish, and while he was ignorant of God's
righteousness, but had confidence in the flesh, and thought himself alive, and
in a good and safe condition. Phil. 3. 4-7. Romans 7. 9. And so it is more
generally true: Such as kill, steal, commit adultery, swear falsely, and burn
incense to other Gods, will yet cry, the temple of the Lord are we, until they
are convinced by the light of Gods testimony. Jer. 7. 4 -- 10. Such can in
words make their boast of God, and call him father, who are of their father the
Devil; and say, they hope to be saved by Christ, as well as any others: And
call their doing the works of the flesh, their infirmities and weaknesses, and
that they are herein like to Paul when he says, the evil I would not, that do
I; in which they lie, and speak not the truth; and yet thus they deceive
themselves. Romans 2. 17-24. Joh. 8. 41-44. And, as has been said, this Angel
and Church were greatly deceived, and did deceive themselves, in thinking
themselves to be something when they were nothing. Gal. 6. 3. And it was
therefore needful for them, and is so for us also, to know our selves, and our
estate and condition: And this is made known to us, and we may see it in and by
this Eye Salve, this testimony of Jesus, in and by which all things are
discovered, and made manifest. Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. He that is an hearer of the
word of truth, and not a doer, he has this great advantage given him in
hearing, that he may see and behold himself: He that is an hearer only is like
unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholds himself, and
sees what manner of person he is, though he likes not the discovery which is
there given of him; and therefore he goes his way, and then forgets what
manner of person he was, the which before he was enabled to see by that glass.
Jam. 1. 22-24. He that does evil has, in and by the light, while it is
vouchsafed, a discovery made of himself, and of his works, to the end he might
continue beholding, and so cleanse himself from what is reproved. That he might
turn from darkness to light, and love light more then darkness; but in going on
to do evil, to make a trade of it, he hates the light, neither comes he to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved and discovered; for he is
convinced of the impartiality of the light in its discovery: And for such folly
he is condemned while he persisteth therein. John 3. 19, 20. In this light then
let us behold our selves; and with this Eye Salve let us anoint our eyes, that
we may know our selves: This is a needful lesson to be learned by us, to know
our selves; but not the first, as many through mistake say: But first, it is
needful to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified, as declared in the Gospel; and
therein, and therewith we may know our selves. 1 Cor. 15. 1-4. with chap. 12.
2. 2 Cor. 5. 14. We our selves, says the Apostle, were sometimes foolish; we
did not know Christ, nor God in him, nor our selves, nor any thing rightly; but
he saved us here-from by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost: Even by discovering to us, and causing to appear before us his kindness,
and love in Christ to man-word. Titus 3. 3-5. He that is an unbeliever, and
unlearned, an ignorant person, when he comes amongst them that prophesy, that
plainly and to edification declare the Gospel, he is convinced of all, he is
judged of all: And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and in this
light he beholds himself, so as he will fall down -- and report, that God is
in such declares of a truth. 1 Cor. 14. 3, 24, 25. For the word of God, the
Gospel of Christ, is quick and powerful; and sharper then any two edged Sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Heb. 4.
12. Therein then let us see and know our selves, and behold what condition we
are in, that if we be like this Angel and Church, we may learn to be zealous,
and repent. And this which has been spoken, shall suffice to the first inquiry
here propounded to be considered, to wit, What should they anoint their eyes
for, that they might see? And now we come to the second, viz. --

2. Why is it needful to our buying, that we anoint our eyes with this
Eye Salve, that we may see: --

To this, in what we have said before, we have spoken in some measure, and
shall therefore be the briefer in what we shall further speak to this Enquiry.
-- And so --

1. It is needful to our buying, that we anoint our eyes with this Eye Salve,
that we may see; because the sight of those things that are before spoken to,
is very powerful to move and prevail with us, to receive this blessed and
needful counsel here given to us, and to buy those heavenly commodities here
proposed to, and set before us. The object, and sight of the eye, was
occasionally the in let to our misery and calamity at first. When the woman saw
that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a
tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of the fruit thereof, etc. Genesis
3. 6. So now also the objects of the eyes, which are presented before us in the
Gospel, are forcible to persuade us, and make us willing to come unto, and
close with Christ, when the eye of the Soul is opened with this Eye Salve. The
eye affects the heart, Lam. 3. 51. It inclines the affection, and makes us
willing to buy that, which while we are in ignorance and blindness, we care not
for, nor know how duly to prize and value. -- As to say particularly.

While we anoint our eyes with this Eye Salve, and see, and continue looking
upon the preciousness of the Blood of Jesus Christ, as it is discovered to us
in this testimony; and his beauty and glory by means thereof. While we behold
this Gold, this enriching Gold, and see, and consider how it has been tried in
the fire, and how proper it is to make us truly rich; and how certainly and
infallibly it enricheth them that have it, this is apt and powerful to draw the
love and heart thereto, and to cause us to covet after it: As it is a powerful
Cord to us naturally to draw our hearts to the riches of this world, to behold
and see them with our eyes; As he confessed, who said; When I saw two hundred
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold -- then I coveted them, and took them,
Josh. 7. 21. 1 John 2. 15, 16. So when we see in this Glass this excellent
Gold, the price whereof is above Rubies, yea above all the riches of this
world, it is a forceable motive to engage our hearts to seek to be made
partakers hereof. If thou knew the gift of God, says our Savior, and who
it is that says unto thee, give me to drink, thou would ask, etc. John 4.
10. How did the knowledge and consideration of this better and enduring
substance in Heaven, make the Hebrews willing, in the days of their first
Illumination, to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and to endure
reproach and shame, and to be companions of them that were shamefully entreated:
Heb. 10. 32-34. What blessedness did the Galatians speak of? And how did they
turn from idols to God: And how ready would they have been, if it had been
possible to have plucked out their eyes, and given them unto them that were
instruments of preaching Christ unto them, when he was evidently set forth
before their eyes in the testimony of Jesus? They were willing then to part
with all for his sake, Gal. 3. 1. and 4. 13-15. And was it not the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ, that made the Apostle willing to suffer the loss of
all things, even of those things also that formerly were gainful to him; and to
count them but dung, that he might gain him, and be found in him? Phil. 3. 7-9.
And to this very end, That a nation he knew not, and nations that knew not him,
might run unto him, he says, Behold me, behold me: As intimating, That the
seeing and beholding him is very powerful and prevalent to overcome, and
persuade us to close with and embrace him, Isa. 55. 5. and 65. 1. And so the
beholding and seeing this White Raiment, and the excellent and useful nature
and property thereof, is proper and powerful to incline us to seek that we may
have it, that we may be clothed therewith, that so the shame of our nakedness
may not appear, Josh. 7. 21. Phil. 3. 4-9. Doubtless the beholding with the
eyes of the understanding, that plenteousness of Redemption in him, even the
forgiveness of our sins; those Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge hid in him;
that everlasting Righteousness brought in by, and treasured in him; that
eternal Redemption obtained by his Blood; that fullness of Grace, Truth, Spirit,
and all things pertaining to life and godliness prepared in him; that Eternal
Life given us in him: As these things are discovered to us in the testimony,
and his complete and unparallell d comeliness and amiableness by means hereof,
it would enamour our hearts on him, and inflame us with love to him; and even
make us sick of Love, and unsatisfied in our desires, till we more know him,
win him, and be found in him; yea, till we see as we are seen, and know as we
are known, and be ever with him, Cant. 5. 10-16. and 2. 3 -- 5. Truly the light
is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun, Eccles.
11. 7. But how much more pleasant and alluring is it, to behold this Pearl of
great price, this Sun of Righteousness, this Robe of Salvation, this excellent
one, who is fairer then the children of men; yea, who is the true God, and
eternal life! And how powerful is the sight of him, to keep us from our sins
and idols: 1 John 5. 20, 21 --

So also the seeing our sins and idols, as discovered in his Cross and
Testimony, is very powerful to move us to cast them away, and part with them,
as has been also in part signified before: There sin is rendered most
abundantly sinful, and our idols most evidently unprofitable and vain: Hence
the Apostle says, Whosoever abides in Christ, in the sight and knowledge of
him, as appears by the opposition, sins not: Though sin be in him, and
moving for service, yet he does not commit it; He does not willingly yield up
his mind or members to the service thereof: And on the other hand, Whosoever
sins, has not seen him, nor known him. He has not anointed his eyes with
this Eye Salve, that he might see; nor seen with his eyes as thus anointed: He
that does evil, has not seen God, 1 John 3. 6, 8. 3 John 11. He that sees,
and abides in the sight of, the end wherefore he was manifested, to wit, to
take away our sins; and of his faithfulness therein; for in him is no sin: he
that beholds and considers the bitter Cup Christ drank off, and the
shameful, cruel, accursed death he died for our sins, who was the Son of God,
to the end he might redeem us from all iniquity; and what a Fountain he is
become, in whom is all forgiveness, righteousness, rest, refreshing, washing
and cleansing, eternal life, etc. Such an one is preserved from sowing to, and
siding with that sin that dwells in him; he gets an escape, and flees
from the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 2. 20. So much the Apostle James also signifies, when he
says, Whose looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues, he being
not a forgetful hearer of the word, but a doer of the works, this man shall be
blessed in his deed. The man that continues looking in this Glass, this
Testimony of Jesus, is a doer; he lays apart all filthiness, and superfluity
of naughtiness, as it is discovered, and made to swim aloft, Jam. 1. 21-25.
This truth known makes him free from the bondage and slavery of his sins, John
8. 31-33. And he is made willing by these arguments contained in the Gospel, to
sell and part with his iniquities and abominations, Romans 6. 1-3. And so also,
in beholding Christ crucified, and looking upon the Cross of Christ which he
has endured and overcome, and the glory which there-thorow he has received, a
man may be broken off from his idols. The world (the wisdom, righteousness,
riches, honor, glory, pomp, and splendor, favor and friendship, customs and
fashions of the world) is crucified unto such an one as is thus exercised
through the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. So as he keeps himself from those
idols, 1 John 5. 20, 21. Thus when the Apostles preached Christ to men, and he
was received, and beheld in his Gospel by them, they then turned to God from
their idols; and were washed, and sanctified, and justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, etc. 1 These. 1. 5-9. and 2: 13. 1 Cor. 6. 9-11. and 12. 2. with
Chap. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. The seeing our sins and idols in this testimony, will
make us willing to sell them, and part with them, that we may have and enjoy
this Gold and White Raiment.

In like manner, the beholding and seeing in, and with this Eye Salve, what a
sad condition we are in without Christ, and without this durable riches and
righteousness here presented to us* this is a powerful argument to engage and
move us to seek the Lord while he may be found, that we may win him, and be
found in him, and be made partakers of him, in whom there is blessing prepared
for all the kindreds of the earth, Acts 3. 25. The seeing and considering, that
without him we are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and naked, and undone
creatures; and that abig ding such, we shall be spued out of his mouth, and
become miserable for ever; for nothing besides him will secure from evil, and
satisfy us with good. This is a forcible motive and argument to move us to be
hot and fervent in Spirit, that we may buy of him those inestimable Treasures
here counseled unto, which only will render us blessed and happy in the
enjoyment of them: As it appears here in this place, the scope of it being
considered by us, Rev. 3. 15-19, 20. Acts 2. 37. --

2. It is also needful for us to anoint our eyes with this Eye Salve, that we
may see; because not only are there such powerful arguments proposed to, and
set before us in this testimony of Christ, to move us, and make us willing to
buy: But also there is a mighty and supernatural power put forth in, and with
these arguments in this Gospel to convert us, and to turn us from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God; and so from our sins and idols
unto the living and true God, Acts 26. 18-23. The Gospel of Christ is the power
of God; his arm and power is put forth therein to effect in us what he
requires of us, Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 18-23, 24. His hand and mighty power is
stretched forth herein all the day long, to enable us to turn to him in and at
his reproofs; and to cast away our sins and abominations out of his sight,
Prove. 1. 20-24. Isa. 65. 1-3. Romans 10. 21. God hereby works in us both to
will, and to do, of good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12-15. Not only is the Gospel the
instrument he makes use of to glor^^^e his Son in and by, and to show us the
vileness and vanity of all other things: but it is that also which he
accompanies with the power and presence of his Spirit: So that he that
rejects, rejects not man simply, but God, who gives of his Spirit in and
with his word, 1 These. 4. 3*-8. And hence these weapons, the arguments of the
Gospel are mighty, mighty through God, to the pulling down strong holds, etc.
For God is in them of a truth, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. In looking
unto Christ, beholding and minding what he has done for us, and is become, and
what is treasured up for us in him; and therein seeing our sins and idols, and
in how sad a condition we are without him; God is saving us from our iniquities
and vanities, and enabling us to run from them to Christ. To this end his grace
brings salvation in due time to all men, saving strength and power, Tit. 2.
11. Hence he says, Look unto me all the ends of the earth, and be ye saved:
Not, Save your selves; But, Be ye saved. As intimating, in our looking unto
him, to enable us whereto also he is preventing us with power, God is saving
us, that we might be saved, Isa. 45. 22. To the same purpose also the Apostle
says, We all (not some of us only, but we all) with open^face as in a glass,
beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed, not change our selves, but we are
transformed, changed out of one form into another, from the love and service of
our sins and vanities, and out of our miserable condition into his image, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, who is in, and with this object as declared and
discovered to us in this Glass, 2 Cor. 3. 18. God in and by his Spirit is so
present in and with this Gospel of Christ, that he that receives that,
receives Christ, and him who sent him, Matthew. 10. 40. And he that despises
and resists that, despises and resists God, Christ, and his Holy Spirit,
Luke 10. 16. Acts. 7. 51. The hand of the Lord is put forth in, and present
with the arguments of the glorious Gospel, to convert and turn us from our
evils and vanities unto Christ, and to make us willing, who naturally are
without an heart, and unwilling to gain and buy Christ, and the unsearchable
riches of him, Acts 11. 20, 21. and 3. 13-19. It therefore evidently appears,
that it is very needful for us to anoint our eyes with this Eye Salve, that we
may see. --

3. And on the other hand, it is needful for us to anoint our eyes with this
Eye Salve, that we may in seeing see the excellency of Christ, and vileness,
and unprofitableness of all other things, to the end we may part with them for
him; or otherwise we shall be, and abide under the power of Satan, as has been
also before said. He has his power in darkness; and while men remain blind, he
can deceive them, and lead them captive at his pleasure, Col. 1. 13. Acts 26.
18. Hence it is said, those evil principalities and powers are the rulers of
the darkness of this world; he rules and prevails over them who remain in
blindness and darkness, and serves himself of them, making them do his lusts
and requirings, Ephesians. 6. 12. He so blinds the minds of them that believe
not, that anoint not their eyes with this Eye Salve, that the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, may not shine unto them;
that they may not perceive his excellency and comeliness. And together herewith
also, he commends, and renders excellent, needful, and pleasurable the
things which indeed are vile, evil, and abominable; For he is the God of this
world, of such as are, and remain in ignorance, 2 Cor. 4. 4. 1 John 5. 19. He
prevailingly persuades them, that the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, are most desirable, and worthy to be earnestly sought
after, and affectionately embraced by us; and that no fruit is so good and
pleasant, and worthy to be sed on by us, as that which is forbidden us of God:
For as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty at first, so he is also
endeavoring to deceive us, and to corrupt from the simplicity that is in
Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 11. 1-3. And what may he not persuade those that are in
ignorance to do? And whither may he not lead them? Through ignorance he
prevailed with the Jews, to prefer a murderer before the Prince of life; and at
last to kill him with wicked hands, Acts 3. 14, 15, 17. 1 Cor. 2. 8. Through
ignorance Saul was a Persecutour, blasphemer, and injurious; and verily thought
he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus, Acts 26. 9. 1 Timothy 1.
13.

Through ignorance men worship stocks, and stones, and prefer vain things
before Christ, and those durable and most excellent treasures hid in him; and
are enemies unto, and haters of him, and of those that call upon his name, Isa.
44. 17-20. and 45. 20-22. John 15. 18-22. and 16. 1-3. Through ignorance men
are establishing a righteousness to themselves, Romans 10. 2, 3. Yea, not to
enlarge hereto, while men are blind, they are in a condition to slight Christ,
and to follow all that is evil, according to their proper inclination, and to
prefer their sins and idols before him. When the Apostle gives us an account
of the sadness of the condition of himself and others, before the Grace of God
was received by them, he first tells us, they were foolish, Tit. 3. 3. As
intimating to us, that that leads to all that is evil. This was doubtless a
great cause of the evil found with this Angel and Church, of undervaluing
Christ, and preferring other things before him, to wit, their blindness; they
had in a great measure lost, or let go the knowledge and sight of Christ, and
of all other things as discovered in him, which sometimes they had had. -- All
which show unto us, in some measure, why it is needful for us to anoint our
eyes with this Eye Salve, that we may see. --

And this instruction, as thus spoken to, may be usefully considered by us. --

1. To show unto us the great evil, and sad judgment of them who endeavor to
bring men into, and keep them in blindness and ignorance; these are not
likeminded after the example of our Lord Jesus, who instructs the blind to
anoint their eyes, that they may see; nor like the Apostles, who instructed the
Believers, to add to their faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge; and to grow
in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
6, and 3. 18. and endeavored their helpfulness hereto: But they are rather
like to those thieves spoken of, against whom the Lord was, and is, who did
steal away his word every one from his neighbor, Jer. 23. 29, 30. Or like unto
them unto whom our Savior says, Woe unto you Lawyers; For ye have taken away
the key of knowledge: Ye entered not in your selves; and them that were entering
in, Ye hindered, Luke 11. 52. They serve Satan's design, and do his lusts. --

2. It shows unto us the wickedness and abominableness of that saying, That
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion: It may be indeed the Mother of that which
they call Devotion; to wit, of their Idolatry and Superstition: But of that
which is true Devotion and Religion it is not, but an enemy thereto, and that
which keeps men therefrom. When the Believers to whom the Apostle Peter
writes, were in darkness, they then walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. with
Chapter 4. 3, 4. --

3. And let it exhort us all to cry after knowledge, and to lift up our voice
for understanding, and to apply our eyes to Gods testimony, and not let that
depart from them, that we may look to Christ that we may be enlightened, and
our faces may not be ashamed, Prove. 2. 1-6. and 4. 1-8. and 8. 10, 11. and 16.
16. --

I shall add no more to this, but to pray God to give us the Spirit of wisdom
and revelation in the knowledge of Christ, to open the eyes of our
understanding, and to reveal Christ to us, and there-through to make us willing
for the excellency of the knowledge of him, to suffer the loss of all things,
and to count them but dung, that we may win him, and be found in him, and abide
in him; that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed
before him at his coming: Even so,

Amen, Amen.
December 19. 1670.
The End.

