Lex Parliamentaria: OR, A TREATISE OF THE LAW and CUSTOM OF PARLIAMENTS.

Just Published.
Parliamentary and Political TRACTS, written by Sir ROBERT ATKINS, Knight of
the Bath, and late one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas: Containing,
I. THE Power, Jurisdiction, and Privilege of Parliament; and the Antiquity of
the House of Commons asserted: Occasioned by an Information in the King's Bench
by the Atorney-General, against the Speaker of the House of Commons.

II. An Argument in the great Case concerning Election of Members to
Parliament, between Sir Samuel Barnardiston Plantiff, and Sir William Soame,
Sheriff of Suffolk, Defendant, in the Court of King's Bench, in an Action upon
the Case, and afterward by Error sued in the Exchequer-Chamber.

III. An Enquiry into the Power of dispensing with Penal Statutes. Together
with some Animadversions upon a Book writ by Sir Edward Herbert, Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, entitled, A short Account of the
Authorities in Law; upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hale's Case.

IV. A Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of
England.

V. A Defense of the late Lord Russels's Innocence, by way of Answer or
Confutation of a Libellous Pamphet, entitled, An Antidote against Poison, with
two Letters of the Author of this Book upon the Subject of his Lordship's Trial.

VI. The Lord Russel's Innocence further defended, by way of Reply to an
Answer, entitled, The Magistracy and Government of England vindicated.

VII. The Lord Chief Baron Atkins's Speech to Sir William Ashurst, Lord Mayor
Elect of the City of London, at the Time of his being sworn in their Majesty's
Court of Exchequer.

Lex Parliamentaria: OR, A TREATISE OF THE LAW and CUSTOM OF PARLIAMENTS.

Showing their Antiquity, Names, Kinds, and Qualities.

Of the three Estates; and of the Dignity and Excellency of Parliaments, their
Power and Authority. Of the Election of Members of the House of Commons in
general, their Privilege, Qualifications, and Duties. Of the Electors; and
their Rights, Duties; and Manner of Elections. Of the Returns to Parliament;
the Sheriff's and other Officers Duty therein. Of the Manner of Election of the
Speaker; and of his Business and Duty. Of the Manner of passing Bills, and the
Orders to be observed in the House of Commons. Of Sessions of Parliament; as
also of Prorogations and Adjournments: Together with the proper Laws and
Customs of Parliaments.
With an APPENDIX of a Case in Parliament between Sir Francis Goodwyn and Sir
John Fortescue, for the Knights Place for the County of Bucks, 1 Jac. I.

The SECOND EDITION, with Large Additions.

LONDON: Printed for J. STAGG, in Westminster Hall.

THE PREFACE.
IT must be confessed, that Lex Parliamentaria, or Parliamentary Law, cannot be
meant or intended to signify any Prescription or Application of Laws to that
Power, which in itself is boundless, and unlimited: This Collection, therefore,
only shows what Parliaments have done, and not what they may or ought to do.
The Parliament alone can judge of such Matters as concern their own Rights,
Authorities, or Privileges.

And yet, seeing the Phrase, Parliamentary Law, or Law of Parliaments, has for
some Ages past obtained, Lord Coke, Sir Matthew. Hales's etc.
(and that too among Authors of great Name,) I hope the present, or any future
Parliament, will not censure me for a Word (misapplied,) or for endeavoring to
illustrate that Authority which is improperly denominated Parliamentary Law.
The Parliament itself is, no doubt, properly to be styled, The fundamental Law
and Constitution of this Kingdom, as it comprehends all Legal Powers whatsoever.

But as God and Nature influenced the Voice and Desires of the People to this
Form of Government by Parliaments, so it must be confessed that the same
supreme Power also influenced their Voices and Desires, to establish this
Parliamentary Government for the Safety and Preservation of the Governed, and
thereby constituted the Salus Populi to be the supreme Law; to whose Support
all other Laws, Powers, and Authorities ought to tend. It Is for this End Kings
are created; and for this End Parliaments assemble; that so the Polity and
Government of the Nation may be administered with Honor and with Safety, for
the Good of the whole Community.

Nor can it be denied, but that Parliaments in former Times esteemed it as
their most incumbent temporal Duty, to oversee, recognize, and resirain, within
the Bounds of Law, the Commands and Acts of Kings; and to take care that that
great and honorable Trust reposed in the Hands of the Prince, for the Good of
the People, might be rightly and duly administered, and not perverted or abused
to the Invasion of their Rights, or the Subversion of the Constitution. Brac,
p. 34 Flet p. 2.17. vide hic, p. 89.
'Twas the Sense of this Duty of Parliaments induced both Bracton, an eminent
Judge under King Henry III. and Fleta, a learned Lawyer in King Edward I's
Time, to record this great Duty of Parliaments to succeeding Ages.

And from this very Motive it was, See the Preface to Privilegia Londini. p. 6,
7.
that our ancient Parliaments were so cautious, as to oblige our Kings to swear
at their Coronations, Concedere justas Leges quas vulgus elegerit; That they
would grant such just Laws as the common People should choose. (See this Oath
admirably well explained in Sadler's Rights of the Kingdom. Page 71, 88, 91.
etc.)

From all which, and much more, that may be added, I think it clearly appears,
That both Kings and Parliaments, Lords and Commons, and all Laws of Government
whatsoever, were in their first Intention instituted and ordained for the sole
Good and Benefit of the People; And wherever all or any of them are perverted
from that View, they loose the Nature of their first Intention, and ought to
receive a contrary Denomination.

And from the foregoing Particulars, I at present apprehend, that the Lex
Parliamentaria, or Fundamental Law of Government, in this Nation, was not
originally founded on any Capitulation or Compact between the King and the
People, as is usually done in Contracts of Bargains and Sales, or other
Purchases; For that would infer a separate Interest between Prince and People.
But who will say, that a British Monarch can by Law have a distinct Interest
from his People?

Also the mutual Obligation that is established between the Prince and People
by the Laws of this Kingdom, have laid an unsurmountable Bar against any such
Capitulation, or contracting Project: For by the original and inherent Nature
of our Government, there is such amutual Relation and political Connection
created between the King and his People, as in that natural Relation and
Connection between the Head and the Members of the Body; so that in neither
Instance can the Head say to the Members, I have no need of you, etc. This
mutual Relation between Prince and People seems to have been interwoven in the
fundamental Being, and impressed in the very Heart of our Constitution, etc.

The Publisher here thinks fit to declare, That this Book has received no
little Advantage from a Manuscript of that judicious and learned Judge, the
late Mr. Justice Price, who, having been many Years a Member of the House of
Commons, had made diverse curious historical Collections, with several Notes and
References relating to the Subject Matter hereof: And in this Edition, the
Reader may find (collected from authentic Records and Histories) all that is
necessary to be known, touching the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments; and,
in a great Measure, the legal Prerogatives of the Prince, and just Liberties of
the People.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of Parliaments in general: Showing their Antiquity, Names, Natures,
Kinds, and Qualities, British, Saxon, etc. Ordinarily, annual, and without
Summons: Extraordinary, on Summons pro arduis, etc. Of the three Estates;
Bishops no essential Part, excluded, elected, created by Patent. Commons ever
represented, and how. Their Right to a Free Election of all Magistrates, etc.
and Consent to all Aids and Taxes. This Right invaded by the Norman Kings,
William I. and II. Reslored by Henry I. Of English Parliaments in his Time; who
the Magnates and Barons Regni then were. Of Coronation Oaths, etc. Page. 1.
CHAP. II. Of the Dignity and Excellency of Parliaments. The Supreme Power of
the Kingdom; and (when Free;) Protectors of the People's Rights, and Preservers
of the legal Government and Constitution. Of the three Estates; and to what End
assembled. Lords and Commons anciently sat together. The highest Court of
Justice, etc. Page. 49. CHAP. III. Of the Power and Authority of Parliaments,
superior to the Law, may judge the Greatest; remove evil Ministers, redress
Grievances of all Kinds: Their three Powers. viz. Consultive, Legislative, and
Judicial; their absolute Power over all Persons, etc. Page. 66. CHAP. IV. and
V. Of the Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction of the House of Peers, distinct
from the Commons. Page. 90, 101. CHAP. VI. and VII. Of the separate Powers and
Authorities of the House of Commons, both in general and in particular Cases.
Page. 109, 114. CHAP. VIII. Shows their Power over their own Members, and how
executed etc. Page. 136. CHAP. IX. Treats of the Election of Members of the
House of Commons in general, and of the several Statutes relating thereto.
Page. 149. CHAP. X. Shows who may be Electors, and the^r Rights, Duties, and
Manner of Election, with the Statutes and Oaths referring thereto. Page 156.
CHAP. XI. Who may be elected; their Qualifications and Duties, etc. with such
Statutes, Oaths, etc. as concern the same. Page 180. CHAP. XII. Of the Returns
to Parliament, and of Amendments of Returns; the Sheriffs and other Officers
Duty therein, with such Statutes and Oaths as relate thereto. Page 226 CHAP.
XIII. and XIV. Of the Manner of Election of the Speaker of the House of
Commons, and of the Business and Duty of the said Speaker. Page 263, 272. CHAP.
XV. and XVI. Of Orders to be observed in and by the House of Commons, or the
Members thereof. Page 278, 285. CHAP. XVII. Of the Manner of passing Bills,
etc. in the said House. Page 306. CHAP. XVIII, XIX, and XX. Concerning
Committees in general; as also of the Orders, Powers, and Proceedings of Grand
Committees; and of Standing Committees, etc. Page 327, 336, 341, CHAP. XXI. Of
Sessions of Parliament; what makes a Session; as also of Prorogations and
Adjournments. Page 347, Note. CHAP. XXII. Of the proper Laws and Customs of
Parliament; and of Acts and Ordinances. Page 358. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Privilege
of Parliament, with the Statutes for regulating it, etc. Page 379. The
APPENDIX; being the Case of Sir Francis Goodwyn, admitted a Member, though
returned outlawed, etc. Concluding with diverse additional Pariculars relating
to the Privileges and Duties of Parliaments. Page 415.
Lex Parliamentaria: OR, A TREATISE OF THE LAW and CUSTOM OF THE PARLIAMENT of
England, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Parliaments in General, their Definition, constituent Parts, etc.
with a brief Inquiry into the Original and Nature of our British, Saxon and
Norman Parliaments.
THE Word Parliament, Minshew, in verbo Parlamt.
in French, Parliament, and in Spanish and Italian, Parliamento, is, Spelm.
Gloss. verbo Debate See Coke on Littl. p. 110.164.
in its principal Part, derived from the French, Parler, to speak, and (as Lord
Coke and some Others conceive) The General Council, or National Assembly of
this Kingdom is so called; Spelm. Gloss. in verbo Parliament. Hales of
Parliaments, 122. Elsing of Parliaments, 167. 4 Inst. 8. Bohun's Collection,
353.
because every Member thereof, should, in the Matters there debated, Parler la
Mente, i. e. Freely speak his Mind: And tho some Authors have oppugned this
Derivation, yet it is evident from the very Nature and Essence of a Parliament,
That every Member thereof, ought to speak his Mind freely, in what relates to
the Public Welfare. And this Freedom of Speech, is now constantly claimed by
the Speaker of the House of Commons, at the first Meeting of every New
Parliament, and in insisted on as a Claim of Right.

The Word Parliament, is, in France, now taken for one of those High Courts of
Justice in that Kingdom, Minshew ut supra. See Vincent Lupanus, lib. 2 c.
Parliament, No. 28.
wherein Men's Causes and Differences are publicly heard and determined,
without further appeal. Of these Parliaments there are Seven, viz. 1. Paris
(now superior to the Rest.) 2. Vide Du Haillan Pasquier, etc. of the Fr.
Parlements.
Toulouse. 3. Grenoble. 4. Aix. 5. Bourdeaux. 6. Dijon. 7. Roan. whereto some
add an 8th, viz. Rhenes in Bretaigne.

But with us in England (or rather Great Britain) The universal Assembly of all
the Estates of the Kingdom (i. e.) The King, Sir Tho. Smith, De Repub. Angl.
lib. 2. c. 1.2.
Lords and Commons (wherein every Freeman of the Kingdom is said to be present,
either in Person or by Representation, and who are met together for debating of
Matters touching the Commonwealth) especially for the enacting of Laws and
Statutes) is properly called a Parliament; Cro. Jur. f. 1. etc. Cambd. Brit. 6.
etc. 4 Inst. 1.
and such Laws and Statutes, when agreed on, are significantly termed Acts of
Parliament.

Indeed, various Authors, Of the three Estates, viz. 1. King. Cotton's Records,
709.710. 4 Inst. 1. Hales of Parliaments, 1. Finch's Nemotecnia, lib. 2. c.
1.2. The Lords. Sadler's Rights of the Kingdom, p. 79. to 93. Kelway's Reports,
184. Stamf. P. Cor. 153. See Bagshaw's Reading, p. 17. to 21.
have had various Sentiments (and even Acts of Parliament differ) about the
three Estates, some (alleging the King to be the Head of, but not included in
the Number) assert, That the three Estates are, 1st, The Lords Spiritual. 2dly,
The Lords Temporal. And 3dly, The Commons; but Others more rationally say, The
King is one of the three Estates, which compose the Parliament; and that the
second Estate, is constituted of both the Spiritual and Temporal Lords jointly;
for (say they) Tho the Archbishops and Bishops are denominated Spiritual, yet
they sit in Parliament as Temporal Barons only, i. e. By Reason of the Temporal
Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics, and not as they are Spiritual Persons.
And they further urge, in Confirmation of their Opinion, 1. That no Bishop,
notwithstanding his Election, Consecration, Confirmation, etc. can be a Lord
of, or sit in Parliament, till the King has granted to him the Temporalities of
the Bishopric. 2. ( N. B. Tho this Stat. was repealed by Q. Mary, yet that
Repeal was repealed by Q. Elizabeth, etc. As the Parliamt. at Bury, 24 E. 1. 1
Eliz. all the Acts about Religion passed Dissentientibus Episcopis. See Journal
Dom. Procer. 11 H. 7.27. Bro. Par. 107. Kelway 184. 3 The Commons. See
hereafter. See Sadler's Rights, p. 79. to 93.
That by Virtue of the Stat. 1 E. 6. c. 2. still in Force, The King may
constitute Bishops by his Letters Patent only, without any Election or
Consecration; and 3. That Parliaments have been, and may be held, Excluso
Clero, exclusive of the Bishops and Clergy; and that some of our most
beneficial Statutes have been enacted, whereto the whole Body of the Clergy
dissented; all which, they say, prove the Bishops to be no essential Part, or
any of the three Estates of Parliament. And in Trinity Term 7 H. 8. it is agreed
by all the Judges of England, That the King may well hold his Parliament by
himself and his Lords Temporal and Commons, without any Bishops or Spiritual
Lords at all.

The third Estate of which we shall herein principally treat, is on all Hands
confessed to consist of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, with the Barons of
the Cinque Ports, all which being at this Day elected by the free Votes of the
Freemen of Great Britain, are properly esteemed the Representative Body of the
People, and constitute that Part of the Parliament usually called the House of
Commons. ( N. B. The ancient Modus Tenendi Parl. reckons up six Degrees, or
Orders of Parliament; but that Division cannot be denominated six Estates.)

The Numbers of the Commons, Numb. of Commons formerly. See Mr. Willis's
Preface to his 1 Vol. of Net. Parl. Prynn of Parliamentary Writs.
I find to have been formerly variant, according as the Sheriffs of Counties,
(from what Motive is uncertain,) were pleased to direct their Precepts, to the
several Cities or Burros, within their respective Counties; or as the same
Sheriffs made their Returns thereupon: But indeed, another Cause of this
Variation, was, That it was usual for the Prince, on his Accession to the
Throne, to grant Charters to ancient Demesne Vills, and other popular Towns,
thereby erecting 'em into free Burros, and this consequently gave 'em a Right
to be represented in Parliament. And by this Artifice, among others, the Crown
advanced its Interests in the House of Commons.

For it must be confessed, That by the ancient Constitution, there were no
Representatives of the Commons as Commons in Parliament, besides the Knights
for the Shires, the Barons for the Cinque Ports, Crompt. of Courts, f. 2.3,
etc. Stat. 23. H. 6. c. 11.
the Citizens for the Cities, and the Burgesses for the ancient Burros only;
and that the Elections for all those, were to be made by such Persons only, as
were possessed of Lands or Tenements, held by them as Freeholds, or free
Burgage Tenures; which consequently excluded all Villeins and Copyholders,
Stat. 12. R. 2. c. 12. Crom. 2.3.4.5. Bro. Ant. Them. 43^
as also Tenants in ancient Demesne (which were but the King's Villeins) and
the Tenants and Dependants of other Lords, Parl. 96. Reg. 261. Not. Bre. 14.
from being either the Electors, or elected of the House of Commons.

Indeed, the Practice of increasing the Number of the Representatives of the
Commons, See Bohun's Col. per Tot.
began very early, viz. Temp. Johan. (if not before) for I find it a Practice
of that Prince, to grant usually, in Consideration of Money, etc. Charters to
Ancient demesne Towns (as generally all Seaport Towns were) thereby erecting
'em into free Buroughs; The Representative of London and West. p. 14. 10 p.
21. Spelm. in voce Major.
and hence it was, as I conceive, That Bridport, Dorchester, Harwich, Helstone,
Kingston upon Hull, and diverse other ancient demesne Towns, came to be erected
into free Burros, which originally had no Right of being represented in
Parliament.

But whatever Methods were then taken to increase the Number of the House of
Commons, I find their Number to be much the same from the End of H. the 6th's
Reign, Fortescue p. 40.
to the Beginning of that of H. the 8th, viz. about 300.

That H. 8. MS. Penes Authorem.
added to their Number, 38. King Ed. 6. added to their Number, 44. Queen Mary,
added to their Number, 25. Queen Elizabeth, added to their Number, 62. King
James the 1st, added to their Number, 27.
And King Charles the 1st, about 10. or 12. so that at the Time of the
Restoration. of King Charles 2. I find their Numbers to have been about 500.
But the Commons, about that Time, restrained this mischievous Practice for the
Future, so that they declared the Elections made by Virtue of that Prince's
Charters void; and as Chester had been enabled to send two Members for the
County, and two for the City, by Virtue of a Sta. 34.35. St. 34.35. H. 8. c. 13
St. 25. C. 2. c. 9.
H. 8. so an Act past in the 25 Car. 2. enabling Durham to send four Members in
like Manner, and thus the Number of the House of Commons stood at 513, till the
Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, when, by Virtue of the Union
Act, St. 5. An. c. 8.
forty-five Scottish Members were added, which made the whole Number of that
House to be 558, as it now stands.

Mr. Prynn and Others observe, Denominations of Parliam. Prynn's Rights of the
Com. etc. p. 99. 99. Spelm. Glossary, in verb. Parlam. and Debata.
That our Ancestors had many Expressions and Phrases, which signified a
Parliamentary Assembly; as Magnates Regni, Omnes Regni Nobiles, Proceres et
Fideles Regni, Universitas Regni, Communitas Regni, Discretio Totius Regni,
Generale Concilium Regni, and many others, varying the Style in successive
Ages, till at length it came to be fixed in the Word Parliament. See diverse
Records and Precedents touching this Matter in the Appendix to Mr. Petyt's
Miscellanea Parliamentaria.

Mr. Prynn also says, Prynn's Truth triumphing over Falsehood, etc. f. 69.
Petyt's Ancient Rights, etc. p. 68.
That by many ancient Precedents before the Conquest, it is apparent, that all
our pristine Synods and Councils, were naught else but Parliaments; and that
our Kings, Nobles, Senators, Aldermen, Wisemen, Knights and Commons, were
usually present, and voted in them as Members and Judges.

And Mr. Lambard, Sir Robert Atkyns's Argument, p. 18. see hereafter.
in his Archaeion, maintains, That Parliaments were used in the Saxon Times; as
in the Time of King Ina, Ann. 712, and other Saxon Princes; and that they then
consisted of King, Lords and Commons.

And that the like Assemblies were in Practice among the ancient Britons,
Rymer's View of Govern. p. 13. 14. etc.
Gauls and Germans, and other Northern Nations, may in some Measure appear from
those noble Remains of Caesar and Tacitus: Caesar De Bello Gallico, l. 5. p. 87.
For the Former, speaking of the Britons, says, Summa Imperii Bellique
administrandi Communi Concilio permissa est Cassivellauno; That the chief Power
of administering the Government, and Command in War, was by a Common Council (or
Parliament) committed to Cassibellan; Tacitus de Moribus Germanor. etc.
and the Latter, treating of the German Customs, De Minoribus Rebus Principes
consultant De majoribus omnes, i. e. That in smaller Matters their Princes only
consult or determine; Rymer ut ante. Sadler's Rights, p. 79.
but if the affair be weighty, they all consult as in a common Assembly or
Parliament. Et quod Reges and Principes audiuntur magis suadendi Authoritate
quam jubendi potestate, i. e. that the Prince's Authority consisted rather in
Persuasion than in Coertion; Et quod Principes, etc. Communi Concilio
Eliguntur, etc.

But the better to clear this Point, touching national Assemblies, especially
those of the Britons and Saxons in this Island; I shall here add the ensuing
Inquiry.

The Denominations of a Parliament, Denomination of Parliaments.
or National Assembly, have been various according to the Language and Phrase
of Speech of the several Nations, where Used and Practiced: Seldom, de
Synedriis Lib. 2. c. 4. sect. 1, 2, 11, etc. and Lib. 3. c. 14. and 15. and De
Successione Pontif. c. 12. See Genes. c. 11, 14, 23, etc.
Thus the Jews had their Great Sanhedrin, consisting of the Prince, the Rulers
of the People, and the Heads of their Tribes and Families; and in this manner
we find their Parliaments assembled in the Days of Saul, David, Solomon,
Rehoboam, etc.

Nor was Moses the first Modeller of a National Assembly or Parliament; the
Scripture itself seems to contradict it; and doubtless there had been something
Equivalent to such collective Consultations from the first Instant of
congregated Societies; nay some spiritualizing Heads have stretched the Pattern
to a Time, antecedent the Existence of Humanity, and almost coeval with Time
itself; These (not contemplating Oriental Idioms) Derive both the Doctrine of
the Trinity and the three Estates of Parliament, Genes. c. 1. v. 26.
from that uneffated Speech, Let us make Man, etc.

But however heavenly their Conjectures are, our inquirers herein must tend
another way; and yet to me it seems apparent, that Parliaments existed before
what the Scriptures Record, i. e. among the Assyrians, Babilonians, Caldeans,
Egyptians, etc. and it is most evident the inspired Legislator confesses himself
in a gross Error, by attempting to Govern without their Assistance; and
therefore instead of consulting the Divine Oracle, condescends to receive the
Instructions of an Arabian, (Compare Exodus c. 18. v. 21, 22, etc. with Deuteronomy. c.
1. v. 13, etc. Take ye, i. e. Elect ye, etc.) Jethro was Prince of Midian in
Arabia.
whereby he now Modelled his Theocracy according to a Parliamentary Plan of
Government; Behold an unenlighten'd Shepherd directing and enlightening the
illuminated Friend and boasted Companion of God! A Riddle might puzzle our best
Divinity, and prove it to be not altogether from above.

That the Persians (whose Language and Laws bear no small analogy with our own)
had also the like Parliamentary Assemblies, is not only intimated by those
Texts which mention the Laws and Decrees of the Medes and Persians, but is
Universally confessed by all the Greek and Latin Historians: That noble
Description of their Government left us by Xenophon, may justly attract our
Approbation and Imitation; Xenoph. Cyripaed. p. 8. and 20.
and their (...), as strongly incline us to desire FREE Parliaments, as their
(...) to insist on FREE Elections.

The Greeks had also their (...), Notae ad Smyrneo. Decreta. p. 11, 13, etc.
or Conventus Primatum. Wherein not only the Kings and great Men, but even the
Commons assented to their Decrees or Statutes, as is Evident from those Marble
Monuments, containing the Statutes and Decrees of those Grecian Assemblies, as
in that of the People of Smyrna and Magnesia, etc. vide Opera Seldeni, Vol. 2.
Tom. 2.

The like Assemblies were in use among the Romans, Paul. Manut. De Senatu
Romano Lib. 1. c. 1.
and as Paulus Manutius observes, Instituted by Romulus in the Infancy of their
Monarchy, and continued in some Degree through all the changes of that State.
They were called in Latin, Comitia quasi Coitia a coeundo quia coeunt ibi
deliberaturi de Salute Republicae, i. e. from Assembling or meeting together,
because they therein, Assembled to Deliberate for the Good and Safety of the
Common Wealth.

Such an Assembly is called in Low Dutch, British Parliamts. See Orig. Jurid.
p. 14. Pref. 2. and 4. ad L. L. Hocli, i. e. Sub Anno Christi. 1.
Rijcs-dach the King's Day. But more properly in High Dutch, or the German
Language, Reich-stagh, i. e. Stabilimentum Regni. For that it is the chief stay
and support of a Kingdom. And that the like meetings were in Practice among the
ancient Britons, is Evident from the Preface to the Laws of Hoel Dha, who
denominated such Assemblies Gynnulleidfa or Cyfrythin-'y Doethjon, i. e.
Conventus Legalis, because Laws were therein made and Chyd-Synniedigaeth, i. e.
Consessus Magnatum; from whence Mr. Cambden's Error may appear, Camb. Britannia
in Wiltshire.
who on occasion of the Pillars on Salisbury-Plain translating the British
Words into Latin, renders 'em Chorea Gigantum, when they properly signify
Conventio Magnatum, See Baxters British Glossary verbo Laberus.
or the Assembly of great Men. That building being apparently Erected for the
Use of such an Assembly, there still remaining not only the marks of
Distinction where the several Orders or States of Parliament Sat; This Authors
own observations.
but very Visible incisions in those Pillars, and diverse intermediate Stones
for supporters do manifestly prove how, and in what order the Seats or Benches
were therein fixed and placed.

Besides which, Spelman's Gloss. 386. Antiquus Mos suit. ut Sub. Dio and intra
Sepimentum aliquod Militare ob Salutis gratiam convenire compagenses, etc,
ibid. Baxter ut supra. Selden's Janus 93.
the Situation of those Parts being near the Heart of the Kingdom, (a
considerable Motive for Northern Princes, to hold their general Councils and
national Assemblies near the midst of their Dominions) as also the Nature of
the Place, being on a wide open Plain, and consequently not so liable to either
Force or Treachery, as more Popular, or covert Places; with diverse other
Motives, may rationally induce the old Britons to choose that Place, for the
holding of their general Councils, or Parliamentary Assemblies.

Note the several Prefaces to the Laws of Howell Dha, Vid. Cot. Titus. D. 2,
and ibid Caligula A. 3. N. 3.
who lived near the Time of our Athelstane, whose Laws as well as those of Ina,
etc. are apparently derived from British Patterns, run thus, Hoelus Bonus Rex
Waltiae convocavit Sextos viros ex Qualibet Centuria ad Domum Albam: Hi erant
ex Sapientissimis viris Regni; Horum (Sextorum) 4 erant Laici and 2
Scholastici: Advocabantur autem Scholastici ne Laici quidquam Sacris Scripturis
contrarium Statuerent, etc. Tum Communi Consilio and consensu Sapientes illic
congregati Leges veteres inspexerunt; Quod durum nimis esse videbatur
allevarunt, Quod nimis leve fuit aggravarunt Quasdam ex eis ut prius erant
reliquerunt alias emendarunt, alias penitus abrogarunt alias denique de novo
Statuerunt; L. L. Hoeli p. 5. and 7.
and lastly a Curse is pronounced on that King, or other Persons who should
attempt to change any of those Laws, without the consent of a General and full
Council or Parliament.

Touching the Saxon Parliaments, Antiq. of Parl. p. 4. Spelman in Voce
Wapentachia.
we may observe that at first all their Councils and Parliamentary Assemblies
whether they debated of Peace or War, were as Caesar and Tacitus observe of the
Germans, etc. Sub. fremitu armorum.

Their averseness at first to the Britons and their Customs consirm'd them in
this practice, Selden's Epinomis, 5 6.
till another Species of Christianity different from that of the Britons, was
introduced amongst them, when they soon applied themselves to more civilized
Assemblies and the making of Laws; only Egbert King of Kent, and some of his
Successors being too much influenced by Austin the Monk and others of his
Order, gave the Clergy opportunity to Usurp over the Rights and Properties of
the Laity, and hence all the Laws of Ethelbert, Wilkins LL. Saxon p. 1. to 14.
Hlothair, Eadric and Wihtred show a Manifest partiality to Churchmen, and
indeed their general Councils or Parliaments seem to be composed only of
Ecclesiastics: But after these Ina the West Saxon King, being near of Kin to
Cadwallader, and of British as well as Saxon Blood, seems to have Established a
better Plan of Government, and to have Founded his Parliamentary Assemblies on
a British Pattern.

For the Prolegomenon to his Laws runs thus, Wilkins LL. Saxon p. 14. Selden's
Janus, 93.
Ego Ina Dei Gratio occiduorum Saxonum Rex, consilio and Doctrina (Suasu)
Cenredae Patris, mei and Heddae Episcopi mei and Eorkenwoldae Episcopi mei, et
cum omnibus meis Senatoribus, and Senioribus Sapientibus Populi mei, etc. So
that his Parliamentary Assembly plainly appears to have been composed of King,
Lords and Commons; and as many of his Laws respect the Britons as well as the
Saxons, so his Parliamentary Assemblies seem to consist of the Representatives
of both People, whom he endeavored to unite in one Body.

As for the Laws of King Alfred, See Wilkins, ibid. p. 34.
it is evident, from the Conclusion of the first Part (or rather the Introduction
to the Second) That they were made in a General Council or Parliamentary
Assembly, in Imitation of the Britons; and here I beg leave to produce my
Authorities, which prove, That this King (as well as Ina) took the Pattern of
his Laws and Government from the Britons, Wilkins ut supra.
induced hereto, as it is probable, by that Relation in Blood he bore to King
Ina, whom he styles, Cognatus meus. See the Notes on LL. Hoeli, p. 4.
But more effectually by the Advice and Persuasion of Asser Menevensis, who
wrote his Life, was one of his chief Counselors, and a Briton born.

The Author of the Life of King Alfred, Life of Alfred, p. 96. 97. 98, etc.
says, That he compiled his Laws chiefly from those of the Old and New
Testament, and after those, added several Matters taken from the Laws of the
Trojans, Greeks, Hist. Jornalen, ad A. D. 1066.
Britains, etc. And mention is made in the Notes thereon, That he took diverse
of his Laws from those of Dunwallo Molmutius, an ancient British King.

And herewith Ponticus Virunnius agrees, Pon. Vir. l. 3. p. 10.
whose Words are, Belinus habens totius Britaniae Dominium Paternas Leges, i.
e. Molmutianas, confirmavit and alias Statuit; Quas (omnes) Gildas Historicus
convertit in Latinum; Ib. p. 14.
Rex vero Alfredus De Latino in Anglicum Sermonem transtulit. See Hygden's
Polychron, l. 1. c. 50.
And afterward he says, Martia etiam ( quae fuit uxor Regis Britonum,
Guitellini) condidit Leges, quae Martiana Lex dicebatur, quas Rex Alvredus
inter caetera transtulit in Saxonicam Linguam.

But more particularly Mr. Dugdale, Dugdal. Mon. v. 1. p. 32. Sub Ann. S 2. and
vide ib. p. 40.
has, from an ancient MS, given us this Passage, viz. Leges Britonum Rex
Alvredus transtulit in Anglicum quae tunc dicebantur Leges Alvredi, and Multos
Libros transtulit eodem modo. Iste instituit Hundredos and Tythingas (these are
known to be of British Original, Sheringham, p. 125. 126.
etc.) See also touching this Matter, Sheringham, De Anglorum Gentis Origin.
Who further observes, That many Words, introduced into the Saxon and English
Laws, are of British Original; as Murder, Denizon, Rout, etc.

And hence the Author of the Notes on the Laws of Howel Dha, LL. Hoeli, p. 4.
has justly remarked, That Alfred learnt the Partition of Shires, Hundreds,
etc. from Asser Menevensis, a learned Briton.

Hollinshead also, in his History, Hollinsh. Part 1. p. 15.
or Chronicle, speaking of the Laws of Dunwallo Molmutius, says, That King
Alfred translated them into English, and inserted them in his Body of Laws. And
Mr. Tailor, in his Treatise of Gavelkind, Hist. Gavelkind, p. 52. 53. and N. B.
ib. p. 49.
says, That both Ethelfred and Alfred, translated the Welsh Laws, and expressly
affirms, That the Saxons had their Laws from the Britons: And if so, we may
well conclude, That they had the Modus Condendi Leges (or Method of enacting
Laws in a Parliamentary Assembly) from them also.

But a Question has arisen, how far the Commons were a constituent Part of
those Assemblies, in the Time of the Saxons; Magnates and Proceres, include the
Commons, Vide Post. 34.
and it must be confessed, That generally those Councils are said to consist of
the King and his Bishops, See Brady of Burros, and his Introduction.
and the Wisemen, or (Magnates) Great Men only; or perchance sometimes with the
Words Seniores Populi added (as in Ina's Laws) But whether the Commons were
present, either in Person, or by Representation, is, in the Opinion of some
Inquirers very doubtful.

Now, Lambard, LL. Sax. p. 26. 27.
in Order to clear this Doubt, it will be necessary to consider, who were those
Magnates, and Seniores, or Sapientiores Populi, and how they came to be so
denominated.

And first, Wilkins, LL. Sax. p. 96. 97. Post. 35.
I am of Opinion, That the Words Magnates and Seniores, did intend not only
those which were Rulers or Governors of Counties and Hundreds, either Civil or
Military, as were the Aldermen of Counties, which we call Earls, and the
Heretoges of Counties (usually rendered Duces, Ibid. 204. 205.
because they headed the People in War (and were then as our Lords Lieutenants,
but of far greater Authority) But, That they also comprehended other, Temporal
Magistrates, as also the Bishops and Rulers of the Church; for that it appears,
those Words, Magnates and Seniores, or Senatores, included the chief Rulers,
Magistrates and Officers of the People, in all Affairs Civil, Military and
Ecclesiastic; and it appears, That these generally constituted the
Wittenagemote, or Saxon Parliament.

Indeed, on extraordinary Occasions, See Saxon Chron. An. 1055. And the
Beadmanealre Witenagemote, i. e. Et indictus fuit omnium Procerum Conventus,
before Mid-Lent. This included the Commons and was by Reason of the
extraordinary Business then there transacted
the Commons, i. e. their lesser Thanes, or Lords of Manors, as also the
Representatives of Cities or Burros, did in Person appear there likewise. But
if we rightly consider the Model of the Saxon Government, we shall find, That,
except in such extraordinary Cases, it would be a vain and fruitless Thing for
the Commons to appear in Person at all their Assemblies of the Magnates Regni,
seeing those Magnates, were, in Truth, the Peoples ordinary Representatives,
being elected and fully instructed by the Commons, about such Affairs as
related to them.

For the Constitution of the Saxon Government, was such, as made all the lesser
Assemblies of the People, for the Election of Magistrates, and Distribution of
Justice, to have a Connection with, and Dependence on some higher and more
honorable Convention, Wilkins ut supra. Lambard, ut supra.
to whom there lay a Representation and Appeal, from the inferior Convention;
in such a Manner, as, That every inferior legal Convention, was, as it were, a
lesser Parliament, which had some other superior Parliament to appeal to: So
the higher Assemblies had the Inspection and Control of what was transacted in
the next subordinate Conventions.

And hence it appears, Spelman, 540.
That the Saxon County-Courts, the Hundred-Courts, or Wapentakes, and even the
Court-Barons, or Manor-Courts, were as much Parliamentary Assemblies within
their respective Precincts and Jurisdictions, as the Wittenagemote, or Assembly
of Great Men was for the whole Kingdom. Thus, in ordinary Cases, there was no
Occasion to apply to the superior Parliament, See Mirror, cap. 5. sect. 1.
Parliamts. to be held at London twice yearly, etc. i. e. Whether the King
summoned 'em or not and as Sadler, p. 50. Licet Rex sit absens, etc. Note, the
Inferior Courts were held 12 Times yearly, on (...) Days Notice; but not the
Superior. Wilkins Sax LL. 205 c 2
when the inserior Parliament could, and usually did, provide a Remedy.

But there are two Things especially remarkable in the Economy, or Connection
of the Saxon Plan of Government, which will give us great Light into the Nature
of their Folkmotes, and Wittenagemotes, or Parliaments, viz.

1st, That all their Folkmotes, or County Assemblies, being generally held
twice yearly, at certain particular Places, and on certain stated Days, or
Times in the Year, there was no Occasion for any special Notice to be given of,
or any Summons to those Assemblies, no more than for the Terms at this Day.
Every Freeman, whose Duty it was, attended there in Person, or by
Representation, and that under a Mulct or Penalty, as may be seen in the Saxon
Laws, relating to this Matter.

Thus the Free-Tenants of Manors, Spel. Glos. in verbis Manor, Turnus,
Comitatus, etc.
by their Lord or Steward, the Burroholders by the Head-Burros, and the Freemen
in each Tything by their Tienmantale, or Representative, attended at the
Hundred Courts, and those of the Hundred, attended at the County Courts, by
their Hundreders, etc. And those of the County (as Earls and Bishops, of the
respective Counties) attended the Witenagemote in this Manner, viz. The Courts
of Manors and Tythings, always ended before the Wapentacks, or Hundred Courts
began, and these ended just before the Folkmotes, or County Courts began, and
these last just before the ordinary Witenagemote, or Grand Parliamentary
Assembly began.

By this Method, See 32d Law Ed. Conf.
a certain Connection and Dependence of all inserior Courts, on the next
Superior was established; so that there lay an easy Transition by Appeal from
the Inferior, to the next superior Court; and lastly, To the Conventio
Magnatum, or Supreme Assembly.

2dly, Another observable, is, That all these Courts were so held, twice
yearly, for the free Election of Magistrates, and the free Distribution of
Justice, within their respective Precincts. To which End, all the inferior
Courts were held about the End of September, for electing their Magistrates and
Officers (as they still are in London and some other Cities) and the other half
yearly Assembly, for Distribution of Justice, was usually about the End of
March, yet so that all was over before the Wittenagemote, See Wilkins, LL.
Saxon. p. (...) c. 1. (...). Purif. (...) M. uno (...) eodem Die per Totum
Regnum.
or Grand Assembly was held, which, by an express Law, was always to commence,
The first, on the Calends of October, for confirming or constituting all the
Aldermen, or Earls or Hetetoges, or Lord Lieutenants of the several Counties,
as also of all the other Great Officers of the Kingdom; and the other about the
Calends of May for distributing of Justice, etc. N. B.


For by the Constitution of the Saxon Government, no Officer, either Civil or
Military, or even Ecclesiastical, could be invested in his Office, or Exercise
any Jurisdiction or Authority over Freemen, without the free Election and
Consent of those Freemen over whom he was to exercise such Authority; and it is
for this Reason, more especially, That the People of England are denominated
Free; for that by the ancient Laws and Constitution of the Kingdom, they had
this just and natural Right, viz. The free Election of their Magistrates and
Governors, without which our Ancestors thought all other Liberties were but a
Species of Bondage. For of what Use can Liberty be to him, whose Person, or
Estate, is subject to Officers, etc. set over him, without his own Consent?

This Freedom of Election of Magistrates, etc. Civil and Military, under the
Saxon Government, fully appears thro-out the whole Body of their Laws,
especially in the 35th Law of Edward the Confessor, which provides, See Spel.
Gloss. in verbo Vicecom. p. 555.
That all Sheriffs (or Earls) and all Heretokes, or Lords Lieutenants of
Counties, shall be elected in pleno Folkmote, i. e. by the Freeholders in a
general County Assembly, or Parliament.

And that their Practice was therein pursuant to the Law, Sax. Chr. sub Anno
1064.
appears from the Case of Tosty, Earl of Northumberland; for (says the Saxon
Chronicle) That Earl, misbehaving himself in his Office, the People of that
County deposed him from being their Earl, and proceeded to elect Morkar, the
Son of Elfgar, LL. Inae c. 8. and 36. LL. Edgari, c. 3. LL. Canuti, c. 13. 14.
into his Place: Which Power of deposing Earls, and other Officers, appears to
have been vested in their Folkmotes, by express Provision of diverse Laws both
of the Saxon and Danish Kings.

I confess, in the Case of Earl Tosty, Sax. Chr. p. 171.
it is said, That after the People had so elected Morker to be their Earl, they
certified their Election to the King, and entreated his Assent thereto, to
which the King yielded; and on the Vigils of Simon and Jude, sent them a
Confirmation, or Renewal of the Laws of King Canute ( i. e. That for deposing
Earls, etc.) This shows, That tho the King had the Power of confirming the Earl
in his Office, yet he could not of himself appoint any Earl over the People,
without their own free Election and Consent, in a Folkmote or County Parliament.

Now, Vide Edv. Cons. 32. and 35.
as all Titles and Dignities in the Saxon Plan of Government, had both Officium
and Benesicium annexed thereto, so there were diverse previous Qualifications
necessary to enable the Persons to be elected to such Dignity or Office: Thus,
in Order to be a greater Thanes-worthy, Qualifications and Elections of Peers,
etc.
or worthy to be elected one of the greater Thanes ( i. e. Lord of a Hundred)
he was to have such an Estate; and to be an Earl, or Alderman's-worthy or
worthy to be elected an Earl, or Alderman of a County, he was to have such an
Estate; with other Qualifications respecting each Office.

So that three Things, at least, ought to concur in constituting an Alderman,
or Earl of a County, as also of a greater Thane, or Lord of a Hundred (both
which, with the Bishops then, made up the Body of their ordinary Folkmotes, and
Witenagemotes) viz. 1st, He was to have an Estate in Lands, with other
Qualifications. Secondly, The Election and Consent of such Freemen over whom he
was to preside. And thirdly, The Royal Assent, or Confirmation (usually in
Parliament)

And further, as all the Magnates Regni, Who ordinarily were Representatives of
the People. That Bishops were elected by the People, even after the Conquest.
See Sadlers Rigts. of the Kingdom, p. 1178. 133. 134. 140. etc.
and all other Officers and Magistrates, whether Civil or Military (and even
Ecclesiastical, as Bishops, etc.) were in those Times elected to their
respective Offices, by the Persons over whom they were to preside; so they were
liable for Misbehaviour in their Offices, not only to a Deprivation, but also
to be otherwise censured and punished in their Folkmotes, and other
Conventions; and consequently were under the strictest Guard, to keep to their
Duty, and perform their Trust, both in their Folkmotes, or County Parliaments,
as also in the Grand Witenagemote, or Supreme Parliament. And tho such Officer
presided in the former, as their Prince or King; yet in the latter, he was but
their Representative: And thus the Magnates Regni, Nota.
or Lords of Parliament, were originally and ordinarily, no other than the
Representatives of the Commons or Freemen.

It Is true, in extraordinary Cases, Spel. Glos. verbo Subsidium.
as in Granting of New Ayds or Taxes, as Danegelt, etc. the Commons likewise
attended in Parliament either in Person, or by their Deputies, specially
authorized; but such Ayds and Taxes were then very rare; See Mr. Madox's Hist.
Exchequer. c. 7. 8, 9, etc.
the Crown in those Times being abundantly supplied in ordinary Cases, by its
Rents and Revenues, both certain and casual; as Fines, Forfeitures, Escheats,
the third Part of the Profits of all Leets, Hundreds, Counties, and other
Courts, Ayds, to make the King's eldest Son a Knight, Vide Paulus Manut. De
Legihus Romany.
to marry his eldest Daughter, etc. all which I take to be of a British or
Roman Original.

Besides which, if we consider the vast Profits and Revenues then arising from
the ancient Demesne, and other Crown Lands, we may easily Grant, That the King
had rarely any Occasion for extraordinary Ayds: For the Tenants of those Lands,
Spel. Glos. verbo Villenagium.
holding the same in Villenage, and they themselves being esteemed as the
Villani Regis, the King could not only Tax 'em at his Pleasure, but also
appoint 'em what Officers and Magistrates, and even out 'em of their
Possessions as he pleased; and therefore Tenants in ancient Demesne, while they
continued such, (...)
were never esteemed Freemen; they never served on Juries, never voted for
Members of Parliament, nor ever contributed to their Expenses: In short, They
were thought to be so far under the Power and Influence of the Crown, as not to
be in any wise entrusted with the Peoples Liberties.

Sir H. Spelman, in his Glossary, In verbo Subsidium p. 527.
says thus, I find not that the (ancient) Saxon Kings had any Subsidies, etc.
But they had many Customs, whereby they levied Money of the People, or Personal
Services toward building (repairing) of Cities, Castles, Bridges, Military
Expeditions, etc. called Burgbote, Bridgebote, Herefare, Heregeld, etc. But
when the Danes oppressed the Land, King Egelrede (or Ethelred) Anno 1007,
yielded (in a Parliament) to pay them 10000 l. which was afterward increased
to 36000 l. then to 113000 l. and lastly, Note, this Assessment was doubtless
with Consent of the Commons Q. If Churchmen were not Procuratores aut
Participes Danici Subsidii.
to a yearly Tax or Tribute of 48000 l. This was called Danegeld, and for
raising it, every Hyde (or Plough) of Land, was cessed at 12 d. yearly (the
Church Lands excepted) which therefore was called Hydage (and Carvage) which
Name afterward remained upon all Subsidies and Taxes imposed upon Lands; for
sometimes it was imposed upon Cattle, and then it was called Horngled.

But though the Saxon Witenagemotes were so ordinarily held per Regem cum
Magnatibus Regni. Yet it is very Evident, that when any matters were to be
there Transacted, which in general concerned the Body of the Freemen of the
Kingdom, in such cases the Rule was Quod tangit omnes tractetur ab omnibus, and
nothing could be determined in their Parliaments relating to Peace or War, new
Ayds, Taxes or other public charges on the People, without their Common Assent
either in Person or by special Representatives.

It Is true, See Madox ut ante.
the Saxon Kings had very rarely any such Ayds, Taxes or Subsidies, as are
granted to our Kings at this Day: The vast Profits arising to the Crown in
those Days, consisted in the Rents and Produce of their ancient Demeasn Lands;
the third Part of the Profits of all the County, and other Courts in the
Kingdom, besides the many other Incomes on Fines, Forfeitures and other
Penalties, and other Revenues certain and casual, made it seldom necessary to
Tax the People by a Parliament.

They had also (says Spelman) many Customs, In verbo Subsidium.
whereby they levied Money of the People, or exacted their Personal Services
toward the Building and Repairing of Cities, Castles and Bridges, for Military
Expeditions, etc. which they called Burg-bote, Vide ante.
Brig-bote, Here-fax, Here-geld, etc. Though we may well conclude those Customs
and Duties, to have been originally granted by Assent of the Commons in a
Parliamentary Assembly, as it is certain Peterpence, Danegeld, Spelman ib.
Horngeld, etc. were.

As to Peterpence, Idem in Verbo Romascot. See Fedus Edvardi and Guthurui c. 6.
LL. Edgari c. 4. LL. Caunti c. 15. LL. Hen. 1. c. 12 etc. In verbo. Subsidium.
otherwise called Romescot and Romefee, whether the same was first granted by
King Ina, as is generally said, or by King Offa, as others affirm; it is plain a
Parliamentary Consent was had thereto, as the Laws touching the Regulation of
the same, do manifestly prove.

And as to Danegeld, etc. Sir Henry Spelman says, The Danes having oppressed
the Land, King Egelred (i. e. Ethelred) in the Year 1007, yielded (i. e. by
consent of Parliament) to pay them for obtaining Peace 10,000 l. which was
after increased to 36,000 l. then to 113000 l. and lastly to a yearly Tribute
of 48,000 l. and for the raising of this Tax, Note this Tax appears to have
been promoted by some Churchmen who it is probable shared the plunder. Splem. ut
Supra.
every Hyde or Plough Land was charged with 12 d. Yearly, (Church Lands
excepted) and thereupon it was called Hydage, which Name was afterward applied
to all Taxes and Subsidies imposed on Lands; but if the Tax was laid on Cattle,
'twas called Horn-geld.

The Normans (says the same Author) called these sometimes, from the Latin and
Greek Word, Taxes, and sometimes from their own Language Tallagia, signifying
to cut or divide from, (as the Word Excise does at present) and sometimes they
denominated 'em according to the usual Words beyond Sea. Auxilia and Subsidia
(Ayds and Subsidies) and accordingly W. 1. had those Taxes or Tallages, and
made Laws for the manner of Levying them: Vide LL. W. 1. p. 125. Rights of the
Kingdom 115.
But this also seems to be by pretense or color of (I cannot call it a free)
Parliament.

But to return to the Saxons and their manner of granting Aids and Taxes; Hist.
Aethelwerdi Li. 3.
we may observe that King Egbert, (who is generally said to have been the first
Monarch of England) seems to have attained his Conquests and Extent of
Dominion, chiefly by the extraordinary Aids and Supplies granted by his
Commons; See Ingulph. p. 6.12.17.
and that by the same Means, he was enabled so vigorously to Repel the Danes,
etc. To this purpose we meet with a Passage in the History of Croyland, viz.
That this King confirmed a grant of Lands to that Abbey; coram Pontificibus and
Majoribus totius Angliae, i. e. (as I apprehend) before the Prelates, Peers and
greater Commons of all England, who (as the History says) were then met
together at London, consulting how to provide Aids and Supplies contra Danicos
Piratas, etc.

The whole Passage proves this Transaction to have been in a general Council,
or Parliament, met purposely for the raising of new Aids; and the Word Majores,
seems plainly to intend the Representatives of the Commons, and to be of a
lower Degree than the proceres or Temporal Peers. Vide Bed. Hist.
And that the Commons attended at that Consult, may not only appear from diverse
of the Names Subscribed to that Charter: But it is also evident from Bid and
other ancient Authors, that the Word Majores was then used to signify such
Officers and Magistrates as we now Term, Sheriffs of Counties, and Mayors or
Bailiffs of Towns and Cities.

And though the Word Danegelt, Ingulph.
is not quite so ancient as the Time of K. Egbert, yet that the first grant
thereof, was with consent of the Commons, appears from the Laws of Edward the
Confessor; Hoveden.
who first remitted it, it having been diverted from its Original and true
Institution; the very Cause ceasing under the Kings of the Danish Race, who
notwithstanding continued the Tax, and which though remitted by the Confessor,
was afterward revived by the Conqueror, See Laws of W. 1.
as a proper Expedient for augmenting regal Power; and yet this Revival seems
also to be by consent of, or under color of a Parliament. -- But further,

In the abovementioned History of Croyland, Hist. Ingulphi ad Annum 855.
there is a remarkable Charter made by Ethelwulph the West Saxon King, who was
Son and Successor to K. Egbert, and the Father of his four Successors, i. e.
Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelfred and Alfred. Rights of the Kingdom p. 84, 85.
The Charter itself imports a grant of Lands, Tithes, etc. to that Abbey, and in
the Body of it, is said to be made cum Consilio Episcoporum Principum, etc. and
is Subscribed by, and in the presence of the Kings of Mercia and East Anglia,
Omniumque Archieporum Episcoporum Abbatum Ducum Comitum Procerumque totius
Terre; aliorumque Fidelium infinita Multitudine, Qui omnes Regio Chirographo
Laudaverant. -- A pregnant Instance of a Saxon Parliament composed of Kings,
Lords and Commons, and of the concurrent Assent of the three Estates in the
passing of the Grant.

I cannot here forbear observing an Expression in that Introduction to the Laws
of K. Alphred (which might seem strange in a King at this Day) where speaking
of his Establishing those Laws. See Wilkins, p. 34 and Lambard 26.
(Ex consulto Sapientum Suorum) By consent of his Parliament, he goes on thus,
Fortham ic ne durst gedyrst-laecan, etc. for that he durst not attempt to do it
otherwise; and it concludes thus, Ergo Ego Alphredus -- omnibus Sapientibus
meis hic usus sum; et illi dicebant quod ipsis omnibus been placuerint ea (quae
Statuta Suut) ut observarentur.

And Andrew Horn, a Learned Lawyer, Mirror of Justices.
who wrote Temp. Ed. 2. in many places of his Book, Speaks of K. Alphred's
Parliaments, and that his Laws were made by Assent of his Great Wise Men and
Commons; He Expressly mentions and applauds that Law of his, that Parliaments
ought to be held twice Yearly, and Declares the Non-observance of that grand
Law of State, to be one of the highest abuses of Law and Government.

I might here also take notice of other Parliaments of the same King, Wilkins
LL. Saxon. p. 51.
particularly that Treaty entered into between him and Guthrun the Dane, which
was made Ex Sapientum anglorum Consilio; and I might further show that all the
Acts of State, both of him and his Saxon and Danish Successors, were made and
transacted with the consent of the Commons, as well as Consilio Magnatum. But
the Point is so fully proved in our ancient Historians, as well as in the style
used by those Princes in their Enacting of Laws, that I conceive my further
Endeavors to illustrate, it would prove but holding a Candle to the Sun.

And as for the Norman Times, though the two Williams, Father and Son,
endeavored what they could to suppress the Rights of the Commons, yet we find
on the Death of the latter; the Commons of England began in some Measure, to be
Restored to their ancient Rights, i. e. the Election of their Officers and
Magistrates, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and their being Represented in
Parliament.

It Is True, W. 1. Soon after his acquisition of the Kingdom, Swore to the
Observation of the Laws of Edward the Confessor, but added a very odd
Limitation to the Oath, viz. with such amendments (i. e. alterations) as he,
with advice of his Council should make therein. This showed he had little
regard to those Laws, and the Rather for that the Observance of them, would in
a great Measure deprive him of Nominating the Officers and Governors of the
Kingdom; a tender Sore to a Prince that aims at arbitrary Power.

He therefore took upon him the Nomination and Disposition of all Offices and
Dignities; Sold and Distributed, Earldoms and Baronies at pleasure, and seems
to have utterly deprived the People of their Right of Election of Magistrates
and Representatives, (except for London) without which, no People can be
esteemed Free; and having afterward settled his Revenue by the Record of
Domesday Book; he had thence forward no occasion for supplies in Parliament.

W. Rufus succeeded him on the like Foot, and on his Coronation, Swore the like
Oath with the like Explanation, i. e. to observe the Confessors Laws with such
amendments, i. e. alterations therein, as had been made by his Father; and H.
1. on his coming to the Throne, Swore to the Observance of the same Laws, with
such alterations as had been made therein, by his Father and Brother.

Hitherto the Yoke of the Norman Conquest and Tyranny, had layn heavy on the
Necks of the Commons of England; but now their Day of Redemption seemed to draw
Nigh; for in a few Years after this, Robert the Eldest Son of W. 1. being
returned from the Holy Land, and coming into England set up his claim to the
Crown, and made such a Party among the Norman Nobility here, that King Henry
was forced to throw himself into the Arms of the English, and thereupon called
a Parliament at London, which seems to have been composed almost, if not wholly
of an English House of Commons.

The Speech made by that Prince at the Meeting of that Parliament, is Recorded
by Mat. Paris, and does so remarkably discover the Restoration of the Rights of
the Commons, and the Renovation of the ancient Constitution (by granting the
Original of our Magna Charta and other Liberties,) that I cannot forbear giving
the Speech and its Introduction to the Reader, both in Latin and in English,
viz.

Magnatibus igitur Regni ob hoc Londonium Edicto Regio convocatis Rex, Oration
Regis Henrici ad Anglos. See Mat. Paris old Edicon p. 83. and in Watts, p. 42.
(Henricus) talibus alloquiis super Mel and Favum Oleumque Mellitis and
Mollitis blandiens Dixit; (Vos Angligeni) Amici and sideles mei Indigenae ac
Naturales. Nostis veraci Fama referente qualiter Fratermeus Robertus electus et
per Deum Vocatus est, ad Regnum Hierosolymitauum feliciter Gubernandum, et quam
frontose illud infeliciter Refutaverit; Merito propterea a Deo Reprobandus:
Nostis etiam in multis alijs Superbiam et ferocitatem illius, et quia Vir
bellicosus Pacis Impatiens est; Vosque Scienter quasi contemptibiles, et quos
Desides vocat and Glutones conculcare desiderat. Ego vero Rex humilis and
pacificus Vos in Pace and in antiquis Vestris Libertatibus prout crebrius
jurejurando promisi gestio confovere, et vestris inclinando Consilijs,
consultius ac Mitius, more Mansueti Principis Sapienter Gubernare; Et super his
(si provideritis) Scripta subarata roborare, et iteratis Juramentis praedicta
certissime Confirmare; Omnia Videlicet quae Sanctus Rex Edvarvardus, Deo
inspirante, provide Sancivit inviolabiliter jubebo observari; ut vos mecum
fideliter Stantes, Fratris mei, immo et mei and totius Regni Angliae Hostis
cruentissimi Injurias, potenter animose ac voluntary propulsetis; si enim
Fortitudine Anglorum roborer, inanes Normanorum Iras, Nequaquam censeo
formidandas.

The King having by his Royal Edict, K. H. ^. his Speech to his Eng. Parliam.
called the English great Men of the Kingdom to London, for that intent
harangued them with a most gracious Speech, smoother than Oil, and sweeter than
Honey, or the Honeycomb, thus: My beloved, and faithful Friends (Englishmen)
You who are the true born Inhabitants, It seems the Norman Nob. though Summoned,
refused to attend H. Parliam. and to have joined with Robert.
and natural Proprietors of this Kingdom. You know what undeniable Truth is
founded in the Report that my Brother Robert has been Elected, and by God
called to the glorious Government of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and how
shamefully he has rejected that call; for which Cause he deserves to be
abandoned by God. You also know among many other his ill Qualities; that he is
of a proud and brutal Disposition, and that being as it were nursed in War and
Blood; he is an utter stranger to Peace; that he publicly Treats you as
contemptible, and calls you Slaves and Gluttons, and that his whole aim is to
Tyrannize over you. But I a mild, gentle and pacifick King, desire to protect
you in Peace, and in the enjoyment of your ancient Laws and Liberties as I have
often Sworn to do, and to be guided by your Counsels, whereby I may Govern you
with the more Prudence and Moderation, as a Mild and a gentle Prince. Nay more
than this, if you will provide a Charter, I am ready to confirm and Establish
thereby, and on my renewed Oath inviolably observe all those good Laws which
the holy King Edward being inspired by God, did with Wisdom ordain. That so,
you standing faithfully and couragecously by me, we may powerfully resist and
repel such injuries as may be attempted against us by this Brother of mine,
who is the bloody Enemy of you, and of the whole Kingdom of England: For let me
be but assisted with the Courage of you Englishmen, I shall not in the least
fear the vain Threats of those (upstart) Normans.

From the foregoing Passage concurrent with other circumstances of those Times,
I conceive we may raise the following conclusions.

1. LL. Ed. Conf. c. 33.35. etc
The Convention abovementioned being Convoked Edicto Regio, etc. was one of
those extraordinary Parliaments before mentioned, met together to consult De
arduis Negotijs Regni ( i. e. how to secure the Possession of the Crown) and
not one of those stated, and ordinary Parliaments which by the Saxon
constitution were to be held twice Yearly ( viz. about the beginning of May and
beginning of October) which ordinary Parliaments were afterward by diverse
Statutes, LL. Ed. gari. c. 5. See 4. Inst. so. 9. and 36. E. 3. c. 10. St. 4.
E. 3. c. 14.
reduced to once a Year certainly, ( i. e. whether Summoned or not) or oftener
if need were, i. e. if there was any occasion to call one by a special Summons,
pro arduis Negotijs Regni.

2. That though the Magnates Regni are only mentioned to be Summoned, yet the
Commons of England were therein included; and indeed it is very Evident, that
the Words Magnates Regni or Nobiles Regni, Selen Tie. Hon. 603. and 604.
in the Language of those Times included both Lords and Commons when applied to
a National Assembly: For as Mr. Seldom observes the Word Nobilis in the Saxon
Times denoted every Gentleman ( i. e. under Thanes or Knights, etc.) So after
the Conquest, the Word Baronagium, Camb. fo. 137. Edit. Land. 1600.
included the Commons as well as Peers, and Mr. Cambden with others, do consess
Quod Sub Nomine Baronagij omnes Regni ordines continebantur. Thus Rex Magnates
and Proceres are said to make the Stat. of Mortmain, which was apparently made
by the K. Lords and Commons; 17 Johanis.
and the Magna Charta of K. John (of which that of K. H. 1. is clearly proved
to be the Foundation) appears to have been made per Regem Barons and Liberos
homines totius Regni, Mat. Par. Edit. per Watts, p. 38.45.51.166. and alibi.
all which are by the Historians of those Times, called Magnates Angliae. See
farther of the Import of the Word Magnates in Mat. Paris.

3. M. Paris 10.6. and 40.
That the Norman Nobility, though Summoned, resus'd to appear at this Parliament,
they being almost entirely devoted to Robert the King's Elder Brother; and
hence it is that we find the King's Speech is here Directed to English Men
only, and that too in opposition to the Normans in general, on whom the King in
the Conclusion very warmly Reflects, in order to ingratiate himself the more
with the English Commons, of whom this Parliament seems to have been (almost)
wholly composed.

The cause of the Normans defection seems to have been, Vide ibid 42.
for that King Henry having in the 2d year of his Reign Married Maude the
Daughter of Margaret, Q. of Scotland, who was Edgar Aetheling's Sister, and the
direct lineal Heir of the English Blood Royal, Mat. Par. 40.
was so enamoured with her (tanto ardentius exarsit in ipsius amorem) that he
very much favored the English for her Sake; whereupon the Normans raised a
general Rebellion against him, in favor of Robert; and tho by the Intervention
of Friends, the difference between the two Brothers was Skinn'd over for the
present, yet we find the K. could never afterward be heartily reconciled to
the Norman Nobility, though of his own Blood, diverse of whom as Robert de
Beleasmo, Ib. 40 41.
William Earl of Moreton, and others; he soon after Banished the Kingdom.

And it is very remarkable, That in the Event of the several Contests about
Robert's Right, the English Commons became the Victors over the Norman
Nobility; first, on behalf of W. Rufus, in the Beginning of his Reign, and now
on the Behalf of K. H. 1. Vide ib. sub Anno 1089.
And the Example of their former Valor might induce this King to gratify and
caress them with those high Encomiums, and Promises in his Speech. Which
Promises, tho as the Historian asserts, he afterward, impudenter violavit;
yet, as to the granting a Charter for restoring the Confessor's Laws, Ib. p. 42.
doubtless the Parliament took him at his Word; and this Charter I take to have
been that very Charter which the same Historian observes to have been produced
to King John, Ib. p. 167.
at the Rencounter of Runny-Mead, and not that which is mentioned to have been
granted by this King, at his Coronation, in which we find this ensnaring
Stricture, Mat. Par. 38.167.
viz. Lagam Regis Edvardi vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater
meus eam emendavit. His Father having, under Pretext of those Emendations,
utterly deprived the English of the Free Election of their Magistrates; whereas
it is evident from History, That for some Years after this new Charter granted in
this English Parliament, the People were generally restored to the Right of
electing their own Magistrates and Officers, Civil, Military and
Ecclesiastical; and this I take to be the grand Foundation of the Magna Charta
of English Liberties, i. e. as it gave Relaxation from Norman Tyranny and
Slavery. And this may teach us, Dier 60 and --. See Mirror, c. 1. Sect 3. Bra.
Flet. Lambards Archaion, 5^.239.245. Sir R. Atkyns, p. 20.15, etc. Vide Post.
c. 6. and 7.
That the Rights and Liberties of the Commons of England, are neither so
illegally begotten as by Rebellion, nor of such tender Years, as some imagine.
But if any Man is not convinced from what I have before produced, touching the
Origin of English Parliaments, and the Antiquity of the House of Commons, let
him peruse the Authors cited in the Margin, especially the Treatise writ by
that learned Judge Sir Robert Atkyns, on this very Subject.

Nor was this the first English Parliament held under this King, Mat. Par.
37.39. 2 Inst. 15.
Mat. Paris has given us a brief Account (which other Authors confirm and
enlarge) That one Ranulph, Saxon Chron. sub Anno 1099. p. 208.210. Flor. Wig.
etc. Mat. Par. 39.
Bishop of Durham (whom Mat. etc. adorn with the sublime Titles of, Vir
pessimus, and corruptissimus; Homo perversus and ad omne scelus paratus; Vir
subacto ingenio and prosunda nequitia, etc.) was imprisoned, etc. by a
Common Council or Parliament of Englishmen. The whole Passage runs thus, Eo
tempore Rex tenuit in Custodia Ranulphum Dunelmensem Episcopum hominem
perversum and ad omne scelus paratum, Quem Frater Regis, i. e. Rex Willielmus
Episcopum fecerat Dunelm. and Regni Anglorum subversorem; N. B. The Office of a
Court Bishop.
Qui cum Regi jam dicto nimium esset familiaris, constituerat eum Rex,
Procuratorem suum in Regno, ut evelleret, destrueret, raperet et disperderet,
et omnia omnium Bona ad Fisci commodum comportaret. Sed mortuo eodim Rege
iniquo and Henrico coronato, de Communi Consilio Gentis Anglorum, posuit Rex
eum in vinculis, etc.

Nor was the Concurrence of the Commons in Parliament requisite only to the
Imprisonment or Exauctoration of Bishops, Rights of the Kingdom, p.
118.133.140. etc.
the same Assent seems as necessary, and that too in a superior Degree, as to
their Election or Confirmation; diverse Instances of this appear in the
Historians of those Times: I shall select some to prove it then the Custom of
England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France, etc.

Anno 1113, Sax. Chr. p. 306.
Ralph, Bishop of Rochester, was elected Archbishop of Canterbury by the King,
Annuente Plebe and Clero; Eadmer. Hoveden.
this was done in Communi Consilio apud Windsore. And I find about the same
Time, That another Ralph, who had been ordained a Bishop in Scotland, was
rejected by all, because not elected with the Consent of the People, etc. And
notwithstanding his Consecration, was forced to wander about, and officiate as
a Coadjutor to other Bishops.

About the Year 1120, Malmsb.
one David was consecrated Bishop of Bangor, by the then Archbishop of
Canterbury; but it is expressly said, That he had been thereto elected, A Principe
Clero and Populo Walliae, i. e. by a Welsh Parliament. And in the same Reign
one Gregory, an Irish Abbot, was elected to the Bishopric of Dublin, a Rege
Hiberniae and Clero and Populo, an Irish Parliament. So that the Commons at
this Time, were a a constituent Part of the Scottish, Welsh and Irish
Parliaments, as well as with us in England.

And in the Year 1128, Vide Sax. Chro. sub An. 112.
I find that famed Scholar Gilbertus Universalis, to be elected and consecrated
Bishop of London, Annuente Clero and Populo. This seems at a Parliament at
London.

But this Right of the Commons in electing Bishops, does more clearly appear in
H. the 2d's Time, when all Historians agree it to be a general Custom both here
and in France (and seems founded on diverse express Canons of the Primitive
Church) Insomuch, as Mezeray, in his History, asserts, That until that Time (
i. e. the Middle of the 12th Century) The Voice of the People in electing
Bishops, was esteemed the Voice of God.

The Successors of K. H. 1. K. Steven Mat. Par. 51.
took their Coronation Oaths in a Form much more enlarged, for the Ease of the
Commons, than those of King Henry 1. or his two Predecessors: Thus K. Steven
swore, Coram Regni Magnatibus, i. e. the Lords and Commons convoked at London.
Ad meliorationem Legum juxta voluntatem and Arbitrium singulorum; which must
mean, That he would reform the Laws according to their common Consent in
Parliament; and afterward going to Oxford ( i. e. to hold his Parliament) Ibi
confirmavit Pacta, quae Deo and Populo, in Die Coronationis suae concesserat.
This I take to be meant of Danegelt, Hydage, Cornage, etc
See there some Particulars of his Oath, whereof the 3d is (Tallagia) Quae
autecessores ejus accipere consueverant in aeternum condonaret. And in the
following Year, on the Arrival of Rob. Earl of Gloucester, Ibid. 51.
this King was again sworn to observe the Good Laws (of the Realm) and thereof
granted his Charter; and see there the conditional Homage paid to the King by
that Earl.

I might here pursue this Thread of Coronation Oaths, in those of H. 2. R. 1.
K. John, Vide Ib. 42. in pede 51. and the Praef. to Privilegia Londini. Rights
of the Kingdom, p. 88.
etc. but my Intention is not to trace the Practices of Kings in taking
Coronation Oaths, an unlucky Blot remains in History as to those Princes I have
already named, it being generally observed, Impudenter fregerunt, etc.

An Author, who seems to be very conversant in Matters of this Nature, and
observes thus, The King's Oath is to confirm the just Laws which the Commons
(not the Lords) shall elect or choose (in Latin, Quas vulgus elegerit) and in
the old French Oaths of Edw. 2. and Edw. 3. it is, Les quels la Communaute aux
Eslue. And in the English Oaths of H. 8. and other Princes, See Sir R. Atkyns
ut supra p 28 29.
it is, Which the Commons of the Realm shall choose. And that the ancient Writs
for summoning the Commons, are, Nobiscum tractur' and consilium impensur' de
arduis Negotiis Regni.

And the same Author, The King dom's Rights, ut supra.
a little before, says thus, The Mirror (as well as Tacitus) shows how our
Lords were originally raised out of (and by) the Commons, and (with Bracton
Fleta, etc.) gives them a judicial Power over the Rest, etc. Nay, the Modus
Parliamenti, will not only tell us, That the Commons have better and stronger
Votes than the Lords; but that there may be a Parliament without the Prelates,
etc. For there was a Time, wherein there was neither Bishop nor Earl, and yet
there were Parliaments without them; but never without the Commons, and
concludes with the Impossibility of holding a Parliament without them; thus,
Parliamentum sine Communitate, tenebitur pro nullo, quamvis omnes alii status
plenarie ibidem intersuerint.

Lastly, Sir R. Atkyn's Power of Parliament, p. 32.
The Freeholders of England had originally the Election of the Conservators of
the Peace, who are become out of Date, by introducing Justices of Peace, who
have their Power, not by any Election of the Freeholders (as of Right they
ought) nor are they nominated by them, but by the King, and have their Power by
his special Commission, etc. (i. e. contrary to the Common Law) And how, and by
what Means, and in what tempered Times, this came about, may be read in
Lambards Eirenarcha. Lambards Justice, f. 16.19.20.147, etc.
It was done by Act of Parliament, in the Beginning of K. Edw. the 3d's Reign,
and in his Minority, when the Queen ( and Mortimer) ruled all.

The Freeholders did also originally, Sir R. Atkyns supra
and from all Antiquity, at their Folkmotes, or County Courts, choose their
Heretochii; and what were these? You may call them Lords Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants (or it may be Lieutenants Generals) For the Saxon Laws tell you
their Duty and Office, LL. Ed. Conf. 35. Vide ante
and that they were to be Ductores Exercitus, etc.

All these great Officers were chosen by the Freeholders, as our Knights of the
Shires now are, and as Conservators, or Justices of Peace formerly were, and as
Coroners and Verdredors (formerly Men of great Power) still are, by Writ at the
County Courts.

These were mighty Powers and Freedoms, Sir R. Atkyns supra See 4 Inst. 174.558.
and were enjoyed by the People, as anciently as any of our Records do reach;
which are more authentic Proofs (of our Constitution) than the Writings of
Modern Historians, etc. And do best show the native Freedom, which the People
had by the ancient Constitution of our Government, contrary to all the new
Doctrines of our late Writers; and prove, That the Privileges and Freedoms we
yet enjoy, are not mere Emanations of Royal Favor, as our Novellists would
impose upon us.

CHAP. II. Of the Dignity and Excellency of Parliaments.
THE Parliament is the Foundation and Basis of Government, Rushw Coll. 3d Part
Vol. 1. fo. 739
and consequently of the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom; as it creates the
Law by which we are ruled and governed in Peace and Quietness; so it preserves
the Law in Power and Authority: It watches over our Religion, that it be not
supplanted and exchanged by suppositious Innovations; or the Truth and
Substance of it eaten up with Formality, vain Pomp, and unnecessary Ceremonies.
It is the Conservative of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and the
Corrective of Injustice and Oppression, which by equal Right is distributed to
all, and every Man has that Benefit and Protection of Justice which is due to
him. It is that by which alone common Necessities can be provided for, and
Public Fears prevented; so that I may say, not only the Peace and Happiness,
and well Being, but the very Being of this Kingdom, can have no other Bottom to
stand upon, but the Parliament; it being the Foundation upon which the whole
Frame of the Commonwealth is built.

The Parliament is the Cabinet, Ib. 201.
wherein the chiefest Jewels both of the Crown and Kingdom are deposited. The
great Prerogative of the King, and the Liberty of the People, are most
effectually exercised and maintained by Parliaments, etc.

Parliaments are the Ground and Pillar of the Subject's Liberty, Ib. 587.
and that which only makes England a free Monarchy.

Parliaments are (says the Earl of Warwick, Ib. 752.
Admiral of the Sea, to John Pym, Esquire July 6, 1742) That Great Council, by
whose Authority the King's of England have ever spoken to their People.

Both Houses of Parliament are the Eyes in the Body Politic, Ib. 702.
whereby His Majesty is (ought) by the Constitution of this Kingdom, to discern
the Differences of those Things, which concern the Public Peace and Safety
thereof.

(The Parliament is the Mouth of the King and Kingdom, Vox Dei, etc.)

Parliaments (says K. C. 1. in his Declaration to all his Loving Subjects,
Rushw. Coll. 3d Part Vol. 2 p 40.
after his Victory at Edgehill, on the 23d of October, 1642) are the only
Sovereign Remedies for the growing Mischiefs which Time and Accidents have, and
will always beget in this Kingdom. That without Parliaments, the Happiness
cannot be lasting to King or People.

The Parliament is to be considered in three several Respects; first, Ib. p. 45.
As it is a Council, to advise; 2dly, As it is a Court, to judge; 3dly, As it
is the Body Representative of the whole Kingdom, to make, repeal, or alter Laws.

L'Assemblie de Troys Estates, Cestascavoir, Finch's Nemotecnia, lib. 2. c. 1.
fo. 21.
Roy, Nobility, and Commons, qui font le Corpse del Realm, est appel un
Parliament, and lour Decree, un Act de Parliament; Car sans touts troys (come
si soit fait per Roy and Seigneurs, mes rien parle del Commons) nest Ascun Act
de Parliament: i. e. The Assembly of the three Estates, to wit, the King, the
Nobility, and the Commons, which make the Body of the Realm, is called a
Parliament, and their Decree an Act of Parliament; for without all three (as if
it be done by the King and Lords, but speaks nothing of the Commons) there is
not any Act of Parliament.

On the Restoration of King Charles the 2d, the Commons resolved, May 1. 1660.
Journal Dom. Co.
That this House does agree with the Lords, and do own and declare, that,
according to the ancient and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the Government
thereof is, and ought to be, By King, Lords and Commons.

The Word Parliament is used in a double Sense.

1. English Liberties, p. 78.
Strictly, as it includes the Legislative Power of England, as when we say --
an Act of Parliament; add in this Acceptance it necessarily includes the King,
the Lords, and the Commons, each of which have a Negative Voice in making Laws,
and without their Joint Consent no new Laws can pass, that be obligatory to the
Subject.

2. Vulgarly, the Word is used for the Two Houses, the Lords and Commons; as
when we say, The King will call a Parliament; His Majesty has dissolved his
Parliament, etc.

This Court is the highest Court in England, Crompton's Juris. p. 1.
in which the Prince himself sits in Person, and (usually) comes there at the
Beginning of the Parliament, and at the End, and at any other Time when he
pleases, 4 Inst. 3.
during the Parliament. The King is the Caput Principium, and Finis of
Parliaments.

It appears by Precedents, That whenever a Parliament was sitting in the King's
Absence, Rushw. Coll. Vol. 3. Part 1. p. 772.
there was always a Custos Regni, or a Locum Tenens Regis, appointed.

This Court consists of the King's Majesty, 4 Inst. 1.
sitting there as in his Royal Politic Capacity, and of the three Estates of
the Realm, viz. the Lords Spiritual, Archbishops, and Bishops (who sit there
by Succession in respect of their Counties, Vide Dyfol. 60.
or Baronies, parcel of their Bishoprics) The Lords Temporal, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, who sit there by reason of their
Dignities, which they hold by Descent, or Creation (every one of which, both
Spiritual and Temporal, ought to have a Writ of Summons, ex debito Justitiae)
And the Commons of the Realm, whereof there be Knights of Shires, or Counties,
Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Boroughs; all which are respectively
elected by the Shires or Counties, Cities and Boroughs, by Force of the King's
Writ, ex Debito Justitiae, and none of them ought to be omitted: And these
represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, and are trusted for them.

The King, and these three Estates, Ib. 2.
are the great Corporation or Body Politic of the Kingdom, and do sit in two
Houses: King and Lords in one House, called, The Lords House; the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses in another House, called, The House of Commons.

That which is done by this Consent, Arc. Parl. 2.
is called firm, stable, and sanctum; and is taken for Law.

All the Judges of the Realm, Towns. Coll. 5.6. Vid. Cromp ton, 1.
Barons of the Exchequer of the Coif, the King's Learned Council, and the
Civilians Masters of the Chancery, are called to give their Assistance and
Attendance in the Upper House of Parliament; but they have no Voices in
Parliament, 4 Inst. 4.
but are made sometimes joint Committees with the Lords.

Every Englishman is intended to be there present (either in Person, Arc. Parl.
3. Smyth's Commonwealth, 74
or by Procuration, and Attorney) of what Preeminence, State, Dignity, or
Quality soever he be; from the Prince (be it King or Queen) to the lowest
Person in England. And the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every Man's
Consent.

In ancient Time, the Lords and Commons of Parliament did sit together, 2
Bulstro. 173. See Cotton's Records, 12.13.348. Post. 60.
in one and the same Room; but afterward they were divided, to sit in several
Rooms, and this was at the Request of the Commons; but yet still they remain
but one Court: And of all this I have seen the Records, one in the Time of H.
1. where all of them did sit together, and mention is there made of the Degrees
of their Seats; so in the Time of E. 3.39.

No Man ought to sit in the High Court of Parliament, 4 Inst. 45.
but he that has Right to sit there: For it is not only a personal Offense in
him that sits there without Authority, but a public Offense to the Court of
Parliament, and consequently to the whole Realm.

It is to be observed, 4 Inst. 2.
That when there is best Appearance, there is the best Success in Parliament.
At a Parliament 7 Hen. 5. of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, there appeared
but Thirty, and there was but one Act passed, of no great Weight. In 50 Ed. 3.
all the Lords appeared in Person, and not one by Proxy; and so many excellent
Things were done, that it was called Bonum Parliamentum.

At the Return of the Writs, Ib. 6.
the Parliament cannot begin, but by the Royal Presence of the King, either in
Person or Representation.

The King's Person may be represented by Commission under the Great Seal to
certain Lords in Parliament, authorizing them to begin the Parliament, or to
prorogue it, etc.

When a Parliament is called, Ib. 28.
and does sit, and is dissolved, without any Act of Parliament passed, or
Judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Convention.

It is an Observation proved by a great Number of Precedents, Ib. 32.
that never any good Bill was preferred, or good Motion made in Parliament
(whereof any Memorial was made in the Journal Book, or otherwise:) Tho
sometimes it succeeded not at the first, yet it has never died, but at one
Time or other has taken effect.

Matters of Parliament are not to be ruled by the Common Law. Ib. 17.


If Offenses done in Parliament might have been punished elsewhere, Ibid. Vide
1 Inst. Sect. 108.
it shall be intended, that at some Time it would have been put in Ure.

It does not belong to the Judges, Ib 50.
to judge of any Law, Custom, or Privilege of Parliament.

The Judges in Parliament are the King or Queen, Sir Tho. Smith's Commonwealth,
74
the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, the Commons represented by the Knights and
Burgesses of every Shire, Borough-Town. These all, or the greater Part of them,
and that with the Consent of the Prince for the Time being, must agree to the
making of Laws.

It is the just and constant Course of Parliament, Seld. Judic. 95.
to bring the Party accused to his Answer: Yea, tho he fly Justice, yet to send
out Proclamation into the Countries, that he appear at a Day, or else such and
such Judgments shall be given against him.

What is done by either House, Sir R. Atkyns Argument, etc. 14.
according to the Law and Usage of Parliament, is properly, and in the Judgment
of the Law, the Act of the whole Parliament: And what concerns the one, must of
Necessity concern the whole; not merely by Consequence, but by an immediate
Concernment, as being one and entire.

The three Estates of Parliament are one entire Body, and Corporation: Ib. 34,
41, 51, 55. Vide Rast. St. 2. and 3. E. 6. c. 36. Pref.
All their Powers and Privileges in the Right of them, and in the Title to
them, are entire, per my and per tout, and belonging to the whole Body of the
Parliament; tho in the Exercise of those Powers, and sometime in the Claim of
them, they are distinguished; and in the Practice of their Powers, they are in
many Things distributed into Parts.

All the Estates in Parliament are called by one common Name, Ibid.
as Commune Concilium Regni, Magna Curia, they are one Body Politic. It is said
by Fineux Chief Justice, That the Parliament at the Common Law consists of the
King, Lords and Commons, and they are but one Body corporate.

The Liberties and Franchises of the Parliament, in the Right of them, Ib. 55.
are entire, and due to both Houses, for both make up the Parliament.

Knighton (one of our best Historians) does notably disclose the ancient Ends
of calling Parliaments, Knyghton de Eventibus Augliae, l. 5. f. 2681. col. 1.2.
Pettyt's Rights, etc. in Pref. p. 43. 44. Hollings. f. 1055. col. 1.
in saying, Quod ex Antiquo Statuto, and Consuetudine landabili and approbata,
etc. That by an ancient Statute, and Custom laudable and approved, which no Man
could deny, the King was once in the Year, to convene his Lords and Commons to
his Court of Parliament, as to the highest Court in the whole Realm [ In qua
omnis Aequitas relucere deberet absque qualibet Scrupulositate vel nota,
tanquam Sol in Ascensu Meridiei; ubi Pauperes and Divites pro Refrigerio
Tranquilitatis and Pacis, and Repulsione Injuriarum, Refugium Infallibile
quaerere possent, ac etiam Errata Regni reformare, and de Statu and
Gubernatione Regis and Regni cum Sapientiori Concilio tractare; ut Inimici
Regis and Regni Intrinseci; and Hosts Extrinseci destruantur and repellantur,
qualiterquoque Onera incumbentia Regi and Regno levius ad Ediam Communitatis
Supportari potuerunt.] i. e. In which Court all Equity ought to shine forth
without the least Cloud or Shadow, like the Sun in its Meridian Glory; where
Poor and Rich, refreshed with Peace and Ease of their Oppressions, may always
find infallible and sure Refuge and Succor; the Grievances of the Kingdom
redressed, and the State of the King and Government of the Realm debated with
wiser Councels; the Domestic and Foreign Enemies of the King and Kingdom
destroyed and repelled, and to consider how the Charges and Burdens of both
may be sustained with more Ease to the People.

Minshieu, But these six Degrees were never allowed to be six Estates of
Parliament.
in his Etymological Dictionary tit. Parliament, says, In a Monument of
Antiquity, meaning the ancient Modus Tenendi Parliament, showing the Manner of
holding the Parliament in the Time of K. Edward, the Son of K. Etheldred, which
(as the Note says) was delivered by the discreeter Sort of the Realm, to
William the Conqueror, and allowed by him, it is said, That the Parliament
consisted of six Ranks or Degrees; it begins thus, Rex est Caput, Principium,
et Finis Parliamenti, and ita non habet Parem in suo Gradu: Et sic a Rege solo
primus Gradus est. Secundus Gradus est ex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, per Baroniam. Tertius Gradus est de Procuratoribus Cleri. Quartus
Gradus est de Comitibus, Baronibus, et aliis Magnatibus. Quintus Gradus est de
Militibus Comitatuum. Sextus Gradus est de Civibus et Burgensibus: Et ita est
Parliamentum ex sex Gradibus.

En Ancient temps tout le Parliament sea Insimul, Rolls 1. Report fol. 18. ante
54.
et le Separation fuit perle desire del Commons, Mes nient obstant ils font
forsque un Mese; jen aie view un Record, 30 H. 1. de lour degrees et seats, 39
E. 3. per Choke chapter Inst.

It is generally believed, Reformed vol. 2. p. 49.
That the whole Parliament sat together in one House, before E. 3. Time, and
then the inferior Clergy were a Part of that Body without Question. But when
the Lords and Commons were divided, the Clergy likewise sat in two Houses, and
granted Subsidies as well as the Temporalities.

My Lord Chief Justice Coke says, 1 Inst. Sect. 164. fol. 109.
The Parliament is the highest and most honorable, and absolute Court of
Justice of England, consisting of the King, the Lords of Parliament, and the
Commons And again, the Lords are here divided into two Sorts, viz. Spiritual
and Temporal. And the Commons are divided into three Parts, viz. Into Knights
of Shires or Counties, Citizens out of Cities, and Burgesses out of Boroughs.

In the High Court of Parliament, all the whole Body of the Realm, and every
particular Member thereof, either in Person, or by Representation (upon their
own Free Elections) are by the Laws of this Realm deemed to be personally
present, 1 Jac. 1. c. 1.

Sir Edward Cook, in his Epistle to the 9th Report, says, There is a threefold
End of this great and honorable Assembly of Estates: First, That the Subject
might be kept from offending, that is, That Offenses might be prevented both by
good and provident Laws, and by the due Execution thereof: Secondly, That Men
might live safely in Quiet: And thirdly, That all Men might receive Justice by
certain Laws and Holy Judgments, that is, to the End that Justice might be the
better administered, that Questions and Defects in Laws might be by this High
Court of Parliament planed and reduced to a Certainty, and that Claims of Right
might be adjudged and determined. This Court being the most supreme Court of
this Realm, is a Part of the Frame of the Common Laws, and in some Cases does
proceed legally, according to the ordinary Course of the Common Law.

The House of Lords cannot exercise any Power, as an House of Parliament, Sir
R. Atkin's Argument, f 51.
or as a Court for Error, without the House of Commons be in Being at the same
Time. Both Houses must be prorogued together, and dissolved together.

By the Law, Ib. 59.
Parliaments ought to be very frequent. Before the Conquest (as it is untruly
called) by the Law, Parliaments were to be held twice a Year, as appears by
King Edgar's Laws. So it was ordained by King Alfred. By the Stat. of 4 Ed. 3.
c. 14. Parliaments ought to be once a Year, and oftener, if need be. And in 36
Ed. 3. c. 10. to be once a Year, without Restriction, if need be. By 16 Car. 2.
c. 1. these Acts are declared to be in Force: And further, it is declared and
enacted, That the holding of Parliaments shall not be discontinued above three
Years at the most.

The Parliament is a Court of very great Honor and Justice, Plow. Com. 398. 11
Col. 14 The Parliament can do no Wrong. 6 Col. 27. Sir R. Atkyne Arg. 60.
of which no Man ought to imagine a Thing dishonorable.

An Offense committed in Parliament, is a very very high Offense; but the
higher it is, the more proper it is for their Judicature; and that Court is
armed with a Power to punish the highest Offenses, and the highest Offenders.

Yet a Parliament may err, Plow. Com. 397. 9 Col. 106. Ibid.
for they are not infallible; but the Law has provided a Remedy against those
Errors, and a way to reform them. A subsequent Parliament may reform the Errors
of a preceding Parliament.

But to say that they will be partial, Ibid.
or unjust, or corrupt, or do any Thing out of Malice, is to raise a Scandal
upon the whole Nation, Ibid
whose Representative they are.

If any Offense whatever be committed in the Parliament by any particular
Member; See Husband's, Collections, ante p. 1. and p. 67.
it is an high Infringment of the Right and Privilege of Parliament, for any
Person, or Court, to take the least Notice of it, till the House it self either
has punished the Offender, or referred them to a due, or proper Course of
Punishment. To do otherwise, would be to make the Highest Court an Offender,
and to charge them with Injustice.

Their Right and Privilege so far extends, Ib. 61.
that not only what is done in the very House, sitting the Parliament; but
whatever is done relating to them, or in pursuance of their Order, during the
Parliament, is no where else to be punished, but by Themselves, or a succeeding
Parliament, tho done out of the House.

Either House does ever for the most part show it self so careful to keep firm
Correspondence with the other, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 186.
as that when a Bill has passed either of the said Houses, and is sent to the
other, it does for the most part pass, and is neither dashed, nor altered,
without very great Cause upon mature deliberation, and usually also not without
Conference desired, and had thereupon; that so full Satisfaction may be given
to that House, from which the Bill so rejected, or altered, was sent.

Pessima Gens humani Generis always abhorred a Parliament: Preface to Petyt's
Miscel. Parlementar.
And the Reason thereof is demonstrative; because they all knew they should
then be called to an impartial and strict Account, and be punished according to
their Demerits.

It was said by the Lord Bacon to Sir Lionel Cranfeild, Ibid.
newly made Lord Treasurer, That he would recommend to his Lordship, and in him
to all other great Officers of the Crown, one considerable Rule to be carefully
observed, which was, Remember, a Parliament will come.

The King at no Time stands so highly in his Estate Royal, Petyt 's Miscel.
Parliament. 6. Vide Cromp. Jur. 10.
as in the Time of Parliament; wherein the King as Head, and they as Members,
are conjoined and knit together in one Body Politic: So as whatsoever Injury
(during that Time) is offered to the meanest Member of the House, is to be
judged as done against the King's Person, and the whole Court of Parliament.

The Prerogative of Parliament is so great, Ibid.
That all Acts and Processes coming out of any inferior Courts, must cease, and
give place to that, the highest.

Statutes in England are made not only by the Princes Pleasure, Fortescue 42.
but also by Assent of the whole Realm: So that of Necessity they must procure
the Wealth of the People, and in no wise tend to their hindrance.

It cannot otherwise be thought, Ibid.
but that they are replenished with much Wit and Wisdom, seeing they are
ordained, not by the Device of one Man alone, or of a hundred wise Counselors
only, but of more than three hundred learned Men ( now 558) that ought to be
freely Elected by the People.

Acts of Parliament are made with such Gravity, Wisdom, 11. Co. 63. Fortesc. c.
18. c. 40.
and Universal consent of all the Realm, and for advantage of the public
Wealth; that they are not from the General and ambiguous Words of a Subsequent
Act to be abrogated.

Acts of Parliament have been tender of racking the King's Subjects for Words,
1. Mod. Rep. 234
and the Scripture Discountenances Men's being made Transgressors for a Word.

Every Proviso in an Act, 1. Siderf. 155.
is not a determination what the Law was before; for they are often added for
the Satisfaction of those that are ignorant of the Law.

The King of England can neither by himself or his Ministers, Fortescu. p. 84.
impose (any) Tallages or other Burdens on his Subjects, or alter their Laws,
or make new Laws, without Assent of the whole Kingdom in Parliament.

CHAP. III. Of the Power and Authority of Parliaments.
THE Parliamentary Power, Hollinsh. Vol. 1. p. 173.
as it is in the Legislative Capacity, consisting of the Agreement and Act of
all the three Estates, King, Lords and Commons, to make it Binding; it imports
no less than the united Consent of all and every Person of the Kingdom; and
under this Notion its Power is Unlimited and Universal; its Authority is the
most unerring and firm support of Monarchy and Government, and has been ever
used as the only Expedient, to accommodate the differences of Pretenders and
Competitors, to arbitrate and decree, not only the Right and Possession, but
even the Inheritance and Reversion of the Regal Power, to succor and defend
the King and Kingdom, against all possibility of Injury or Incroachment that
might be Intended against or Usurped upon it, or its Authority; to decree the
Nations Liberties, ascertain Property, and to establish an unquestionable
Peace, and Security to all the People, both from the danger of Grievances at
Home, or the Assaults of foreign Power.

In this capacity it has Power above the Law itself, Hollinshead c. 1. vol. 1.
p. 173.
having Power to alter the common Law of England, to declare the meaning of any
doubtful Laws, to repeal old Patents, Grants or Charters, and Judgments
whatsoever of the King, or any other Court of Justice if erroneous or illegal,
and extends so far as finally to oblige both King and People, to punish
Offenders of all Sorts, to examine into the corruptions of Religion, and either
to disanul or reform it.

Anno 1626. 2. Rushw. Coll. vol. 1. p. 245.
Car. the Commons in their Remonstrances declare, that it has been the
ancient, constant, and undoubted Right and Usage of Parliaments, to question
and complain of all Persons of what degree soever, found grievous to the
Commonwealth, in abusing the Power and Trust committed to them by the
Sovereigns, a Course approved of by frequent Presidents in the best and most
glorious Reigns, appearing both in Records and Histories, etc.

In 30. E. 3. 7. H. 4. Rot. Parl. No 31 and 32.
the Parliament accused John de Gaunt, the King's Son, and Lord Latimer, and
Lord Nevil, for misadvising the King; and they went to the Tower for it.

In 11. Rushw. Ib. p. 627.
H. 4. No 13. the Council are complained of, and are removed from the King; for
that they mewed-up the King, and disuaded him from the common Good. In 4. H. 3.
and 27. E. 3. and 13. R. 2. the Parliament moderateth the King's Prerogative,
and nothing grows to an Abuse, says Sir Edward Coke, but the Parliament has
Power to treat of and Correct it.

And King James the 1st. Idem. p. 62^.
put the Commons assembled in Parliament, in mind, that it would be the
greatest unsaithfulness, and breach of Duty to his Majesty, and of the Trust
committed to them by the Country that could be, if in setting forth the
Grievances of the People, and the Condition of all the Petitions of this
Kingdom from whence they come; they did not deal clearly with him, without
sparing any Persons how near, and dear soever they were unto him; if they were
hurtful, or dangerous to the Commonwealth.

The most High and Absolute Power of the Realm of England, Sir Tho. Smith's
Commonwealth, l. 2. c. 2. p. 72. Arcana Parl. 1.
consists in the Parliament. For as in War, where the King himself in Person,
the Nobility, the rest of the Gentility, and the Yeomanry are, is the Force and
Power of England: So in Peace and Consultation, where the Prince is to give
Life, and the last and highest Commandment, the Barony or Nobility for the
higher; the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Commons for the lower part of the
Commonwealth; the Bishops for the Clergy be present to advertise, consult and
show what is good and necessary for the Commonwealth, and to consult together;
and upon mature deliberation; every Bill or Law being thrice read and disputed
in either House, the other two parts, first each a part, Ibid p. 73.
and after the Prince himself in presence of both the Parties does consent
unto, and allows, that it is, the Prince's and whole Realm's Deed; whereupon
justly no Man can complain, but must accommodate himself to find it good, and
obey it.

Thus, the concurrent Consent of these three Estates when reduced to writing,
Inst. Leg. p. 34.
and passed in Parliament, is as it were a Tripartite Indenture, between King,
Lords and Commons; and that which is so done by this Consent is called firm,
stable and sanctum, and is taken for Law.

As to the Power of Parliaments. Sir Tho. Smith. ibid. Arc. Parl. 2. Vide
Crompt. Jur. 3.


1. It abrogateth old Laws. 2. Makes new Laws. 3. Gives order for things
past. 4. Directs things hereafter to be followed. 5. Changes Right and
Possessions of private Men. 6. Legitimateth Bastards. 7. Establishes Forms of
Religion. 8. Alters Weights and Measures. 9. Gives Form of Succession to the
Crown. 10. Defines of doubtful Rights whereof is no Law already made. 11.
Appoints Subsidies, Tallies, Taxes and Impositions. 12. Gives most free
Pardons and Absolutions. 13. Restores in Blood and Name. 14. And as the
highest Court condemns or absolveth them who are put upon their Trial.
In short, Ibid.
all that ever the People of Rome might do, either Centuriatis, Comitiis or
Tributis, the same may be done by the Parliament of England; which
represents, and has the Power of the whole Realm, both the Head and Body:
For every Englishman is intended to be there present, either in Person, or by
Procuration, and Attorney, of what pre-eminence, state, dignity or quality
soever he be, from the Prince (be he King or Queen) to the lowest Person of
England. And the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every Man's consent.

As to its Power over both the Statute and Common Law of this Realm, Rastal's
Statutes, fol. 546. 25 H. 8. c. 21.
you will be best informed of it from the memorable words of an Act of
Parliament itself, viz. Whereas this Realm recognizing no Superior under God
but only the King, has been, and is free from Subjection to any Man's Laws,
but to such as have been devised, made, and ordained within this Realm, for the
Wealth of the same; or to such other as by Sufferance of the King and his
Progenitors, the People of this Realm have taken at their free Liberty by their
own Consent to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long Use and
Custom to the Observance of the same; not as to the Observance of the Laws of
any Foreign Prince, Potentate or Prelate, but as to the Custom and ancient Laws
of this Realm, originally established as Laws of the same, by the said
Sufferance, Consents and Custom, and none otherwise. It stands therefore with
Natural Equity and Good Reason that all and every such Laws Humane, made within
this Realm by the said Sufferance, Consents and Custom, that the King and the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons representing the whole State of
this Realm in the most High Court of Parliament, have full Power and Authority,
not only to dispense, but also to authorize some Elect Person or Persons, to
dispense with those and all other Human Laws of this Realm, and with every one
of them, as the Quality of the Persons and Matter shall require; And also the
said Laws, and every of them to abrogate, adnul, amplify, or diminish, as it
shall be seem to the King, and the Nobles and Commons of this Realm, present in
Parliament, meet and convenient for the Wealth of this Realm.

The Power and Jurisdiction of the Parliament for making of Laws in proceeding
by Bill, 4 Inst. 36.
is so transcendent, and absolute, as it cannot be confined, either for Causes
or Persons within any Bounds. Si Antiquitatem spectes, est vetustissima: si
Dignitatem, est honoratissima: si Jurisdictionem, est capacissima.

The whole Parliament (which should best know its own Power) affirms, Speed's
Hist. f. 914 Rot. Parl. 1 R. 3. In Cotton's Abridgment f. 713, 714
that the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, and the People of this Land
of such a Nature and Disposition, as Experience teaches, that the
Manifestation and Declaration of any Truth or Right made by the Three Estates
of this Realm assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of the same, makes,
before all other things most Faith, and certain quieting of Men's Minds, and
removes the Occasion of Doubts.

Parliamentum omnia Potest, says the 4 Inst. 74.76.

The Parliament is of an absolute and unlimited Power in things Temporal, Sir
Rob. Atkyns's Argument etc. 50. Ibid.
within this Nation.

The Parliament has the highest and most sacred Authority of any Court: it
has an absolute Power: It is the highest Court in the Realm, as is
acknowledged by our most learned and gravest Writers and Historians.

A Man gives Land to one, and to his Heirs Males; Crompton 20. b. Dr. and
Student.
in that Case his Heirs Females shall also inherit; and this was adjudged in
Parliament.

One of the fundamental and principal Ends of Parliaments was, Petit's Preface
to Ancient Rights, etc. p. 41.
for the Redress of Grievances, and easing the Oppressions of the People. And
the Mirror of Justices says, 6.1. p. 4. and 5. That Parliaments were instituted
to hear and determine the Complaints of the wrongful Acts of the King, the
Queen, and their Children; and especially of those Persons against whom the
Subjects otherwise could not have common Justice for wrongs so by them done.

Covient per droit que le Roy ust Companions pur oyer et terminer aux
Parliaments trestouts les breues et plaints de Torts de le Roy, de la Roigne,
Horn's Mirror. p. 9.
et de lour Enfants, et de Eux specialment de que Torts len ne poit aver
autrement Common droit. (i. e.) The King ought by Law to have Companions or
associates, to hear and determine in Parliament of all Writs and Plaints of all
Torts or Wrongs, as well of the King as of the Queen, and their Children; and
especially of those (Great Ones) where one cannot otherwise have Common right
for those wrongs.

The greater the Persons are, Sir Rob. Atkyns Argument, p. 45.
if they are in the Rank of Subjects, they must be subject to the King's Laws,
and they are the more proper for the Undertaking, and Encounter of this High
Court. It will not be impar congressus.

King John had resigned up the Crown of England to the Pope, Id. 37.
by the Hand of Pandulphus his Legate, Mat. Paris
and sordidly submitted to take the Crown at his Hand again, Rot. Parl. 40. E.
3. No 7. 8.
at a yearly Tribute. In the Reign of our Noble King Edward the Third, the Pope
demanded this Rent, and all the Arrears. But the Prelates, Dukes, Counts,
Barons, and Commons resolved, that neither the King, nor any other, could put
the Realm, nor the People thereof, into Subjection, sans l'assent de eux,
without their Assent.

This intimates, Sir R. Atkyn's Arg. p. 50.
that with their joint Consent the Crown may be disposed of. And it was the
highest Resolution in Law, in one of the highest Points in Law, concerning the
King's claim of an Absolute Power, and in a Time, when the Pope was in his
Meridian Height.

It is the proper Work of this Supreme Court to deal with such Delinquents,
Ibid.
as are too high for the Court of King's- Bench, or other ordinary Courts.

Daughters, and Heirs apparent of a Man, or Woman, 4 Inst. 36.
may by Act of Parliament inherit, during the Life of the Ancestor. Ante 69.


It may adjudge an Infant or Minor to be of full Age. Ibid.


It may Attaint a Man of Treason after his Death. Ibid.


It may Naturalize a mere Alien, Ibid.
and make him a Subject born.

It may bastard a Child, Ibid.
that by Law is Legitimate, ( viz. begotten by an Adulterer, the Husband being
within the four Seas.)

It may Legitimate one that is Illegitimate, Ibid.
and born before Marriage, absolutely: It may Legitimate secundum quid,
etiamque simpliciter.

21 Rich. 2. The Lords Appellants accused the Duke of Gloucester of Treason;
Selden's Judicature 91.
and though they knew he was dead, they prayed the King that he might be brought
to his Answer. The King sent his Writ, etc. they desired Judgment, and had it.

So Robert Possington was impeached at the Parliament at Westminster, Id. 95.
and found Guilty, long Time after he was dead, and so forfeited his Estate.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster had by Catherine Swinford, 4 Inst. 36.
Cotten's Record p. 363.
before Marriage, four illegitimate Children, Henry, John, Thomas, and Joan. At
the Parliament holden 20 Rich. 2. the King by Act of Parliament, in Form of a
Charter, does Legitimate the three Sons, and Joan the Daughter.

Thomas Cromwell, Vide post. 4 Inst. 36.
Earl of Essex was attainted by Parliament, and forthcoming to be heard, and
yet never called to answer in any of the Houses of Parliament; and resolved by
the Judges, that if one be Attainted by Parliament, it can never come in
question after, whether he were called, or not called to answer; for the Act of
Attainder being passed by Parliament did bind.

Where by Order of Law a Man cannot be Attainted of High Treason, Id. 39.
unless the Offense be in Law, High Treason; he ought not to be Attainted by
general Words of High Treason by Authority of Parliament (as sometimes has
been used) but the High Treason ought to be especially expressed; seeing that the
Court of Parliament is the highest and most honorable Court of Justice, and
ought to give example to inferior Courts

Acts against the Power of the Parliament subsequent bind not. Id. 42.
It is against the Power and Jurisdiction of the Parliament, the Liberty of the
Subject, and unreasonable, ( i. e. Illegal.)

The Stat. 11. Rich. 2. c. 5. Id. 42.
That no Person should attempt to revoke any Ordinance then made, was repealed;
for that such Restraint is unreasonable, etc.

An Act 11 Rich. 2, c. 3. Ibid.
That no Man, against whom any Judgment or Forfeiture was given, should sue for
Pardon, or Grace, etc. was holden to be unreasonable, without Example, and
against the Law and Custom of Parliament, and therefore void.

The Authority of the High Court of Parliament to be committed to a few (as in
21 Rich. 2. c. 16. Ibid.
) is holden to be against the Dignity of a Parliament, and that no such
Commission ought to be granted.

Though it be apparent, what transcendent Power and Authority the Parliament
has, Id. 43
and though diverse Parliaments have attempted to bar, restrain, suspend, qualify,
or make void the Power of subsequent Parliaments; yet could they never effect
it: for the latter Parliament has ever Power to abrogate, suspend, qualify,
explain, or make void the former in the Whole, or in any Part thereof,
notwithstanding any Words of Restraint, Prohibition, or Penalty in the former.
For it is a Maxim in the Law of Parliament, Quod Leges posteriores priores
contrarias abrogant.

An Act of Parliament does include every Man's Consent, Hobart 256.
as well to come (and unborn Persons) as those present.

The Sovereign Power of this High Court of Parliament is such, Hakewel 86.
that although the King's Majesty has many great Privileges and Prerogatives,
yet many Things are not effectual in Law, to pass under the great Seal by the
King's Charter, without the consent of Parliament, as was resolved by all the
Judges in the Princes case.

The King by his Letters Patents may make a Denizen; Id. 87. Bro. Denizen. No
9. 36. H. 8.
but cannot Naturalize him to all purposes, as an Act of Parliament may do.

If a Man be Attainted of Felony, Hakewel 89.
or Treason, by Verdict, Outlawry, Confession, etc. his Blood is corrupted
(which is a perpetual and absolute Disability for him, or his Posterity, to
claim any Hereditament in Fee-simple, either as, Heir to him, or any Ancestor
paramount him) and he shall not be restored to his Blood, without Parliament.
And yet the King may give to any attainted Person his Life, by this Charter of
Parliament.

The King cannot alter the Common Law, Id. 90.
or the general Customs of the Realm (as Gavelkind, Borough-English, or the
like) without consent of Parliament.

Although a King have a Kingdom by Descent, Ibid.
yet seeing by the Law of that Kingdom he does inherit that Kingdom, he cannot
change those Laws of himself, without Consent of Parliament.

By the Laws of this Kingdom, Ibid.
the King cannot by his Proclamation alter the Law; but the King may make
Proclamtion, that he shall incur the Indignation of his Majesty, that
withstands it. But the Penalty of not obeying his Proclamation, may not be upon
Forfeiture of his Goods, his Lands, or his Life, without Parliament.

Le Parliament d'Engleterre ne lia Ireland, quoad Terras suas, Brook 123. 91.
Vide 20 H. 6.9. Crompton 22. b.
quar ils ont Parliament la: mes il poient eux lier quant al Chooses transitory,
come eskipper de Lane, ou Merchandise, al intent de ceo carrier al auter Lieu
ultra Mare.

The Parliament of England cannot bind Ireland, Quere infra
as to their Lands, for they have a Parliament there; but they may bind them,
as to Things transitory, as the shipping of Wool, or Merchandise, to the intent
to carry it to another Place beyond the Sea. 4 Inst. 350.


Sometimes the King of England called his Nobles of Ireland to come to his
Parliament of England, etc. And by special Words the Parliament of England may
bind the Subjects of Ireland.

The Lords in their House have Power of Judicature; Id. 23.
and the Commons in their House have Power of Judicature; and both Houses
together have Power of Judicature.

This Power is best understood by reading the Judgments and Records of
Parliament at large, Ibid.
and the Journals of the House of Lords, and 6 H. 8. c. 16. Rast. 429, 430.
Vaughan 285.
the Book of the Clerk of the House of Commons, which is sometimes also styled
a Record.

If Inconveniences necessarily follow out of the Law, only the Parliament can
cure them.

If a Marriage be declared by Act of Parliament to be against God's Law, Id.
327.
we must admit it to be so: for by a Law (that is by an Act of Parliament) it
is so declared.

In many Cases Multitudes are bound by Acts of Parliament, Id. 14.
which are not Parties to the Elections of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, as
all they that have no Freehold, or have Freehold in ancient Demesne, and all
Women having Freehold, or no Freehold; and Men within the Age of One and
twenty Years, Hob. 256.
etc. (and we may add Persons unborn.)

It is declared by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, (upon Demand made
of them on the Behalf of the King) That they could not assent to any Thing in
Parliament, that tended to the disherison of the King, and his Crown, whereunto
they were sworn.

The Expounding of the Laws does ordinarily belong to the Reverend Judges;
Hakewel 94.
and in Case of greatest Difficulty, or Importence, to the High Court of
Parliament.

Errors by the Law in the Common Pleas are to be corrected in the King's Bench;
4 Inst. 22. Vid. Stat. 1 Jac. 1 c. 1.
and of the King's Bench in the Parliament, and not otherwise, i. e. where the
Proceedings are by original Writ. Instit. Leg. 171.172.
For if they are by Bill, they may be corrected in the Exchequer Chamber by St.
27 Eliz. c. 8. from whence a Writ of Error lies to the Parliament.

Actions at Common Law are not determined in this High Court of Parliament,
Selden's Judicature 2.
yet Complaints have ever been received in Parliaments, as well of private
Wrongs, as public Offenses. And according to the Quality of the Person, and
Nature of the Offense, they have been retained, or referred to the Common Law.

There be diverse Precedents of the Trial of Bishops by their Peers in
Parliament, Id. 4.5.
as well for Capital Offenses, as Misdemeanors, whereof they have been accused
in Parliament. And so there have been of Commoners.
As the Archbishop of Canterbury, 15 Ed. 3. n. 6, 7, 8. and ibid. postea, 44.
and 39. and ibid 17 E. 3.22. And the Bishop of Norwich, 7 Ric. 2. for
Misdemeanors: So were the Bishops of York and Chichester tried for Treason by
their Peers in Parliament, upon the Appeal of the Lords Appellants, 11 R. 2.

And Anno 21 R. 2. The Commons Accused the Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason
by their Peers in Parliament, upon the Appeal of the Lords Appellants, 11 R. 2.
And

Anno 21 R. 2. The Commons accused the Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason,
and the Temporal Lords judged him a Traitor, and banished him.

But if a Bishop be accused out of Parliament, he is to be tried by an ordinary
Jury of Freeholders; for his Honor is not inheritable, as is the Temporal
Peers out of Parliament; yet in all other Matters, save that only of their
Trial, they have Privilege; as no Day of Grace to be granted against them in
any Suit, A Knight to be returned upon the Panel where a Bishop is Party, and
no Process in a Civil Action to be awarded against his Body, and the like; And
by this it appears what Persons are, de Jure, triable by the Lords in
Parliament, viz. their Peers only (which Bishops are not.)

Judgments in Parliaments for Death have generally been strictly guided per
Legem Terrae (i.e. Lex Parliamenti. d. 168.
)

The Parliament has three Powers; Sir Rob. Atkyns Argument, etc. 36.
a Legislative, in Respect of which they are called the three Estates of the
Realm: a Judicial, in respect of this it is called Magna Curia, or the High
Court of Parliament: a Counselling Power, hence it is called, Commune Concilium
Regni.

The Parliament gives Law to the Court of King's Bench, Id. 49.
and to all other Courts of the Kingdom: and therefore it is absurd, and
preposterous that it should receive Law from it, and be subject to it. The
greater is not judged of the less.

All the Courts of Common Law are guided by the Rule of the Common Law; Id. 50
but the Proceedings of Parliament are by quite another Rule. The Matters in
Parliament are to be discussed and determined by the Custom and Usage of
Parliament, and the Course of Parliament, and neither by the Civil, nor the
Common Law, used in other Courts. Ibid.


The Judges of all the Courts of Common Law in Westminster are but Assistants,
and Attendants to the High Court of Parliament; And shall the Assistants judge
of their Superiors.

The High Court of Parliament is the dernier Refort, Ibid.
and this is generally affirmed, and held; but it is not the last if what they
do may yet again be examined, and controlled.

Because the High Court of Parliament proceeds by a Law peculiar to that High
Court, Id 52.
which is called, Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti (and not by the Rules of the
Common Law) and consists in the Customs, Usages, and Course of Parliament; no
Inferior Court can, for this very Reason, judge, or determine of what is done
in Parliament, or by the Parliament.

A Statute, Arc. Parl. 85.
or Act of Parliament need not be proclaimed, for the Parliament represents the
Body of the whole Realm, for there are Knights and Burgesses of every County,
and Town; But otherwise where it is ordained by the Act, that it shall be
proclaimed.

A Man Attainted of Felony, Id. 100.
or Treason, shall not be restored in Blood without Parliament.

28 Ed. 1. Petyt's Appendix to Miscel. Parliam. n. 38.
A Truce being concluded between the English and French, by King Edward's
Ambassadors (who therein had dishonourably agreed to include the Scots) the
Ambassadors at the ensuing Parliament were sharply rebuked and corrected, not
only by the King himself, the Prelates and Nobles, but by the Commons.

The Court of Parliament was the Sanctuary, Turner's Case of Bankers, 36.
whether the distressed Subject in his Exigence fled for Shelter, and Refuge,
and always found it.

Into the Sacred Bosom of Parliaments it was, Ibid Vide Several Precedent and
Records
that they poured out their Sighs and Groans with constant Success; and when in
Cases of high Nature the Common Law was arrested, and stopped in her proceedings,
Parliaments evermore ran into there Rescue, and in dutiful ways discharged those
Locks and Bars which had been unjustly fastened on the Exchequer.

The Right of the Crown of England, Stat. Prove. 25 Ed. 3. Rast. Stat. 99.
and the Law of the said Realm is such, that upon the Mischiefs and Damages
which happen to the Realm, the King ought, and is bound by his Oath (of the
Accord of his People in Parliament) thereof to make Remedy, etc.

To conclude this Chapter, Le Parliament ad Absolute poiar en touts Cases, come
a fair Leys, d'adjuger Matters en Ley, a trier vie del home, a reverser Errors
en Bank le Roy; especialment lou est ascun Commune Mischief que l'ordinary
Course del Ley n'ad ascun means a remedier; en tiel Case ceo est le proper
Court. Et tonts chooses que ils font sont come Judgments. Et si le Parliament
mesme err, Finche's Nomotecnia l. 2. c. 1. f. 21. 22.
come il poet, ceo ne poet estre reverse en ascun Lieu forsque en le
Parliament. Which, because it is omitted (as several other things are in the
Book translated into English) I will thus give it the Reader that does not
understand French.

The Parliament has Absolute Power in all Cases, as to make Laws, to adjudge
Matters in Law, to try Men upon their Lives, to reverse Errors in the King's
Bench; especially where there is any Common Mischief which the ordinary Course
of the Law has not any means to remedy, in such Case this is the proper Court.
And all things which they do are as Judgments. And if the Parliament it self
errs, as it may, that cannot be reversed in any place but in Parliament.

Sir Robert Cotton, See Sir Robert Cot. Treatise of Parliaments p. 44, 45 etc
in his Discourse of the Privilege and Practice of Parliaments, says thus; by
Parliaments all the wholesome Fundamental Laws of this Land were, and are
Established and Confirmed.

By Act of Parliament the Pope's Power and Supremacy (in this Kingdom) and the
Romish Superstition and Idolatry, were abrogated and abolished.

By Act of Parliament God's true Religion, Worship and Service are (or may be)
established and maintained.

By Act of Parliament, the two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, with other
Cities and Towns, have had many Privileges and Immunities granted 'em.

By Parliament, one Pierce Gaveston, a great Favorite and Misleader of King
Ed. 2. was removed and Banished; and afterward by the Lords Executed.

(Also by Parliament, the Spencer's Favorites and Misguiders of the same King,
were Condemned, etc. and so was Delapool, in H. 6. Time, and others since.)

By Parliament, Empson and Dudley, two notable Polers of the Commonwealth, by
exacting Penal Laws on the Subjects were Discovered, and afterward Executed.

By Parliament, the Damnable Gunpowder Treason (hatched in Hell) is recorded,
to be had in Eternal Infamy.

By Parliament, one Sir Giles Mompesson, a Caterpiller and Poler of the
Commonwealth, by exacting upon In-holders, etc. was discovered, degraded and
Banished by Proclamation.

By Parliament, Sir Francis Bacon, Note the Censure on the late E. of
Macclesfield and Quere.
made by K. James 1. Baron of Verulam, Viscount of St. Albans, and Lord
Chancellor of England, was for Bribery, etc. discovered and displaced.

By Parliament, Sir John Bennet, one of the Judges of the Prerogative Court,
being Pernicious to the Commonwealth in his Place, was discovered and
displaced.

By Parliament, Lyonel Cranfield, sometime a Merchant of London, and made by K.
James 1. Earl of Middlesex, and Lord Treasurer of England, being hurfull in his
Place to the Commonwealth, was discovered and displaced.

By Parliament, Note.
Sir Francis Mitchell, a jolly Middlesex Justice of Peace, in the Suburbs of
London, another Cankerworm of the Commonwealth, by Corruption in exacting an
Execution of the Laws upon poor Alchouse-keepers, Victuallers, etc. was
discovered and degraded from his Knighthood, and utterly disabled from being a
Justice of Peace.

By Parliament, Ib. p. 46.
the Spanish Frauds were discovered, and by an Act of Parliament the two
Treaties ( i. e. touching the Spanish Match, and for restoring the Palatinate,
both which had cost the King and his Subjects much Money and much Blood) were
Dissolved and Annihilated.

And we may remember, (says the same Author) That, that sage Councellor of
State Sir William Cecil, Lord Burley, and Lord Treasurer of England, was often
Times heard to say, He knew not what a Parliament might not do; which saying
was approved by K. James 1. and is cited by him in one of his public Speeches.

The Parliament (says one) is of an absolute and unlimited Power in all Things
Temporal within this Nation. Sir Robers Atkins's Argument, p. 50. Bract. fo.
34. Fleta, p. 2. 17.
Another says, Parliamentum omnia potest. Bracton and Fleta both affirm Rex
habet Superiorem in Regno. Scilicet Curiam suam i. e. Comites and Barons
(doubtless the Lords and Commons) qui apponuntur Regi ut si Rex sine Fraeno, i.
e. sine Lege fuerit, Debent ei Fraenum apponere etc. Nay, some great Authors
have asserted, Quod Concilium hoc (i. e. Parliamentum) Facultatem habet
Deponendi Regem Malum and Substituendi Novum; See Mat. Paris per Watts, page
498. Knighton de Eventibus Angliae p. 2683. in the December. Scriptores.
and that this Power is claimed ex antiquo Statuto, etc. Knighton has a
remarkable Passage concerning the Execution of that ancient Statute in the
Cases of E. II. and R. II. which at this Time I forbear to Transcribe or
Translate.

Note, It appears by Mat. Paris, p. 99. etc. That the Commons were then ( i. e.
15 H. II.) summoned to the Parliament held at Clerkenwell; and that they also
were a Part of the Parliament in the Time of K. H. I. See before, p. 34. 35.
etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the House of Lords in general.
THE House of Peers, Rushw. eol. vol. 3. part. 1. p. 777.
are the hereditary Counselors of the (King and) Kingdom, as the House of
Commons are the representative Body of the whole Commons of the Kingdom.

There certainly cannot in the whole World be seen a more illustrious Court,
Nalson, 566.
than this high and honorable Assembly of Peers in Parliament; nor any Thing
of greater Benefit and Advantage to the Subjects of this Monarchy.

No Lord of Parliament can sit there, Sir Simon d'Ewes's Jour. 11. Col. 1.
till he be full One and twenty Years, unless by special Grace of the Prince;
and that very rarely, unless they be near upon the Age of Twenty one Years at
least.

A Bishop elect may sit in Parliament, Ibid. ante 3, 4, 43, 44.
as a Lord thereof, ( i. e. if called thereto by Writ,) Q. For he is not
properly a Peer, (or even a Bishop,) till his Temporalties are granted to him.

If the King by his Writ calls any Knight or Esquire to be a Lord of the
Parliament, 4 Inst. 44.
he cannot refuse to serve the King there in communi illo Consilio, for the
Good of his Country.

It lies in the Favor of the Prince, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 2.4. Col. 2.
to make Heirs of Earldoms Members of the upper House, by summoning them
thither by Writ; but then they take not their Place there as the Sons of Earls,
but according to the Antiquity of their Fathers Baronies.

The Archbishop of Canterbury is the first Peer of the Realm. Id. 140. Col. 1.


The Earl-Marshal's Place in Parliament is betwixt the Lord Chamberlain, Id.
535. Col. 2.
and the Lord Steward. See the Statute.

No Man ought to sit in that high Court of Parliament, 4 Inst. 45.
but he that has Right to sit there.

If a Lord depart from Parliament, Id. 44.
without License, it is an Offense done out of the Parliament, and is finable
by the Law.

4 June 1642, Rushw. Col. Vol. 3. part 1.737. Post.
upon an Order of the House of Lords, to those Lords that had left the
Parliament, and repaired to the King at York, requiring their Appearance as
Delinquents, in the Answer they returned to it, there are these Words, We do
conceive, that it is the apparent, usual and inherent Right, belonging to the
Peerage of England, that in the highest Misdemeanors whatsoever, no Peer is to
answer to the first Charge, but in his own Person, and not upon the first
Charge to come to the Bar.

Any Lord of the Parliament, 4 Inst. 12.
by License of the King, upon just Cause to be absent, may make a Proxy.

43 Eliz. 1601, Towns. Col. 135. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 605.
agreed by the Lords, That the ancient Course of the House is, That the Excuses
of such Lords, as should happen to be absent from the House, upon reasonable
Occasions, ought to be done by some of the Peers, and not by other Information.

Anno Domini 1626, Rushw. Col. Vol. 1. p. 365.
2 Car. 1. resolved upon the Question by the whole House, Nemine dissentiente,
That the Privilege of this House is, That no Lord of Parliament, the
Parliament sitting, or within the usual Time of Privileges of Parliament, is
to be imprisoned or restrained, without Sentence or Decree of the House, unless
it be for Treason or Felony, or refusing to give Surety of the Peace. N. B.
This was upon the King's having committed the Earl of Arundel to the Tower,
without expressing the Cause of his Commitment.

All the Privileges which do belong to those of the Commons House of
Parliament, Hakewell 82.
a fortiori, do appertain to all the Lords of the upper House; for their
Persons are not only free from Arrests, during the Parliament, but during their
Lives: Nevertheless, the original Cause is, by Reason they have Place and Voice
in Parliament. And this is manifest by express Authorities, grounded upon
excellent Reasons in the Books of Law.

A Proxy is no more than the constituting of some one or more by an absent
Lord, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journals 5. Col. 2.
to give his Voice in the upper House, when any Difference of Opinion, and
Division of the House shall happen; for otherwise, if no such Division fall
out, it never comes to be questioned, or known, to whom such Proxies are
directed; nor is there any the least Use of them, save only to show, prove, and
continue the Right which the Lords of the upper House have, both to be
summoned, and to give their Voices in the same House, either in their Persons,
or by their Proxies.

As many Proxies as any Peer has, Ibid. Col. 2.
so many Voices he has beside his own; and if there be two or three Proxies
constituted by one absent Lord (as is frequent) then always the first named in
the same, is to give the Voice, if he be present; and if absent, then the
second, and sic de reliquis.

It is plain by the ancient Treatise, Ibid. 6. Col. 1.
Modus tenendi Parliamentum; That if a Peer neither came to the Parliament, nor
sent a Proxy upon his Writ of Summons, he forfeited 100 l. if an Earl, 100
Marks, if a Baron, 100 s. etc.

It seldom happens, Towns. Col. 4.39, 40, 42.
That any Bishop does nominate fewer than three, or two Proctors; nor any
Temporal Lord more than one.

John Archbishop of Canterbury, Id. 34.
had this Parliament five Proxies.

1 Eliz. a Lord of Parliament by License obtained of the Queen to be absent, 4
Inst. 12, 13
made a Proxy to three Lords of Parliament; one of which gave Consent to a
Bill; the other two said, Not Content. And it was by Order of the Lords debated
among the Judges and Civilians Attendants, and conceived by them, That this was
no Voice; and the Opinion was affirmed by all the Lords, That it was no Voice.

2 Car. 1. 1626. the House of Peers made an Order, Rush. Col. 269.
That after this Session, no Lord of this House shall be capable of receiving
above two Proxies, or more, to be numbered in any Cause voted.

In the Lords House, Arc Parl. 12. Smith's Commonwealth, 87.
the Lords give their Voices from the puisne Lord seriatim, by the Word
[Content] or [Not Content.] 4 Inst. 34. First for himself, and then severally
for so many as he has Letters and Proxies.

A Bill had three Readings in one Forenoon, Towns. Col. 11.
in the House of Lords.

Towns. Col. 9.
Where a Committee of Lords is selected out to meet with another Committee of
the House of Commons; neither the Judges, being but Assistants, nor the Queen's
Council, being but Attendants of and upon the House, were ever nominated a
Joynt-Committees with the Lords. But when the Lords among themselves do appoint
a Committee to consider of some ordinary Bill, especially if it concern Matter
of Law, it has been anciently used, and may still, without Prejudice to the
Honor of the House, that the King's learned Council, but especially the
Judges, may be nominated as Committees alone, or as Joynt-Committees with the
Lords.

January 19. 1597. 39 Eliz. it was resolved, Towns. Col. 94. Sir Simon d'Ewes
Jour.
That the Order and Usage of this House was, and is, that when any Bills or
Messages are brought from the lower House, to be preferred to the upper House,
the Lord Keeper, and the rest of the Lords, are to rise from their Places, and
to go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come from the lower House, and
from them to receive in that Place their Messages, or Bills. Contrariwise, when
any Answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper, etc.

In passing of Bills, Arc. Parl. 5.
if the Not Contents be most, then the Bill is dash't, i. e. the Law is
annihilated, and goes no further. If the Contents be the most, then the Clerk
writes underneath, Soit bail aux Commons, i. e. Let it be delivered (or sent)
to the Commons.

3 Car. 1. 1626. resolved upon the Question, Rush. Col. 365.
That the Privilege of this House is, that no Lord of Parliament, the
Parliament sitting, or within the usual Time of Privileges of Parliament, is
to be imprisoned, or restrained, without Sentence, or Decree of the House,
unless it be for Treason, or Felony, or refusing to give Surety of the Peace.

Giving the Lie to a Peer, Nalson 380. Hakewel 84. Vide Kel. wey 184. Vid. Lord
Hollis's Letter. Vid. Lord Hollis's Remains. Vid. contra Hunt's Argument for
the Bishops Right, etc. Vid. Grand Question concerning Bishops Right, per totum.
is a Breach of Privilege.

Ever since the Conquest, the Archbishops, and Bishops, have no Title to have
Voice and Place in Parliament, but only in respect of their Temporal Baronies;
where they are present, quousque perveniatur ad Diminutionem Vitae, etc.

When a Question is had of the Attainder of any Peer, Hakewel 84. Vid. contra
Heart ut supra per tot. Vid. Grand Question concerning Bishops Right, etc per
tetum.
or other, in Parliament, the Archbishops and Bishops depart the higher House,
and do make their Proxies; for by the Decrees of the Church, they may not be
Judges of Life and Death.

11 Rich. 2. Diverse Lords, and others, being appealed of Treason, and other
Misdemeanors, the Prelates absented themselves during the Trial, Seldom of
Judicature, p. 150. Vid. there the Protestation of the Bishops. Ibid. 151.
having first made Protestation, saving their Right to be present in Parliament.

The Protestation, I think, intends, That they could not be present by Reason
of the Common Law, and by Reason of an Ordinance made at the Council at
Westminster, in 21 Hen. 2. by which all Clergymen were forbidden agitare
Judicium Sanguinis, upon Pain to be deprived both of Dignities and Orders. For
surely, as I think, they might otherwise have been present, both by the Common
Law, and by the Law of God. Sed Quere.

All the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Selden's Judicature, etc. 39.
11 Rich. 2. claimed as their Liberty and Franchise, that the great Matters
moved in this Parliament, and to be moved in other Parliaments in Time to come,
touching the Peers of the Land, ought to be admeasured, adjudged, and discussed
by the Course of the Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, nor by the Law of
the Land, used in the more base Courts of the Realm; which the King granted in
full Parliament.

The Proceeding against a Peer in Parliament is not necessary. Id. 53.
Q.

It appears that the Lords cannot of themselves judge a Common Person for an
Offense, Id. 61.
for he is no Peer, according to that of 4 E. 3. Numb. 26.

1 Rich. 2. Id. 123.
The Lord Beauchamp was sworn, and examined; and the Duke of Lancaster being
one of the Committee, was diligently examined before the rest of the said
Committee, but not sworn ad testificandum. Vid. roast.
Earls and Dukes are not sworn, on Trials, etc. in Parliament.

In Judgments on Delinquents in Parliament, Id. 132.
the Commons might accusare, and petere Judicium, and the King assentire, but
the Lords only did judicare.

The King's Assent ought to be to capital Judgments, Id. 141. Vid. Id. 144.14^,
148, 154, 158.
and the Lords Temporal to be only Judges therein, and not the Lords Spiritual;
but in Misdemeanors, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are equal Judges, and the
King's Assent is not necessary, Id. 136. yet it seems that the King's Assent
is necessarily required in capital Causes and Judgments.

If a Peer be committed to Prison, the Gentleman Usher has the Charge of him
thither, and the Sergeant attending on the Great Seal.

How Lords of Parliament shall be placed in the Parliament, Vide Stat. 31 Hen.
8. c. 10. Vid. 4 Inst. 362. Rot. Parl. 3 H. 6.10. Arcana Parl. 70.
and other Assemblies and Conferences of Council.

A Peer of the Realm shall be tried in an Appeal by Knights, etc. and not by
his Peers, because it is at the Suit of the Party, Brook 142, 153. Otherwise it
is in an Indictment of Treason or Felony, for that it is at the Suit of the
King.

The Duke of Somerset in the Time of Ed. 6. was tried for Felony and Treason by
his Peers upon an Indictment, Id. 71.
for it is the Suit of the King.

When a Lord of Parliament is tried by his Peers, 1 Hen. 4.1. Id. 72.
they shall not be Sworn to say their Verdict; but they shall give their
Verdict upon their Honor, and are not charged but upon their Honors.

And 6 Maij, 1628. Sir Wm. Jones's Rep. 154, 155.
It was ordered on the Question, (Nem. Dissen.) That the Nobility of this
Kingdom, and Lords of the upper House of Parliament, are of ancient Right to
Answer in all Courts as Defendants, upon Protestation of Honor only, and not
upon the common Oath.

An order of the House of Lords was in 1640. Cursus Cancel. 112.
That the Nobility of this Kingdom, and Lords of the upper House of Parliament,
and the Widows and Dowagers of the Temporal Lords, shall Answer (in Chancery,
etc.) upon Protestation of Honor only; but although their Honor may bind their
Conscience in Equity, yet Evidence upon their Honor, ought not to be admitted
in any Court of Law.

And we must here Note, That even Lords of Parliament, or Peers of the Realm,
in giving Evidence to a Jury, or in their Depositions in Chancery, etc. are to
be Examined on Oath.

A Lord of Parliament shall have Knights upon his Trial in every Action. 27
Hen. 8. f. 27.


A Lord of Parliament may be Outlawed for Murder. 27 Hen. 8. f. 17.


If a Lord of Parliament makes a Rescous, 27 H. 8.27
a Capias shall be taken out against him, if the Sheriff return the Rescous;
otherwise it is in Case of Debt.

A Capias ad Satisfaciendum does not lyc against a Lord of Parliament, 11 H.
4.15.
27 Hen. 8.27. for the Law presumes that he has Assets.

An Attachment is not grantable by the Common Law, Dyer 316.
Statue Law, Custom, or Precedent against a Lord of Parliament: and the Lord
Cromwell by Order in the Parliament-Chamber was discharged of such Process.

In a Praemunire against a Lord of Parliament, Arc. Parl.
he ought to appear in his proper Person, and not by Attorney, unless he has a
special Writ of Chancery, De attornato faciendo.

CHAP. V. The Power of the House of Lords.
A Peer of the Realm being Indicted of Treason, or Felony, 4 Inst. 23.
or Misprision of Treason, may be Arraigned thereof in Parliament, a Lord
Steward being appointed; and then the Lords Spiritual shall make a Procurator
for them: and the Lords, as Peers of the Realm, during the Parliament, are
Judges, whether the Offense be Treason, etc. (that is supposed to be committed
by any Peer of the Realm,) and not the Justices.

Vide, a Letter sent by nine Lords, Rush. Col. 3. Stat. vol. 1. f. 737. Ant. 42.
(to the Parliament, June 4, 1642) who had gone from their House, and repaired
to the King at York, wherein they say, We do conceive, that it is the apparent
usual and inherent Right belonging to the Peerage of England, that in the
highest Misdemeanour whatsoever, no Peer is to Answer to the first Charge, but
in his Place in his own Person, and not upon the first Charge to come to the
Bar.

In 1553. primo Mariae, Burn. His. Ref. vol. 2. p. 253.
The Bill of Tonnage and Poundage was sent up to the Lords, who sent it down to
the Commons to be reformed in two Provisoes that were not according to former
Precedents. How far this was contrary to the Rights of the Commons, who now
say, that the Lords cannot alter a Bill of Money, I am not able to determine.

Die Mercurij, 25 Novembris, 1692. It is Resolved upon the Question, by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that for the future when there shall be a
Devision in the House upon any Question, the Contents shall go below the Bar,
and the Not Contents, stay within the Bar: And it is Ordered, that this
Resolution be added to the Roll of standing Orders of this House.

Die Lune, 7. Decembris, 1691. It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, that for the future, upon giving Judgment in
any Cases of Appeals, or Writs of Error in this House, the Question shall be
put for Reversing, and not for Affirming: And that this be added to the Roll of
standing Orders.

30. Jan. 1640. Rush. Col. 3. part vol. 1 p. 165.
Upon a Debate in the Lord's House, touching the Power of conveying away of
Honor, it was (Nemine contradicente) Resolved upon the Question, that no
Person that has any Honor in him as a Peer of this Realm, may alien and
transfer the same to any other Person. See Sir B. Shower's Cases in Parliament,
1.2. etc.

See many notable Judgments by the Lords, at the Prosecution of the Commons,
Rush. Col. passim. and Nalson.
and in later Times.

Error serra sue in Parliament, Vid. Crom. 18. Error Vid. infra.
and Parliament poet prendre Recognizance, Brook 137. Error. Error shall be
sued in Parliament, and the Parliament may take a Recognizance.

If a Judgment be given in the King's Bench, 4. Inst. 21.
either upon a Writ of Error, or otherwise, the Party grieved may (upon a
Petition of Right made to the King in English or in French, and his Answer
thereto, Fiat Jusstitia, let Justice be done) have a Writ of Error directed to
the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, for removing of the Record in praesens
Parliamentum, etc.

And hence it may be presumed, that Writs of Error in Parliament, were
originally Returnable before the Commons, as well as the Lords. See Yelverton's
Rights of the Commons, and Hales of Parliaments, p. 18. to 23.

When one sueth in Parliament to Reverse a Judgment in the King's Bench, he
shows in his Bill, which he exhibiteth to the Parliament, some Error, or
Errors, whereupon he prays a Scire Facias. Id. 22.


The Proceeding upon the Writ of Error is only before the Lords in the Upper
House, Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti.

The Case between Smith and Busby in a Writ or Error Resolved, 2 Nalson 716.
'twas decidable in no other Court, but in Parliament.

If any Question be moved in Parliament for Privilege, 4 Inst. 363
or Precedence of any Lord of Parliament, it is to be decided by the Lords of
Parliament, in the House of Lords, as all Privileges and other Matters
concerning the Lords House of Parliament are.

November 1641. 2 Nalson 625.
Resolved by the House, Nemine contradicente, that it belongs to the House of
Peers, by the ancient Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, to interpret Acts
of Parliament, in Time of Parliament, in any Cause that shall be brought before
them.

Julij 12. 1641. 2. Nalson 381.
An order of the Lords for Relief of a Feme-Covert, and her Children, against a
Husband refusing to Cohabit.

The Sentence pronounced by the Lords upon Sir Giles Mompesson, Rushw Col.
27.28.
and Sir Fracis Michel, for Projectors.

Upon Complaints and Accusations of the Commons, Selden's Judicature etc. 6, 7.
the Lords may proceed in Judgment against the Delinquents of what Degree
soever, and of what Nature soever the Offense be. For where the Commons
complain, the Lords do not assume to themselves Trial at Common Law. (Q.)
Neither do the Lords at the Trial of a Common Impeachment by the Commons,
decedere de Jure suo; for the Commons are then instead of a Jury; and the
Parties Answer, and Examination of Witnesses, are to be in their Presence, Post
120.
or they to have Copies thereof: and the Judgment is not to be given but upon
their Demand, which is instead of a Verdict; so the Lords do only judge, not
try the Delinquent.

28 Hen. 6. Id. 98.
Though the Lords refused to commit the Duke of Suffolk upon the Commons
complaint of him of a common Fame of Treason; yet when they accused him of a
particular Treason, he was Committed and brought Prisoner to his Answer. But in
Cases of Misdemeanors it is otherwise: Then the Party accused, whether Lord, or
Commoner, answers as a Freeman, viz.

The Lord within his Place, Ibid.
the Commoner at the Bar; and they are not committed till Judgment; unless upon
the Answer of a Commoner, the Lords find Cause to commit him, till he find
Sureties to attend, etc. lest he should fly. Prout Jo. Cavendish upon the Lord
Chancellor's demand of Justice against him for his false Accusation, was
Committed after his Answer until he put in Bail, Anno 7 Rich. 2. and before
Judgment.

In Cases of Misdemeanors only, Id. 105.
the Party accused was never denied Counsel.

If the Commons do only complain, Id. 163.
and do neither impeach the Party in Writing, nor by Word of Mouth in open
House, nor demand Trial to be in their Presence: Post 120.
in these Cases it is in the Election of the Lords, whether the Commons shall
be present, or not.

In Complaints of Extortion, Id. 173.
and Oppression, the Lords awarded Satisfaction to the Parties wronged, which
sometime was certain, sometime general; but always secundum, non ultra Legem.

It appears plainly by many Precedents, Id. 176, 177.
that all Judgments for Life and Death, are to be rendered by the Steward of
England, or by the Steward of the King's House; and this is the Reason, why at
every Parliament the King makes a Lord Steward of his House, though he has none
out of Parliament. And at such Arraignment the Steward is to sit in the
Chancellor's Place; and all Judgments for Misdemeanors are by the Chancellor,
or by him who supplies the Chancellor's Place.

In Case of Recovery of Damages, Id. 187.
or Restitution, the Parties are to have their Remedy (the Parliament being
ended) in the Chancery, and not in any other inferior Court at the Common Law.
But the Lords in Parliament may direct how it shall be levied.

The Judges (who are but Assistants to the Upper House) have leave from the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 527. Col. 2.
to sit covered in the House, but are always uncovered at a Committee.

3. Car. 1. Petyt's Msscel. Parliam. 212, 213.
The Sentence of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, pronounced by the Lord
Keeper against Ensign Henry Reynde, for ignominious Speeches uttered by him
against the Lord Say and Seal, and for his Contempt of the High Court of
Parliament, was thus: 1. That he never bear Arms hereafter, but be accounted
unworthy to be a Soldier: 2. To be imprisoned during Pleasure: 3. To stand
under the Pillory (with Papers on his Head showing his Offense) at Cheapside,
London, or at Banbury: 4. To be fined at 200 l. to the King: 5. To ask
Forgiveness here of all the Lords of Parliament in general; and of the Lord Say
and his Son in Particular, both here, and at Banbury.

And the Court of Star Chamber ordered by the Lords to put the said Sentence in
Execution, out of Time of Parliament. Id. 213.


Vide a Sentence pronounced by the Lords Die Martis, 26. Julij, 1642. against
one John Escot, of Launceston in the County of Cornwall, for speaking
Scandalously of the Parliament, in Rush. Col. Vol. 1. f. 759, 760. And likewise
against John Marston, Clerk, Rector of St. Mary Magdalen, in the City of
Canterbury. ibid.

See diverse particulars touching the Power and Jurisdiction of the House of
Lords, in Prynn's Plea for the House of Lords, etc. as also a Book printed Anno
1669. Entitled, The Grand Question concerning the Judicature of the House of
Peers Stated, etc.

See also Sir M. Hales of Parliaments, Pa. 138, 139. and ibid 140, etc. where
Attendants on the upper House may be Members of the House of Commons. Q.

CHAP. VI. House of Commons.
THE House of Commons was originally, Sir R. Atkyns Argument, etc. p. 13.
and from the first Constitution of the Nation, the Representative of one of
the three Estates of the Realm, and a part of the Parliament.

It is assirmed by Mr. Lambard, Lambard's Archeion. 257, 258.
that Burgesses were chosen to the Parliament before the Conquest.

The ancient Towns called Boroughs, Littleton, Sect. 164.
are the most ancient Towns that are in England; for the Towns that now are
Cities or Counties in old Time were Boroughs; and called Boroughs, for that of
such old Towns came the Burgesses to the Parliaments.

Knights of the Shire to serve in Parliament, Sir Rob. Atkyn's 18.
and the paying Wages to them for their Service, has been Time out of Mind, and
did not begin 49 Hen. 3. for that is within Time of Memory, in a Legal Sense.

The House of Commons, Id. 34.
as a Member of the High Court of Parliament, have been as ancient as the
Nation itself, and may in the Sense of Julius Caesar, be accounted among the
Aborigines, and that they have had a perpetual Being (to speak in the Language
of the Law) a Tempore cujus Contraria memoria Hominum non existit, and that
they are therefore capable by Law (together with the rest of the three Estates
in Parliament) to prescribe and claim a share in all Parliamentary Powers and
Privileges; I do not mean seperately, but in conjunction with those other
Estates, which they could not otherwise legally have done, if their Original
and Commencement could have been shown.

During the British Saxon, Petyt's Preface to the ancient Rights of the Commons
etc. p. 3.
and Norman Governments, the Freemen (or Commons of England, as now called, and
distinguished from the great Lords) were pars essentialis and constituens, an
essential and constitutent part of the Wittena Gemot, Commune Concilium,
Baronagium Angliae, or Parliament in those Ages.

It is apparent, Id. 12.
and past all Contradiction, that the Commons (in the Times of the Britons,
Vid. Chapter 1 ante
Saxons, and Picts) were an essential Part of the Legislative Power, in making
and ordaining Laws, by which themselves and their Posterity were to be
Governed, and that the Law was then the golden Metwand and Rule which Measured
out, and allowed the Prerogative of the Prince, and Liberty of the Subject (and
when obstructed, or denied to either, made the Kingdom deformed and leprous.)

I may with good Reason and Warranty conclude, Id. 125.
that our Ancestors the Commons of England, the Knights, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, Citizens, and Burgesses of a great and mighty Nation, were very
far from being in former Times such Vassals and Slaves, or so abject, poor, and
inconsiderable, as the absurd and malicious Ignorance and Falsities of late
Writers have been pleased to make and represent them, especially the Author of
the Grand Freeholders Inquest, and Mr. James Howel, etc. as if they were only
Beasts of Carriage and Burden, ordained to be taxed and talliated, and have
their Lives, Estates, and Liberties given away, and disposed of, without their
own Assents.

If the Commons do only Accuse by any way of Complaint whatsoever, Selden's
Judicature, etc. 14.
and do not declare in Special against the Party accused, then the Suit is the
King's, and the Party is to be Arraigned, or otherwise proceeded against by
Commandment, Ex part Domini Regis.

In the Lower House sit the Speaker, Crompton 2.4 Inst. 1.
and the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, who
represent the Body of the whole Commonalty of England.

All Persons, St. 5 Rich. 2 c. 4. Rast. 140.
and Commonalties, which shall be summoned to Parliament, shall come, as they
have been used and accustomed of ancient Time; and he that shall not come
(having no reasonable Excuse) shall be amerced, and otherwise punished, as of
ancient Time has been used. Vide ante p. 17. Algernon Sidney, c. 3. Sect. 38


An Eminent and Noble Author, has in his Discourses on Government, asserted
that the Power of calling and dissolving Parliaments, is not simply in our
Kings alone. And in support of this Assertion, gives us the following Reasons,
viz.

First, (says he) the King can have no such Power, unless it be given him; (by
Law) for every Man is naturally Free; and the same Power that makes him King,
gives him all that belongs to his being King, and no more: It Is not therefore
an Inherent, but only a Delegated Power; and whoever Receives it, is
accountable to those who gave it; for they who give Authority by Commission, do
always retain more than they Grant.

Secondly, The Law for Annual Parliaments expressly Declares it, not to be in
the King's Power as to their Meeting; nor consequently as to their Continuance;
for they meet to no Purpose if they may not continue to do the Work for which
they meet; and it were absurd to give them a Power of Meeting; if they might
not continue till the End for which they met were attained; Qui Dat Finem Dat
Media ad Finem Necessaria; the only Reason (End) why Parliaments do Meet, is to
provide for the public Good, and they ought to Meet (and continue) for that
End; they ought not therefore to be Dissolved till it be accomplished; and
'twas for this Reason, that the Opinion given by Tresilian, that Kings might
Dissolve Parliaments at their Pleasure, Note.
was adjudg'd to be a principal part of his Treason.

See other Reasons there Assigned; and on the whole he concludes, that
Parliaments have in themselves a Power of Meeting, Sitting and Acting for the
Public Good.

After which, Ibid p. 432.
he further Prosecutes the same Point, and then proceeds to show; That as the
Peoples Delegatees or Representatives in Parliament do not meet there by a
Power derived from Kings, but from those that choose them; so they who Delegate
Powers, do always retein to themselves more than they give; and therefore the
People do not give their Delegates an absolute Power of doing what they please,
but do always retein to themselves more than they confer on their Deputies, who
must therefore be accountable to their Principalls. Vide plura ibid.

CHAP. VII. The Power of the House of Commons in particular Cases.
THE House of Commons is a House of Information and Presentment, Rush Coll.
217. vol 1.
but not a House of Definitive Judgment.

The House of Commons is a considerable Grand Jury, Trials of the Regicides, p.
53.
it is a good Billa vera they return; their Orders are Records, and that appears
also by 6. H. 8. c. 16. where the Words are, viz. And the same License shall be
entered on Record, in the Book of the Clerk of the Parliament appointed, or to
be appointed for the Common's House, etc. [Sir Audley Mervyn's Speech to the
Duke of Ormond, 13. Heb. 1662. containing their Sum of Affairs in Ireland, p.
17.] And more directly in their point upon the Trial of Harrison the Regicide,
Mr. Jessop was produced to attest several Orders of the Common's House, Mr.
Jessop being Clerk of the House.

Note the said Stat. 6. H. 8. c. 16. says; Rast. Stat. p. 429. 4. Inst. 23.
Hales of Parl. 213. 215.
That no Member should depart from the Parliament, nor absent themselves from
the same, without the License of the Speaker and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, to be entered upon Record in the Book of the Clerk of the Parliament.

And yet some Judges have been of Opinion, Hob. Rep. 110.111.
that the Journals of the House of Commons are no Records, but only
Remembrances.

Before the Year 1550. 3. E. 6. Bur. Hist. Ref. vol. 2. p. 143.
it seems that no Eldest Sons of Peers were Members of the House of Commons;
and Sir Francis Russel, becoming by the Death of his Elder Brother, Heir
Apparent to the Lord Russel; it was on the 21st of January carried upon a
Debate, that he should abide in the House as he was before. But this was by a
special Order; so it is entered in the Original Journal of the House of
Commons, and is the first Journal that ever was taken in that House.

1. Car. 1. 1625. Resolved, Rush. ib.
that common Fame is a good Ground of Proceeding for this House, either by
Enquiry, or Presenting the Complaint (if the House find Cause) to the King or
Lords.

26 Jan. 28 Hen. 6. Selden's Judicat. p. 29. Vid. id. 38
The Commons required the Duke of Suffolk might be committed to Ward, for that
the General Fame went of him, etc. The Lords, on Consultation with the
Justices, thought the same to be no good Cause of Commitment, unless some
special Matters were objected against him.

It is certain, Pettyt's Miscell. Pref. etc. p. 5.
and not to be denied, That in elder Time the People, or Freemen had a great
Share in the Public Council, or Government. For Dion Cassius (or Xiphiline out
of him) in the Life of Severus assures us, Apud hos (i. e. Britannos) Populus
magna ex Part Principatum tenet.

It was not in the Power of all the Tenants in Capite in England, Id. 47, 48.
though with the King's Consent, to bind and oblige others, or to make, or alter
a Law, sine Assensu Communitatis Regni, who had Votum consultivum, and
decisivum, an Act of Authority and Jurisdiction, as well in assenting to
Spiritual Laws as Temporal; as may appear for an Instance in their Declaration,
or Protestation to Edward the Third in Parliament, which concludes thus, For
they will not be obliged by any Statute or Ordinance made, without their Assent.

In a MS. M. S. Penes W. Bohun. p. 5, 6.
Treatise, written by Mr. Rymer, entitled, an Inquiry into the ancient Method
of passing Bills in Parliament, I find it to have been the usual Practice,
Temp. Ed. 3ij. etc. See Annis Edw. 3. 14 15, 16, 20, 21, 22. 36. 33, etc.
For the Commons to have first their Petitions and Bills answered, ( i. e.
their Grievances Redressed) and then to Grant their Aids and Supplies.

But note, These Matters often proceeded pari Passu. And sometimes Aids were
granted by the Commons, on express Condition, That the King Grant the Petitions
Exhibited to him, etc.

But in 47 E. 3. The Subsidy or Aid, Ibid. p. 7.
is commanded to be first Treated on, or Debated, which (says my Author) I
remember not to have been in any other Parliament whatsoever, save that of 7 R.
2. And Note, 11 R. 2. The Commons Demand it as of Right not to Grant Subsidies
till the End of the Parliament.

To give Subsidies upon Subsidies is not usual. In the 18 H. 3. Rush. vol. 1.
p. 190.
There was one Punished for pressing for more Subsidies, when Subsidies had
been Granted before in that Parliament.

And note, See Cottons Records p. 17. 198.
If any new Project was proposed in Parliament, for raising Subsidies or
Supplies, the Commons usually replied thereto, That they were not Instructed by
their Principals in that Matter; or that they durst not consent to such Tax,
etc. without Conference with their Countries.

A Member of Parliament may charge any great Officer of State with any
particular Offense. Rush Col. 690.


If any Lord of Parliament Spiritual or Temporal, 4 Inst. 24.
have committed any Oppression, Bribery, Extortion, or the like; the House of
Commons, being the general Inquisitors of the Realm (coming out of all Parts
thereof) may examine the same; and if they find, by the Vote of the House, the
Charge to be true, then they transmit the same to the Lords, with the Witnesses
and the Proofs.

1 Jac. 1. 1603. Petyt's Miscel. Parl. 64.
The Bishop of Bristol publishing a Book, tending to make Division and Strife,
Wrong and Dishonor both to the lower House, and the Lords themselves, was
complained of by the Commons to the Lords; and he made his Recantation: 1. That
he had erred. 2. That he was sorry for it. 3. If it were to do again, he would
not do it. 4. But protested, it was done of Ignorance, and not of Malice.


7 Jac. 1. 1609. Vide Rvsh. Hist. Col. 4 Car.
Dr. Cowel writ a Book perniciously, asserting certain Heads to the Destruction
of Parliaments, and the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom, and was
complained of by the Commons to the Lords, who resolved to Censure his Errors
and Boldness. Ibid. And afterward the Book was burnt by Proclamation.

Vide Dr. Manwaring's Case, Rush. Col. and Nalson. Vide Petyt's Miscel. Part 74.

Vide Dr. Montague's Case in Rushworth, Nalson, and Petyt's Miscell. Part 82.

Note, The Case of Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, who for writing and
publishing a Book, Entitled, King William and Queen Mary Conquerors, was
Censured in Parliament, and as I think on the Commons Address, Removed from
being Preceptor to the Duke of Gloucester, etc. Note also Bishop Fleetwood's
Preface, censured and burnt by Order of the House of Commons. And see Nalson's
Col. p. 9. and 43. ten Bishops at once sent to the Tower by the Lords, etc.

4 Junij, 19 Jac. Petyt's Miscel. Parl. 120.
The Commons House of Parliament this Day, adjudged Randolph Davenport, Esquire for
his Offense in Mis-informing the House, in a Cause wherein he was produced as a
Witness, to be committed Prisoner to the Tower for the space of one whole
Month, and then to be Discharged, paying his Fees.

19 Jac. 1. Id. 160.
Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Sergeant of Arms
attending this House shall attach the Body of John Churchill, one of the
Deputy-Registers of the Chancery, and him shall take into his Custody, and
bring him to this House on Monday Morning next at Eight of the Clock; and the
said Sergeant is in the mean time to keep him so, as none be suffered to speak
with him, but in the hearing of the Sergeant.

Vide ad hoc Rush. Collect. passim. Vide Nalson's 2 Volumes. Vide Selden's
Judicature, etc. Vide Sir Robert Atkyns's Argument, etc. Vide Petyt's Preface
to Mis. Parliamentaria.

Thomas Long gave the Mayor of Westbury four Pounds to be elected Burgess, 4
Inst. 23. Vide Sir d'Ewes Jour. 182.
who thereupon was elected. This Matter was examined, and adjudged in the House
of Commons, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, and the Mayor fined
and imprisoned, and Mr. Long removed ( i. e. expelled the House) for this
corrupt Dealing was to poison the very Fountain it self. See several Orders and
Resolutions of the House of Commons against Bribery and Corruption in electing
Members, etc. in Bohun's Collection of Debates, etc. pa. 28. 55. 275. 281. 340.
etc. particularly the Journal of the Commons for 1701. viz. Mar.
6.7.13.17.18.20.30. April 29. etc.


Arthur Hall, Ibid. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 212. Post 89, etc.
a Member of the House of Commons, for publishing and discovering the
Conferences of the House, and writing a Book to the Dishonor of the House,
was, upon due Examination, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti,
adjudged by the House of Commons, to be committed to the Tower for six Months,
Post 87.
fined at five hundred Marks, and expelled the House.

23 Apr. 1. Mariae, Ibid. Called Marington by Scobel 113.
Muncton struck William Johnson, a Burgess of B. returned into the Chancery of
Record; for which, upon due Examination in the House of Commons, it was
resolved, That secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, every Man must
take Notice of all the Members of the House returned of Record, at his Peril:
And the House adjudged Muncton to the Tower.

Injuries offered to the Members, Scobel 113.
and their Servants, during the Session, have been usually punished by the
House, upon Complaint.

29 Febr. 1575, one Williams, Ibid. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 251. Col. 2.
for assaulting a Burgess of this House, was, upon Complaint, sent for by the
Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and committed to the Serjeant's Ward.

28 Nov. Ibid.
1601, complaint being made by Mr. Fleetwood, a Member of the House, that one
Holland, a Scrivener, and one Brooks, his Servant, had evil entreated and
beaten the Servant of the said Mr. Fleetwood, in his Presence; they were both
sent for by the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and for the said Offense,
committed for five Days to the Sergeant.

12 Febr. 18. Jac. 1, Mr. Lovel, Ib. 114.
a Member of the House, informed, That one Darryel, threatened his Person (that
for a Speech spoken by him in the House, he should be sent to the Tower, during
the Parliament, or presently after) Darryel was sent for by the Sergeant, to
answer it to the House, and upon Testimony of it, he was committed to the
Sergeant till Thursday following, and then to acknowledge his Fault, or to be
committed to the Tower.

16 Junij 1604, Ibid.
Complaint being made of one Thomas Rogers, a Currier, dwelling in
Colemanstreet, for abusing Sir John Savil, in slanderous and unseemly Terms
(upon his Proceedings at a Committee in the Bill touching Tanners, etc.) he was
sent for by the Sergeant at Arms, to the Bar, to answer his Offense.

Sir William Aston, Rush. Col. 656. Vid. Petyt 's Miscell. Parl. 108. Acon 's
Case.
Sheriff of London, being examined before the Committee, concerning some
Matters about the Customs, and not giving that clear Answer which he ought, and
as the House conceived he might have done, was therefore committed to the Tower
of London. And a Question was made in the House, at that Time, Whether the
House had at any Time before committed a Sheriff of London to Prison. To which
Mr. Seldom made Answer, That he could not call to mind a Precedent of sending
one Sheriff of London to Prison; but he well remembered a Precedent of sending
both the Sheriffs of London to the Tower, and instanced the Case.

One Trussel, Towns. Col. 20. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 438. Col. 1.
being in Execution in one of the Compter's in London, was ordered to be
brought before the Committee, with his Keeper, without Danger of an Escape in
the Execution.

Note, the Case of Mr. W. Montague, who being a Prisoner in Execution, was
notwithstanding elected a Burgess for Stockbridge, and discharged of his
Imprisonment by the House. See the Case in Bohun's Collection of Debates, pa.
275. to 281, where all the Precedents of this Kind are cited at large.

4 November. 1640, Scobel 16.
upon a Report from the Committee for Privileges, That several Indentures were
returned for Burgesses, for the Borough of Bossinny, in the County of Cornwall,
the one by the Mayor of the Town, the other promiscuously; the Committee were
of Opinion, upon view of the bare Indenture, That Sir Charles Harbord (who was
returned by the Mayor) was well returned; See hereafter Chapter 12. and 13
but the House declared he should not sit, till the Election were decided.

44 Eliz. 1601, the Course has been, Towns. Col 297.
if the House has been desirous to see any Record, the Speaker should send a
Warrant to the Lord Keeper to grant a Certiorari, to have the Record brought
into the House.

December. 1641, Nalson 753.
ordered, That Mr. Speaker do write his Letters to the Mayor of Berwick,
enjoining him to require such Papists, and suspected Persons as reside there,
or make their constant Repair thither, forthwith to depart the Town; and to
tender the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to such as shall refuse; and to
proceed against them according to Law; and to require him that a Guard be kept
at the several Gates, and that the Arms of that Place be in Readiness. The like
to the Mayor of Newcastle, and of Hull.

The Commons, Rush. Col. 358.
upon Imprisonment of their Members, and the Offense taken by the King,
resolved to proceed in no other Business, till they were righted in their
Liberties. See Nalson's Col. p. 3. to 21.

Dec. 1641, Nalson 732.
Mr. Long, a Justice of the Peace, sent to the Tower, for setting a Guard,
without Consent of the Parliament.

A Knight, 4 Inst. 12.
Citizen, or Burgess of the House of Commons, cannot by any Means make a Proxy;
because he is elected, and trusted by Multitudes of People.

If the Commons accuse a Commoner of Misdemeanors; Seldom 's Jud. 101.
in such a State of Liberty or Restraint as he is in, when the Commons complain
of him, in such he is to answer.

Sir Francis Michel, Seld. Jud. Ibid.
and Sir John Bennet, were both committed by the Commons, before their
Complaint to the Lords, and so they answered as Prisoners; but that in a Sort
may be called, Judicium parium suorum.

If the Commons impeach any Man, Ib. 124. Ante
they are in loco proprio, and there no Jury ought to be; only Witnesses are to
be examined in their Presence, or they to have Copies thereof; and the Judgment
not to be given until the Commons demand it.

The Presence of the Commons is necessary at the Parties Answer, Ib. 158. Ante
56.
and Judgment in Cases Capital. Now one Reason for the King's Assent, and the
Commons Presence in such Judgments, may be this: Both King and People are to be
satisfied for the Death of the Subject; therefore all Trials for Life and Death
are public in the full Assembly of the Court; and how can it be said in full
Parliament, when the Commons, one of the States, are absent?

Tho the Commons are not present when the Lords do consider of the Delinquents
Answer, and the Proofs, Ib. 159.
and do determine of their Judgment; yet at their Return to their own Assembly,
they consider among themselves, if the Proceedings were legal, and may come
again, and show it, and require a Rehearing of the Cause; as they did at the
Judgment of the Duke of Clarence in 18 Ed. 3.

In Judgments on Misdemeanors, Ib. 162. Ante 58.
the Presence of the Commons is not necessary, unless they impeach a
Delinquent, prout 50 E. 3. and then they are present at all the Answers of
those whom they impeach, and are to demand Judgment.

When the Lords had determined one Part of the Complaint of the Commons against
William Ellis (touching the Wrong done to certain Scottish Merchants) the
Commons prayed a general Inquiry might be made of the Residue whereof they
complained, Ibid.
which the Lords granted.

When the Lord Nevil answered, Id. 163.
the Commons required, that one Richard Love might be examined, to prove that
which the said Lord denied, and so departed; but two of the Commons remained,
and heard the Examinations, and told the Lords, That the said Richard had
related otherwise to the Commons, the Day before, which the said Richard
denied. Then all the Commons came, and justified it again, and thereupon the
said Richard Love confessed it, and on their Demands was committed.

In the 10 Rich. 2. Ibid.
when the Commons had Impeached the Lord Chancellor, they were present at his
Answer, and so often replied, and enforced his Oath against him, Vid. Post 80.
and required him to be committed, and so he was before Judgment.

If the Commons do only complain, Ibid.
and do neither impeach the Party in Writing, nor by Word of Mouth in open
House, nor demand Trial to be in their Presence: in these Cases it is in the
Election of the Lords, Whether the Commons shall be present, or not.

Issuing of Quo Warranto's out of the Court of King's Bench, Nalson 588.
Court of Exchequer, or any Court, against Boroughs, that anciently or recently
sent Burgesses to Parliament, to show cause, why they sent Burgesses of
Parliament, and all the Proceedings thereupon, are Coram non Judice, illegal
and void. And the Right of sending Burgesses to the Parliament, is questionable
in Parliament only; and the Occasioners, Procurers, Note.
and Judges in such Quo Warranto's and Proceedings, are punishable, as in
Parliament shall be thought consonant to Law and Justice.

And note, See Bohun's Inst. Legalis 186.190. etc.
The Practice and Proceedings on Quo Warranto's, Mandamus's, and some other
Prerogative Writs, seem to have been an Invention of the Judges, in order to
draw the Rights and Privileges of Buroughs and Corporations, as well as of the
People under the Cognizance of B. R. etc.

Where the Articles against the Delinquents are ex Part Domini Regis, Seldom
's Judicature 118.
there the Commons cannot reply, nor demand Judgment; for the Suit is the
King's, and not theirs.

In Trewinnard's Case, Id. 39.
Dyer 60 and 61. The Privilege of the Commons, is termed the Privilege of
Parliament; and the Judgment given in that Case by the House of Commons, is
there said to be, The Judgment of the most High Court of Parliament. Sir Robert
Atkyn's Argument, 35. which proves, they are not without a Judicial Power.

The King cannot take notice of what is done in the Commons House, Id. 53.
or delivered to them, but by the House itself; and that is one of the Laws and
Customs of Parliament.

In 31 Hen. 6. Id. 55.
When the Commons requested the King and Lords, to restore their Speaker to
them, etc. The Judges being demanded of their Counsel therein; See this Case
reported at large, in Bohun's Debates in Parliament, p. 276. etc. Ibid.
after mature deliberation, they answered, It was not their part to judge of
the Parliament, which may judge of the Law.

The Reason, to judge of the Law, signifies that they (the Parliament) can
judge whether a Law be good, or not; in order to approve it, and to re-enact
it; or to repeal a Law, etc.

In 1621. Ibid.
The House of Commons made a Protestation against all Impeachments, other than
in their House, for any thing there said or done.

It was said by Mr. Justice Crook, Id. 58. Rush. Col. Vol. 1. f. 663.
That regularly a Parliament Man cannot be compelled, out of Parliament, to
answer Things done in Parliament, in a Parliamentary Course. See Sir R.
Atkins's Argument, per Totum.
If it be done in a Parliamentary Course, what Occasion can there be to answer
for it? But who shall judge what is a Parliamentary Course, but a Parliament?
Not Judges of the Common Law; for the Parliamentary Course differs from the
Rules of the Common Law.

27 Eliz. 1584, ordered, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 347, Col. 2.
That the Sergeant of this House do forthwith go to the Common Pleas Bar, and
charge the Recorder, then pleading there, to make his present Repair unto this
House for his Attendance.

See and Note the Case of Judge Thorp, Cottons Rec. 74 and 316.
who 25 E. 3. was condemned to Death, and to forfeit all his Lands and Goods
for Bribery, i. e. receiving 20 l. from a Person who had a Cause depending
before him.

Note in the Parliament 11 R. 2. commonly called, The Wonder working
Parliament, all the Judges, as they were sitting in Westminster Hall, were
arrested, etc. by Order of Parliament. And the like happened to several Judges
in the Convention Parliament upon the Revolution; but Quere if their Commitment
was by the Lords and Commons, or by the Commons only?

See also the Journal of the House of Commons, Journal of the Commons An. 1680.
Anno 1680, several Orders and Resolutions of the Commons, against diverse of
the Judges and others, for encouraging Addresses, etc. in Order to obstruct the
Meeting and Sitting of that Parliament.

And see there December the 30th, the following Resolutions of that House, viz.

1. That the several Writings, Papers and Proceedings relating to such Members,
of the late Long Parliament of Pensioners, who received Allowances out of the
Moneys appointed for secret Services, be produced to this House. 2. (Nem.
Contr.) That no Member of this House, shall accept of any Office or Place of
Profit from the Crown, without the Leave of this House; nor any Promise of any
such Office or Place, during his being or continuing a Member of this House. 3.
That all Offenders herein be expelled this House.
See there also the Report and Censure of the the Proceedings of diverse of the
Judges of Westminster Hall, viz. Sir Francis North, Sir W. Scroggs, Justice
Jones, and Baron Weston; whereupon the House came to the following Resolutions,
viz. 1. That the Discharge of the Grand Jury of the Hundred of Osulston, in
Com. Middx. by the Court of B. R. in Trin. Term last, before the last Day of
the Term, and before they had finished their Presentiments, was arbitrary and
illegal, destructive to public Justice, a manifest Violation of the Oaths of
the Judges of that Court, and a Means to subvert the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, and to introduce Popery. 2. That the Rule made by the Court of B. R.
in Trinity Term last, against Printing of a Book, called, The Weekly Packet of
Advice from Rome, is illegal and arbitrary; the Judges thereby usurping to
themselves Legislative Power, to the great Discouragement of the Protestants,
and countenancing of Popery. 3. That the Court of King's Bench, in the
Imposition of Fines on Offenders, have of late Years acted arbitrarily,
illegally and partially, favoring Papists, and Persons popishly affected, and
excessively oppressing his Majesty's Protestant Subjects. 4. That the refusing
sufficient Bail in those Cases wherein the Persons committed were Bailable by
Law, was illegal, and a high Breach of the Liberties of the Subject. 5. That
the Expressions in the Charge given to the Grand Jury by Baron Weston, were a
Scandal to the Reformation, and tending to raise discord between His Majesty
and his Subjects, and to the Subversion of the ancient Constitution of
Parliaments, and of the Government of this Kingdom. 6. That the Warrant
mentioned in the Report ( i. e. for Harry Carrs Commitment, etc.) was arbitrary
and illegal.


And then follow the several Resolutions for Impeaching the Judges abovenamed,
See also Ibid. Jan. 3.
and the Articles against Scroggs, etc. -- And,

Jan. 4. 1680, resolved (Nem. Cont.) That such Members of this House, who in
this Time of imminent Danger, do absent themselves without Leave of the House,
are to be reputed Deserters of their Trust, and Neglecters of that Duty they
owe to this House and their Country.

27 Eliz. 1584, John Bland, a Currier, for making dishonorable Reflections on
the House of Commons, brought to the Bar, and pardoned upon his Submission,
paying twenty Shillings Fee to the Sergeant, and taking the Oath of Supremacy.

Eodem An. Id. 368. Col. 1.
A Warrant for a Writ of Privilege awarded for setting at Liberty John Pepler,
(Servant to Sir Philip Sidney, a Member of this House) now Prisoner for Debt in
the Compter in London.

28, 29 Eliz. 1586, Id. 397. Col. 1.
resolved by the whole Body of the House, That the discussing and adjudging of
Differences about Elections, only belonged to the said House: That tho the Lord
Chancellor and Judges were competent Judges in their proper Courts, yet they
were not (Judges) in Parliament.

31 Eliz. 1588. Id. 451. Col. 1.
Thomas Drury committed to the Serjeant's Custody, was brought to the Bar, and
discharged, paying his Fees; for speaking Dishonourably of the Proceedings of
the House.

23 Eliz. 1580. Ibid. 283 Col. 1.
A Member of the House stood Indicted of Felony. Adjudged, That he ought to
remain of the House till he were Convicted; for it may be any Man's Case, who
is Guiltless, to be Accused, and thereupon Indicted of Felony, or a like Crime.

18 Eliz. 1575. Petyt's Miscel. Parl. 16.18.
Edward Smalley was upon the Question adjudged by the House to be Guilty of
Contempt, and abusing the House by fraudulent Practice of procuring himself to
be Arrested upon Execution, of his own Assent and Intention, to be discharged
as well of his Imprisonment, as of the said Execution. And Matthew Kirtleton
adjudged Guilty of Confederacy with the said Smalley. Whereupon they were both
Ordered to the Tower. And the said Smalley to remain there for a Month, and
after, till he gave sufficient Assurance for Payment of a hundred Pounds to the
Creditor, and forty Shillings for the Scrjeant's Fees.

4 Ed. 6. Criketoft, Id. 96.
for the confederating in the Escape of one Floyd, was committed to the Tower,
and afterward difcharged paying his Fees.

1 Jac. 1. Id. 98.
Bryan Tash, a Yeoman of his Majesty's Guard, for keeping the Door of the Lobby
of the upper House against several Members of the House of Commons, brought to
the Bar of the House, and upon his Submission, and Confession of his Fault,
dismissed, paying the ordinary Fees to the Clerk and Sergeant.

20 Jac. 1. Id 104.
Dr. Harris, for mis-behaveing himself in Preaching, and otherwise with respect
to Election of Members of Parliament; called to the Bar as a Delinquent, and
admonished to confess his Fault there, and in the Country, and in the Pulpit of
his Parish Church.

3 Car. 1. Mr. Burgess a Minister, Id. 104.105.
for abusing his Function in the Duty of Catechizing, etc. sent for by a
Messenger, committed to the Tower, and upon humble Submission delivered.

In the same Parliament, Id. 105.106.
Sir William Wray, Mr. Langton, Mr. John Trelawny, and Mr. Edward Trelawny,
Deputy Lieutenants for Cornwall, for assuming to themselves a Power to make
Knights of the Shire, defaming such as stood to be chosen, sending for the
Trained Bands, menacing the Country, etc. were committed, some to the Tower,
some to the Sergeant, till they made a Submission and Recognition in the House,
and in the Country.

In the same Parliament, One Levet, Id. 106.107.
for peremptorily exercising a Patent in Time of Prorogation, which was
adjudg'd a Grievance by the House in the last Session, ordered to be sent for
by the Sergeant at Arms.

As to the Powers exercised by the House of Commons, Anno 1640, in restraining
the Excesses of Episcopal Jurisdiction, and redressing other Grievances arising
from Ecclesiastics. See Mr. Tindal's Translation of Rapin, vol. 2. pa. 361.363.
etc.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Power of the House of Commons over their own Members. See
the precedent Chapter. p. 130 and 132. Scelel 72

THOUGH Freedom of Speech and Debates be an undoubted Privilege of the House;
yet whatsoever is spoken in the House, is subject to the Censure of the House;
and where they find cause, Offenses of this kind have been severely punished;
by Calling the Persons to the Bar, to make Submission; Committing him to the
Tower, (the usual Prison to which the Commons do send Delinquents) expelling
the House, disabling him to be a Member during that Parliament, and sometime of
any suture Parliament.

17 Maij 1572. Ibid. Vide d'Ewes Jour. 212. Vid. Petyts Misceell. Parl. 12, 13,
etc.
Upon sundry Motions made by diverse Members of the House, it was ordered, That
Arthur Hall, Esquire for sundry Speeches used by him in the House, and abroad,
should be warned by the Sergeant to be at the House on Monday following, and at
the Bar, to answer Matters charged against him; and all such Persons as had
noted his Words, either in the House, or abroad, were forthwith to meet, and
set down the same Words in Writing, and deliver the same to the Speaker. On
Monday Mr. Hall being brought to the Bar by the Sergeant, was charged with
several Articles, and confessed his Folly, and humbly submitted himself to the
House, and was remitted.

8 Febr. 1585. Peter Wentworth, Id 73. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 244. Col.
1
Esquire one of the Burgesses for Tregony in the County of Cornwall, was, for
violence and wicked Words uttered by him in the House touching the Queen,
sequestered; and being brought to the Bar by the Sergeant (to whom he was
committed) received this Judgment by the Mouth of the Speaker, That he should
be committed close Prisoner to the Tower, till the House take further
Consideration concerning him.

4 Febr. 1580. Id 74, 75 Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 296, 297, 298. Vid. Petyts
Miscell. Par. a. p. 20 ad p. 63. Ante 71.
23 Eliz. Complaint was made in the House against Arthur Hall, Esquire (spoken of
before) who had caused a Book to be Printed, wherein were published the
Conferences of the House; and in it was contained Matter of Reproach against
some particular Members of the House, derogatory to the General Authority,
Power and State of the House, and prejudicial to the Validity of the
Proceedings of the same. The Matter was referred to a Committee to examine; and
upon Report thereof, and bringing Mr. Hall to the Bar several Times to Answer,
he was sentenced by the House to be committed to the Tower (as the Prison to
this House) there to remain for the space of six Months, and so much longer, as
until he should himself willingly make a Retraction of the said Book, to the
satisfaction of the House, or of such Order as the House should make during
that Session. That the said Arthur Hall should be fined to the Queen Five
hundred Pounds for his said Offense: That he should be presently severed and
cut off from being a Member of this House, during this Parliament, and a Writ
to Issue for Election of a new Burgess for the Borough of Grantham in his
stead: Vide post. 143. and Bohun's Coll.
That the said Book should be deemed and adjudged False and Erroneous.
Thereupon the said Mr. Hall was brought to the Bar, to whom Mr. Speaker, in the
Name of the whole House, pronounced the said Judgment, in Form aforesaid, and
the Sergeant was commanded to take Charge of him, and to convey him to the
Tower, and deliver him to the Lieutenant of the Tower, by Warrant of this
House, to be signed by the Speaker.

Note, Ibid.
It appears by the Journal 21 Nov. 1586. That he was disabled for ever to
serve in Parliament Quere post. 141.146.

17 Dec. 1584. 27 Eliz. Id. 76. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 340.341, 342.
A Bill against Jesuits and Seminary Priests passed upon the Question. Dr.
Parry only gave a Negative, and after inveighed in violent Speeches against the
whole Bill; affirming it to savor of Treason, to be full of Blood, Danger,
Despair, and Terror or Dread to the English Subjects of this Realm, our
Brethren, Uncles, and Kinsfolks. Upon which he was sequestered from the House
into the outer Room, into the Hands of the Sergeant, and not to confer with
any, while the House was in Debate of that Business. Afterward he was brought
to the Bar, and there kneeling, he was told by the Speaker, If he thought fit,
the House was content to hear his Reasons; but he refusing, was committed to
the Serjeant's Ward. The next Day he was brought to the Bar, and kneeling,
confessed he had unduly behaved himself, and had rashly and unadvisedly uttered
those Speeches he had used, and was with all his Heart very sorry for it;
alleging withal, he had never been of the House till that Session, and so
could not so well know the Orders of the House, as he should do, and that he
would not henceforth willingly offend the House, nor any one Man in it, and so
humbly prayed their good Favor toward him. Whereupon being again sequestered
out of the House, after some Arguments and Debates it was resolved, upon this
Acknowledgement of his Fault, and his humble Submission, he should be received
into this House again, as a Member thereof, and take his Place, as before, so
that he would still afterward behave himself in good sort, as he ought to do;
and thereupon being called again to the Bar, and there Kneeling, and directly
reiterating his former Confession of his Fault, and humble Submission, with
promise of better Demeanor, he was admitted.

18 Febr. 1584. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour 352. Col. 2
27 Eliz. Upon a Motion by Mr. Diggs, That the same Dr. Parry, a late unworthy
Member of this House, and now Prisoner in the Tower, has since his Submission
and Reconcilement, so mis-behaved himself as deserveeth the said Imprisonment:
Resolved by the House, That he be disabled to be any longer a Member of this
House, and that a Warrant be directed for choosing another Burgess in his stead.

18 Jac. 1. Sir Giles Mompesson, for being a Vid. Post Conysby's Case.
Monopolist, and for other great and insufferable Crimes by him Committed, to
the Abuse of his Majesty, and grievous Oppression of the Subjects; was turned
out of the House, committed to the Tower, and after Impeached before the Lords,
who gave Judgment upon him.

1. Petyt's Miscel. Par. 91, 92
To be degraded of the Order of Knighthood. 2. To stand perpetually in the
degree of a Person Outlawed for Misdemeanors and Trespasses. 3. His Testimony
never to be received in any Court, nor to be of any Inquisition or Jury. 4. To
be excepted out of all General Pardons. 5. That he should be Imprisoned during
his Life. 6. Not to approach within twelve Miles of the Courts of the King, or
Prince, nor at the King's High Court usually held at Westminster. 7. That the
King should have the profits of his Land for Life, and all his Goods and
Chattels. 8. That he should be fined at 10,000 l. 9. He was also disabled to
hold or receive any Office under the King, or for the Commonwealth. 10. And
lastly, Ever to be held an infamous Person.
19 Jac. 1. Sir John Bennet, Id. 92.
for receiving Bribes, etc. Ordered by the Commons House to be safely kept by
the Sheriffs of London; to be put out, and no longer continue a Member of the
House; and a Warrant for a Writ for a new choice.

In the same Parliament, Id. 93.
Sir Robert Floyd, for being a Projector of a Patent for a Monopoly; resolved
una voce, That he was a Person unworthy to continue a Member of this House, and
adjudged presently to be put out.

3 Car. 1. Id. 94, 95.
Mr. John Harbor, Recorder of Wells, for subscribing a Warrant for the
Quartering of Soldiers; suspended the House, and sequestered, till the Pleasure
of the House be known.

13 Febr. 1606. Id. 77, 78.79.
Upon a Report made in the House of the Remembrances formerly set down of the
Particulars of a Conserence; the Speaker offering to read the Paper, and being
interrupted by some Motions, and Disputes, Whether they should be read one by
one, and so debated, or all at once: In that Difference, one of the Knights for
Bucking hamshire, with a loud Voice (not standing up Bare-Headed, as the Order
is) pressed to have them Read. The House observing his earnestness, and manner
of Sitting and Calling, for Order's sake, urged him to stand up, and speak: He
stood up, and pretending to offer some Reasons, fell into an Invictive against
the Scots, much distasting the House; yet out of a common Care to expedite the
weighty Business then in Hand, his Speech was neglected, without Tax or
Censure. But on Monday following it was remembered, and his Words of Offense
recited in particular: The Gentleman being absent, was sent for by the
Sergeant. The Sergeant having brought the Offender, it was moved he might be
heard at the Bar, which was assented to, and after he had spoken, he was
commanded to retire; and not long after was called in again to the Bar, where
Kneeling, Mr. Speaker acquainted him, Since the Offense was so apparently
heinous, the House did not hold it fit that any Particulars should be named, or
to give any Reason of their Judgment; but the Order was, That he should be
carried to the Prison of the Tower, and there remain, during the Pleasure of
the House; and that he should be dimiss'd from his Place of Knight of the Shire
for Bucks, and a new Writ to issue for a new Choice.

15 Febr. 18 Jac. 1. Id. 79.
A Bill being read the second Time, for the better Observation of the Sabbath,
one of the Members made an Invective against it, and something which seemed to
reflect on a Member of the House, who presented it, as favoring a Puritan, and
factious Spirit; Exceptions were taken at the Words. After he had explained
himself, he was ordered o withdraw out of the House; and Debate being had, he
was called to the Bar, and upon his Knees he received the Judgment of the House
pronounced by the Speaker, That he should be discharged from the Service of the
House; with an Intimation that his Judgment was very merciful, for that the
House might, for so exorbitant an Offense, have Imprisoned, and further
punished him.

3 Apr. 1604. Id. 80.
In a Debate upon a Bill, a Member of the House uttered some Speeches highly
distasting the House; but no Notice was taken of it till the Bill was
Committed; and then the Words being repeated, he was called to the Bar, where
he made his Excuse, and was Pardoned.

26 Apr. 1641. Ibid.
Great Offense was taken by the House, at Words spoken by Mr. J. H. He was
first heard to explain himself, and then commanded to withdraw; and was called
to the Bar, and suspended the House, during that Session of Parliament.

27 Maij 1641. Ibid.
A Paper was brought in, containing Words spoken by Mr. Tailor a Member of the
House, concerning the Passing the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford;
who being heard to explain himself, and then commanded to withdraw; after some
Debate in the House, it was Resolved, That he should be expelled the House,
Anto 139.
be made incapable of ever being a Member of this House, and should forthwith
be committed Prisoner to the Tower, there to remain, during the Pleasure of the
House, and to make an acknowledgment of his Offense, both at the Bar and at
Windsor publicly. And he was called to the Bar, and there Kneeling, Mr.
Speaker pronounced the Sentence accordingly.

13 Maij, 12 Jac. 1. Id. 82.
Complaint was made, that some Indignities were offered to Sir R. Owen, when he
was in the Chair at the Committee (about the Bill for the due Observation of
the Sabbath Day) by Sir W. H. who told him, He was Partial; and by Sir R. K.
who took him by the Hand, and told him, He would pull him out of the Chair,
that he should put no more Tricks upon the House. Sir W. H. being present, made
an Acknowledgment of his Error, which upon the Question was taken for a good
Satisfaction. Sir R. K. was ordered by the House to Acknowledge his Error at
the Bar.

19 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Some Speeches passing in the House privately between two Members, and some
Offense taken, which seems was not intended to be given; one of them in going
down the Parliament-Stairs, struck the other; who thereupon caught at a Sword
in his Man's Hand to strike with it. Upon Complaint made of it to the House,
they were both ordered to attend the House; being come, he who gave the Blow
was called in, and standing (not at the Bar, but) by the Bar, was Examined by
Mr. Speaker, confessed the giving the Blow, insisted on the Provocation, and
withdrew: The other was also called in to relate the Truth. After he had made
the Relation, and was likewise withdrawn, and Testimony given by a Member of
the House, who heard the Words; the House proceeded to Sentence against Mr. C.
who struck the Blow. He being brought to the Bar, there on his Knees he
received Judgment, which was pronounced by the Speaker, That he should be
committed to the Tower, during the Pleasure of the House.

1626. Nalson's Introduction 61. 2 Nalson 513
Mr. Moor sent to the Tower for speaking out of Season.

November. 1641. Ordered, That Mr. Fitz-Williams Conisby, shall be Expelled this
House, he being a Monopolist, and that the Speaker issue out a Warrant to the
Clerk of the Crown for a Writ for a new Election for a Member to serve for the
County of Hertford in his Place.

Mr. Hugh Benson, Id. 596.
a Member of the House, having granted many Protections for Money, taking for
some sixteen, seventeen, forty shillings, and twenty for ten shillings a piece.
Resolved upon the Question, That Mr. Hugh Benson, is unworthy and unfit to be a
Member of this House, and shall sit no longer as a Member of this House. That
he be forthwith sent for as a Delinquent, by the Sergeant at Arms attending on
this House.

Mr. Jervase Hollis, Id. 710.
Expelled the House for a Speech (made with great strength of Reason and
Courage, but more Heat than the Times would bear) was restored to his Place, to
sit as a Member of the House of Commons.

Sir William Widdrington, Id. 27^.
and Sir Herbert Price, sent to the Tower, for bringing in Candles against the
Desire of the House.

23 Eliz. 1580. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 309. Col. 2.
Ordered and Resolved by the House, That every Knight for the Shire that has
been Absent this whole Session of Parliament, without Excuse allowed by this
House, shall have a Fine set upon him to her Majesty's use; and upon every
Citizen and Burgess for the like, ten Pounds.

1 Jac. 1. 1603. Mr. Lawrence Hide, Petyt's Miscel. Parl: 147.
(pretending Business of his Clients, etc.) made known to the House, That he
would go out of Town, and so took his Leave in open Audience, without the
Assent or Leave of the House, which was Taxed (Censured) by the House, and Mr.
Speaker ordered to write to him.

It was also moved and Resolved, Ib. 149.
That Mr. Speaker should write another Letter to other Lawyers being gone down
in the same Circuit where Mr. Lawrence Hide was, advising them to Return and
attend the House.

Hither may be referred, The Case of the several Lawyers, Members of the House,
March 173.4.
etc. Committed by the House, for appearing as Council in the Case of Ashby and
White, touching the Election for Aylesbury in the County of Bucks.

12. Mar. 1694. Bolun's Col. of Debates, etc. p. 331. and See there p. 354. Mr.
Hungerford expelled for a like Cause.
Resolved by the House, That Sir John Trevor, Speaker of this House, in
receiving a Gratuity of one thousand Guineas from the City of London, after
passing of the Orphans Bill, is guilty of a High Crime and Misdemeanor.

And a few Days after he was only Expelled the House; too mild a Punishment for
so flagrant a Crime! King Edw. 3. would have Hanged him as well as Judge Thorp:
But Times change by great Examples. And we have seen greater Crimes since
Escape scot Free.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Elections of Members.
Vid. of this Matter, Lit. rep. 327.8.9.30. etc. 5 R. 2 St. 2. c. 4.
ALL Persons and Commonalties who shall be summoned to the Parliament, shall
come, as has been accustomed of old Time, and he that comes not, having no
reasonable Excuse, shall be amerced, and otherwise punished.

The King sends Writs to the Sheriffs of every Shire, Arc. Parl. 4. Vide the
Form of the Writ. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 37.
to admonish the whole Shire to choose two Knights of the Parliament, in the
Name of the Shire, to hear, and reason, and to give their Advice and consult in
the Name of the Shire, and to be present at the Day.

At every County, Hakewel 47. Vide Crompton's Juris. 3.
after the Delivery of the Parliament Writ to the Sheriffs, Proclamation shall
be made in the full County, of the Day and Place of the Parliament; and that
all Men shall attend for the Election of the Knights for the same County for
that Parliament.

Where the Parliament Writ speaks de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius, Arc.
Parl. 22. Vide Cromp. 3.
this is intended where the City is not a County in it self. If it be, the Writ
shall be directed to them, etc. as it is to Sheriffs of other Countries.

28 Eliz. 1586, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 396.397.
resolved, That the House of Commons are the only competent Judges concerning
Elections, which are duly made, and which not.

18 Jac. 1, Petyt 's Miscell. Parl. 111.
The Mayor of Winchelsey, for mis-behaving himself at the Election of
Parliament Men for that Town, and making a false Return, ordered to be
committed to the Sergeant, and to make a Submission at the Bar, and an
Acknowledgment in the Town, before the new Election.

20 Jac. 1, Id 112.
The Mayor of Arundel, for mis-behaving himself in the Election, by putting the
Town to a great deal of Charges, not giving a due and general Warning, and
packing a Number of Electors; ordered to be sent for, and adjudged to pay the
Charge to be set down by three of the Members.

Likewise to every City and Town, Arc. Parl. 4. Smith 's Commonwealth, 76
which of ancient Time has been wont to find Burgesses of the Parliament, so
to make Election of their Members, that they might be present there at the
first Day of the Parliament.

In 7 Hen. 4, 4 Inst 10. 2 Inst. 169
it is enacted, That Elections should be freely and indifferently made,
notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the contrary, sine Praece, vel
Pretio without any Prayer or Gift, and sine Praecepto, without Command-the King
by Writ, or otherwise, or of any other.

The King, de advisamento Concilii, 4 Inst. 4.
resolving to have a Parliament, does out of the Court of Chancery send out
Writs of Summons, at the least forty Days before the Parliament begin.

The third Estate is the Commons of the Realm, 4 Inst. 1. Crompton's Juris. 2.
whereof there be Knights of the Shires, or Counties; Citizens of Cities, and
Burgesses of Boroughs. All which are respectively elected by the Shires or
Counties, Cities and Boroughs, by Force of the King's Writ, ex debito
Justitiae, and none of them ought to be omitted.

These represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, are entrusted for them,
Ibid.
and are in Number at this Time, now 558, viz. 513 for England, and 45 for
Scotland.

Whosoever is not a Lord of Parliament, Id. 2.
and of the Lord's House, is of the House of Commons, either in Person, or by
Representation, partly coagmentative, and partly representative.

Every Member of the House being a Counselor for the Kingdom, Id. 3.
should have three Properties; First, to be without Malice or Envy. Secondly,
to be constant and inflexible, Thirdly, to be of ripe and perfect Memory, as
appears in Parliament Roll, Rot. Parl. 3 H. 6. n. 3.

The Knights of the Shire are chosen by all the Gentlemen and Yeomen ( i. e.
Freeholders) of the Shire, Arc. Parl. 5. Smith 's Commonwealth, 77.
present at the Day assigned for the Election: The Voice of any absent is to be
counted for none.

Concerning the Writs for summoning the Knights and Burgesses; and the Return
of the Sheriff thereupon Vide Crompton's Juris. 1.2.

Every Englishman is intended to be there present, Arc. Parl. 3.
either in Person, or by Procuration and Attorney; and the Consent of the
Parliament is taken to be every Man's Consent.

These meeting at one Day, Id. 10. Smith 's Commonwealth, 77.
the two who have most of their Voices, are chosen Knights of the Shire for
that Parliament. Likewise by the Plurality of the Voices of the Citizens and
Burgesses, the Citizens and Burgesses are elected.

The Election ought to be in full County, 4 Inst. 48.
between Eight and Nine (says the Statute of 23 Hen. 6. c. 15.) No Election can
be made of any Knight of the Shire, but between Eight and Eleven of the Clock
in the Forenoon, says the Lord Coke. But if the Election be begun within the
Time, and cannot be determined within those Hours, the Election may be made
after.

Any Election or Voices given, Id. 49.
before the Precept be read and published, are void and of no Force; for the
same Electors, after the Precept read and published, may make a new Election,
and alter their Voices, Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti.

For the Election of the Knights, Id. 48.
if the Party or Freeholders demand the Poll, the Sheriff cannot deny the
Scrutiny, for he cannot discern who be Freeholders by the View; and tho the
Party would wave the Poll, yet the Sheriff must proceed in the Scrutiny.

The Knights shall be returned into Chancery by Indenture sealed betwixt the
Sheriff and the Choosers of Knights for the Parliament. St. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 7 H.
4. c. 1. 23 H. 6. c. 15. Vide Crompton's Juris. 3. 2 Nalson 870.


Jan. 1641, in the Case of Mr. Downs, returned a Burgess for Arundel, ordered,
That he be presently sworn and admitted as a Member into the House, until such
Time as the Election be determined.

A Burgess elected for two several Boroughs, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 430, 622.
and passim. Petyt 's Miscel. Parliament. 112, 113.
may choose for which he will serve.

21 Jac. 1, Edward Ingry, Undersheriff of Cambridgeshire, for refusing the
Poll (declaring that Sir Thomas Steward promised to defend him against Sir John
Cutts) was brought to the Bar, and kneeling upon his Knees, adjudg'd to be
committed to the Serjeant's Custody, and to make a Submission at the Bar, and
at the next Quarter Sessions, and to acknowledge his Faults.

3 Car. 1, Id. 113. to 120.
Thomson, Sheriff of York, for his hasty and precipitate Judgment of an
Election, and denying the Poll, being required; and Alderman Henlow for
advising and abetting the same; adjudged to stand committed to the Sergeant
during Pleasure, to acknowledge their Offenses at the Bar, to pay all due Fees,
to defray the Charge of Witnesses, to be assessed by four of the Committee, to
acknowledge their Faults on their Knees at the Bar, and to read a Submission.

After the Precept of the Sheriff directed to the City or Borough for making an
Election; Id. 49.
there ought, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, to be given a
convenient Time for the Day of Election, and sufficient Warning given to the
Citizens and Burgesses that have Voices, that they may be present; otherwise
the Election is not good, unless such as have Voices do take Notice of
themselves, and be present at the Election.

When there is a Corporation made by Charter; Hobart 15. Dungannon 's Case in
Ireland.
and by the same an Ordinance, that the Provost and Burgesses only shall
choose, etc. the Law shall vest this Privilege in the whole Corporation in
mandment of Point of Interest, tho the Execution of it be committed to some
Persons, Members of the same Corporation.

The King cannot grant a Charter of Exemption to any Man, 4 Inst. 49.
to be freed from Election of Knight, Citizen, or Burgesses of Parliament (as
he may do of some inferior Office or Places) because the Election of them ought
to be free, and his Attendance is for the Service of the whole Realm, and for
the Benefit of the King and his People; and the whole Commonwealth has an
Interest therein.

18 Eliz. 1575, resolved, Sir Simon d'Ewes, 244. Col. 2. Vide contra Sir Simon
d'Ewes Jour. 281, 282.
That any Person being a Member of the House, and being either in Service of
Embassage, or else in Execution, or visited with Sickness, shall not in any
wise be amoved from their Place in this House, nor any other to be, during such
Time of Service, Execution, or Sickness, elected.

Nota Been, By the Claim of Right, St. 1. W. and M. Ses. 2. c. 2.
made on the Abdication of King James the 2d, it was declared, That all
Elections of Members to Parliament, ought to be free; and it was enacted
accordingly. See the Statute, and also the following Chapter.

CHAP. X. Who may be Electors.
ELectors are to attend to Elect Knights of the Shires, Knights of the Shire.
St. 7. H. 4. c. 15.
on Proclamation to be made at the next County Court, after the Delivery of the
Writ to the Sheriff, and to proceed to (in) the Election freely and
indifferently, notwithstanding any Command to the contrary.

Electors of such Knights, Ibid. and St 8. H 6 c. 7
after the Election to seal an Indenture, containing the manner of the Persons
chosen, which is to be annexed to the Writ, and be the Sheriffs Return, and
none to Elect who cannot Expend 40 s. by the Year.

Electors of Knights of the Shires, St. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 8. H. 6. c. 7. 10. H. 6.
c. 2.
to be only of such Persons as are resiant and dwelling within the said Shire
at the Date of the Writ.

No Person shall be an Elector of the Knights for the Parliament, St. 8. H. 6.
c. 7. 10. H. 6. c 1, 33. H. 8 c. 1. in Ireland.
except he has Freehold Lands or Tenements within the same County, to the
value of Forty Shillings per Annum at the least, above all Charges.

The Sheriff has Power given him by the said Statute to examine upon Oath
every such Chooser, how much he may expend by the Year, Crompt. Jurisdict. 3.
if he doubt the value of it.

Every Freeholder (electing such Knights) to be Sworn before admitted to Poll,
if so required by any Candidate, St. 7.8. W. 3 c. 25. St. 10. A. c. 23. The
Freeholder's Oath. See the Candidate's Oath. c. 10 and the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, etc. post. and this Oath altered 10 Annae infra
or other Person that has Right to Elect. Note, the said Oath by Sta. 10 Annae
is thus. You shall Swear that you are a Freeholder within the County of -- and
have Freehold Lands or Hereditaments, lying, or being at -- in the County of --
of the yearly value of 40 s. above all Charges, payable out of the same; and
that such Freehold Estate has not been made, or granted to you fraudulently,
on purpose to qualify you to give your Vote, and that the Place of your Abode
is at -- in (the County) -- and that you have not Polled before at this
Election. -- So help you God.

Trustees or Mortgagees, St. 7.8. W. 3. c. 25.
are not to be Electors unless in Possession, or Receive the Rents of the
Estate; but the Mortgagor or Person to whose use the Trust is may.

Conveyances of Houses, Lands, Ibid.
etc. in Parcels to several Persons, in order to multiply Votes to be Void; and
no more than one Vote admitted for one Tenement, nor any to be an Elector under
21 Years.

That Persons refusing the Oaths, St. 7.8. W. 3. c. 27. that
or being Quakers, subscribing the Declaration of Fidelity, not to be admitted
to Vote, etc.

That all collusive Estates and Conveyances made to qualify Electors for
Knights of the Shire (i. e. Subject to a conditional Determination, St. 10. A.
c. 23.
or Reconveyance, etc.) shall be taken and held as Free and Absolute against
the Grantor; and all Bonds, Convenants, etc. for Restoring, or Reconveying
thereof, are declared Null and Void; and the Maker, Adviser, and Voter shall
each (every) of them forfeit 40 l. with full Costs to any that will Sue in any
Court at Westminster, and no Essoign, etc.

Also none to Vote for such Knights in right of any Lands not assessed to the
public Taxes, Church Rates and Parish Duties, in proportion to other Lands of
40 s. per Annum in the same Parish; and for which he shall not be entitled to
40 s. Rent before the Election, unless it come to him by Descent. And Voting
otherwise, forfeits 40 l. one Moiety to the Poor where the Lands lie, and the
other to the Prosecutor.

And note, This Act repeals only so much of the Statue 7 W. 3. as concerns the
Oath to administered to Freeholders, and therefore this Statute further Enacts.

That if any Quaker (during the continuance of an Act passed 7 W. 3. That the
Solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers, St 10. A. c.
23. Quaker's Affirmation.
shall be accepted instead of an Oath, etc.) shall on such Election if required
by any Candidate, Declare the Effect of the said Oath on his solemn Affirmation
as directed by that Act, the Sheriff, etc. is required to accept the same
instead of the said Oath. But if such Quaker shall be after Convicted, to have
Wilfully, Falsely, If false, guilty of Perjury, vid. infra.
and Corruptly, Affirmed or Declared; he is to incurr the same Penalties and
Forfeitures, as Persons Convicted of Wilful and corrupt Perjury. Vide infra.

That the said Act 10 Annae, St. 12. A. Sess. 1. c. Rents Tithes Incorporeal
Inheritances. Chambers in Inns of Court or Chancery. etc.
shall not Extend to Restrain any Person from Voting, in Right of any Rents,
Tithes, or other incorporeal Inheritances, or any Messuages or Lands in
Extraparochial Places; or any Chambers in the Inns of Court, or Inns of
Chancery; or to any Messuages or Seats belonging to any Offices, or in Right of
any other Messuages or Lands that have not been usually Charged and Assessed to
all and every the public Taxes, Church Rates and Parish Duties. Proviso.
Provided such Messuages or Lands have been usually Charged or Assessed, to
some one or more of the said public Taxes, or Duties, in such Proportion as
other Messuages or Lands of 40 s. per Annum. within the same Parish or
Township, are usually Charged.

Note, St. 10. A: c. 23.
The Form of the Freeholders Oath required by the 7, 8, W. 3. was abolished by
this Statute, and the following Form Substituted, viz.

You shall Swear ( or being a Quaker, Freeholder's Oath
you shall in the presence of Almighty God, Declare) that you are a Freeholder
in the County of -- and have Freehold Lands, or Hereditaments, lying, or being
at -- in the County of -- of the yearly value of 40 s. above all Charges
payable out of the same. And that such Freehold Estate has not been made, or
granted to you Fraudulently, on purpose to qualify you to give your Vote; and
that the Place of your Abode is at -- in the County of -- And that you have not
been Polled before at this Election.

The Form of the Oath to be taken by Freeholders, etc. (on an Objection made)
by Statute 12 Annae, viz.

I. A. B. Do in the presence of God Swear, Freeholder's Oath by St. 12. Ann.
( or if a Quaker, Declare) That the Lands and Estates of -- for which I claim
to give my Vote in this Election, are not conveyed to me in Trust, or for the
behoof of any Person whatsoever: And I do Swear (declare) before God, that
neither I, nor any Person to my Knowledge, in my Name, or by my allowance, has
given, or intends to give any Promise, Obligation, Bond, Back-Bond, or other
Security, for re-disposing, or re-conveying the said Lands and Estate, any
manner of way whatsoever; and this is the Truth as I shall Answer to God.

The Freeholders Oath appointed to be taken, By St. 2. Geo. 2. c. 24. Sect. 1.
by Statute 2 Geo. 2. if Demanded by either of the Candidates, or any two of
the Electors.

I. A. B. Do Swear ( or being one called a Quaker) do solemnly affirm, That I
have not received, or had by my self, or any Person whatsoever in Trust for me,
or for my Use, and (or) Benefit, directly or indirectly, any Sum or Sums of
Money, Office, Place or Employment, Gift or Reward, or any Promise, or Security
for any Money, Office, Employment, or Gift, in order to give my Vote at the
Election, and that I have not before been Polled at this Election.

But note, Ibid. Sect. 2.
This Oath seems intended for other Voters, besides Freeholders; for by Sect.
2. of the same Stat. It Is Ennacted, That such Votes, etc. Ante. p. 132.

Citizens and Burgesses within Cities and Buroughs, St. 23. H. 6. c. 15.
to Elect Citizens and Burgesses of the same; and the Sheriff is to direct his
Precept accordingly.

That the Nomination, St. 2. W. M. c. 7. See 1 W. M. Sess. 2. c. 2. Supra
or Recommendation, to the Electors of one of the Barons of each Cinque Port,
the two ancient Towns, and their Members claimed by the Lord Warden is contrary
to Law, and Void.

By the claim of Right made on the Abdication of King James the II. Claim of
Right.
All Elections of Members of Parliament ought to be Free, and it was Enacted
accordingly. See the Stat. Et vide post.

No Collector, St. 5. W. M. c. 20. Officers of the Excise.
Supervisor, Gauger, or other Officer, or Person whatsoever, Concerned or
Employed in the Charging, Collecting, Levying or Manageing the Duties of
Excise, or any Branch, or Part thereof, shall by Word, Message or Writeing, or
in any other manner, persuade any Elector to give, or disuade any Elector from
giving his Vote, for the Choice of any Person to be a Knight of the Shire,
Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of any County, City, Borough or Cinque-Port; and
every Officer, or other Person offending herein, Penalty.
to forfeit 100 l. one Moiety to the Informer, and the other to the Poor, where
the Offense is committed; to be recoverd by him that Sues for it by Action, of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any Court of Record at Westminster. And
no Essoign, Protection, Privilege, or Wager of Law, or more than one
Imparlance; Incapacity.
and the Party Convicted to be for ever Incapacitated to bear any Office, or
Place of Trust under the Crown.

No Commissioner, Collecter, Comptroller, St. 12.13. W. 3. c. 10 Officers of
the Customs.
Searcher, or other Officer, or Person concerned, or employed in Discharging,
(chargeing) Collecting, Levying, or Managing the Customs, or any Branch, or
thereof, shall by Word, Message, or Writing, etc, (as above for the Excise)
Officers, with the like Penalty, Incapacity, etc.

In many Cases Multitudes are bound by Acts of Parliament, 4 Inst. p. 5.
which are not Parties to the Elections of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; as
all they that have no Freehold, or who have Freehold in ancient Demesne, and
all Women having Freeholds, or no Freehold, and Men within the Age of One and
twenty Years, etc.

Every Inhabitant choosing or electing in any other manner (than is prescribed
by the Statute) to forfeit an hundred Shillings, half to the King, St. 33. H.
8. c. 1. Ireland.
and half to him that will Sue for it.

If any Man keeps a Household in one County, Arc. Parl. 25.
and remains in Service with another Family in another County, yet he may be at
the choosing of Knights of the Shire where he keeps his Family; Crempton's
Juris. 3. b.
for it shall be said in Law a Dwelling in either of those Counties.

If the Mayor and Bailiffs (or other Officer, St. 23 H. 6. c. 15. Vid Cromp.
Jur. 3. b. 4.2.
where no Mayor is) shall return other than those which be chosen by the
Citizens and Burgesses of the Cities or Boroughs where such Elections be, shall
incur and forfeit to the King forty Pounds; and moreover, shall forfeit to
every Person hereafter chosen Citizen or Burgess to come to Parliament, and not
by the same Mayor, or Bailiff, etc. Returned; or to any other Person that will
Sue for it, forty Pounds.

That such Votes shall be deemed legal, St 2. G. 2. c. 24. ibid. Sect. 2. What
Votes shall be deemed legal.
which have been so declared by the last Determination in the House of Commons;
which last Determination concerning any County, Shire, City, Borough,
Cinque-Port, or Place, shall be sinal to all Intents and Purposes, any Usage to
the contrary.

That no Person convicted of wilful and corrupt Perjury, Sect. 4. Persons
convicted of perjury never capable to vote.
or Subornation of Perjury, shall, after such Conviction, be capable of Voting
in any Election of any Member or Members to serve in Parliament.

That if any Elector shall ask, receive, Sect. 4. Persons taking Money or
Reward for their Vote, etc.
or take any Money, or other Reward, by way of Gift, Loan, or other Device, or
agree or contract for any Money, Gift, Office, Employment, or other Reward
whatsoever, to give his Vote; or to refuse or forbear to give his Vote; or if
any Person by himself, or any employed by him, shall, by any Gift or Reward, or
by any Promise, Agreement, or Security for any Gift or Reward, corrupt or
procure any Person to give his Vote, or to forbear to give his Vote, in any
such Election, such Person shall for every such Offense forfeit the Sum of five
hundred Pounds, On Conviction Forfeits 500 l
with full Costs of Suit; and every such Person after Judgment obtained against
him in any Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, or summary Action, or
Prosecution, or being any otherwise lawfully Convicted thereof, shall for ever
be disabled to Vote in any Election to Parliament, and also to hold, exercise,
And disabled to Vote, or to enjoy any Office or Franchise.
or enjoy any Office or Franchise, to which he and they then shall, or at any
time afterward may be entitled, as a Member of any City, Borough, Town
Corporate, or Cinque-Port, as if such Person was naturally Dead.

And that if any Person offending against this Act, Sect. 5. Offenders in 12.
Months after the Election discovering others in femnified.
shall within twelve Months after such Election, discover any other Person
offending against this Act, so that such Person be thereupon Convicted, such
Person so discovering, and not having been before that time Convicted of any
Offense against this Act, shall be indemnified, and discharged from all
Penalties, which he shall then have incurred by any Offense against this Act.

Enacted that forty five shall be the number of the Representatives of Scotland
in the House of Commons of the Parliament of Great Britain. Stat. 5. Annae. c.
8. the Union Act.


Of the said Forty-five Representatives of Scotland, Members for Scotland
Thirty shall be chosen by the Shires, and Fifteen by the Royal Burghs (as
follows, viz.) one for every Shire and Stenartry, (excepting the Shires of Bute
and Caitness, which shall choose one by turns, Bute having the first Election;
the Shires of Nairn and Cromarty, which shall also choose by turns, Nairn
having the first Election; and in like mannet the Shires of Clackmannan and
Kinross shall choose by turns; ( Clackmannan having the first Election) and in
case of the Death or legal Incapacity of the said Members from the said
respective Shires or Steuartries, Scotland.
the Shire or Steuartry who elected the said Member, shall elect another Member
in his Place. And that the said Fifteen Representatives for the Royal Burghs
shall be chosen as follows, viz. That the Town of Edinburgh shall have Right to
elect and send one Member, and that each of the other Burghs shall elect a
Commissioner in the same manner as usual to elect Commissioners and Burghs (
Edinburgh excepted) being divided into fourteen Classes or Districts, shall
meet at such time and Burghs within their respective Districts, as her Majesty,
her Heirs or Successors shall appoint, and elect one for each District, (viz.)
the Burgs of Kirkwall, Week, Dornock, Dingwall and Tain, one: The Burghs of
Fortrose, Inverness, Nairn and Forress, one; The Burghs of Elgin, Cullen,
Bamff, Inverary, and Kintore, one: The Burghs of Aberdeen, Inverbery, Montrose,
Aberbrothock, and Brochine, one: The Burghs of Forfar, Perth, Dundee, Coupar,
and St. Andrews, one: The Burghs of Craill, Kilrenny, Anstruther Easter,
Anstruther Wester, and Pittenween, one: The Burghs of Dysart, Kirkaldie,
Kinghorn, and Bruntsland, one: The Burghs of Innerkethen, Scotland.
Dunfermline, Queensferry, Culross, and Sterling, one: The Burghs of Glasgow,
Renfrew, Ruglen, and Dumbarton, one: The Burghs of Haddington, Dunbar,
North-Berwick, Lauder and Jedburgh, one: The Burghs of Selkirk, Peebles,
Linlithgow, and Lanerk, one: The Burghs of Dumfreis, Sanquhar, Anna, Lockmaben,
and Kirkeudbright, one: The Burghs of Wigtown, New Galloway, Stranraver, and
Whitehorn, one: The Burghs of Air, Irvin, Rothesay, Cambletown, and Inverary,
one. And where the Votes of the Commissioners for the said Burghs met to choose
Representatives from their several Districts, shall be equal, the President of
the Meeting shall have a casting or decisive Vote, and that by and according to
his Vote as a Commissioner from the Burgh from which he is sent; the
Commissioner from the eldest Burgh presiding in the first Meeting, and the
Commissioners from the other Burghs in their respective Districts, presiding
afterward by turns in the order as the said Burghs (used to be) called in the
Rolls of the Parliament of Scotland; and that in case any of the said fifteen
Commissioners from Burghs shall decease, or become legally incapable to sit in
the House of Commons, then the Town of Edinburgh, Scotland.
or the District which chose the said Member, shall elect a Member in his or
their Place.

That none shall be capable to elect (a Representative for any Shire or Burgh
of Scotland) unless twenty one Years of Age complete, and Protestant, excluding
all Papists, or such who being suspect of Popery, and required refuse to swear
and subscribe the Formula, contained in the third Act made in the eight and
ninth Sessions of King William's Parliament (in Scotland) nor shall be capable
to elect (a Representative to) a Shire or Burgh in the Parliament of Great
Britain (for Scotland) except such as (were at the time of passing this Act)
capable by the Laws of (Scotland) to elect as Commissioners for Shires or
Burghs to the Parliament of Scotland.

Enacted, Stat. 6 A. c. 6.
etc. That when any Parliament shall at any time hereafter be summoned or
called, ( on Notice to be forthwith given after Receipt of the Writs by the
Shertff, or Stewart, of the time of Election for Knights of the Shire or
Commissioners for Scotland) at such time of Election the several Freeholders in
the respective Shires, and Stewartries shall meet and convene at the head
Burghs of their several Shires and Stewartries, and proceed to the Election of
their respective Commissioners or Knights for the Shire or Stewartry; Scotland.
and the Clerks of the said Meetings shall respectively return the Names of the
Persons Elected to the Sheriff or Stewart of the Shire or Stewartry ( on a
Precept in like manner to be directed by the Sheriffs of Edinburgh, to the Lord
Provost of that City) and on Receipt of such Precept, the City of Edinbusgh
shall elect their Member, and their common Clerk shall certify his Name to the
Sheriff of Edinburgh.

On Precepts in like manner to be directed by the Sheriffs or Stewarts of the
several Shires or Stemartries, where the other fourteen Districts of Royal
Burghs respectively are, reciting the Contents and Date of the Writ, and
commanding them to elect each of them a Commissioner, as they used formerly to
elect Commissioners to meet at the presiding Borough of their respective
District, (naming it) on the thirtieth day after the Test of the Writ, unless
Sunday, and then the next day after, and then to choose their Burgess for the
Parliament. The common Clerk of the then presiding Borough, shall immediately
after the Election, return the Name of the Person so Elected to the Sheriff or
Stewart of the Shire, Scotland.
or Stewartry wherein such presiding Borough is. And in case a vacancy shall
happen in time of Parliament, by the decease or legal incapacity of any Member,
a new Member shall be Elected in his Room conformable to the method herein
before appointed; and in case such Vacancy be of a Representative for any one
of the said fourteen Classes, or Districts for Royal Boroughs, that Borough,
which presided at the Election of the deceased or disabled Member, shall be the
presiding Borough at such Election.

That from and after the Determination of this present Parliament, 2 St. 12.
Annae.
no Conveyance or Right whatsover, whereupon Infeoffment is not taken, and
Seisin registered One Year before the Test of the Writs for calling a New
Parliament, shall, upon Objection made in that Behalf, entitle the Person or
Persons, so Infeoft, to Vote at that Election, in any Shire or Stewartry in
that Part of Great Britain called Scotland; and in case any Election happen
during the Continuance of a Parliament, no Conveyance or Right whatsoevel,
whereupon Infeoffment is not taken One Year before the Date of the Warrant for
making out a new Writ for such Election, shall, upon Objection made in that
Behalf, Scotland
entitle the Person or Persons so Infeost, to Vote at that Election; and that
it shall be lawful for any of the Electors present, suspecting any Person or
Persons to have his or their Estates in Trust, and for the Behoof of another,
to require the Praeses of the Meeting to tender the Oath (in this Act
contained) to any Elector; and the said Praeses is hereby empowered and
required to administer the same.

In case such Elector refuse to Swear, and also to subscribe the said Oath,
such Person or Persons shall not be capable of Voting at such Election.

Notwithstanding such Oath taken, it shall be lawful to make such other
Objections as are allowed by the Laws of Scotland against such Electors.

No Infeoffment taken upon any redeemable Right (except proper Wadsetts,
Adjudications, or Apprisings allowed by the Act of Parliament relateing to
Elections in One thousand six hundred eighty one) shall entitle the Persons so
Infeoft, to Vote at any Election in any Shire or Stewartry: And no Person or
Persons, who have not been Enrolled, and Voted at former Elections, shall upon
any Pretense whatsoever be Enrolled or admitted to Vote at any Election,
Scotland.
except he or they first produce a sufficient Right or Title to qualify him or
them to Vote at that Election, to the satisfaction of the Freeholders formerly
Enrolled, or the Majority of them present; and the returning Officers are
hereby ordained to make their Returns of the Persons Elected by the Majority of
the Freeholders enrolled, and those admitted by them, reserving always the
Liberty of objecting against the Persons admitted to, or excluded from the
Roll, as formerl.

The Right of Apparent Heirs in Voting at Elections by Virtue of their
Predecessors Infeoffments, and of Husbands by Virtue of their Wives
Infeoffments, reserved.

Any Conveyance or Right, which by the Laws of Scotland is sufficient to
qualify any Person to Vote in the Elections of Members of Parliament for Shires
or Stewartries, and whereupon Infeoffment is taken on or before the first Day
of June, in the Year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and thirteen, shall
entitle the Person or Persons so Infeoft, to Vote at the Elections of Members
to serve in the next ensuing Parliament.

No Husband shall Vote at any ensuing Election by Virtue of their Wives
Infeoffments, Wales.
who are not Heiresses, or have not Right to the Property of the Lands, on
account whereof such Vote shall be Claimed.

Ordained, St. 23. H. 6. c. 15. Vide post.
etc. That every Sheriff, after the Delivery of any Writ (of Election) to him
made, shall make and deliver without Fraud a sufficient Precept under his Seal
to every Mayor and Bailiff, etc. of the Cities and Boroughs within his County,
commanding them by his Precept, if it be a City, to choose by Citizens of the
same City, Citizens; and in the same manner and form if it be a Borough, (to
choose a Burgess) by the Burgesses of the same, to come to the Parliament.

Enacted, St. 23 H. 8. c. 26. Wales.
etc. That the Dominion of Wales shall be, stand, and continue for ever from
henceforth Incorporated, United, and Annexed to and with the Realm of England;
and that all and singular Person and Persons, born and to be born, in the said
Principality, Country, or Dominion of Wales, shall have, enjoy and inherit all
and singular Freedoms, Liberties, Rights, Privileges, and Laws, within this
Realm, and other the King's Dominions, as other the King's Subjects naturally
Born within the same) have, enjoy, and inherit.

For all Parliaments to be holden and kept for this Realm, Wales.
two Knights to be elected to the same Parliament for the Shire of Monmouth, in
the like Manner, Form, and Order, as Knights and Burgesses be elected and
chosen in all other Shires.

And that one Knight shall be Elect-for every of the Shires of Brecknock,
Radnor, Montgomery and Denbigh, and for every other Shire within Wales, and for
every Borough being a Shire-Town within Wales (except the Shire Town of the
County of Merioneth) one Burgess, and the Election to be in like Manner, as
Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament be Elected in other Shires.

That the Burgesses of all and every Cities, Boroughs, St. 35. H. 8 c. 11.
and Towns (in the twelve Shires within Wales and County of Monmouth, not
finding Burgesses for the Parliament themselves, and contributary to Wages of
Burgesses of such Shire-Towns) shall be lawfully admonished by Proclamation, or
otherwise, by the Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head Officers of the said Towns,
or by one of them, to come and give their Elections for the Electing of the
said Burgesses, at such Time and Place, Lawful and Reasonable, as shall be
assigned for the same intent by the said Mayors, Chester.
Bailiffs, and other Head Officers of the said Shire-Towns, or by one of them,
in which Elections the Burgesses shall have the like Voice and Authority to
elect the Burgesses of every the said Shire-Towns, in such Manner, as the
Burgesses of the said Shire-Towns have and use.

That the County Palatine of Chester shall have two Knights for the said County
Palatine; St. 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 13. Chester.
and likewise two Citizens to be Burgesses for the City of Chester; the same
Election to be made under like Manner and Form, to all Intents, Constructions,
and Purposes, as is used within the County Palatine of Lancaster; or any other
County or City within this Realm.

That the County Palatine of Durham may have two Knights for the same County,
St. 25. c. 2. c. 9. Durham
and the City of Durham two Citizens to be Burgesses for the same City, for
ever hereafter to serve in Parliament; the same Election from time to time to
be made in Manner following, viz. The Elections of the Knights to serve for the
said County Palatine, to be made by the greater Number of the Freeholders of
the said County Palatine that shall be present at such Elections, as is used in
other Counties, and that the Election of the said Burgesses from Time to Time,
Vid. Post 190.191,
shall be made by the Major part of the Mayor, Aldermen and Freemen of the
City, which shall be present at such Election.

See also the Stat. 34 35 H. 8. c. 24. Cambridge.
concerning the Payment of the Wages of the Knights of the Shire for Cambridge.

The Form of the Abjuration, as altered by Stat. 4 Ann. c. 8. and as the same
is now to be taken.

I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in
my Conscience, before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King George
the Second, is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and all other His
Majesty's Dominions and Countries thereunto belonging. And I do solemnly and
sincerely declare, That I do believe in my Conscience, that the Person
pretended to be Prince of Wales, during the Life of the late King James, and
since his Decease, pretending to be, and taking upon himself the Style and
Title of King of England, by the Name of James the Third, or of Scotland, by
the Name of James the Eighth, or the Style and Title of King of Great Britain,
has not any Right or Title whatsoever to the Crown of this Realm, or any other
the Dominions thereto belonging: And I do renounce, refuse, and abjure any
Allegiance or Obedience to him. And I do swear, That I will bear Faith and true
Allegiance to His Majesty King George the Second, and Him will desend to the
utmost of my Power, against all Traitorous Conspiracies and Attempts
whatsoever, which shall be made against his Person, Crown or Dignity. And I
will do my utmost Endeavor to disclose and make known to His Majesty and his
Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know to be
against Him, or any of Them. And I do faithfully Promise, to the utmost of my
Power, to support, maintain and defend the Succession of the Crown, against him
the said James, and all other Persons whatsoever: As the same Succession, by an
Act, entitled, An Act for the further Limitation of the Crown, and better
Securing the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, is, and stands limited to the
Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, and the Heirs of
Her Body, being Protestants. And all these Things I do plainly and sincerely
acknowledge and swear, according to these express Words by me spoken; and
according to the plain and common Sense and Understanding of the same Words,
without any Equivocation, mental Evasion or secret Reservation whatsoever. And
I do make this Recognition, Acknowledgement, Abjuration, Renunciation and
Promise, heartily, willingly and truly, and upon the true Faith of a Christian.

So Help me God.

CHAP. XI. Who may be Elected to Parliament.
BY Stat. 5. 4 Inst. 48. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 39, 40.
Eliz. c. 1. no Knight, Citizen, or Burgess can sit in Parliament, before he
has taken the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; but Note, other Oaths are now
appointed: Vide ante.

Because the Words of the Writ for Election of Knights, 4 Inst. 10.
etc. were duos Milites gladiis cinctos, etc. it required an Act of Parliament,
that notable Esquires might be eligible.

Therefore the Statute says, St. 23. H. 6. c. 15.
the Knights of the Shires for the Parliament must be notable Knights, or such
Esquires, or Gentlemen, born of the same County, as be able to be Knights.

Any Man may be chosen Knight, St. 18. Ed. 4. c. 2. in Ireland.
Citizen, or Burgess, though he be not dwelling within the same.

Every Knight, Citizen, and Burgess shall be resiant and dwelling within the
Counties, Cities, and Towns. Every Knight, Citizen, or Burgess taking it upon
him, and not chosen (in the manner prescribed by the Act of Parliament) to
forfeit an hundred Pounds. St. 33 H. 8. c. 1. in Ireland.


Si home n'esteaut Inhabitant, Meor so. 551. n. 741
ne free de un Borough, il poit Eslier, s'il voit server a lour Election, ou
nemy, pur le Borough.

If a Man be not an Inhabitant, nor free of a Borough, he may choose if he will
serve at their Election, or not, for the Borough.

By the Statute none ought to be chosen a Burgess of a Town, Rush. Col. Vol.
1.689.
in which he does not inhabit; but the usage of Parliament is contrary. But if
Information be brought upon the said Statute against such a Burgess, I think
that the Statute is a good Warrant for us to give Judgment against him, by
Whitlock.

The King cannot grant a Charter of Exemption to any Man to be freed from
Election of Knight, Citizen, 4 Inst. 49.
or Burgess of the Parliament.

A Person Outlawed in a Personal Cause may be a Burgess. Towns. Col. 63.64.
Vide John Smiths Ca. Si Simon d'Ewes Jour. 48. Col. 2.480. Col. 1 Vide Sir
Simon d'Ewes Jour. 481. Col. 2. and 482. Col. 1.
See Bohun's Collection, p. 278. 279.

If exception be taken to such an Election, and an Outlawry alleged to
disinable him, the Stat. 23 Hen. 6. c. 15. will disinable most of this House,
for they ought to be Burgesses resident.

Though the Common Law does disinable the Party, yet the Privilege of the House
being urged, that prevails over the Law.

A Man Attainted, Ibid.
Outlawed, or Excommunicated, or not lawfully elected, if he be returned, out
of all doubt is a lawful Burgess.

A Knight Banneret, 4 Inst. 46.
being no Lord of Parliament, is eligible to be Knight, Citizen, or Burgess of
the House of Commons, being under the Degree of a Baron, which is the lowest
Degree of the Lord's House.

An Earl's Son may be a Member of the House of Commons. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour.
244. Col. 2. 4 Inst. 47.


One under the Age of one and twenty years is not eligible. Neither can any
Lord of Parliament sit there till he be full one and twenty Years.

An Alien cannot be elected of the Parliament, Ibid.
because he is not the King's Liege Subject; and so it is, albeit he be made
Denizon by Letters Patents, etc. But if an Alien be naturalized by Parliament,
then he is eligible to this, or any other Place of Judicature.

No Alien denizated ought to sit here, Petyt 's Miscell. Parl. 175. Ibid.
per Sir Edward Coke. Note also the St. 4 An. c. 8. for settling the
Succession, etc. excludes Aliens.

Resolved upon the Question, that the Election of Mr. Walter Steward, being no
natural born Subject, 4 Inst. 47.
is void, and a Warrant to go for a new Writ.

None of the Judges of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas, or Barons of the
Exchequer, that have Judicial Places, can be chosen Knight, Citizen, or Burgess
of Parliament, as it is now holden, because they are Assistants in the Lord's
House. Yet read Parl. Roll. 31 H. 6.

But any that have Judician Places in other Courts Ecclesiastical or Civil,
Ibid.
being no Lords of Parliament, are eligible.

None of the Clergy, though he be of the lowest Order, is eligible to be Knight,
Moor so. 783. n. 1083. 4 Inst. 47.
Citizen, or Burgess of Parliament, because they are of another Body, viz. of
the Convocation.

The Clergy of the Convocation-House are no Part or Member of the Parliament.
Hakewel 59. Vide Fox's Book of Martyrs f. 1639. 4 Inst. 48.


A Man Attainted of Treason or Felony, etc. is not eligible. For he ought to be
magis idoneus, discretus, and sufficiens.

Mayors and Bailiffs of Towns Corporate are eligible. 4 Inst 48. Vide contra
Brook Abridg. tit. Parl. 7.


At a Parliament holden 38. H. 8. it was admitted and accepted, that if a
Burgess of Parliament be made a Mayor of a Town, or have Judicial Jurisdiction,
Crompt. 16.
or is Sick, etc. that these are Causes sufficient to choose others.

Any of the Profession of the Common Law, and which is in Practice of the same,
4 Inst. 48.
is eligible.

By special Order of the House of Commons, Ibid.
the Attorney General is not eligible to be a Member of the House of Commons.
Vide infra.

At the Parliament began in October 28. Mor. rep. 551. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour.
441, 442. Moor 551.
Eliz. and continued 'till the 29th. Tho. Egerton, Solicitor General, was by
Writ commanded to attend in Parliament upon the Lords in the upper House, and
after he had attended there three Days, he was chosen a Burgess for Reading in
Com. Berks and upon the Return of him, the Commons went to the House of Lords,
and demanded that he might be dismissed from further attendance there, and come
into their House. But upon Consultation and Defense made by himself, the Lords
retained him, and the main Reason was, because they were first posessed of him.

And in 5. Mor. ut Sup. Simon d'Ewes Jour. 121, Col. 1, 2.
Eliz. Ouslow being a Member of the lower House, upon a Prorogation of
Parliament, was made Solicitor General, and when the Parliament met again, he
was commanded by Writ, to attend the Lords House, though chosen Speaker of the
House of Commons, but the Commons demanded him, and it was granted, because he
was a Member of the lower House first; so that this was the difference between
his, Journ. Dom. Co. 21. Jac. 1.10. Martij. Vid. Petyts Miscell. Parl. 174.
and the case above.

Sir Dudley Diggs said, that in that Parliament, when Bacon Attorney was in
Question, whither he ought to sit in the House of Commons or no, it was overruled
he ought not; but yet in favor of him he was suffered to sit there, and an
Express order was made that never any other Attorney after should.

So careful were our Ancestors not to admit any to be a Representative of the
People who was a Dependant on, or could be influenced by the Court, etc.

18 Eliz. 1585. Concluded by the House, Sir Simon d'Ewes, Jour. 249. Col. 1.
that Mr. Sergeant Jeffreys, being one of the Knights returned for Sussex, may
have Voice or give his Attendance in this House, as a Member of the same,
notwithstanding his Attendance in the Upper House, as one of the Queen's
Sergeants, for his Counsel there, where he has no Voice indeed, nor is any
Member of the same.

23 Eliz. 1580. Popham Solicitor General, Id. 281. Col. 1.
upon demand made by the House, was restored to them by the Lords, beause he
was a Member of the House of Commons, and they possessed of him before he was
Solicitor, or had any Place of Attendance in the Upper House.

No Sheriff shall be chosen for a Knight of Parliament, nor for a Burgess; why?
Book of Entr. 41.1. Crompton's Jur. 3. 4 Inst. 48.
because nominated by the Crown.

1. Car. 1. The Sheriff of the County of Buckingham was chosen Knight for the
County of Norfolk, and returned into the Chancery; and had the Privilege of
Parliament allowed to him, by the Judgment of the whole House of Commons.

Vide de hoc Pro and Con, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal 38, 436, 624, 625.

1 Jac. 1. Scobel 96.
Sess. 2. Sir John Peyton, Knight. returned the last Session, and since chosen
Sheriff; Resolved upon the Question, that he shall attend his Service here.

The Personal Residence and Attendance of Sheriffs is required within their
Bailywicks, Rush Coll. vol 1.684, 685.
during the time of their Sheriffwick. Mr. Walter Long, being Sheriff of Wilts,
was after chosen Citizen for Bath; and for that Offense was committed, and
fined ( viz. because he sat and served in Parliament.)

Sir Andrew Noel, Touns. Col. 185. Vid. de hoc. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 38. Col.
1, 2. and 624. Col. 2.
Knight. Sheriff of Rutland, returned himself Knight, and adjudged a void Return,
and a Warrant ordered for a new Election. For ( said Sergeant Harris) we know,
in Law, that a Man cannot make an Indenture to himself; no more can he here,
between himself and the County; for there are required two Persons. Yet Sir
Edward Hobby said, That the House might well receive him, and vouched a
Precedent, when the Bailiffs of Southwark returned themselves Burgesses, and
were received. See also Bohun's Collection, 81.143.153.188.243.253.254.

The Fee for the Knight of any County is, four Shillings per Diem, England.
and every Citizen or Burgess is to have two Shillings per Diem. 4 Inst. 46.


Where one Person is chosen and returned to serve in several Places, Scobel 18.
Vide Sir S. d'Ewe's Jour. passim.
it is in his Election to make his Choice in the House in his own Person, for
what Place he will serve, and wave the other Election, so as a Writ may issue
for a new Election, that the Number may be full.

No Tallage or Aid shall be taken or levied by Us, or our Heirs, St. So. E. I.
c. 1. Of the Elected vide ante. 14.21.
in our Realm without the Goodwill and Assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land.

The King wills and commands, Stat. 5. R. 2. c. 4. Persons and Commonalty
summoned to attend, etc. as of old.
and it is assented in Parliament by the Prelates, Lords and Commons, That all
Persons and Commonalties, which shall have the Summons of Parliament, shall
come to the Parliaments in the Manner as they are bound to do, and have been
accustomed within the Realm of England, of old Times.

And if any Person of the same Realm, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
absenting to be a merced and punished as in Old Times.
which shall have the said Summons (be Knight of the Shire, Citizen of City,
Burgess of Borough, or other Person, Commonalty) do absent himself, and come
not at the said Summons (except he may reasonably, England.
and honestly excuse him to our Lord the King) he shall be amerced, and
otherwise punished as in old Times has been used, etc.

That Knights of Shires, which shall be chosen in every Shire, St. 1. H. 5. c.
1. Knights of Shires to be elected of such only who reside within the Countries
at the Dat. of the Writ.
be not chosen, unless they be resident within the same Shire, the Day of the
Date of the Writ of Summons.

And that the Citizens and Burgesses of the Cities and Boroughs be chosen Men,
Citizens and Burgesses to reside in, and be free of the Cities and Boroughs.
Citizens and Burgesses, resient, dwelling, and free in the same Cities and
Boroughs, and no other in any wise.

That such as have the greatest Number of them that may expend 40 s. by the
Year, Knights of Shires shall be such as have the majority of those that can
expend 40 sa Year, or more, and be resident.
and above, shall be returned (Knight of the Shire) etc. and that they which
shall be chosen shall be dwelling, and resient within the same Counties.

Ordained, St. 23. H. 6. c. 15. Citizens and Burgesses only to be elected by
Citizens and Burgesses, and the Sheriff to direct his Precept accordingly.
etc. That every Sheriff after the Delivery of any Writ (of Election) to him,
shall make and deliver without Fraud, a sufficient Precept under his Seal to
every Mayor and Bailiff, or to Bailiffs or Bailiff where no Mayor is, England.
of the Cities and Boroughs within his County, reciting the said Writ,
commanding them by his Precept, if it be a City, to choose, etc. Citizens; and
in the same Manner if it be a Borough, to choose Burgesses.

And every Sheriff at every Time that he does contrary to this, Knights,
Citizens, or Burgesses elected, and not duly returned (the Sheriff acting
contrary to have Action of Debt against him, his Executors, or Administrators,
for 100 l. with Costs, wherein no Wager of Law, etc.
or any other Statute for the Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses,
before made, shall forfeit and pay to every Person chosen Knight, Citizen or
Burgess in his County, and not duly returned, 100 l. whereof every Knight,
Citizen or Burgess so grieved, severally shall have his Action of Debt against
the said Sheriff, or his Executors or Administrators, to demand and have the
said 100 l. with his Costs spent. And that the Defendant shall not wage his
Law, or have any Essoign.

And if any Mayor and Bailiffs, The like Action given against Mayor or
Bailiffs, their Executors or Administrators for 40 l. Debt and Costs, for
returning others than such as are chosen Citizens and Burgesses by Citizens and
Burgesses. And no Wager of Law, etc. Such Knt. Citizen, and Burgess to commence
the Action within 3 Months after the Commencement of such Parliament, and
proceed without Fraud
or Bailiffs or Bailiff, where no Mayor is, shall return others than those
which be chosen, etc. he shall forfeit and pay to every Person hereafter chosen
Citizen or Burgess, and not returned, 40 l. whereof every of the Citizens and
Burgesses so grieved, severally shall have his Action of Debt, against every of
the said Mayor and Bailiffs (or Bailiffs or Bailiff where no Mayor is) or
against their Executors, England.
Administrators, to demand and have of every of them, 40 l. with his Costs in
this Case expended.

And that in such Action of Debt, no Defendant shall wage his Law, nor have any
Essoign.

Provided that every Knight, Citizen and Burgess in due Form chosen, and not
returned as asoresaid, shall begin his said Action within three Months after
the Parliament commenced, and to proceed in the same Suit effectually, without
Fraud.

And if any Knight, If any Knt. Citizen, or Burgess returned, be put out, etc.
100 l. forfeited to the King by any Person put in his place, and serving as
such And a like Action against him, etc. for 100 l. Debt and Costs to the
partygrieved, to be commenced within 3 Mo. after the Commencement of Parliam.
No Wagers of Law, etc. And like Process as in Trespass at common Law.
Citizen or Burgess hereafter returned by the Sheriff, in Manner asoresaid,
after such Return be by any Person put out, and another put in his Place, that
such Person so put in the Place of him which is out, if he take upon him to be
Knight, Citizen or Burgess at any Parliament, shall forfeit to the King 100 l.
and 100 l. to the Knight, Citizen or Burgess so returned by the Sheriff, and
after put out. And that the Knight, Citizen or Burgess so put out, shall have
an Action of Debt of the same 100 l. against such Person put in his Place, his
Executors or Administrators, England.
provided he begin his Suit within three Months after the Parliament commenced,
etc. And that no Defendant in such Action shall wage his Law, nor be essoigned.
And that such Process shall be in the Actions aforesaid, as in a Writ of
Trespass against the Peace, at Common Law.

That the Knights of the Shires for the Parliament, shall be notable Knights of
the same Counties, Knts. of the Shires be Knts. of the Counties they shall be
elected for, or Esquires, or Gentlemen able to be Knts. and not Yeomen, etc.
for the which they shall be chosen, or otherwise such notable Esquires or
Gentlemen born of the same Counties as shall be able to be Knights. And no Man
to be such Knight, which stands in the Degree of a Yeoman, or under.

That no Knights (of Shires) Citizens, St. 6 H. 8 c. 16. Knts. Citizens, etc.
not to depart or be absent from Parliament, without leave of the House to be
entered in the Journal.
Burgesses and Barons (of Cinque Ports) nor any of them that be elected to
Parliament, do depart from the said Parliament, nor absent himself from the
same, till the said Parliament be fully finished, ended, or prorogued, except
he or they so departing have License of the Speaker and Commons in the said
Parliament assembled, England.
and the same License entered of Record in the Book of the Clerk of the
Parliament, appointed for the Commons House, etc.

That the two Knights to be elected to Parliament for the Shire of Monmouth
(heretofore Part of Wales) and the one Burgess for the Borough of Monmouth, St.
27 H. 8. c. 26. The two Knts. and one Burgess for the Borough and County of
Monmorth to have like Privilege, etc. as other Knights and Burgesses.
shall have like Dignity, Pre-eminence and Privilege, as other Knights and
Burgesses of Parliament.

And that the Knight which shall be elected for the Shires of Brecknock, And
Knt. for each County, and Burgess for each Shire-Town in Wales, to have like
Privileges etc.
Radnor, Montgomery and Denbigh, and for every other Shire within the Country
or Dominion of Wales, and for every other Borough being a Shire-Town within the
same, shall have like Dignity, Pre-eminence and Privilege, as other Knights of
Parliament.

That the two Knights to be elected for the County Palatine of Chester, The two
Knts. for the County, and two Burgesses for the City of Chester, to have like
Privileges, etc.
and two Citizens as Burgesses for the City of Chester, shall be Knights and
Burgesses of the Court of Parliament, and have like Voice and Authority, to
Intents and Purposes, as any other the Knights and Burgesses of the said Court
have, use, and enjoy, etc. Vide ante 176.

That the two Knights to be elected for the County, England.
and the two Citizens as Burgesses for the City of Durham ( the Election of
Knights of the Shire to be by a Majority of Freeholders; Stat. 25 C. chapter 29.
ante. The two Knights to be elected for the County and two Burgesses for the
City of Durham, by a Majority of Freeholders, and a like Majority of Mayor,
Aldermen and Freemen present, to have like Privileges etc.
and the Burgesses by a Majority of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Freemen present at
such Election) shall be Knights and Burgesses of the High Court of Parliament,
to all Intents and Purposes, and have and use the like Voice, Authority and
Places therein, to all Intents and Purposes, as any other the Knights and
Burgesses of the said Court, and shall, have, use and enjoy all such and the
like Liberties, Advantages, Dignities and Privileges concerning the said Court,
to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes as any other the Knights and
Burgesses of the said High Court have, had, used, etc. Vide ante 176.

That every Person which hereafter shall be elected a Knight, Stat. 5. Eliz. c.
1. Knights, Citizens, etc. before their sitting in Parliament, to take the Oath
of Supremacy before the Lord Steward, or his Deputies, and for the contrary to
lose their Memberships, and incur such Penalties as if they had sat without
Election, Return, etc.
Citizen or Burgess, or Baron for any of the Five Ports, for any Parliament or
Parliaments hereafter to be holden, shall before he enter the Parliament House,
or have any Voice there, openly receive and pronounce the Oath ( The Oath of
Supremacy mentioned in this Act, is abrogated by the Stat. 1 W. and M. chapter 1.
and a new one appointed, which see, ante p. 177.
expressed in the Stat. 1 Eliz. chapter 1. England.
commonly called the Oath of Supremacy) before the Lord Steward (of the Queen's
Household) or his Deputy or Deputies for that Time to be appointed, and that he
which shall enter into the Parliament House without taking the said Oath, shall
be deemed no Knight, Citizen, Burgess nor Baron for that Parliament, nor shall
have any Voice, but shall be to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, as if
he had never been returned nor elected Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron for
that Parliament, and shall suffer such Pains and Penalties, as if he had
presumed to sit in the same without Election, Return or Authority.

That all and every the Knights, Citizens, Stat. 7. Jac 1. c. 6. Knights,
Citizens, etc. at any Parliament, or Sessions, to take the Oath of Allegiance
before the Lord Steward, etc. ere they be permitted to sit.
Burgesses and Barons of the Five Ports of the Commons House of Parliament, at
any Parliament or Session of Parliament, before he or they shall be permitted
to enter into the said House ( shall make, take and receive the Oath of
Obedience mentioned in the Statute of 3 Jac. 1. chapter 4. commonly called the Oath
of Allegiance The Oath of Allegiance mentioned in this Act, is abrogated by the
Stat. of 1 W. and M. c. 1. as aforesaid. post. 198.
) before the Lord Steward ( of the King's Household) his Deputy or Deputies.

That none which shall be a Member of the House of Commons, England.
shall vote in the said House, St. 30 C. 2. c. 1. Members of the House of
Commons shall not vote or sit there during any Debate after their Speaker
chosen, until they have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
subscribed the Test, between Hours of 9 and 4, in a full House.
or sit there during any Debate in the said House, after their Speaker is
chosen, until such Member shall first take the several These Oaths are
abrogated by Stat. 1 W. and M. c. 1.
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and make, subscribe, and audibly repeat the
Declaration ( in this Act contained, commonly called the Test) which said Oaths
and Declaration shall be in this and every succeeding Parliament solemnly and
publicly made and subscribed betwixt the Hours of Nine in the Morning and Four
in the Afternoon, by every such Member at the Table, in the Middle of the said
House, and whilst a full House of House is there duly sitting, with their
Speaker in his Chair, and that the same be done in the House, in suchlike
Order or Method as the House is called over by.

If any Member of the House of Commons shall presume to do any thing contrary
to this Act, Members acting contrary, shall be adjudged Popish Recusants
convict, and suffer as such, and be disabled to hold any Office or Place of
Profit or Trust in England or is Dominions, to sit or vote in Parlia-, meant,
bring any Action or Information at Law, or Suit in Equity, be Guardian of any
Child, Executor or Administrator of any Person, or capable of any Legacy or
Deed of G^^, and forfeit 500 l for every Offense to any that will sue by Action
of Debt, etc. where no Essoign, etc.
every Member so offending shall from thenceforth be deemed and adjudged a
Popish Recusant Convict, to all Intents and Purposes, and shall forfeit and
suffer as a Popish Recusant Convict, and shall be disabled to hold or execute
any Office or Place of Profit or Trust, England.
Civil or Military, in any of His Majesty's Realms of England or Ireland,
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or in any of His Majesty's
Realms, Islands, or Foreign Plantations to the said Realms belonging, and shall
be disabled to sit or vote in Parliament, or to sue or use any Action, Bill,
Plaint, or Information in course of Law, or to prosecute any Suit in any Court
of Equity, or to be Guardian of any Child, or Executor or Administrator of any
Person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift, and shall forfeit for every
wilful Offense against this Act the Sum of 500 l. to be recovered or received
by him or them that will sue for the same, and to be prosecuted by any Action
of Debt, Suit, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, where no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall lie.

It shall be lawful to and for the House of Commons, as often as they shall see
Occasion, Members obliged to take the said Oaths and subscribe the Test in the
House as often as the House shall think fit, and Members acting contrary, and
presuming to sit, incapacitated during that Parliament.
to order or cause all or any of the Members of Parliament openly in their
House to take the said Oaths, England.
and to make and subscribe the said Declaration, at such Times, and in such
Manner, as they shall appoint. And if any Member of the House of Commons shall,
contrary to such Order made by their House, wilfully presume to sit therein,
without taking the said Oaths, and making and subscribing the said Declaration,
every such Member so presuming to sit, shall be adjudged, and is declared to be
incapable and disabled in Law, to all Intents and Purposes, to sit in the said
House, or give any Voice therein during that Parliament.

And in Case any Member of the House, Such Members Election declared void, and
the Speaker by Order of the House to issue his Warrant for a new Election.
shall by virtue of this Act be disabled to sit or vote in the House, then,
without any further Conviction, or other Proceedings against such Member, the
Place for which he was elected, is hereby declared void, and a new Writ shall
issue out of Chancery, by Warrant from the Speaker, and by Order of the said
House, for the Election of a new Member, in the Place of such Member so
disabled, to all Intents and Purposes, as if such Member or Members were
naturally dead, etc.

During the taking the Oaths and subscribing the Test, all other Proceedings in
Parliament to cease, and the Oath, Declaration and Subscription, with a
Schedule of the Names of the Persons taking and subscribing them, England.
to be entered and filed in Parchment Rolls provided by the Clerk of the House,
and each Member to pay only 12 d. for every such Entry.

That the said Act 30 Car. 2. Stat. 1 W. and M. c. 1. Members of the House of
Commons qualified to sit and vote by taking the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy appionted by this Act (instead of the old ones, now repealed) and by
subscribing the Test according to the Limitations, etc. of the preceding
Statute 30 Car. 2
and all other Acts of Parliament, as to so much of the said Act or Acts only
as concerns the taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, or either of them
in the said Acts respectively mentioned) by any Member or Members of the House,
with relation to their sitting and voting in Parliament, are hereby repealed to
all Intents and Purposes, any Thing in the said recited Act or Acts to the
contrary. And

In all future Parliaments the Oaths (in this Act mentioned) and the
Declaration in the Act 30 Car. 2. mentioned, shall be taken, made, subscribed
and repeated by every Member of the House, within the Time, and in the same
Manner and Form, and under the Penalties and Disabilities as the said Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the said Declaration by the said Act of Car. 2.
are limited, ordained and appointed (and not at any other Time, England.
or in any other Manner) to enable them to sit and vote in Parliament, any
Thing in the said Act or Acts to the contrary.

That Elections of Members of Parliament ought to be Free. Stat. 1 W. and M. c.
2. The claim of Right.


That the Freedom of Speech and Debates on Proceedings in Parliament ought not
to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parliament. Enacted
accordingly.

That no Member of the House of Commons shall at any Time be concerned directly
or indirectly, Sta. 5 and 6 W. and M. chapter 7. Members of the House of Commons to
be no ways concerned in Duties or Aids to be granted by Parliament, except
Commissioners of the Treasury, Customs, Excise, and Land Tax.
or any other in Trust for him, in the farming, collecting or managing any of
the Duties, or other Aids that hereafter shall be granted by Act of Parliament
(except the Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Officers, and Commissioners
for managing the Customs and Excise, not exceeding the present Number in each
Office, and Commissioners of the Land Tax. (Quere the Novelty of this
Exception.)

That any Member or Members of the House of Commons, Stat. 5 and 6 W. and M. c.
20. Members of the House of Commons may be Members of the Bank.
may be a Member or Members of the Corporation ( of the Governor and Company of
the Bank of England. England.
)

That o Collector, Supervisor, Gauger or other Officer, or Person whatsoever
concerned or employed in the charging, levying or managing the Duties of
Excise, or any Branch or Part thereof, shall by Word, Officers of the Excise
not to intermedle, etc.
Message or Writing, or in any other Manner endeavor to persuade any Elector
to give, or dissuade any Elector from giving his Vote for the Choice of any
Person to be a Knight of the Shire, Citizen, Burgess or Baron of any County,
City, Borough or Cinque-Port, and every Officer, or other Person offending
therein, shall forfeit the Sum of 100 l. one Moiety thereof to the Informer,
the other Moiety to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be
committed, to be recovered by any Person that shall sue for the same, by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record
at Westminster, in which no Essoign, Protection, Privilege, or more than one
Imparlance shall be allowed, and every Person convict on Suit of the said
Offense, shall be for ever incapacitated to bear any Office, or Place of Trust
under the Crown.

That no Persons hereafter to be elected to serve in Parliament for any County,
City, Town, England.
Borough, St. 7. W. 3. c. 4. No Persons to be elected after the Test of the
Writ shall by themselves, or any other at their charge, before the Election,
give, promise, or oblige themselves to give any thing to any Person, having a
Vote in particular or to any County or Place in general in order to be elected.
Port or Place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, after the Test of the Writ of Summons, or after the Test,
or issuing out, or ordering of the Writ or Writs of Election upon the calling,
or summoning of any Parliament, or after any such Place becomes vacant, shall,
or do hereafter by himself, or themselves, or by any other Ways or Means on his
or their Behalf, or at his or their Charge, before his or their Election in
England, Wales or Berwick, directly or indirectly, give, present or allow to
any Person, having Voice or Vote in such Election, any Money, Meat, Drink,
Entertainment or Provision, or make any Present, Gift, Reward or Entertainment,
or shall make any Promise, Agreement, Obligation or Engagement to give or allow
any Money, Meat, Drink, Provision, Present, Reward or Entertainment, to or for
any such Person in Particular, or to any such County, City, Town, Borough, Port
or Place in general, or to or for the Use, Advantage, Benefit, Employment,
Profit or Preferment of any such Person or Place, in Order to be elected,
England.
or for being elected to serve in Parliament, for such County, City, Town,
Borough, Port or Place.

And that every Person so giving, presenting or allowing, Such Persons so
giving, promising, etc. disabled to serve, as never elected or returned.
making, promising or engaging, doing, acting or proceeding, shall be, and are
hereby disabled and incapacitated upon such Election to serve in Parliament for
such County, City, Town, Borough, Port or Place, and shall be deemed and taken
no Member in Parliament, and shall not act, sit or have any Vote or Place in
Parliament, but shall be, and are to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes,
as if they had been never returned or elected, etc.

That all false Returns wilfully made of any Knight of the Shire, Stat. 7 and
S. W. 3. c. 7. and continued by St. 12. and 13. W. 3. c. 5. False Returns of
Knights, Citizens, etc. illegal and prohibited.
Citizen, Burgess, Baron of the Cinque Ports, or other Member to serve in
Parliament are against Law, and are hereby prohibited.

The Party grieved ( by any false return, An Action given to any duly elected
against the Officer and Procurer of a false Return, or Return contrary to the
last determination of the Kight of Election in any Court at Westminster, with
double Damages, and full Costs.
and contrary to the last Determination of the Right of Election of the House
of Commons, which is also adjudg'd a false Return) (to wit) every Person that
shall be duly Elected to Parliament for any County, City, Borough, Cinque-Port,
or Place, England.
by such false Return, may Sue the Officers and Persons making or procuring the
same, and every or any of them, at his Election, in any of his Majesty's Courts
of Record at Westminster, and shall recover double the Damages he shall sustain
by reason thereof, together with his full Costs of Suit.

And if any Officer shall wilfully, Like Action given the elected against
Officer, etc. falsely, etc. making double Returns, and the Prosecuters of such
Returns. Contracts Bonds, etc. given to procure the Return of any Members
adjudged void, and such (Members) as make or give them to procure any false or
double Return, forfeit 300 l. One third to the King, another to the Poor of the
County, City, etc. and a third to the Informer, with his Costs, to be recovered
by Action of Debt, etc. wherein no Essoign etc. and but one Imparlance.
falsely, and maliciously Return more Persons than are required to be chosen by
the Writ or Precept on which any Choice is made, the like Remedy against him or
them, and the Party or Parties that willingly procure the same, or any of them,
by the Party grieved at his Election.

All Contracts, Promises, Bonds, and Securities whatsoever hereafter made or
given to procure any Return of any Member to Parliament, or any thing relating
thereunto, shall be adjudged void; and whoever makes or gives such Contract,
Security, Promise, or Bond, or any Gift or Reward to procure such false or
double Return, shall forseit the Sum of 300 l. one third part to his Majesty,
another third part to the Poor of the County, City, Borough or Place concerned,
England.
and one third part to the Informer, with his Costs, to be recovered in any
Court of Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed,
nor more than one Imparlance.

The Clerk of the Crown to keep a Book of Entry of every single and double
Return, Clerk of the Crown to keep Books of Entry of Returns, etc.
and of every Alteration and Amendment in every such Return, whereto all
Persons are to have access, and take Copies of so much as desired at a
reasonable Fee -- The Parties prosecuting such Suit (Candidates) may give such
Book, or a true Copy thereof in Evidence, and have like Advantage as by
producing the Record itself: And if the Clerk of the Crown makes not such Entry
within six Days after any Return, or alters any Return without Order of the
House of Commons, or gives a Certificate of any Person not returned, or
wilfully neglects or omits his Duty herein, he shall forfeit 500 l. for each
Offense to the parth grieved (Candidate) to be recovered as aforesaid, and lose
his Office, and be for ever incapable of holding it.

Every Information or Action upon this Statute, England.
shall be brought within two Years after the cause of Action shall arise,
Informations or Actions on this Statute to be brought within 2 Years.
and not after.

That upon every Election to be made of any Knight or Knights of the Shire (in
case a Poll shall be required) the Sheriff or his Undersheriff shall appoint
for each Candidate such one Person as shall be nominated to him by each
Candidate, Candidates for Knights of the Shire may nominate Persons to be
Inspectors of the Poll, and may require each Freeholder to be sworn before
admitted to Poll.
to be Inspectors of every Clerk who shall be appointed for taking the Poll;
and every Freeholder, before he is admitted to Poll at the same Election,
shall, if required by the Candidates or any of them, first take the Oath (in
this Act contained) Vide ante.

And if any Person do unlawfully and corruptly procure or suborn any Freeholder
or Person to take the said Oath in order to be Polled, Any Person procuring a
Freeholder or other to take the Oath for the Poll, whereby he commits Perjury,
and convicted of such Subornation, for every Offense ( forfeits 40 l. and be
incapacitated as a Witness till such Judgment reversed; and for want of 40 l.
imprisoned half a Year and stand in the Pillory an Hour, per Stat. 5 Eliz. chapter
9.
whereby he shall commit wilful and corrupt Perjury, and shall be thereof
convicted, he for every such Offense shall incur the like Pains and Penalties
as are in and by one Act made in the 5th Elizabeth, etc. enacted against all
such who shall, etc. Suboru or Procure any Person to commit any unlawful and
corrupt Perjury contrary to the said Act. England.


The said Sheriff, Without the Candidates consent, the County Court not to be
adjourned from the place of Election, nor the Poll discontinued.
or in his Absence his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute, shall not
adjourn the County Court from the Place of Election to any other Town or Place
within the same County without consent of the Candidates, but shall duly and
orderly proceed to take the Poll from Day to Day, and Time to Time, without any
further or other Adjournment, without the Consent of the Candidates for such
Adjournment.

Every Sheriff, Any Person may demand a Copy of any Poll, which the Sheriffs,
Mayors, etc. are required to deliver, paying reasonably for writing it. To each
Party grieved, Mayors, Sheriffs, etc. for every wilful offense forfeit 500 l.
to be recovered by such Party, his Executors, or Administrators, with full
Costs, by Action of Debt, etc. wherein no Essoign, etc.
Undersheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, and other Officer, to whom the Execution of any
Writ or Precept shall belong for the electing Members to Parliament, shall
forthwith deliver to such Person or Persons as shall desire the same, a Copy of
the Poll taken at such Election, paying only a reasonable Charge for writing:
And every Sheriff, Undersheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, and other Officer, to whom
the Execution of any Writ or Precept for electing Members to Parliament does
belong, for every wilful Offense contrary to this Act shall forfeit to every
Party so aggrieved the Sum of 500 l. to be recovered by him or them, England.
his or their Executors or Administrators, together with full Costs of Suit,
and for which he or they may Sue by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information in any Court at Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection, Wager
of Law, Privilege, or Imparlance, shall be allowed.

No Person shall be capable of being elected a Member to Parliament, who is not
of the Age of 21 Years, None shall be elected under the age of 21 Years. The
choice of any elected under that Age declared void; and such Minor sitting etc.
in Parliament shall incur like Penalties as if sitting, etc. unchosen or
returned.
and every Election or Return of any Person under that Age is declared Null and
Void. And if any such Minor chosen shall presume to sit or vote in Parliament,
he shall incur such Penalties and Forfeitures as if he had presumed to Sit and
Vote in Parliament without being chosen or returned.

The Sheriff of the County of Southampton, Candidates for the County of
Southampton, may demand of the Sheriff, after the end of the Poll at
Winchester, an Adjournmens to Newport in the Isle of W^ight.
or his Deputy, at the request of one or more of the Candidates for Election of
a Knight or Knights for that County, shall adjourn the Poll from Winchester,
after every Freeholder then and there present is Polled, England.
to Newport in the Isle of Wight, for the Ease of the Inhabitants of the said
Island, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary.

No Person which shall refuse to take the Oaths ( of Allegiance and Supremacy,
St. 7 and 8 W. 3. c. 27. Candidates may require the Sheriff or Chief Officer on
the Poll, at any Election, to administer the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
to Electors, (and if Quakers, the Declaration of Fidelity) and on refusal, not
to admit them to Vote.
) directed by an Act made in the First Year of His present Majesty, and the
late Queen Mary, or being Quakers, shall refuse to subscribe the Declaration of
Fidelity directed by one other Act made in the said First Year of His present
Majesty and the late Queen (to be administered on the Poll by the Sheriff or
Chief Officer at any Election) at the Request of any one of the Candidates,
shall be admitted to give any Vote for the Election of any Knight of the Shire,
Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the Cinque Ports, to serve in Parliament.

Enacted, St. 11. and 12. W. 3. c. 2. Members of the House of Commons while
such by themselves, Deputies, or Trustees, taking or executing any Office in
the Excise, or Appeals thereof, declared incapable of sitting, etc
etc. That if any Member of the House of Commons, during the time of his being
a Member of Parliament, by his Deputy, or any other in trust for him or his
benefit, take, enjoy, or execute any Office, Place, or Employment touching or
concerning the farming, managing, or collecting the Duty of Excise, or
determing Appeals concerning the said Duty, or comptrolling or Auditing the
Accounts of the same, such Person is hereby declared and enacted to be
absolutely incapable of siting, voting, or acting as a Member of the House of
Commons in such Parliament.

That after the Limitation of the Crown to the Princess Sophia of Hanover, St.
12 and 13 W. 3. c. 2. For the Limitation of the Crown to the House of Hanover
(by this Act) shall take effect no Person born out of the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, or Ireland, or the Dominions thereunto belonging, ( although he be
naturalized or made a Denizen; except such as are born of English Parents)
shall be capable to be a Member of the House of Commons.

Enacted, Members of the House of Commons incapacitated from being
Commissioners or Farmers of the Customs, or to hold in their own or others
Names, or by others in trust, or execute by Deputies any Office in the Customs.
etc. That no Member of the House of Commons shall be capable of being a
Commissioner or Farmer of the Customs, or of holding or enjoying in his own
Name, or in the Name of any other Person in Trust for him, or for his Use or
Benefit, or of Executing,. by himself or his Deputy, any Office, Place or
Employment touching or concerning the Farming, Collecting, or Managing the
Customs. Vide ante of Officers of the Excise.

If any Member of the House of Commons shall, Members while such, so taking or
executing any such Office, declared incapable of sitting, etc.
during the time of his being a Member of Parliament, by himself, or his
Deputy, or any other in Trust for him, or for his Benefit, take, enjoy, or
execute any Office, Place or Employment, touching or concerning the Farming,
Managing, or collecting the Customs, such Person is hereby declared and enacted
to be absolutely incapable of Sitting, Voting, or Acting as a Member in such
Parliament.

Enacted, St. 1^ and 14 W. 3. c. 6. Members of the House of Commons not to vote
or sit there during any Debate, after their Speaker chosen, until they have
taken and subscribed the Abjuration between 9 and 4, in a full House.
etc. That none which shall be a Member of the House of Commons, shall Vote in
the House of Commons, or Sit there during any Debate in the said House of
Commons, after their Speaker is chosen, until such Member shall, from time to
time take the Oath ( mentioned in this Act, commonly called the Abjuration, and
altered by Statute 1 Annae chapter 22. again by Stat. 4 and 5 Annae chapter 8. again by
Stat. 6 Annae chapter 7.) And subscribe the same in manner following; (that is to
say) the said Oath shall be in this and every other succeeding Parliament,
solemnly and publicly made and subscribed between the Hours of Nine in the
Morning, and Four in the Afternoon, by every such Member of the House of
Commons, at the Table, in the middle of the said House, and whilst a full House
is there duly Sitting with their Speaker in his Chair. And

If any Member shall presume to Vote, Members voting, not having so taken, etc.
the said Oath, adjudged Popish Recusants convict, and forfeit as such, and
disabled to hold any Office or Place of Profit or Trust in England or its
Dominions, to sit or vote in Parliam. bring any Action or Information at Law;
or Suit in Equity, be Guardian of any Child, Executor or Administrator of any
Person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift, and to forfeit 500 l. to any
that will sue by Action of Debt, etc. where no Essoign, etc. shall lie.
not having taken the said Oath, and subscribed the same as aforesaid, he shall
from thence be deemed and adjudged a Popish Recusant convict to all Intents and
Purposes, and shall forfeit and suffer as a Popish Recusant convict, and shall
be disabled to hold or execute any Office or Place of Profit or Trust, Civil or
Military, in England, Ireland, Wales, or in any of the Islands, or Plantations
belonging, and shall be disabled from thenceforth to sit or Vote in Parliament,
or to use any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in course of Law, or to
prosecute any Suit in Equity, or to be Guardian of any Child, or Executor, or
Administrator of any Person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift, and
shall forfeit for every wilful Offense against this Act 500 l. to be recovered
and received by him or them that shall Sue by any Action of Debt, Suit, Bill,
Plaint or Information, in any Court at Westminster, wherein no Essoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall lie.

That no Register ( for the Registering Memorials of Deeds, Stat. 2. and 3
Annae, c. 4. The Register for the West Riding of York, or his Deputy,
incapacitated. Vide post. p. 218.
Conveyances and Wills) within the West Riding in the County of York, or his
Deputy for the Time being, be capable of being chosen a Member to Parliament.

That no Person, St. 4 and 5 Annae, c. 8 No Candidate who shall have in his own
Name or in trust for him or his Benefit, any new Officers or Place of Profit
hereafter to be created, or be a Commissioner or Sub-Commissioner, Secretary or
Receiver of Prizes, Commissioner of the Armies Accounts, Commissioner of the
Sick and wounded, Agent for any Regiment, Commissioner for Wine Licenses,
Governor or Deputy Governor of any of the Plantations, Commissioner in any
out-Port, or have a Pension from the Crown during Pleasure, shall be capable of
being elected or sitting, etc. as a Member.
who shall have in his own Name, or in the Name of any Person or Persons in
Trust for him or for his Benefit, any new Office, or Place of Profit
whatsoever, under the Crown, which at any time hereafter shall be created or
erected, nor any Person who shall be a Commissioner or Sub-Commissioner of the
Prizes, Secretary or Receiver of the Prizes, nor any Comptroller of the
Accounts of the Army, nor any Commissioner of Transports, nor any Commissioner
of the Sick and Wounded, nor any Agent to any Regiment, nor any Commissioner
for Wine Licenses, nor any Governor nor Deputy Governor of any of the
Plantations, nor any Commissioner of the Navy employed in any of the Out-Ports,
nor any Person having any Pension from the Crown during Pleasure, shall be
capeable of being Elected, or of sitting or voting as a Member of the House of
Commons.

If any Person being chosen a Member of the House of Commons shall accept of
any Office of Profit from the Crown during such time as he shall continue a
Member, his Election shall be, Members chosen accepting any Office of Profit
from the Crown, while they continue Members, their Election void, and a new
Writ to issue, but capable of being again Elected.
and is hereby declared to be Void, and a new Writ shall issue for a new
Election, as if such Person so accepting was naturally Dead. Nevertheless such
Person shall be capable of being again Elected, as if his Place had not become
Void as aforesaid.

No greater Number of Commissioners shall be made for the Execution of any
Office than have been employed in the Execution of any such Office from the
first Day of the Session.

Nothing herein contained shall extend to any Member of the House of Commons
being an Officer in Her Majesty's Navy or Army, Members being Officers in the
Navy or Army, receiving any New Commission in either, not incapacitated.
who shall receive any new or other Commission in the Navy or Army
respectively.

If any Person hereby disabled or declared to be incapable to Sit or Vote in
Parliament, Members hereby incapacitated, if returned, their Election void, and
presuming to sit and vote forfeit 500 l. to any that will sue by Action of
Debt, etc. wherein no Essoin, etc and but one Imparlance.
shall nevertheless be returned as a Member to serve for any County, City,
Town, or Cinque-Port in any such Parliament, such Election and Return are
declared to be Void to all Intents and Purposes, and if any Person disabled or
declared incapable by this Act to be Elected, shall presume to sit or vote as a
Member of the House of Commons in any Parliament, such Person so sitting or
voting shall forfeit 500 l. to be recovered by such Person as shall Sue by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or
Wager of Law, shall be allowed, and only one Imparlance.

Forty five shall be the Number of the Representatives of Scotland in the House
of Commons of the Parliament of Great Britain. G. Britain.
Stat. 5 Annae, c. 8.


Every Member of the House of Commons of the Parliament of Great Britain (
until the Parliament of Great Britain shall otherwise direct) shall take the
respective Oaths appointed to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, The Union Act.
by an Act of Parliament made in England in the First Year of the Reign of the
late King William and Queen Mary ( The new Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy)
And make, subscribe, and audibly repeat the Declaration mentioned in an Act of
Parliament made in England in the Thirtieth Year of the Reign of King Charles
the Second ( The Test) and shall take and subscribe the Oath mentioned in an
Act of Parliament made in England in the First Year of Her Majesty's Reign. (
The Abjuration) At such time and in such manner, as the Members of both Houses
of Parliament of England are by the said respective Acts directed to take,
make, and subscribe the same, upon the Penalties and Disabilities in the said
respective Acts contained: And it is declared and agreed, that these Words
(This Realm, The Crown of this Realm, and the Queen of this Realm) mentioned in
the Oaths and Declaration contained in the aforesaid Acts, which were intended
to signify the Crown and Realm of England, shall be understood of the Crown and
Realm of Great Britain, and that in that Sense the said Oaths and Declaration
be taken and subscribed by the Members of the Parliament of Great Britain.

None shall be capable to be elected ( a Representative for any Shire or
Borough of Scotland) but such as are twenty one Years of Age complete, None
capable to be elected for any Shire or Borough of Scotland under 21 Years, nor
unless a Protestant Papists and such as refuse the Formula excluded. Like
Incapacity on Candidates, not at this Time capable by the Laws of Scotland
Stat. 6. An. c. 7.
and Protestant, excluding all Papists, or such who being suspect of Popery,
refuse to swear and subscribe the Formula contained in the third Act made in
the 8th and 9th Sessions of King William's Parliament ( in Scotland) nor shall
be capable to be elected to represent a Shire or Burgh in the Parliament of
Great Britain ( for Scotland) except such as (were at the Time of passing this
Act) capable by the Laws of (Scotland) to be elected as Commissioners for
Shires or Boroughs to the Parliament of Scotland.

A like Clause for incapacitating Persons to be elected, etc. Members of
Parliament, and likewise for incapacitating Members of Parliament, with like
Restrictions, Exceptions and Penalties (throughout the united Kingdom) as are
contained in the Statute 4 and 5 Annae, c. 8. relating to Candidates and
Members for the Parliament of England.

And further, Candidates disabled to be elected or Members to sit, etc. in the
Parliament of England, under like Disabilities, as to any Parliament of Great
Britain.
That every Person disabled to be elected, or to sit or vote in the House of
Commons of any Parliament of England, shall be disabled to be elected, or to
sit, or vote in the House of Commons of any Parliament of Great Britain.

Except the present Commissioners for disposing the Equivalent by the present
or any other Commission.

That every Person who shall refuse to take the Oath of Abjuration, St. 6 Ann.
c. 23. Candidates or others may require the Sheriff, President of the Meeting,
etc. on the Poll at any Election of Members in Great Britain, or of
Commissioners for choosing Burgesses in Scotland to administer the Abjuration
upon Oath (or Affirmation to Quakers) and Electors refusing it, incapable to
vote.
or being a Quaker, shall refuse to declare the Effect thereof upon his solemn
Affirmation, as directed by an Act of Parliament made 7 W. 3. to be administered
by the Sheriff, President of the Meeting, or chief Officer taking the Poll at
any Election of Members to serve in the House of Commons for any Place in Creat
Britain, or Commissioners for choosing Burgesses for any Place in Scotland, at
the Request of any Candidate or other Person present, shall not be capable of
giving any Vote for any Election of any such Member to serve in the House of
Commons for any Place in Great Britain, or Commissioner to choose a Burgess for
any Place in Scotland.

That no Register for the Registring Memorials of Deeds, St. 6 Ann. c. 35. The
Register for the East Riding of Tor^shire, etc. or his Deputy, incapacitated.
Conveyances, Wills, etc. within the East Riding of the County of York, or the
Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, or his Deputy for the Time being, be
capable of being chosen a Member to serve in Parliament. Vide ante 212.

That no Person shall be capable to sit or vote as a Member of the House of
Commons, St. 9 Ann. Persons incapacitated to sit or vote in the House of
Commons who have not an Estate, Freehold or Copyhold for Life, or greater, in
England of 600 l. for a Knight of the Shire, manfully; and 300 l. for a
Citizen, Burgess, etc. and if any such elected, etc. the Election, etc. void.
for any County, City, etc. within that Part of Great Britain called England,
etc. who shall not have an Estate Freehold or Copyhold for his own Life, or for
some greater Estate, either in Law or Equity to his own Use, in Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, above what will satisfy and clear all Encumbrances
within that Part of Great Britain called England, etc. of the annual Value of
six hundred Pounds above Reprizes, for every Knight of a Shire; and of three
hundred Pounds above Reprizes for every Citizen, Burgess, etc. And if any
Persons elected or returned to serve in any Parliament, as a Knight of a Shire,
or as a Citizen, Burgess, etc. shall not, at the Time of such Election and
Return, be seized of, or entitled to such an Estate before required, such
Election and Return shall be void.

Nothing in this Act contained shall extend to make the eldest Son or Heir
Apparent of any Peer or Lord of Parliament, Eldest Son or Heir Apparent of a
Peer or Person qualified to serve as a Knight of a Shire excepted. Universities
in England also excepted.
or of any Person qualified by this Act to serve as Knight of a Shire,
incapable of being elected and returned, and sitting and voting as a Member of
the House of Commons.

Nor extend to either of the Universities in that Part of Great Britain called
England, but that they may elect and return Members to represent them in
Parliament, as heretofore they have done.

No Person shall be qualified to sit in the House of Commons, No Person
qualified by Virtue of a Mortgage, unless in Possession of the mortgaged
Premises for seven Years before his Election.
by virtue of any Mortgage, whereof the Equity of Redemption is in any other
Person, unless the Mortgagee shall have been in Possession of the mortgaged
Premises for seven Years before the Time of his Election.

Every Person (except as aforesaid) who shall appear as a Candidate, Candidates
to be sworn to their Estates, if required by any other Candidate or two
Electors.
or shall by himself, or any others, be proposed to be elected, shall, upon
Request (at the Time of such Election, or before the Day to be prefixed in the
Writ of Summons for the Meeting of the Parliament) by any other Person who
shall stand Candidate at such Election, or by any two or more Persons having
Right to vote at such Election, take a Corporal Oath in the Form (in this Act
contained, which see ante.

The respective Oaths aforesaid shall be administered by the Sheriff or
Undersheriff, Before the Sheriff or other Officer by whom the Poll is to be
taken or Return made, or 2 or more Justices of the Peace. The Election and
Return of Candidates refusing to take the Oath, void.
for any County, or by the Mayor, Bailiff or other Officer or Officers for any
City, Borough, etc. to whom it shall appertain to take the Poll, or make the
Return at such Election, or by any two or more Justices of the Peace within
England, etc. And if any of the said Candidates, etc. shall wilfully refuse to
take the Oath, the Election and Return of such Candidate or Person shall be
void.

That from and after the Determination of this present Parliament, 2 St. 12
Ann. No Conveyance or Right whereon Infeoffment is not taken, and Seisin
registered a Year before the Test of the Writs, shall entitle the Person to be
elected in any Shire or Stewartry in Scotland. The like as to Inoffments not
taken a Year before the Date of the Warrant for a new Writ during (...)
Continuance of a Parliament. Any Elector present, su^pecting Persons to have
Estates in Trust, may require the Praeses of the Meeting to swear such to their
Estates.
no Conveyance or Right whereupon Infeoffment is not taken, and Seisin
registrated one Year before the Test of the Writs for calling a new
Parliament, shall, upon Objection made in this Behalf, entitle the Person so
infeost, to be elected at that Election in any Shire or or Stewartry in
Scotland; and in case any Election happen during the Continuance of a
Parliament, no Conveyance or Right whatsoever, whereupon Infeoffment is not
taken One Year before the Date of the Warrant for making out a new Writ for
such Election, shall, upon Objection made in that Behalf, entitle the Person so
Infeoft, to be elected at that Election; and that it shall be lawful for any of
the Electors present, suspecting any Person or Persons to have his or their
Estates in Trust, and for Behoof of another, to require the Praeses of the
Meeting to tender the Oath ( in this Act contained, entitled, The Form of the
Freeholders, etc. Oath to be taken (upon Objection made) by Stat. 12. Annae,
and is the same mutatis mutandis) to any Elector, and the said Praeses is
required to administer the same.

In case such Elector (Electee Q.) refuse to Swear, On Refusal to swear and
subscribe the Oath incapable to be elected. Stat. 1 G. 1. c. 13.
and also to subscribe the said Oath, such Person or Persons shall not be
capable of being Elected at such Election.

That after the 29th of September, 1715, no Person that now is, or hereafter
shall be a Member of the House of Commons, shall Vote in the House of Commons,
or sit there, during any Debate in the said House of Commons, After 29 Sept.
1715 No Member to vote before taking the Oaths.
after the Speaker is chosen, until such Peer or Member shall, from Time to
Time respectively, take the Abjuration Oath (which Oath see) instead of the
Oath of Abjuration which before by Law ought to have been taken, in such
Manner, and together with such other Oaths, and Declaration against
Transubstantiation, as the said former Oath of Abjuration ought to have been
taken.

And further, That if any Person that now is, or hereafter shall be a Member of
the House of Commons, Penalty
in this or any succeeding Parliament, Vid. ante.
and after the said 29th of September, presume to vote, not having taken the
said Oath, and subscribed the same as aforesaid, every such Member so offending
shall be disabled to sue or use any Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any
Court of Law, or to prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, or to be
Guardian of any Child, or Executor or Administrator of any Person, or be
capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift, or to be in any Office within this Realm
of Great Britain, or to vote at any Election for Members to serve in
Parliament, and shall forfeit the Sum of five hundred Pounds, to be recovered
by him or them that shall sue for the same, to be prosecuted by Action of Debt,
Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall lie, or any
more than one Imparlance, Note.
and by Way of summar Complaint before the Court of Justiciary in Scotland.

Enacted, St. 1 G. 1. c. 56. Persons having Pensions from the Crown
incapacitated.
That no Person having any Pension from the Crown for any Term or Number of
Years, either in his own Name, or in the Name or Names of any other Person or
Persons in Trust for him, or for his Benefit, shall be capable of being
elected, or chosen a Member of, or for sitting or voting as a Member of this
present or any future House of Commons which shall be hereafter summoned.

Enacted, Penalty 20 l. per Day.
That if any Person who shall have such Pension as aforesaid, at the Time of
his being so elected, or at any Time after, during such Time as he shall
continue or be a Member of the House of Commons, shall presume to sit or vote
in that House, then and in such Case, he shall forfeit twenty Pounds for every
Day in which he shall sit or vote in the said House, to such as shall Sue for
the same in any Court in Westminster Hall; with full Costs, by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint, or Information, in which no Essoign, Privilege, Protection, or
Wager of Law, shall be allowed, and only one Imparlance.

Enacted, Stat. 3 G. 1. c. 18. No Member of the Bank disabled. St. 3 G. 1. c.
9. Nor of the South Sea Company.
That no Member of the Bank of England shall be disabled from being a Member of
Parliament. See Stat. 5.6. W. M. c. 20. ad idem.

Enacted, That no Member of the South Sea Company shall be disabled from being
a Member of Parliament.

Enacted, That no Governor, Director, or other Officer of the Corporations for
Assurance of Ships, St. 6 G. 1. c. 18. Nor Governor. etc. of Corporations for
Assurance of Ships.
shall be disabled from being a Member of Parliament.

Enacted, That the late Governor, St. 7 G. 1. c. 28. The late Governor and
Director of the South Sea Company disabled.
Deputy Governor, Directors, Cashire, and Accomptant of the South Sea Company,
and John Aislaibe, Esquire be disabled for ever to sit or vote in either House of
Parliament.

I. A. B. do swear, That I truly, and bona fide, The form of the Candidate's
Oath to be taken (if required) by Stat. 9. Annae.
have such an Estate in Law or Equity, to and for my own Use and Benefit, of or
in Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments (over and above what will satisfy and
clear all Encumbrances that may affect the same) of the annual Value of Six
hundred Pounds, above Reprizes, as does qualify me to be elected and returned
to serve as a Member for the County of (...) according to the Tenor and true
Meaning of the Act of Parliament in that Behalf; and that my said Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, are lying or being within the Parish, Township, or
Precinct of (...)

Or, in the several Parishes, Townships, or Precincts of (...) in the County of
(...)

Or, in the several Counties of (...)

(as the Case may be)

The like Oath (Mutatis Mutandis) as to the Value of 300 l. per Annum to be
taken by Candidates for a City, Borough, etc.

CHAP. XII. Of Returns of Sheriffs, etc. And Amendments of Returns.
COncerning the Punishment of Sheriffs for their Negligence in returning of
Writs, 5 R. 2. St. 2. c. 4.
or for leaving out of their Returns any City or Borough, which ought to send
Citizens and Burgesses. See the Stat. hereafter. p. 229.

Every Sheriff, who does not make true Return of Elections of Knights, St 8 H.
6. c. 7. 23 H. 6 c. 15. Vide Crom^ton's Juris. 3. Hakewel 48.
Citizens and Burgesses, to come to Parliament, shall forfeit an hundred Pounds
to the King, and an hundred Pounds to the Party injured, and be imprisoned for
a Year without Bail or Mainprize. And every Mayor or Magistrate of a Town so
offending, shall pay forty Pounds to the King, and forty Pounds to the Party.
See the Stat. hereafter p. 236.

Note, This Action to be (by the Party) within three Months after the
Parliament commenced, or (after) by any other Man who will.

If the Party do not, Hakewel 49. Vide Crompton's Juris. 3.
and prosecute his Suit with Effect and without Fraud; any other Man who will,
may have the said Suit for the said hundred Pounds, as the Knight had, and
Costs of Suit also shall be awarded to the said Knight, or any other who will
Sue in his behalf.

The Sheriff shall make a good Return of his Writ, Hakewel 51.
and of every Return of the Mayor and Bailiff, or Bailiffs, where no Mayor is,
to him made.

The Burgesses of Leskard in Cornwall being Elected, Towns. Col. 63.
the Town refused to deliver up their Indenture to the Sheriff; but the Party
Elected made his Indenture, and delivered it to the Clerk of the Crown, who
filed it with the rest of the Indentures returned by the Sheriff having
endorsed it upon his Writ; but this Indenture was never executed by the
Sheriff, nor returned; and yet this Return was held by the Committees to be
good.

Jan. 1641. Ordered, Nalson 870.
That the High Sheriff of the County of Sussex, who has returned two Indentures
for the Town of Arundel, shall be summoned to appear here at the Bar, to amend
his Return. Sir Simon d'Ewes, Jour. 490. Col. 2.


35 Eliz. 1592. It was said by the Speaker, No Return can be amended in this
House: For the Writ and the Return are in Chancery, and must be amended there.
Sed aliter nunc.

Every Sheriff, or other Officer, St. 33 H. 8. c. 1. in Ireland.
returning any Knight, Citizen, or Burgess chosen in any other Manner (than is
prescribed in the Statute) to forfeit a 100 l. Vide Post.

If one be duly Elected Knight, 4 Inst. 49. It cites in the Margin Rot. Parl. 5
H. 4. n. 38.
Citizen, or Burgess, and the Sheriff Return another; the Return must be
reformed and amended by the Sheriff, and he that is duly Elected, must be
Inserted; for the Election in these Cases is the Foundation, and not the Return.

18 Jac. 1. Scobel 115.
The Sheriff of Leicestershire having Returned Sir Thomas Beaumont; upon Report
from the Committee for Elections that Sir George Hastings was duly chosen; the
Sheriff was ordered to Return Sir George Hastings to the Clerk of the Crown,
and he to accept it, and file it.

21 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Upon Report from the Committee of Privileges, That in the Election of Mr. John
Maynard for Chippingham, John Maynard was Chosen, but by a Mistake Charles was
afterward written in stead of John: It was Resolved, The Return should be
amended, without a new Writ, and that the Bailiff should do it, and not the
Clerk of the Crown, and that it should be sent down to the Bailiff in the
Country, and he to Return John Maynard, Esquire the first Burgess.

1. Febr. 1640. Ibid.
It being Resolved, That the Election of Mr. Earl for one of the Burgesses of
Wareham, is a good Election: Ordered, That the Officer when the Return was
made, or his Deputy, or the Electors, should amend the Return. But the next Day
it was Ordered, That Edward Harbin, the late Mayor of Wareham 's Deputy, should
come to the Bar of the House, and amend the Return.

20 Febr. 1640. Ibid. 116.
The Bailiff of Midhurst in Sussex came to the Bar (being sent for by Order of
the House) and amended one of the Indentures of Return of Burgesses for that
Town, and the other was taken off the File.

If a Sheriff shall Return One for Knt. of the Shire, who was unduly, Simon
d'Ewes Jour. 283. Col. 2.
or not at all Elected; yet he that is so Returned, remains a Member of the
House till his Election be declared Void.

Of double Returns, England.
and new Writs Ex Memorials of Parliament.

That if any Sheriff be henceforth negligent in making his Returns of Writs of
Parliament, St. 5 R. 2. c. 4. Sheriffs neglecting to make Returns, or leaving
out the Returns of Cities or Borought, shall be amerced, or otherwise punished,
as in old Times.
or that he leave out of the said Returns any Cities or Boroughs which be
bound, and of old Time were wont to come to the Parliament, he shall be
amerced, or otherwise punished in manner as was accustomed in the said Case in
times past.

That from henceforth (in order to (the Elections of Counties) at the next
County after the Delivery of the Writ, England.
Proclamation shall be made in full County of the Day and Place of the
Parliament, St. 7. H. 4. c. 15. Proclamation to be made at the next
County Court after the Delivery of the Writ to the Sheriff for the Election of
knights of the Shires.
and that all they that be there present, as well Suitors duly summoned for the
same Cause, as other shall attend to the Election of the Knights for the
Parliament; and then in the full County they shall proceed to the Election
freely and indifferently, notwithstanding any Request or Commandment to the
contrary.

And after they be chosen, Sheriff's Return after the Election shall be by
Indenture (containing the Persons chosen) sealed by the Electors, and annexed
to the Writ.
the Names of the Persons so chosen (be they present or absent) shall be
written in an Indenture under the Seals of all them that did choose them, and
tacked to the same Writ, which Indenture so sealed and tacked, shall be holden
for the Sheriff's Return of the said Writ touching Knights of the Shires.

In Writs of Parliament hereafter to be made, this Clause shall be put; Et
Electionem tuam in pleno Comitatu factam sub sigillo tuo, and sigillis eorum
qui electioni illi interfuerant, nobis in Cancellaria nra' ad diem and locum in
brevi contentu' certifices indilate. England.


Forasmuch as in the Statute (7 H. 4. chapter 15.) no Penalty was ordained or
limited in special upon the Sheriffs of the County, if they make any Returns
contrary of the same Statute, St. 11. H. 4. c. 1. Of Returns made by Sheriffs,
contrary to the Statute 7 H. 4. c. 15. Justices of Assize empowered to inquire,
and on Inquest and Proof made thereof, such Sheriffs to pay 100 l. to the King.
It is ordained that the Justices assigned to take Assizes, shall have Power to
inquire at their Assizes of such Returns made; and if it be found by Inquest
and due Examination before the same Justices that any such Sheriff has made,
any Return contrary to the Tenor of the said Statute, the same Sheriff shall
incur the Penalty of 100 l. to be paid to our Lord the King.

That all Sheriffs shall have their Answer and Traverse to Inquests and
Offices, St. 6 H. 6. c. 4. Sheriffs shall have their Traverses to Inquests,
etc. upon the St 7.4. c. 15. and 11 H. 4. c. 1.
before any Justices, of Assizes hereafter to be taken, ( upon the Stat. 7 Hen.
IV. chapter 15. and 11 Hen. IV. chapter 1.) and the said Sheriffs shall not be
endamaged unto our Lord the King, or his Successors, for any such Inquest
taken, until they be duly convict according to the Form of Law.

That such are to be chosen Knights of the Shire as have the greatest Number of
them that may expend 40 s. by Year and above, England.
and shall be returned by the Sheriffs of every County, St. 8 H. 6. c. 7. See
Cromp. Juris. 3. Hakewell 48.
Knights for Parliament, by Indentures sealed betwixt the said Sheriffs and the
said Choosers.

And every Sheriff of the Realm of England shall have Power to examine upon the
Evangelists every such Chooser, how much he may expend by the Year.

And if any Sheriff return Knights to Parliament contrary to the said
Ordinance, the Justices of Assizes, in their Sessions shall have Power thereof
to inquire.

And if by Inquest the same be found before the Justices, and the Sheriff
thereof be duly attainted, he shall incur the Penalty of 100 l. to be paid to
our Lord the King, and also that he have Imprisonment by a Year, without
Mainprize or Bail.

And that in every Writ hereafter to go forth, Quere
mention shall be made of this Ordinance.

That every Sheriff, St. 23 H. 6. c. 15. Sheriff, after the Receipt of the
Writ, to deliver a Precept under his Seal to every Mayor, Bailiff, etc. of the
Cities and Boroughs within his County, reciting his Writ, and commanding them
to choose, etc.
after the Delivery of any Writ (of Election) shall make and deliver without
Fraud, England.
a Precept under his Seal to every Mayor and Bailiff (or to Bailiffs or Bailiff
where no Mayor is) of the Cities and Boroughs within his County, reciting the
said Writ, and commanding them if it be by a City, to choose by Citizens of the
same City, Citizens, and if it be a Borough, a Burgess, by the Burgesses of the
same, to come to the Parliament.

And that the same Mayor and Bailiffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. to return the
Precept to the Sheriff, by Indentures of the Election, and the names of the
elected. Sheriffs to return the Writ, and every Return made by such Mayors,
Bailiffs, etc.
(or Bailiffs or Bailiff, where no Mayor is) shall return the Precept to the
same Sheriff and them, to be made of the said Elections, and of the Names of
the said Citizens and Burgesses by them so chosen; and thereupon every Sheriff
shall make a rightful Return of every such Writ, and of every Return by the
Mayors and Bailiffs, (or Bailiffs or Bailiff, where no Mayor is) to him made.

And that every Sheriff, Sheriffs acting contrary to this Statute, or any other
Statute for Elections, to pay 100 l. to the King, (and suffer a Year's
Imprisonment, with out Bail,) ( per Stat. 8 Hen. 6 chapter 7.) and forfeit to every
Person chosen a Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, and not duly returned, or to any
otherwhich in their Default, will sue, 100 l to be recovered by Action of Debt
against the Sheriff, his Executors or Administrators, with Costs wherein no
Wager of Law, etc.
at every time that he does contrary to this Statute, or any other Statutes for
the Election Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, before this Time made, shall
incur the Pain contained in the Statute, England.
made the 8th Year (of the then King's Reign) and moreover shall forfeit and
pay to every Person hereafter chosen Knight, Citizen or Burgess in his County,
and not duly returned, or to any other Person which in Default of such Knight,
Citizen or Burgess will sue, an hundred Pound, whereof every Knight, Citizen
and Burgess so grieved, severally, or any other Person which in Desault will
sue, shall have his Action of Debt against the said Sheriff or his Executors or
Administrators, to demand and have the said 100 l. with his Costs spent, and
that in such Action the Desendant shall not wage his Law or have any Essoign.

And if any Mayor and Bailiffs (or Bailiffs or Bailiff, Mayors, Bailiffs etc
returning other than those chosen by Citizens and Burgesses, shall forfeit 40
l. to the King, and to every Person chosen a Citizen or Burgess, and not by
them returned, or to any other that in Default of such Citizen or Burgess will
sue 40 l. (more) to be recovered by like Action of Debt, with Costs.
where no Mayor is) shall return other than those which be chosen by the
Citizens and Burgesses of the said Cities or Boroughs, he shall incur and
forfeit to the King 40 l. and moreover shall forfeit and pay to every Person so
chosen Citizen or Burgess, and not by the same Mayor and Bailiffs, or Bailiff
(or Bailiffs where no Mayor is) returned, England.
or to any other Person, which in Desault of such Citizen or Burgess so chosen
will sue 40 l. whereof every of the Citizens and Burgesses so grieved
severally, or any other Person which in their Default will sue, shall have his
Action of Debt against every of the said Mayor and Bailiffs (or Bailiffs or
Bailiff where no Mayor is) against their Executors or Administrators, to demand
and have of every of them 40 l. with his Costs expended.

And that in such Action of Debt, no Defendant shall wage his Law nor have any
Essoign.

And every Sheriff that makes no due Election of such Knights in convenient
Time (that is to say) every Sheriff in his full County, betwixt the Hour of
Eight, and the Hour of Eleven before Noon, without Collusion; and that makes
not good and true Return of such Elections of Knights in Manner aforesaid,
Sheriff not making Election of Knights of the Shire in a full County Court
between 8 and 11 in the Morning, and a good Return accordingly, to forfeit 100
l. to the King, and 100 l. more to him that will sue, to be recovered by like
Action of Debt with Costs.
shall forfeit to the King an hundred Pound, and also incur the Pain of 100 l.
to be paid to him that will sue him, his Executors or Administrators, by Way of
Action of Debt, with his Costs expended, without waging of Law or having
Essoign as aforesaid. England.


Provided always, Such Actions to be brought by such Knight, Citizen, and
Burgess within 3 Months after the Commencement of suce Parliament, and to be
proceeded in without Frand. And after that time by any other. See Cromp. Juris.
3. Hakewel 43.
That every Knight, Citizen and Burgess chosen, and not returned as aforesaid,
shall begin his said Action within three Months after the same Parliament
commenced, to proceed in the same Suit effectually without Fraud. And if he
does not so, another that will sue shall have the said Action of Debt (as is
before said) and shall recover the same with his Costs, and that no Defendant
in such Action shall wage his Law nor be essoign'd. And that such Process shall
be in the Actions aforesaid, as in a Writ of Trespass done against the Peace at
the Common Law.

That the Knights of the Shires shall be notable Knights of the same Counties
for which they shall be chosen, Like Process to be in such Actions as in
Trespass at Common Law. Provided, That Knights of the Shires be Knights of the
Counties they shall be elected for, or Esquires or Gentlemen, able to be
Knights, and not Yeomen or under.
or otherwise such notable Esquires or Gentlemen (born) of the same Counties,
as shall be able to be Knight; and no Man to be such Knight which stands in
the Degree of a Yeoman and under.

That Elections shall be made for the Sheriffs and Boroughs in Monmouthshire
(heretofore Part of Wales) and in Wales, England.
in like Manner, St. 27 H. 8. c. 26. Duties of Sheriffs and other returning
Officers in Wales, like the same in England.
Form and Order as Knights and Burgesses be elected in other Shires of this
Realm.

That the County Palatine of Chester shall have two Knights for the said
County, St. 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 13. Writ of Election under the Great Seal for
Elections in Chester, to be directed to the, Chamberlain, etc. of Chester, and
his Precept thereon to the Sheriff of the County.
and two Citizens to be Burgesses for the City of Chester, to be elected and
chosen by Process to be awarded by the Chancellor of England unto the
Chamberlain of Chester, his Lieutenant or Deputy for the Time being, and so
like Process to be made by the Chamberlain, his Lieutenant or Deputy, to the
Sheriff of the said County of Chester, and the same Election to be made in like
Manner and Form to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, as is used within
the County Palatine of Lancaster or any other County and City within England,
which said Knights and Burgesses and every of them shall be returned by the
said Sheriff into the Chancery of England in due Form, and upon like Pains as
is ordained that the Sheriff or Sheriffs of any other County should make their
Return. England.
Sheriff of Chester to make like Returns, and on like Pains as other Sheriffs.


That the Burgesses of all Cities, Stat. 35 H. 8. c. 11. Mayors, Bailiffs, etc.
of the twelve Shire-Towns in Wales and of Monmouth-Shire, shall summon the
Burgesses as well of all other Cities, Boroughs, and Towns in those Counties as
of Burgesses of those Towns themselves, to come to Elections.
Boroughs, and Towns ( in the twelve Shires within Wales and County of Monmouth
not finding Burgesses for the Parliament themselves and contributary to Wages
of Burgesses of such Shire Towns) shall be lawfully admonished by Proclamation
or otherwise by the Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head Officers of the said
Towns, or by one of them, to come and give their Elections for the Electing the
said Burgesses at such Time and Place lawful and reasonable, as shall be
assigned for the same by the said Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head Officers of
the said Shire Towns, or by one of them.

That the County Palatine of Durham may have two Knights for the same County,
St. 25 C. 2. c. 9. Writ of Election under the Great Seal for Elections in
Durham, to be directed to the Bishop of Durham, etc. and his Precept thereon to
the Sheriff of that County.
and the City of Durham two Citizens to be Burgesses for the same City, to be
elected by Writ to be awarded by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper to the Lord
Bishop of Durham, or his Temporal Chancellor of the said County, England.
and a Precept to be thereupon grounded and made by the said Lord Bishop, or
his Temporal Chancellor to the Sheriff of the said County; and the same
Election to be made in Manner following, viz. the Elections of the Knights to
be made by the greater Number of the Freeholders of the said County Palatine
which shall be present at such Elections, as is used in other Counties of this
Kingdom, and that the Election of the said Burgesses for the City of Durham, to
be made by the major part of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Freemen of the said City,
which shall be present at such Elections, which said Knights and Burgesses,
Sherish of Durham to make like Returns, and under like Pains, as other
Sheriffs. St. 7 and 8 W. 3. c. 7. continued by St. 12 and 13 W. 3. c. 5. False
Returns illegal and prohibited and all made contrary to the last Determination
of the Right of Election in the House of Commons adjudged a false Return.
so elected, shall be returned by the said Sheriff into the Chancery in due
Form, and upon the like Pains as be ordained for the Sheriff or Sheriffs of any
other County in like Cases.

That all false Returns wilfully made of any Knight of the Shire, Citizen,
Burgess, Baron of the Cinque Ports, or other Members are against Law, and are
hereby prohibited, and in case that any Person or Persons shall return any
Member for any County, City, Borough, Cinque-Port, or Place, contrary to the
last Determination in the House of Commons of the Right of Election in such
County, England.
City, Borough, Cinque-Port, or Place, such Return is hereby adjudged a false
Return.

The Party so grieved (to wit) He that shall be duly elected for any County,
Officers, etc. making such false Return, liable to an Action at the Suit of any
duly elected in any of the Courts at Westminster with double Damages and full
Costs.
City, Borough, Cinque-Port, or Place, by such false Return may sue the
Officers and Persons making or procuring the same, and every or any of them at
his Election, in any Court of Record at Westminster, and shall recover double
Damages with his full Costs.

Any Officer that shall wilfully, Officers, etc. falsely, etc. making double
Returns liable to the like Action.
falsely, and maliciously return more Persons than are required to be chosen by
the Writ or Precept on which any Choice is made, the like Remedy may be had
against him or them, and the Party or Parties that willingly procure the same,
by the Party grieved.

All Contracts, Contracts, Bonds, etc. given to procure the Return of any
Member adjudged void, and such as make or give them to procure any false or
double Return, forfeit 300 l. one third to the King, another to the Poor of the
County, City, etc. and a third to the Informer, with his Costs, to be recovered
by Action of Debt, etc. wherein no Essoign, etc.
Promises, Bonds, and Securities whatsoever hereafter made or given, to procure
any Return of any Member, or any thing relating thereto, be adjudged void, and
that whoever makes or gives such Contract, Security, Promise, or Bond, or any
Gift or Reward to procure such false or double Return, England.
shall forfeit 300 l. one third Part to his Majesty, another third Part to the
Poor of the County, City, Borough, or Place concerned, and one third Part to
the Informer, with his Costs to be recovered in any Court of Record at
Westminster by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no
Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law allowed, nor more than one Imparlance.

The Clerk of the Crown to keep a Book of Entry of every single and double
Return, and of every Alteration and Amendment in every such Return, whereto all
Persons to have Access, and take Copies of so much as desired at a reasonable
Fee. And if the Clerk of the Crown makes not such Entry in Six Days after any
Return, or alters any Return without Order of the House of Commons, or gives a
Certificate of any Person not returned, or wilfully neglects or omits his Duty
herein, to forfeit 500 l. for each Offense to the Party grieved, to be
recovered as aforesaid, and lose his Office, England.
and be for ever incapable of holding it.

Every Information or Action brought upon this Statute, Informations or Actions
on this Statute to be brought within two Years after the Cause.
shall be brought within the Space of two Years after the Cause of Action shall
arise.

That when any New Parliament shall at any Time hereafter be Summoned or
called, Staf. - and 8 W. 3. c. 25. Writs of Summons to Parliament to have forty
Days between the Test and Returns, and be issued with all Expedition, and
delivered to the proper Officer to whom its Execution belongs, who shall
indorse thereon the Day he received it, and within three Days issue out his
Precept to the like proper Officer of each Borough, etc. who shall also indorse
the Day of his Receipt of the Precept in the former's Presence, and proceed to
Election in eight Days and give four Days Notice of the Day appointed.
there shall be forty Days between Test and Returns of the Writs of Summons,
and that the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Lords Commissioners of the Great
Seal for the Time being, shall issue out Writs for Election of Members to serve
in the same Parliament with as much Expedition as the same may be done. And
that as well upon the calling or summoning any New Parliament, as also in case
of any Vacancy in Parliament, the several Writs shall be delivered to the
proper Officer to whom the Execution thereof does belong or appertain, and to
no other Person whatsoever. And that every such Officer, upon the Receipt of
the same Writ, shall upon the back thereof indorse the Day he received the
same, and shall forthwith, send his Precept or Precepts to each Borough, Town
Corporate, Proper Officer of the Cinque Ports allowed six Days from the Receipt
of the Writ for the Delivery by a sulsequent Statute, 10 and 11 W. 3. c. 7.
Port, England.
or Place within his Jurisdiction, where any Member or Members are to be
elected to serve in such New Parliament, or to supply any Vacancy in
Parliament, and within three Days after the Receipt of the said Writ, shall by
himself or proper Agent deliver or cause to be delivered such Precept or
Precepts to the proper Officer of every such Borough, Town Corporate, * Port,
or Place within his Jurisdiction, to whom the Execution of such Precept does
belong or appertain, and to no other Person. And every such Officer, upon the
back of the same Precept, shall indorse the Day of his Receipt thereof in the
Presence of the Party from whom he received such Precept, and shall forthwith
cause Notice to be given of the Time and Place of Election, and shall proceed
to Election thereupon within the Space of eight Days next after his Receipt of
the same Precept, and give four Days Notice at least of the Day appointed for
the Election.

Neither the Sheriff nor his under Sheriff in any County or City, No Sheriff
etc. in any County or City, nor Mayor, etc. of any Borough Town, Port or Place
to whom the Execution of any Writ or Precept belongs, to pay or receive any
Fee, etc. for making out, Receipt, Delivery, Return, or Execution of the same.
nor the Mayor, Bailiff, Constable, Portreeve, or other Officer or Officers of
any Borough, England.
Town Corporate, Port or Place, to whom the Execution of any Writ or Precept
for electing Members, does belong or appertain, shall give, pay, receive or
take any Fee, Reward, or Gratuity for making out, Receipt, Delivery, Return, or
Execution of any such Writ or Precept.

Upon every Election to be made of any Knight or Knights of the Shire to serve
in Parliament, Sheriff, for Election of Knights of the Shire, to hold his
County Court where the same has been most usually kept for forty Years last,
and proceed to the Election the next Court unless it happen within six Days
after the Receipt of the Writ, or the same Day, and then to adjourn giving ten
Days notice of the Time and Place. If a Poll required, the Sheriff, etc.
forthwith to proceed thereon publicly and appoint Clerks to take the Poll in
his etc. Presence, who shall be sworn to take it indifferently, and set down
each Free-holder's Name, the Place of his Freehold, and for whom he polls, and
to poll no Freeholder not sworn, if required by any Candidate.
the Sheriff of the County where such Election shall be made, shall hold his
County Court for the same Election at the most public and usual Place of
Election within the said County, and where the same has most usually been for
40 Years last past, and shall there proceed to Election at the next County
Court, unless the same fall out to be held within six Days after the Receipt of
the Writ, or upon the same Day, and then shall adjourn the same Court to some
convenient Day, given ten Days Notice of the Time and Place of Election; and in
case the said Election be not determined upon the View with the Consent of the
Freeholders there present, but that a Poll shall be required; the said Sheriff,
or in his Absence, the Undersheriff, England.
with such others as shall be deputed by him, shall forthwith there proceed to
take the said Poll in some open or public place or places, by the same Sheriff
or his Undersheriff in his Absence, or others appointed for the taking thereof
as aforesaid: And for the more due and orderly proceeding in the said Poll, the
said Sheriff, or in his Absence his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute,
shall appoint such Number of Clerks as to him shall seem convenient, for the
taking thereof, which Clerks shall all take the said Poll in the presence of
the said Sheriff, or his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute; and before
they begin to take the said Poll, every Clerk so appointed shall by the said
Sheriff, or his Undersheriff aforesaid, be Sworn truly and indifferently to
take the same Poll, and to set down the Names of each Freeholder, and the
Place of his Freehold, and for whom he shall Poll, and to Poll no Freeholder
who is not Sworn, if so required by the Candidates, or any of them (which Oath
of the said Clerks, the said Sheriff or his Undersheriff, or such as he shall
depute, are hereby empowered to administer) and the Sheriff or his Under
Sheriff shall appoint for each Candidate, such one Person as shall be nominated
to him by each Candidate to be Inspectors of every Clerk, England.
who shall be appointed for taking the Poll, Sheriffs, etc. to appoint for each
Candidate one Person nominated by such Candidate to be Inspectors of every
Clerk of the Poll. And to sweareach Freeholder before his Poll to be taken, if
by any Candidate required, to his Freehold.
and every Freeholder before he is admitted to Poll at the same Election,
shall, if required by the Candidates, or any of them, first take the Oath (in
this Act contained) Which Oath the Sheriff by himself, or his Undersheriff, or
such sworn Clerks by him appointed for taking the said Poll as aforesaid, are
hereby authorized to administer.

The said Sheriff, Sheriff, etc. at the Place of Election to proceed to the
Poll, and not adjourn the County Court to any other Place, without the
Candidates Consent, nor without such Consent delay or discontinue the Poll.
or in his Absence his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute, shall at the
Place of Election proceed to the Polling all the Freeholders then and there
present, and shall not adjourn the County Court then and there held to any
other Town and Place within the same County, without the Consent of the
Candidates, nor shall by any unnecessary Adjournment in the same Place of
Election, protract or delay the Election; but shall duly and orderly proceed to
take the said Poll from Day to Day, and Time to Time, without any further or
other Adjournment, without the Consent of the Candidates, until all the
Freeholders then and there present shall be polled. England.


Every Sheriff, Undersheriff, Mayor, Sheriffs, Mayors, etc. to deliver to any
Person desiring it, a Copy of the Poll, paying reasonably for writing it.
Sheriffs, Mayors, etc. for every wilful Offense contrary to this Act, forfeits
to each Party grieved 500 l. to be recovered by him, his Executors, etc. with
full Costs, by Action of Debt etc wherein Essoign, etc. to be allowed.
Bailiff, and other Officer to whom the Execution of any Writ or Precept shall
belong, for the electing Members to serve in Parliament, shall forthwith
deliver to such Person or Persons as shall desire the same, a Copy of the Poll
taken at such Election, paying only a reasonable Charge for writing the same;
and every Sheriff, Undersheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, and other Officer to whom the
Execution of any Writ or Precept for electing of Members does belong, for every
wilful Offense contrary to this Act, shall forseit to every Party so aggrieved
the Sum of five hundred Pounds, to be recovered by him or them, his or their
Executors or Administrators, together with full Costs, for which he or they may
sue by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court at
Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law, Privilege, or
Imparlance shall be allowed.

Every Return of any Person under the Age of twenty one Years, The Return of
any Person chosen under 21 Years, void.
is hereby declared to be null and void.

All County Courts for the County of York or any other County Courts, England.
which heretosore used to be held on a Monday, County Courts for Yorkshire and
others used to be held on a Menday, to be called and held on a Wednesday.
shall be called and begun upon a Wednesday, and not otherwise, any Custom or
Usage to the contrary.

The Sheriff of the County of Southampton, Sheriff, etc. of Hampshire, at the
Request of any Candidate, to adjourn after the End of the Poll at Winchester to
Newgate in the Isle of Wight.
or his Deputy, at the Request of one or more of the Candidates for Election of
a Knight or Knights of that County, shall adjourn the Poll from Winchester,
after every Frecholder then and there present is polled, to Newport in the Isle
of Wight, for the Ease of the Inhabitants of the said Island, any thing in this
Act to the contrary.

That no Person which shall refuse to take the Oaths (of Allegiance and
Supremacy) directed by an Act made in the first Year of His present Majesty and
the late Queen Mary, St. 7 and 8. W. 3. c. 27. Sheriffs, etc. on the Poll at
any Election to administer the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to Electors
(and if Quakers the Declaration of Fidelity) at the Request of any Candidate,
and on Refusal not to admit them to vote.
or being Quakers, shall refuse to subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity
directed by one other Act of Parliament made in the said first Year of the
Reign of His present Majesty and the late Queen (which Oaths and Subscription
respectively the Sheriff or chief Officer taking the Poll, England.
at the Request of any one of the Candidates are required to administer) shall
not be admitted to give any Vote for the Election of any Knight of the Shire,
Citizen, Burgess or Baron of the Cinque Ports to serve in Parliament.

That the Sheriff or other Officer having the Execution and Return of any Writ
to Parliament, St. 10 and 11 W. 3. c. 7. Sheriffs, etc. by themselves or
Deputies, on or before the Day any Parliament shall called to meet, and not
exceeding fourteen Days after any Election made, to make his Return to the
Clerk of the Crown, etc.
shall on or before the Day that any suture Parliament shall be called to meet,
and with all convenient Expedition, not exceeding fourteen Days after any
Election made by virtue of any new Writ, either in Person, or by his Deputy,
make Returns of the same to the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, to be by him
filed, etc. and pay to the Clerk of the Crown 4 s. for every Knight of the
Shire, and 2 s. for every Citizen, Burgess, etc. which the Sheriff, etc. shall
charge to the King, and have allowed upon his Account.

(See the Stat. etc. 7 and 8. W. c. 25. p. 107.)
The proper Officer of the Cinque Ports shall be allowed six Days from the
Receipt of such Writ for the Delivery very of the Precept according to the
Purport of the Act (7 and 8 W. III. G. Britain.
c. 25.) any thing in the said Act, or any other Law, Statute or Usage to the
contrary.

Every Sheriff or other Officer aforesaid who shall not make the Returns
according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, Sheriffs, etc. not making
Returns accordingly, to forfeit for each Offense 500 l. one Moiety to the King,
the other to him that will sue by Action of Debt, etc. wherein no Essoign, etc.
to be allowed, and but one Imparlance.
shall forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of 500 l. one Moiety to His
Majesty, and the other Moiety to him or them that will sue for the same, to be
recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court at
Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law allowed, nor more
than one Imparlance.

That when any Parliament shall hereafter be summoned or called, St. 6. Annae
c. 6. Writs to issue to the respective Sheriffs or Stewarts, for choosing the
45 Representatives of Scotland to Parliament Sheriffs, etc. thereon, forthwith
to give Notice of the Time of Election for the Shires. Clerks of the Meetings
forthwith to return the Names of the elected to the Sheriff, who is to annex
and return it with his Writ.
the Forty five Representatives of Scotland in the House of Commons in the
Parliament of Great Britain, shall be elected and chosen by Authority of the
Queen's Writs, under the great Seal of Great Britain, directed to the several
Sheriffs and Stewarts of the respective Shires and Stewartries, and the said
several Sheriffs and Stewarts shall, on Receipt of such Writs, forthwith give
notice of the Time of Election for the Knights or Commissioners for their
respective Shires or Stewartries: G. Britain.
And the Clerks of the said Meetings, immediately after the said Elections are
over, shall respectively return the Names of the Persons elected to the Sheriff
or Stewart of the Shire or Stewartry, who shall annex it to his Writ, and
return it with the same into the Court out of which the Writ is issued.

And as to the Manner of Election of the fifteen Representatives of the Royal
Boroughs, Sheriff of Edinburgh, on Receipt of his Writ, forthwith to direct his
Precept to the Lord Provost, for electing the Burgess for that City Common
Clerk of Edinburgh to certify the Name of the elected to the Sheriff, who is to
annex and return it with the Writ.
the Sheriff of the Shire of Edinburgh shall, on Receipt of the Writ directed
to him, forthwith direct his Precept to the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, to cause
a Burgess to be elected for that City, and their Common Clerk shall certify the
Name of the Member elected to the Sheriff of Edinburgh, who shall annex it to
his Writ, and return it with the same into the Court, from which the Writ
issued.

And as to the other Royal Burghs divided into fourteen Classes or Districts,
Sheriffs, etc. in like Manner to direct their Precepts to the Royal Burghs, for
the electing a Commissioner for each, and the Commissioners of each District to
meet at the presiding Borough (by name) for each District on the thirtieth Day
after the Test of the Writ, unless Sunday, and then Menday, to their Burgess.
Common Clerk of such presiding Borough forthwith to return the Name of the
elected to the Sheriff, etc. in whose Shire such Borough is, who is to annex
and return it with his Writ. Like Method to be taken by Sheriffs, etc. in Case
of Vacancy in Parliament Time, by Decease or Incapacity of a Member; and if for
a Burgh the presiding Burgh at the first to preside at the new Election.
the Sheriffs or Stewarts of the several Shires and Stewarties shall, G.
Britain.
on the Receipt of their several Writs, forthwith direct their several Precepts
to every Royal Burgh within their respective Shires or Stewartries, reciting
therein the Contents of the Writ and the Date thereof, and commanding them
forthwith to elect each of them a Commissioner as they used formerly to elect
Commissioners to the Parliament of Scotland, and to order the said respective
Commissioners to meet at the presiding Borough of their respective District
(naming the said presiding Borough) upon the thirtieth Day after the Day of the
Test of the Writ, unless it be upon the Lord's Day, and then the next Day
after, and then to choose their Burgess for the Parliament: And the
Common-Clerk of the then presiding Borough shall immediately after the Election
return the Name of the Person so elected to the Sheriff or Stewart of the Shire
or Stewartry wherein such presiding Borough is, who shall annex it to his Writ,
and return it with the same into the Court from whence the Writ issued. And in
case a Vacancy shall happen in Time of Parliament, by the Decease or legal
Incapacity of any Member, a new Member shall be elected in his Room, G. Britain.
conformable to the Method herein before appointed; and in Case such a Vacancy
be of a Representative for any one of the said fourteen Classes or Districts of
the said Royal Boroughs, that Borough which presided at the Election of the
deceased or disabled Member, shall be the presiding Borough at such new
Election.

Provided always that upon the issuing of the Writs of Summons for the electing
of a Parliament, if any Shire or Stewartry where a Royal Borough is, In Writs
to Sheriffs the Election of a Knight to be omitted, if the Shires (where a
Royal Burgh is) have not then a Turn to elect.
has not then a Turn or Right to elect a Commissioner or Knight of the Shire
or Stewartry for that Parliament, that then it shall be omitted out of the
Writ, etc.

That every Person who shall refuse to take the Oath (of Abjuration) or being a
Quaker, St. 6 An. chapter 23. Sheriffs, Presidents of Meetings, etc. on the Poll at
any Election of Members of Parliament for Great Britain, or of Commissioners
for choosing Burgesses for Scotland, at the Request of any Candidate or others
to administer the Abjuration Oath (or Affirmation to Quakers) and Electors
refusing it disabled to vote.
shall refuse to declare the Effect thereof upon his solemn Affirmation, as
directed by an Act made 7. W. 3. which Oath or Declaration the Sheriff,
President of the Meeting, or chief Officer taking the Poll at any Election of
Members for any Place in Great Britain, G. Britain.
or Commissioners for choosing Burgesses for any Place in Scotland, at the
Request of any Candidate or other Person present at such Election, (which they
are to administer) shall not be capable of giving any Vote for the Election of
any such Member, for any Place in Great Britain, or Commissioner to choose a
Burgess for any Place in Scotland.

Enacted, St. 9 An. chapter 5. Candidate to be sworn to his Estate, if required by
any other Candidate, or two Electors.
That every Person ( except the eldest Son or Heir Apparent of a Peer, or of a
Person qualified by this Act to serve as Knight of a Shire, or such as shall be
elected for each of the Universities of England) shall upon Request, at the
time of the Election, or before the Day to be prefixed in the Writ of Summons
for the Meeting of (any Subsequent) Parliament, by any other Person who shall
stand Candidate at such Election, or by any two or more Persons having a Right
to Vote at such Election, take a Corporal Oath in the Form, (in this Act
contained,) Vide aute.

The respective Oaths aforesaid shall be administered by the Sheriff or
Undersheriff for any County, G. Britain.
or by the Mayor, Bailiff, The Oaths to be administered by the Sheriff or other
Officer by whom the Poll is to be taken, and Return made or two or more
Justices of the Peace. Who are to certify the same into the Chancery or Queen's
Bench within 3 Months, under 100 l. Forfeiture, to be recovered by Action of
Debt, etc. half to the Queen, and half to him that sues, with full Costs.
or other Officer or Officers for any City, Borough, etc. to whom it shall
appertain to take the Poll, or make the Return at such Election, or by any two
or more Justices of the Peace within England, etc. and the said Sheriff, Mayor,
Bailiff, or other Officers; and the said Justices of the Peace respectively are
hereby required to certify the taking thereof into Chancery, or the Queen's
Bench, within three Months after the taking the same, under the Penalty of
forfeiting one hundred Pounds, one Moiety to the Queen, and the other to such
Person or Persons as will sue for the same, to be recovered with full Costs, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court of Record at
Westminster.

No Fee or Reward shall be taken for administering any Oath, or making, 1 s.
only to be paid for the Oath, 2 s. for making, and 2 s. for filing the
Certificate, under 20 l. Forfeiture, to be recovered and divided as above.
receiving, or filing the Certificate thereof, except one Shilling for
administering the Oath, and two Shillings for making the Certificate, and two
Shillings for receiving and filing the same, under the Penalty of twenty Pounds
to be forfeited by the Offender, G. Britain.
and to be recovered and divided as aforesaid.

That upon every Election to be made of a Knight of a Shire within England, St.
10. An. chapter 23. Sheriff, etc. to swear each Freeholder, if by any Candidate or
Voter required. Sheriff, etc. shall enter the Place of the Elector's Freehold,
of his Abode, and Jurat' against the Name of every Voter sworn, and with in
twenty Days after the Elections deliver the Poll-Books upon Oath to he Clerk of
the Peace etc.
every Freeholder before he is admitted to Poll, shall, if required by the
Candidates, or any of them, or any other Person having a Right to Vote, first
take the Oath (in this Act contained) which Oath the Sheriff, etc. is to
administer: And in taking the Poll, the Sheriff, etc. shall enter not only the
Place of the Elector's Freehold, but also the Place of his Abode, and Jurat'
against the Name of every Voter, who shall be tendered and take the Oaths
hereby required; and the Sheriff, or returning Officer, shall within twenty
Days after such Election, deliver over upon Oath ( to be administered by the two
next Justices of the Peace, one of the Quorum) unto the Clerk of the Peace of
the same County, all the Poll-Books of such Elections, and in Counties where
there are more than one Clerk of the Peace, the Original to one, and attested
Copies to the rest, to be kept among the Records of the Sessions of the Peace
for the County: And of an Act, (7 Guil. III.) Entitled, G. Britain.
An if any Quaker, Sheriff, etc. to admit any Quaker to vote during the Act 7
W. 3. and accept his Affirmation to the Effect of the Oath, according to the
said Act, instead thereof; and enter Affirmat' against the Name of such Quaker.
during the Continuance of an Act, (7 Guil. III.) Entitled, An Act that the
solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers, shall be
accepted instead of an Oath in the usual Form) shall upon such Election, if
required by the Candidates or any of them, declare the Effect of the said Oath
upon his solemn Affirmation in such Manner and Form as is directed by the said
Act, every such Quaker shall be capable and admitted to give his Vote for the
Election of any such Member within England; and every Sheriff, etc. is hereby
authorized and required to accept such Affirmation instead of the said Oath,
and shall enter Affirmat' against the Name of every such Quaker.

That any of the Electors present, 2 St. 12 Annae Praeses of the Meeting upon
Request of any Elector of a Shire or Stewartry in Scotland to swear either
Elector or Candidate to their Estates.
suspecting any Person or Persons ( either Electors or Candidates for Shires or
Stewartries in Scotland) to have his or their Estates in Trust, and for the
Behoof of another, may require the Praeses to the Meeting, to tender the Oath
(in this Act contained) and the said Praeses is required to administer the
same.

Returning Officers are ordained to make their Returns of the Persons elected
by the Majority of the Freeholders enrolled, G. Britain.
and those admitted by them, Returning Officers to return Persons elected by a
Majority of Freeholders in rolled, and those admitted by them, with Liberty of
objecting, etc.
reserving always the Liberty of objecting against the Persons admitted to, or
excluded from the Poll, as formerly.

All Sheriffs of Shires and Stewarts of Stewartries shall, Sheriffs and
Stewarts under 50 l. Penalty, half to the Queen, half to him that sues before
the Court of Session, etc. to make public Intimation at the Parish Churches
within their Jurisdictions three Days before the Diet of Elections.
under the Pain of 50 l. Sterling, one Moiety whereof shall be to the Queen,
Her Heirs and Successors, and the other to the Person or Persons who shall sue
for the same, to be recovered before the Court of Session, by any Action
summarily, without abiding the Course of the Roll, make the public Intimations
required by the Laws of Scotland, at the several Parish Churches within their
respective Jurisdictions, at least three Days before the Diet of Elections.

That the Oath or Affirmation (which see ib.) the Officer or Officers
presiding, St. 2 G. 2. chapter 4. Presiding Officer to administer the Oath or
Affirmation, on Forfeiture of 50 l.
or taking the Poll at such Election, is and are hereby empowered and required
to administer gratis, if demanded, upon Pain to forfeit the Sum of Fifty Pounds
of lawful Money of Great Britain, G. Britain.
to any Person that shall sue for the same, to be recovered, with full Costs,
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record at
Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law, or more than one
Imparlance; and if the said Offense shall be committed in that Part of Great
Britain called Scotland, then to be recovered, together with full Costs, by
summary Action, or Complaint before the Court of Session, or by Prosecution
before the Court of Justiciary there, for every Neglect or Refusal so to do;
and no Person shall be admitted to poll, till he has taken and repeated the
said Oath in a public Manner, in Case the same shall be demanded as aforesaid,
before the returning Officer or such others as shall be legally deputed by him.

If any Sheriff, Mayor, Sheriff or other returning Officer admitting any to be
polled, before sworn to forfeit 100 l.
Bailiff or other returning Officer shall admit any Person to be polled,
without taking such Oath or Affirmation, if demanded, as aforesaid, such
returning Officer shall forfeit One hundred Pounds, to be recovered as
aforesaid, together with full Costs; and if any Person shall vote or poll at
such Election, without having first taken the Oath, or, if a Quaker, having
made his Affirmation as aforesaid, G. Britain.
if demanded, such Person shall incur the same Penalty, Voters to incur the
like Penalty. Returning Officer, after reading the Writ, to take the following
Oath.
which the Officer is subject to for the Offense above mentioned.

That every Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, Headborough or other Person, being the
returning Officer of any Member to serve in Parliament, shall, immediately
after the Reading the Writ or Precept for the Election of such Member, take and
subscribe the following Oath (which see ante.)

Which Oath any Justice or Justices of the Peace of the said County, City,
Corporation or Borough, where such Election shall be made, or, in his or their
Absence, any Three of the Electors, are hereby required to administer; and such
Oath so taken, shall be entered among the Records of the Sessions of such
County, City, Corporation and Borough as aforesaid.

If any returning Officer, Penalty of wilful Perjury.
Elector or Person taking the Oath or Affirmation herein before mentioned,
shall be guilty of wilful corrupt Perjury, or of false affirming, and be
thereof convicted by due Course of Law, he shall incur and suffer the Pains and
Penalties, which by Law are enacted or inflicted in Cases of wilful and corrupt
Perjury.

That all and every the Sheriffs, Mayors, G. Britain.
Bailiffs and other Officers, The Act to be read by the Sheriff, etc. after
reading the Writ,
to whom the Execution of any Writ or Precept for electing any Members belongs,
shall, at the Time of such Election, immediately after the Reading of such Writ
or Precept, read, or cause to be read, openly before the Electors there
assembled, this present Act, and every Clause therein contained; and the same
shall also openly be Read once in every Year at the General Quarter Sessions of
the Peace after Easter, and at the Quarter Sessions after Easter, and on
electing Magistrates, etc.
for any County or City, and at every Election of the chief Magistrate in any
Borough, Town Corporate, or Cinque-Port, and at the annual Election of
Magistrates, and Town Counselors for every Borough in Scotland.

That every Sheriff, Undersheriff, Wilful Offense forfeits 50 l.
Mayor, Bailiff and other Officer, to whom the Execution of any Writ or Precept
for the electing of Members does belong, for every wilful Offense, contrary to
this Act, shall forseit 50 l. to be recovered with full Costs as before
directed.

Provided, Prosecution to commence within two Years.
That no Person shall be made liable to any Incapacity, Disability, Forfeiture
or Penalty, by this Act, unless Prosecution be commenced within two Years after
such Incapacity, etc. incurred, or in Case of a Prosecution the same be carried
on without wilful Delay; any Thing herein to the contrary.

After a Recital of the St. 7.8. St. 6. G. 11. c. 23.
W. 3. and the Inconveniences of County Courts being adjourned to Mondays,
Fridays or Saturdays, it enacts, That no County Court in England, shall be
adjourned to a Monday, Friday or Saturday, and all Adjournments and Acts done
at such Courts so adjourned, to be null and void, any Law, Custom or Usage, to
the contrary.

Provided, That any County Court begun, holden on, or adjourned to any Day (not
prohibited by this or the said former Act) for electing any Knight of the Shire
for any County, or for hearing and determining Causes, or for such other
Matters and Business as are usually transacted at County Courts, may be
adjourned over from Day to Day, though the same may happen to be on a Monday,
Friday or Saturday, until such Election or other Matters be fully finished, any
thing therein to the contrary, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Election of the Speaker.
THE Speaker is he that does prefer and commend the Bills exhibited to the
Parliament, Arc. Parl. 3. Smyth's Commonwealth 75.
and is the Mouth of the Parliament.

It is true, 4 Inst. 8. Smyth's Commonwealth 75. See Bohun's Coll. 352. contra.
the Commons are to choose their Speaker; but seeing that after their Choice
the King may refuse him; for avoiding of expense of Time and Contestation, the
Use is (as in the Conge d'Eslier of a Bishop) that the King does name a discret
and learned Man, whom the Commons elect.

But without their Election no Speaker can be appointed for them, 4 Inst. 8.
because he is their Mouth, and trusted by them, and so necessary, as the House
of Commons cannot sit without him.

And therefore a grievous Sickness is a good Cause to remove the Speaker, Id. 8.
and choose another. So in 1 Hen. 4. Sir John Cheyny discharged; and so William
Sturton. So in 15 Hen. 6. Sir John Tyrrel removed. So March 14. 1694. Sir John
Trevor.

The first Day each Member is called by his Name, Modus tenend. Pal. 35.
every one answering for what Place be serves: That done, they are willed to
choose their Speaker, who (though nominated by the King's Majesty) is to be a
Member of that House. Their Election being made, he is presented by them to the
King sitting in Parliament. 35. So Sir Thomas Gargrave 1 Eliz. So Christopher
Wray 13 Eliz. So Robert Bell 14 Eliz. See Bohun's Coll. 352, 353.
So John Puckering 27 Eliz. So George Snagg 31 Eliz. So Edward Coke 35 Eliz. So
Yelverton 39 Eliz. So John Crook 43 Eliz. So Sir Thomas Crew 19 Jac. 1. So Sir
Heneague Finch 1 Car. 1. cum multis aliis.

The Speaker ought to be religious, Towns. Coll. 1.4.
honest, grave, wise, faithful, and Secret. These Virtues must concur in one
Person able to supply that Place.

The long Use has made it so material, Elsyng. 154
that without the King's Commandment or Leave, they cannot choose their
Speaker. (Sed aliter ab Antiquo.)

Surely the Election of the Speaker was anciently free to the Commons, Id. 155.
to choose whom they would of their own House; which appears in this, that the
King never rejected any whom they made Choice of.

Vide contra Sir Simon d'Ewes Journ. 42. Col. 1. where he says, That 28 Hen.
6. Sir John Popham was discharged by the King ( i. e. on his excuse); and
thereupon the Commons chose and presented William Tresham Esquire who made no
Excuse. See the like of Paul Foley, in Bohun's Collection, 353.

The Cause of Summons being declared by the King or Chancellor; Elsing. 151
Cook 12, 115. Smyth's Commonwealth 79.
the Lord Chancellor confers first with his Majesty, and then in his Name,
commands the Commons to assemble in their House, and to choose one of their
Members to be their Speaker, and to present him to his Majesty on a Day certain.

Upon which the Commons shall presently assemble themselves in the Lower House,
Co. 12.115.
and he is to be a Member of their Parliament.

The Commons being thereupon assembled in their House; Elsyng. 152 Vid. Town.
Coll. 174. See Bohun ut Supra.
one of the Commons puts the rest in mind of their Charge given in the Upper
House, touching the choosing of a Speaker; and then does of himself commend one
unto them, and desires their Opinions to be signified by their Affirmative, or
Negative Voices; and if any Man stand up, and speak against him so named,
alleging some Reason, he ought to name another.

Some Person (when the generality of Members are come, Scobel 3. Vid. Town.
174. Vide Sir S. d'Ewe's Jour. passim.
and sit) does put the House in mind, that for their better proceeding in the
weighty Affairs they are come about, their first Work is to appoint a Speaker;
and re-commends to the House some Person of Fitness and Ability for the Service
and Dignity, which usually has been one of the long Robe.

If more than one Person be named for Speaker, Scobel 3.
and it be doubtful, who is more generally chosen; sometime one of the Members
standing in his Place, does by Direction or Leave of the House, put a Question
for determining the same, or the Clerk at the Board.

So it was in the first Session 1 Jac. 1. Scobel 4.
when Sir Edward Philips the King's Sergeant at Law was first named by Mr.
Secretary Herbert as fit for that Place; and the Names of others were
mentioned, but the more general Voice run upon Sir Edward Philips; and a
Question being put, he was by general Acclamation chosen Speaker.

When the Speaker is chosen, Co. 12.115. Vid. Towns. 175 Vid. Sir S. d'Ewe's
Jour. passim. Elsyng. 153 Vid. Town. 175. Vide Sir S. d'Ewe's Jeur. passim.
he in his Place, where he first shall sit down, shall disable himself, and
shall pray, That they would proceed to a new Election.

When it appears who is chosen, after a good Pawse he stands up, and
shows what Abilities are required in a Speaker; and that there are diverse
among them well furnished with such Qualities, etc. disableth himself, and
prays a new Choice to be made; which is commonly answered with a full Consent
of Voices upon his Name.

If the House generally give a Testimony of their Approbation, Elsyng. 153 4
Inst. 8. Vid. Town. 175. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. passim.
two of the Members (which for the most Part ware of the Council, or chief
Officers of the Court) going to the Gentleman named, and agreed to be Speaker,
take him from his Place, and lead him unto the Chair ( Elsying says, take him
by the Arms, and lead him to the Chair) where being set, they return to their
Places.

After a while he rises, and uncovered, Elsyng. 153
with humble Thanks for their good Opinion of him, promises his willing
Endeavors to do them Service.

After he is put into the Chair, Co 12.115.4. Inst 8.
then he shall pray them, that with their Favors, he may disable himself to the
King, that so their Expectations may not be deceived. See Bohun ut Supra.

Then some (and commonly he that first spoke) puts them in mind of the Day to
present him, etc. Elsyng. 153. Vid. Town. 175. Sir Simon, d'Ewes Jour. passim.
So it was done by Sir William Knowls the Controller in the 43 Eliz.

And the next Day, Co. 12.115. Rush. Coll. 480. Smyth's Commonwealth 80.
or 2 or 3 Days after the Commons shall present the Speaker in the Upper House
to the King, where he shall disable himself again to the King, and in most
humble manner shall entreat the King to command them to choose a more
sufficient Man. Vide ante 265. aliter.

At the Day appointed, Elsyng. 156 Vid. Towns. 175.
his Majesty sitting on his Royal Throne, and the Lords all in their Robes, the
Commons are called in, who being come, the Speaker is brought between two of
them, with low Obeisance to the Bar, and so presented at the Bar to his Majesty.

The Speaker having made his Excuse, the Lord Chancellor confers with the King,
and then tells him, That his Majesty does approve the Commons Choice, and
will not allow of his Excuse. Then the Speaker proceeds to his Speech. But
anciently he made first a Protestation; as you may read in Elsyng. 159, 160.

After he is allowed by the King, Co. 12.115. Vide Rush. Coll. 117. Vi. Smyths
Commonwealth 80. Elsyng. 164
then he shall make an Oration, and in the Conclusion, shall pray the four
usual Petitions.

The Speaker's Speech is what it pleases himself (having no Direction at all
from the Commons touching the same) making Petition to the King on behalf of
the Commons, some in general Words for all their ancient Privileges, and some
in particular.

The Protestation of the Speaker consists of three Parts. 4 Inst. 8. Vi. Towns.
Coll. 4. and 54 Rush. Coll. 424.
First, That the Commons in this Parliament may have free Speech, Vide Elsyng.
164.
as by Right and of Custom they have used, and all their ancient and just
Privileges and Liberties allowed to them. Secondly, That in any Thing he shall
deliver in the Name of the Commons (if he shall commit any Error) no Fault may
be arrected to the Commons, and that he may resort again to the Commons for
declaration of their true Intent, and that his Error may be pardoned. Thirdly,
That as often as necessity for his Majesty's Service, and the Good of the
Commonwealth shall require, he may by Direction of the House of Commons, have
Access to his Royal Person.

Some add a Fourth, Modus tenend Parl. 35.
That they may have Power to Correct any of their own Members that are
Offenders.

And some make a Fifth, Id 62.
That the Members, their Servants, Chattels, and Goods necessary, may be free
from all Arrests.

Though the Speaker does (upon his being approved of by the King) make it his
humble Petition to have Liberty of Speech allowed the Commons; Sir R. Atkin's
Argument, etc. 33.
from whence Dr. Heylin and Sir Robert Filmer, and others infer, That the
Commons enjoy that Liberty by the King's Grace and Favor: yet they are clearly
answered by the words that accompany that humble Petition, he prays, That they
may be allowed that Freedom, as of Right and Custom they have used, and all
their ancient, and just Privileges, and Liberties. So that this from the
Speaker is a Petition of Right.

The Speaker having ended his Oration, Eisyng. 165
the Lord Chancellor confers again with the King, and makes Answer thereunto in
his Majesty's Name, granting his Requests, etc.

That humble and modest way of the Peoples addressing to their Sovereign, Sir
R. Atkin's Argument 33.
either for the making Laws, which has been very ancient, or for granting
Privileges (by the Speaker of the Commons) shows great Reverence, and becomes
the Majesty of the Prince so to be addressed to: but let it not be made an
Argument, that either the Laws thereupon made, or the Privileges so allowed,
are precarious, and merely of Favor, or may be refused them (of Right.)

The Oration being answered by the Lord Chancellor, Co. 12 115. 4 Inst. 10.
and his Petitions allowed, the Speaker and the Commons shall depart to the
House of Commons, where the Speaker in the Chair shall request the Commons,
That inasmuch as they have chosen him for their Mouth, they would assist him,
and favorably accept his Proceedings, which do proceed out of unfeigned and
sincere Heart to do them service.

The first Business in the House is ordinarily to read a Bill that was not
passed in the last Parliament preceding, or some new Bill, as in that of 10
Jac. 1. Scobel 5. Vide Sir Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 43, 44.
But on that Day, before that was done, there was a Motion made for Privilege
of Sir Thomas Shirley, who was chosen a Member to serve in that Parliament, but
detained by an Arrest. Upon which a Habeas Corpus was awarded; and the Sergeant
that Arrested him, and his Yeoman sent for, and a Committee for Elections and
Privileges chosen.

See the Form and Manner of Electing Paul Foley, Esquire to be Speaker, Bohun's
Collection of Debates p. 350 to 354
after the Censure of Sir John Trevor, for a High Crime and Misdemeanor, in
receiving a Gratuity (or Bribe) of 1000 Guineas of the City of London, on
passing the Orphans Bill.

CHAP. XIV. Business of the Speaker.
THE Mace is not carried before the Speaker, Eisyng. 153
until his Return, being presented to the King, and allowed of.

The speaker sits in a Chair placed somewhat high, Modus tenend. Parl. 36.
Smith 's Commonwealth, 84.
to be seen and heard the better of all; the Clerks of the House sit before him
in a lower Seat, who read Bills, Petitions, etc.

The Speaker's Office is, when a Bill is read, Modus tenend. Parl. 37. Smith 's
Commonwealth, 86. Hakewel 138, 139. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 43.44.
as briefly as he may, to declare the Effects thereof to the House.

That Day that the Speaker, being approved by the King, comes down into the
Commons House to take his Place, the Custom is, to read for that time only one
Bill lest unpast the last Sessions, and no more; This is done, to give him
Seisin, were, as it of his Place.

1 Jac. 1. Scobel 19.
Sir Edward Philips was chosen Speaker, and the same Day (before he was
presented to the King) he signed a Warrant as Speaker, Note.
by Command of the House, for Election of another Person in the Place of Sir
Francis Bacon, being chosen in two Places.

A general Order has usually been made in the Beginning of the Session, Id. 20.
to authorize the Speaker to give Warrants for new Writs in Case of Death of
any Member, or of double Returns, where the Party makes his Choice openly in
the House during that Session.

Where such general Order is not made, Ibid.
Writs have issued by Warrant of the Speaker, by Virtue of special Order, upon
Motion in the House.

Oftentimes on the first Day of the Meeting of the House, Scobel 18.
as soon as the Meeting of the House, as soon as the Speaker has been
approved, and sometime before, such Persons as have been doubly returned, have
made their Choice.

43 Eliz. Mr. Johnson said, Towns. 191.192.
The Speaker may, ex Officio, send a Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown, who is
to certify the Lord Keeper, and so make a new Warrant.

The Speaker said, Ibid. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 627. Col. 2.
That I may inform you of the Order of the House, the Warrant must go from the
Speaker to the Clerk of the Crown, who is to inform the Lord Keeper, and then
to make a new Writ.

This Proposition I hold, Ibid. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 627. Col. 2.
That our Speaker is to be commanded by none, neither to attend any, but the
Queen, per Sir Edward Hobby.

The Warrant is to be directed to the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, Scobel
20. Vid. Tow. Col. 216.217. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim. Scobel 65. Petyr
's Mis^ell. Parl. 140.
by Order of Parliament 13 November. 1601.

May 1604. Resolved, That no Speaker from henceforth shall deliver a Bill, of
which the House is possessed, to any whosoever, without Leave and Allowance of
the House, but a Copy only. It is no Possession of a Bill, except the same be
delivered to the Clerk to be read, or that the Speaker read the Title of it in
the Chair.

5 Car. 11. 1628. R^b. Col. 66^.
The Speaker being moved to put the Question then proposed by the House, he
refused to do it, and said, That he was otherwise commanded from the King. 2
Martij, The Speaker was urged to put the Question; who said, See S^^dens Lise.
I have a Command from the King to adjourn till the Tenth of March, and to put
no Question; and endeavoring to go out of the Chair, was notwithstanding held
by some Members (the House foreseeing a Dissolution) till a Protestation was
published.

When the Queen made an Answer to the Speaker's Speech, Towns. Col. 263. Vide
Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 6^^. Col. 1.2. Towns. Col. 61.
he, with the whole House, sell upon their Knees, and so continued, till she
bid them stand up.

35 Eliz. Mr. Speaker was sent for to the Court, where the Queens Majesty her
self gave him Commandment what to deliver to the House.

The Speaker was commanded upon his Allegiance not to read any Bills touching
Matters of State or Reformation in Causes Ecclesiastical. Id. 63.


16 Car. 1. 1640. Apr. 16. Rush. Col. 1127.
The Speaker received Command from the King, That His Majesty's Speech should
be entered in the Journal of the Commons House of Parliament: Whereupon the
House passed a declarative Vote, That they did not expect that this should be
performed by other Speakers, but upon the like special Command, or by the Order
of the House.

Eodem Die, Resolved, Id. 1137.
That it was a Breach of Privilege of the House, for the Speaker not to obey
the Commands of the House; and that it appeared the Speaker did adjourn the
House by the Command of the King, without the Consent of the House, which is
also a Breach of the Privilege; it was therefore ordered, that this should be
presented to His Majesty.

1 Jac. 1. 1603. Ordered, Scobel 65. Petyt 's Miscol. Parl. 140.
That it should be precisely registered as the Judgment of the House, that no
Speaker from henceforth should deliver a Bill, whereof the House stands
possessed, to any whomsoever, without Allowance and Leave: But that he had
Power, and might either show it, or deliver a Copy (if it seems meet to him.)

But yet it was admitted, Id. 142.
that a Copy may be delivered, or it may be showed to His Majesty.

If upon Division of the House, Hakewel 145.
it appear that the Members are equal; the Speaker has always the casting
Voice upon all Questions.

44 Eliz. upon the Question, Towns. 321.322. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 683. Col.
2.
Whether Mr. Speaker had a Voice. It was said by Sir Walter Raleigh (and
confirmed by the Speaker himself) That the Speaker is foreclosed of his Voice,
by taking of that Place, which it had pleased them to impose upon him, and that
he was to be indifferent to both Parties. He was seconded by Mr. Secretary
Cecil.

The Speaker has no Voice in the House, Arc. Parl. 18. Smyth 's Commonwealth
86. Rush. Col. 3. p. v. 1. p. 35.
nor will they suffer him to speak in any Bill, to move, or dissuade it.

It was resolved by Vote in the last Parliament (says Mr. Harbottle Grimston,
in his Speech Nov. 9. 1640.) That the Speaker refusing to put the Question,
being thereunto required by the House; or to adjourn the House upon any Command
whatsoever, without the Consent and Approbation of the House it self; were
Breaches and Violations that highly impeached our Privileges.

Ordered, Id. p. 42.
That Mr. Speaker be entreated to be here this Afternoon ( viz. 10 Nov. 1640.
to sit by, at the great Committee of Irish Affairs; and if there be Cause, to
resume the Chair.

Nov. 20. 1640. Id. p. 53.
This Day the House ordered the Speaker should sit in the Afternoon.

Note, The Speaker is said to be not only the Mouth, but the Eyes and Ears of
the House. And hence it was, That when King Charles I. commanded the Speaker on
his allegiance to discover certain Transactions, etc. in the House; he justly
replied. That he had neither Eyes to See, Ears to Hear, nor Mouth to Speak, but
as the House shall direct him.

See also several Letters, Messages, etc. of that Prince to and by the Speaker
to the House in Rapin's History, Vol. II, Numb. 57, etc.

CHAP. XV. Order to be observed in the House.
THE Litany is read the first Thing, Towns. 54.
after the Speaker is set in the Chair. So agreed upon the Motion of Mr.
Speaker 13 Eliz. 1571.

When the Speaker is set in his Chair, Scobel. 6.
every Member is to sit in his Place, with his Head covered.

No Member in coming into the House, Ibid.
or in removing from his Place, is to pass between the Speaker, and the Member
then speaking; nor may cross, or go overthwart the House, or pass from one Side
to the other while the House is sitting.

23 Eliz. 1580. Sir Suron a (...), Jour. 282. Col. 2.
Upon a Motion made by Sir John Croft, Comptroller of her Majesty's Household,
and allowed of by the whole House, That Mr. Speaker and the Residue of the
House of the better sort of Calling, do always at the rising of the Trouse
depart, and come forth in comely and civil sort, for the Reverence of the
House, in turning about with a low Courtesy, as they make at their coming into
the House, and not unseemly to thrust, and throng out.

No Member is to come into the House with his Head covered, Scobel. 6.
nor to remove from one Place to another with his Hat on, nor is to put on his
Hat in coming in, or removing, until he be set down in his Place.

39 Eliz. None to enter the House with his Spurs on; Town. 101, 181. Vide Sir
S. d'Ewes Jour. 550. Col. 1.623. Col. 1. Scobel. 6. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour.
487. Col. 1.
nor until he pay the Serjeant's Fees.

While the House is sitting, no Man ought to speak or whisper to another, to
the End the House may not be interrupted, when any are speaking; but every one
is to attend unto what is spoken; in which Case Penalties have been imposed.

When any Member intends to speak, Ibid.
he is to stand up in his Place uncovered, address himself to the Speaker; who
usually calls such Person by his Name, that the House may take Notice who it is
that speaks.

Mr. Downold going about to speak about a Bill, Town. Coll. 224.
the Speaker interrupted him, and arose, without further hearing him, which he
took in great Disgrace, and told him, He would complain of him the next Sitting.

If any Man in this House speak wisely, Town, Coll 252.
we do him great wrong to interrupt him: if foolishly, let us hear him out, we
shall have the more Cause to tax him, per Sccretary Cecil.

If more than one stand up at once, Scobel. -. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 434.
Col. 1, 2.
the Speaker is to determine who was first up; and he is to speak, and the
other sit down, unless he, who was first up, sit down again, and give way to
the other; or that some other Member stand up, and acquaint the House, that
another up before him, whom the Speaker calls, and the House adjudge it so.

While one is speaking, Ibid. Vid. Town. Coll. 205.
none else is to stand up, or interrupt him, until he have done speaking, and
be set down, and then the other may rise up and speak, observing the Rules.

21 Junij 1604. Ibid.
It was agreed for an Order, That when Mr. Speaker desires to speak, he ought
to be heard without interruption, if the House be silent, and not in Dispute.

When the Speaker stands up, Ibid.
the Member standing up, ought to sit down.

27 April 1604. Scobel. 8.
Agreed for a Rule, That if any Question be upon a Bill, the Speaker is to
explain; but not to sway the House with Arguments or Dispute.

4 Junij 1604. Scobel. 8. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 335. Col. 1.640. Col 2.
Agreed for an Order, That whosoever hisseth, or disturbeth any Man in his
Speech, by coughing, spitting, etc. shall answer it at the Bar.

7 Maij 1607. Ordered upon the Question, Ibid.
That in going forth, no Man shall stir, until Mr. Speaker do arise and go
before, and then all the rest to follow after him.

He, who first stands up to speak, Co. 12.116. Smith's Commonwealth 84.
he shall shall first speak, without any Difference of Persons.

If in Debate Words be let fall, that give Offense, Exceptions should be taken
the same Day, and before such Member go out of the House: or he, who is
offended, may move, that such Person may not go out of the House 'till he has
given Satisfaction in what was by him spoken. And in such Case, Scobel. 81.
after the present Debate is over, the Words must be repeated by the Person
excepting: and in case he desire, or the House command him, he is to explain
himself, standing in his Place; which if he resuse to do, or the House be not
satisfied with such Explanation, then he is to withdraw.

43 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Coll 199. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 630. Col. 2.
It was said by Secretary Cecil, If any that sit next the Door, be desirous to
sit next the Chair, to give his Opinion; I will not only give him my Place, but
thank him to take my Charge: We that sit here, take your Favors out of
Courtesy, not out of Duty.

Though Freedom of Speech and Debates be an undoubted Privilege of the House,
Scobel. 72.
yet whatsoever is spoken in the House, is subject to the Censure of the House.

Febr. 19. 1592. Towns. Coll. Ibid.
35 Eliz. After the Names of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses were read and
declared to the Clerk of the Crown, and entered in his Book, they entered into
the House.

The House being set, Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. pas.
the Earl of Derby, High-Steward for this Parliament, came into the House to
take their Oaths. All being removed into the Court of Requests, the Lord
High-Steward sitting at the Door, called the Knights and Burgesses of every
County, according to the Letters of their Names in the Alphabet. Alphabetically
every one answered, as he was called, and having answered, departed thence to
the Parliament House Door, and there took the Oath of Supremacy, given him by
one of the Queen's Privy-Counsellors.

The Fee for entering his Name into the Serjeant's Book is Two shillings, Town.
Coll. 51.
the Rewards to the Door-Keepers, Three shillings and Eight-pence, the Fee for
returning the Indenture, Two shillings.

Febr. 7. 1588. Id. 15.
31 Eliz. This Day the House was called over, and all those that did then sit
in the House, and were present at the calling of the same, did thereupon
severally answer to their Names, and departed out of the House, as they were
called.

31 Eliz. 1588. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 432. Col. 2.
By Consent of the House (upon the Motion of Sir Edward Hobby) Admonition was
given given by Mr. Speaker, That Speeches used in this House by the Members of
the same, be not any of them made or used as Table Talk, or in any wise
delivered in Notes of writing to any Person or Persons whatsoever, not being
Members of this House, for that they are the Common Council of this Realm.

It was declared in the House in 10 Nov. 1640. 16 Car. 1. Rush. Coll. p. 3. v.
1. fol. 41.
that at the naming a Committee, if any Man rise to speak about the same, the
Clerk ought not to write down any more Names, whilst the Member standing up, is
speaking.

It was the same Day declared in the House, Id. 42.
that when a Business was begun and in debate, if any Man rise to speak to a
new Business, any Member may, but Mr. Speaker ought to interrupt him.

Whosoever shall go forth of the House in consused Manner, before Mr. Speaker,
Id. 44.
shall forfeit 10 s. and that the Reporters ought to go first, to take their
Places at Conferences. 11 Nov. 1640.

Ordered, Id. 60.
that when any Message is to go up to the Lords, none shall go out of the House
before the Messenger. 25 Nov. 1640.

Nov. 26. Id. 61
That neither Book nor Glove may give any Man Title or Interest to any Place,
if they themselves be not here at Prayers.

Ordered, Id. 83.
Dec. 4. 1640. that whosoever does not take his Place when he comes into the
House, or removes out of his Place to the Disturbance of the House, shall pay
12 d. to be divided between the Sergeant and the Poor: and whosoever speaks so
loud in the House, when any Bill or other Matter is reading, as to disturb the
House, shall pay the like Forsciture.

Dec. 4. Id. 84.
1684. Ordered, that no Bills have their second reading, but between nine and
twelve.

Dec. 10. Id. 92.
Declared for a constant Rule, that those who give their Votes for the
Preservation of the Orders of the House, should stay in; and those who give
their Votes otherwise, to the introducing of any new Matter, or any Alteration,
should go out.

It Is a Rule of Order, Id. 283.
that there ought to be no Heats nor Distempers within the House.

CHAP. XVI. Other Orders of the House.
2 Maij. A Member speaking, Scobel. 32.
and his 1610. Speech, seeming impertinent, and there being much hissing and
spitting, it was conceived for a Rule, That Mr. Speaker may stay impertinent
Speeches.

18 Maij 1604. It was Resolved, Ibid.
That eight engrossed Bills should be read the next Day, half an Hour after
Eight. The next Day about that Time, a Member entering into a long Discourse,
De mera Fide, and sola Fide, etc. was interrupted; and the Question offered,
Whether he should go on, in respect of the Order. But it was agreed for a Rule,
That if any Man speak not to the Matter in Question, the Speaker is to moderate.

April 1604. Idem 31. Vid. Town-Coll. 276.
He that digresseth from the Matter, to fall upon the Person, ought to be
suppressed by the Speaker.

17 April 1604. Ibid.
If any superfluous Motion or tedious Speech be offered in the House, the Party
is to be directed, and ordered by the Speaker.

No reviling or nipping Words must be used, Smith 's Commonwealth, 85, 86.
for then all the House will cry, It is against the Order. And if any speak
unreverently or seditiously against the Prince, or the Privy Council, I have
seen them not only interrupted, but it has been moved after in the House, and
they have sent them to the Tower.

If any Man speak impertinently, Scobel. 33.
or beside the Question in Hand, it stands with the Orders of the House, for
Mr. Speaker to interrupt him, and to know the Pleasure of the House, Whether
they will further hear him.

24 Jan. 23 Eliz. Mr. Carleton endeavoring to speak contrary to the Sense of
the House, Id. 31. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 283.
was interrupted: and offering to speak again, urging it was for the Liberty of
the House; the Speaker and the House did stay him.

When a Motion has been made, Id. 21.
the same may not be put to the Question, until it be debated, or at least
seconded by one or more Persons standing up in their Places: and then the same
may be put to the Question, if the Question be called for by the House, or
their general Sense be known; which the Speaker is to demand, unless any Member
stand up to speak. Ibid.


When a Motion has been made (and seconded) that Matter must receive a
Determination by the Question, or be laid aside by the general Sense of the
House, before another be entertained.

28 June 1604. A Motion being made, Ibid.
another interposed a Speech tending to another Business: but it was answered,
That there was no Precedent for that Speech to be used, before the other
Motion, which was made before, had received an Answer, and an End. And the
House accordingly determine the first Motion in the first Place.

4 Dec. 1640. Ordered, Scobel. 22
That till the Business in Agitation be ended, no new Motion of any new Matter
shall be made without leave of the House.

If the Matter moved do receive a Debate pro and contra, Ibid.
in that Debate none may speak more than once to the Matter: and after some
Time spent in that Debate, the Speaker collecting the Sense of the House upon
the Debate, is to reduce the same into a Question, which he is to propound, to
the End the House in their Debate afterward may be kept to the Matter of the
Question, if the same be approved by the House to contain the Substance of the
former Debate.

After such Question is proprounded, Ibid.
any Member may offer his Reasons against that Question in whole, or in part;
which may be be laid aside by a general Consent of the House, without a
Question put.

But without such general Consent, Scobel. 23
no part of the Question propounded may be laid aside, or omitted: and though the
general Debates run against it, yet if any Member before the Question put
(without that part) stand up, and desire that such Words or Clause may stand in
the Question, before the main Question is put: a Question is to be put, Whether
those Words, or that Clause shall stand in the Question.

The like Method is observed when any other Alteration is debated upon, Ibid.
to be made in a Question propounded: but upon putting a Question for such
Addition, Alteration, or Omission, any Person, who has formerly spoken to the
Matter of the Question, may speak again, to show his Reasons for, or against
such Alteration, Addition, or Omission, before such Question be put.

When the Speaker (the House calling for a Question) is putting the same, Ibid.
any Member that has not spoken before to the Matter, may stand up before the
Negative be put.

13 Junij 1604. Ibid.
A Bill touching a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage having been formerly upon a
third Reading recommitted, was returned: and a Proviso being tendered for
Chester, which was twice read, the Question was put for Commitment, in the
Affirmative, after which, the Negative was put, which was admitted to be so
orderly, because it is no sull Question without the Negative part be put, as
well as the Affirmative.

Every Question is to be put first in the Affirmative, and then the Negative:
Id. 24.
to which Question every Member ought to give his Vote one way or other: and
the Speaker is to declare his Opinion, whether the Yea's or the No's have it;
which is to stand as the Judgment of the House. But if any Member, before any
new Motion made, shall stand up and declare, that he does believe that the
Yea's, or the No's (as the Case shall be) have it, contrary to the Speaker's
Opinion, then the Speaker is to give Direction for the House to divide,
declaring whether the Yea's or the No's are to go forth.

Upon the dividing of the House, Id. 25.
those are to go forth, who are for varying from, or against the constant
Orders of the House (as, that a Question shall not be put, or not be now put;
it being the Course of the House, that after a Debate the same should be
determined by a Question, or the like) or against any positive Order made by
the House; or for the passing any new Thing, and for reading a Petition, or
Bill, and committing, engrossing, or passing such Bills, or the like.

Those that are for the new Bill (if there be a Question of Voices) shall go
out of the House; Id. 52.
and those who are against the Bill, Co. 12.116. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 505.
Col. 1. Vid. contra Scobel. 43.
and for the common Law, or any former Law, shall sit still in the House, for
they are in Possession of the old Law. Yet in 1604. those for the Bill sat,
and those against it went out. So 7 Aug. 1641.

10 Dec. 1640. Memorials in Hakewel, 25. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 505.
It was declared for a constant Rule, That those that give their Votes for
Preservation of the Orders of the House shall stay in; and those who give their
Votes otherwise, to the introducing any new Matter, or for any Alteration,
shall go forth.

24 Mart. Memorials ut supra.
21 Jac. 25. The House being divided upon a Question about Election of Members;
it was overruled by the House, that the No's should go forth.

This is also the Course upon any Question to agree with a Report in Favor of
the Opinion of a Committee. Ibid.


Upon dividing the House, Id. 26.
the Speaker is to nominate two of those that are in the Affirmative, and two
of the Negatives, to count the House; which four (each of them having a Staff
in his Hand) are to count the number of the Persons who remain sitting in the
House: and then to stand within the Door, two on the one Side, and two on the
other, and to count the Number of them who went forth, as they come in.

While the House is thus divided, Ibid.
or dividing, no Member may speak, nor (unless it be to go forth upon the
Division) remove out of his Place.

When the House is thus told, Id 27.
those two of the Tellers, who are of the Number of those who have the major
Votes, standing on the right Hand, and the two other on the left Hand at the
Bar (the rest being all set in their Places) are to come from thence up to the
Table together (making the usual Obeisance to the House three Times; once at
the Bar, again in the middle of the House, and again when they are come to the
Table) and that Person who stands on the right Hand, is to declare to the
Speaker the Number of the Yea's (who sat, or went out, as the Case is) and of
the No's: and then with like Reverence to depart into their Places; after
which, Mr. Speaker is to report the same to the House.

If the Affirmative have the major Votes by the Judgment of the Speaker, Ibid.
or (in case of Division) upon the Division; the Clerk is to enter the Vote,
Resolved. If the Negatives, then he is to enter it thus -- The Question being
put (setting down the Words of the Question) it passed in the Negative.

Upon the Division, Ibid.
if the Members appear to be equal, then the Speaker is to declare his Vote,
whether he be a Yea, or a No, which in this Case is the casting Voice: but in
other Cases the Speaker gives no Vote.

1 Maij 1606. Ibid.
Upon a Question, whether a Man saying Yea, may afterward sit and change his
Opinion, a Precedent was remembered by the Speaker, of Mr. Morris, Attorncy of
the Wards, in 39 Eliz. that in like case changed his Opinion.

If upon a Debate it be much controverted, Id. 28.
and much be said against the Question; any Member may move, that the Question
may be first made, whether that Question shall be put, or whether it shall be
now put; which usually is admitted at the Instance of any Member, especially if
it be seconded, and insisted on: and if that Question being put, it pass in the
Affirmative; then the main Question is to be put immediately, and no Man may
speak any thing further to it, either to add, or alter. But before the Question
(whether the Question shall be put) any Person, who has not formerly spoken to
the main Question, has liberty to speak for it, or against it; because else he
shall be precluded from speaking at all to it.

If in a Debate there arise more Questions than one, and it be controverted,
Ibid.
which Question should be first put; the Question first moved and seconded is
regularly to be first put, unless it be laid aside by general Consent. If the
first Question be insisted on to be put, and the major Part seem to be against
it, the Question is to be, whether that Question shall be now put: if that pass
in the Negative, then the other Question may be put, if desired: nevertheless
any Person may speak to it again, before it be put. If in the Affirmative, then
it is to be put without any Addition or Alteration, as before: and after the
Question is put, if any Member move to have the other Question put, every one
has leave to speak to it again, as if it were a new Question.

If a Matter be received into Debate, Id. 29
and a Question grow, whether the House shall proceed in that Debate at this
time, and it fall out, that the House be divided; in such Case the No's are to
go forth (it being contrary to the Course of the House, that any Business
should be laid aside 'till it be determined by a Question) if the Question be
for an Adjournment of a Debate the Yea's are to go forth upon the same Reason.

After a Question is propounded, Ibid.
no Man may speak more than once to the Matter; but having spoken to the
Matter, when the Question comes to be put, he may speak to the Manner or Words
of the Question, keeping himself to that only, and not ravelling into the
Merits of it.

If a Question upon a Debate contain more Parts than one, Ibid
and the Members seem to be for one Part, and not for the other; it may be
moved, that the same may be divided into two, or more Questions: as Dec. 2.
1640, the Debate about the Election of two Knights was divided into two
Questions.

No Member in his Discourse in the House may mention the Name of any other
Member then present, Id. 30. Vide Smyth's Commonwealth 85.
but to describe him by his Title or Addition (as that Noble Lord, that worthy
Knight; or by his Office, as Judge, Sergeant, Gentleman of the long or short
Robe; or by his Place, as the Gentleman near the Chair, near the Bar, or on the
other side; or that Gentleman that spoke last, or last save one, or the like.)

During any Debate any Member, Memorials ut supr. 30.
though he have spoken to the Matter, may rise up, and speak to the Orders of the
House, if they be transgressed, in Case the Speaker do not: but if the Speaker
stand up, he is first to be heard, and when he stands up, the other must sit
down, 'till the Speaker sit down.

But if any Person rise up to speak to the Orders of the House in the midst of
a Debate, Ibid. and 31.
he must keep within that Line, and not fall into the Matter itself: if he do,
he may be taken down by the Speaker, or any other Member, calling to the Orders
of the House.

While a Member is speaking to a Debate or Question, he is to be heard out, Id.
31. Vid. Town. Coll. 205.
and not taken down, unless by Mr. Speaker (as in some Cases he may) or that he
speak of such Matter as the House does not think fit to admit.

A Matter upon Debate having been once finally determined by a Question,
Memorials in Hakeavel, 33.
ought not to be again brought into Dispute.

27 Martij 1604. Ibid.
Sir Edward Coke Attorney General, and Dr. Hone bring a Message from the Lords,
desiring a Conference about the Case of Sir Francis Godwyn. Vide this Argument
at large in the Appendix.
Upon this Message it was argued, That now the Judgment having passed the
House, it could not, nor ought to be reversed by them: and upon the Question it
was resolved, There should be no Conference.

2 Apr. 1604. Ibid
A Vote having passed some Days past, That no Conference should be admitted
with the Lords, the same Question was again moved, but was carried in the
Negative. And it was then urged for a Rule, That a Question having been once
made, and carried in the Affirmative, or Negative, cannot be questioned again,
but must stand as the Judgment of the House.

4 Junij 1604. Id. 45
Agreed for a Rule, If two stand up to speak to a Bill, He who first stood up
(if it be known by Demand or otherwise) is to be first heard.

11 Nov. 1640. Id. 69.
It is declared, as a constant Order of the House, That if a Witness be brought
to the House, the House sitting, the Bar is to be down; otherwise, if the House
be in a Committee.

In a Debate about an Election, Id. 70.
it was Resolved, That the Party concerned shall be heard to inform the House,
and then he is to go forth.

When any Complaint is made against a Member, Id. 71.
or Exceptions taken to any Thing spoken by him (after he has been heard to
explain himself, if he desire, or the House command it, which is usually done
by him standing in his Place) if the House be not satisfied, but sall into
Debate thereof, such Member is to withdraw.

The Members of the lower House came to the Lords, upon a Conference, Town.
Coll. 311.
as they were sitting at the Table, and going to the upper End thereof, spoke.

When any Bills or Messages are brought from the lower House to be presented to
the upper House, the Lord Keeper, Towns. 95. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 585.
and the rest of the Lords are to rise from their Places, and to go down to the
Bar, and there meet such as come from the lower House, and from them to receive
in that Place their Messages or Bills.

But when any answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper in the Name and
behalf of the upper House, Ibid.
to such Knights and Burgesses as come from the lower House, the said Knights
and Burgesses are to receive the same, standing toward the lower End of the
House; and the Lord Keeper is to deliver the same with his Head covered, and
all the Lords are to keep their Places.

In the Answer of the Commons House of Parliament to King James his Objection
in Sir Francis Goodwyn's Case (3 Apr. 1604.) Memorials ut supra. 33, 34.
the Objection being, That they refuse Conference with the Lords. The Answer is
in these Words, Concerning our refusing Conference with the Lords; there was
none desired, 'till after our Sentence passed: and then we thought, that in a
Matter private to our own House (which by Rules of Order might be by us
revoked) we might without any Imputation refuse to confer.

Orders and Resolves of the House, taken out of the third Volume of Mr. Rush
worth's Collections. Part 1.

2 Apr. 1604. Id. 71.
A Rule, that a Question being once made, and carried in the Affirmative or
Negative, cannot be questioned again, but must stand as a Judgment of the
House; the Case of Sir Francis Goodwyn, and Sir John Fortescue; See at the End
of the House of Commons Proceedings about the Aylesbur-men.

9 Nov. 1640. Id. 38.
Ordered, that the general Order for those that are double returned, shall not
bind Mr. -- now extra Regnum.

10 Nov. 1640. Id. 41.
Declared in the House, that at the naming a Committee, if any Man rise to
speak about the same, the Clerk ought not to write down any more Names, whilst
the Member standing up, is speaking.

Ibid. Id. 42.
Declared, that when a Business was begun and in Debate, if any Man rise to
speak to a new Business, any Member may, but Mr. Speaker ought to interrupt him.

11 Nov. 1640. Id. 44.
That whosoever shall go forth of the House to a Conference in a confused
manner, before Mr. Speaker, shall forfeit 10 s. and that the Reporters ought to
go first, to take their Places at Conferences.

25 Nov. 1640. Id. 60.
Ordered, that when any Message is to go up to the Lords, none shall go out of
the House before the Messenger.

26 Nov. 1640. Id. 61.
That neither Book nor Glove may give any Man Title or Interest to any Place,
if they themselves be not here at Prayers.

28 Nov. 1640. Id. 66.
Ordered, that if any one be chosen a Member of this House, and his Writ not
yet returned, he may notwithstanding be admitted to the Sacrament to Morrow,
delivering a Ticket of his Name, and the place for which he serves.

4 Dec. 1640. Id. 83.
Ordered, that whosoever does not take his Place when he comes into the House,
or removes out of his Place to the Disturbance of the House, shall pay 12 d. to
be divided between the Sergeant and the Poor; and whosoever speaks so loud in
the House when any Bill or other Matter is reading, as to disturb the House,
shall pay the like Forfeiture. And it is further ordered, that the Business
then in Agitation being ended, no new Motion of any new Matters shall be made,
without leave of the House.

5 Dec. 1640. Id. 84.
Ordered, that no Bills have their second Reading, but between Nine and Twelve.

10 Dec. 1640. Id. 92.
Declared for a constant Rule, that those that give their Votes for the
Preservation of the Orders of the House, should stay in; and those that give
their Votes otherwise, to the introducing of any new Matter, or any Alteration,
should go out.

8 Sept. 1641. Id. 392.
See how far an Order of this House is binding.

In March 1627. Rush. Coll. vol. 1.513.
Resolved, that is the ancient and undubitable Right of every Freeman, that he
has a full and absolute Property in his Goods and Estate; that no Tax,
Tallage, Loan, Benevolences, or other like Charge ought to be commanded, or
levied by the King, or any of his Ministers, without common Consent by Act of
Parliament.

March 1627. Id. 513.
Resolved, that no Freeman ought to be detained, or kept in Prison, or
otherwise restrained by the Command of the King or Privy Council, or any other,
unless some Cause of the Commitment, Detainer or Restraint be expressed, for
which by Law he ought to be committed, detained, or restrained.

Resolved, Id. 513.
that the Writ of HabeasCorpus may not be Detained, Denied, but ought to be
granted to every Man that is committed, or detained in Prison, or otherwise
restrained, though it be by the Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any
other, he praying the same.

Resolved, that if a Freeman be committed, or detained in Prison, or otherwise
restrained by Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any other, no Cause of
such Commitment, Detainer, or Restraint being expressed, for which by Law he
ought to be committed, detained, or restrained, and the same be returned upon a
Habeas Corpus, granted for the said Party, then he ought to be delivered or
bailed.

2 April 1628. Resolved, Id. 523.
that no Freeman ought to be confined by any Command from the King, or
Privy Council, or any other, unless it be by Act of Parliament, or by other due
Course, or Warrant of Law.

King James I. having in 1621. Rapin Vol. 2. No. 54. p. 208.209.
for some Words spoken by him in the House, it occasioned a Remonstrance of the
Commons to the King, (therein) complaining of Breach of Privilege, and
asserting their Liberty of Speech and Debate, to be their ancient and undoubted
Right and Inheritance, received from their Ancestors, etc.

This they sent to the King, by twelve Members, at the Head of whom, they
(affectedly) set Sir R. Weston, a Privy-Counsellor, one whom they conceived had
incensed the K. against them, who were received very roughly, and their
Remonstrance rejected.

But some Days after, the K. sends 'em a long Answer in Writing, wherein,
toward the Conclusion, he objects against the stiling their Privileges, Id. p.
211.
their ancient and undoubted Right and Inheritance, and wishes they had said (
i. e. commands 'em to acknowledge) that their Privileges were derived from the
Grace and Permission of him and his Ancestors.

The House, on reading this Answer, plainly perceived the King's Aims, The
Commons Protestation in Vindication of their Privileges. Ibid. p. 211. 212.
etc. and knowing the Parl. was going to be prorogued or dissolved, drew up a
Protestation, in Order to vindicate their Privileges, viz.

The Commons now assembled in Parl. being justly occasioned thereunto,
concerning sundry Liberties, Franchises and Privileges of Parliament, amongst
others here mentioned, do make this Protestation following; That the Liberties,
Franchises, Privileges and Jurisdiction of Parliament, are the ancient and
undoubted Birthright and Inheritance of the Subjects of England; and that the
arduous and urgent Affairs concerning the King, the State, and the Defense of
the Realm, and of the Church of England, and the Maintenance and making of
Laws, and Redress of Mischiefs and Grievances which happen daily within this
Realm, are proper Subjects and Matter of Counsel and Debate in Parliament: And
that in the handling (debating) and proceeding in those Businesses, every
Member of the House of Parliament has, and of Right ought to have Freedom of
Speech to propound, treat, reason and bring to Conclusion the same; and that
the Commons in Parliament have like Liberty and Freedom to treat of these
Matters in such Order, as in their Judgment shall seem fittest; See of the
Terms Parliament and Prerogative. Id. p. 213.
and that every Member of the said House has like Freedom from all
Impeachment, Imprisonment and Molestation (other than by Censure of the House
it self) for or concerning any speaking, reasoning or declaring of any Matter
or Matters touching the Parliament or Parliament-Business; and that if any of
the Members be complained of and questioned for any Thing said or done in
Parliament, the same is to be showed to the King, by the Advice and Assent of
the Commons assembled in Parliament, before the King give Credence to any
private Information.

But the K. being informed of this Protestation, called a Council, and sending
for the Commons Journal, (in Presence of the Judges, etc.) with his own Hands
tore it out of the Journal, and in a few Days after dissolved the Parliament;
but this did not deter the Commons from insisting on their Claim: And in his
Son's Reign it was asserted with a Witness, and is now confirmed by the Claim
of Right, and other Statutes.

Mar. 12. 1700. the House, Journal Dom. Com.
on a Report of that Part of the K's Speech which related to the Hanover
Succession, agreed with the Committee in these Resolves, viz.

1. That all Things relating to the well governing of this Kingdom, which are
properly cognizable in the P. Council, shall be transacted there; and all
Resolutions taken thereupon, shall be signed by the P. C.

2. That no Person whatsoever that is not a Native of England, Scotland or
Ireland, or of the Dominions thereunto belonging, or who is not born of English
Parents beyond the Seas (although such Person be naturalized or made a Denizen)
shall be capable to be of the P. C. or a Member of either H. of P. or to enjoy
any Office of Place or Trust either Civil or Military. P. Council.


3. That no such Person, etc. shall be capable of any Grant of Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments from the Crown to himself or any other in Trust for him.

4. That upon the further Limitation of the Crown, in Case the same shall come
to any Person not being a Native of this Kingdom of England, this Nation be not
obliged to engage in any War for the Defense of any Dominions or Territories
not belonging to the Crown of England, without the Consent of Parliament.

5. That whoever shall hereafter come to the Possession of this Crown, shall
join in Communion with the Church by Law established.

6. That no Pardon shall be pleaded to any Impeachment in Parliament.

7. That no Person who shall hereafter come to the Possession of this Crown,
shall go out of the Dominions of England, Scotland or Ireland, without Consent
of Parl.

8. That no Person who has any Office under the King, Note.
or receives a Pension from the Crown, shall be capable of serving as a Member
of the House of Commons.

With diverse other Resolves, for better securing the Rights and Liberties of
the People, on which the Stat. 12. and 13. W. 3. c. 2. was made.

CHAP. XVII. Passing of Bills. See for this a MS. Discourse penes W. Bohun.
Journal Dom. Com.

ON the 27th of July 1660, it was represented to King Charles the Second, That
by the constant Course of Parliament, they have used to receive Acts of Grace,
and such Bills as concern the Redress of Grievances, and Confirmation of the
Subjects Liberties, before they present Bills of Aid or Supply; but now in
Confidence of His Majesty, etc, they tender a Money-Bill, etc. i. e. before a
Redress of Grievances.

All Bills take effect and work from the Beginning of the Parliament or
Session, Hob. 111.33. H. 6.18. Bro. tit. Parl. 86. tit. Relation. 35. Plow. 79.
Town. Col. 209.
except it be otherwise ordained by the Act itself.

43 Eliz. 1601. while there were diverse Disputes about a Bill, Mr. Fleming the
Queen's Solicitor, took the Bill to look a Word in it; after he had done, and
laid it on the Board, one stood up and said, Mr. Speaker, after a Bill is
engrossed, you ought to hold it in your Hand, and let no Man look into it;
which was confessed by all. And so the Speaker took it.

When a Bill is read, Cook 22.115.
the Speaker does open the Parts of the Bill; so that each Member of the House
may understand the Intention of each Part of the Bill.

Such Bills, Hakewel 134.
as being first passed in one House, are sent unto the other, are always sent
in Parchment fairly engrossed.

Public Bills are in due Course to be preferred in Reading and Passing before
Private: And of Public, Ibid. Col. 12.116.
such as concern the Service of God, and Good of the Church. Secondly, such as
concern the Commonwealth, in which are included such as touch the Person,
Revenue or Household of the King, Queen, etc. and they ought especially to be
preferred in Passing. Lastly, Private Bills are to be offered to be read, and
passed in such Order as they were preferred. Town. Col. 270.
And they that carry them, to give some brief Commendation of them.

Any Member of the House may offer a Bill for Public Good, Scobel 40.
except it be for imposing a Tax; which is not to be done, but by Order of the
House first had.

If any Member desire, Ibid.
that an Act made, and in Force, may be repealed or altered, he is first to
move the House in it, and have their Resolution, before any Bill to that
Purpose may be offered; and if upon the Reasons showed, for repealing or
altering such Law, the House shall think it fit, they do usually appoint one or
more of the Members to bring in a Bill for that Purpose.

But the Speaker is not precisely bound to any of these Rules, Hakewel 136.
for the preferring of Bills to be read or passed; but is left to his own good
Discretion (except he be specially directed by the House to the contrary) and
tho he be earnestly pressed by the House for the reading of some one Bill; yet
if he have not had convenient Time to read the same over, and to make a Breviat
thereof for his own Memory; the Speaker does claim a Privilege to defer the
Reading thereof to some other Time.

The Clerk being usually directed by the Speaker (but sometime by the House)
what Bill to read, Hakewel 137.
with a loud and distinct Voice first reads the Title of the Bill, and then,
after a little Pause, the Bill it self; which done, kissing his Hand, he
delivers the same to the Speaker; who stands up uncovered (whereas
otherwise he sits with his Hat on) and holding the Bill in his Hand, says,
The Bill is thus entitled, and then reads the Title; which done, he opens
to the House the Substance of the Bill, which he does, either trusting to his
Memory, or using the Help, or altogether the Reading of his Breviat, which is
filed to the Bill.

Sometimes reading the Bill it self, Hakewel 137. Vido Scobel 42.
especially upon the Passage of a Bill, when it has been much altered by the
Commitees, so that thereby it differs very much from the Breviat.

When he has opened the Effect of the Bill, he declares to the House, Id. 138.
That it is the first Reading of the Bill, and delivers the same again to the
Clerk.

The Bill containing the King's General Pardon has but one Reading in the
Lords House, and one below: Id. 138. Vid. To^. Col. 29, 44, 126. Vide Sir Simon
d'Ewes Jour. 91. Col. 2.
The Reason is, because the Subject must take it as the King will give it,
without any Alteration; and yet many times Exceptions are taken at the Reading
thereof, for that it is not so favorable as in former Times.

The like of a Bill of Subsidies granted by the Clergy. Hakewel Ibid.


The usual Course is to spend the Morning, before the House grow full, Id. 139.
in the first Readings, and to defer the second or third Reading till the House
grow full.

All Men of Law know, that a Bill, Town. Call. 238.
which is only expository, to expound the Common Law, does enact nothing,
neither is any Proviso good therein.

No Knight, Col. 12.116.
Citizen or Burgess, ought to speak above once to one Bill in one Day, unless
sometime by Way of Explication.

At the first Reading of the Bill, Hakewel 139.
it is not the Course for any Man to speak to it, but rather to consider of it,
and to take Time till the second Reading; unless it carry Matter of apparent
Hurt to the Commonwealth, and so to be rejected.

Nor for any Addition, Ibid.
for thereby it is implied, That the Body of the Bill is good, which till the
second Reading, does not regularly come to the Trial.

If any Bill originally begun in the Commons House, Id. 140. Scobel 42.
upon the first Reading happen to be debated too and fro, and that upon the
Debate, the House do call for the Question; it ought to be, not Whether the
Bill shall be read the second Time (for so it ought to be in ordinary Course)
but whether it shall be rejected.

If a Bill coming from the Lords be spoken against, Hak. Ibid.
and pressed to be put to the Question, upon the first Reading; the Speaker, in
Favor and Respect thereto, should not make the Question for Rejection (as in
the former Case) but should first make the Question for the second Reading; and
if that be denied, then for Rejection. But usually when any such Debate is, the
Speaker does forbear to make any Question at all thereupon, except he be much
pressed thereto, it being better to consider of it before it be put to such a
Hazard.

If the Question for Rejection be made, Id. 141. Scobel 42.
and the greater Voice be to have it rejected, the Clerk ought to note it
rejected in his Journal, and so to indorse it on the Back of the Bill; and it
shall be no more read: If the Voice be to have the Bill retained, it shall have
his second Reading in Course.

It is against the ordinary Course that the same Bill should be read more than
once in one Day, Ibid.
but for special Reasons it has been suffered, that private Bills have been in
one Day read twice.

It is likewise done sometimes, Hakewell 142
when the House lacks other Businesses wherein to employ themselves,
especially if the Bill be of no great Importance, howsoever it is never but
upon Motion and special Order.

When special Committees appointed for the drawing of some one special Bill,
Ibid.
present the same ready drawn to the House, it has been often seen, that the
same Bill has not only been twice read, but ordered also to be engrossed the
same Day.

It is not without Precedent that a Bill has been thrice Read, Ibid.
and passed in the same Day. But this is a President that stands alone. Q.
the D. of Monmouth's Attainder.

A Bill was read the fourth Time, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 90. Co. 1.
before it passed the House, and tho there want not other Presidents, yet it is
rare and worth the Observation.

A Bill was put to the Question, Id. 335. Col. 1.
upon the first Reading, and rejected; but it is not usual for a Bill to be put
to the Question upon the first Reading.

27 Eliz. 1584. Id. 337. Col. 2.415. Col. 2.
A Bill was committed upon the third Reading, having been formerly committed
upon the second; which is not usual.

A Bill may be preferred to be secondly read the next Day after the first
Reading; Hakewel 143.
but the usual Course is to forbear for two or three Days, that Men may have
more Time to consider upon it, except the Nature of the Business be such, that
it requires haste.

After the Bill is secondly read, Ibid.
the Clerk, as before, in humble Manner delivers the same to the Speaker; who
again reads the Title and his Breviat, as he did upon the first Reading;
which done, he declares, That it was a second Reading of the Bill. And then he
ought to pause a while, expecting whether any of the House will speak to it;
for before the Speaker has so declared the State of the Bill, no Man should
offer to speak to it; and then, and not before, is the Time when to speak.

If after a pretty distance of Time, Ibid.
no Man speak against the Bill for matter or Form, he may make the Question for
engrossing thereof, if it be a Bill originally exhibited into the Commons House.

So likewise if diverse speak for the Bill, Id. 144.
without taking Exception to the (Matter or) Form thereof, he may make the same
Question for the engrossing.

The like Question for the engrossing ought to be made, Ibid.
if the greater Voice be, That the Bill should not be committed: for it were to
End further delay in the proceeding of the Bill, if there be no Exception taken
to the matter or Form thereof: but upon the second Reading, and after the
Speaker has delivered the State thereof, the House does usually call for
committing of the Bill; and then if any Man will speak against it, either for
Matter or Form, he ought to be heard.

After the first Man has spoken, Id. 144.
the Speaker ought to rest a while, expecting whether any other Man will speak
thereto: so ought he likewise to do after every Speech ended: when he
perceives that the Debate is at an End, he ought then to make the Question for
the committing thereof, in this sort: As many as are of Opinion that this Bill
shall be committed, Id. 145.
say Yea.

And after the Affirmative Voice given, As many as are of the contrary Opinion,
say No.

And he ought by his Ear to judge which of the Voices is the greatest: if that
be doubtful, the House ought to be divided.

If upon Division of the House it appear that the Numbers are equal, Ibid
the Speaker has the casting Voice upon all Questions.

If it appear that the Affirmative Voice be the greater, Ibid.
then ought he to put the House in Mind touching the naming of Committees,
which is done thus.

Every one of the House that list may call upon the Name of any one of the
House to be a Committee, and the Clerk ought in his Journal to write under the
Title of the Bill the Name of every one so called on, at least of such whose
Names (in that Confusion) he can distinctly hear; and this he ought to do
without Partiality, either to those that name, or to the Party named.

He that speaks directly against the Body of the Bill, Id 146. Town. Coll.
208.
may not be named a Committee: for he that would totally destroy, will not
amend it.

When a convenient Number of Committees are named, Hak. Ibid.
then ought the Speaker to put the House in Mind to name Time and Place, when
and where the Committees may meet; which the Clerk ought likewise to enter into
his Journal Book: and when the House is in silence, he ought with a loud Voice
to read (out of his Book) the Committees Names, and the Time and Place of the
Commitment, that the Committees may take Notice thereof.

After a Bill, Ibid.
which is sent from the Lords, is twice read, the Question ought to be for the
Commitment: if it be denied to be committed, it ought to be read the third
time, and the next Question ought to be for the Passage, and not for the
Engrossing (as it is where the Bill originally begins in the lower House) for
Bills, which come from the Lords come always engrossed.

The Question for the Passage should in ordinary Course be then made, Hakewel
147.
when the Bill is denied to be committed; but not till the Bill be read the
third Time.

In the debating of Bills in the House, Co. 12.116
no Man may speak twice in one Day (unless sometime by way of Explication)
except the Bill be oftener read than once; and then a Man may speak as often as
the Bill is read. Hak. 148.
Otherwise it is at Committees, or when in the House the Debate arises upon
some Motion concerning the Order of the House.

After the Debate is ended, Id. 250.
the Speaker ought to put the Question for Engrossing.

If the greater Number of Voices be, Ibid.
that the Bill ought not to be engrossed, the Clerk ought to make an Entry in
his Journal, that the same was dashed: and so he ought likewise to note upon
the back of the Bill, and the Day when, If the Voice be to have it engrossed,
it is the Office of the Clerk to do it.

It is always to be observed, Ibid.
that when the Bill is engrossed, the Clerk ought to endorse the Title thereof
upon the back of the Bill, and not within the Bill in any Case. Ibid.


So ought likewise such Bills as come from the Lords to have Titles endorsed
upon the back of the Bill, and not within.

After a Bill has been committed, Id. 151.
and is reported, it ought not in an ordinary Course to be committed, but
either to be dashed or engrossed: and yet when the Matter is of Importance, it
is sometimes for special Reasons suffered; but then usually the Re-commitment
is to the same Committee.

About two or three Days after the Bill is thus ordered to be engrossed, Id.
152.
and is accordingly engrossed, it is offered by the Speaker to be read a third
Time, for the Passage thereof.

For the most part the Speaker puts not any one Bill to the Passage by
itself alone, Id. 153.
but stays till there be diverse Bills ready engrossed for the third Reading;
and when he has a convenient Number (which may be five, or six, rather less
than more) then he gives Notice to the House, That he purposes next Day to
offer up some Bills for the Passage, and desires the House to give special
Attendance for that purpose; and then the Day following he does accordingly put
them to the third Reading. First private Bills, until the House be grown to
some fullness; and then he offers to be read the public Bills, which are
engrossed.

It has at some times been ordered, Ibid.
That for the preventing of carrying of Bills with a few Voices, that no Bills
should be put to the Passage until Nine of the Clock, at which time the House
is commonly full, or shortly after.

When the Bill is read the third Time, Id. 153
the Clerk delivers it to the Speaker, who reads the Title thereof, and
opens the Effect of the Bill, and tells them, That the Bill has now been
thrice read, and that with their Favors he will put it to the Question for the
passing; but pawseth a while, that Men may have Liberty to speak thereto; for
upon the third Reading the Matter is debated afresh, and for the most part it
is more spoken unto this Time, than upon any of the former Readings.

When the Argument is ended, Id. 154.
the Speaker (still holding the Bill in his Hand) makes a Question for the
Passage, in this sort: As many as are of Opinion that this Bill should pass,
say Yea, etc.

If the Voice be for the Passage of the Bill, Ibid.
the Clerk ought to make a Remembrance thereof in his Journal; if otherwise,
then his Remembrance must be accordingly made. Breck Abr. f. Edit. 119 n. 4.


Upon the Bill thus passed (if it be originally exhibited in the House of
Commons) the Clerk ought to write within the Bill on the top toward the right
Hand, (Soit baille aux Seigneurs.) Let it be delivered to the Lords.

If the Bill passed be originally begun in the Lords House, Brook 119.4.
then ought the Clerk to write underneath the Subscription of the Lords (which
always is at the foot of the Bill) A cest Bill les Commons sont assentus. i. e.
To this Bill the Commons have assented.

19 Dec. 1584. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 344. Col. 2.
27 Eliz. The House of Commons taking Exceptions about endorsing of Bills in
the upper part of them, whereas it ought to be done at the neither and lower
part; the Lords did very respectfully take away their said Grievance, by the
alteration of the Indorsinents aforesaid, according to the usual and ancient
Form.

No Bill upon the third Reading, Hak. 156.
for the Matter or Body thereof, may be recommitted: but for some particular
Clause or Proviso, it has been sometimes suffered; but it is to be observed as
a Thing unusual after the third Reading.

It has been much doubted, Hakewel 157.
whether when a Bill is in Debate for the Passage, it ought not to receive the
Resolution of the House the same Day wherein it is first offered to the
Passage; but Precedents are, where the Case being of some Importance, and the
Debate growing long, the Argument has been put over to the next Day: In which
Case he that has already spoken to the Bill the first Day, may not again speak
the Second, no more than he may speak twice in one Day, where the Argument is
not deferred to another Day.

If a Bill be rejected, Id. 158.
the same Bill may not be offered to the House again the same Session; but if
it be altered in any Point material, both in the Body, and in the Title, it may
be received the second Time.

In the Time of the Reading of a Bill, Ibid.
the House should not be interrupted with any other Business; and yet in 1.
Eliz. the House adjourned itself till the next Day after the Bill for Sealing
Clothes was half read, only to be present at the Conference about Religion in
Westminster-Abby.

Sometimes the House conceiving much Offense against some Bills, Ibid.
does not only order them to be rejected, but to be torn, etc. in the House.

When a Bill is thrice read, Id. 159.
and passed in the House, there ought to be no further Alteration thereof in
any Point.

When the Speaker has in his Hands a convenient Number of Bills ready passed,
Id. 175.
as five or six, or therabouts, he then puts the House in Mind of sending
them up to the Lords, and desires the House to appoint Messengers; who
accordingly do appoint some one principal Member of the House for that Purpose;
to whom the Bills are delivered in such Order, as he ought to present them to
the Lords; which is done by Direction of the Speaker, except the House be
pleased to give special Direction therein.

The Order which has usually been observed in ranking them, is, First, Id. 176.
To place those that came originally from the Lords. Secondly, Those that being
sent up to the Lords from the Commons House, were sent back to be amended.
Thirdly, Public Bills originally coming from the Commons House, and these to
be marshalled according to their Degrees in Consequence. Lastly, Are to be
placed private Bills, in such Order as the Speaker pleases.

Many Times the House (with a Purpose especially to grace some one Bill)
sends it alone, Ibid.
with a special Recommendation thereof: The Messenger for this Purpose is
usually attended by thirty or forty of the House, as they please, and are
affected to the Business.

The principal Messenger, Id. 177.
who delivers the Bills to the Lords, coming in the first Rank of his Company
to the Bar of the Lords House with three Congies, tells the Lords, That the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House, have sent unto their
Lordships certain Bills; and then reading the Title of every Bill, as it lies
in Order, he so delivers the same in an humble Manner to the Lord Chancellor;
who of Purpose comes to receive them.

Bills sent from the Lords to the Commons House, Ibid.
if they be ordinary Bills, are sent down by Serjants at Law, or by two Doctors
of the Civil Law, being Masters of the Chancery, and Attendants in the Upper
House, accompanied sometimes with the Clerk of the Crown, an Attendant there.

Bills of greater Moment are usually sent down by some of the Judges Assistants
there, Id. 178.
accompanied with some of the Masters of the Chancery; who being admitted
Entrance, do come up close to the Table where the Clerk sits, making three
Congies, and there acquainting the Speaker, That the Lords have sent unto the
House certain Bills, does read the Titles, and deliver the Bills to the
Speaker; and so departs, with three Congies. When they are out of the House,
the Speaker holds the Bills in his Hands, and acquaints the House, That the
Lords by their Messengers have sent to the House certain Bills; and then
reading the Title of every Bill, delivers them to the Clerk to be safely
kept, and to be read, when they shall be called for.

When Bills are thus passed by both Houses, Id. 179.
upon three several Readings in either House, they ought, for their last
Approbation, to have the Royal Assent; which is usually deferred till the last
Day of the Session.

The Royal Assent is given in this sort: Id. 181. Vid. Towns. Coll. 12, 49.
Vide Sir S. d'Ewe's Jour. 467.
After some Solemnities ended, the Clerk of the Crown reads the Title of the
Bills in such Order as they are in Consequence: After the Title of every Bill
is read, the Clerk of the Parliament pronounces the Royal Assent, according to
certain Instructions given him from his Majesty in that Behalf.

To the Subsidy Bill, Towns. Coll. 49.
because it is the mere Gift of the Subject, the Queen's Consent is not
required for the passing of it, but as it is implied in her thankful
Acceptance: Nor to the Bill of Pardon; because it is originally her free Gift,
no other Circumstance is required than that the thankful Acceptance thereof by
the Lords and Commons be likewise expressed; it being but once read in either
House, before it comes at last to be thus expedited. To all other Bills either
Private or Public, the Queen's express Consent, though in different Words, is
always requisite.

February 9. Id. 127.
1597. 39. Eliz. Her Majesty gave her Royal Assent to twenty four public Acts,
and nineteen private; and refused forty eight, which had passed both Houses.

If it be a public Bill, Towns. 13.
to which the King assenteth, the Answer is, Le Roy le veult; in English, The
King wills it.

If a private Bill, allowed by the King, the Answer is, Soit fait come il est
desire; i. e. Be it done as is desired.

If a public Bill, which the King forbears to allow, Le Roy se avisera; i. e.
The King will consider.

To the Subsidy Bill, Id. 12.
Le Roy remercie ses loyaux Subjets, accept lour Benevolence, and ainsi le
veult; i. e. The King thanks his loyal Subjects, accepts their Benevolence, and
so wills it.

To the General Pardon; Towns. Col. 13.49. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 467. Gol. 2.
The Assent is thus, Les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Commons encest Parliament
assembles an nom de toutes vous autres Subjets remercient tres humblement
vostre Majesty, and prient a Dieu que il vous done en sante, bon vie, and
longue; The Prelates, Lords, and Commons, in this Parliament assembled, in the
Name of all other your Subjects, do most humbly thank your Majesty, and do pray
God to give you Health, and a good and long Life.

A private or particular Act is always field, Sir R. Atkin's Argument, 57. Arc.
Parl. 45.
but never enrolled

Every Bill that passes the Parliament, shall have Relation to the first Day
of the Parliament, though it come in at the End of the Parliament, unless a
Time be specially appointed by the Statute when it shall commence.

If a Bill be admitted to be read, Scobel, 41.
it is to be presented fairly written, without any Razure or Interlineation,
together with a Breviat of the Heads of the Bill; and unless it be so tendered,
the Speaker may refuse it.

Until the Bill be opened, Id. 42.
no Man may speak to it.

An Act was read, Towns. c. 187.
to which no Man offered to speak. Whereupon Mr. Speaker stood up, and said,
That if no Man speak, it must be engrossed, i. e. Silence gives Consent.

It is the usual Rule of the Law, Towns. Col. 134.
That where the Numbers of the Affirmative and Negative are equal, Semper
presumetur pro negante, The Negatives by Custom are to carry it; i. e. That the
former Law is not to be changed.

When Votes are digested into a Bill, Scobel, 45.
and that comes to be read, or passed, it is lawful to debate or argue against
all, or any Part thereof, to alter or reject it: Because Votes in order to a
Bill are no further binding, but that the Bill is to be presented containing
those Votes; and because the Bill gives Occasion of a more large Debate, before
it can pass into a Law, every Member has Liberty to offer his Reasons against
it, as well as give his, Vote, as often as it comes to a Question. Ibid.


When a Bill has been read the second Time, and opened, any Member may move to
have it amended, but must speak but once to it; and therefore must take all his
Exceptions to it, and every Part of it, at one Time; for in the Debate of a
Bill no Man may speak but once the same Day, except the Bill be read any more
than once that Day, and then he may speak as often as it is read. Id. 58.


23 Junii, 1604. It was agreed for a Rule, If a Bill be continue in Speech from
Day to Day, one may not speak twice to the Matter of the same Bill.

Note. His. Refor Vol. I. p. 144.
A Bill was read in the House of Lords four Times. Quere, if in one Day?

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning Committees.
A Committee of either House ought not by Law to publish their own Refults,
Rush. Part. 3. Vol. 2. p. 74.
neither are their Conclusions of any Force without the Confirmation of the
House, which has the same Power of controuling them, as if the Matter had
never been debated.

Committees are such as either the Lords in the Higher House, Sir Tho. Smyth 's
Commonwealth, 75.
or Commons in the Lower House, do choose to frame the Laws upon such Bills as
are agreed upon, and afterward to be ratified by the same Houses.

The Proceeding in a Committee is more honorable and advantageous to the King
and the House; Rush. Col. 557.
for that Way leads most to the Truth. And it is a more free and open Way;
where every Man may add his Reason, and make Answer upon the hearing of other
Men's Reasons and Arguments.

For Referring a Bill to Committees, Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour. 186.
it is chiefly for Amendment or Alteration thereof, after it has been penned,
and put into the House by some one or more private Men.

June 1641. 2 Nalson 319.
In the Afternoon, it being a considerabe Time before there were forty Members
to make a House; Ordered, That so soon as the House sits, and that the Sergeant
comes to any Committee then sitting, to signify to them that the House is
sitting, that the Chairman shall immediately come away to attend the Service
of the House.

35 Eliz. 1592. Towns. Col. 61. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 476. Col. 1. Id. 189.
It was held to be against the Order of the House, That a Bill should be
committed before it was read.

43 Eliz. 1601. By Order of the House agreed, When a Bill is returned from
Commitment, the Words must be twice read, which are amended, before the
engrossing thereof.

Eodem tempore. Id. 190.
By Order of the House it was agreed upon, That a Committee once made, and
agreed upon, there shall not hereafter be more Committees joined unto them for
the same Bill; but for any other there may.

Eodem. Id. 198. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewe's Jour. 630. Col. 1.
Sir Walter Raleigh speaking at a Committee, Sir Edward Hobby told him, He
should speak standing, that the House might hear him. To which Sir Walter
Rawleigh replied, That bing a Committee, he might speak sitting or standing.

Eodem. It is a Rule in the House, Id. 208. Vid. Sir. S. d'Ewe's Jour. 634.
Col. 2.
That they, who have given their Voice against the Body of the Bill, cannot be
Committees. And it was said by Mr. Wiseman, That by committing of a Bill, the
House allowed of the Body thereof, though they disallow of some Imperfections
in the same; and therefore committed it to some chosen Men in Trust, to reform
and amend any Thing therein which they found imperfect. And it is presumed,
that he who will give his No to the committing of a Bill at the Commitment,
will be wholly against the Bill; and therefore the House allowing of this Bill
to be committed, are, in my Opinion, to disallow any that will be against the
Body of the Bill, for being Committees. And so Resolved upon the Question.

Eodem. Resolved upon the Question, Towns. 208. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 135.
Col. 1.
If any Committee speak against a Bill at the Commitment, he may speak again at
the Ingrosing thereof in the House, and have his free Voice.

11 Nov. 1601. Ordered, Memorials, 60, 61. Vid. Towns. Col.
That any Member of this House that has been, or shall be a Committee in any
Bill, may afterward speak or argue negatively to any such Bill, without
Impeachment or Imputation of Breach of former Order.

Sometimes the House upon Debate does pass some Votes to be the Heads of a
Bill, Scobel, 44.
or refer it to a Committee of the whole House to prepare such Heads.

If the Exceptions to a Bill be such, Id. 46.
that it may not be amended at the Table, then the Question is for committing
the Bill: But no Bill is to be committed without some Exceptions taken to it.

In the House of Commons, Towns. Col. 138.
as well as in the Upper House, after any Bill is committed upon the second
Reading, it may be delivered indifferently to any of the said Committees.

No Proviso or Clauses are to be tendered to a Bill upon the second Reading;
Scobel, 46.
because if it be committed, it is proper to offer them to the Committee,
without troubling the House; as 16 Jun. 1604. it was moved, That sundry
Proviso's, then tendered, be offered to the Committee.

If the Question for Commitment pass in the Negative, Ibid.
then the Question is to be put for the Engrossing the Bill. But if the
Question for Engrossing the Bill pass in the Negative, then the Question is to
be put for rejecting the Bill.

If the Question for committing the Bill pass in the Affirmative, Id. 47.
then a Committee is to be named: Of which all those that took Exceptions at
any Particulars in the Bill (but not those who spoke against the whole Bill)
are to be; and any Member that pleases, may name one apiece, but not more, to
be of that Committee.

10 Nov. 1604. Declared for Rule, Ibid.
That at the naming of a Committee, if any Man rise to speak, the Clerk ought
not to write.

11 Nov. 1601. Resolved, Ibid.
and Ordered upon the Question, That such Member as declares himself against
the Body or Substance of any Bill, upon any the Readings thereof, shall not
hereafter be admitted to be of a Committee in any such Bill, according to
former Order used in Parliament.

Committees upon Bills have not usually been less then eight, Ibid.
sometimes twenty, seldom more in former Times, which engaged them to attend
it, and speed it.

12 April, 1604. Id. 48.
Upon a Motion made touching the slow Proceedings and Dispatch of such Bills
and Businesses as were depending in the House, which grew, as was said, by the
Non-attendance of the Committees, Ordered, That if eight of any Committee do
assemble, they might proceed to a Resolution in any Business of the House.

When a competent Number are named, Ibid.
the Speaker uses to put the House in Mind of appointing the Time and Place of
their Meeting; at which Time the Committee are to meet, especially those who
did make any Exceptions to the Bill: Eight of the Persons named must be present
to make a Committee, (unless ordered otherwise in some Cases,) but five may
adjourn.

In some Cases the House has ordered a Committee to withdraw into the
Committee-Chamber presently, Ibid.
and to prepare and bring it back, sitting the House.

Any Member of the House may be present at any select Committee; Id. 49.
but is not to give his Vote unless he be named to be of the Committee.

35 Eliz. 1592. Two or three stood up to speak, Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 493.
Col. 2.
striving who might speak first. It was made a Rule, That the Chairman shall
ask the Parties that would speak, on which Side they would speak, whether with
him that spoke next before, or against him; and the Party that speaks against
the last Speaker, is to be heard first.

The Committee are first to read the Bill, Scobel, 49.
and then to consider the same by Parts.

The Preamble, Id. 50.
if any be, is usually considered after the other Parts of the Bill; because
upon Consideration of the Body of the Bill, such Alterations may therein be
made, as may also occasion the Alteration of the Preamble; which will be best
done last.

The Committee may not raze, interline, Ibid.
or blot the Bill itself; but must in a Paper by itself set down the Amendments
in this Manner, (in such a Folio, and such a Line, between such a Word and such
a Word, or after such a Word, insert these Words, or omit these Words.)

When the Amendments are all perfected, Ibid.
every one being voted singly, all of them are to be read at the Committee, and
put to the Question, Whether the same shall be reported to the House. When the
Vote is to be put, any Member of the Committee may move to add to those
Amendments, or to amend any other Part of the Bill.

4 Junii, 1607. Id. 52.
The Bill touching the Union between England and Scotland having been
committed, when the Amendments were reported, the whole Bill was by Order of
the House first read, and then Amendments by themselves. Which is a single
Precedent used only in a Case of great Weight.

In the Journal, 4 Junii, 1607. Ibid.
the Entry is, When a Vote is once passed at a Committee, the same may not be
altered, but by the House. Every Question upon the Voices of the Committee
binds, and cannot be altered by themselves. And thus every Thing agreed to be
reported ought to be reported.

If the Vote of the Committee pass for reporting the Amendments to the House,
Id. 51.
then he of the Members of the Committee (which is commonly the Chairman) who
is best accquainted with the Bill, is to be appointed to make the Report; which
being done, that Committee is dissolved, and can act no more without a new
Power.

3 Martii, Ibid.
1606. It was ordered, That every Committee, when they proceed to the Amendment
of any Billcommitted to them, shall also amend the Breviat annexed, and make it
agree with the Bill.

Reports are usually to be received daily in the first Place, Ibid.
after the House is full; except there be Bills engrossed, which are to take
Place, and public Bills before private.

The Reporter must first acquaint the House, Id. 52. Hakewell, 148.
That he is to make a Report from such a Committee, to whom such a Bill was
committed; and standing in his Place, must read each of the Amendments, with
the Coherence in the Bill; and opening the Alterations, and the Reasons of the
Committee for such Amendments, until he has gone through all; and then must
(if he sit not in the Seat next the Floor) come from his Place to the Bar, and
so come up to the Table, and deliver both the Bill and Amendments to the Clerk;
by whom he is to stand, while they are twice read; which is to be done by him
(without reading any Words that are to be omitted, but only such as are to be
inserted) before any Man speak to any of them; and then the Bill, with the
Amendments, is to be delivered to the Speaker.

After reading of the Amendments, Scobel, 52.
any Member may speak against all, or any of the Amendments, and desire the
Coherence to be read. But he is to make all his Objections at once to all the
Amendments, without speaking again.

Exceptions may be taken, Id. 53.
as well to what is omitted out of the Bill by the Committee, as to what is
amended.

Amendments in Bills ought to be writ in Paper, not in Parchment, Sir Simon
d'Ewe 's, Jour. 573, 574. Scobel, 53.
and without any Indorsement.

Upon any Report from a Committee, the first Question ought to be for agreeing
with the Report, unless the House generally dislike it.

Junii 1607. Agreed for a Rule, Id. 39.
That every Thing directed, and agreed to be reported, ought accordingly to be
reported: But not every Thing spoken or debated at the Committee.

28 Julii, Id.
1641. Declared by the House, That no Committee ought by Votes to determine the
Right or Property of the Subject, without first acquainting the House therewith.

6 Aug. 1641. Ibid.
Resolved, That no Vote passed at a Committee, and not reported, nor confirmed
by the House, shall be any Rule or Direction for any Court of Justice to ground
any Proceedings thereon.

CHAP. XIX. The Order and Power of Grand Committees.
A Grand Committee consists of as many Members (at least) as constitute the
House; Scobel, 35.
less may not sit, nor act as a Committee; who have general Power to consider
of any Matter touching the Subject Matter referred, and to present their
Opinions therein to the House, the better to prepare Matters of that Nature, or
Bills thereon, for the House; which may better be prepared by the Liberty that
every Member has in a Grand Committee, as well as in other Committees, to
speak more than once to the same Business, (if there be Cause,) which is not
permitted in the House.

Bills of great Concernment, Id. 49.
and chiefly Bills to impose a Tax, or raise Money from the People, are
committed to a Committee of the whole House; to the End there may be
Opportunity for fuller Debate: For that at a Committee the Members have Liberty
to speak, as often as they shall see Cause, to one Question: And that such
Bills being of general Concernment, should be most solemnly proceeded in, and
well weighed.

Grand Committees have their Powers and Rules in other Circumstances given them
in express Words by the House: Id. 35.
As to send for Witnesses, to hear Counsel, or assign them on either Part, to
send for (Persons, Paper, and) Records.

When any great Business is in Agitation that requires much Debate, Id. 36.
or a Bill for a public Tax is to be committed, the House does use to resolve
into a Grand Committee of the whole House; which is done by a Question; and
then the Speaker leaves the Chair; and thereupon the Committee makes choice of
a Chairman.

If more than one be generally called to the Chair, Scobel, 36.
any Member may stand up, and by Consent of the Committee put a Question for
one of those named to be the Chairman.

19 Jac. 1. Ibid.
A Dispute being in the Committee, which of two Members named should go to the
Chair, the Speaker was called to his Chair, and put the Question, That Sir
Edward Coke (one of the Persons named) should take the Chair; and then the
Speaker left his Chair.

The Chairman of the Grand Committee is to sit in the Clerk's Place at the
Table, Ibid.
and to write the Votes of the Committee.

If upon putting a Question, Id. 38.
the Chairman (who is to judge the Voices) have delivered his Opinion, That
the Yea's have it, and any Member stand up, and say, He believes the No's have
it, (or contrariwise,) the Committee is to divide within the House, the
Chairman directing the Yea's to one Side of the House, and the No's to the
other; and then he is to appoint one of each to count the Numbers, and report
them: Which is to be done in the same Order as in the House, saving that the
Obeisance is only twice in the Committee, thrice in the House. If the Number be
equal, the Chairman has the casting Voice; otherwise he has none in the
Committee.

When the Committee has gone through the Matter referred to them, Ibid.
the Chairman, having read all the Votes, is to put the Question, That the
same be reported to the House. If that be resolved, he is to leave the Chair,
and the Speaker being again called to the Chair, (or at the next Sitting of the
House, if be then adjourned,) the Chairman is to report what has been
resolved at the Committee, standing in his usual Place; from whence (if it be
not in the Seat next the Floor) he is to go down to the Bar, and so to bring up
his Report to the Table.

If the Committee cannot perfect the Business at that Sitting, Ibid.
they may not adjourn, as other Committees; but a Question is to be made for
reporting to the House, and that Leave be asked, That the Committee may sit at
another Time on that Business.

But if, as it sometimes falls out, Ibid.
the Matter has received a full Debate in the Committee, and it is judged fit
to be resolved in the House, the Speaker is again called to the Chair for that
Purpose.

In other Things the Rules of Proceedings are to be the same as are in the
House. Id. 39.


4 Junii, Ibid.
1607. Agreed for a Rule, That every Question upon the Voices of a Committee
binds, and cannot be altered by themselves.

Every Thing directed, Ibid.
and agreed to be reported, ought to be accordingly reported; but not every
Thing spoken or debated at a Committee.

15 Maii, Id. 36.
22 Jac. 1. Upon Complaint from the Grand Committee for Grievances, That they
had sent several Warrants for diverse Persons to bring in their Patents, which
they had not done, the House ordered the Serjant at Arms to send for them.

The Committee for Trade is sometimes made of a Grand Committee of the whole
House, Id. 9.
as in 21 Jac. 1. andnow usually so.

The Committees for Religion, Ibid.
Grievances, and Courts of Justice, are always Grand Committees of the House,
which are to sit in the Afternoon upon such Days as the House does appoint to
them respectively.

8 and 13 Martii, Id. 36.
21 Jac. 1. Upon Report from the Committee for Trade, (which then was a Grand
Committee,) the House was moved for their Order to the Merchants Adventurers to
bring in their Patents, and that the Inventor of the pretermitted Customs
should attend the Committee.

The Commons, Rush. Col. 225.
upon Debate of what fell from his Majesty and the Lord Keeper, turned the
House into a Grand Committee, ordered the Doors to be locked, and no Members to
go forth; and that all Proceedings in all other Committees shall cease till the
House come to a Resolution in this Business.

CHAP. XX. Of Standing Committees.
THE Commons being the General Inquisitors of the Realm, 4 Inst. 11.
have principal Care, in the Beginning of the Parliament, to appoint Days of
Committees, viz. of Grievances, (both in the Church and Commonwealth,) of
Courts of Justice, of Privileges and Advancement of Trade.

In Parliament there have usually been five Standing Committees appointed in
the Beginning of the Parliament, Scobel, 9.
and remaining during all the Session; other Committees are made occasionally,
and dissolved after the Business committed to them is reported.

Standing Committees are for Privileges and Elections. Ibid.
Religion. Grievances. Courts of Justice. Trade.

These Committees when they meet, 4. Inst. 12.
they elect one of them to sit in their Chair, in Likeness of the Speaker. The
Committee may examine, and vote the Questions handled by them; and by one, whom
they appoint, report their Resolutions to the House; and the House sitting, the
Speaker to determine the same by Question.

The Committees for Religion, Scobel, 9.
Grievances, and Courts of Justice, are always Grand Committees of the House,
which are to sit in the Afternoon, upon such Days as the House does appoint to
them respectively.

The Committee for Trade has sometimes been a select Committee, Ibid.
particularly named; and all such Members as should come to it, to have Voices,
as in Nov. 1640. Sometimes a Grand Committee of the whole House, as 21 Jac. 1.

The Committee for Privileges and Elections has always had the Precedence of
all other Committees; Id. 10.
being commonly the first Committee appointed, and ordinarily the first Day
after, or the same Day the Speaker does take his Place.

This Committee is constituted of particular Numbers named by the House. Ibid.


21 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Upon naming a Committee for Privileges and Elections, a Motion was made, That
all that come should have Voices; but insisted on to be contrary to all former
Precedents. A Question was put, Whether all that come should have Voices at the
Committee, and passed in the Negative: Another being put, Whether the Persons
nominated only should be of the Committee, it was resolved in the Affirmative.

In the Journal, 26 February, Id. 11.
1600. 42 Eliz. the Power anciently given to this Committee, is to examine and
make Report of all Cases touching Elections and Returns, and all Cases for
Privileges as may fall out, during the Parliament. But in other Parliaments,
both before and since, that Power does not appear to have been given them so
absolutely; but Matters of Privilege were, upon Information to the House, there
heard, and not in a Committee, unless in some special Cases, wherein there was
Cause of Examination, or some Preparation of a Charge.

Council may be admitted at that Committee. Id. 11.


The Power of this Committee usually was (as it is entered in Nov. 1640. Id. 12.
) to examine and consider all Questions which shall grow and arise in that
Parliament about Elections, Returns, and other Privileges. Or (as in 1 Jac. 1.)
this Committee are to examine all Matters questionable touching Privileges and
Returns; and to acquaint the House with their Proceedings from Time to Time, so
as Order may be taken according to the Occasion, and agreeable with ancient
Customs and Precedents

And to the End these Questions may be speedily determined, Ibid.
and the House may know their Members, Days are usually assigned; beyond which
there shall be no questioning a former Election.

So in the Parliament 21 Jac. 1. Ibid.
it was ordered, That all Petitions about Elections and Returns should be
preferred to the Committee of Privileges within a Fortnight, from that Day, or
else to be silenced for that Session.

16 April. Id. 13.
1640. Ordered, That those who would question Elections, should do it within
ten Days by Petition.

6 Nov. 1640. Ordered, Ibid.
That all such as will question Elections now returned, shall do it in fourteen
Days, and so within fourteen Days after any new Return.

Some Questions have been (where there have been double Indentures returned for
several Persons for the same Place) whether all, or any, or which shall sit.
Id. 13.
The general Rule and Practice has been in such Case, That neither one nor
other shall sit in the House, till it were either decided or ordered by the
House.

17 April, 19 Jac. 1. Ordered, Id. 16.
That no Petition shall be received by a Committee, but openly at a Committee;
and read at the Committee, before the Party go that perferred it; and the
Party's Name that preferred it be subscribed.

In the Parliament 21 Jac. 1. Resolved, Id 17.
That all Assidavits to be taken in any Court, concerning Elections, Returns,
or any Thing depending thereupon, should be rejected, and not hereafter to be
used.

Though the Committee examine not upon Oath, Ibid.
yet they may punish any that shall testify untruly; of which there was an
Instance in the Case of one Damport.

Sir Francis Popham being returned a Burgess for Chippenham by one Indenture,
Id. 14.
and another Person returned for the same Place by another Indenture, it was
moved he might be admitted into the House, till the Matter were determined. But
he was not so admitted; and it was referred to the Committee for Privileges.

21 Jac. 1. Id. 15.
Two Indentures were returned for Southwark; the one returned Yarrow and Mingy,
the other Yarrow and Bromfeild. Upon a Report from the Committee of Elections
it was resolved, That the Election and Return for Yarrow should stand good, and
that he should sit in the House.

22 Martii, Ibid.
21 Jac. 1. Sir John Jackson and Sir Thomas Beaumont, were both returned for
one Burgess's Place for Pontefract. Ordered, That the Committee take the
Election into Consideration to Morrow, and that in the mean Time the Parties
forbear to come into the House.

CHAP. XXI. A Session of Parliament; and of Prorogations and Adjournments.
WHAT shall make a Session of Parliament. See 1 Roll. R. 29. Hutton 61. 4 Inst.
27. 1 Siderf. 457. 1 Mod. Rep. 151, 155.

If several Bills are passed at one and the same Parliament, none of them shall
have Priority of the other; for they are made all in one Day and Instant, and
each of them have relation to the first Day of the Parliament, though in
several Chapters; and shall so be construed, as if they had been all
comprehended in one and the same Act of Parliament. Sir W. Jones Rep. 22. Hob.
111. Bro. tit. Parl. 86. and Relat. 35. Plowd. 79.6. Levintz. 9. Crook says,
That though in Fiction of Law a Statute shall have relation to the first Day of
the Parlaiment, yet revera nothing is settled; nor is it a perfect Statute till
the Parliament is ended. Jones ut sup. 370. Vide cont. ibid. 371.

Hales (Justice) said, That if the Parliament has several Prorogations, and in
the second or third Session an Act is made, this shall not have relation to the
Day of the Beginning of the Parliament, that is to say, to to the first Day of
the first Session, but only to the first Day of the same Session in which it is
made. Plowd. 79.6.

In a Session of Parliament, though it continue never so many Weeks, yet there
is nothing prius aut posterius, but all Things are held and taken as done at
one and the same Time. Rush. Vol. I. Page 581.

Jones in the Case of Sir John Elliot, Ibid. p. 687.
says, We are Judges what shall be said a Session of Parliament. Sed Quere de
hoc.

The Passing of any Bill or Bills, 4 Inst. 27.
by giving the Royal Assent thereto, or the giving any Judgment in Parliament,
does not make a Session; but the Session does continue till that Session be
prorogued or dissolved: And this is evident by many Presidents in Parliament
ancient and modern.

14 Ed. 3. Ibid.
On the first Monday a Grant of, etc. being given to the King, was made a
Statute, and passed both Houses, and had the Royal Assent thereunto; yet after
this the Parliament continued, and diverse Acts made, and Petitions granted.

3 Rich. 2 Declared by Act of Parliament, Ibid.
That the killing of John Imperial, Ambassador of Genoa was High Treason; yet
the Parliament continued long after, and diverse Acts made, etc.

7 Hen. 4. Ibid.
An Act made for certain Strangers departing the Realm, etc. yet the Parliament
continued till Dec. 8. Hen. 4.

1 Hen. 7. Ibid.
The Attainders of such as were returned Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, were
reversed by Act Parliament, before they could sit in the House of Commons, and
the Parliament continued, and diverse Acts made.

33 Hen. 8. Ibid.
At the Beginning of the Parliament, the Bill of Attainder against Queen
Catherine Howard passed both Houses; yet the Parliament continued, and diverse
Acts passed.

Though Bills passed both Houses, Ibid.
and the Royal Assent be given thereto, there is no Session until a
Prorogation, or a Dissolution.

The Diversity between a Prorogation and an Adjournment, Ibid.
or Continuance of the Parliament, is, That by the Prorogation in open Court,
there is a Session; and then such Bills as passed either, or both Houses, and
had no Royal Assent to to them, must at the next Assembly begin again.

Every several Session of Parliament is in Law a several Parliament: Ibid.
Hutton, 61. Brook, tit. Parl. 86.
But if it be but adjourned or continued, then there is no Session; and
consequently all Things continue in the same State they were in before the
Adjournment or Continuance.

The Titles of diverse Acts of Parliament be, 4 Inst. 27.
At the Session holden by Prorogation, or by Adjournment and Prorogation; but
never by Continuance or Adjournment tantum. And the usual Form of Pleading is,
ad Sessionem tentam, etc. per Prorogationem.

The Adjournment or Continuance is much more beneficial for the Commonwealth, 4
Inst. 28.
for expediting of Causes, than a Prorogation.

The King desired the House of Commons not to make a Recess in the Easter
Holidays. Rush Col. 537
This Message for Non-recess was not well pleasing to the House. Sir Robert
Philips first resented it, and took Notice, That in 12 and 18 Jac. 1. upon the
like Intimation, the House resolved, It was in their Power to adjourn or sit.
Hereafter, said he, this may be put upon us by Princes of less Piety. Let a
Committee consider hereof, and of our Right herein, and to make a Declaration.
Sir Edward Coke said, The King makes a Prorogation; but this House Adjourns
itself. The Commission of Adjournment we never read, but say, This House
adjourns it self. If the King writes to an Abbot for a Corody, for a Vallet, if
it be ex rogatu, though the Abbot yields to it, it binds not. Therefore I
desire that it be entered, That this be done ex Rogatu Regis.

And this Matter touching his Majesty's Pleasure about the Recess, Rush. Col.
537.
was referred to a Committee, and to consider the Power of the House to adjourn
itself.

The Sovereign may adjourn the Parliament, Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 318. Col. 2.
as well as the Parliament adjourns itself.

When a Parliament is called, 4 Inst. 28. Hutton. 61. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewe's
Jour. 407. Col. 1.
and does sit, and is dissolved, without any Act of Parliament passed, or
Judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Convention.

18 Rich. 2. The Petitions of the Commons were answered, 4 Inst. 28.
and a Judgment given in the King's Bench reversed; but no Act passed: Yet
without Question it was a Session; else the Judgment should not be of Force.

Many Times Judgments given in Parliament have been executed, Ibid.
the Parliament continuing, before any Bill passed.

If diverse Statutes be continued till the next Parliament, Hutton 61.
or next Session, and there is a Parliament or Session, and nothing done
therein as to Continuance, all the said Statutes are discontinued, and gone.

8 April, Hakewel 180.
1604. In the last Session of the first Parliment of K. James the First, the
House being desirous to have a Bill forth with passed, declared, That the Royal
Assent to one Bill, or more, did not dissolve the Session, without some special
Declaration of his Majesty's Pleasure to that Purpose.

1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. The King and Queen came of Purpose into the Parliament
House, Ibid.
to give their Assent to Cardinal Pool's Bill, and resolved upon the Question
by the whole House, That the Session was not thereby concluded, but they might
proceed in their Business, notwithstanding the Royal Assent given. But for more
Security, it is usual to insert a Proviso to that Purpose.

If there be diverse Sessions in one Parliament, Arc. Parl. 93. (...) Jour 7.12.
^b.
and the King signs not a Bill till the last, there all is but one and the same
Day; and all shall have relation to the first Day of the first Session; Post.
336.
and the first Day and the last are but one Parliament, and one and the same
Day, unless special Mention be made in the Act when it shall take its Force.

See Touching the Commencement, Prorogation, and Dissolution of several
Parliaments, from the Beginning of Edward III. to the End of Richard III. in
Cotton's Records, per Totum; and from the Beginning of Edward VI. in Hale's
Parliaments, page 107, to 110. and page 142, 143, etc.

Upon a Prorogation of the Parliament, On a Prorogation, Bills to continue in
Statu quo: Burnet 's Reformation. Vol. I. page 276. Journal Dom. Com.
15 May, 1540. (32 Hen. 8.) to the 25th, a Vote passed, That their Bills should
remain in the State they were in; and upon their next Meeting they went on
accordingly.

On the 18th of February, 1666, the Parliament was prorogued till the 10th of
October, 1667. (the King present.)

Memorandum, That his Majesty, by Proclamation, 1 Siderf. 338.
dated 26 June, 1667. Ann. 19. of his Reign, summoned his Parliament to meet on
the 25th of July following, (by Reason of the War against the Dutch then in
Being.) On which Day they met, and adjourned at his Majesty's Appointment to
the 29th of the same Month; on which Day (a Peace being then concluded,) the
Parliament was by his Majesty's Appointment prorogued to the 10th of October,
as aforesaid.

A Parliament may be summoned (by Proclamation) to meet before the Day to which
they are prorogued.

Anno Dom. 1628. Rush. Vol. I. page 537.
4 Car. 10 April. Mr. Secretary Cook delivered this Message from the King, That
his Majesty desired this House not to make any Recess these Easter-Holidays,
that the World may take Notice, how earnest his Majesty and we are for the
public Affairs of Christendom; the which, by such a Recess, would receive
Interruption. But,

This Message for Non-recess was not well pleasing to the House.

Sir Robert Phillips first resented it; Post. 366.
and too Notice, that in 12 and 18 Jac. upon the like Intimation, the House
resolved it was in their Power to adjourn itself, or sit. Hereafter, said he,
this may be put upon us by Princes of less Piety. Let a Committee consider
hereof, and of our Right herein, and make a Declaration. And accordingly, this
Matter, touching his Majesty's Pleasure about the Recess, was referred to a
Committee, and to consider the Power of the House to adjourn itself, to the End
that it being now yielded unto, in Obedience to his Majesty, it might not turn
to Prejudice in Time to come.

Sir Edward Coke spoke to the same Purpose, and said, I am as tender of the
Privileges of this House, as of my Life; They are the Heart Strings of the
Commonwealth. The King makes a Prorogation; but this House adjourns itself. The
Commission of Adjournment we never read, but say, this House adjourns itself.
If the King write to an Abbot for a Corody for a Valet, if it be ex rogatu,
though the Abbot yields to it, it binds not. Therefore I desire that it be
entered, that this is done ex rogatu Regis.

Hereupon a Message was sent to the King, That the House would give all
Expedition to his Majesty's Service, notwithstanding their Purpose of Recess.
To which Message his Majesty returned this Answer, That the Motion proceeded
from himself, in regard of his Engagement in the Affairs of Christendom, wished
them all Alacrity in their Proceedings, and that there be no Recess at all.

A Message from the King by the Speaker, Ibid. page 608. same Year.
That his Majesty commands for the present they adjourn the House till
Tomorrow Morning; and that all Committees cease in the mean Time. And the
House was accordingly adjourned.

On Wednesday, February 25. the same Year, both Houses, by his Majesty's
Command, adjourned themselves until Monday Morning the 2d of March.

Monday, Ibid. page 660. and Appendix, page 9.
2d of March, the Commons meet, and urged the Speaker to put the Question; who
said, I have a Command from the King to adjourn till the 10th of March, and put
no Question; endeavoring to go out of the Chair, was notwithstanding held by
some Members (the House foreseeing a Dissolution) till a Protestation was
published in the House.

Hereupon the King sent for the Sergeant of the House; but he was detained, the
Door being locked: Then he sent the Gentleman Usher of the Lords House, with a
Message; and he was refused Admittance, till the said Votes were read. And then
in much Confusion the House was adjourned till the 10th of March, according as
it was intimated from his Majesty.

In Mr. Mason (of Lincoln's Inn) his Argument for Sir John Elliot, he said, the
second Charge in the Information against him, was the Contempt to the Command
of the King's Adjournment, Jac. 18. It was questioned in Parliament, whether
the King can adjourn the Parliament (although it be without doubt that the King
can prorogue it.) And the Judges resolved, That the King may adjourn the House
by Commission; and 27 Eliz. it was resolved accordingly.

But it is to be observed and wondered, Rush. Vol. I. in Appendix. page 48.
that none was then impeached for moving that Question. And it is to be noted,
that they resolved that the Adjournment may be by Commission; but did not
resolve, that it may be by a verbal Command, signified by another; and it
derogates not from the King's Prerogative, that he cannot so do, no more than
in the Case of 26 H. 8. c. 8. that he cannot grant one Acre of Land by Parol.
The King himself may adjourn the House in Person, or under the Great Seal, but
not by verbal Message, for none is bound to give Credit to such Message; but
when it is under the Great Seal, it is Test meipso. And if there was no legal
Command, then there can be no Contempt in the Disobedience of that Command. In
this Case no Contempt appears by the Information; for the Information is, that
the King had Power to adjourn Parliaments. Then put the Case the Command be
that they should adjourn themselves; this is no Pursuance of the Power which he
is supposed to have. The House may be adjourned two Ways, to wit, by the King,
i. e. by Writ, or by the House itself; the last is their own voluntary Act,
which the King cannot compel; for Voluntas non cogitur.

Note, Rush. 3 Part, Vol. I. page 385.
Under the Number of forty Members the House of Commons is not reputed a House,
so as to make an Adjournment.

CHAP. XXII. The proper Laws and Customs of Parliament.
THE Laws, 4 Inst. 50.
Customs, Liberties, and Privileges of Parliament, are better to be learned out
of the Rolls of Parliament, and other Records, and by Precedents, and continual
Experience, then can be expressed by any one Man's Pen.

If an Ordinance only be entered in the Parliament Roll, Sir William Jones page
104.
and it has the Reputation and Use of an Act of Parliament, that makes it an
Act of Parliament.

If any doubt be conceived upon the Words or Meaning of an Act of Parliament,
Rush. Vol. 3. page 77, 78.
it is good to construe it according to the Reason of the Common Law.

When Laws shall be altered by any other Authority, Ibid. page 653.
than that by which they were made, (says King Charles the First, in his Speech
at Newark to the Inhabitants of Nottingham, 1642.) your Foundations are
destroyed.

As every Court of Justice has Laws and Customs for its Directions, 4 Inst. 15.
some by the Common Law, some by the Civil and Canon Law, some by peculiar Laws
and Customs, etc. so the High Court of Parliament suis propriis Legibus, and
Consuetudinibus subsistit.

It is Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti, Ibid.
that all weighty Matters in any Parliament moved, concerning the Peers of the
Realm, or Commons in Parliament assembled, ought to be determined, adjudged,
and discussed by the Course of Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, nor yet by
the Commons Laws of this Realm used in more inferior Courts; which was so
declared to be secundum Legem, and C^nsuetudinem Parliamenti, concerning Peers
of the Realm, by the King, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and the
like pari Ratione is for the Commons, for any Thing moved or done in the House
of Commons; and the rather, for that by another Law and Customof Parliament,
the King cannot take Notice of any Thing said or done in the House of Commons,
but by the Report of the House of Commons; and every Member of Parliament has
a judicial Place, and can be no Witness. And this is the Reason that Judges
ought not to give any Opinion of a Matter of Parliament, because it is not to
be decided by the Common Laws, but secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Parliamenti; and so the Judges in diverse Parliaments have confessed. And some
hold, That every Offense committed in any Court, punishable by that Court, must
be punished (proceeding criminally) in the same Court, or in some higher, and
not in any inferior Court; and the Court of Parliament has no higher.

By the ancient Law and Custom of Parliament, Id. 14.
a Proclamation ought to be made against being armed, against Games, Plays, and
strange Shows, etc. during the Parliament, that the Parliament may not be
disturbed, or the Members thereof (who are to attend arduous and urgent
Business) be not withdrawn.

Dec. 15. 1597. Resolved, Towns. Col. 116. Vide. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 505.
Col. 1.
according to the ancient Custom of the House, That all the Members of the
same, which did speak against passing of the Bill, should go forth of the
House, to bring the Bill into the House again, together with the Residue of the
Members which went out before with the passing of the said Bill. All the
Members of the House being gone forth, except Mr. Speaker and the Clerk, Mr.
Controller brought in the Bill in his Hand, accomanied with all the Members of
the House, and delivered the said Bill to Mr. Speaker.

17 Dec. 1597. The same Ceremony on the like Occasion omitted, Id. 117. Sir
Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 574. Col. 2.
upon a Motion of the Speaker; and ordered accordingly upon the Question.

18 Dec. 1601. Towns. 332.
As the Speaker was coming to the House in the Morning, the Pardon was
delivered unto him, which he took, and delivered it to the House; which they
sent baek again, because it was not brought according to Course.

The Subsidy of the Clergy was sent in a Roll, according to the usual Acts: Id.
333.
To which Sir Edward Hobby took Exceptions, because it was not sent in a long
Skin of Parchment under the Queen's Hand and Seal; so it was sent back, and
then the other was sent.

Si les Commons grant Poundage pur quatre Ans, Brook 119.4. Crompt. 8.
and les Seigneurs grant nisi pur deux Ans; le Bill ne serra re-bayl al
Commons, mes si les Commons grant nisi pur deux Ans, and les Seigneurs pur 4
Ans, la ceo serra redeliver al Commons. Et in cest case les Seigneurs doient
fair un Scedule de lour Intent, ou d'endorcer le Bill en cest Form, Les
Seigneurs ceo assentont, pur durer pur quatuor Ans: Et quant les Commons ount
le Bill arere, and ne volent assenter a ceo, ceo ne poet estre un Act; mes si
les Commons volent assenter, donques ils endorce lour Respons sur le Margent de
bass deins le Bill en tiel Form; les Commons sont assentuz al Scedule les
Seigneurs, a mesme cestuy Bill annex; and donques serra bayl al Clerk del
Parliament.

If the Commons grant Poundage for four Years, and the Lords grant it but for
two Years, the Bill shall not be sent back to the Commons; but if the Commons
grant but for two Years, and the Lords for four Years, there it shall be
redelivered to the Commons. And in that Case the Lords may make a Schedule of
their Intent, or Endorse the Bill in this Form; The Lords do assent to the
continuing for four Years. And when the Commons have the Bill again, and will
not assent to it, that cannot be an Act: But if the Commons will assent, then
they endorse their Answer on the Margin below within the Bill in this Form, The
Commons do assent to the Schedule of the Lords annexed to this Bill; and then
it shall be sent to the Clerk of the Parliament.

The Custom and Privilege of this House has always been, first, Vide Sir Simon
d'Ewe's Jour. 483. Col. 2.
to make Offer of the Subsidies from hence; then to the Upper House, except it
were that they present a Bill unto this House, with Desire of their Assent
thereto, and then to send it up again. And Reason it is, that we should stand
upon our Privilege, seeing the Burden rests upon us as the greatest Number;
per Francis Bacon, 35 Eliz. 1592.

The Lord Chancellor in Parliament offered the Commons a Writ to deliver their
Burgess; but they refused it, Petyt 's Miscel. Parl. 4. in Margin.
as being clear of Opinion, That all their Commandments and Acts were to be
done and executed by their Sergeant, without Writ.

It is the Law and Custom of Parliament, 4 Inst. 14, 34. Rot. Parl. ^3 E. 3. n.
Cot. Records f. 17. n. 6, 9.
That when any new Device is moved on the King's behalf in Parliament, for his
Aid, or the like, the Commons may answer, That they tender the King's Estate,
and are ready to aid the same, only in this Device they dare not agree, without
Conference with their Countries: Whereby it appears, That such Conference is
warrantable by the Law and Custom of Parliament.

Mar. 19. Journal, Dom. Com.
1677. It was conceived by the Commons, that according to the ancient Course
and Method of Transactions between the two Houses, when a Bill with Amendments
is sent from either House to the other by Messengers of their own, the House
that sends them gives no Reasons of their Amendments; but the House to whom it
is sent, if they find Cause to disagree, do use to give Reasons for their
Dissent to every particular Amendment; every one of them is supposed to carry
the Weight of its own Reason with it, until it be objected against.

May 28. Ibid.
1678. A Paper of Reasons against a Bill ( viz. for wearing Woollen) being
printed, and delivered at the Door, was committed, it being irregular for
Reasons to be printed and published against a public Bill, before a Petition
be exhibited to the House against the Bill.

It is to be observed, 4 Inst. 14.
though one be chosen for one particular County, or Borough, yet when he is
returned, and sits in Parliamment, he serves for the whole Realm; for the End
of his coming thither (as in the Writ of his Election appears) is general, ad
faciendum, and consentiendum, etc.

If Offenses done in Parliament might have been punished elsewhere, 4 Inst. 17.
it shall be intended, that at some Time it would have been put in Ure.

As Usage is a good Interpreter of Laws, Coke Lit. 81. b.
so Non-usage, where there is no Example, is a great Intendment that the Law
will not bear it,

Not that an Act of Parliament by Nonuser can be antiquated or lose his Force,
Coke. Lit. 81. b.
but that it may be expounded or declared how the Act is to be understood.

There is no Act of Parliament but must have the Consent of the Lords, 4 Inst.
25.
the Commons, and the Royal Assent of the King; and whatsoever passes in
Parliament by this threefold Consent, has the Force of of an Act of Parliament.

The Difference between an Act of Parliament, Ibid.
and an Ordinance in Parliament, is, for that the Ordinance wants the
threefold Consent, and is ordained by one or two of them.

Some Acts of Parliament are introductory of a new Law; Ibid.
and some be declaratory of the ancient Law; and some be of both kinds, by
addition of greater Penalties, or the like. Ibid.
Some Acts are general, and some private, or particular.

All Acts of Parliament relate to the first Day of Parliament, 33 H. 6. f. 18.
a. 33 H. 8. Brook Parl 86 and Relation 35. 4. Inst. 28. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe 's
Jour 550. Col. 1, 2.
if it be not otherwise provided by the Act.

The House of Commons is to many Purposes a distinct Court; and therefore is
not prorogued or adjourned by the Prorogation or Adjournment of the Lords
House; but the Speaker, upon the Signification of the King's Pleasure, by the
Assent of the House of Commons, does say, This Court does Prorogue or Adjourn
itself. And then it is prorogued or adjourn, and not before.

39 Eliz. 1597. Towns. Col. 101.102. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour. 550. Col. 1,
2.
Nov. 5. Through a mere Mistake and Error of the Speaker and themselves, the
House conceived themselves to have been Adjourned by the Lord Keeper, the first
Day of this Parliament, to this present Day.

When it is dissolved, Ibid.
the House of Commons are sent for up to the Higher House, and there the Lord
Keeper, by the King's Commandment, dissolveth the Parliament, and not before.

A Parliament cannot be discontinued or dissolved but by Matter of Record;
Hutton, 62.
and that by the King alone.

The King at the Time of the Dissolution ought to be there in Person, 4 Inst.
28.
or by Representation; for as it cannot begin without the Presence of the King,
either in Person, or by Representation, so it cannot end or be dissolved
without his Presence either in Person, or by Representation.

Nihil enim tam Conveniens est naturali aequitati, Bracton.
unumquodque dissolvi eo ligamine quo ligatum est.

By the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 21. Ibid.
it is declared by Act of Parliament, That the King's Letters Patents under his
Great Seal, and signed with his Hand, and declared and notified in his Absence
to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled in the House of
Parliament, is, and ever was, as good Strength and Force, as if the King's
Person had been there personally present, and had assented openly and publicly
to the same.

In the Lords House, the Lords give their Voices from the puisne Lord seriatim,
4 Inst. 34.35.
by the Word of [Content] or [Not Content.] The Commons give their Voices upon
the Question, by Yea, or No.

Every Lord Spiritual and Temporal, 4 Inst. 43. Crompton 4. b.
and every Knight, Citizen, and Burgess, shall upon Summons come to the
Parliament, except he can reasonably and honestly excuse himself, or else he
shall be amerced, etc. that is, respectively, a Lord by the Lords, and one of
the Commons by the Commons.

By the Statute of 6 Hen. 8. c. 16. no Knight, Ibid. Crompton, 4. b.
Citizen, or Burgess of the House of Commons shall depart from the Parliament
without License of the Speaker and Commons; the same to be entered of Record in
the Book of the Parliament, upon Pain to lose their Wages.

Sickness is no Cause to remove any Knight, 4 Inst. 8.
Citizen, or Burgess of the House of Commons.

18 Eliz. 1575. Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour 244. Col. 2.
Resolved by the House, That any Person being a Member of the same, and being
either in Service of Embassage, or else in Execution, or visited with Sickness,
shall not in any Ways be amoved from their Place in this House, nor any other
to be during such Time of Service, Execution, or Sickness, elected.

31 Eliz. 1588. Id. 439.
It was assented to by the whole House, That none after the House is set, do
depart before the rising of the same House, unless he do first ask Leave of Mr.
Speaker, on pain of paying Six Pence to the Use of the Poor.

If a Lord depart from Parliament without License, 4 Inst. 44.
it is an Offense done out of the Parliament, and is finable by the Lords. And
so it is of a Member of the House of Commons; he may be fined by the House of
Commons.

It does not belong to the Judges to judge of any Law, Custom, 4 Inst. 50. Rot.
Parl. 31 H. 6. n. 27.
or Privilege of Parliament.

Cardinal Wolsey coming to the Lower House of Parliament, told them, Hebert's
Hen. 8.136.
That he desired to reason with them who opposed his Demands. But being
answered, That it was the Order of that House to hear, and not to reason but
among themselves, the Cardinal departed.

If any sit in the House, Scobel, 84.
who are not returned by the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, it is accounted a
great Crime; and severely punished.

5 Mar. 1557. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. For that Christopher Pern affirmed, Ibid.
That he is returned a Burgess for Plimpton in Devon, and has brought no
Warrant thereof to the House, nor is returned hither by the Clerk of the Crown,
by Book, or Warrant, he is awarded to be in the Custody of the Sergeant, till
the House have further considered.

13 Eliz. 1571. The House was called; Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour. 156. Col. 1, 2.
and thereupon Edward Lewknor, John Bullock, Nicholas Plumtree, Edward Goodwyn,
and John Garnons, were commanded to attend the Order of this House Tomorrow;
for that the House being this Day called, they had entered into the House, and
had not as then been returned by the Clerk of the Crown; except Garnons, whose
Case is, for that he is said to be excommunicated.

9 Jan. 1562. Scobel, 85.
For that it seemed to the House, being very full, that there were a greater
Number than was returned, therefore the Names were immediately called over, and
as they were called, departed out of the House.

7 Feb. 1588. Ibid.
The House was called, and every one answered to his Name, and departed out of
the House as they were called.

Chiefly the Calling of the House is, Ibid.
to discover what Members are absent without Leave of the House, or just Cause;
in which Case Fines have been imposed.

If the House be called, Ibid.
the Manner has been to call over the Names, and each Member to stand up at the
Mention of his Name, uncovering his Head. Such as are present are marked, and
the Defaulters called over again the same Day, sometimes the Day after,
sometimes summoned, sometimes sent for by the Sergeant.

Upon calling the House, Ibid.
if the Person be present, he rises up bare-headed, and answers; if absent,
he is either excused (and so entered, Licentiatur per speciale Servitium,
excusatur ex gratia, or aegrotat,) or if none excuse him, he is entered Deficit.

That no Man may sit in the House, Id. 86. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jeur. passim
till he be legally returned, appears by several Instances of Persons who were
not Members; and for coming into the House, were brought to the Bar, and some
committed, and some sworn, before they departed, to keep secret what they had
heard there.

5 April, 1571. Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour. 156. Col. 1.
13 Eliz. Thomas Clerk and Anthony Bull, of the Inner Temple, London, Gent.
were by this House committed to the Serjeant's Ward, until further Order should
be taken with them, for that they presumed to enter into this House, and were
no Members of the same, as themselves at the Bar confessed.

18 Eliz. 1575. Charles Johuson, Id. 248. Col. 1.
of the Inner Temple, Gent. committed to the Serjeant's Ward, till surther
Order be taken by this House, for coming into this House this present Day, the
House sitting, confessing himself to be no Member of this House.

27 Eliz. 1584. Charles Morgan Gent. Id. 334. Col. 1.
Servant to Sir George Carry, Knight of a Shire, being himself no Member of this
House, was found to be standing within the House next to the Door; and as it
was thought of mere Ignorance and Simplicity, without any evil Purpose or
Meaning, and yet was committed by Order of the House to the Serjeant's Ward.

30 Nov. Eodem An. Richard Robinson being found to be sitting in the House by
the space of two Hours, Ibid. Col. 1.
(while several Speeches were made) was stripped to his Shirt, and his Pockets
searched; and being brought to the Bar, was censured by the House, (after
taking the Oaths,) to suffer Imprisonment in the Serjeant's Ward till Saturday
next; and then (having sworn to keep secret what he had heard) to be released.

28 Eliz. 1586. Id. 394. Col. 2.
Edmund Moor and John Turner presumed to come into the House, being no Members;
and upon their Submission discharged, because it was done of Simplicity and
mere Ignorance. Id. 394. Col. 2. So John Leg, Vide Id. 486. Col. 2. So Matthew
Jones, Id. 511. Col. 1. So William Hanner, Id. 288. Col. 2

Petitions are usually presented by Members of the same County. Scobel, 87.
If they be concerning private Persons, they are to be subscribed; and the
Persons presenting them called in to the Bar, to avow the Substance of the
Petition, especially if it be a Complaint against any.

18 Nov. 1640. Ibid.
One Vivers presenting a Petition in the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen,
Burgesses, and other Inhabitants of Banbury, was called in, and did acknowledge
the Hand to the Petition to be his, and that he did deliver it by Order, and on
Behalf of the Town of Banbury; and thereupon it was committed.

The like in the same Parliament, Ibid.
upon reading the Petition of one Ward of Salop; and likewise on reading the
Petition of Henry Hogan.

Though Freedom of Speech and Debates, Scobel, 72.
be an undoubted Privilege of the House, yet whatsoever is spoken in the House
is subject to the Censure of the House.

Though the Committee examine not upon Oath, Id. 17.
yet they may punish any that shall testify untruly.

In the Parliament, Hakewel 93.
if the greatest Part of the Knights of the Shire do assent to the making of an
Act of Praliament, and the lesser Part will not agree to it, yet this is a good
Act or Statute to last in perpetuum, and that the Law of Majoris partis is so
in all Councils, Elections, etc. both by the Rules of the Common Law, and the
Civil.

Tenants d'ancient Baronies sont discharge de Contribution al Gages de
Chivaliers del Parliament; Moor, fol. 768.
quia lour Seigneurs servent pur eux in Parliament.

i. e. Tenants in ancient Demeasn.
Tenants of ancient Baronies are discharged from Contribution to the Wages of
Knights of Parliament, because their Lords serve for them in Parliament.

April, Scobel, 14.
1640. It was ordered by the Commons, That if any sit in that House, that are
returned by more Indentures then usual, they should withdraw till the Committee
for Privileges had sarther ordered.

In the Beginning of every Parliament, Id. 40.
some Persons have been appointed to consider of such Laws as had Continuance
to the present Session, whether they were fit to be coutinued, or determined,
as also of former Statutes repealed or discontinued, whether fit to be revived,
and what are fit to be repealed.

Any Member of the House may offer a Bill for public good, Ibid.
except it be for imposing a Tax; which is not to be done, but by Order of the
House first had.

A private Bill that concerns a particular Person, Id. 41.
is not to be offered to the House till the Leave of the House be desired, and
the Substance of such Bill made known, either by Motion or Petition.

It has at some Times been ordered, Hakewel, 135.
That every one that prefers a private Bill should pay five Pounds to the
Poor, as in 43 Eliz. toward the End of the Parliament, when they were troubled
with much Business; but it holds not in other Parliaments. Scobel. 41.


Nevertheless the Speaker had Liberty to call for a private Bill to be read
every Morning; and usually the Morning is spent in the first Reading of Bills
until the House grow full.

If any public Bill be tendered, Ibid.
the Person who tenders the Bill must first open the Matter of the Bill to the
House, and offer the Reasons for admitting thereof; and thereupon the House
will either admit, or deny it.

7 Martii, 1606. Mr. Id. 46.
Hadley being assigned of a Committee to confer with the Lords, desired to be
spared, he being in Opinion against the Matter itself. And it was conceived for
a Rule, That no Man was to be employed in any Matter that had declared himself
against it; and the Question being put, it was resolved Mr. Hadley was not to
be employed.

Presidents reported by Mr. Pryn, 28 Jan. 1666.
about the Method of Proceeding upon the Impeachment of the Lord Mordant.

28 May, 1624. In the Lords Journal, Council to be allowed Impeachment.
which is entered in haec verba, and allows Council in all Cases.

1 and 2 Car. 1. A great Dispute, if the Earl of Bristol, impeached for High
Treason, should be allowed Council. The Lords then stood on the Order above
recited: The King objected to that Order, that the Judges and his Council had
not assented thereto; yet the King consented (to avoid being thought rigorous,)
that the Earl of Bristol should be allowed Council, so it were not drawn into
Precedent.

Council was allowed to Sir George Bynion.

Council allowed to Garney, Lord Mayor of London, impeached for High Crimes and
Misdemeanors, 5 and 11 July 1642. and 1 and 2 August.

Sept. 30. 1645. An Impeachment of of the Earl of Strafford.

H. Poulton, etc. for striking Sir Arthur Haselrig.

Upon all which the House did acquiesce in the Lord Mordant's having Council.

As to his sitting within the Bar: The Lords insisted on it, on the Precedents
of 18 Jac. the Bishop of Landass, and 1645. the Lord Stamford.

Seignor Coke, Litt. Rep. 330.
Elect. 1 Car. 1. Viscount de Bucks, and Chivaler de Norsolk, Comment que ill
abstein de la maison, uncore il avoit privilege versus la Dame Clear.

The Privileges of Parliament consist in Three Things: May 's Hist. Parl. l. 3.
p. 27, Sir Robert Atkin's Power of Parliaments, 36. Rush. Col. Vol. 1.663.
First, as they are a Council to advise; Secondly, a Court to judge; Thirdly, a
Representative Body of the Realm, to make, repeal, or alter Laws.

Upon some Questions propounded to the Judges, Anno 1629. 5 Car. 1. all the
Judges agreed, That regularly a Parliament Man cannot be compelled, out of
Parliament, to answer Things done in Parliament in a parliamentary Course.

Their Rights and Privileges are the Birthright and Inheritance, not only of
themselves, Rush. Col. Vol. 3. p. 1. 458.
but of the whole Kingdom, wherein every Subject is interested.

The Violating of the Privileges of Parliament, Rush. Col. Vol. 3. p. 1. 475.
Rush. Col. Vol. 1. p. 537.
is the Overthrow of Parliament.

The Privileges of the House, says Sir Edward Cook, are the Heart Strings of
the Commonwealth; and therefore if the King desires a Nonrecess, I desire that
this may be entered, That it is done ex rogatu Regis.

The King ( viz. Charles II. Journ. of House of Commons.
) in his Letter to the King of Spain, declares, That the Murder of his Father
was not the Act of the Parliament or Kingdom of England, but of a little
Company in the Kingdom, 23 Aug. 1660.

Expulsion from the House for Words.
Thursday, in the Morning, 27 May, Diurnal Occurrences of Parliament, from Nov.
3. 1640. to Nov. 3. 1641. p. 11^
1641. Mr. Tailor, a Barrister, and Burgess for Old Windsor, was brought upon
his Knees in the House of Commons, for speaking some Words in Disparagement of
the whole House, about the Earl of Strafford's Death, saying, They had
committed Murder with the Sword of Justice; and that he would not for a World
have so much Blood lie on his Couscience, as did on theirs, for that Sentence.
Which Words being proved against him by the Mayor of Windsor, (to whom he spoke
them,) and some others, he was thereupon expelled the House, and voted
incapable of ever being a Parliament Man, committed to the Tower during
Pleasure; to be carried down to Windsor, there to make Recantation for those
Words; and to return back to the House of Commons, to receive further Sentence:
And it was ordered, That a Writ should presently issue out for a new Election
is his room.

The 2d of June he petitioned to be restored upon his Submission: Id. p. 116.
Id. the where. Rush. Col. part 3. vol. 1. fo. 278, and 280.
But his Petition would not be hearkened unto.

A Member sent to the Tower, for discovering what was said in the House in a
former Parliament.
Mr. Francis Nevill, Rush. Col. part 3. vol. 1. fo. 169.
of Yorkshire, a Member of the House, was, February 4. 1640. 16 Car. 1.
questioned for Breach of Privileges in the precedent Parliament, which met 13
Apr. 1640. by discovering to the King and Council what Words some Members did
let fall in their Debate in that House. Whereupon Mr. Bellasis, Knight for
Yorkshire, and Sir John Hotham, were committed by the Council Board. And Mr.
Nevill being brought to the Bar, was by the House committed to the Tower of
London; and Sir William Savill, touching the same Matter, was ordered to be
sent for in Custody.

CHAP. XXIII. Privilege of Parliament.
THE Privilege of Tenants in Ancient Demense, Sir R. Atkin's Argument 18. Vide
Coke 9 Rep. in Pref.
must be as ancient as their Tenure and Service; for their Privilege comes by
Reason of their Service, and their Service is known by all, to be before the
Conquest, in the Time of Edward the Confessor, and in the Time of the Conqueror.

Every Man must take Notice of all the Members of the House returned of Record,
4 Inst. 23.24.
at his Peril.

Otherwise it is of the Servant of any of the Members of the House. Id. 24.


A Member of Parliament shall have Privilege of Parliament, Id. 42. Hakewel 62.
not only for his Servants, but for his Horses, etc. or other Goods
distrainable.

The Privilege is due eundo, Scobel, 88.
morando, redeundo, for the Persons of Members, and their necessary Servants;
and in some Cases, for their Goods and Estates also during the Time.

For their own Persons they have been privileged from Suits, Ibid.
Arrests, Imprisonments, Attendance on Trials, Serving on Juries, and the like,
yea, from being summoned or called to attend upon any Suit in other Courts, by
Subpoena served on them.

He that does arrest any Member of either House during the Session of
Parliament, Hakew. 62. Vide Dyer. 60.
shall be imprisoned in the Tower, by the nether House of which he is, and
shall be put to his Fine; and the Keeper also, if he will not deliver him when
the Sergeant at Arms does come for him by Command of the House.

The Servants tending upon their Masters during Parliament, Ibid. Crompton 's
Juris. 11.
who are necessary, and also of such Officers as attend the Parliament, as the
Sergeant at Arms, the Porter of the Door, Clerks, and such like, and also their
Chattels and Goods necessary, are privileged; so that they shall not be taken,
or arrested by any Officer, if it be not in Case of Treason or Felony.

Generally the Privileges of Parliament do hold, unless it be in three Cases, 4
Inst. 25.
viz. Treason, Felony, and the Peace.

No Privilege is allowable in Case of the Peace, nor in Case of Conviction, 2
Nalson. 450.
or disarming of Recusants.

No Minister of the Parliament, during forty Days before, St. 3 Ed. 4. in
Ireland.
and forty Days after the Parliament finished, shall be impleaded, vexed, or
troubled, by no Means.

That every Minister, as well Lords Proctors, as Commons, Ibid.
be discharged and quitted of all Manner of Actions had or moved against them,
or any of them, during the Time aforesaid; and this to endure for Ever.

Apres que Members sont returns, lour personal Attendance est cy necessary al
Parliament, Dyer, 60. pl. 19.
que ils ne doient pur ascun Business estre absents, and null un Person poit
estre bien mis, eo que il est un necessary Member; and pur ceo, si ascun morust
devant le Parliament, un novel serra eslie en son lieu, issint que l'entire
Number ne doit failer; and donque il ensue, que le Person de chescun tiel
Member doit estre Privilege d'arrest al Suit d'aseun private Person, durant cel
temps que il est embusyd entour les Affairs del Roy, and son Realm; and tiel
privilege ad estre touts foits grant per le R^ya les Commoners al Request del
Prolocutor del Parliament le primer Jour, etc.

After that the Members are returned, their Attendance is so necessary to the
Parliament, that they ought not for any Business to be absent, and no one
Person can well be mist, for that he is a necessary Member; and therefore if
any die before the Parliament, a new one shall be chosen in his Place, so that
the entire Number may not fail; and then it follows, that the Person of every
such Member ought to be privileged from Arrest at the Suit of any private
Person, during the Time that he is busied in the Affairs of the King and the
Realm; and such Privilege has used to be granted at all Times by the King to
the Commons, at the Request of the Speaker of the Parliament the first Day, etc.

Common Reason voit, que intant que le Roy, Ibid.
and tout son Realm ad un Intrest en le Corpse de chescun de dits Members; il
semble que le private Commodity d'ascun particular home ne doit estre regard.

Common Reason will have it, that forasmuch as the King and his whole Realm
have an Interest in the Body of every one of its Members, it seems that the
private Commodity of any particular Man ought not to be regarded.

Cest Court de Parliament est pluis haut Court, and ad plusors Privileges que
ascun auter Court del Realm; Ibid. Crompt. 7. b.
pur que semble que en chescun Case sans ascun Exception, chescun Burgess est
privilege, quant l' Arrest n'est forsque al Suit d'un Subject.

The Court of Parliament is the highest Court, and has more Privileges than any
Court of the Realm; for which it seems that in every Case, without any
Exception, every Burgess is privileged when Arrest is only at the Suit of the
Subject.

Coment que le Parliament erra in le grant del Brief de Privilege, Id. 61.
uncore ceo n'est reversible en auter Court.

Though the Parliament do err in the Grant of a Writ of Privilege, yet it is
not reversible in another Court.

Fuit dit per Dyer, que si home soit condemn en Debt on Trespass, Moor. s. 57,
n. 163.
and est esl en un des Burgesses ou Chivalers del Parliament, and puis soit
prise en Execution, il ne poet aver le Privilege del Parliament; and issint
fuit tenus per les Sages del Ley en le Case d'un Ferrers en temps le Roy H. 8.
Crompton's Jur. p. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. 34 11. 8.
and coment que le privilege a ceo temps suit a luy allow, ceo fuit miuns
just. Sed vide Boliun's Collection and post contra.

It was said by Dyer, That if a Man be condemned in Debt or Trespass, and is
chosen one of the Burgesses or Knights of Parliament, and afterwads is taken in
Execution, he cannot have the Privilege of Parliament; and so it was held by
the Sages of the Law, in the Case of one Ferrers, Petyt 's Mi'cel. Farl. p. 1.
etc.
in the Time of King Henry the Eighth; and though the Privilege at that Time
was allowed him, yet it was unjust.

Hill and Stukely les Viscounts de Londres fueront commit al Tower pour lour
Coutems; Dyer 61. pl. 28.
pur ceo que ils ne voil lesser George Ferrers, que fuit arrest sur un
Execution, d'aler alarge, quant les Sergeants del Arms vient pur luy, sans
ascun Brief.

Hill and Stukely, the Sheriffs of London, were committed to the Tower for
their Contempts, for that they would not suffer George Ferrers, who was
arrested upon an Execution, to go at large, when the Sergeant at Arms came for
him, without any Writ.

Le lower Meson del Parliament agree, Eitzlerberts Case. Moor, fol. 340. n 461.
que entant que un fuit arrest, devant que il fuit eslie Burgess, que il ne
doit aver le privilege del Meson.

The Lower House of Parliament agreed, That in regard one was arrested, before
he was chosen Burgess, that he ought not to have the Privilege of the House.

Vide Fitz-Gerald's, Case, Anno 1640. Post 393.
in Ireland. Vide 39 Hen. 6. Walter Clerk's Case, 5 Hen. 4. Richard Chidder, 38
Hen. 8. Tyneman's Case, 43 Eliz. Belgrave's Case, 39 Hen. 6. Ferrer's Case, in
Holinshead, f. 1584.

Debt upon an Obligation, Brownl 91. Jackson versus Kirton.
whereof the Condition was, That if A would render himself to an Arrest in such
a Place, etc. A pleads Privilege of Parliament; and that being Servant to such
a Member, he could not render himself to be arrested. Upon Demurrer, the
Opinion of the Court was for the Plantiff: For A might render himself; and let
it be at their Peril, if they will arrest him.

Magister Militiae Templi petat, 4 Inst. 24.
quod distringat Catalla unius de Concilio, tempore Parliamenti, pro Reditu
unius Domus in London, Rex respondet, non videtur honestum, quod illi de
Concilio suo di stringantur Tempore Parliamenti; sed alio Tempore, etc.

Bogo de Clare, and the Prior of Trinity, Ibid. Townso. Col. 255. Sir Simon
d'Ewe's Jour. 655. Col. 1 flys he was fined 20000 Marks 4 just. 24.
for serving a Citation on the Earl of Cornwall in the Time of the Parliament,
committed to the Tower; and Bogo, at whose Procurement it was done, fined in
two thousand Marks to the King, and a thousand Pounds to be paid to the Earl.

And yet the serving of the said Citation did not arrest or restrain his Body;
and the same Privilege holds in Case of Subpoena, or other Process, out of
any Court of Equity.

Rex mandavit Justiciariis suis ad Assisas, Ibid.
etc. quod super sedeant captioni corundem, ubi Comites, Barons, and alii
Summoniti ad Parliamentum Regis sunt Parts, quamdiu dictum Parliamentum
duraverit.

A Citation shall not be served on any Member, Ibid. Vid. Sir Sir Simon d'Ewe's
Jour. 435. Col. 1. Ibid. Scobol. 110. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 249. Col. 2.
nor Subpoena.

Diverse Persons committed to Prison for serving a Citation on John de Thorsby,
Clerk of the Parliament.

22 Febr. 6 Ed. 6. Ordered, If any Member require Privilege for himself or his
Servant, upon Declaration thereof to the Speaker, he shall have a Warrant
sigu'd by the Speaker to obtain the Writ.

22 Martii, Scobel, 110.
18 Jac. 1. It was resolved, That no Protection under any Man's Hand of this
House, is good.

29 Jan. 1557. Id. 89.
4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Thomas Ennys Burgess for the Borough of Thrusk,
complained that a Subpoena was delivered him to appear in Chancery, and
required the Privilege of the House; whereupon Sir Clement Higham and Mr.
Recorder of London, were sent to the Lord Chancellor, to revoke the Process.

27 Eliz. One Kyrl having caused a Subpoena out of the Star Chamber to be
served on a Member of the House of Commons, and for want of Appearance, Id. 90.
Vid. Towns. Col. 213. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 438. Col. 1, 2.
taken out an Attachment, and enforced the Payment of Money to discharge the
same; the said Kyrl was committed, till he had paid Costs to the Party served,
and made a Submission to the House on his Knees at the Bar.

15 Maii, 1604. Scobel, 90
The Serjant was sent to attach the Body of one who served a Subpoena on the
Person of Sir Robert Needham, a Member.

7 May, 1607. Ibid.
The Sergeant was sent for Edward Throgmorton, for serving a Subpoena on Sir
Oliver Cromwell.

14 Maii, 19 Jac. 1. Id. 91.
1. Upon Complaint of the Service of a Subpoena on a Member of this House, Sir
Edward Coke vouched a Precedent, 10 Ed. 3. That a Subpoena being served on the
Clerk of this House, the Party was committed for breaking the Privilege of this
House.

4 Maii, 1607. Ibid.
A Subpoena out of the Exchequer being served on Sir R. Pawlet, a Member, the
House granted Privilege, and ordered the Sergeant by his Mace, to attach the
Parties delinquent, and to bring them to the Bar, to receive the Judgment of
the House. And the next Day Mr. Speaker writ a Letter to the Lord Chief Baron,
That no further Process do issue against the said Sir R. Pawlet.

3 Dec. 19. Ibid.
Jac. 1 Upon occasion of a Subpoena served on Mr. Brereton, it was agreed by
the whole House, That the serving of a Subpoena upon a Member of this House,
knowing him to be a Parliament Man, is a Breach of Privilege; and Napper, who
served the Subpoena, was committed.

39 Eliz. Mr. Combs and Mr. Henry Powle, Towns. Col. 109. Vid. Sir Simon
d'Ewe's 546. Col. 2.
Members of this House, being served with a Subpoena ad testificandum, by Mrs.
Ann Wye, the Sergeant of the House was ordered to bring in the said Ann to
appear in this House, to answer the Contempt.

43 Eliz. 1601. Id. 212, 213, 214.
A Subpoena ad testificandum served on Mr. Johnson, and other Members, Agreed,
That the Sergeant be sent to arrest all those to appear that had procured the
Subpoena, to answer their Contempt with all Speed.

44 Eliz. 1601. Id. 246. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 651. Col. 1. Id. 257.
Sir Edmond Morgan, a Member of this House, was served with a Subpoena at the
Suit of one Lemney; who was sent for by the Sergeant. And because Christopher
Kennel, who served it, professed Ignorance, he was only adjuged to three Days
Imprisonment in the Custody of the Sergeant, and to pay his Fees.

The same Order with William Mackerless, Ibid. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 656.
who served a Subpoena on Mr. Pemberton, a Member, at the Suit of one
Mackerness.

44 Eliz. 1601. Mr. Philips, Col. 1, 2. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 655. Col. 1, 2.
a Member of the House, was served with a Privy Seal out of the Court of Wards,
by one Thomas Dean, Servant to Mrs. Chamberlain a Widow. The House ordered that
she and her Servant should be sent for by the Sergeant.

Vide plus de hi Sir Simon d'Ewe's Journal 637. and alibi passim.

33 Eliz. The Sheriffs of London were fined by the Commons, Scobel, 92.
and sent to the Tower, for not delivering a Burgess arrested for Debt, sitting
the Parliament.

6 April, 1593. The Sergeant at Mace, Id. 921 Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 519.
who arrested Mr. Neal, a Member, upon on Execution, and Weblyn, at whose Suit
he was arrested, were brought to the Bar, and both committed Prisoners to the
Tower; and the Sergeant at Arms attending this House was ordered to deliver
them over to the Lieutenant of the Tower.

13 Maii, 1607. Ibid.
Nicholas Allen an Attorney, and Palmer, at whose Suit Mr. Martin, a Member,
was Out-lawed; ordered to be sent for by the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar,
to answer their Contempt.

An Attachment for Contempt being taken out of Chancery against Mr. Belingham,
Ibid.
a Member, the House ordered to have Privilege, and a Letter to be sent to Mr.
Evelyn, one of the six Clerks, to stay the Suit.

Upon a Writ directed to the Sheriff to levy twenty Pounds Issues upon Sir
Robert Oxenbridge, Id. 93.
for Nonappearance, it was ordered, That if the Issues were not discharged
before that Night, the Parties deliquent to be brought next Day to the Bar by
the Sergeant.

14 Maii, Ibid.
1576. Sir Edward Montague a Member of the House, was warned to attend a Trial
in London, which was to be had against him, and was by Order of the House
privileged; and the Party that gave the Warning, was summoned to appear at the
Bar next Morning.

21 Febr. 1588. Id. 94. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 436. Col. 1, 2.
Ordered, That those Members of the House who have Occasion of Privilege (
Writs of Nisi prius being brought against them) do declare their Case to the
Speaker, who thereupon shall direct the Warrant of this House to the Lord
Chancellor, for awarding Writs of Supersedeas.

3 Martii, Ibid.
18 Jac. 1. Upon a Report from the Committee (appointed to consider of a Way of
staying Trials against Members of the House) that by several Precedents the
Custom appeared to be in such Cases, That on Motions and Orders in the House,
Letters were written to the Justices of Assize for stay of Trials against
Members of the House; which Letters were entered in the Journal Book; and that
it belongs to the Clerk to write the the same: It was thereupon Resolved,
That the former Course of writing Letters to Justices of Assize should be held
according to former Precedents.

10 Junii, 1607. Sir Robert Johnson, Id. 95.
a Member of this House, moved for a Letter to stay a Trial against him in the
Exchequer. Which was granted (as appears by the Entry on the 13th Day, when a
Petition of Sir Robert Brett was read against that Privilege.) The Privilege
formerly granted was affirmed upon this Reason, That no Man should have any
Thing to withdraw him from his Service in the House. The like 14 Feb. 18 Jac. 1.

The Privilege of the House is so much insisted on, that it has been a
Question, Ibid.
Whether any Member of the House could consent, that himself might be sued,
during the Session; because the Privilege is not so much the Person's, as the
House's: And therefore when any Person has been brought to the Bar for any
Offense of this Nature, the Speaker has usually charged the Person in the Name
of the whole House, as a Breach of the Privilege of the House.

3 Junii, Ibid.
1607. Sir Thomas Holcroft a Member of the House, had occasion to sue at Law;
and was sued; with which he was content, and desired the Leave of the House.
There was a Question, Whether the House should give Leave for a Breach of
Privilege; and it was resolved, The House might give Leave.

7 Maii, Id. 96.
1607. Sir Thomas Bigg and Sir Thomas Love being returned upon an Attaint in
the King's Bench, it being moved, That in this Case they ought to have
Privilege, it was so ordered; and the Sergeant sent with his Mace to deliver
the Pleasure of the House to the Secondary, the Court sitting.

22 Nov. 1597. Ibid. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 560. Col. 2.
Sir John Tracey, a Member of this House, being at the Common Pleas Bar, to be
put upon a Jury, the Sergeant at Arms was presently sent with his Mace to fetch
him thence, to attend his Service in the House.

April, Scobel, 96.
12 Jac. 1. Sir William Bamp-field was committed by the Lord Chancellor for a
Contempt after the Writ of Summons, but before the Election. Ordered, upon the
Question, That he shall have his Privilege by Writ of Habeas Corpus.

1 Jac. 1 Sess. 2. Ibid.
Sir John Peyton returned Knight for Cambridge the last Session, and since
chosen Sheriff, Resolved, That he shall attend his Service here.

28 Martii, 1542. Herbert's Hen. 8. 539.
During this Session of Parliament, some Wrong was offered to their ancient
Privileges, a Burgess of theirs being arrested. Whereof the King understanding,
not only gave Way to their releasing him, but Punishment of the Offenders:
Insomuch that the Sheriffs of London were committed to the Tower, and one
Delinquent to a Place called Little Ease, and others to Newgate.

2 Martii, 1592. Scobel, 112, 113. Vide Moor. fo. 340. n. 461. Fitzherbert's
Case. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 479, 480, 490, Col. 2.
Upon a Report from the Committee of Privileges, That one Mr. Fitzherbet was
returned a Burgess, and excepted against, because he was alleged to be
Outlawed, and detained upon such Outlawry; the House ordered, That Mr. Speaker
should move the Lord Keeper for an Habeas Corpus cum Causa to bring up the Body
and the Cause of Mr. Fitzherbert. But the Lord Keeper returned, That in regard
of the ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House, the Sergeant at Arms be
sent by Order of this House for Mr. Fitzherbert at his own Charge; by Reason
whereof he may be brought, without Peril of being further arrested by the Way;
which was approved of.

1 Jac. 1. Scobel, 104, 105, 106, 107. Vid. Petyt's Miscel Parl. 222, 123, 124,
125,
The first Day of sitting Complaint was made, That Sir Thomas Shirley, chosen a
Member of the House, was arrested four Days before the Sitting of this
Parliament, a Warrant issued to the Clerk of the Crown for a Habeas Corpus to
bring him to the House, being then a Prisoner in the Fleet; and the Sergeant
and his Yeoman were sent for in Custody; who being brought to the Bar, and
confessing their Fault, were remitted for that Time. 17 April, Upon hearing
Council in the House at the Bar for Sir Thomas Shirley, and the Warden of the
Fleet, it was ordered, That Simson, at whose Suit, and the Sergeant by whom the
Arrest was made, should be committed to the Tower. 4 Maii, A Habeas Corpus was
awarded to the Warden of the Fleet to bring Sir Thomas Shirley to the House.
The Warden denied to execute it. For which, the 7th of May following, he was
sent for by the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar; who denying to bring his
Prisoner, a new Writ of Habeas Corpus was awarded, and the Warden was committed
to the Sergeant, with this Order, That if that Writ were not executed, that
then he should be delivered over to the Lieutenant of the Tower as the House's
Prisoner. 8 Maii, The Sergeant was sent with his Mace to the Fleet, the House
sitting, to require the Body of Sir Thomas Shirley. But the Sergeant being
denied, a Warrant was made to the Sergeant to deliver the Warden of the Fleet
to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to be kept close Prisoner. 11 Maii, The Warden
was again sent for, and brought to the Bar; and refusing to deliver up his
Prisoner, he was committed to the Place called the Dungeon, or Little Ease in
the Tower. 14 Maii, A new Warrant was ordered for a new Writ of Habeas Corpus;
and that the Sergeant should go with the Writ; that the Warrant should be
brought to the Door of the Fleet by the Lieutenant himself, and there the Writ
to be delivered to him, and the Commandment of the House to be made known to
him by the Sergeant, for the executing of it; that in the mean Time the Warden
to be presently committed to the Dungeon, and after to be returned thither
again. 18 Maii, The Warden did deliver Sir Thomas Shirley; and so was not put
into the Dungeon. 19 Maii, He attending at the Door, was brought into the Bar;
where, upon his Knees, confessing his Error and Presumption, and professing he
was unfeignedly sorry he had so offended this Honorable House. Upon that
Submission, by Direction of the House, the Speaker pronounced his Pardon and
Discharge, paying ordinary Fees to the Clerk, and to the Sergeant.

Mr. Belgrave, Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 688. Col. 1.
being a Member of the House of Commons had an Information exhibited against
him in the Star Chamber by the Earl of Huntington. And Order was entered, as
the Act of that House. 43 Eliz. 601. That he ought not to be molested in that
Manner.

10 Feb. 4 Car. 1. Rush. Col. 653. Vid. Petyt 's Miscel. Parl. p. 107.
Whilst the House was in Debate, the Warehouse of Mr. Rolls (Merchant and
Member of the House then sitting in Parliament) was locked up by a Pursuivant,
and himself called from the Committee, and served with a Subpoena. This gave
Occasion of smart Debates in the House. Id. 654.
After which the Attorney General writ a Letter, That the serving a Subpoena
was a Mistake, and prayed a favorable Interpretation. Resolved, That Mr.
Rolls, Rosh. Col. 659.
a Member of the House, ought to have Privilege of Person and Goods.

16 Feb. 5. Memorials of the Method of Proceedings in Parliament 97. Vid. Sir
Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 85. Col. 1.
Eliz. Robert Parker, Servant to Sir William Woodhouse, Knight for Norfolk,
being attached in London, at the Suit of one Baker, in Trespass, had a Warrant
of Privilege, notwithstanding Judgment given against him for four hundred Marks.

20 Febr. 18 Eliz. 1575. Ibid. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 251. Col. 1.
Upon the Question, and also upon Division of the House, Edward Smaley, Servant
to Arthur Hall Esquire one of the Burgesses for Grantham, being arrested upon an
Execution, had Privilege.

16 Dec. 44 Eliz. Anthony Curwen, Ibid. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 680. Col.
1.
Servant to William Huddleston Esquire one of the Knights of Cumberland, being
arrested upon a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, out of the Common Pleas, for six
Pounds Debt, and forty Shillings Damages, and detained in Execution, a
Supersedeas was awarded, and he was delivered.

And the House awarded the Officer that arrested him should be discharged,
Towns. Col. 326. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 680. Col. 1 686. Col. 1.
paying his Fees; and that Matthews should pay them, and also his own Fees, and
remain three Days in the Serjeant's Custody, for procuring the Arrest.

11 Maii, 19 Jac. 1. Memorials, etc. p. 98.
The Undersheriff of Middlesex was called to the Bar, for causing Alexander
Melling, Servant to the Chancellor of the Duchy, to be arrested. He denied he
knew him to be his Servant. Mr. Speaker let him know the House had ordered him
to have Privilege; and therefore orders the Undersheriff to discharge him.

1 Jac. 1. Sess. 2. Ibid.
Sir Edward Sandys moves a Breach of Privilege by Sir Robert Leigh, a Justice
of the Peace, for committing his Coachman to Newgate. Sir Robert Leigh was
sent for by the Sergeant, and an Habeas Corpus for the Prisoner. Sir Robert
Leigh being brought to the Bar, acknowledged his Fault, and was discharged; and
so was the Prisoner.

3 Martii, Ibid.
1606. Valentine Sire, Servant and Bag-Bearer to the Clerk of the Commons
House, being arrested upon an Execution, was by Order and Judgment of the House
enlarged.

7 Sept. 1601. Id. 99. Vid. Towns. Col. 196, 206, 210, Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's
Jour. 629. Col. 1.
Woodal, Servant of William Cook Esquire a Member of the House, being arrested, and
in Prison in Newgate, the Sergeant at Arms was presently sent to Newgate, to
bring him to the House sedente Curia. And being brought to the Bar with his
Keeper, was discharged from his said Keeper, and from his Imprisonment.

1 Julii, Memorials, 99.
1607. John Pasmore, the Marshal's Man, being sent for, and brought to the Bar,
for arresting John Jessop Waterman, Servant to Sir Henry Nevil, a Member of the
House. He denied that he knew he was Sir Henry's Servant, until afterward;
notwithstanding he took an Assumpsit from him, to answer the Action. The House
thought fit to commit him to the Sergeant till the House's Pleasure were
further known, and till he had discharged the Assumpsit, and paid the Fees.

17 Junii, 1609. Ibid.
Upon a Report from the Committee for Privileges, That a menial Servant of Sir
Robert Wroth was arrested eight Days before this Session; the Sergeant was sent
for the Prisoner, and the Sergeant that made the Arrest, one King, who followed
it, and Fisher, at whose Suit he was arrested.

4 Junii, 19 Jac. 1. Johnson, Id. 100.
a Servant to Sir James Whitlock, a Member of the Commons House, was arrested
upon an Execution by Moor and Lock; who being told, That Sir James Whitlock was
a Parliament Man; Fulk, one of the Prosecutors, said, He had known greater
Men's Men than Sir James Whitlock 's taken from their Masters Heels in
Parliament Time. This appearing, Lock and Moor were called in to the Bar; and
by the Judgment of the House were sentenced, First, That at the Bar they should
ask Forgiveness the of House, and of Sir James Whitlock, on their Knees. Petyt
's Miscel. Parl. 118.
Secondly, That they should both ride upon one Horse bare-back'd, Back to Back,
from Westminster to the Exchange, with Papers on their Breasts, and this
Inscription, For arresting a Servant of a Member of the Commons House of
Parliament. And this to be presently done sedente Curia. Which Judgment was
pronounced by Mr. Speaker against them at the Bar upon their Knees.

28 Apr. 22 Jac. 1. Memorials, 100.
A Warrant was ordered to be issued by the Speaker for a Writ of Privilege, to
bring up Andrew Bates, Servant to Mr. Richard Godfrey, of the House, in
Execution with the Sheriff of Kent, at the Suit of one Hunt.

This Privilege does take Place by Force of the Election, and that before the
Return be made, as appears in the Case following.

19 Nov. 1601. Id. 107, 108. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 642. Col. 2. 643.
Col. 1. Vid. Petyt. Miscel. Parl. 119.
Upon Information to the House, that one Roger Boston Servant to -- Lanckton,
Baron of Walton, who (upon credible Report of diverse Members of the House, was
affirmed to be chosen a Burgess for the Borrough of Newton in Lancashire, but
not yet returned by the Clerk of the Crown,) had been, during that Session of
Parliament, arrested in London at the Suit of one Muscle; the said Muscle
together with the Officer that made the Arrest, were sent for by the Sergeant,
and brought to the Bar, and there charged by Mr. Speaker, in the Name of the
whole House, with their Offense herein. And having been heard, Boston was
ordered to have Privilege, and to be discharged of his Arrest and Imprisonment;
and the Offenders for three Days committed to the Sergeant, and ordered to pay
such Charges to Boston as the Speaker shall set down, and their Fees.

6 Martii, 1586. Memorials, p. 108, 109. Sir Simon d'Ewe's Jour. 410. Col.
1.414. Col. 2.
This Day William White, brought to the Bar for arresting Mr. Martin, a Member
of the House, made Answer, That the Arrest was made above fourteen Days before
the Beginning of the Parliament. The House thereupon appointed a Committee to
search the Precedents. And, March 11. the Committee made their Report of Mr
Martin, a Member of this House, arrested upon mean Process by White, above
twenty Days before the Beginning of this Parliament, holden by Prorogation,
(mistaken for Adjournment;) and in respect that the House was divided about it
in Opinion, Mr. Speaker, with the Consent of the House, the sooner to grow to
some Certainty of the Judgment of the House in this Cause, moved these Question
to the House, viz.

First, Whether they would limit a Time certain, or a reasonable Time, to any
Member of the House for his Privilege. The House answered, a Convenient Time.

Secondly, Whether Mr. Martin was arrested within this reasonable Time. The
House answered, Yea.

Thirdly, If White should be punished for arresting Martin. The House answered,
No. Because the Arrest was twenty Days before the Beginning of the Parliament,
and unknown to him, what would be taken for reasonable Time. But the principal
Cause why Mr Martin had his Privilege, was, for that White the last Session
(mistaken for Meeting) of Parliament, arrested Mr. Martin; and then knowing him
to be returned a Burgess for this Honse, discharged his Arrest.

And then afterward Mr. Martin again returning out of his Country to London to
serve in this House, Mr. White did again arrest him; and therefore this House
took in evil Part against him his second Arrest; and thereupon judged that
Martin should be discharged of his second Arrest out of the Fleet by the said
Mr. White.

12 Martii, Id. 102.
1606. Complaint was made by Mr. James, a Burgess of Parliament, That his Horse
standing at his Inn, was taken by the Post-Master's Servant. Both the
Postmaster and his Servant were sent for, and brought to the Bar. Moreton, the
Postmaster, appearing to be ignorant of what his Servant had done, and
disavowing it, was by Order of the House discharged. But upon the Testimony of
a Witness at the Bar, that he told the Servant, when he took the Horse, that a
Member of Parliament was Owner of it, the Servant was committed.

In Dec. 1606. Thomas Finch, Memorials, p. 101, 102.
a Servant to Sir Nicholas Sandys, one of the Burgesses for Quinborough, was
arrested during the Adjournment; which being conceived to be a great Contempt
to the Privilege of the House, an Habeas Corpus was awarded to bring him to the
House; and he was accordingly brought; and also one Knight, who procured the
Arrest, and Harrison the Yeoman. The Excuse was, That Finch was an Attorney at
Law; but it being avowed by Sir Nicholas Sandys, That Finch lay in his House,
solicited his Causes, and received Wages from him; and it being insisted on,
That all menial and necessary Servants are to be privileged; and Instance given
of a Precedent of the Baron of Walton's Solicitor, and Huddleston's Solicitor
in the Time of Queen Elizabeth. Upon the Question, Finch was privileged, and
delivered according to former Precedents.

During the Adjournment, Ibid. 102.
a Suit was prosecuted in the Court of Wards against Nicholas Pots Esquire and
Francis Wethered Gent. Committees of a Ward which concerning Mr. Nicholas
Davys, Servant to the then Speaker, as Assignee of the Ward. The Speaker writ a
Letter to the Court, to make known, That he was one of his Clerks, and nearest
Servants; and that the Privilege was now as warrantable as in the Time of
sitting, and prayed the Court to take Notice of it.

During another Adjournment in March following, Id. 103.
the Speaker (warranted by the general Order) at the Desire of Sir Edmund
Ludlow, who was summoned to attend the Execution of a Commission out of the
Chancery, writ a Letter to the Commissioners to excuse his Attendance, and that
he should not be prejudiced by his Absence.

In May 1607. Ibid.
during an Adjournment, the Speaker directed a Letter to the Lord President and
Council at York, to stay Proceedings in a Suit there against Talbot Bows, a
Member of the House.

29 Feb. 1575. Id. 113.
One Williams, for assaulting a Burgess of this House, was upon Complaint sent
for by the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and committed to the Serjeant's
Ward.

23 April, Ibid.
1 Mar. One Monington, for striking William Johnson a Burgess, was sent for,
and confessing it, was committed to the Tower.

28 Nov. 1601. Ibid. Towns. Col. 259. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour 658. Col. 1.
Complaint being made by Mr. Fleetwood, a Member of the House, That one Holland
a Scrivener, and one Brook his Servant, had evil entreated and beaten the
Servant of the said Mr. Fleetwood in his Presence, they were both sent for by
the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and for the said Offense committed for
five Days to the Sergeant. And that they should pay double Fees.

12 Feb. 18 Jac. 1. Mr. Lovel, Memorials, 114,
a Member of the House, informed, That one Darryel threatened his Person, that
for a Speech spoken by him in the House, he should be sent to the Tower during
the Parliament, or presently after. Darryel was sent for by the Sergeant, to
answer it to the House; and upon Testimony of it, he was committed to the
Sergeant till Thursday following, and then to acknowledge his Fault, or be
committed to the Tower.

16 Jun. 1604. Complaint being made of one Thomas Rogers a Currier, dwelling in
Coleman-Street, for abusing Sir John Savill in slanderous and unseemly Terms,
upon his Proceedings at a Committee in the Bill touching Tanners, etc. he was
sent for by the Sergeant at Arms to the Bar, to answer his Offense.

1 Car. 1. 4 Inst. 48.
The Sheriff for the County of Buckingham was chosen Knight for the County of
Norfolk, and returned into the Chancery; and having a Subpoena served upon him
at the Suit of the Lady C. pendente Parliamento, upon Motion, he had the
Privilege of Parliament allowed to him by the Judgment of the whole House of
Commons.

43 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Co. 195. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour. 629. Col. 1.
This Day a Page was brought to the Bar, whom Sir Francis Hastings had caused
to be committed; for that as he went down the Stairs, the Page offered to
throng him. But upon (...) is Hastings his Entreaty, speaking very earnestly
for him, and upon the Page's Submission upon his Knees at the Bar, he was
discharged.

44 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Col. 229. Vid. Sir Simon d'Ewe 's Jour. 643 Col. 2.
Mr. William Morris, Burgess for Beaumaris, coming on his Way to London, his
Man was arrested at Shewsbury. Ordered, That the Bailiff, and he that procured
the Arrest, and the Sergeant, be sent for.

44 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Col. 225, 226.
The Solicitor of one Langton, a Burgess for Newton in Lancashire, was arrested
at the Suit of one Musket a Tailor, and committed to the Compter. Agreed by the
House, That both Musket and the Sergeant should pay the Solicitor's Costs and
Damages, and be imprisoned three Days in the Serjeant's Custody, and to pay the
Sergeant attending this House his Fees.

The Parliament shall not give Privilege to any Member contra morem
Parliamentarium, Rush. Col. 663.
to exceed the Bounds and Limits of his Place and Duty. And all agreed, That
regularly he cannot be compelled out of Parliament to answer Things done in
Parliament in a Parliamentary Course, but it is otherwise where Things are done
exorbitantly, for those are not the Acts of the Court.

No Privilege is allowable in Case of the Peace betwixt private Men, 2 Nalson,
450.
much more in Case of the Peace of the Kingdom.

Privilege cannot be pleaded against an Indictment for any Thing done out of
Parliament, Ibid.
because all Indictments are contra Pacem Domini Regis.

Privilege of Parliament is granted in regard of the Service of the
Commonwealth, Ibid.
and is not to be used to the Danger of the Commonwealth.

All Privilege of Parliament is in the Power of Parliament, Ibid.
and is a Restraint to the Proceedings of other inferior Courts; but is no
Restraint to the Proceedings of Parliament.

16 Car. 1 Resolved, Rush. 2 vol. 2d Part. 1147.
That the Lords voting the propounding and declaring Matter of Supply, before
it was moved in the House of Commons, was a Breach of Privilege of the House.

Dec. 1641. Resolved, 2 Nalson, 729.
That the setting of any Guards about this House, without the Consent of the
House, is a Breach of the Privilege of this House; and that therefore such
Guards ought to be dismissed.

Resolved upon the Question, Id. 743.
Nemine Contradicente, That the Privileges of Parliament were broken by his
Majesty's taking Notice of the Bill for suppressing of Soldiers being in
agitation in both Houses, and not agreed on.

Resolved upon the Question, Ibid.
Nemine Contradicente, That his Majesty, in propounding a Limitation and
provisional Clause to be added to the Bill, before it was presented to him by
the Consent of both Houses, was a Breach of the Privilege of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question, Ibid.
Nem. Con. That his Majesty expressing his Displeasure against some Persons,
for Matters moved in the Parliament, during the Debate, and Preparation of that
Bill, was a Breach of the Privilege of Parliament.

Whereas his Majesty, 2 Nalson, 823.
in his Royal Person, the 4th of Jan. 1641. did come to the House of Commons,
with a great Multitude of Men, armed in a warlike Manner, with Halberts,
Swords, and Pistols, who came up to the very Door of the House, and placed
themselves there, and in other Places and Passages near to the House, to the
great Terror and Disturbance of the Members then there sitting, and according
to their Duty, in a peaceable and orderly Manner, treating of the great Affairs
of both Kingdoms of England and Ireland; and his Majesty having placed himself
in the Speaker's Chair, did demand the Persons of diverse Members of the House
to be delivered unto him.

It was thereupon declared by the House of Commons, Ibid.
That the same is a high Breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
inconsistent with the Liberty and Freedom thereof; and therefore the House does
conceive, they could not with Safety of their own Presons, or the Indemnities
of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, sit there any longer, without a
full Vindication of so high a Breach of Privilege, and a sufficient Guard
wherein they might confide.

The Lords cannot proceed against a Commoner, Sleden's Jud. p. 84.
but upon a Complaint of the Commons.

But Note (as to Freedom from Suits and Arrests,) Stat. 12, and 13. Will. 111.
that in the Parliament of 12 and 13 William the Third, an Act passed,
entitled, An Act for preventing any Inconveniences that may happen by
Privilege of Parliament, Which enacts,

Sect. I. That any Person may prosecute any Peer of this Realm, or Lord of
Parliament, or any of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgess, of the House of
Commons for the Time being, or their or any of their menial or other Servants,
or any other Person entitled to the Privilege of Parliament in any of the
Courts of Record at Westminster, or high Court of Chancery, or Court of
Exchequer, or the Duchy Court of Lancaster, and in the Court of Admiralty; and
in all Causes Matrimonal and Testamentary in the Court of Arches, the
Prerogative Courts of Canterbury and York, and the Delegates, and in all Courts
of Appeal, from and after the Dissolution or Prorogation of any Parliament,
until a new Parliament shall meet, or the same be reassembled. And from and
after any Adjournment of both Houses for above fourteen Days, until both Houses
shall meet or reassemble. And that the said Courts respectively, shall and may
after such Dissolution, Prorogation, or Adjournment, proceed to give Judgment,
and make final Orders, Decrees, and Sentences, and award Execution thereon, any
Privilege of Parliament to the contrary notwithstanding.

Sect. II. Provides against subjecting the Person of any Knight, Citizen, or
Burgess, or any other entitled to the Privilege of Parliament, to be arrested
during the Time of Privilege. Nevertheless allowing the Liberty, that any
Person, having Cause Action or Complaint against any Peer of the Realm, or Lord
of Parliament, so that after any Dissolution, Prorogation, or Adjournment, as
aforesaid, or (and) before any Session of Parliament, or Meeting of both
Houses, as aforesaid, shall and may have such Process out of the Courts of
King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, against such Peer or Lord of
Parliament, as he might have had against him out of the Time of Privilege. And
if any Person having Cause of Action against any of the said Knights, Citizens,
or Burgesses, or any other entitled to Privilege, after any such Dissolution,
Prorogation, or Adjournment, or before any such Sessions or Meeting of both
Houses ut supra; he shall and may prosecute such Knight, Citizen, or Burgess,
or other such privileged Person, in the said Courts of King's Bench, Common
Pleas, or Exchequer, by original Bill and Summons, Attachment and Distress
infinite, out of the same Courts, who are respectively empowered to issue the
same against him or them, until the Defendant shall enter a Common Appearance,
or file Common Bail to the Action, according to the Course of each Court. And
that any Person having Cause of Suit or Complaint, may in the Time aforesaid
exhibit any Bill of Complaint against any Peer of the Realm, or Lord of
Parliament, or against any Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, or other Person so
entitled to Privilege, in the Chancery, Exchequer, or Duchy Court; and proceed
thereon by Letter or Subpoena, as usual. And upon leaving a Copy of the Bill
with the Defendant, or at his House or Lodging, or last Place of Abode, may
proceed thereon; and for Want of an Appearance or Answer, or for
Nonperformance of any Order or Decree, or for Breach thereof, may sequester
the real or personal Estate of the Party, as is used and practiced where the
Defendant is a Peer of the Realm; but shall not arrest or imprison the Body of
any of the said Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, or other privileged Person,
during the Continuance of Privilege of Parliament.

Sect. III. That where any Person, by reason of Privilege of Parliament, is
stayed or prevented from prosecuting any Suit by him commenced, he shall not be
barred by any Statute of Limitation, nor nonsuited, dismissed, or his Suit
discontinued, for want of Prosecution, but shall from Time to Time, on the
rising of the Parliament, be at Liberty to proceed to Judgment and Execution.

Sect. IV. That no Action, Suit, Process, Order, Judgment, Decree, or
Proceedings in Law or Equity, against the King's original and immediate Debtor,
for Recovery, or obtaining of any Debt or Duty, originally and immediately due
or payable to his Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors, or against any Accomptant,
or Person answerable or liable to render an Account to his Majesty, his Heirs,
or Successors, for any Part or Branch of their Revenues, or other original and
immediate Debt or Duty; or the Execution of any such Process, Order, Judgment,
Decree, or Proceedings, shall be impeached, stayed, or delayed, by or under the
Color or Pretense of Parliament. Yet so that that the Person of any such
Debtor or Accomptant, or Person answerable or liable to account, being a Peer
of this Realm, or Lord of Parliament, shall not be liable to be arrested or
imprisoned, by or upon any such Suit, Process, Order, Judgment, etc. or being a
Member of the House of Parliament, shall not, during the Continuance of the
Privilege of Parliament, be arrested or imprisoned by or upon any such Order,
Judgment, Decree, Process, or Proceedings.

Sect. V. Provided, That this Act, or any Thing therein, shall not extend to
give any Jurisdiction, Power, or Authority, to any Court to hold Plea in any
real or mixed Action, in any other Manner than it might have been done before
the making of this Act.

Jovis, Bohun's Collection, page 27.
13 Feb. 1700. Resolved, That no Member have any Privilege in any Case, where
he is only a Trustee.

Resolved, Nem. Cont. That no Peer of the Realm has any Right to vote in the
Election of any Member to serve in Parliament. And,

Declared by the House as a standing Order, Ibid.
That no Member have any Privilege, except for his Person only, against any
Commoner, in any Suit or Proceeding at Law or Equity, for any longer Time than
the House shall be actually sitting for the Dispatch of Business in Parliament.

Martii, Ibid. page 230.
28 Nov. 1699. Resolved, That no Member of this House, acting as a Public
Officer, has any Privilege of Parliament, touching any Matter done in
Execution of his Office.

APPENDIX. The Report of a Case happening in Parliament in the first Year of
King James the First, which was the Case of Sir Francis Goodwyn, and Sir John
Fortescue, for the Knights Place in Parliament for the County of Bucks.
Translated out of the French.
IN this Case, after that Sir Francis Goodwyn was elected Knight, with one Sir
William Fleetwood, for the said County, which Election was freely made for him
in the County, and Sir John Fortescue refused, notwithstanding that the
Gentlemen of the best Rank put him up; the said Sir John Fortescue complained
to the King and Council Table, (he being one of them, to wit, one of the Privy
Council) that he had been injuriously dealt with in that Election; which does
not appear to be true: But to exclude Sir Francis Goodwyn from being one of the
Parliament, it was objected against him, That he was Outlawed in Debt; which
was true; scilicet, he was outlawed for sixty Pound the 31st of Queen
Elizabeth, at the Suit of one Johnson, which Debt was paid; and also the 39th
of Eliz. at the Suit of one Hacker for sixtteen Pounds, which Debt was also
paid; and that (notwithstanding) this the King, by the Advice of his Council at
Law, and by the Advice of his Judges, took Cognizance of these Outlawries, and
directed another Writ to the Sheriff of the said County, to elect another
Knight in the Place of the said Sir Francis Goodwyn, which Writ bore Date
before the Return of the former.

And this Writ recites, N. B. Here the King assumes the Power of judging and
determining the (...) of Members Parliament. Sed (...).
That because the said Sir Francis was outlawed, prout Domino Regi constabat de
Recordo, and for other good Considerations, which were well cognisant to the
King, and because he was Inidonious for the Business of the Parliament,
therefore the King commanded the Sheriff to elect one other Knight in his Room;
which Writ was executed accordingly, and Sir John Fortescue elected.

And at last Day of the Return, to wit, the first Day of the Parliament, both
Writs were returned; the first with the Indenture sealed, between the Sheriff
and the Freeholders of Bucks, in which Sir Francis Goodwyn and Sir William
Fleetwood, were elected Knights for the Parliament; and also the Sheriff
returned, (upon the Dorse of the Writ,) That the said Sir Francis was outlawed
in two several Outlawries, and therefore was not a meet Person to be a Member
of the Parliament House. The second Writ was returned with an Indenture only,
in which it was recited, That Sir John Fortescue, by reason of the second Writ,
was elected Knight.

Both these Returns were brought the third Sitting of the Parliament to the
Parliament House by Sir George Copping, being Clerk of the Crown.

And after that the Writs and Returns of them were read, it was debated in
Parliament, Whether Sir Francis Goodwyn should be received as Knight for the
Parliament, or Sir John Fortescue.

And the Court of Parliament, after a long Debate thereupon, gave Judgment,
That Sir Francis Goodwyn should be received: And their Reasons were these;

First, because they took the Law to be, That an Outlawry, in Personal Actions,
was no Cause to disable any Person from being a Member of Parliament; and it
was said, That this was ruled in Parliament 35th of Queen Elizabeth, in the
Parliament House, in a Case for one Fitz-Herbert.

Another Precedent, was 39 H. 6.

Secondly, The Pardons of the 39th of Queen Eliz. and 43 Eliz. had pardoned
those Outlawries; and therefore, as they said, he was a Man able against all
the World, but against the Party Creditor, and against him he was not. But in
this Case the Parties were paid.

Also, Thirdly, it was said, That Sir Francis Goodwyn was not legally outlawed,
because no Proclamation was issued forth to the County of Bucks, where he was
Commorant and Resiant: And therefore the Outlawry being in the Hustings in
London, and Sir Francis Goodwyn being Comorant in Bucks, the Outlawry (no
Proclamation issuing to the County of Bucks) was void by the Statute of the
31st of the Queen; which, in such Cases, makes the Outlawries void.

Fourthly, It was said that the Outlawries were, 1. Against Francis Goodwyn Esquire
2. Against Francis Goodwyn Gent. And, 3. The Return was of Francis Goodwyn
Knight.


Et quomodo constant, that those Outlawries were against the said Sir Francis
Goodwyn? For these Reasons also they resolved, That the Outlawries were not any
Matter against Sir Francis Goodwyn, to disenable him to be a Knight for the
County of Bucks.

Fifthly, It was said, That by the Statute of 7 H. 4. which prescribes the
Manner of the Election of Knights and Burgesses, it is Enacted, That the
Election shall be by Indenture between the Sheriff and the Freeholders; and
that the Indenture shall be the Return of the Sheriff.

It was also said, That the Precedents do warrant this Judgment, viz.

1. One Precedent of 39 H. 6. where a Person outlawed was adjudged a sufficient
Member of Parliament. Another 1 Eliz. and at that Time one Gargrave, who was a
Man learned in the Law, was Speaker, and of the Queen's Council.

2. Another was the Case of one Fludd, in the 23d of the Queen, who, being
outlawed, was adjudged, That he should be privileged by Parliament; and at that
Time the Lord Chief Justice Popham was Speaker. And,

3. In the 35th of Elizabeth, there were three Precedents, scil. one of
Fitz-Herbert; another of one Killegrew, being outlawed in fifty two Outlawries;
and the third of Sir Walter Harecourt, being outlawed in eighteen Outlawries.

But after this Sentence and Judgment of the Parliament, the King's Highness
was displeased with it, because the second Writ emanavit by his Assent, and by
the Advice of his Council.

And therefore it was moved to the Judges in the Upper-House, Note,
Whether a Person outlawed could be a Member of Parliament; who gave their
Opinions that he could not. And they all, except Williams, agreed, That the
Pardon, without a Scire facias did not help him, but that he was outlawed to
that Purpose, as if no Pardon had been granted.

And upon this the Lords sent to the Lower House, desiring a Conference with
them concerning this Matter; which Conference the Lower House, after some
Deliberation, denied, for these Reasons:

1. Because they had given their Judgment before; and therefore they could not
have Conference de re Judicata; as in like Manner they did 27 Queen Eliz. upon
a Bill that came from the Lords, and was rejected by Sentence upon the first
Reading, Sir Walter Mildmay being then of the Privy Council, and of the House.

2. Because they ought not to give any Account of their Actions to any other
Person, but to the King himself.

This Answer the Lords did ill resent; and therefore refused Conference in
other Matters concerning Wards and Respite of Homages and Purveyors; and also
they sent to the King to inform him of it. But before their Messengers came to
the King, two of the Privy Council, scilicet, Sir John Stanhope, and Sir John
Herbert, were sent to the King by the Lower House, to inform him that they had
heard that his Grace was displeased with the House, for their Sentence given
for Sir Francis Goodwyn, as well as in the Matter of the Sentence; which was,
(as they heard) said to be against Law; as also for the Manner of their
Proceedings, being done hastily, without Calling to it either Sir John
Fortescue, or his Council, or without making his Grace acquainted with it.

And therefore they desired his Grace to understand the Truth of this Matter;
and also told him, That they were ready, with his good Leave, with their
Speaker, to attend his Majesty, to give him Satisfaction about their
Proceedings.

But the King told them they came too late; and that it ought to have been done
sooner, calling the House Rash and Inconsiderate: But yet notwithstanding, he
was content to hear their Speaker in the Morning at Eight of the Clock.

Upon this Message, Committees were chosen to consider of the Things and
Matters aforesaid, which should be delivered to the King, in Satisfaction of
the Sentence given by the House, (which afterward were considered of, and
digested by the Speaker and Committees,) in three Points, viz.

1. In the Reasons and Motives of their Resolutions. 2. In the Precedents,
which were those I before have reported. 3. And in Matters of Law.
Which were those Matters of Law also before reported by me, with another
Addition;

That in the Time of Henry the Sixth, the Speaker of the Parliament was
arrested, in Execution, at the Suit of the Duke of York; and the Question being
put to the Judges at that Time, See Bohun's Col. p. 277.
Whether the Speaker ought to have his Privilege, it was said by them, That
they were Judges of the Law, and not Judges of Parliament.

The Reasons and Motives were the free Election of the County; the Request of
one of the House; the double Return of the Sheriff, with a Commemoration of the
Length of the Time since the Outlawries; and with that the Payment of the Debts.

To this Report the King answered, That he now ought to change his Tune which
he used in his first Oration, scilicet, Thanksgiving, to Grief and Reproof. But
he said, That it was as necessary they should be reproved, as congratulated;
and therefore he cited a parcel of Scriptures, wherein God had so done with his
People Israel, nay, with King David, the People whom he tendered as the Apple
of his Eye; and David, who was a Man after his own Heart.

He said, It seems anciently, to be a Privy Counselor, was incompatible with
being a Member of Parliament or Public Counselor.
That since Sir Francis Goodwyn was received by the House upon Reasons and
Motives inducing the House thereunto, so the King, upon Reason too, took
Consideration of Sir John Fortescue, being one of the Council, an ancient
Counselor, a Counselor not chosen by the King, but by his Predecessors, and
so he found him; and therefore he endeavored to grace him, being the only Man
of them that had been disgraced, the King protesting that he would not for any
Thing in the World, offer unjustly any Disgrace to any Man in the Nation.
Besides, he did not proceed rashly, as they had proceeded, but upon
Deliberation, with double Advice, as well with that of his Council, as with
that of his Judges.

And in his answering the Precedents, Quere, If the King himself was not here,
too over weening.
he said, That those were his own proper Records; and to use them against
himself was overgreat Weenings: But in Precedents, he said, that they ought to
respect Times and Persons; and therefore said, That Henry the Sixth's Time was
troublesome, he himself Weak and Impotent. And as for the other Precedents,
they were in the Time of a Woman, which Sex was not capable of Mature
Deliberation; and so he said where Infants are Kings, whom he called Minors.

For the Law Part, he referred to the Answer of his Judges; who, by the Lord
Chief Justice, gave these Resolutions: They all unanimously agreeing in them;

1. That the King alone, and not the Parliament House, had to do with the
Returns of the Members of Parliament; for from him the Writs issued, and to him
the Sheriff is commanded to make his Returns; but when a Man is returned and
sworn, the Parliament House has to do with him, and the Sheriff ought to
Return the Outlawry, if he knew it before his Return.

2. They resolved clearly, Thatan outlawed Person cannot by the Law be a Member
of the Parliament House; but for that Cause the King might refuse the Return of
him; and for that Cause he was removable out of the House. And therefore the
Lord Chief Justice said, That in the 35th of Henry the Sixth it was so adjudged
in Parliament; which answers the Precedents vouched by the Commons of that
Time. And also he said, That in the first Year of Henry the Seventh, it was
adjudged in Parliament, That Persons outlawed, or attainted, could not sit in
Parliament, without Restitution by Act of Parliament. And he said, That though
the Books do not warrant his Saying, yet the Parliament Roll (which he had
seen) does warrant it, which any Man might see.

3. They resolved, at the Instance of the King himself, That the Party could
not be discharged from the Outlawry without a Scire Facias sued against the
Party Creditor, Plantiff in Debt; and Justice Windam for that Purpose recanting
his former Opinion, said, That he, upon perusing of his Books, and by Reasons
of the Law, was of Opinion with his Companions.

4. As for the Statute of the 31st of the Queen, concerning Proclamation to be
made in the County, etc. they all resolved, as before Times it had been
resolved, That no Outlawry by that Statute was void until a Judgment,
declaring, That there was no Proclamation issued forth to the County where the
Party was Resiant at the Time of the awarding of the Exigent.

5. As for the Statute of 7 Hen. 4. which enacts, That the Indenture shall be
only the Return of the Sheriff, the Judges said, That was true, that such was
the Statute, and that that was his Return for so much; but that Statute does
not restrain the Sheriff from returning any other Thing material which disables
the Parties chosen.

6. It was held, That the Indorsement of the Writ, comprehending the Matter of
the Outlawry, was material, and not a Nugation.

7. And, lastly, they resolved, That by the Return of the Sheriff, it apeared
that Sir Francis Goodwyn was the same Person who was outlawed 31 Eliz. by the
Name of Francis Goodwyn Esquire; and 39 Eliz. by the Name of Francis Goodwyn
Gentleman; and that by the Words of the Return, scilicet, Idem Franciscus
Goodwyn Miles Vtlagatus existit, etc. And they also agreed, That no Person
outlawed ought to have his Privilege of the Parliament House; and that all the
Precedents vouched by the Commons were after the Parties were Members of the
House, and not before they were returned.

But notwithstanding these Resolutions, scilicet, the Resolution of the Judges,
the Commons House hold clearly; That Sir Francis Goodwyn was well received into
Parliament; and the King commanded them to confer together, and resolve, if
they could, of themselves; and if they could not resolve, to confer with the
Judges, and then to resolve; and when they were resolved, then to deliver their
Resolution to his Council, not as Parliament Men, but as his Privy Council, by
whose Hands he would receive the Resolution; and for that Purpose he left them
behind him, (he himself being to ride to Royston a hunting.) And to pursue the
Commandment of the King, the Commons House clearly resolved, That what they had
done, was well and duly done; and they were of Opinion clearly against the
Judges, as to the Matter of the Outlawry, and that Ratione of the Precedents:
And also that the Parliament only had to do with the Sheriff's Returns of
Members of Parliament; and that the Returns ought not to be made till the first
Day of the Parliament; and therefore They would not confer with the Judges: But
they appointed a Committee to consider of the Reasons to be delivered to the
Council for the Satisfaction of the King; which Committee, by the Assent of all
the House of Commons, sent to the Lords this Resolution following, videlicet,

As to what the King taxed the House for, That they meddled with the Sheriff's
Return of Members of Parliament, being but one half of the Body, the Lords
being one, and the principal Part of the Parliament's Body.

Note. This Resolution was written in Parchment, and so delivered to the Council
of the King, not as Parliament Men, but representing the King's Person; and, a
Copy thereof was kept in the House.
As to that they answered; That all Writs for the Election of Members of
Parliament were returned into the Parliament House before 7 Hen. 4. (at which
Time it was enacted, That all such Returns ought to be made in Chancery;) and
that appeared by the Records from the Time of Edward the First, until the said
Year of the Seventh of Henry the Fourth. And therefore the Parliament must of
Necessity have only meddled with the Returns till the making of the said
Statute of the Seventh of Henry the Fourth; at which Time the Place of the
Return was altered, and enacted to be in Chancery; but yet that did not take
away the Jurisdiction of the Parliament, to meddle with the Returns of the
Members of Parliament; but that remained as it was before. And this was
manifest, as well by Reason as by Use: For that Court is to meddle with
Returns, where the Appearance and Service of Members is to be made and used;
but in the Parliament only the Appearance and Service are to be made and used,
and therefore in the Parliament only are the Returns to be examined and
censured.

Likewise, ever since the making of the said Statute of the Seventh of Henry
the Fourth, the Clerk of the Crown attends the Parliament every Day till the
End of it, with all the Writs and Returns; and at the End of the Parliament, he
brings them into the Petty-Bag.

The Precedents also do warrant this intermeddling with Returns for the
Parliament, as in the Twenty-ninth of the Queen, a Writ issued forth to the
Sheriff of -- who made a Return before the Day into Chancery; and the
Chancellor, upon that Return containing such Matter, as this Writ now contains,
sent a second Writ to the said Sheriff; who thereupon made a new Election; and
that second Writ was also returned, and both the Writs and Returns brought into
Parliament, and there censured by the Parliament, That the first should stand;
and that the second Election was void; and that the Chancellor has no Power to
award a second Writ, nor to meddle with the Return of it; and diverse other
Precedents were shown by the Commons to the same Effect, videlicet.

In the Nine and twentieth of Queen Elizabeth one.

And in the Three and fortieth of Queen Elizabeth another.

And in the Thirty fifth of the Queen two.

Whereof one was upon the Return of the Sheriff, that the Party first elected
was Lunatic; and thereupon the Parliament examined it; and upon Examination
thereof they found the Return true, and gave a Warrant for another Writ.

As to the Matter, That they were but one half of the Body; to that they said,
That though in the making of Laws they were but an half Body, yet as to
Censuring of Privileges, Customs, Orders, and Returns of their House, they were
an entire Body; as the Upper House was for their Privileges, Customs, and
Orders, which continual and common Usage has approved of.

As to their Charge of having used Precipitancy and Rashness, they answered;
That they used it in such a Manner as in all other Cases they were wont to do,
scilicet,

To have first a Motion of the Matter in Controversy; and then they caused the
Clerk of the Crown to bring the second Day the Writs and Returns; and they
being thrice read, they proceed to the Examination of them; and upon
Examination, gave Judgment; which was the true proper Course of the Place.

As to the House's not having used the King well, the Thing being done by his
Command, they say, That they had no Notice before their Sentence, that the King
himself took any special Regard of that Case; but only that his Officer, the
Chancellor, had directed his second Writ, as formerly had been done.

As to the Matter of the Outlawry, they said, That they understand by his Royal
Person more Strength and Light of Reason from it, than ever before; and yet it
was without Example, That any Member of the House was put out of the House for
any such Cause; but to prevent that, they had prepared a Law, That no outlawed
Person, for the Time to come, should be of the Parliament; nor any Person in
Execution, should have the Privilege of Parliament.

But they said further, That Sir Francis Goodwyn was not outlawed at the Day of
his Election; for he was not Quinto Exactus, the five Proclamations never had
been made; which Proclamations they in London always spare, except the Party,
or any for him, require it; and that Exigent was never returned, nor any Writ
of Certiorari directed to the Coroners to certify it, but after his Election;
which was a Thing unusual, (the Money being paid, and the Sheriffs being long
since dead,) to disenable the said Goodwyn to serve in Parliament; that the
Exigent was returned, and the Names of the deceased Sheriffs put thereto. Et ex
hoc fuit, without doubt that Goodwyn could not have a Scire Facias; for there
was no Outlawry against him, and by Consequence the Pardons had discharged him.

And they farther showed to the King, That if the Chancellor only could examine
Returns, then upon every Surmise, whether it were true or false, the Chancellor
might send a second Writ, and cause a new Election to be made; and thus the
free Election of the County should be abrogated; which would be too dangerous
to the Commonwealth.

For by such Means the King and his Council might make any Man, whom they
would, to be of the Parliament House, against the Great Charter and the
Liberties of England.

It is found among the Precedents of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Rush. 3 vol. page
591.
on whose Times all good Men look with Reverence, that She committed one
Wentworth, a Member of the House of Commons to the Tower, sitting the House,
only for proposing, That they might advise the Queen in a Matter which she
thought they had nothing to do to meddle in. ( Quere, If not in advising her to
marry?)

This notorious Infringement of their Liberties and Privileges, See Sir Matthew
H^^'s of Parliament, page 206, 216, 217.218, etc.
in the latter End of Queen Elizabeth, seems to be what the Commons complained
of, and mention in that famed Remonstrance or Declaration of their Privileges,
printed and directed to King James the First, in the Beginning of his Reign,
viz. Anno Dom. 1604. Wherein they tell that King, That they bore with some
Things in the latter Times of Queen Elizabeth, in regard of her Sex and her
Age; and not to impeach his Majesty's Succession, under whom they then hoped to
have them redressed and rectified. Whereas, on the contrary, in that (very
first) Parliament of his Majesty, they found, That the whole Freedom of the
Parliament and Realm had been on all Occasions mainly hewed at. As,

That the Freedom of their Persons in Election had been impeached.

The Freedom of their Speech prejudiced by often (open) Reproofs.

That particular Persons, (Members,) who had spoken their Consciences in
Matters proposed to the House, noted with Disgrace, etc.

That a Jailer had contemned the Decrees (and Orders) of the House.

Some of the higher Clergy, to write Books against them, even fitting in
Parliament.

The inferior Clergy to inveigh against them in their Pulpits, etc.

After which, they roundly assert, That the Prerogative of Princes may easily,
See the Force of a Precedent once fixed in the Crown. 2 Inst 61. Hou^^shead 1
Tom. page 135.
and do daily grow (and increase.) -- But the Privileges of Subjects are for
the most Part at an everlasting Stand: They may by good Providence and Care be
preserved; but being once lost, are not to be recovered, but with much Disquiet
and Disorder. (Vide ibid. plura.)

To conclude this Treatise, as I begun it, give me leave to add, There is
nothing ought to be so dear to the Commons of Great Britain as a Free
Parliament, that is, a House of Commons every Way free and independent either
of the Lords or Ministry, or, etc. Free in their Persons; Free in their
Estates; Free in their Elections; Free in their Returns; Free in their
assembling; Free in their Speechs, Debates, and Determinations; Free to
complain of Offenders; Free in their Prosecutions for Offenses; and therein
Free from the Fear or Influence of others, how great soever; Free to guard
against the Encroachments of arbitrary Power; Free to preserve the Liberties
and Properties of the Subject; and yet Free to part with a Share of those
Properties, when necessary for the Service of the Public. Nor can he be justly
esteemed a Representative of the People of Britain, who does not sincerely
endeavor to defend their just Rights and Liberties against all Invasions
whatsoever. See further, touching the Rights and Duties of Parliaments, in
Rapin's History. Vol. II. Book XXII. especially Page 583, and 595. Sed quae
sunt Jura si non Libere Fruantur?

FINIS
Books lately Printed.
MODERN Entries in English: Being, a select Collection of Pleadings in the
Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, viz. Declarations, Pleas
in Abatement and in Bar, Replications, Rejoinders, etc. Demurrers, Issues,
Verdicts, Judgments, Forms of Continuances, Discontinuances, and other Entries,
and of entering Judgments, etc. in all personal Actions; and also all Kinds of
Writs, Original and Judicial. Translated from the most authentic Books, but
chiefly from Lutwich's, Saunders's Ventris's Salkeld's, and the Modern Reports;
and from other Cases lately tried and adjudg'd, and wherein Writs of Error have
been brought and Judgments affirmed: Together with Readings and Observations on
the several Cases in the Reports, as well relating to the Precedents herein, as
to all other Cases incident to each particular Title; and the same abridg'd in
a methodical Order. To which are added, References to all the other Entries in
the Books, with three distinct Tables; one of the Precedents; the second, of
the Cases abridg'd; and the third, of the Names of the Cases. By a Gentlman of
the Inner Temple.

The Law of Uses and Trusts, collected and digested in a proper Order from the
Reports of adjudged Cases in the Courts of Law and Equity, and other Books of
Authority. Together with a Treatise of Dower. To which is added, A complete
Table of all the Matters therein contained. And,

The Law and Practice of Ejectments: Being a compendious Treatise of the Common
and Statute Law relating thereto. To which is added, Select Precedents of
Pleas, special Verdicts, Judgments, Executions, and Proceedings in Error; with
two distinct Tables to the Whole. The Second Edition, (carefully corrected and
revised by the Author.)

The Attorney's Pocket Companion: Or, A Guide to the Practisers of the Law. In
two Parts. Being a Translation of Law Proceedings in the Courts of King's Bench
and Common Pleas: Containing a Collection of the common Forms; beginning with
the Original, and ending with the Judicial Process. Together with an
historical, as well as practical Treatise on Ejectment. To which is also added,
The Law and Practice of Fines and Recoveies, and several other Precedents; with
some Remarks on the Forms of the Habeas Corpora and Jurata now in Use. In two
Vols


