The Grandeur OF THE LAW: OR, An exact Collection of the Nobility and Gentry of
this Kingdom, whose Honors and Estates have by some of their Ancestors been
acquired or considerably augmented by the Practice of the Law, or Offices and
Dignities relating thereunto.

The Name of such Ancestor, together with the Time in which he Fluorished, the
Society in which he was a Member, and to what Degree in the Law he arrived,
being perticularly expressed.

By H. P. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Arthur Jones at the Flying-Horse near St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, 1684.

TO The RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS Lord GVILFORD, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT SEAL OF
England, etc.
MY. LORD,
THE welfare of Mankind has so necessary a Dependence upon Laws, and the
Administration of Justice, that by the Vote of all Ages, The Profession of the
Law has ever been rank't amongst the most Honorable Callings. Perhaps in the
Judgment of many, it would not have become any Person, less eminent than
Cicero, to have said, Cedant Arma Togae; And yet, if a good Peace be the end
and only justifiable ground of War, and if it be true what Philosophy teaches
us, That the End is always more noble than the Means, I do not well see how the
Consequence will be avoided, in Favor and Preferrence of the Gown. But this
small Treatise has nothing to do with such Polemical Debates; It only designs
to set down, and enumerate those Illustrious Families of our Nation, which have
been raised to Honor and Wealth by the Profession of the Law: The very Nature
of the Subject, does in a manner entitle it to your Lordships Protection, who
are in your self the greatest Example of this kind, and the greatest Ornament
of the Law, in this, or any Age. Others have owed their Preferments in Honor
and Estate to the Law, To which your Lordship is much more a Creditor, than a
Debtor: When we consider your Nobility of Extraction, Eminency of Parts, and
above all, your Inviolable Integrity, we are all bound to confess, that you
brought with you more Honor to the Gown, than you receive from it. But these
great Truths are not fit to be spoken by so mean a Person, as I am who shall be
too much honored in being permitted to lay my self with this small Tribute at
your Lordships Feet, and to make a Profession of being,

My Lord, Your Honors most Obedient and most humble Servant H. Philipps.

TO THE READER.
THE Method I have taken, is first of all to Enumerate so many of the present
Nobility of England, and such Englishmen whose Titles of Honor are in Scotland
and Ireland, (of which there are but few) as by the Study and Practice of our
Laws, eminent Preferments, and Places of Trust and Profit relating thereunto,
are risen and advanced to such their Dignities; and according to the times of
their respective Creations, have placed them with all Circumspection; Yet I do
not insist that they are ranked without any Error, but submit it to the
Judgment of those better read in Matters of that Nature: It may be Objected,
That I ought not to have preferred the Scots and Irish Nobility any otherwise
than according to such English Honors as they are here invested with, and
truly they ought not; but in regard they were but few, I thought it would not
be improper to place them next after our English Nobility according to their
Titles.

The next Degree are the Baronets, which being an Hereditary Title, I have with
the like Care placed them persuant to the Date of their several Patents.

And as to the Knights and Esquires, forasmuch as there is not any material
Precedence claimed or used, I have placed those Degrees promiscuously as they
came to my hands, without the least design or intention of Injury to them or
any of them, and hope it will be so taken.

There have been many Families both of Nobility and Gentry, as have been raised
by the means abovementioned, besides such as I have expressed in this Book,
who are now become Extinct as to their Names, though perhaps their Estates have
been United to some other Families by Daughters and Heirs, but being it is
difficult to point particularly at such Families to whom such Estates were
carri^d, and least it might be offensive, I have not in the least meddled
therewith.

THE NOBILITY.
THE first who laid the Foundation of that Noble, and Flourishing Family of the
Howards, was William Howard, one of the Judges of the Howard.
Court of Common Pleas, in the Reigns of the two first Edwards: From which
William, are directly descended, Henry Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Earl D. of
Norfolk.
of Arundel, Surry, Norfolk and Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England, etc.

James Howard, Earl of Suffolk, and Baron Howard of E. Suffolk.
Walden.

Thomas Howard, Earl of E. Berkshire.
Berkshire, Viscount Andover, and Baron of Charleton.

Charles Howard, Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Morpeth, and E. Carlisle.
Baron Dacres of the North.

Henry Lord Stafford. Son and Ld. Stafford.
Heir to William Howard, Late Lord Viscount Stafford.

Francis Howard, Baron of Ld. Effingham.
Effingham.

And William Lord Howard Ld. Escrick.
of Escrick, with diverse other Honorable Persons of this great Family.

Henry Cavendish, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of New Castle, D. of Newcastle.
Earl of Ogle, Viscount Mansfield, Baron Ogle Bertram of Bothall and Bolesover;
as also William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire, and Baron Cavendish E. of
Devonshire.
of Hardwick, are both descended from Sir John Cavendish Knight, Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of King's Bench, in the Reigns of King Edward the Third,
and Richard the Second.

*Observe, The Earl of Devonshire is the Elder House.

Charles Sackvill Earl of Dorsett E. of Dorsett.
and Middlesex, Baron of Buckhurst, and Lord Cranfield, is descended of an
Ancient Family of that Name in Sussex: But the first who made any considerable
addition to the Estate and Honor, was Sir Richard Sackvill Knight, one of the
Benchers of the Inner Temple, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; and
afterward Under-Treasurer of the Court of Exchequer, whose Son and Heir was
the first Lord Buckhurst.

James Cecill Earl of Salisbury, E. of Salisbury.
Viscount Cranbourne, and Baron of Essendon; as also John Cecill Earl of
Exeter, and Baron E. of Exeter.
of Burleigh, are both Issued in a direct Line, from William Cecill, an eminent
Lawyer of the Society of Gray's Inn, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; in
which Study he made so great a Progress, that (besides many other worthy
Offices) he at last was constituted Lord High Treasurer of England, and created
Baron of Burleigh, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and at his Death, left an
Estate of a prodigious Vallue.

John Edgerton Earl of Bridgewater, E. of Bridgewater.
Viscount Brackley, Baron of Elsmeere, is the Grandson of Thomas Edgerton, a
Natural Son to Sir Richard Edgerton of Ridley in Cheshire Knight, which Thomas
being placed in Lincoln's Inn, to the Study of the Law, so improved himself
therein, that he became, first, Solicitor General to Queen Elizabeth, next,
her Attorney General, then Master of the Rolls, then Lord Keeper, afterward
Lord Chancellor, and last created Baron of Elesmere, and Viscount Brachley,
leaving at his Death, an Estate of his own raising, of at least Eight thousand
pound per Annum.

Edward Rich Earl of Warwick E. of Warwick.
and Holland, Lord Rich of Leez and Kensington, is Lineally descended from Sir
Richard Rich Knight, Reader of the Middle Temple, in the One and twentieth year
of Henry the Eighth, who for his great knowledge in the Law, was made
Solicitor General to that Prince; and afterward in the Reign of King Edward
the Sixth, farther advanced to the Dignity of Lord High Chancellor of England,
and created Baron of Leez Court, obtaining a great share of the Revenues of the
Church to support his Dignity; both which he left to his Son Robert, created
Earl of Warwick.

Charles Montague Earl of Manchester, E. of Manchester.
Viscount Mandevill, and Baron of Kimbolton; Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich,
E. of Sandwich.
Viscount Hitchinbrooke, and Baron of St. Neotts; and Ralph Montague Baron of
Boughton, all persons of great Estates: The foundation whereof, was first laid
by Sir Edward Montague Ld. Montague.
Knight, Sergeant at Law, first, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and
then Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth: He was the Father of Sir Edward Montague Knight, who had Six Sons;
First, Sir Edward, made Lord Montague of Boughton; the Third Son was Sir Henry
Montague of the Middle Temple, London, Knight, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of King's Bench, Lord High Treasurer of England in the
Reign of King James, afterward advanced to the Dignity of the Earl of
Manchesters: The Sixth Son was Sir Sidney Montague Knight, Grandfather to
Edward now Earl of Sandwich.

John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave, E. of Mulgrave.
and Baron of Butterwick, is directly descended from Sir Robert Sheffield of
the Inner Temple, Knight, Recorder of London, and Speaker of the House of
Commons, in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh; which Sir Robert, by his great
knowledge in the Laws of this Kingdom, very much advanced his Family, and
purchased a fair Estate in the County of Lincoln, which is now part of the
Inheritance of the present Earl, who is the Fifth Baron, and Third Earl of the
Family.

Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough, E. of Peter-Borough.
Baron of Turvey, and Charles Lord Viscount Viscount Mordant.
Mordant, are both of them the Descendants of John Mordant of the
Middle Temple, Sergeant at Law, and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, in
the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, who having accumulated a great Estate, was
before his death, made a Peer of this Realm by King Henry the Eighth.

Thomas Weston Earl of Portland, and Baron of Neyland, is E. of Portland.
descended from Richard Weston of the Inner Temple, one of the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who being a younger
Brother, may truly be supposed to be the first advancer of this Family to the
Quality and Estate it now enjoys.

Henry Hide Earl of Clarendon, E. of Clarendon.
Viscount Cornbury, and Baron of Hindon, as also Lawrence Hide Earl of
Rochester, Viscount Kenellworth, and Baron E. of Rochester.
of Wooton Basset, are both of them the Sons of Edward late Earl of Clarendon,
who was bred up in the Middle Temple in the Study of the Law, in which he
arrived to such perfection, that he became first, Chancellor of the Court of
Exchequer, and afterward Lord High Chancellor of England, by means of which
Honorable preferments, it is well known what a Vast Estate he left to his
Posterity.

Robert Brudnell Earl of Cardigan, and Baron Brudnell of E. of Cardigan.
Stanton-Wivell, is direct Heir-Male to Robert Brudnell Esquire;, Sergeant at Law;
and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the time of King Henry
the Eighth, a Man of great Learning in the Laws, and Master of a great Estate,
most of his own acquiring.

Robert Earl of Alesbury, Viscount E. of Alesbury.
Bruce of Ampthill, and Baron of Skeleton, is the Grandson of Edward Bruce
Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James; by whom, the said Edward was
created Baron of Kinloss in Scotland: The place of Master of the Rolls did
doubtless much conduce to the advancement of the Estate which the said Edward
Lord Kinloss had; yet notwithstanding, he was Honorably descended, and enjoyed
an ample Fortune before he executed that Office: but most of it lay in
Scotland, the place of his Nativity.

Anthony Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, E. of Shaftesbury.
Baron Ashly of Wimbourne Saint Giles, and Lord Cooper of Paulett, is the Son
and Heir to Anthony late Earl of Shaftesbury, who, though I cannot say he ever
made it his business to study the Law, yet was he of the Society of
Lincoln's Inn, and by the profits arising out of such Offices as he enjoyed,
relating to the Law, did he greatly augment his Estate, being, first,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and afterward Lord High-Chancellor of England.

Charles Gerrard Earl of Macklesfield, E. of Macklesfield.
Viscount and Baron of Brandon; Digby Lord Gerrard, Baron of Gerrards-Bromley,
Ld. Gerrard
are both descended from that Learned and Judicious Lawyer of Gray's Inn, Sir
Gilbert Gerrard Knight, Attorney General, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, who being a Younger Son of the House of Bryn in Lancashire,
was placed to Study the Law, and thereby laid the first Foundation of those
great Estates and Honors, which in succeeding times accrewed to this spreading
Family.

* The Reader may be pleased to observe, that though the Earl of Macklesfield,
according to his Dignity, be placed before the Lord Gerrard of Bromley, yet the
said Lord Gerrard is of the Elder House.

William Paston Earl and Viscount E. of Yarmouth.
of Yarmouth, and Baron of Oxnead, is descended from Sir William Paston Knight,
one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth. Much might be mentioned to the Antiquity and Greatness of this Worthy
Family, were it not contrary to the method designed.

Daniell Finch Earl of Nottingham, E. of Nottingham.
and Baron of Daventry, is the Grandson of Sir Heneage Finch of the
Inner Temple Knight, Recorder of the City of London, and Son of Sir Heneage
Finch Barronet, a Member of the same Society, who was first, Attorney General
to this King; next, Lord Keeper, then Baron of Daventry, after, Lord High
Chancellor of England, and lastly Earl of Nottingham; which first Sir Heneage
was a younger Branch of the House of Winchelsea, and so consequently it may be
presumed what Estate this Noble Earl now enjoys, was in a great measure
acquired by those two famous Members of the Law. A younger Brother of this
Earl, is that most Ingeneous and Excellent Lawyer, Heneage Finch of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, His now Majesty's Solicitor General; as also William Finch
Esquire; his Brother, a learned Gentleman of the same Socity: Of this Family was
John Finch of Gray's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Charles the first, and for a short
time, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and created Baron of Fordwich
in Kent, but dyed without Issue.

William Brabazon Earl of Mead in Ireland, is the direct E. of Mead.
Heir Male to Sir Roger Brabazon of Estwell in the County of Leicester Knight,
one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward
the first.

Francis Lord Angier, Earl of Longford in Ireland, is descended E. of Longford.
from Francis Angier of Gray's Inn Esquire;, Reader thereof in the Four and fortieth
year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and afterward became Master of the Rolls
in Ireland, where he laid the foundation to this Honor, and the Estate that
attends it.

Horatio Townsend, Lord Viscount Viscount Raynham.
Raynham, and Baron of Lynn-Regis in the County of Norfolk, is descended, by
many worthy Ancestors, from Sir Roger Townsend Knight, Reader of Lincoln's Inn,
who, for his great knowledge in the Law, was called to the Degree of a
Sergeant, and made one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in the
Reigns of King Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh*

Thomas Thynn, Viscount Viscount Weymouth.
Weymouth, and Baron of Warminster, enjoys a very plentiful Estate, as
descended from Sir Egremont Thynn of the Inner Temple, London, Knight, Sergeant
at Law in the Reign of King James; which Sir Egremont did not a little augment
the Estate of his Ancestors, who were before Men of very considerable repute
and Quality.

Christopher Hatton, Viscount Ld. Hatton, Viscount Gretton.
Gretton, and Baron of Kirby, in the County of Northampton, is a Branch of the
Ancient Stem of the Hattons of Cheshire, and is the Heir to Sir Christopher
Hatton Knight, who, from a Student in the Inner Temple, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, did, by his great abillities, and singular knowledge in the Laws,
raise himself to great Honor and Estate by the access of diverse places of
great Profit and Repute, and at last arrived to the highest step of Preferment,
being made Lord High-Chancellor of England; but Dying without Islue, a great
part of his Estate did at length devolve to the Ancestor of this Lord Hatton,
who was Nephew to the said Lord-Chancellor.

William Farefax, Lord Viscount Viscount Farefax.
Farefax of the Kingdom of Ireland, is descended from that famous Lawyer, Sir
Guy Farefax Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the several Reigns of King Edward the Fourth, and Richard the
Third.

Bryen Cockain, Lord Viscount Cullen of the Kingdom of Lord Cullen.
Ireland, whose Seat is at Rushton, in the County of Northampton, is descended,
by a Younger Son, from that famous and Learned Judge, Sir John Cockain, Lord
Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, and afterward one of the Justices of
the Court of Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, which John
had his residence at Ashborn in the Peake, in the County of Derby, where his
Ancestors for many Ages before, and his Successors ever since, continue and
live in great Honor and Esteem.

Charles Mildmay, Lord Fitz Lord. Fitz Walter.
Walter, a person of very Noble Extraction, as descended from the Female Issue
of the Ancient Lords Fitz Walter, and the Ratcliffs Earls of Sussex; and by the
Fathers side, from Thomas Mildmay Esquire;, one of the Auditors of the then new
Erected Court of Augmentations, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Henry Yelverton, Lord Gray Ld. Gray of Ruthyn.
of Ruthyn, is lineally descended from those two Learned Judges, Sir Cristopher
Yelverton of Gray's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
King's Bench, in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, and also from
Sir Henry Yelverton of the same Society Knight, (Son of the said Sir
Chistopher) who was called to the Degree of a Sergeant, and constituted one of
the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, by King Charles the First, in the
beginning of his Reign; both which Eminent persons were the Descendants of Sir
William Yelverton Knight, one of the Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas
in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Vere Cromwell, Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oakeham in England, Ld. Cromwell.
and Earl of Ardglass, Viscount Lecale, etc. in Ireland, is directly descended
from Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, Baron of Oakeham, and Knight of the Garter,
who being a person of no great Extraction, did, by his great knowledge in the
Laws, and other singular accomplishments, first of all obtain the place of
Clerk of the Hannaper, next, Chancellor of the Court of Exchequer, then Master
of the Rolls, after, Lord Privy Seal, and lastly to those Honorable Titles
abovementioned, by the access of which Offices, and by the dissolution of
Religious Houses (in which he acted a considerable part) he did greatly enrich
himself, till at last being Convicted, Attainted and Beheaded for Treason, or
some other great Offense, the Earldome of Essex was thereby lost, and his Son
an Heir only dignified with the said Barony, by a new Creation; and restored to
a considerable part of his Fathers Estate.

William Pagett; Lord Pagett Ld. Pagett.
and Baron of Beudesert in Staffordshire, is descended by many Noble Peers of
this Realm, in a direct course of succession from Sir William Pagett Knight, a
Gentleman very Learned in the Laws, by means whereof he was made one of the
Clerks of the Council, and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, in the
several Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, and afterward
having greatly advanced himself in Estate and Riches, he was created a Baron of
this Kingdom, being at first but a Student in the Inns of Court.

Charles North, Lord North, Ld. North, and Gray.
Baron of Carthlidge, and Lord Gray of Rolleston, is lineally descended from
Edward North Esquire; a Younger Branch of the worthy Family of the Norths of
Walkringham, in the County of Nottingham, which Edward having applied himself
to the Study of the Laws, and thereby made himfelf capable of those honorable
Preferments, to which he afterward arrived, was first, one of the Clerks of
the Council, next, Treasurer and Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations in
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; and lastly made a Peer of this Realm by
Queen Mary.

John Lord Petre, Baron of Writtle in the County of Essex, Lord Petre.
is descended from Sir William Petre Knight, Doctor of the Civil Law, and one
of the Secretaries of State to King Henry the 8th, Edward the Sixth, Queen
Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, and by his great Learning and Honorable
Preferments, became Master of a great Estate, most of which continues to his
Successors at this Day.

Christopher Roper, Lord Tenham, Baron of Tenham in Ld. Tenham.
Kent, is very Honorably descended from a Family of great Antiquity in the
said County, amongst whom was John Roper of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, direct Ancestor
to this Noble Lord; which John being Attorney General to King Henry the Eighth,
and of profound Judgment and Knowledge in the Laws, made a very considerable
Augmentation to the Ancient Inheritance of this worthy Family.

John Lovelace, Lord Lovelace, Ld. Lovelace.
Baron of Hurly in Berkshire, is Descended from that eminent Lawyer, William
Lovelace of Gray's Inn Esquire;, Reader thereof in the fourth Year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and soon after called to the Degree of a Sergeant at Law.

John Lord Coventry, Baron Ld. Coventry*
of Alesbrough in the County of Worcester, enjoys an Estate of vast extent and
worth, as Heir to those two most famous Lawyers of their time, the first of
which was Thomas Coventry of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire; Sergeant at Law,
and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King
James, Father of the no less Learned Thomas Coventry, a Student in the same
Society, who for his great Abillities was, first, Recorder of London, next,
Solicitor, and afterward Attorney General to King James, and lastly, further
advanced to the Dignity of Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England. which
Honorable place, he Executed with great Honor and Justice for the space of
Fifteen years, in the Reign of King Charles the first, And was longer than any
person before, or since his time, ever held the same, and longer he might have
enjoyed it had not Death interposed.

Francis Smyth, Lord Carrington, Ld. Carrington.
and Baron of Woton in Warwickshire; is directly descended from John Smyth,
Esquire; Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which John Dyed, seized of a very plentiful
Estate, most of his own acquiring.

John Lord Colepeper, Baron Ld. Colepeper.
of Thoresway in the County of Lincoln, is lineally descended, by many worthy
Ancestors, and men of great quallity in the County of Kent, from John Colepeper
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in
the Reign of King Henry the Fifth. The Father of this Lord Colepeper was Master
of the Rolls for a short time, till he was divested thereof, for his Loyalty,
by the Parliament, about the year, 1642.

Thomas Crew, Lord Crew, Ld. Crew.
and Baron of Stone in the County of Northampton, is the Grandson and Heir to
Sir Thomas Crew Knight, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law in the Reign of
King Charles the First; which Sir Thomas purchased a very fair Estate in the
County of Northampton, himself being a younger Branch of the Ancient Family of
the Crews of Crew in Cheshire.

A younger Brother of the present Lord Crew, is the Right Reverend Father in
God, Nathaniel Lord Bishop of Durham.

Hugh Clifford, Lord Clifford Ld. Clifford of Chudleigh.
of Chudleigh in the County of Devon, is the Son and Heir to the late famous
and truly honorable Sir Thomas Clifford, Baron Clifford of Chudleigh, who was
of the Society of the Middle Temple, and for his singular Learning and Merits,
was made Lord High-Treasurer of England, which great Trust he faithfully
Executed with all the Justice and integrity imaginable.

Francis Lord North, Baron of Ld. North, Baron of Guilford.
Guilford in the County of Surry, (whose descent from Edward North Esquire;,
Treasurer and Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, I have herein before
expressed) being a younger Son of Dudly, late Lord North, applied himself to
the Study of the Law in the Middle Temple, in which he became so eminent for
his great Learning and Experience, that he was, first, invested with the Honor
of Knighthood, and then constituted his now Most Gracious Majesty's Solicitor
General, after, Attorney General, then one of his said Majesty's Sergeants at
Law, and shortly after Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, from
whence, upon the Death of the late Earl of Nottingham, his Lordship was most
worthily removed to the Dignity of Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, in
which he now continues, Administering Justice and Equity without partiallity, to
the great ease and satisfaction of His Majesty's Subjects, and his own
everlasting Honor.

Henry Lord Farfax, Baron of Ld. Farfax.
Cameron in the Kingdom of Scotland, is descended from that Learned Lawyer, Sir
Guy Farfax Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth; which Sir Guy was
descended of a Family of great Antiquity and Honor in the County of York, in
which his now Lordship's residence is.

Henry Lord Richardson, Baron Ld. Richardson.
of Cramond in the said Kingdom of Scotland, is descended from the late famous
Sir Thomas Richardson of Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, first, Lord
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and thence removed to the same
Dignity in the Court of King's Bench in the Reign of King James; by which
honorable places, and his own great Abillities, he laid a fair foundation to
that Honor and Estate which now attends this Noble Lord.

Henry Hare, Baron of Colerane Ld. Colerane.
in the Kingdom of Ireland, is descended from Sir Nicholas Hare Knight, Reader
of the Inner Temple in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, made Master of the
Rolls in the Reign of Queen Mary, and from Hugh Hare Esquire;, who was Reader of
the same Society in the last Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Thomas Needham, Lord Kilmurry Ld. Kimurry.
of the Kingdom of Ireland is descended from Sir John Needham of Shevington,
Alias Sheinton, in the County of Salop Knight, Sergeant at Law, Chief Justice
of Chester, and one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of
King Henry the Sixth, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the
beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Baronets.
SIR Edmond Bacon of Redgrave Bacon.
in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, (the first of that Dignity within this
Kingdom) is Descended from the famous Sir Nicholas Bacon of Gray's Inn Knight,
Attorney of the Court of Wards, and Liveries, and Lord Keeper of the great Seal
of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; a younger Son of which Sir
Nicholas, was the no less learned Francis Bacon of Gray's Inn aforesaid; a
person singularly read in the Laws, and of incomparable Parts, in respect
whereof, he was Created Baron of Verulam, Viscount, St. Albans, and Lord High
Chancellor of England by King James, which great Honors and Preferments were
soon blasted by some great Offense he committed, during the time he had the
Custody of the Seal, and so became reduced to lead the remainder of his Life in
privacy, at his Chambers in Gray's Inn till his Death, leaving no Issue Male.

Sir Henry Hobart, of Intwood, Hobart.
in the County of Norfolk Baronet, a Gentleman of a very fair Estate in those
parts, is the great Grandson and Heir to Sir Henry Hobart of Lincoln's Inn
Knight and Baronet, Sergeant at Law, Attorney General to King James, and
afterward Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, a person of
profound Judgment and Knowledge in the Laws, as by his Learned works lately
published under the Title of Hobarts Reports, is sufficiently manifested; which
said Reverend Judge was descended by a Younger Son from Sir James Hobart
Knight, Reader of the same Society, and Attorney General to King Henry the
Seventh.

Sir John Shelly, of Michelgrove Shelly.
in the County of Sussex, Barronet, is Descended from William Shelly of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which William did very
considerably augment the Estate of his Ancestors, who for many Ages before had
flourished in this County in great splendour.

Sir Henry Mounson, of Carleton, Mounson.
in the County of Lincoln, and of Broxbourn-Bury, in the County of Hertford
Baronet, of the Ancient Family of the Mounsons of Burton, in the County of
Lincoln, is descended from Robert Mounson, a Learned Lawyer of Gray's Inn,
called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law by Queen Elizaheth, in the beginning
of her Reign, and soon after constituted one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, by which means he made a fair Addition to his Ancient Inheritance.

Sir Philipp Woodhouse of Wilber Hall in the County of Norfolk Woodhouse.
Baronet, is descended by many worthy Ancestors of great honor in this County
from Robert de Woodhouse, Esquire one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign
of King Edward the Third.

Sir Philip Tirwhit, of Kettilby in the County of Lincoln Tirwhit.
Baronet, is descended from Robert Tirwhit Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of
the Justices of both Benches in the several Reigns of King Henry the Fourth,
and Henry the Fifth.

Sir Robert Dallison of Lauton Dallison.
in the County of Lincoln Baronet, is descended from William Dallison of
Gray's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

Sir Thomas Hussy of Hennington, in the County of Lincoln, Hussy.
Baronet, is directly descended from Sir William Hussy of Gray's Inn Knight,
Sergeant at Law, Attorney General to King Edward the Fourth, and afterward
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, in the Reign of the same Prince.

Sir Charles Mordant of Massingham Mordant.
in the County of Norfolk, Baronet, is descended by a younger Branch from John
Mordant Serjant at Law, and Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster in the Reign of
King Henry the seventh, created Lord Mordant of Turvey by King Henry the 8th.

Sir Thomas Spencer of Yarnton, Spencer.
in the County of Oxford, Baronet, (a younger Branch of the Spencers Earls of
Sunderland) had a fair Addition made to his Estate by the access of diverse
Mannours and Lands of great value, given to Sir Thomas his Grandfather, by
Thomas Spencer of Claverdon in the County of Warwick, Esquire; a Lawyer of Eminent
practice and Note in Lincoln's Inn, of which Society he was many years one of
the Governors, or Treasurers, in the Reign of King James.

Sir William Appleton, of Appleton.
South-Bemstead, and great Badow, in the County of Essex, Baronet, is descended
from Thomas Appleton Esquire;, Reader of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King Richard
the Third.

Sir Charles Sedley of Aylesford, Sedley.
and Southfleet in the County of Kent Baronet* is descended from Sir William
Sedley of Lincoln's Inn Knight and Baronet, one of the Benchers of the said
Society in the Reign of King James.

Sir Edward Hales of Woodchurch, Hales.
and Tunstal in the County of Kent Baronet, is descended from James Hales Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and one of the Justices
of the Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.

Sir William Portman of Orchard Portman.
in the County of Somerset, Knight of the Bath, and Baronet, a person of great
Honor and ample Fortune, is descended from William Portman Esquire;, Reader of the
Middle Temple, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Reverend Judges of the
King's Bench, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Wray, of Glentworth Wray.
in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from the Famous and Learned
Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the
Court of King's Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which Sir John lately
terminating in one Daughter and Heir, She by her Intermarriage with George Son
and Heir apparent to George Sanderson, Lord Viscount Castleton of the Kingdom
of Ireland, has annexed avast Estate to that Honorable Family.

Sir William Ayloff, of Ayloff.
Braxted-Magna, in the County of Essex, Baronet, is directly descended from
William Ayloff Esquire;, Reader of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh, and from William Ayloff of the same Society, Esquire; Sergeant at Law in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Christopher Wivel, of Constable-Burton, in the County Wivell.
of York Baronet, (a Family of great Antiquity and repute) is descended from
John de Wivell, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Judges of
the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Third.

Sir Thomas Englefield, of Englefield.
Wooton-Basset, in the County of Wilts, Baronet, is descended from Thomas
Englefield of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Napier of Lewtonhow, Napier.
in the County of Bedford, Baronet, is descended from Sir Robert Napier of the
Middle Temple, London, Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in
Ireland.

Sir Henry Littleton, of Franckley, and Over-Arley, in Littleton.
the County of Worcester, Baronet, is the Eldest Male Branch, directly
descended from the Famous Sir Thomas Littleton, Alias Westcote of Franckley
aforesaid, Knight of the Bath, Author of that Excellent Book, Entitled,
Littleton's Tenures, which Sir Thomas applied himself to the Study of the Law,
in the Inner Temple, wherein he soon arrived to such perfection, that he was
called to the Degree of a Sergeant at Law, (a Dignity in those days esteemed of
at a better rate than it is now usually looked upon) and lastly constituted one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth; this Sir Thomas accumulated a very great Estate, and therewith made
such ample Provisions to advance his Posterity, that few Families in this
Kingdom, now living, do surpass them in Estate and Dignity, as by what I shall
herein after mention of the rest of the Branches thereof, will sufficiently be
Demonstrated.

Sir Edward Philipps of Barrinton, Philipps.
in the County of Somerset Baronet, is directly descended from Sir Edward
Philipps of the Middle Temple London, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Master of
the Rolls (a place of great Honor and Profit) in the Reign of King James.

Sir Henry Newton, alias Puckering of the Priory near Warwick, Newton. alias
Puckering.
in the County of Warwick, and of Charleton in the County of Kent Baronet,
enjoys a great Estate as Heir to the Learned Sir John Puckering of
Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, toward the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir John Boteler of Hatfield-Woodhall Boteler.
in the County of Hatford, Baronet, is descended from John Boteler of
Lincoln's Inn Esque, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Packington, of Packington.
Hampton-Lovett, in the County of Worcester, and of Aylesbury, in the County of
Buckingham, Baronet, is descended from John Packington of the Inner Temple
Esquire;, one of the Kings Sergeants at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
which John greatly advanced his Estate and Family.

Sir Thomas Delves of Duddington, in the County of Delves.
Chester, Baronet, a Family of long continuance in that County, is direct Heir
Male to Sir John Delves Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Sir John Norton of Rotherfield, Norton.
in the County of Southampton, Baronet, is descended from Richard Norton Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, in the
first year of the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Sir Henry Skipwith of Priestwold Skipwith.
in the County of Leicester, Baronet, is descended, through a continued course
of Eminent Ancestors, from William de Skipwith Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of
the Barons of the Exchequer, and also one of the Justices of the Common Pleas
in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Sir Thomas Tempest of Stella, Tempest.
in the Bishopric of Durham, Baronet, is descended from Thomas Tempest, a
Learned Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and twice Reader thereof in the beginning of
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, this Family is of far greater Antiquity in
those Northern parts, than in Henry the 8th's time, though the said Thomas then
did considerably add to the Ancient Inheritance thereof.

Sir John Playters of Sotterly-Hall, in the County of Suffolk Playters.
Baronet, a Person of a very worthy Family; is descended from Thomas Playter
Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and one of the Governors thereof in
the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir John Harpur of Calke, in Harpur.
the County of Derby Baronet, is directly descended from Richard Harpur of
Swarkeston, in the said County, Esquire;, who being brought up to the Study of the
Law in the Inner Temple, became one of the Readers of that Society in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and in a short time after called to the
Degree of a Sergeant at Law, and then made one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas. Of this Family was Sir John Harpur, late of Swarkeston aforesaid,
Knight, who dyed without any Issue Surviving.

Sir Thomas Beaumont of Beaumont.
Grace-dieu, in the County of Leicester, Baronet, (a Younger Branch of the
Ancient Lords Beaumont) is descended from John Beaumount of the Inner Temple
Esquire;, Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and from
Francis Beaumont of the same Society Esquire;, (Son and Heir of the said John)
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Learned Justices of the Court of Common Pleas
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: By which two Eminent Persons was this branch
of that Noble Family very considerably advanced both in Honor and Estate.

Sir Thomas Colepeper of Colepeper.
Preston-Hall, in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from that learned
Lawyer John Colepeper Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Sir Henry Moore of Falley, Moore.
in the County of Berks, Baronet, is the Heir directly descended from Sir
Francis Moore of Falley aforesaid, Knight, Reader of the Middle Temple, and a
Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King James, Author of that elaborate Collection
of Reports, entitled, Moors Reports, some time since made public by the
learned Sir Gefrey Palmer, Knight and Baronet.

Sir Henry Hele of Fleet, in Hele.
the County of Devon, Baronet, is descended from John Hele of the Inner Temple
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, in the several Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James.

Sir Edward Littleton of Littleton.
Pillaton-Hall in the County of Stafford, Baronet, is descended from Richard
Littleton, second Son of the famous and Learned Sir Thomas Littleton, Alias
Westcote, of Franckly in the County of Worcester, Knight of the Bath, Sergeant
at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward
the Fourth, which Richard was also of the Society of the Inner Temple, where he
became very Eminent for his great Judgment in the Law, and thereby, and by his
Intermarriage with Allice Sole, Daughter and Heir to William Winsbury of
Pillaton-Hall aforesaid, Esquire;, together with what Estate the said Sir Thomas
settled upon him, did he leave an ample Estate to his Posterity, who were and
are of as Honorable Esteem as this County affords.

Sir Henry Bacon, of Milden-Hall, Bacon.
and Laund in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, is descended by many Honorable
Ancestors, from John de Bacon, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, in the Sixth Year of the Reign of King Edward the Second, and
from Thomas de Bacon, one of the Learned Judges of the same Court in the Reign
of King Edward the Third.

Sir John Corbett of Stoke, upon Corbett.
Tene and Adderly, in the County of Salop; Baronet, is lineally descended from
Reignald Corbett of the Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Justices of the King's Bench, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Reignald
was a younger Son of Sir Robert Corbett of Moreton Corbett in the said County,
Knight, a Family of great Antiquity in those parts.

Sir Thomas Nitingall of Newport-Pond, in the County of Nitingall.
Essex, Baronet, is descended from Gefrey Nitingall of Gray's Inn, a person very
Eminent for his great Knowledge in the Laws, and Reader of the said Society in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir William Colepeper of Colepeper.
Wakehurst and Ardingly in the County of Sussex, Baronet, is descended, by many
renowned Ancestors, from John Colpeper, one of the Learned Judges of the Court
of Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Sir Thomas Vavasour of Haselwood, Vavasour.
in the County of York, Baronet, is descended from John Vavasour of the
Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, in the Reigns of King Edward the Fourth
and Fifth, after which, he became Reader of the said Society, being the first
that arrived to that Dignity in that House, and in the fifth year of King Henry
the Seventh was constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas: This is a
Family of very long continuance, and great Honor in the County of York for
many Ages before this Learned Judges time, yet did he in a large measure
augment the Estate of his Ancestors.

Sir Charles Wolsely of Wolsely Wolsely*
in the County of Stafford, Baronet, is descended from Ralph Wolsely Esquire;, one
of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir John Anderson of St. Ives, Anderson.
in the County of Huntington, Baronet, is directly descended from the Famous
and Learned Sir Edmond Anderson of the Inner Temple, Knight, Sergeant at Law,
and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the first year of the Reign of
King James, which Sir Edmond was the Author of that Learned Volume of Reports,
Entitled, Anderson's Reports.

Sir Roger Cave of Stanford Cave.
in the County of Northampton, Baronet, a person of a very Honorable and
Ancient Family, who for many Generations have had their Chief Seat and
Residence at Stanford aforesaid, is descended from John de Cave, one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, in the beginning of the Reign of the Victorious
and renowned Prince, King Edward the First.

Sir Oliver Boteler of Teston, Boteler.
in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from John Boteler Reader of
Lincoln's Inn, and called to the Degree of a Sergeant at Law by King Henry the
Seventh, after which, in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth
he was constituted one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

Sir Robert Hatton, of Long Hatton.
Stanton, in the County of Cambridge, Baronet, is descended from Thomas Hatton
Esquire;, Reader of the Middle Temple in the Reign of King Charles the First, a
Branch of the Ancient Family of the Hattons in Cheshire.

Sir Thomas Hare of Stow-Bardolf in the County of Norfolk, Hare.
Baronet, a person of a very fair Estate, is descended from Sir Nicholas Hare
Knight, Reader of the Inner Temple in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and
afterward made Master of the Rolls by Queen Mary.

Sir Roger Norwich of Brompton, Norwich.
in the County of Northampton, Baronet, is descended from Robert Norwich of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Brownlow of Humbey Brownlow.
and Belton, in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, a person of a vast Estate in
those parts, is descended from Richard Brownlow, a Learned Lawyer, and one of
the Benchers of the Inner Temple in the Reign of King James, Author of
Brownlow's Reports.

Sir John Sidenham of Brimpton, Sidenham.
in the County of Somerset, Baronet, is descended by many worthy Ancestors,
from Richard de Sidenham Esquire;, one of the Learned Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, in the Eleventh year of the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Sir Edward Nicholls of Hardwick and Flaxon, in the County Nicholls.
of Northampton, Baronet, is descended from Sir Augustine Nicholls of the
Middle Temple, Knight, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King James, and
Chancellor to King Charles the First whilst he was Prince of Wales.

Sir Hugh Cholmley, alias Cholmondleigh of Whitby, in Cholmley*
the County of York, Baronet, is directly descended from Sir Roger Cholmondley,
of Lincoln's Inn, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of
Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which Sir Roger was descended
by a younger branch from the Cholmondleighs of Cholmondleigh in Cheshire, the
Chief of which is Hugh Lord Viscount Cholmley of Kellis in Ireland, residing at
Cholmley aforesaid.

Sir Thomas Trevor of Tennington Trevor.
Hastings, in the County of Warwick, Knight and Baronet, is descended from Sir
Thomas Trevor Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer
in the Reign of King Charles the First, which Sir Thomas is (as I hear) lately
Dead without Issue Male.

Sir Francis Rhodes of Barlbrough Rhodes.
in the County of Derby, Baronet, is descended from the Learned Sir Francis
Rhodes of Gray's Inn, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Robert Bindloss of Borrick-Hall, Bindloss.
in the Parish of Warton in the County of Lancaster; Baronet, is lineally
descended from William Bindloss, a Famous and Learned Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn,
and one of Her Majesty's Sergeants at Law in the Reign of Queen Mary; which
William left a great Estate to his Posterity.

Sir William Walter of Saresden Walter.
in the County of Oxford, Baronet, is descended from Sir John Walter of the
Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of
Exchequer in the Reign of King James; which Sir John was the Son and Heir to
Edmund Walter Esquire;, a Man of great Judgment in the Law, and diverse times
Reader of the same Society in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by which two
eminent persons, a great part of the Lands and Estate of this Sir William was
Purchased, and annexed to the Ancient Possessions of this worthy Family.

Sir Robert Coke of Longford, Coke.
in the County of Derby, Baronet, is descended by a younger Son, from the
Famous and Profound Lawyer Sir Edward Coke of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant
at Law, Attorney General to King James, and afterward Lord Chief Justice of
the Court of King's Bench, whose Learned and Elaborate Works now extant, and
made public, do sufficiently evidence his great Abilities, and remain as
lasting monuments of Honor to him and his Posterity.

Sir John Gell of Hopton in Gell.
the County of Derby, Baronet, is descended from Anthony Gell, an Eminent
Lawyer of the Inner Temple, Reader, as also one of the Benchers thereof in the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir William Ingilby of Ripley Ingilby.
in the County of York, Baronet, is lineally descended from Thomas Ingilby
Esquire;, one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the
Third; and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Richard
the Second.

Sir John Lowther of White-Haven Lowther.
in the County of Cumberland, and of Sockbridge in the County of Westmorland,
Baronet, a Family of great Antiquity and Honor in those Northern parts, is
descended by many worthy Ancestors of Signal Renown and Quality, from Hugh de
Lowther, Attorney General to King Edward the First, and from Thomas de Lowther,
one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the
Third.

Sir Robert Markham of Sedgebrook Markham.
in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from that Reverend and Learned
Judge, Sir John Markham Knight, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench in the Reign of King
Edward the Fourth; which Sir John Markham was descended from another Sir John
Markham Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
in the several Reigns of King Richard the Second, and Henry the Fourth.

Sir Anthony Thorold of Marston, Thorold.
in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is a person of a very Ancient Family in
this County, and men of great Repute and Honor in their times, amongst whom
was that Learned Lawyer of Gray's Inn, Sir Anthony Thorold Knight, one of the
Readers of the said Society in the Reign of Queen Mary, by which last named Sir
Anthony, was the Estate of this flourishing Family considerably advanced.

Sir William Halton of Samford, in the County of Essex, Halton*
Baronet, is directly descended from Robert Halton of the Inner Temple Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, and Reader of that Honorable Society in the Fifteenth year of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Thomas Littleton of Littleton.
Stoke-Milburge and Munslow, in the County of Salop, and of North Okindon, in
the County of Essex, Baronet, a person of a very ample Fortune, is lineally
descended from Thomas Littleton of Spechley, in the County of Worcester Esquire;,
the third and youngest Son of the deservedly famous, and Learned Judge, Sir
Thomas Littleton of the Inner Temple, Knight of the Bath, Sergeant at Law, and
one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
The Estate of this Sir Thomas Littleton, Baronet, was in a large measure
augmented by the Access of what his Mother annexed thereto, who was, Ann Sole,
Daughter and Heir to that Eminent Lawyer, Edward Lord Littleton, Baron of
Mounslow aforesaid, who (being a younger Son of the Littletons of Spechley
abovementioned,) applied himself to the studies of the Law in the Inner Temple,
and therein arrived to such perfection, that he became first of all, Reader of
that House, then Solicitor General, soon after Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and lastly, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, all in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First; He was
the Author of that Learned Book Entitled Littleton's Reports, lately made
public; and elder Brother of William Littleton Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and to
Sir Timothy Littleton of the Inner Temple Knight, also Sergeant at Law, and
lately one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Chamberlain
Wickham in the County of Oxford, Baronet, is descended from Sir Thomas
Chamberlain of Gray's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Chief Justice of Chester,
from whence he was removed, and constituted one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King James.

Sir Samuel Danvers of Cullworth Danvers.
in the County of Northampton, Baronet, is descended from Robert Danvers, a
Learned and Famous Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, one of the King's Sergeants at Law,
and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of Henry the Sixth.

Sir Richard Anderson of Penley Anderson.
in the County of Hertford, Baronet, is descended from Sir Edmond Anderson
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the
first year of the Reign of King James.

Sir Richard Foster of Stokesly in the County of York, Baronet, Foster.
is descended from William Foster Esquire;, Reader of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, and called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law by Queen
Mary.

Sir Aston Cockain of Ashburn Cockain.
in the Peak in the County of Derby, and of Pooley in the County of Warwick,
Baronet, a Family of great Antiquity in those Counties, perticularly in
Derbyshire, is descended from Sir John Cockain of Ashburne aforesaid, Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of
King Henry the Fourth, as also Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer.

Sir Paul Whichcott of Hendon Whichcott.
in the County of Middlesex, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to Sir Jeremiah
Whichcott of the Inner Temple, Baronet, sometime Warden of the Fleet in His now
Majesty's Reign.

Sir John Bridgeman of Great Leaver in the County of Lancaster, Bridgeman.
and of Castle-Bromwich in the County of Warwick, Baronet, is the eldest Son,
and Heir to the late famous Sir Orlando Bridgeman of the Inner Temple, Knight
and Baronet, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and from thence removed to the dignity of
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; he was the first English man that His
present Majesty advanced to the degree of a Baronet after His most happy
Restoration.

Sir Lewis Palmer of Carleton Palmer.
in the County of Northampton, Baronet, a Gentleman of a very plentiful Estate,
is the Son and Heir to the late worthy Sir Jefrey Palmer of Carleton aforesaid,
and of the Middle Temple, Knight and Baronet, His Majesty's Attorney General, a
person of profound Judgment in the Laws, and of other singular Abilities.

Sir Humphry Winch of Hannes Winch.
in the County of Bedford, and of Harleford in the County of Buckingham,
Baronet, is descended from Sir Humphry Winch of Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant
at Law, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court
of Common Pleas in Ireland, and thence removed to the dignity of one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in England in the Reign of King James.

Sir Thomas Allen of the City of London, Knight and Baronet, Allen.
sometime since Lord Mayor thereof, is descended from John Allen Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law, Reader of Lincolns Inn in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh, and afterward one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

Sir Henry North of Mildenhall North.
in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, a younger branch of the Honorable Family
of the Lord North, is descended from Sir Edward North Knight, who was
Chancellor and Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth, after created Lord North.

Sir Thomas Darcey of St. Cleres Hall in the County of Darcey.
Essex, Baronet, (of the Ancient Family of the Darcies of the North) is
descended from John Darcey of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of
the Readers of that Honorable Society in the Reign of His late Majesty King
James.

Sir Henry Stapleton of Mitton in the County of Tork, Baronet, Stapleton.
is descended by many worthy Ancestors, (who by Marriages were allied to the
best Families in this Kingdom) from Nicholas de Stapleton, a Person of great
Note in the time of Henry the Third, and one of the Justices of the
King's Bench, in the first Year of the Reign of King Edward the First.

Sir Robert Cordell of Long-Melford Cordell.
in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, is descended from Sir William Cordell of
Lincoln's Inn Knight, a person of great Learning and Knowledge in the Laws; in
respect whereof he was called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law by Queen Mary,
and afterward made Master of the Rolls.

Sir William Wray of Ashby in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, Wray.
is a younger Branch, descended from the Famous Sir Christopher Wray Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

Sir George Warburton of Arely-hall Warburton*
in the County of Chester, Baronet, a Family of long continuance, and great
esteem in this County, is descended from Sir Peter Warburton of Lincoln's Inn
Knight, Sergeant at Law in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and one of the Justices
of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King James, a person very eminent
in his time for his great abilities in the Law.

Sir Saint Andrew Saint John of Woodford in the County of St. John.
Northampton, Baronet, is descended from Oliver St. John of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;,
a man of great Prudence and Learning, who was Attorney General to King Charles
the First, in the year One thousand six hundred and forty, and afterward Lord
Chief Justice of the Upper Bench (as it was then termed) in the time of the
late unhappy Usurpation.

Sir Andrew Henly of Bramsell Henley.
in the County of Somerset, Baronet, is descended from Sir William Henley
Knight, one of the Readers of Gray's Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir William Ellis of Wyham in the County of Lincoln, a Ellis.
Gentleman of a very great Estate, is the Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Ellis
Baronet, and Nephew and Heir to the late Famous and Learned Judge, Sir William
Ellis of Gray's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and several times one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in His now Majesty's Reign: Both which,
Sir Thomas, and Sir William, were the descendants of another Sir William Ellis
Knight, who was also one of the Readers of Gray's Inn in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

Sir Robert Hales of Beaksbourne Hales.
in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from James Hales Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.

Sir Thomas Vernon of Hodnett in the County of Salop, Baronet, Vernon.
is descended from George Vernon of the Inner Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one
of the Readers of the said Society, afterward one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, and lastly, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of
King James.

Sir Robert Leicester of Nether Leicestar.
Tabley in the County of Chester, Baronet, a person of a very fair Estate, and
great Antiquity in those parts, is descended, by many Honorable Ancestors,
from Roger de Leicester, one of the Barons of the Exchequer toward the later
end of the Reign of King Edward the First.

Sir John Knightly of Off-Church in the County of Warwick, Knightly.
Baronet, enjoys the Lordship of Off-Church, and other Lands of good worth in
that County, as Heir to Sir Edmond Knightly of the Middle Temple, Knight, a
Learned Sergeant at Law, and one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth; which Sir Edmond was a younger Son to Sir Richard
Knightly of Fawsely in the County of Northampton Knight.

Sir John Bowyer of Knipersley Bowyer.
in the County of Stafford, Baronet, a person of a very ample Fortune in those
parts, is descended from John Bowyer Esquire;, of great judgment in the Laws, and
several times Reader of Lincoln's Inn, as also many years one of the Governors
thereof, in the several Reigns of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Felix Wild of St. Clement Wild.
Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to Sir William
Wild Knight and Baronet, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of the City of London, and
lately one of the Learned Justices of the Court of King's Bench.

Sir John Wroth of Blendenhall Wroth.
in the County of Kent, Baronet, is descended from Robert Wroth of Gray's Inn
Esquire; Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, in the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Anderson of Broughton Anderson.
in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended from the memorable Sir Edmond
Anderson of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas for Twenty years together in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and
so continued for some time in the Reign of King James.

Sir Edward Ward of Bexley Ward.
in the County of Norfolk, Baronet, is descended from Richard Ward of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Reader, as also Treasurer of that Society in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Jackson of Hickleton Jackson.
in the County of York, Baronet, is descended from Sir James Jackson Knight,
one of the Readers of the Inner Temple in the beginning of the Reign of King
James.

Sir William Rookeby of Skyers Rookeby.
in the County of York. Baronet, is descended from Ralph Rookeby Esquire;, an
Eminent Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and twice Reader thereof in the beginning of
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Walter Ernley of Itchilhampton and Salisbury in the Ernley.
County of Wilts, Baronet, is descended from Sir John Ernley Knight, Solicitor
General to King Henry the Eighth; by whom (in the Tenth year of his Reign) he
was advanced to that great dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas.

Sir Compton Read of Burton Read.
in the County of Berks, Baronet, is descended from John Read Esquire;, Sergeant at
Law in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.

Sir Walter Henly of Lunchfield Henley.
in the County of Sussex, Baronet, is descended by a younger Son from Sir
William Henley Knight, a Learned Lawyer of Gray's Inn, and one of the Readers of
that House in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Charles Golding of Colston-Bassett Golding.
in the County of Nottingham, This Sir Charles Golding is not properly placed;
for in point of Precedence, he ought to stand next above Sir Thomas Littleton
of Stoke-Milburge, Baronet.
Baronet, a person of great integrity and worth, is descended from Robert
Golding Esquire;, a Learned Bencher of the Inner Temple, and several times Reader
of that Honorable Society in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Charles Gaudy of Crowshall Gaudy.
in the County of Suffolk, Knight and Baronet, is descended from two eminent
persons of great knowledge and learning in the Laws, and both Readers in the
Inner Temple, the one was Sir Thomas-Gawdy Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of
the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and the other
was Francis Gaudy Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court
of Common Pleas in the Reign of King James.

Sir John Curson of Waterpirry Curson.
in the County of Oxon, Baronet, (a Family of great honor and esteem) is
descended from Robert Curson Esquire;, Reader of the Society of Lincolns Inn in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and afterward made one of the Barons of the
Court of Exchequer by King Edward the Sixth, in the beginning of his short
Reign.

Sir William Glyn of Amersden near Bisseter, alias Burncester, Glyn.
in the County of Oxon, and of Hawarden Castle in Flintshire, Baronet, is the
Son and Heir to that famous and wealthy Lawyer, John Glyn of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Upper Bench in the time of the
late unhappy troubles in this Kingdom.

Sir Robert Brook of Netton, in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, Brook.
is descended from another Sir Robert Brook Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the
Readers of the Middle Temple, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Mary.

Sir Henry Andrews of Lathbury Andrewe.
in the County of Bucks, Baronet, is descended from Eusebius Andrews Esquire;, one
of the Governors of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King James; and one of the
Readers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the first.

Sir Henry Dereham of West-Dereham in the County of Dereham.
Norfolk, Baronet, a Family of long continuance there, is descended, by many
honorable Ancestors, men of singular esteem and reputation, from Thomas
Dereham Esquire;, a person of profound Learning in the Laws, and Attorney General
to King Henry the Fourth.

Sir Thomas Sylyard of Dela-Ware in the County of Kent, Sylyard.
Baronet, is descended from John Sylyard of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law,
and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Richard the
Third, and from William Sylyard Esquire;, (Son of the said John) a person of
eminent repute for his great abilities in the Law, and one of the Treasures of
that honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn for many years, in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth.

Sir Charles Hussy of Gaythorpe in the County of Lincoln, Hussy.
Baronet, is a descendant of the famous Sir William Hussy of Graies-Inn
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench in
the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir John Banks of Ailesford in the County of Kent, Baronet, Banks.
is descended from Sir John Banks of Grayes-Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King James.

Sir Henry Ingoldsby of Lethenborow Ingoldsby*
in the County of Bucks, Baronet, is descended from John Ingoldsby Esquire;, one of
the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir Walter Young of Colliton in the County of Devon, Baronet, Young.
is descended from Thomas Young Esquire;, a Learned Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir Thomas Wyndham of Orchard Wyndham in the County Wyndham.
of Somerset, Knight and Baronet, is descended from Francis Wyndham of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the One and twentieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth;
from which Francis, did also descend the late Learned and Loyal Wadham Wyndham
of Lincoln's Inn aforesaid Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and made one of the Judges of
the Court of King's Bench by His now Majesty, soon after his happy Restoration.

Sir John Southcott of Witham Southcott.
in the County of Essex, and of Bliborrow in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is
descended from John Southcott of the Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one
of the Readers of that House, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the
Reign of Queen Mary.

Sir Richard Bacon of Gillingham in the County of Norfolk, Bacon.
Baronet (Brother and Heir to Sir Edmond Bacon, Baronet, lately deceased) is a
younger branch, descended from the late memorable Sir Nicholas Bacon of
Grayes-Inn Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, which Sir Nicholas was descended from Thomas de Bacon, one of
the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Sir Miles Stapleton of Carleton, Stapleton.
in the County of York, Baronet, (a Family of great Honor and Antiquity in the
North) is descended from Nicholas de Stapleton, one of the Judges of the Court
of King's Bench in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the First.

Sir John Bernard of Brampton Bernard.
in the County of Huntington, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to Sir Robert
Bernard Knight and Baronet, a person very famous for his great Judgment in the
Laws of this Kingdom, in respect whereof, he was called to the degree of a
Sergeant by His now Majesty, in the first year of His most happy Reign.

Sir James Long of Draycott-Cerne Long.
in the County of Wilts, Baronet, is the Heir both to the Honor and Estate of
Sir Robert Long of the City of Westminster, Baronet, deceased, late Auditor
General of the Court of Exchequer.

Sir George Reeve of Thwaites in the County of Suffolk, Knight Reeve.
and Baronet, is descended from Edmond Reeve Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and Reader
of Grayes-Inn in the Reign of King Charles the First.

Sir Thomas Brogave of Hammels, in the County of Hertford, Brograve.
Baronet, is descended from Sir John Brograve of Grayes-Inn Knight, one of the
Readers thereof, and Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth and King James.

Sir William Cook of Bromhall Cook.
in the County of Norfolk, Baronet, is descended from William Cook Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Readers of the Honorable Society of Grayes-Inn
in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and afterward made a Judge of the
Common Pleas by King Edward the Sixth.

Sir William Gaudy of West-Herting in the County of Norsolk, Gaudy.
Baronet, is descended from that excellent Lawyer, Sir Thomas Gaudy Knight, one
of the Readers of the Inner Temple, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
afterward called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law, and constituted one of
the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

Sir Robert Barnham of Boughton-Montchensey Barnham,
in the County of Kent, Baronet, a Family of Signal Esteem, great Antiquity,
and an ample Estate, is descended from Sir Walter Barnham Knight, Lord Chief
Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Sir George Selby of Whitehouse in the Bishopric of Durham, Selby.
Baronet, is descended, through a continued course of Eminent Ancestors in that
Northern Tract, from William de Selby, Attorney General to King Edward the
first in the beginning of his Reign.

Sir Edmond Fortescue of Fortescue.
Fallowpitt, in the County of Devon, Baronet, is descended from Lewis
Fortescue, one of the Readers of the Middle Temple, as also a Sergeant at Law,
and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the latter end of the Reign
of King Henry the Eighth, which said Lewis was a younger Son of the Ancient and
Flourishing Family of the Fortescues of the West.

Sir John Tempest of Tongue in the County of York, Baronet, Tempest.
an Ancient Family in the North, is descended from Thomas Tempest, a famous
Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and diverse times Reader of that Society in the
beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Littleton Osbaldeston of Osbaldeston.
Chadlington, in the County of Oxon, Baronet, is descended from Richard
Osbaldeston a person of eminent practice and great Judgment in the Law, and
Reader of Grays Inn in the beginning of the Reign of his late Majesty, King
Charles the First.

Sir Gyles Tooker of Maddington, Tooker.
in the County of Wilts, Baronet, is descended from Gyles Tooker, one of the
Readers, and one of the Governors of Gray's Inn in the beginning of the Reign of
King James.

Sir Stephen Anderson of Eyworth, Anderson.
in the County of Bedford, Baronet, is a descendant of the truly Honorable and
Learned Sir Edmond Anderson of the Inner Temple, Knight, Sergeant at Law, who
for above twenty Years successively in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and for
sometime in the Reign of King James, sat in that great place of Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas.

Sir Thomas Tailor of Parkhouse in the County of Kent, Tailor.
Baronet, is descended from Edward Yayler Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, in the Reign
of King Charles the First.

Sir Phillip Tyrell of Hanslape Tyrell.
and Castlethorpe, in the County of Bucks, Baronet, is descended from Sir
Thomas Tyrell of Castlethorpe aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple, Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, in the beginning
of his now Majesty's Reign.

Sir Abell Barker of Hambledon, in the County of Rutland, Barker.
Baronet, is descended from Richard Barker Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer of Gray's Inn,
and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Anthony Shirly of Preston, Shirly.
in the County of Sussex, Baronet, is descended from that Eminent Lawyer, Sir
George Shirly Knight, Reader of the Middle Temple, and afterward Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of King's Bench in Ireland in the Reign of King James;
which Sir George was a Branch of the Ancient Family of the Shirlyes of Shirly
in Derbyshire, Nether Ettendon in Warwickshire, and Stanton Harrold in
Leicestershire, all which Lordships, with many more, are now the Inheritance of
Robert Shirly, Lord Ferrers of Chartly.

Sir Goddard Nelthrope of Nelthrope*
Burton, in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to Sir John
Nelthrope Baronet, a Lawyer of very considerable note, and of the Society of
Gray's Inn in His now Majesty's Reign.

Sir Roger Twisden of Bradburne near East-Malling, in the Twisden.
County of Kent, Baronet, is the Son and Heir to the late Reverend and Learned
Judge, and most Excellent Lawyer, Sir Thomas Twisden of the Inner Temple, and
of Bradburne aforesaid, Knight and Baronet, Sergeant at Law, and for above
Twenty years together one of the Justices of the King's Bench, till through the
greatness of Age, and the infirmities of his Body, he obtained His Majesty's
leave to retire from the Affairs of the Bench, and spend the short remainder of
his days in Peace, whereupon he betook himself to a private Life at his Manor
of Bradburne, and there soon expired, in the Eighty first year of his Age.

Sir Gilbert Gerrard of Fiskerton, Gerrard.
in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, is descended by a younger Son from Sir
Gilbert Gerrard of Gray's Inn Knight, Reader thereof in the Reign of Queen Mary,
and afterward made Attorney General, and Master of the Rolls by Queen
Elizabeth.

Sir Roger Martyn of Long-Melford, Martyn.
in the County of Suffolk, Baronet, is descended from Roger Martyn Esquire;, one of
the Rea^ers, as also one of the Governors of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King
Henry the Seventh.

Sir Orlando Bridgeman of Ridley, in the County of Chester, Bridgeman.
Baronet, is the second Son to the late famous Sir Orlando Bridgeman of the
Inner Temple, Knight and Baronet, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas, and lastly Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England;
which said Sir Orlando the Father was descended from John Bridgeman of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Chief Justice of Chester in the Reign of King James.

Sir Francis Wyndham of Trent, Windham.
in the County of Somerset, Baronet, is descended from Francis Wyndham Esquire;, a
Learned and profound Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, called to the degree of a Sergeant
at Law, and constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas by Queen
Elizabeth.

Sir Arthur Onslow of West-Clandon Onslow.
in the County of Surry, Baronet, (in revection expectant upon the Death of Sir
Thomas Foot Baronet) is descended from Richard Onslow Esquire;, a Reader of the
Inner Temple in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which Richard
was a Branch of the ancient Stock of the Onslowes of Shropshire.

Sir Thomas Rich of Sonden, in Rich.
the County of Essex, Baronet, is descended from Sir Richard Rich, Knight,
Reader of the Middle Temple, and Solicitor General to King Henry the Eighth;
afterward created Baron Rich of Leez in Essex, and constituted Lord High
Chancellor of England by King Edward the Sixth.

Sir Jobn Hoskins of Harwood Hoskins.
in the County of Hereford, Baronet, one of the Masters of the High Court of
Chancery, is descended from Bennet Hoskins Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer, and one of
the Readers of the Middle Temple, in the Reign of King Charles the First.

Sir Francis Willoughby of Willoughby.
Wollaton-Hall, in the County of Nottingham, and of Middleton, in the County of
Warwick, Baronet, is directly descended from Sir Thomas Willoughby of Lincolns
Inn, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: which said Sir Thomas was a
younger Son to Christopher Lord Willoughby of Eresby, and married with the only
Daughter and Heir to Sir Robert Read Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, from which
said Sir Thomas, descended Sir Percevall Willoughby Knight, who in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, did intermarry with one of the Daughters and Heirs to Sir
Francis Willoughby then of Wollaton aforesaid, Knight, descended from Sir
Richard de Willoughby Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the
Reign of King Edward the Third.

Sir John Newdigate of Erdbury, in the County of Warwick, Newdigate.
Baronet, is Son and Heir to the late Famous and Wealthy Sir Richard Newdigate
of Erdbury and Lincoln's Inn, Baronet, Sergeant at Law, who was lineally
descended from John Newdigate, Reader of the same Society in the Reign of King
Henry the Seventh, and made a Sergeant at Law by King Henry the Eighth.

Sir James Poole of Poole, in the County of Chester Baronet, Poole
a person of singular Repute and Worth, and of a very Honorable Family in this
County, is descended from Ralph Pool Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Sir Thomas Skipwith, of Skipwith.
Methringham, in the County of Lincoln, and of Gray's Inn, Knight and Baronet,
Sergeant at Law, a Gentleman of an excellent Family, is descended from William
de Skipwith Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the
Third.

Sir Roger Bradshaw of Haigh in the County of Lancaster, Bradshaw.
Knight and Baronet, is descended from Henry Bradshaw of the Inner Temple Esquire;,
one of the Readers thereof, Attorney General, and Lord Chief Baron of His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, branched
out of the Ancient Family of Bradshaw of Bradshaw in the said County.

Sir Thomas Parkins of Bonney Parkins.
in the County of Nottingham, Baronet, is lineally descended from Richard
Parkins of the Inner Temple Esquire;, Recorder of the Towns of Leicester and
Nottingham, and a Lawyer of great Note in those Counties, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

Sir John Crook of Shilton in Crook.
the County of Buckingham, Baronet, is descended from Sir John Crook of the
Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of the City of London, Speaker
of the House of Commons, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the
Reign of King James.

The time of the Creation of this Sir John to the Dignity of a Baronet, I
cannot at present find; and therefore I place him here till I can be certified
of his due precedencey.

Sir Thomas Gascoigne of Barnbow Gascoigne.
in the County of York, Baronet of Scotland, is descended, by many renowned
Ancestors, persons of great Interest in those parts, from the famous Sir
William Gascoigne of Gray's Inn, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice
of the King's Bench, in the Second year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.

Sir John Lowther of Lowther-Hall Lowther.
in the County of Westmorland, and of Newton-Reigney in the County of
Cumberland, Baronet of Scotland, is descended from Thomas de Lowther; one of
the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Knights.
THE Right Honorable Mountague.
Sir William Mountague of Croft in the County of Lincoln, Knight, and of the
Honorable Society of the Middle Temple, Sergeant at Law, formerly Attorney
General to Her most Gracious Majesty Queen Katharine, and at this time Lord
Chief Baron of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, having been most worthily
advanced to that great dignity in April 1676. and there sat with great Honor
and Prudence in the worst of times, executing the trust reposed in him with
that equality and Justice, that the poisonous Tongues of factious and
malevolent persons (of late so forward in aspersing His Majesty's Ministers of
public Justice) never once found the least imaginary foundation whereby they
might vent their malice upon this Honorable person, honorable in his place
of Judicature, but much more in Blood, as being the Son of Edward, and Brother
of Edward, both late Lords Mountague of Boughton, and great Grandson to that
famous Lawyer, Sir Edward Mountague of the Middle Temple Knight, Serjant at
Law, and Lord Chief Justice of both Benches in the Reign of King Henry the 8th,
and Edward the Sixth, being first of the King's Bench, and then of the Common
Pleas.

Sir John Ernley of Buriton in the County of Wilts, Ernley.
and of Much-Marcle in the County of Hereford, Knight, sometime since
Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of the Court of Exchequer, and at present one of
the Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, is descended from Sir John Ernley
of Gray's Inn Knight, Solicitor General to King Henry the Seventh, and
afterward in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, he was
created a Sergeant at Law, and made Attorney General to that Prince, and
afterward Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.

Sir Hugh Wyndham of Sylton Wyndham.
in the County of Dorset, and of Lincoln's Inn Knight, was called to the degree
of a Sergeant at Law in the year 1653. but not owning the Authority whereby he
was so called, His present Majesty, in the first year of his most happy
Restoration, directed his Writ to this great and famous Lawyer, to call him to
the said dignity; after which, in the year 1672. he was made one of the Barons
of the Exchequer, where he sat Two years, and then was further advanced to the
Common Pleas, and continues one of the Justices of that Court to this day: He
is descended from Francis Wyndham of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, a person of great
Learning and Judgment in the Law; in respect whereof, the said Francis was
first made a Sergeant, and afterward one of the Justices of the King's Bench in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: Which said Sir Hugh Wyndham is like to terminate
in Two Daughters and Heirs, who are very honorably advanced in Marriage, the
one to John Digby the present Earl of Bristol, and the other to Sir Nathaniel
Napper of Dorsetshire, Knight and Baronet.

The Reverend Sir Job Charleton Charleton.
of Whitton in the County of Sallop, Knight, Sergeant at Law, lately Chief
Justice of Chester, and now one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas,
is descended of the Ancient and Honorable Family of the Charletons of
Shropshire, who deduce their descent from Sir Robert de Charleton Knight, a
person of profound Judgment and Knowledge in the Law, and Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Second.

The Honorable Sir Edward Atkins.
Atkins of Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, is a younger Son of that Eminent Lawyer Sir
Edward Atkins Knight, Sergeant at Law, Reader of the said Honorable Society in
the Reign of King Charles the First, and afterward one of the Barons of the
same Court; which Sir Edward the Father, was the Son and Heir of Richard Atkins
Esquire;, Reader of that House in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and Chief Justice
of North Wales; and the Son and Heir to Thomas Atkins Esquire;, another Learned
Member of Lincoln's Inn, and twice Reader thereof, in the Reigns of King Henry
the Eighth and Edward the Sixth.

Sir Richard May of the City May.
of Chichester, in the County of Sussex, Knight, now the puisne Baron of the
Exchequer, is descended from Sir Humphry May Knight, Master of the Rolls in the
Reign of King Charles the first.

Sir Robert Sawyer of the Inner Temple, Sawyer.
and of Lawrence Waltham in the County of Berks, Knight, His Majesty's Attorney
General, whose great Loyalty, and profound Judgment and Abilities in the Law,
are sufficiently conspicuous to the World, by his prudent management of Affairs
of great import to his Prince, and courageously effecting the same, in a time
when Fidelity and Loyalty were branded with reproach and Infamy; and to serve
His Majesty, was looked upon as a disservice to his people, by such whose
endeavors tended wholly to the subversion of all Civil Government and Society:
Notwithstanding which, and the affronts of the Faction, did this most worthy
Gentleman faithfully adhere to the Service of his Prince in those distracted
times. He is the Son and Heir of Sir Edmond Sawyer of the same Society, Knight,
deceased, late one of the Auditors of the Court of Exchequer.

Sir John Franklyn of Lincoln's Inn Franklyn.
Knight, one of the Masters of the Honorable Court of Chancery, is descended
from Nicholas Franklyn Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer of that Society, and one of the
Readers thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First.

Sir Robert Henley of Northington in the County of Southampton, Henley.
and of the Inner Temple, Knight, Master of the Kings-Bench-Office, a Place of
great Honor and Profit, is descended from Sir William Henley Knight, Reader of
Gray's Inn, and a person very eminent for his great Learning in the Laws, in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Heath of Brastead Heath.
in the County of Kent, and of the Inner Temple Knight, His Majesty's Attorney
General of the Duchy of Lancaster, is descended from that great Lawyer Sir
Robert Heath Knight, one of the Readers of that House, and Solicitor General to
King James; after which, in the Reign of King Charles the First, he was
Recorder of the City of London, Attorney General to that Prince, who called him
to the dignity of a Sergeant at Law, and then advanced him to the Honor of
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

Sir Edward Turner of Little Turner.
Paringdon, and Hollingbury in the County of Essex Knight, is the Son and Heir
to the late Famous and Learned Judge, Sir Edward Turner of Little Parringdon
aforesaid, and of the Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer,
which Sir Edward was the Son and Heir to Arthur Turner of the same Society
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and he the second Son of Edward Turner of Paringdon
aforesaid, and of the Middle Temple Esquire;, a person very Eminent for his
Learning and practice in the Law, in the Reign of King James.

Sir William Scroggs of Southweal, Scroggs*
in the County of Essex, and of the Society of Gray's Inn, Knight, one of His
most Gracious Majesty's Council, Learned in the Laws, is the Son and Heir
apparent to the Learned and Memorable Sir William Scroggs of the same Society,
Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, and
thence removed to that great Honor of Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
King's Bench, where he sat not long, but the clamours of the Faction, backed by
some haughty Members of the House of Commons, found a means to get him removed
from the said Dignity, nor would their malice have ended there, had not the
Dissolutions of those hot Spirited men so fortunately ensued, whereby his
Enemies became dispersed.

Sir Robert Atkins of Sapperton, Atkins*
in the County of Gloucester, of Totteridge, in the County of Middlesex, and of
Lincoln's Inn, Knight of the Honorable order of the Bath, Sergeant at Law,
lately Recorder of the City of Bristol, and before that time one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, is the Son and Heir to Sir Edward Atkins
Knight, Sergeant at Law, Reader of Lincoln's Inn in his late Majesty's Reign,
and since one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, soon after this Kings
most happy Restoration.

Sir John Brampston of Screnes, in the County of Essex, Knight Brampston.
of the Bath, and High Steward of the Burough of Malden, is directly descended
from that able Lawyer, Sir John Brampston Knight, one of the Readers of the
Middle Temple, in the Reign of King James, by whom he was called to the Degree
of a Sergeant at Law, and by King Charles the First advanced to the place of
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.

Sir Francis Popham of Little Popham.
coat, in the County of Somerset, Knight of the Bath, a person of a very
plentiful Fortune, and a worthy Family, is descended from that Eminent and
Judicious Lawyer, Sir John Popham of the Middle Temple, Knight, Reader of that
Society, Sergeant at Law, Solicitor and Attorney General to Queen Elizabeth,
who afterward made him Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, which great
Trust was also reposed in him by King James.

Sir Edward Sylyard of Wetherden Sylyard.
in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended, through many Honorable
Ancestors, from John Sylyard of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers of that
House in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, by whom he was called to the
degree of a Sergeant at Law, and by King Richard the Third made one of the
Justices of the Court of King's Bench, whose Son and Heir William Sylyard Esquire;,
was an Eminent and Learned Lawyer of the said Honorable Society, and for many
years one of the Benchers and Governors thereof, in the beginning of the Reign
of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Robert Howard of Vasterne, in the County of Wilts, Howard.
and of St. Margarets Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, Knight, (of the
Noble Blood of the Howards, and a younger Branch of the House of Berkshire) is
descended from the Learned William Howard Esquire;, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reigns of King Edward the First and Second.

Sir Thomas Yarborough of Snaith, in the West Riding of Yarborough.
Yorkshire, Knight, a person of a very plentiful Fortune in those parts, is
descended from Francis Yarborough Esquire;, a famous Lawyer of Lincolns Inn, and
one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir William Hoskins of Oxtead, Hoskins.
in the County of Surry, Knight, is descended from John Hoskins of the
Middle Temple Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof, and called to the degree of a
Sergeant by King James.

Sir Nevill Catlyn of Darsham-Hall, Catlyn.
in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended from Richard Catlyn Esquire;,
Reader of Lincoln's Inn, and made a Sergeant at Law by Queen Mary. A
Contemporary with this Richard; and of the same Society and Family was that
profound Lawyer, Sir Robert Catlyn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, who leaving one only Daughter and Heir, She by her
intermarriage with Sir John Spencer of Althorpe in the County of Northamptom,
and of Wormleighton, in the County of Warwick, Knight, annexed a considerable
estate to that worthy Family, from whom Robert Spencer the present Earl of
Sunderland, and Mr. Spencer of Ashton in Lancashire are lineally descended.

Sir Richard Ingoldsby of Walridge, Ingoldsby.
in the County of Bucks, Knight of the Bath, is descended from John Ingoldsby
Esquire;, a person very well read in the Laws, and one of the Barons of the Court
of Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir Thomas Engham of Godmingston, Engham.
in the County of Kent, Knight, is descended from Ralph de Hengham or Engham,
one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in the Reigns of King-Henry
the Third and Edward the First.

Sir Thomas Harvey of the Harvey.
Town of St. Edmonds-bury, in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended from
the late famous and profound Lawyer, Sir Francis Harvey Knight, Sergeant at
Law, one of the Readers of the Middle Temple in the Reign of King James, and
afterward one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

Sir Thomas Forster, of Egham, Forster.
in the County of Surry, Knight, is descended from William Forster Esquire;, Reader
of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, after which, in respect
of his great Learning and Abilities, he was made a Sergeant at Law.

Sir Thomas Estcourt of St. Dunstans in the West, London, Estcourt.
and of Pinckney, in the County of Wilts, Knight, is the Son and Heir to Sir
Thomas Estcourt Knight deceased, late one of the Masters of the Hononrable
Court of Chancery, who was descended from Edmond Estcourt Esquire;, one of the
Benchers of Lincoln's Inn, and Reader thereof in the Reign of King James.

Sir George Crook of Waterstocke, Crook.
in the County of Oxon, Knight, is the lineal Heir, and Eldest male branch,
descended from the Learned Sir John Crook of Waterstocke aforesaid, Knight,
and of the Middle Temple, Sergeant at Law, Speaker of the House of Commons,
Recorder of the City of London, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in
the Reign of King James.

Sir Nicholas Bacon of Shrubland Bacon.
Hall, in the County of Suffolk, Knight of the Honorable order of the Bath, is
descended, by a younger Son, from that famous Lawyer, Sir Nicholas Bacon of
Gray's Inn, Knight, Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Lord Keeper
of the great Seal of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Thomas Stephens of Little Stephens.
Sadbury, in the County of Gloucester Knight, a person of a signal Repute and an
ample Fortune, is descended from Thomas Stephens Esquire;, an Eminent Practicer in
the Law, and Attorney General to Henry Prince of Wales, after whose Decease he
Executed the like Office to Prince Charles, (afterward King Charles the First.)

Sir Francis Brampston of the Middle Temple, Knight, Sergeant Brampston.
at Law, one of the Readers of that Society, and lately one of the Barons of
the Court of Exchequer, is also descended from Sir John Brampston Knight, one
of the Readers of that Honorable House, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law,
and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Charles the
First.

Sir Bulstrode Whitlocke of Chilton Park, in the County Whitlocke.
of Wilts, Knight; a person of an ample Fortune, is the Son and Heir to
Bulstrode Whitlocke of the Middle Temple Esquire;, a man of great Note in the late
miserable distractions of this Kingdom, being one of the Commissioners of the
great Seal, and one of the prime favorers of the Factions so predominant in
those unhappy Days, he being commonly called Bulstrode Lord Whitlock.

Sir Henry Wood of Lowdham-Hall, VVood.
in the County of Suffolk, Knight, of an Ancient and worthy Family in that
County, is descended from the Learned Sir Thomas Wood Knight, Sergeant at Law,
and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh.

Sir Edward Ascough of North Ascough.
Kelsey, in the County of Lincoln, Knight, High Sheriff of the said County, is
directly descended, by many worthy Ancestors, from Sir William Ascough Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the
Reign of King Henry the Sixth; by which Sir William, was this worthy Family
greatly advanced.

Sir John Pooley of Boxtead, in the County of Suffolk Knight, Pooley.
a Family of great Antiquity and Esteem in that County, a great advancer
whereof was John Pooley, a Learned Lawyer, and one of the Readers of Grayes-Inn
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Lineal Ancestor to this Honorable person.

Sir John Knivet of Ketringham Knivet.
in the County of Norfolk, Knight of the Bath, is descended from John Knivet
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, first, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas,
and afterward constituted Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench by King Edward
the Third.

Sir John Clopton of Clopton, Clopton.
in the County of Warwick, Knight, a Family of Eminent quallity, and long
continuance at Clopton aforesaid, is descended from Walter de Clopton Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Edward the Third, and advanced to the
Dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench by King Richard the Second.

Sir John Coventry of Pit-Minster, Coventry.
in the County of Somerset, and of Mere in the County of Wilts, Knight of the
Honorable Order of the Bath, is descended from Thomas Coventry of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas
in the Reign of King James's Father, of the Famous Thomas Lord Coventry, first
a Member of the said Society, and afterward Lord Keeper of the great Seal.

Sir Henry Fitz-James of Fitz James.
in the County of Essex, Knight, is descended from John Fitz-James of the
Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of
Exchequer in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,

Sir Robert Crook of Chekers, Crook.
in the County of Bucks, Knight, is a Branch of the Honorable Family of the
Crooks of Waterstocke in Oxfordshire, descended from Sir John Crook of the
Middle Temple, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas for many years in the Reign of King James.

Sir Peter Ball of Mynehead in the County of Devon, Ball.
Knight, is descended from Sir Peter Ball Knight, a late worthy Member of the
Middle Temple, and Attorney General to her late Majesty Mary the Queen Mother.

Sir Anthony Brown of Chig Brown.
well in the County of Essex, Knight, is descended from that eminent and
Learned Lawyer, Sir Anthony Brown of the Middle Temple, Knight, Sergeant at
Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the several Reigns
of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth.

Sir William Fleetwood of Fleetwood.
Woodstock in the County of Oxon, Knight, is descended from William Fleetwood
Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer of the Middle Temple, several times Reader of that
Society, and Recorder of the City of London in the time of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Robert Clench of Cretinghall Clench.
in the County of Suffolk, Knight, is descended from that famous and eminent
Lawyer of Lincolus-Inn, John Clench Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Barons of
the Exchequer, and afterward one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir John Mallett of St. Andrews in West-Quantox-head, in Mallett.
the County of Somerset Knight, Recorder of the Town of Bridgewater in the said
County, is the Son and Heir to Thomas Mallett of the Middle Temple Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of His
late Majesty, where he sat, till for his Loyalty to that Prince, he was forced
to retire, but His Majesty, upon his most happy Restoration, re-advanced him to
the same dignity.

Sir Philip Howard of Sissinghurst, Howard.
in the County of Kent, Knight, is a younger Branch of the House of Carlisle,
of the Noble Blood, and numerous Family of the Howards, descended from Sir
William Howard Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the
Reign of King Edward the first, as before is expressed.

Sir Drue Drury of Rougham, Drury.
in the County of Suffolk, Knight is descended from Robert Drury of Lincolns
Inn, Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof, Speaker of the House of Commons, and a
person of singular Note and Esteem in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Sir Edward Chisnall of Chisnall in the County of Lancaster, Chisnall.
Knight, is descended from Richard Chisnall Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer, and one of
the Readers of Gray's Inn, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. This is a
Family of great antiquity and repute in this County for many Generations before
this eminent person; yet did he make a very considerable addition to the
Ancient Inheritance of his Ancestors.

Sir Dudly North of the City of London, Knight and Alderman, North.
is descended from Edward North (afterward Lord North) a person of great
judgment in the Laws, and Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign
of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Francis Wingate of Harlington in the County of Bedford, Wingate.
Knight, is descended from that Learned Gentleman Edmond Wingate of Gray's Inn
Esquire;, Author of that Excellent Book Entitled Wingate's Maxims.

Sir Gilbert Ireland of the Ireland.
Hutt and Beausey in the County of Lancaster, Knight, a person of great
Integrity and Honor, and of an Ample Fortune, is descended from Sir Thomas
Ireland Knight, Reader of Gray's Inn, and Vice Chamberlayn of the County
Palatine of Chester in the time of King James.

Sir Richard Piggott of Dedershall in the County of Bucks, Piggott.
Knight, is descended from Thomas Piggott Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the
Readers of the Inner Temple in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir John Walpole of Dunston in the County of Lincoln, Walpole.
Knight, a person of exemplary Loyalty and singular Repute, is directly
descended from John Walpole of Gray's Inn Esquire;, Reader thereof, and called to
the degree of a Sergeant by Queen Mary.

Sir Thomas Scott of Scots-hall in the County of Kent, Knight, Scott.
is descended, by many Honorable Ancestors of signal Renown and Quality in
this County, from William Scott Esquire;, Sergeant at Law first, one of the
Justices, and afterward Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench in the
Reign of King Edward the Third: A descendant also of which William, was that
great Lawyer Sir John Scott Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer
in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir William Carleton of Carleton Carleton.
in the County of Cumberland, Knight, a Family of great Antiquity, is descended
from William de Carleton Esquire;, Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in
the Reign of King Edward the first.

Sir Walter Moyle of Bake in Moyle.
the County of Cornwall, Knight, is descended from Walter Moyle Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the time of King Henry
the Sixth.

Sir Robert Pie of Farrindon Pie.
in the County of Berks, Knight, is descended from Sir Walter Pie of the
Middle Temple, Knight, Attorney General of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and
one of the Readers of that Honorable Society in the time of King James.

Sir John Arderne of Arderne in the County of Chester, Arderne.
Knight, is descended from Sir Peter Arderne of Arderne aforesaid, Knight,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the time of King Henry
the Sixth, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the first
year of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Sir John Zouch of Codnor in the County of Derby, Knight, Zouch.
(of the Noble Family of the Ancient Lords Zouch,) is descended from
Alan-le-Zouch, Lord Chief Justice of England in the Reign of King Henry the
Third.

Sir John Archer of Theydon Garron in the County of Essex, Archer.
Knight, is the Son and Heir to John Archer Esquire; deceased, Sergeant at Law, and
lately one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, a person of great
Judgment in the Laws.

Sir Lumley Robinson of the Robinson.
Inner Temple, Knight, is the Son and Heir to the late unfortunate Gentleman
Sir Thomas Robinson of the same Society, Knight, one of the Prothonotories of
the Court of Common Pleas, which said Sir Thomas had the hard fate to lose his
Life in August last; For a sudden Fire breaking forth in or near his Chamber,
he, to avoid the fury and violence of the Flames, adventured to leap out at his
Chamber Window, and thereby (being a very corpulent Man) so bruised his body,
that he soon expired, leaving a great Estate to this worthy Gentleman.

Sir Charles Caesar of Bennington Place in the County of Caesar*
Hertford, Knight, is the direct and eldest Male Branch, descended from Sir
Julius Caesar Knight, Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James, Father of
Sir Charles Caesar Knight, also Master of the Rolls in the Reign of His late
Majesty King Charles the First.

Sir Philip Boteler of Wotton-Woodhall in the County of Boteler.
Hertford, Knight of the Bath, is descended from Sir John Boteler of
Lincoln's Inn, Knight, Sergeant at Law in the time of King Henry the Seventh,
and constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas by King Henry the
Eighth.

Sir Thomas Daniel of Beswick in the County of York, Knight, Daniel.
is descended from William Daniell of Gray's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of
the Readers of that honorable House in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King James; which William was
a younger Son of the Ancient and worthy Family of the Daniels of Over-Tabley in
Cheshire, where they have flourished for many Ages in great repute, and still
remain in the name and person of thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley aforesaid, Esquire;.

Sir William Coventry of St. Martins Coventry.
in the Fields in the County of Middlesex, Knight, a person of great Prudence
and excellent parts, is one of the younger Sons of Thomas Lord Coventry, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England.

Sir John Henden of Biddenden in the County of Kent, Henden.
Knight, is descended from Edward Henden Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Readers of Gray's Inn in the Reign of King James, and afterward made one of the
Barons of the Exchequer by King Charles the First.

Sir Robert Owen of Tundover Owen.
in the County of Salop, Knight, is descended from that Famous and Learned
Lawyer Thomas Owen Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the honorable Benchers of
Lincolns Inn, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Francis Clerk of the City Clerk.
of Rochester, and of Vlcombe in the County of Kent, Knight, is descended from
Henry Clerk of Rochester aforesaid, and of the Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at
Law, and one of the Readers of that House in the Reign of King Charles the
First, which Henry was a younger Branch of the worthy Family of the Clerks of
Willough by in the County of Warwick, persons of great esteem and plentiful
fortune.

Sir Francis Rolls of Shapwick in the County of Somerset, Rolls.
and of East-Tedderley in the County of Southampton, Knight, a Gentleman of an
Ample Fortune in these Western Counties, is descended from the late Learned and
most Excellent Lawyer Henry Roll Esquire;, Reader of the Inner Temple, and called
to the degree of a Sergeant at Law by His Majesty of Blessed Memory; after
which, in the times of the late Rebellion, being no great Enemy to the
predominant factions of this miserable Kingdom, then Governing, he was pleased
to accept of that great Office of Lord Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, which
he executed under the Authority of the late Traitor and Usurper Oliver
Cromwell, and was the Author of those Learned Vollumes, entitled Rolls Reports
and Rolls Abridgement.

Sir Roger Hill of Wesdon in the County of Bucks, Knight, is descended from
Roger Hill Esquire;, called to the dignity of a Sergeant at Law in the year 1655.
by the same Usurped Powers next above mentioned, and further advanced to sit as
one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer then in being.

Sir Charles Littleton of St. Martins in the Fields, in the Littleton.
County of Middlesex, Knight, a person of renowned Valor, and Military
Conduct (and younger Brother, and Heir apparent to Sir Henry Littleton of
Frankly in the County of Worcester, Baronet,) is descended from Sir Thomas
Littleton of the Inner Temple, and of Frankley aforesaid, Knight of the Bath,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of
King Edward the Fourth.

Sir Marmaduke Dalton of Dalton.
in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Knight, is descended from James Dalton Esquire;,
a Learned and skilful Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and one of the Benchers of that
House in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Author of several Learned Books now
extant.

Sir Mondiford Brampston of Brampston.
Woodham-Walter in the County of Essex, and of the Middle Temple, Knight,
lately one of the Masters of the High and Honorable Court of Chancery, is
descended from the late famous Sir John Brampston of the said Society, Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reign of His
late Majesty King Charles.

Sir Thomas Overbury of Burton Overbury.
upon the Hill, in the County of Gloucester, Knight, is descended from Sir
Nicholas Overbury, Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the Readers of the
Middle Temple, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the
Reign of King James. The eldest Son of which Sir Nicholas, was that Ingenuous
Gentleman Sir Thomas Overbury Knight, Poisoned in the Tower of London during
his Imprisonment, by the procurement and contrivance of Robert Carr, Earl of
Somerset (a great Favorite to King James*) and his Countess.

Sir Edward Challoner of Gisburgh, in the North Riding Challoner.
of the County of York, Knight, is descended from Robert Challoner Esquire;, a
person eminent for his Learning in the Laws, and one of the Readers of
Gray's Inn in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Robert Rich of Horndon in the County of Essex, Knight, Rich.
is a younger Branch of the Noble Family of Rich, Earls of Warwick, descended
from Richard Rich of the Middle Temple, Esquire;, one of the Readers of that
Society in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, afterward created a Peer of
this Realm, and constituted Lord High Chancellor of England.

Sir William Underhill of Idlicote Underhill.
in the County of Warwick, Knight, is descended from William Underhill of
Idlicote aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple Esquire;, an eminent practicer of the
Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by means whereof, he raised a considerable
Estate in this County, which his posterity now enjoys, he himself being a
younger Son of Edward Underhill of Nether-Etendon in this County Esquire;, where
the eldest Branch of this Family now makes his residence.

Sir Edward Griffin of Dingley Griffin.
in the County of Northampton, Knight, a Family of great Honor and Interest in
that County* and possessor of a very plentiful Estate, is descended from Sir
Edward Griffin of Dingly, Knight, one of the Readers of Lincoln's Inn, and
Solicitor General in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, also Attorney General
to Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary.

Sir Robert Townsend of the Townsend.
City of Coventry in the County of Warwick, Knight, is descended from Sir
Robert Townsend of Ludlow in the County of Salop, Knight, Reader of
Lincoln's Inn, Chief Justice of all Wales, and called to the degree and dignity
of a Sergeant at Law by King Henry the Eighth.

Sir Humphry Sydenham of Dulverton in the County of Sydenham.
Somerset, Knight, is de^sended from Richard de Sydenham Esquire;, one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the beginning of the Reign of King
Richard the Second, this is a Family of great Antiquity, and of Signal note in
these Western Counties.

Sir Edward Rich of Milburton Rich.
in the County of Norfolk, Knight, is descended from Richard Rich of the
Middle Temple Esque, Chyrographer of the Court of Common Pleas, Reader of the
said Society, and Lord High Chancellor of England, in the several Reigns of
King Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth.

Sir Edward Philips of Mountacute in the County of Somerset, Philips.
Knight, is descended from the Learned Sir Edward Philips of the Inner Temple,
Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the Readers of that Honorable Society, and
thence advanced to that great Office of Master of the Rolls by his late Majesty
King James.

Sir Thomas Colepeper of Hollingbourne Colepeper.
in the County of Kent, Knight, is descended from John Colepeper Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law, and one of the Learned Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the
Reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Sir Christopher Calthorpe of Calthorpe.
Basham in the County of Norfolk, Knight of the Bath, is descended from the
late Learned Sir Henry Calthorpe of the Middle Temple, Knight, one of the
Readers thereof, and Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries in His late
Majesty's Reign; this is a Family, which for many Generations have flourished
in great splendour, and Executed many Honorable Offices relating to this
County: Nevertheless did this Sir Henry, by his great Prudence and eminent
Practice, together with the profits arising out of the Court of Wards, in a
great measure augment the ancient Inheritance of his Ancestors.

Sir Stephen Hales now or late of Newland, and Snitfield in Hales.
the County of Warwick, Knight of the Bath, is descended from Sir Charles Hales
of Newland aforesaid, and of Gray's Inn, Knight, one of the Readers of that
Society, and one of her Majesty's Council in the North in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

Sir James Altham of Latton, in the County of Essex, Knight Altham.
of the Bath, is descended from Sir James Altham, Knight, one of the Readers of
Gray's Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and afterward called to the degree
of a Sergeant at Law, and made one of the Barons of the Exchequer by King James.

Sir George Carey of Dorr-Abby in the County of Devon, Knight, Carey.
is descended in a lineal course of many renowned Ancestors, from John Carey of
Hollway in the County of Devon, Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of
the Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second, from which John, by a
younger Branch, did descend John Carey, late Earl of Dover, and Robert Carey,
late Earl of (...) Monmouth, both lately terminated and extinguished in Female
Heirs, (the too common Fate and utter Ruin of many great Families of this
Kingdom.)

Sir William York of Burton-Pedwardine York.
in the County of Lincoln, Knight, is descended from Roger York Esquire;, a Learned
Lawyer of Grays Inn, and one of the Readers of that Ancient and Honorable
Society in the Fifteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Sir William Bastard of West-Allington Bastard.
in the County of Devon, Knight, a person of great Loyalty and Repute, is
descended from that able and Learned practicer of the Laws, William Bastard
Esquire;, one of the Readers of the Middle Temple in the Reign of King James.

Sir Robert Carry of Clovel in Carry.
the County of Devon, Knight, is also a younger Branch, descended from John
Carry of Hollway aforesaid Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the
Exchequer in the Reign of King Richard the Second, which John was of the
Ancient Family of Carry, of Carry in the said County, and indeed the prime Branch
thereof.

Esquires.
I Shall begin the Catalogue Finch.
of those of this dignity, with the Honorable Heneage Finch of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, a person endowed with all the accomplishments that Learning
and Education can afford, and a most Excellent Ornament of the Laws; in the
Studdy whereof, he has already arrived to so great perfection, that his most
gracious Majesty, as a mark of his Royal Favor, has been pleased to make
choice of him to execute the Office of his Solicitor General, being but an
entrance to those future preferments which his great Learning, Loyalty and
Elloquence do most justly entitle him to. He is the Second Son of the late
Famous and most Incomparable Lawyer, Heneage Earl of Nottingham, Lord High
Chancellor of England, and the true inheritor of his great Abilities and
Judgment, who (as in the Catalogue of the Nobility I have there mentioned) was
the Son and Heir of another great Lawyer of the same Society, namely Sir
Heneage Finch Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of the City of London, a
younger Son of Sir Thomas Finch, and Brother to Thomas Finch Earl of Winchelsea.

Roger North of the Middle Temple Esquire;, Chief Justice of North.
Chester, and one of His Majesty's Learned Council in the Law, is a younger
Brother to the Right Honorable Francis Lord North, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, Sons of Dudley, late Lord North of Carthlidge, who was
descended from Edward Lord North, a person eminently Learned in the Laws, and
Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations in the Reigns of Henry the Eighth,
Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary.

Evan Seys of the City of Seys.
Gloucester, and of Boverton in the County of Glamorgan Esquire;, several times one
of the Members of Parliament for the said City, was called to the degree of a
Sergeant at Law by the Arch-Traytor Oliver Cromwell, in the year 1656, and
again, by his present Majesty in the year 1660. which said Evan Seys (being by
Birth of the Ancient British Race) is descended from Roger Seys of Boverton
aforesaid, a Man of great Note, and Attorney General of the whole Principality
of Wales in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Tristram Coniers of the Middle Temple, Coniers.
Sergeant at Law, and of Walthamstow in the County of Essex Esquire;, a person of
great Judgment and knowledge in the Law, is descended from William Coniers
Esquire;, a Learned Member of the said honorable Society, and one of the Readers
thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First.

Gyles Strangwaies of Melbury-Samford in the County of Dorset Strangwaies.
Esquire;, a Gentleman of a very fair Estate, is the direct descendant of James
Strangwaies Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas
in the several Reigns of King Henry the Fifth and Sixth.

John Caryll of Harting in Caryll.
the County of Sussex Esquire;, a person of great Learning and Integrity, is the
eldest Malebranch, directly descended from Sir John Caryll of Harting
aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple Knight, one of the Readers of that
Honorable Society in the Thirty Sixth year of the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, after which, by Queen Mary, in the Second year of her Reign, he was
called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law, and lastly by Queen Elizabeth was
constituted her Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster; which Sir John Caryll, was
the Son and Heir to the no less famous and learned John Caryll of the
Inner Temple aforesaid Esquire;, advanced to the like dignity of a Sergeant at Law
by King Henry the Eighth, in the Second year of his Reign; by which two great
Sages of the Law, was considerable part of the Estate of this Honorable Family
raised, which remains to their Posterity at this day.

Francis Plowden of Shiplake in the County of Oxon Esquire;, Plowden.
and Cotton Plowden of the City of London, Gentleman, are lineally descended
from that famous and excellent Lawyer of his time, Edmond Plowden, originally
of Plowden-Hall in the County of Salop (a Family of great Antiquity there) and
of the Middle Temple Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen
Mary, by whom he was called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law, whose Learned
Works now extant, do sufficiently evidence his great Abilities.

Thomas Markham of Allerton in the County of Nottingham, Markham
Esque, a person of great Integrity and Repute, is the Son and Heir to the late
valiant and Loyal Thomas Markham of Allerton aforesaid Esquire;, who discerning the
Flames of Rebellion breaking forth upon this Kingdom, which threatened no less
then those Miseries and Calamities which afterward befell this distressed
Nation, did Cordially put himself in Arms on the behalf of His late Majesty, in
whose Service he was slain, at Gainsburgh in Lincolnshire, fighting stoutly
against the Parliament forces, in the year 1643. to the no small diminution of
his Estate; which Thomas was descended, by many Ancestors of the greatest note
in this County, from Sir John Markham, Knight, one of the Justices of the Court
of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, and he the Son of Robert
Markham and Grandson of John Markham, both Eminent Lawyers.

John Lukener of West-Dean Lukener.
in the County of Sussex, Esquire;, a Gentleman of a very ample Fortune, is
descended from Sir Roger Lukener, Knight, one of the Readers of the
Middle Temple, and made a Sergeant at Law by Queen Elizabeth in the latter end
of her Reign, which Sir Roger was descended from Geffrey de Lukener, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the
First.

John Stoner of Stoner in the Stoner.
County of Oxon Esquire;, a Family of great Honor and Antiquity in this County, is
descended from John de Stoner Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Baron of the
Court of Exchequer; and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reigns of
King Edward the Second, and Edward the Third.

Thomas Sympson of the Inner Temple Sympson.
Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to the late Learned and Judicious Sir John Sympson
of the same Society, Knight, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, Recorder of
the Town of St. Albans in the County of Hertford, and one of the Judges of the
Sheriffs Court held in the City of London.

Thomas Gaudy of Claxton in Gaudy.
the County of Norfolk, Esquire;, is descended from Thomas Gaudy of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Readers of that House, and one
of the Justices of the King's Bench in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

William Fortescue of Buckland Fortescue.
in the County of Devon, Esquire;, is descended from the famous Sir John Fortescue
of Buckland aforesaid, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth; he was a Man of profound
knowledge and experience in the Law, as his Learned Works (some part whereof)
still extant do manifest, and by Birth was a younger Son to Sir Henry Fortescue
of Wood in the said County of Devon, Knight, Chief Justice of Ireland, and
descended of a Family of great Honor and Antiquity in the West of England.

Edward Tildesly of Morlies in the County of Lancaster, Tildesly.
Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to that great pattern of Loyalty and Valor, Sir
Thomas Tildesly of Morleys aforesaid, Knight, who being in Arms on the behalf
of his late Majesty; after many brave Actions by him achieved, had the hard
fate at last to dye in the Bed of Honor, being killed in the Road near Preston
in Lancashire, fighting stoutly in his Princes Service; after which, his Body
was buried in the place where it fell, under a heap of Stones there remaining
as a monument to perpetuate his memory, it being a Custom amongst the Ancient
Romans, to erect such as marks of Honor where any great Action was performed:
which said Sir Thomas Tildesly was descended, by many renowned and honorable
Ancestors of this County, from Thomas Tildesly Esquire;, a person famous for his
great Judgment in the Laws of our Nation, and called to the dignity of a
Sergeant at Law by King Henry the Fourth, and from whom also did descend
another Sir Thomas Tildesly of Gray's Inn, Knight, one of the Readers thereof,
and one of the Council in the North in the Reign of King James, but he dyed
without Issue Male.

Henry Guildeford of Hempsted in the County of Kent, Esquire;, Guildeford.
a Gentleman of a fair Estate, and a most excellent Family in that County, is
descended from Henry de Guildeford, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the First.

Richard Hopton of Cannon-Frome (vulgarly) Can-Frome Hopton.
in the County of Hereford Esquire;, is descended from Walter de Hopton Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of Assize for several years, in the
Reign of King Edward the First.

Colonel John Wyndham of Wyndham.
Norrington, and of the City of Salisbury in the County of Wilts Esquire;, a
Gentleman of great Loyalty and Repute, and possessor of a very considerable
Estate, is the Son and Heir of the no less Loyal Wadham Wyndham of Lincoln's Inn
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in
the year 1660. who was descended from Francis Wyndham of the same Society Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the same Court in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth; and he descended of a younger branch of the Ancient Family of
the Wyndhams of Felbrig-hall in Norfolk, where the same still remains and
flourishes in great esteem.

John Caesar of Barkway in the County of Hertford, is descended Caesar.
from Sir Julius Caesar of the Inner Temple, Knight, Chancellor of the Court of
Exchequer, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James, and one of the
Privey Council to that Prince.

Francis Harvey of the Middle Temple, Harvey*
and of Cockfield in the County of Suffolk, Esquire;, lately Reader of that
Honorable Society, is descended from Sir Francis Harvey of the same House,
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the
Reign of King James.

Lestrange Calthorp of the Calthorp.
Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, is descended from Sir Henry Calthorp of
the same Society, Knight, one of the Readers thereof, as also Attorney of the
Court of Wards and Liveries in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the
First, descended of the Ancient Family of the Calthorp's of Cockthorp in the
County of Norfolk.

William Fitz-Herbert of Tissington Fitz-Herbert
in the County of Derby, Esquire;, a Gentleman of an Ample Fortune, is directly
descended from the famous Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert of Norbury in the said
County of Derby, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court
of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: He was descended of an
Ancient Family in the said County; but having an elder Brother, who happening
to dye without Issue Male, a great part of his Estate descended to this Learned
Judge, who so greatly augmented the same, that thereby he preferred his younger
Children (of which he had diverse, both Sons and Daughters) by matching them to
several worthy Families of this Kingdom; and yet left a very plentiful Estate
to his Son and Heir.

Christopher Danby of Masham, Danby.
Thorp-parrow, and Scruton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, of Driffield in
the East Riding, and of Thornby near Leeds in the West Riding of the said
County, Esquire;, a Family of great interest in those parts, is descended from Sir
Robert Danby Knight, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, and
constituted Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the first year
of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

William Stanford of Salford-Priors in the County of Warwick, Esquire;, is
descended, by a younger Son, from that great and famous Lawyer William Stanford
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Readers of Gray's Inn in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth; after which, by Queen Mary he was made one of the Justices of
the Common Pleas.

Richard Walmesly of Dunkenhalgh Walmesly.
in the County of Lancaster, Esquire;, a Gentleman of excellent parts, and of an
ample estate, is the direct Heir to the sometime Learned and most expert Lawyer
of his time, Sir Thomas Walmesly of the Honorable Society of Lincolns Inn,
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the said Court of
Common Pleas, in the several Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James.

The Right Honorable Henry Coventry.
Coventry of Enfield in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, late one of His present
Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, and a person of great Integrity and
Stedfastness to the Royal Interest, is one of the younger Sons of Thomas Lord
Coventry. Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, who was the Son and Heir to
Thomas Coventry of Crombe in the County of Worcester, and of the Inner Temple
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in
the Reign of King James.

Robert Coke of Holkham in Coke.
the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is the eldest Branch, descended from Sir Edward
Coke of the Inner Temple Knight, so much celebrated for his profound Judgment
and experience in the Laws of this Kingdom, in respect whereof he became the
Autumn Reader of the said Society, in the thirty fourth year of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign; soon after which time, he was constituted Solicitor, and then
Attorney General to that Princess, as also Recorder of the City of London; and
by King James called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law, and advanced to the
dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, whence he was removed to the
like Honor in the King's Bench, and elected one of His then Majesty's
Privy Council.

John Crew of Misterton in the Crew.
County of Leicester Esquire;, is descended from the Famous Sir Randolph Crew of
Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and (...) Lord Chief Justice of the Court
of King's Bench in the Reign of King James, which said Sir Randolph was
descended of the Ancient and Worshipful Family of the Crews of Crew-Hall in the
County Palatine of Chester, where they have flourished for five Hundred years
and upwards, as men of the greatest Honor and Esteem of that County, and are
at this day so reputed.

William Whitlocke of Fellis-Court Whitlocke.
in the County of Oxon, and of the Middle Temple Esquire;, lately one of the
Readers and Treasurers of that House, a person very well read in the Law, and
of eminent note for his great Knowledge in the Rules and Practice of the
Honorable Court of Chancery, is a younger Son to Bulstrode Whitloke of the
same Society, Esquire;, one of the Commissioners of the great Seal of England in
the time of the late Rebellion, and a leading Man in those unhappy days; which
Bulstrode was descended from Sir James Whitlocke of the Middle Temple
aforesaid, Knight, Sergeant at Law, Chief Justice of Chester, from whence he
was removed to the Court of Common Pleas, and made one of the Justices thereof
by King James.

Thomas Bedingfield of Darsham-Hall, and other fair Possessions Bedingfield.
of great vallue in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, is descended from the late
worthy Sir Thomas Bedingfield of Darsham-Hall aforesaid, and of Gray's Inn,
Knight, one of the Readers of that Society, Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster
in His late Majesty's Reign, since which, by His now Most Gracious Majesty, in
the year 1660. he was called to the dignity of a Sergeant: Which said Sir
Thomas was a Younger Branch of the Ancient and Flourishing Family of the
Bedingfields of Norfolk and Suffolk.

Charles Dallison of the City Dallison.
of Lincoln Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to the late Learned Sir Charles Dallison
of Lincoln aforesaid, and of Gray's Inn, Knight, Sergeant at Law, who was
descended from William Dallison of the same Society, Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and
one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.

Henry Lowther of Cokermouth Lowther.
in the County of Cumberland, a Gentleman of an Excellent Family in those
parts, is descended from Thomas de Lowther Esquire;, one of the Justices of the
Court of King's Bench, in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Francis Beresford of Fenny-Bently Beresford.
in the County of Derby Esquire;, is descended from William de Beresford Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign
of King Edward the first, and Lord Chief Justice of the same Court in the Reign
of King Edward the Second.

Walter Littleton of the City Littleton.
of Litchfield in the County of Stafford Esquire;, is one of the Descendants of the
memorable Sir Thomas Littleton of the Inner Temple, Knight of the Bath,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the
Reigns of King Henry the Sixth and Edward the Fourth, this Walter being
descended from Richard Littleton (second Son of the said Sir Thomas) a Learned
Lawyer, and one of the Readers of that Society in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh.

Richard Harpur of Little-Over Harpur.
in the County of Derby, Esquire;, is descended from Sir Richard Harpur of
Swarkeston in the said County, and of the Inner Temple, Knight, Sergeant at
Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

Ralph Earl of Sawle in the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is Earl.
descended from Erasmus Earl Esquire;, one of the Honorable Benchers of
Lincoln's Inn in His late Majesty's Reign, and afterward called to the Degree
of a Sergeant at Law.

Wallop Brabazon of Eaton, Brabazon.
in the County of Hereford, Esquire;, is directly descended, through alineal course
of diverse renowned Ancestors, from the Learned Sir Roger de Brabazon of
Eastwell in the County of Leicester, Knight, many years Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the First.

William Milward of Eaton in the County of Derby Esquire;, Milward.
is descended from Sir Thomas Milward Knight, a Lcarned Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn,
one of the Readers thereof, and Chief Justice of Chester in the Reign of His
late Majesty King Charles the First.

Roger Wilbraham of Nantwich Wilbraham.
in the County Palatine of Chester Esquire;, is descended from Sir Roger Wilbraham
of Nantwitch aforesaid, Knight, one of the Readers of Lincoln's Inn in the
latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; after which, King James advanced
him to the dignities of Master of the Requests, and Surveyor of the Court of
Wards and Liveries; which Sir Roger was a younger branch of the Ancient Family
of the Wilbrahams of Woodhey in the said County of Chester, the chief branch
whereof is Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey aforesaid, Baronet.

William Fortescue of Cokehill Fortescue.
in the County of Worcester, and of Wethele in the County of Warwick Esquire;, by a
younger Son is descended from Jews Fortescue of the Middle Temple Esquire;, one of
the Readers thereof, and one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Richard Caryll of West-Grinstead in the County of Sussex, Caryll.
Esquire;, a Gentleman of singular repute and excellent parts, is descended from
those two famous Lawyers of the Inner Temple herein before mentioned, namely,
John Caryll Esquire;, and Sir John Caryll Knight his Son, both Sergeants at Law in
the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth and Queen Mary, and the latter, Attorney of
the Duchy of Lancaster in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Richard Brudnell of Stanton-Wivell in the County of Leicester Brudnell.
Esquire;, (of the Honorable Family of Robert Earl of Cardigan) is descended from
Robert Brudnell Esquire;, Sergeant at Law; and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Charles Caesar of Gransden in Caesar.
the County of Huntington, and of Much-Hadham in the County of Hertford Esquire;,
is the second Son of Sir Charles Caesar of the Inner Temple Knight, Master of
the Rolls, Son of Sir Julius Caesar of the same Society Knight, also Master of
the Rolls, and Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Reign of King James.

Anthony Gawdey of the Town of Ipswich in the County of Gawdey.
Suffolk Esquire;, is descended from the Learned Sir Thomas Gawdey Knight, Sergeant
at Law, one of the Readers of the honorable Society of the Inner Temple, and
one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Henry Cavendish of Donebridge in the County of Derby, Cavendish.
Esquire;, a person of great Honor both by birth and otherwise: (being nearly
related in blood to the Duke of Newcastle and the Earl of Devonshire) is
descended from Sir John de Cavendish Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Edward Sylyard of Runwell Sylyard.
in the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from William Sylyard of Lincoln's Inn
Esquire;, a person of eminent Note, and one of the Governors of that honorable
Society for many years, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the eighth;
which William was descended from John Sylyard Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, another
Learned Member of the said House, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign
of King Edward the fourth, and constituted one of the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench by Richard the third.

Henry Bromley of Holt-Castle, and other Manors and Bromley.
Lands of large extent and vallue in the County of Worcester Esquire;, a Gentleman
of great Loyalty and Repute, is the direct Heir to the famous Sir Thomas
Bromley of Holt-Castle aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple Knight, Recorder of
the City of London, Solicitor General, and lastly Lord High Chancellor of
England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which Sir Thomas was the Second Son of
George Bromley of Bromley in the County of Chester and of the Inner Temple
Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Francis Bell of Outwell in Bell.
the County of Norfolk, Esquire;, is descended from that incomparable Lawyer of his
time, Sir Robert Bell of the Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord
Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Edward Vaughan of Yrawscoed Vaughan.
in the County of Cardigan Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Sir John Vaughan of
Yrawscoed aforesaid Knight, Sergeant at Law, late Lord Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas, and Author of the Learned Vollume, Entitled Vaughan's
Reports.

Stephen Anderson of Eyworth Anderson.
in the County of Bedford, and Hamstead in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, is
descended from the Learned Sir Edmond Anderson of the Inner Temple, Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the
several Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James.

Anthony Irby of Boston in Irby.
the County of Lincoln Esquire;, (a Gentleman of a very plentiful Fortune) is
descended from Anthony Irby of the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire;,
one of the Readers, as also for several years one of the Governors thereof in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

William Lenthall of Besselsleigh Lenthall.
and Burford in the County of Oxon Esquire;, is the Grandson and Heir to William
Lenthall of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Reader thereof in the Reign of King Charles the
First: After the cruel Murder of which Royal Martyr, the said William
complying with the usurped Authority of those miserable times, became a person
of principal Note and Action, being constituted Master of the Rolls, Elected
Speaker of the House of Parliament then S^tting, and frequently Honored with
the Title of William Lord Lenthall.

Richard Lovelace of Wargrave Lovelace.
in the County of Berks Esquire;, is descended from William Lovelace Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law, and one of the Readers of Gray's Inn in the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

John Thymelby of Iruham in Thymelby.
the County of Lincoln, Esquire;, a Gentleman of great Integrity and of ample
Fortune, is descended from Stephen Thymelby Esquire;, very eminent for his Learning
in the Law, and one of the Benchers of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

George Mordant of Ickwell in the County of Bedford Esquire;, Mordant.
is directly descended by a younger Branch from the Right Honorable John
Mordant of the Middle Temple, Sergeant at Law, and Attorney of the Dutchey of
Lancaster in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, after which, by King Henry
the Eighth he was created Baron of Turvey in the County of Bedford.

Nicholas Overbury of Barton on the Heath, in the County Overbury*
of Warwick Esquire;, is directly descended by a younger Son from Sir Nicholas
Overbury of Burton on the Hill in the County of Gloucester, and of the
Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King James.

Hugh Trevanion of Treluggan Trevanion*
in the County of Cornwall Esquire; is descended from John Trevanion Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Eighth year of the
Reign of King Edward the Third.

Geffrey Nightingal of Knesworth Nightingal.
in the County of Cambridge Esquire;, is descended from Geffrey Nightingal Esquire;,
one of the Readers of Gray's Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Allexander Crook of Studly, Crook.
in the County of Bucks Esquire;, is one of the younger Branches, descended from
Sir John Crook of Waterstock in the County of Oxon, and of the Middle Temple
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the
Reign of King James.

Robert Berkley of Spechly in the County of Worcester Esquire;, Berkley.
a person of rare Accomplishments, Singular Repute, and of an ample Fortune, is
the Grandson and Heir to the Learned and Loyal Sir Robert Berkly of the Middle
Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and for many years one of the Justices of the
Court of King's Bench in the Reign of His late Majesty of Blessed memory: But at
last the dark Clouds of Tyranny and Rebellion over-spreading this miserable
Nation; and all such as favored or stood firm in their Duty and Allegiance to
their Prince, being branded with that ignominious Title of Malignants and
enemies to the Arbitrary Government of those unhappy days, This great Lawyer
had the Honor to be one of those many worthy and Loyal Patriots as were then
deposed and bereft of their places of trust, and great part of their Estates,
for not complying with the Barbarous cruelties then practiced.

Mondeford Brampston of the Brampston.
Middle Temple Esquire;, Recorder of the Borough of Maulden in the County of
Essex, is descended from Sir John Brampston of the same Society Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the Reign of King
Charles the First.

John Mingay of Gimingham Mingay.
in the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is descended from Francis Mingay Esquire;, one of
the Readers of the Inner Temple, in the Reign of King James.

John Breerewood of the City Breerewood.
of Chester Esquire;, is descended from Sir Robert Brerewood of the Middle Temple,
Knight, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of Chester, and one of the Justices of the
Court of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Charles the first.

William Noy of Pendrea in Noy.
the County of Cornwall Esquire;, is descended from that expert Lawyer, William
Noy Esquire; (a man of great practice) one of the Benchers of Lincoln's Inn, and
Attorney General to his late Majesty King Charles the first in the beginning of
his Reign.

Alexander Denton of Hillesden Denton.
in the County of Bucks Esquire;, is descended from Thomas Denton a learned Lawyer
of the Middle Temple, and one of the Benchers thereof in the Reigns of Queen
Mary and Queen Elizabeth.

Edward Turpin of Basingbourne Turpin.
in the County of Cambridge Esquire;, is descended from John Turpin Esquire;, one of
the Governors of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.

Thomas Catesby of Ecton in Catesby.
the County of Northampton, and of Harmead in the County of Bucks Esquire;, a
Family of great Antiquity, is descended from Sir John Catesby Knight, Sergeant
at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward
the Fourth.

Francis Meynell of Bradley in Meynell.
the County of Derby Esquire;, is descended from Robert Meynell of Lincoln's Inn
Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the eighth; and
afterward called to the dignity of a Sergeant at Law.

William Ayloff of Chisele in Ayloff.
the County of Essex, Esquire;, is descended from William Ayloff Esquire;, Sergeant at
Law, and one of the Readers of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and he descended from another William Ayloff Esquire;, a learned Lawyer of the same
Society, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Bazill Fitz Herbert of Norbury in the County of Derby, Fitz. Herbert.
and of Swinnerton in the County of Stafford, Esquire;, a Gentleman of a very fair
estate, is descended from the famous and learned Sir Anthony Fitz Herbert of
Norbury aforesaid, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the eighth; a younger Son of
which Sir Anthony, was William Fitz Herbert, who by Marriage with Elizabeth,
Daughter and Coheir to Humphry Swinnerton of Swinnerton aforesaid, Esquire;,
annexed that Lordship and other Lands of good vallue to this Family, and so
continue to this day in the possession of the said Bazill.

William Palms of Ashwell in Palms.
the County of Rutland Esquire;, is descended, by many honorable Ancestors, from
Guy Palms of the Middle Temple, Esquire;, who, for his great Judgment and
Abilities in the Law, was called to the state and dignity of a Sergeant by King
Henry the Seventh; and by King Henry the eighth constituted one of his Council,
learned in the Laws.

William Petre of Stanford in Petre.
the County of Essex Esquire;, (of the Noble Family of the Lord Petre) is a younger
Branch, descended from Sir William Petre Knight, Doctor of the Civil Law,
Secretary of State to King Henry the eighth, and a man of great action in most
of the revolutions of that Princes Reign.

Richard Dowdswell of Poole-Court Dowdswell.
in the County of Worcester Esquire;, enjoys a very fair estate in that and other
adjacent Counties, as Grandson and Heir to Richard Dowdswell of Poole-Court
aforesaid Esquire;, an eminent Practicer in the Laws, and Principle of New-Inn, as
also Steward to the Right Honorable George Lord Coventry.

Daniel Kingsmill of Kings-Clere Kingsmill.
in the County of Southhampton Esquire;, is descended from George Kingsmill of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which George was descended from
John Kingsmill Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the same Court in
the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

George Scott of Chigwell in Scott.
the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from John Scott Esquire;, a Learned Lawyer
and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth.

Robert Coke of Trusly in the Coke.
County of Derby Esquire;, is descended by a younger Son from Sir Edward Coke of
the Inner Temple, Knight, Sergeant at Law, Attorney General to Queen Elizabeth,
and Lord Chief Justice of both Benches in the time of King James.

Thomas Snagg of Milbrooke in the County of Bedford Esquire;, Snagg.
is descended from Thomas Snagg Esquire;, a Learned and able Lawyer of
Lincoln's Inn, and twice Reader thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; who in
the two and twentieth year of her Reign, advanced him to the degree of a
Sergeant at Law.

Peter Phesant of Vpwood in the County of Huntington Esquire Phesant.
is descended from Peter Phesant of Gray's Inn, Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof
in the Reign of King James, who was the Son and Heir to Peter Phesant another
famous Lawyer, and one of the Readers of that Honorable Society in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth; who constituted him her Attorney for the Northern parts of
this Kingdom.

William Purefoy of the Sow, in the County of Purefoy.
Warwick Esquire;, is descended from Humphrey Purefoy of Barwell in the County of
Leicester, and of Gray's Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers of that House in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, which Humphrey was a younger Branch of the Ancient and
Numerous Family of the Purefoys of Drayton in the said County of Leicester,
where they have flourished for above five Hundred years past, Sir Henry Purefoy
of Wadley in the County of Berks and of Drayton aforesaid, Baronet, being the
principal and Eldest Branch thereof.

Edward Bromley of Hampton Bromley.
in the County of Chester Esquire;, the eldest Branch of that Honorable and
Ancient Family, is descended from George Bromley of the Inner Temple, Esquire;, one
of the Readers thereof, and Chief Justice of Chester, in the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which George was the eldest Brother to Sir Thomas
Bromley Knight, Lord High Chancellor of England, and the eldest Son and Heir to
George Bromley Esquire;, another Learned Lawyer of the same Society, and one of the
Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Samuel Trotman of Siston in the County of Gloucester, and Trotman.
of Bucknell in the County of Oxon, Esquire;, one of the utter Baristers of the
Inner Temple, and a person of a very fair estate, is descended from Edward
Trotman Esquire;, one of the Readers of that Honorable Society in the third year
of the Reign of his late Majesty King Charles the First.

Richard Norton of Southwick in the County of Southampton Norton.
Esquire;, is descended from Richard Norton Esquire;, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of
King Henry the Fourth, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reigns
of King Henry the Fifth and Sixth.

John Turner of Walden in the Turner.
County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from Edward Turner of Little-Paringdon in
the said County Esquire;, an eminent Lawyer of the Middle Temple, and one of the
Benchers thereof in the Reign of King James.

Thomas Babington of Rothely Babington.
in the County of Leicester Esquire;, is descended by many Worthy and Honorable
Ancestors from Sir William Babington Knight;, Sergeant at Law, Attorney General
to King Henry the Fourth and Fifth; by which last Prince he was advanced to
that great Dignity of Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, and from
thence removed to the like Honor in the Court of Common Pleas being
constituted Lord Chief Justice thereof.

Phillip Caryll of Shipley in Caryll.
the County of Sussex Esquire;, is descended from Sir John Caryll of Harting in
this County, and of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Attorney of
the Duchy of Lancaster, Son and Heir to John Caryll of the same Society Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law in the Reign of Henry the Eighth.

Thomas Coventry of Chilvers Coventry.
Coton in the County of Warwick Esquire;, (Uncle to John now Lord Coventry) is
descended from Thomas Coventry of the Inner Temple Esquire;, one of the Readers
thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, called to the Dignity of a Sergeant at
Law, and made one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, in whose Reign
he Dyed, leaving Thomas Coventry Esquire; his Son and Heir, who Studying the Laws
in the same Society, became Recorder of London, Solicitor and Attorney General
to King James, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and Baron of
Alesburough in the Reign of King Charles the First.

Thomas Atkins of Easendon Atkins.
in the County of Hertford Esquire; is descended from Thomas Atkins Esquire;, a Learned
Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth.

Richard Maunsfield of Westleak in the County of Nottingham Maunsfield.
Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Thomas Maunsfield of Westleak aforesaid Esquire;, an
ingenious practicer of the Law, and a Barister of the Inner Temple in the Reign
of King Charles the First.

Edward Willoughby of Boreplace in the County of Kent Willoughby.
Esquire;, is descended from the Learned Sir Thomas Willoughby of Lincoln's Inn
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth; which Thomas intermarrying with the sole
Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert Read Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the same
Court, did thereby annex an ample Estate to this Honorable Family, amongst
whom was Edward Willoughby of Boreplace aforesaid Esquire;, who added very
considerably thereunto by a Match with one of the Daughters; and Coheirs to Sir
Francis Willoughby of Wollaton in the County of Nottingham Knight, descended in
a direct Course of Succession, from Sir Richard de Willoughby Knight, one of
the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in the beginning of the Reign of King
Edward the Third; from which Sir Richard, by younger Sons, did descend Sir
Henry Willoughby late of Risley in the County of Derby Baronet, and Sir
Willoughby late of Willoughby in the County of Nottingham Baronet, both lately
terminated in Daughters and Heirs, who have carried the Inheritance of those
two honorable persons to several worthy Families of this Kingdom.

Edward Rich of Dowdeswell Rich.
in the County of Gloucester Esquire; is the Son and Heir to the late Learned Sir
Edward Rich of Dowdswell aforesaid Knight, one of the Readers of Lincolns Inn,
and a person eminent for his great Experience in the Laws in the beginning of
His now Majesty's Reign.

George Willoughby of Cossale Willoughby.
in the County of Nottingham Esquire; of the Ancient Family of the Lords Willoughby
of Eresby, is descended from Sir Thomas Willoughby of Lincoln's Inn aforesaid
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Richard Shuckburgh of Burton Shuckburgh.
upon Dunsmore, and Birdingbury in the County of Warwick Esquire; is directly
descended from John Shuckburgh of Birdingbury aforesaid, one of the Six Clerks
in Chancery in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; Which John being a wary provident
Person, Purchased all or the greatest part of the Estate which this worthy
Gentleman is now possessed of.

Francis Morgan of Kingsthorp Morgan.
in the County of Northampton Esquire; is descended from Francis Morgan of Heyford
in the County aforesaid, and of the Middle Temple Esquire; Sergeant at Law, one of
the Readers of that House, and one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench,
in the Reign of Queen Mary.

Robert Brom of Woodlow in Brom.
the County of Warwick Esquire; is descended from John Brom of Badsly-Chiston in
this County Esquire; a Lawyer of very eminent note in the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth, and Purchasor of this Manor of Woodlow; which he settled upon Nicholas
Brom his Son and Heir, who left it to Ralph his Son by a Third Venture (the
lineal Ancestor of the said Robert) which John was himself the Grandson and
Heir to Robert Brom of Warwick Esquire; another learned Lawyer in the Reign of
King Richard the Second.

William Seyes of Killan in the County of Glamorgan Esquire; is descended Seyes.
from Roger Seyes of Boverton in the said County Esquire; a Learned Lawyer, and
Attorney General of all Wales, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Gilbert Boon of Hockerton in the County of Nottingham Esquire Boon.
is the Son and Heir to the late Learned and Loyal Gilbert Boon of Grayes-Inn,
Esquire; called to the Degree of a Sergeant at Law by His late Majesty King Charles
the First, in the year 1636. after which he endured great Oppressions in the
time of the late Rebellion, for his exemplary Loyalty and Stedfastness to his
Prince.

Charles Skipwith of Gosberton Skipwith.
in the County of Lincoln Esquire; is descended from William de Skipwith Esquire;
Sergeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, in the Reign of
King Edward the Third.

Thomas Wetenhall of East-Peckham Wetenhall.
in the County of Kent Esquire; a Gentleman of honorable Extraction and great
Integrity, is descended from George Wetenhall Esquire; a learned Lawyer of
Grayes-Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth.

John Philipps of the Inner Temple Philipps.
Esquire; one of the Auditors of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, is descended
from Sir Edward Philipps of the same Society Knight, Sergeant at Law, and
Master of the Rolls in the Reign of King James.

Cecill Tirwhitt of Cameringham Tirwhitt.
in the County of Lincoln Esquire; a Family of great Antiquity and Honor in that
County, is descended from Robert Tirwhitt an eminent Lawyer, in the Reigns of
King Henry the Fourth and Fifth, by which two Victorious Princes, he was first
called to the Dignity of a Sergeant at Law, and then constituted one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, out of which Court he was removed to the
like Place in the King's Bench.

Henry Reynell of Laytham in the County of Middlesex Reynell.
Esquire; is descended from Richard Reynell Esquire; Reader of the Middle Temple in the
Reign of King James.

Edward Atkins of Albury-Hall in the County of Hertford Esquire; is descended from
Thomas Atkins of Lincoln's Inn Esquire; one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.

Michael Lister of Burwell in the County of Lincoln Esquire Lister.
with other worthy Gentlemen of that Name and Family in the said County, are
descended from Sir Richard Lister of the Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law,
Solicitor-General to King Henry the Eighth; which Prince in the last year of
his Reign, constituted him Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.

Thomas Herlakenden of Woodchurch Herlakenden.
in the County of Kent Esquire; a Family of long continuance there is descended
from Thomas Herlakenden of Woodchurch aforesaid, and of Grayes-Inn Esquire; a
Person of great Judgment in the Laws of this Nation, and one of the Readers
thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

George Townsend of Wrotham Townsend.
in the County of Norfolk Esquire; is descended from Sir Roger Townsend of
Lincoln's Inn Knight, Reader thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, by
whom he was called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law. After which, by King
Richard the Third, he was made one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and in
that place continued by King Henry the Seventh.

Richard Raynsford of Dallington Raynsford.
in the County of Northampton Esquire; is the eldest Son and Heir to Sir Richard
Raynsford of Dallington aforesaid Knight, Sergeant at Law deceased, first one
of the Barons of the Exchequer, then one of the Justices of the King's Bench,
and lastly, Lord Chief Justice of that Court; in which he sat not long before
he was eased of the burden thereof by His Majesty's Writ.

Robert Heath of O^ford in the County of Kent, and of the Heath.
Inner Temple Esquire; called to the degree of a Sergeant at Law in Hillary Term
last, is descended from that excellent Lawyer Sir Robert Heath Knight, Sergeant
at Law, a worthy Member of the same Society, Recorder of the City of London,
and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King
Charles the First.

Francis Bacon of the City of Bacon.
Norwich Esquire; Recorder of the said City, lately one of the Readers of
Grayes-Inn, is descended from Francis Bacon Esquire; Sergeant at Law, also one of
the Readers of that Honorable Society, and one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First.

George Hill of St. Martins in Hill.
the Fields in the County of Middlesex Esquire; is the Son and Heir to George Hill
late of Clifford's -Inn Esquire; a Person of great Practice and Eminent Repute, as
also one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex
for many years before his Death.

Robert Challoner of the City of London Esquire; is descended Challoner*
from Robert Challoner Esquire; a learned Lawyer of Gray's Inn, and one of the
Readers thereof in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Francis Twisden of the Inner Temple Esquire; one of the Masters of the Examiners
Office belonging to the Court of Chancery, is one of the younger Sons of the
late famous and Profound Lawyer, Sir Thomas Twisden of Bradburne in the County
of Kent, and of the Inner Temple aforesaid, Knight and Baronet, Sergeant at
Law, and for many years one of His present Majejestie's Justices of the Court
of King's -Bench.

Francis Crawley of Enfield in the County of Middlesex, and Crawley.
of Someris near Luton in the County of Bedford Esquire; is descended from Sir
Francis Crawley Knight, Sergeant at Law, Reader of Grayes-Inn, and lastly, one
of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King James.

Henry Montague of the Inner Temple Montague.
Esquire; a Person of Noble Extraction, is descended from Sir Henry Montague of the
Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
King's Bench, and Lord High Treasurer of England in the Reign of King James;
after which, he became Earl of Manchester, and was descended by a younger Son
from Sir Edw. Montague of the said Honorable Society of the Middle Temple
Knight, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Reigns
of King Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth.

Edward Diggs of Chilham-Castle Diggs.
in the County of Kent Esquire;, ((...) of good account there) is descended from
Sir Dudley Diggs Knight, Master of the Rolls in the Reign of His late Majesty;
which Sir Dudley was descended from Richard Diggs of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, one of
the Readers thereof in the Reign of King James.

John Danvers of Shackerston, Danvers.
in the County of Leicester Esquire;, is descended by many worthy Ancestors from
Sir Robert Danvers of Lincolns Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of the
City of London, first one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, and
afterward one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas for many years in
the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

George Markham of Werksopp-Lodge Markham.
in the County of Nottingham Esquire;, is descended, by many eminent Ancestors,
from Sir John Markham Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas
in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, who was descended from Robert Markham,
(Son of John) both very learned Lawyers in the Reign of King Edward the Second,
and Edward the Third, which said Sir John was Father also to the famous Sir
John Markham Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the same Court, from whom is
descended Sir Robert Markham of Sedgebrooke Baronet, herein before mentioned
amongst the Baronets.

William Booth of Witton in Booth.
the County of Warwick Esquire;, is descended from William Booth of Witton
aforesaid, and of the Middle Temple Esquire;, Reader thereof in the Reign of King
Charles the First; which William was a younger Branch of the honorable Family
of the Booths of Dunham-Massey in Cheshire, Originally of Barton in Lancashire.

Nevill Brom of Clifton in the Brom.
County of Oxon Esquire;, a Gentleman of an Ancient Family in this County and
Warwickshire, is descended from Robert Brom of Warwick Esquire;, a Person very
eminent for his Knowledge in the Laws. In respect whereof, he was made Steward
to Thomas de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, who lived in the Reign of King Richard
the Second, and thereby laid the first step to the Estate and Preferments,
which in succeeding Ages accrewed to his Posterity.

Richard Seys of Swansey in Seys.
the County of Glamorgan Esquire;, is descended from Roger Seys of Boverton in the
said County Esque, Attorney General of all Wales for many years in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

Cliston Rhodes of Sturton in Rhodes.
the County of Nottingham Esquire;, is a younger Branch, descended from Sir Francis
Rhodes of Grayes-Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

George Montague of St. Martin's Montague.
in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, is descended from Sir Henry
Montague of the Midale-Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice
of the King's Bench in the Reign of King James; which Sir Henry was the
Grandson of Sir Edward Montague of the same Society Knight, Sergeant at Law,
and Lord Chief Justice of the same Court in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Fountayn of Melton upon Fountayn.
the Mount, in the West Riding of Yorkshire Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to that
able Lawyer John Fountayn, late Sergeant at Law deceased, a Person of very
considerable Practice and great Wealth.

Thomas Sackvill of Seddlescombe Sackvill.
in the County of Sussex Esquire;, is descended from Sir Richard Sackvill Knight,
one of the Benchers of Grayes-Inn in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and
soon after became Under Treasurer of the Court of Exchequer.

George Harpur of Twiford in the County of Derby Esquire;, is Harpur.
descended from the Learned Sir Richard Harpur of the Inner Temple Knight,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Readers of that ancient House, and one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

William Cartwright of Normanton Cartwright.
in the County of Nottingham Esquire;, is the Son and Heir of William Cartwright of
Normanton aforesaid Esquire;; Barister at Law, and a Person of considerable repute
and practice in this County.

John Sylyard of Penshurst in Sylyard.
the County of Kent Esquire;, is descended from John Sylyard of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;,
one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and by King
Richard the Third called to the State and Dignity of a Sergeant at Law, and
made one of the Justices of the King's Bench.

Thomas Ascough of West-Terrington Ascough.
in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended by a younger Son from Sir William
Ascough of Colling in the said County of Lincoln Knight, Sergeant at Law, and
one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth.

John Bingham of Bingham's-Melcombe Bingham.
in the County of Dorset Esquire;, is descended from Sir Richard Bingham Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reigns of
King Henry the Sixth, and Edward the Fourth.

George Faunt of Foston in the County of Leicester Esquire;, a Faunt.
Gentleman of a very Ancient and Worshipful Family in that County, is descended
from William de Faunt Esquire;, one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign
of King Edward the Third.

Clement Spelman of Magdalen Spelman.
in the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is descended from Clement Spelman Esquire;, late
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the year 1663. who
was descended from Sir John Spelman of Grayes-Inn Knight, (the first Reader of
that House) Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench in the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth.

Francis Howard of Thornthwait Howard.
in the County of Westmorland, is a younger Branch of the Noble house of the
Howards Dukes of Norfolk, and consequently descended from William Howard Esquire;
one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward
the First.

Francis Lovelace of Baynhurst Lovelace.
in the County of Berks Esquire;, is descended from William Lovelace of Gray's Inn
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

William Bromley of Baginton Bromley.
in the County of Warwick Esquire;, is descended from Sir Thomas Bromley of the
Inner Temple, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
King's Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; after the Death of which
Prince he was constituted Chief Justice of that Court by King Edward the Sixth:
This Sir Thomas was the Son and Heir of Sir John Bromley of Radington in the
County of Chester Knight, by his second Wife, the Daughter of Richard Widvill
Earl Rivers; but it so fell out, that Sir John had before entailed his whole
Estate upon the Issue of his first Lady, who were all Daughters, insomuch that
the said Sir Thomas left little to his Posterity, but what was of his own
acquiring.

Thomas Townsend of Horseford in the County of Norfolk Townsend
Esquire;, is one of the descendants of Sir Roger Townsend of Lincoln's Inn Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of
King Henry the Seventh.

John Chamberlayn of Chilvers-Coton, in the County of Chamberlain.
Warwick Esquire;, is descended from Richard Chamberlayn of Chilvers-Coton
aforesaid, and of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Clerk of the Court of Wards and Liveries
in the Reign of King Charles the First.

Charles Baldwin of Stoake in the County of Salop Esquire;, Baldwin.
is the Son and Heir to the late Learned Sir Samuel Baldwin of Stoake
aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple Knight, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at
Law deceased, which Sir Samuel was descended from Sir John Baldwin of the same
Society Knight, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

-- Paston of Paston and Appleton in the County of Norfolk Paston.
Esquire;, a Gentleman of an Honorable Family of great Antiquity, is descended
from Sir William Paston of Paston Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench in the Reign of Henry the Sixth.

John Keeling of Southill in Keeling.
the County of Bedford Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Sir John Keeling of the
Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, lately deceased, Son of another Sir John
Keeling of the same Society Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas in His now Majesty's Reign.

William Glanvill of Broad-Hinton Glanvill.
in the County of Wilts Esquire, is descended from the learned John Glanvill of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas
toward the latter end of Q Elizabeth's Reign.

Francis Fitz Herbert of Somersall-Herbert in the County Fitz. Herbert.
of Derby Esquire;, is descended from Sir Anthony Fitz Herbert of Norbury in the
said County Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Coke of Melburne in the County of Derby Esquire;, is descended by a younger
Son from the famous Sir Edward Coke of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at
Law, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the Reign of King James.

John Hobart of the City of Norwich in the County of Norfolk Hobart.
Esquire;, is descended from Sir James Hobart of Lincoln's Inn Knight, one of the
Readers thereof in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and Attorney General to
King Henry the Seventh.

Robert Jenny of Knats-Hall in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, Jenny.
is descended from Christopher Jenny Esquire;, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth; which Christopher was descended from Thomas Jenny Esquire; an
eminent Lawyer, several times Reader of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King
Edward the Fourth.

Baldwyn Mallett of Poyntington Malle
in the County of Somerset Esquire;, is descended from Baldwyn Mallett of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth.

Edward Skipwith of Ketsby Skipwith.
in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended from William de Skipwith Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward
the Third.

Roger Downs of Wardley in the County of Lancaster Esquire, Downs.
is descended from Roger Downs Esquire, Reader of Grayes Inn, and Vice-Chamberlain
of the County Palatine of Chester in the Reign of King James.

Adrian Scroope of Cockrington in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, (Brother and Heir
to the Ingenious Sir Carr Scroope Baronet, deceased) is descended by many
honorable Ancestors and Peers of this Realm, from Geffery de Scroope Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench in the Reign of Edward the second.

Vincent Denn of Denn's-hill in the County of Kent Esquire;, is Denn.
descended from Thomas Denn of Denn's-hill aforesaid, a learned Practicer of
the Laws, and Reader of the Inner Temple in the Third year of the Reign of King
Charles the First.

Clement Higham of Barrow Higham.
in the County of Suffolk Esquire;* is descended from Richard Higham of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Richard the
Third, and afterward by King Henry the Seventh he was called to the degree of
a Sergeant at Law.

Anthony Drury of Intwood in Drury.
the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is descended from Robert Drury of Lincoln's Inn
Esquire;, a Person of great Learning, and Speaker of the House of Commons in the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Thomas Colepeper of Hackington Colepeper.
in the County of Kent Esquire;, a younger Branch of that truly Noble and worthy
Family of that County, who derive their descent from John Colepeper Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King
Henry the Fifth.

William Bassett of Cheale alias Chedle in the County of Lincoln Bassett.
Esque, a Person of very Noble and Honorable Parentage, being branched out of
the Ancient stock of the Lords Bassett of Drayton, whose Ancestor was Ralph de
Bassett Lord Chief Justice of England (the first Advancer of this sometime
renowned Family) in the Reign of King Henry the First, which is now almost Six
hundred years since.

Richard Lister of Thorp-Arnold Lister.
in the County of Leicester Esquire;, is descended from Sir Richard Lister Knight,
Sergeant at Law, Reader of the Middle Temple, and Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Petre of Feedlers in the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended Petre.
from the famous Sir William Petre of Corbican in the County of Devon Knight,
Doctor of the Civil Laws, and one of the Principal Secretaries of State to that
resolute Prince King Henry the Eighth.

Evers Armyne of Osgodby in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, Armyne
(the only remaining Branch of that honorable and worthy Family) is descended
from William Armyne Esquire;, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Barons of the
Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.

Robert Oldsworth of Bradley in the County of Gloucester Esquire;, Oldsworth.
is descended from William Oldsworth Esquire;, Reader of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth.

Thomas Turner of Queendon Turner.
in the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from Edward Turner of Paringden in
the said County, and of the Middle Temple Esque, a learned Lawyer, and one of
the Benchers of that honorable Society in the Reign of King James.

Edward Roper of Eltham in the County of Kent E^que the Roper.
eldest Branch of that ancient and honorable Family, is descended from John
Roper of Eltham aforesaid, and of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers
thereof, and Attorney General to King Henry the Eighth.

Edward Briscoe of Aldenham in the County of Hertford Esquire;, Briscoe.
is descended from William Briscoe Esquire;, a Person of great experience in the
Laws, and several times Reader of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth

John Empson of Boston in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is Empson.
descended from Sir Richard Empson Knight, a learned Lawyer, and a Person of
great Note, and employed by King Henry the Seventh in matters of confiderable
moment and advantage to that provident Prince. But this Sir Richard Empson
incurring the hatred of the People, through the great Exactions and Oppressions
which he imposed upon them; at length they formed an Accusation against him and
Edmond Dudley Esquire;, Sergeant at Law (Father to John Dudley Duke of
Northumberland) both jointly concerned, of diverse Misdemeanors and undue
Courses by them committed beyond the bounds of their Authority, for which at
length they both suffered Death*

Edmond Clench of Great Belingshall in the County of Suffolk Clench.
Esquire;, is descended from John Clench of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one
of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Hugh Cholmley of Newton-Grange in the County of York Cholmley.
Esquire;, is descended from Sir Roger Cholmley of Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant at
Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth.

Montfort Spelman of Narborough Spelman.
in the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is descended from the learned Sir John Spelman
of Grayes-Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Richard Crook of Marston in Crook.
the County of Oxon Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Richard Crook of Marston
aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple aforesaid Esquire;, Sergeant at Law deceased,
and lately Recorder of the City of Oxon; which Richard was descended from Sir
John Crook of the same Society Knight, Sergeant at Law, Recorder of London,
Speaker of the House of Commons, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in
the Reign of King James.

John Brook of Redlesham in the County of Suffolk, is descended Brook.
from Sir Robert Brook of the Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law and Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Mary.

William Frampton of Moreton in the County of Dorset Esquire;, Frampton.
is descended from Robert Frampton Esquire;, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in
the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

St. Ledger Scroop of Louth in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended by many
honorable Ancestors, from Geoffrey de Scroop Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Second.

Francis Tirwhitt of Misson in the County of Nottingham Esquire;, Tirwhitt.
a Gentleman of Honorable Blood, is descended from Robert Tirwhitt Esquire;, a
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of both Benches in the several Reigns
of King Henry the Fourth and Fifth.

Edmond Walter of Godstow in the County of Oxon Esquire;, is Walter.
descended from the learned Sir John Walter of the Inner Temple Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the Reign of King
James; which Sir John was the Son of Sir Edmond Walter of Ludlow in the County
of Salop, and of the same Society Knight, several times Reader thereof, and
Chief Justice of South Wales in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Philip Bacon of Wolverton in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, Bacon:
with diverse other worthy Gentlemen of that Name in the said County, are
descended from John de Bacon Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Second.

John Hody of North-Over in the County of Somerset Esquire;, Hody.
is descended from Sir William Hody Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief
Baron of the Court of Exchequer in the Reigns of King Henry the Seventh and
Henry the Eighth; which said Sir William was descended from Sir John Hody
Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench in
the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Vnton Crook of Heddington Crook.
in the County of Oxon Esquire;, is descended from Vnton Crook of the Inner Temple
Esquire;; called to the Dignity of a Sergeant at Law by Mr. Oliver Cromwell; which
Vnton was descended from Sir John Crook of Waterstock in the said County, and
of the same Society Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Court of King's Bench in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James.

Ralph Darnall of Lawton-Hope Darnall.
in the County of Hereford Esquire;, is descended from John Darnall Esquire;; Sergeant
at Law, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward
the Sixth.

Francis Charlton of Apley in Charlton.
the County of Salop Esquire;, a Gentleman of a very plentiful Estate, and of a
very ancient Family, is descended from Sir Richard de Charlton Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the
Second.

Willliam Lenthall of Great Lenthall.
Hasely in the County of Oxon Esquire;, is the Grandson of Sir John Lenthall
Knight, late Marshal of the Court of King's Bench, and Prison thereunto
belonging: The Inheritance of which Office is vested in the said William.

William Tate of De-la Pree Tate.
in the County of Northampton Esque, is descended from Francis Tate of the
Middle Temple Esquire;; one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King James.

Roger Sydenham of Shilgate Sydenham.
in the County of Somerset Esquire;, is descended from Richard de Sydenham Esquire;,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King
Richard the Second.

Henry Bromley of Vpton in the County of Worcester Esquire;, Bromley.
is descended from the famous Sir Thomas Bromley of the Inner Temple Knight,
Solicitor General, and lastly, Lord High Chancellor of England in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

John Danvers of Bainton in the County of Wilts Esquire;, is Danvers.
descended from Robert Danvers of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, a Person of great learning
in the Law, in respect whereof he was called to the Degree of a Sergeant at
Law, and made one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas by King Henry
the Sixth.

The Honorable Colonel Edward Sackvill of St. Martins in Sackvill.
the Fields in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, a Person of exemplary Loyalty and
Valor, is of the Noble Blood ^ of the Sackvills Earls of Dorset, descended
from Sir Richard Sackvill of Buckhurst in the County of Sussex, and of
Grayes-Inn Knight; one of the Benchers of that Society, and Under Treasurer of
the Court of Exchequer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

The Honorable Edward Howard of Vrchfont in the County Howard.
of Wilts Esquire;, (a younger Son of Thomas late Earl of Berkshire) is descended
from William Howard Esquire;, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign
of King Edward the First.

Isaac Farfax of Dunsley in Farfax.
the County of York Esquire;, is descended from the learned Sir Guy Farfax Knight,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reigns
of King Edward the Fourth and Richard the Third.

Anthony Ingilby of Clape-Dale in the West Riding of Yorkshire Ingilby.
Esquire;, is descended from Thomas de Ingilby Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third, from whence
he was removed, and made one of the Justices of the Common Pleas by King
Richard the Second.

The Honorable Robert Philipps Philipps.
Esquire;, one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Bedchamber, is descended from
Sir Edw. Philipps of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Master of
the Rolls in the Reign of His late Majesty King James.

Nicholas Delves of Camberwell Delves.
in the County of Surrey Esquire;, (a Branch of the ancient Name and Family of
Delves of Cheshire) is descended from Sir John Delves Knight, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Robert Sheffield of Kensington Sheffield.
in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, is descended (by a younger Son of Edmond late
Earl of Mulgrave) from Sir Robert Sheffield of Botterwick in the County of
Lincoln, and of the Inner Temple Knight, Recorder of London, and Speaker of the
House of Commons in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Edmond Pooley of Collumbyne-Hall Pooley.
in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, is descended from Edmond Pooley Esquire;, one of
the Readers of Grayes-Inn, and a Person very Eminent for his learning the Laws,
in the Reign Queen Elizabeth.

John Fitz Herbert of Luckington in the County of Wilts Fitz Herbert.
Esquire;, is descended (by a younger Son) from Sir Anthony Fitz Herbert of Norbury
in the County of Derby Knight, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Vavasour of Fogarthorp Vavasour.
in the East Riding of the County of York Esquire;, is descended from John Vavasour
of the Middle Temple Esquire;, the first Reader of that Honorable Society in the
17th year of King Henry the Seventh: After which he was called to the Dignity
of a Sergeant at Law, and constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas
by that Prince.

Dymock Walpole of Louth in Walpole.
the County of Lincoln, and of Grayes-Inn Esquire;, is descended from John Walpole
of Grayes-Inn aforesaid Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof, and one of Her
Majesty's learned Sergeants at Law in the Reign of Queen Mary.

Thomas Petyte of Boughton Petyte.
Under Bleane in the County of Kent Esquire;, is descended from John Petyte of
Grayes-Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Gerrard of Hilderston in Gerrard.
the County of Stafford Esquire;, is descended from Sir Gilbert Gerrard of
Grayes-Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, Attorney General for above Twenty years
together, and also Master of the Rolls in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Thomas Colepepper of Bedgebury in the County of Kent Colepepper.
Esquire;, is descended from John Colepepper Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Henry Drax of Sibsey in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended Drax.
from Richard Drax a learned Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and one of the Governors
thereof for many years in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Anthony Drury of Intwood in Drury.
the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is descended from Robert Drury Esquire; one of the
Readers of Lincoln's Inn, and Speaker of the House of Commons in the Reign of
King Henry the Seventh.

John Kingsmill of Sandleford Kingsmill.
in the County of Berks Esquire;, is descended from John Kingsmill Esquire;, Sergeant
at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh.

William Walsh of Abberlylodge Walsh.
in the County of Worcester Esquire;, is descended from Thomas Walsh Esquire;
Remembrancer of the Court of Exchequer, and one of the Barons of the same Court
in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Stapleton of Warter in the County of York Esquire;, is descended Stapleton.
from Nicholas de Stapleton Esquire; one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the
Reign of King Henry the Third and Edward the First.

John Wyvell of Osgerby in the Wyvell.
County of York Esquire;, is descended from John de Wyvell, one of the Barons of
the Exchequer, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King
Henry the Third.

Thomas Keble of Newton in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, Keble.
with several other worthy Gentlemen of that Name, Family, and County, are
descended from Thomas Keble Esquire;, a learned Sergeant at Law in the Reign of
King Henry the Seventh.

John Higham of East-Ham Higham.
in the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from Richard Higham of Lincoln's Inn
Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof, and called to the Degree of a Sergeant at Law
by King Henry the Seventh.

Henry Henly of Coleway in the County of Dorset Esquire;, is Henly.
descended from Sir Walter Henly Knight, a learned Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and
twice Reader of that Society in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Charles Trevanion of Goran in Trevanion.
the County of Cornwall Esquire;, is descended from John Trevanion Sergeant at Law,
and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the beginning of the
Reign of King Edward the Third.

Christopher Turner of Milton-Erneys Turner.
in the County of Bedford Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Sir Christopher Turner
late of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Barons of the
Exchequer deceased.

Edward North of Benaker in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, is North.
a younger Branch of that Noble Family descended from Sir Edward North Knight,
Treasurer and Chanc^llor of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth.

Bryan Farfax of Denton in Farfax.
the East Riding of Yorkshire Esquire;, is descended from Sir Guy Farfax Knight,
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King
Edward the Fourth.

-- -- Cavendish of Cavendish Cavendish.
in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, the Principal Branch of that truly Honorable
and Ancient Family is descended from Sir John de Cavendish Knight, Sergeant at
Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the
Third and Richard the Second.

Thomas Windham of Witham Windham.
in the County of Somerset Esquire;, is descended from Francis Windham of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

James Hobart of Great Plumstead in the County of Norfolk Hobart.
Esquire;, is descended from Sir James Hobart of Lincoln's Inn Knight, one of the
Readers thereof, and Attorney General to King Henry the Seventh.

John Boys of Fredvill in the Boys.
County of Kent Esquire;, is descended from John Boys Esquire;, an eminent Lawyer of
Grayes-Inn, and several times one of the Readers thereof, and Attorney of the
Duchy of Lancaster in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Thomas Berkley of Tibberton Berkley.
in the County of Worcester Esquire;, is descended from Sir Robert Berkley of
Spechly in the said County of Worcester, and of the Middle Temple Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of
King Charles the First.

Walter Faunt of Kingsthorpe in the County of Northampton Faunt.
Esquire;, is descended from William Faunt Esquire;, one of the Justices of the
King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Thomas Carus of Horton in Carus.
the County of Lancaster Esquire;, is descended from Thomas Carus of the
Middle Temple Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof, and called to the Degree of a
Sergeant at Law by Queen Mary, and afterward by Queen Elizabeth was
constituted one of her Justices of the King's Bench.

John Bagshaw of Lulworth in Bagshaw.
the County of Northampton Esquire;, is descended from Edward Bagshaw of the
Middle Temple Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Charles the
First of Blessed Memory.

Thomas Conningsby of Hampton Conningsby.
Court in the County of Hereford Esquire;, a Family of great Interest and Antiquity
in that County, is descended from Humphrey Conningsby Esquire;, Sergeant at Law,
and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the first year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.

John Cave of Horsepoole-Grange Cave.
in the County of Leicester Esquire;, is descended from John de Cave, one of the
Justices of the King's Bench in the Reign of Edward the First.

Lionell Gosnold of Otley-Hall Gosnold.
in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, is descended from John Gosnold Esquire;, a learned
Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and twice Reader of that Society in the Reigns of King
Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth.

Charles Holloway of the City Holloway.
of Oxon Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to the late learned Charles Holloway of the
Inner Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law deceased.

Ambrose Philipps of the Inner Temple Philipps.
Esquire;, a Person of great Learning and Judgment in the Laws, and particularly in
the Rules and Practice of the Court of Chancery, is the Son and Heir to Ambrose
Philipps Gentleman, a worthy Practicer in the same Court.

Joseph Offley of Kentish Town Offley.
in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, enjoyes a very fair Estate as Brother, Heir,
and Executor to Robert Offley late of the Middle Temple Esquire; deceased.

Thomas Hesketh of Rufforth Hesketh.
in the County of Lancaster Esquire;, a Gentleman of an Ample Estate and a very
ancient Family in that County, is descended from Sir Thomas Hesketh of
Grayes-Inn Knight, one of the Readers thereof, Attorney of the Court of Wards
and Liveries, and one of the Council in the North in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth and King James; which Sir Thomas was descended from Richard Hesketh
Esquire;, another able Lawyer, and Reader of the same Society in the beginning of
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Glanvill of the City of Glanvill.
Exeter in the County of Devon, and of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, is descended from the
learned Sir John Glanvill of the same Society Knight, called to the Dignity of
a Sergeant at Law by King Charles the First; which Sir John was descended from
John Glanvill of the same Society Esquire; Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices
of the Court (...) of Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Gilbert Hody of Cornworthy Hody.
in the County of Devon Esquire;. is descended from Sir William Hody Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth; which Sir William was descended from Sir John Hody Knight,
Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in the Reign of King
Henry the Sixth.

Richard Hutton of Goldesbrough in the West Riding of Hutton.
Yorkshire Esquire;, is descended from the famous Sir Richard Hutton Knight,
Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of
King James.

Oliver Luke of Wood-End in Luke
the County of Bedford Esquire;, is descended from Walter Luke Esquire;, Reader of the
Middle Temple, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the King's Bench in
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

John Moreton of Kiddington Moreton.
in the County of Oxon Esquire;, is descended from Sir William Moreton Knight
deceased, late one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, and one of the Justices
of the King's Bench in the year of our Lord 1666.

Charles Pelham of Brocklesby Pelham.
in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended from Sir Edmond Pelham of
Grayes-Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Baron of the Court of
Exchequer in Ireland in the Reign of King James; which Sir Edmond was descended
of the Ancient and Worshipful Family of the Pelhams of Lawton in Sussex, where
Sir John Pelham Baronet, the eldest branch thereof, now resideth.

Francis Lane of Glen in the County of Northampton Esquire;, Lane.
is descended from Thomas Lane of Lincolns Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers of that
House in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Thomas Mead of Wenden in the County of Essex Esquire;, is Mead:
descended from Thomas Mead of the Middle Temple Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one
of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Thomas Neale of Wollaston in the County of Northampton Neale.
Esquire;, is descended from Sir Richard Neale Knight, Sergeant at Law, and one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas in the several Reigns of Edward the Fourth,
Edward the Fifth, Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh.

Robert Redmayne of Foulforth in the County of York Esquire;, is Redmayne.
descended from Edward Redmayne a learned Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and one of
the Readers of that ancient Society in the Reign of King-Henry the Seventh.

John Powtrell of West-Halome Powtrell.
in the County of Derby Esquire;, is descended from Nicholas Powtrell of Grayes-Inn
Esquire;, called to the Degree of a Sergeant at Law in the first year of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth.

Nicholas Pedley of Abbotsley in the County of Huntington Pedley.
Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Sir Nicholas Pedley of Lincoln's Inn Knight,
Sergeant at Law.

Richard Hopkins of the City of Coventry in the County of Hopkins.
Warwick Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to Sir Richard Hopkins Knight, Sergeant at
Law, one of the Readers of the Inner Temple, and lately Recorder of the said
City of Coventry.

Littleton Powis of Lincoln's Inn Powis.
Esquire;, is the Son and Heir of Thomas Powis of the said Society Esquire; Sergeant at
Law, and very eminent for his great Knowledge therein.

John South of Skelston in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended South.
from Thomas South Esquire;, a learned Lawyer of the Middle Temple, and one of the
Readers thereof in the Reign of King James.

Henry Portington of Portington Portington.
in the County of York Esquire;, (a Gentleman of an Excellent Family) is descended
from John Portington Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Francis Roper Esquire;, lately Roper.
Gentleman Usher to Her most Gracious Majesty Queen Catherine, is descended
from John Roper of Eltham in Kent, and of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Attorney General
to King Henry the Eighth.

Edward Thurland of Rigate in the County of Surrey Esquire;, Thurland.
is the Son and Heir to the late learned Sir Edward Thurland of Rigate
aforesaid, and of the Inner Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, Solicitor General
to his Royal Highness James Duke of York, and afterward one of the Barons of
the Exchequer.

Charles Stutevill of Daltham Stutevill.
in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, is descended from Thomas Stutevill (or
Stotevill) Esquire;, one of the Benchers of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign of King Henry
the Sixth.

William Stratford of Barton Stratford.
on the Heath in the County of Warwick Esquire;, is descended from George Stratford
Esquire;, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Governors of Lincoln's Inn in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth.

William Peck of the Inner Temple Peck.
Esquire;, a Gentleman of a very fair Estate, is the Son and Heir to Edward Peck of
the same Society Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, very eminent in that Calling, and more
particularly for his Skill in the Rules and Practice of the Court of Chancery.

William Branthwaite of Swarston in the County of Norfolk Branthwaite.
Esquire;, is descended from Richard Branthwaite of Lincoln's Inn, Sergeant at Law,
one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

John Thorpe of Danthorpe in Thorpe.
the East Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire; is descended by many worshipful Ancestors
from Sir Robert de Thorpe Knight, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas in the Reign of King Edward the Third.

Richard Shuttleworth of Gawthorpe Shuttleworth
in the County of Lancaster Esquire;, is descended from Richard Shuttleworth of
Grayes-Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
by whom he was called to the Dignity of a Sergeant at Law, and made Chief
Justice of Chester.

Charles Hare of Tottenham-High-Cross, Hare.
in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, is descended from Sir Nicholas Hare of the
Inner Temple Knight, Reader thereof in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; to
which Prince he was Master of the Requests, and by King Edward the Sixth was
constituted Master of the Rolls.

Nicholas Townley of Royle in Townley.
the County of Lancaster Esquire;, (of the Ancient and Honorable Family of Townleys
of Townley in the said County) is descended from Nicholas Townley Esquire;, a
learned Lawyer of Grayes-Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.

Robert Spelman of Holme in the County of Norfolk Esquire; is Spelman.
descended from the learned Sir John Spelman of Grayes-Inn Knight, Sergeant at
Law, one of the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench in the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth.

William Sydenham of Winford Sydenham.
Eagles in the County of Dorset Esquire;, is one of the Descendants of Richard
Sydenham Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Richard the Second.

John Boyse of Pottshanger in Boyse.
the County of Kent Esquire;, is descended from John Boyse of Grayes-Inn Esquire;
diverse times Reader of that Honorable Society, and Attorney of the Duchy of
Lancaster in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Richard Naylour of Offord-D'arcey Naylour.
in the County of Huntington Esquire;, is descended from William Naylour Esquire;, one
of the Six Clerks in the High and Honorable Court of Chancery in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

James George of Bawnton in George.
the County of Gloucester Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to John George of Bawnton
aforesaid Esquire;, a Person of great Loyalty, and one of the Benchers of the
Middle Temple for many years before his Death.

Edward Salter of Rich-Kings Salter.
in the County of Bucks Esquire;, is the Grandson and Heir to Sir Edward Salter
Knight, a learned Lawyer, and one of the Masters of the Court of Chancery in
the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles the First of blessed Memory.

Challoner Chute of the Vine in Chute.
the County of Southampton Esquire;* a Gentleman of a fair Estate, is the Son and
Heir to Challoner Chute of Sutton-Court in the County of Middlesex Esquire;, a
Person of great Abilities and Practice in the Law.

Nicholas Martyn of Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, is the Son and Heir Martyn.
to Nicholas Martyn Esquire;, a late learned Lawyer of the said honorable Society.

Roger Portington of Barnsby upon Dun in the West Riding of Portington.
the County of York Esquire;, is descended from John Portington Esquire;, Sergeant at
Law, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Twenty second year of the
Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Robert Montague of Sharnborne Montague.
in the County of Bedford Esquire;, is descended from Sir Henry Montague of the
Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench
and Lord High Treasurer of England in the Reign of King James and King Charles
the First; which Sir Henry was descended from Sir Edward Montague of the same
Society Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the same Court in
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

Charles Gerrard of Lamburne Gerrard.
in the County of Berks Esquire;, is descended from Sir Gilbert Gerrard of
Grayes-Inn, and of Gerrards-Bromly in Staffordshire Knight, Sergeant at Law,
Attorney General, and Master of the Rolls in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Ralph Leicester of Toft in the County of Chester Esquire;, (a Leicester.
younger Branch of the worthy Family of the Leicester's of Nether-Tabley in the
said County) is descended from Roger de Leicester one of the Barons of the
Exchequer in the Reign of King Edward the First.

Thomas Yarbrough of Campsall Yarbrough.
in the West Riding of the County of York Esquire;, a Gentleman learned in the Law,
is descended from Francis Yarbrough Esquire;, one of the Readers of Lincolns Inn in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Richard Godbolt of Hatfield-Peverell Godbolt.
in the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from John Godbolt of Grayes-Inn
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Charles the First.

William Roper of Brentford in Roper.
the County of Middlesex Esquire;, a Gentleman of great Probity and Loyalty, and of
an Excellent Family, is descended from John Roper Esquire;, a learned Lawyer of
Lincoln's Inn, of which Society he became one of the Readers, and was Attorney
General to King Henry the Eighth.

William Broxholme of Barrow Broxholme.
in the County of Lincoln Esquire;, is descended from Thomas Broxholme Esquire;, a
learned Lawyer of Grayes Inn, and one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

Robert Houghton of Ranworth Houghton*
in the County of Norfolk Esquire;, is descended from Robert Houghton of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

John Carry of Wilcott in the Carry.
County of Oxon, is descended from John Carry of Holway in the County of Devon
Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Barons of the Exchequer in the Reign of King
Richard the Second.

Peter Warburton of Abbots-Bromley Warburton.
in the County of Stafford Esquire;, is descended from the learned Sir Peter
Warburton of Lincoln's Inn Knight, Sergeant at Law in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of King
James.

John Gaynsford of Cohurst-Place Gaynsford.
in the County of Surrey Esquire;, is descended from William Gaynsford Esquire;, a
famous Lawyer and one of the Governors of the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn
in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Gyles Air of Brickworth in the County of Wilts, and of Air.
Lincoln's Inn Esquire;, Recorder of the Town of Southampton, and Deputy Recorder of
the City of Salisbury, a Gentleman of great Experience and Judgment in the Law,
and of eminent Practice; is descended from William Air of the same Society
Esquire;, one of the Readers thereof in the Reign of King Charles the First.

John Goodrick of Altofts in the Goodrick.
West Riding of Yorkshire Esquire;, is descended from the late learned Sir Francis
Goodrick of Lincoln's Inn Knight, Temporal Chancellor of the County Palatine of
Durham.

John Scroope of Castle-Combe Scroope.
in the County of Wilts Esquire;, (a younger Branch of the Noble and Ancient Family
of the Lord Scroop) is descended from Sir Goffery de Scroop Knight, Sergeant
at Law, and Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the Reign of King Edward
the Second.

Henry Shelly of Jews in the County of Sussex Esquire;, is descended Shelly*
from William Shelly Esquire;, Sergeant at Law, one of the Readers of the
Inner Temple, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the Reign
of King Henry the 8th.

William Peckham of the City Peckham.
of Chichester in the County of Sussex Esquire;, is the Son and Heir to the late
learned and Judicious Sir Henry Peckham Knight Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of
the said City of Chichester.

Robert Hyde of Dinton in the County of Wilts Esquire;, is Hyde.
descended from Sir Robert Hyde of the Middle Temple Knight, Sergeant at Law in
the Reign of King Charles the First, and upon His Majesty's Restoration was
first constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, from whence he was
shortly after advanced to the Dignity of Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.

James Zouch of Woking in the County of Surrey Esquire;, is descended Zouch.
by many Noble Ancestors from Allan le Zouch Lord Chief Justice of England in
the Reign of King Henry the Third.

Robert Bernard of Syleby in Bernard.
the County of Leicester Esquire;, is descended from Sir Robert Bernard of Brampton
in the County of Huntington Knight and Baronet, a wealthy and learned Sergeant
at Law, being called to that Degree in the year 1660.

Thomas Needham of Dutton Needham.
in the County of Chester Esquire;, (a Gentleman of great Honor and Repute, and of
an excellent Family) is descended from Sir John Needham of Sheinton in the
County of Salop Knight (the Ancient Seat of this Family) Sergeant at Law, Chief
Justice of Chester, and one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the Reign of
King Henry the 6th.

Charles Yaxley of Yaxley-Hall Yaxley.
in the County of Suffolk Esquire;, is descended from John Yaxley of Yaxley
aforesaid Esquire;, a learned Sergeant at Law in the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh.

Humphrey Noy of Carnanton Noy.
in the County of Cornwall Esquire;, is descended from the famous William Noy of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire; Attorney General to King Charles the First.

Henry Mildmay of Graces in Mildmay.
the County of Essex Esquire;, is descended from Sir Walter Mildmay Knight,
Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, which Sir Walter was the Son and Heir to Thomas Mildmay Esquire;, one of
the Auditors of the Court of Augmentations in the Reign of Henry the Eighth.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A. ALlen, Page 69 Altham, 149 Anderson, 53, 66, 77, 91, 182 Andrews, 81 Anger
Lord Strangford, 15 Appleton, 38 Archer, 135 Ardern, 134 Armyn, 231 Ascough,
124, 220 Atkins, 108 114, 200, 208 Ayloff, 40, 190 B. BAbington, 194 Bacon, 32,
50, 85, 122, 237 Bagshaw, 253 Baldwin, 223 Ball, 127 Banks, 83 Barker, 92
Barnham, 89 Basset, 229 Bastard, 150 Beaumont, 47 Beddingfield, 172 Bell, 181
Beresford, 173 Berkley, 186, 252 Bernard, 86, 275 Bindloss, 58 Bingham, 220
Boon, 205 Booth, 215 Boteler, 43, 54, 137 Bowyer, 76 Boys, 252 Boyse, 266
Brabazon Lord of Mead, 14, 175 Bradshaw, 100 Brampston, 115, 123, 142, 188
Branthwaite, 263 Brerewood, 188 Bridgman, 67 Briscoe, 232 Brograve, 88 Broom,
204, 216 Bromley, 180, 196, 222, 240 Brook, 81, 235 Brown, 128 Brownlow, 56
Broxholme, 271 Brudnell Lord Cardigan, 9, 178 Bruce Lord Alesbury, 10 C.
CAlthorp, 148, 165 Carleton, 133 Cartwright, 219 Carus, 253 Carry, 149, 151, 271
Caryll, 156, 177, 199 Catesby, 190 Catelyn, 118 Cave, 53, 254 Cavendish Lord
Newcastle and Devon, 2, 179, 251 Caesar, 136, 164, 176 Cecil Lord Exeter and
Salisbury, 3 Chaloner, 143, 211 Chamberlayn, 65, 223 Charleton, 108, 239
Chisnall, 130 Cholmley, 57, 234 Chute, 267 Clerk, 139 Lord Clifford, 27
Clopton, 126 Cockain Lord Cullen; 17, 67 Lord Colepeper, 26, 48, 51, 147, 229,
246 Coke, 60, 169, 194, 226 Conyers, 155 Coningsby, 253 Cook, 88 Cooper Lord
Shaftsbury, 11 Corbet, 51 Cordell, 71 Lord Coventry, 24, 126, 138, 168, 199
Crawley, 712 Lord Crew, 26 Cromwell Lord Ardglass, 20 Crook, 101, 121, 127,
186, 234, 238 Curson, 80 D. DAllison, 36, 173 Dalton, 142 Danby, 167 Daniell,
137 Darcey, 70 Darnall, 238 Danvers, 66, 214, 240 Delves, 44, 243 Denn, 228
Denton, 189 Dereham, 82 Diggs, 213 Dowdswell, 193 Downs, 227 Drax, 246 Drury,
130, 229, 247 E. Earl, 175 Egerton Lord Bridgewater, 4 Ellis, 73 Empson, 232
Engham, 119 Englefield, 40 Ernley, 78, 105 Estcourt, 121 Air, 272 F. LOrd
Farfax, 17, 29, 242, 250 Faunt, 220, 252 Finch Lord Nottingham, 13, 152 Fitz
Herbert, 166, 191, 225, 244 Fitz James, 127 Fleetwood, 128 Forster, 120
Fortescue, 90, 161, 177 Foster, 66 Fountain, 218 Frampton, 235 Franklyn, 111 G.
GAscoigne, 102 Gaudy, 80, 88, 160, 179 Gaynsford, 272 Gell, 60 George, 267
Gerrard Lord Maxfield, etc. 11, 95, 246, 269 Glanvill, 225, 256 Glyn, 81
Godbolt, 270 Goodrick, 273 Gosnold, 254 Griffin, 145 Guilford, 163 H. HAles,
38, 74, 148 Halton, 63 Hare, 264 Harpur, 46, 175, 218 Hare Lord Colrain, 30, 55
Harvey, 120, 165 Lord Hatton, 16, 54 Heath, 112, 210 Hele, 49 Henly, 73, 79,
111, 249 Henden, 138 Herlackenden, 208 Hesketh, 255 Hide Lord Clarendon and
Rochester, 9 Higham, 228, 249 Hill, 141, 211 Hobert, 33, 226, 251 Hody, 237,
256 Holloway, 254 Hopkins, 260 Hopton, 163 Houghton, 271 Howard Duke of
Norfolk, etc. 1, 2, 117, 130, 221, 241 Hussy, 36, 83 Hutton, 257 Hyde, 274 I.
JAckson, 77 Jenuy, 226 Ingilby, 61, 242 Ingoldsby, 84, 119 Irby, 182 Ireland,
132 K. KEble, 248 Keeling, 224 Kingsmill, 193, 247 Knightly, 75 Knivett, 125 L.
LAne, 258 Leicester, 75, 269 Lenthall, 183, 239 Lister, 208, 230 Littleton, 41,
49, 63, 141, 174 Long, 87 Lord Lovelace, 24, 184, 222 Lowther, 61, 102, 173
Luke, 257 Lukener, 159 M. MAllet, 129, 227 Markham, 62, 157, 214 Martyn, 95,
268 Maunsfield, 200 May, 109 Mead, 259 Meynell, 190 Mildmay Lord Fitzwalter,
18, 276 Milward, 176 Mingay, 188 Montague Lord Manchester, 6, 104, 213, 217,
268 Moore, 48 Mordant, Lord Peterborough, 8, 37, 184 Morgan, 204 Moreton, 258
Mounson, 34 Moyle, 134 N. NApier, 41 Naylour, 266 Neale, 259 Needham Lord
Kilmurry, 30, 275 Nelthorpe, 93 Newdigate, 99 Nicholls, 56 Nitingall, 51, 186
Lord North, 22, 27, 70, 131, 153, 250 Norton, 45, 197, Norwich, 55 Noy, 189,
276 O. OFfley, 255 Oldsworth, 231 Onslow, 96 Osbaldeston, 91 Overbury, 143, 185
Owen, 139 P. PAckington, 44 Lord Paget, 21 Palmer, 68 Palms, 192 Parkins, 101
Paston Lord Yarmouth, 12, 224 Peck, 263 Peckham, 274 Pedley, 260 Pelham, 258
Pettit, 245 Lord Petre, 22, 192, 230 Phesant, 195 Philipps, 42, 147 206, 243,
255 Piggott, 132 Playters, 46 Plowdon, 157 Poole, 99 Pooley, 125, 244 Popham,
115 Portington, 261, 268 Portman, 39 Powtrell, 260 Powis, 261 Puckering, 43
Purefoy, 195 Pie, 134 R. RAinsford, 209 Read, 79 Redmayne, 259 Reeve, 87
Reynell, 207 Rhodes, 58, 217 Rich Lord Warwick, 5, 97, 144, 146, 202 Lord
Richardson, 29 Robinson, 136 Rolls, 140 Rookby. 78 Roper Lord Tenham, 23, 232,
262, 270 S. SAckvill Lord Dorset, 3, 218, 241 Salter, 267, ^awyer, 109 Scroop,
228, 236, 273 Scott, 133, 194 Scroggs, 113 Sedley, 38 Selby, 89 Seys, 154, 205,
216 Sheffeild Lord Mulgrave, 7, 243 Shelly, 34, 273 Sherly, 93 Shukburgh, 203
Shuttleworth, 264 Sidenham, 56, 146, 240 Skipwith, 45, 100, 206, 227 Smith Lord
Carington, 25 Snagg, 194 South, 261 Southcott, 85 Spelman, 221, 234 Spencer, 37
Stanford, 167 Stapleton, 70, 86, 248 Stephens, 122 Stonher, 159 Strangwaies,
155 Stratford, 263 Stutevill, 262 Sylyard, 82, 116, 180 219 Sympson, 160 T.
TAte, 239 Tailor, 92 Tempest, 45, 90 Thorold, 62 Thorpe, 264 Thurland, 262
Thymelby, 184 Thyn Lord Weymouth, 16 Tildesly, 161 Tirwhit, 35, 207, 236
Tooker, 91 Townley, 265 Townsend Lord Raynham, 15, 145, 209, 203 Trever, 58
Trevanion, 185, 249 Trotman, 197 Turner, 112, 198, 231, 250 Turpin, 189
Twisden, 94, 212 Tyrrel, 92 V. VAvasour, 52, 244 Vaughan, 182 Vernon, 74
Underhill, 144 W. WAlmesly, 168 Walpole, 132, 245 Walsh, 247 Walter, 59, 236
Warburton, 72, 271 Weston Lord Portland, 8 Wetenhall, 206 Whichcot, 67
Whitlock, 123, 171 Wilbraham, 176 Wild, 76 Willoughby, 98, 201, 203 Winch, 69
Wingate, 131 Wivell, 248 Wolseley, 53 Wood, 124 Woodhouse, 35 Wray, 39, 71
Wroth; 76 Wyndham, 84, 96, 106, 164, 251 Y. YArborough, 117 270 Yaxley, 275
Yelverton Lord Gray, 19 York, 150 Young, 84 Z. ZOuch, 135, 274.
FINIS.

