THE ADVICE OF W. P. TO Mr. SAMVEL HARTLIB.

FOR The Advancement of some particular Parts of LEARNING.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

There is invented an Instrument of small Bulk and price, easily made, and
very durable, whereby any Man, even at the first sight and handling, may write
two resembling Copies of the same thing at once, as serviceably and as fast
(allowing two lines upon each page for setting the Instruments) as by the
ordinary way. Of what Nature or in what Character, or what Matter soever, as
Paper, Parchment, a Book, etc. the said writing ought to be upon made.

The Use hereof will be very great to Lawyers and Scriveners, for making of
Indentures, and all kind of Counter-parts, to Merchants, Intelligencers,
Registers, Secretaries, Clarks; etc. for copying of Letters, Accounts,
Invoices, Entering of Warrants, and other Records, To Scholars, for
Transcribing of rare Manuscripts, and preserving Originals from falsification,
and other injuries of time. It lesseneth the Labor of Examination, serves to
discover forgeries and surreptitious Copies, and to the transacting of all
businesses of writing, as with ease and speed, so with much privacy also.

To his honored friend Master SAMUEL HARTLIB.
SIR,
I Have had many flying thoughts, concerning the Advancement of Real Learning
in general, but particularly of the Education of Youth, Mathematics,
Mechanics, Physic, and concerning the History of Art and Nature, with some
more serious ones concerning your own most excellent advices for an Office of
Public address. And indeed they were but flying thoughts, for seeing what
vast sums were requisite to carry on those designs, and how unwilling or
unable men generally were to contribute toward them, I thought it but labor
lost to fix my mind much upon them.

But it having pleased God unexpectedly, to make me the Inventor of the Art of
Double Writing, daily and hourly useful to all sorts of Persons in all places
of the world, and that to perpetuity, I conceived that if there were
understanding enough in Men to be sensible of their own good, and Thankfulness
or honesty enough to reward the Contrivers of it, such Means might be raised
out of this Art as might at least set the aforementioned Designs on float, and
make them ready to set sail toward the haven of perfection upon every
opportunity of stronger gales. And thereupon I reassumed my Meditations, which
I here give you, desiring you and your Ingenious Friends to remeditate upon
them and correct them, but withal to think of the best Course, how to improve
my Invention to such advantage, as may if possible, make us capable of enjoying
more then bare Ideas of that Happiness, which the achievements of our designs
promises. I shall desire you to show them unto no more then needs you must,
since they can please only those few, that are Real Friends to the Design of
Realities, not those who are tickled only with Rhetorical Prefaces,
Transitions, and Epilogues, and charmed with fine Allusions and Metaphors, (all
which I do not condemn) wherewith, as I had no abilities to adorn my
discourse, so I wanted all other requisites thereunto, Having written it (as
Your self must bear me witness) at your own Importunity in the midst of my
cares and endeavors, to perfect mine Invention, and which is work in the midst
of my hard and perhaps unprofitable labor, to prevent the ingratitude and
backwardness of men to reward him, who shall earnestly labor to express
himself,

London the 8. January. 1647/8 Yours and your designs most affectionate
servant, W. P.

THE Advice For Advancement of some particular Parts of Learning.
TO give an exact Definition or nice Division of Learning, or of the
Advancement thereof, we shall not undertake (it being already so accurately
done by the great Lord Verulam) Intending only to show where our own shoe
pincheth us, or to point at some pieces of Knowledge, the improvement whereof
(as we at least conceive) would make much to the ^enerall good and comfort of
all mankind, and withal to deliver our own opinion by what means they may be
raised some one degree nearer to perfection.

But before we can meddle with this great Work, we must first think of getting
Laborers, by appointing some General Rande vouz, where all men either able or
willing to take up arms against the many difficulties thereof, may find
entertainment. That is to say, We must recommend the Institution of an Office
of common Address according to the projection of Master Hartlib (that painful
and great instrutment of this Design) whereby the wants and desires of all may
be made known unto all, where men may know what is already done in the
buisinesse of Learning. What is at present in doing, and what is intended to be
done: to the end, that by such a general communication of designs, and
mutual assistance; The wits and endeavors of the world may no longer be as so
many scattered coals or firebrands, which for want of union, are soon
quenched, whereas being but laid together they would have yeeled a comfortable
light and heat. For me thinks the present condition of men is like a field
where a battle has been lately fought, where we may see many legs, and
arms, and eyes lying here and there, which for want of a union and a soul to
quicken and enliven them, are good for nothing but to feed Ravens; and infect
the air. So we see many Wits and Ingenuities lying scattered up and down
the world, whereof some are now laboring to do what is already done, and
pusling themselves to reinvent what is already invented, others we see quite
stuck fast in difficulties, for want of a few Directions, which some other man
(might he be met withal) both could and would most easily give him; again one
man wants a small sum of money, to carry on some design, that requires it,
and there is perhaps another, who has twice as much ready to bestow on the
same design, but these two having no Means ever to hear the one of the
other, the good Work intended and desired, by both parties does utterly perish
and come to nothing: But this we pass over slightly, though very fundamental
to our business, because the Master Builder thereof himself has done it so
solidly. Having by this means procured workmen and what else is necessary to
the Work, that which we would have them to labor in, is, How to find out
such Arts as are yet undiscovered, How to learn what is already known, by more
compendious and facile ways, and to apply it to more, and those more noble
uses, how to work in men an higher esteem of Learning so as to give occasion,
encouragement and opportunity to more Men to apply themselves to its
Advancement.

The next thing then to be done, will be, First, to see what is well and
sufficiently done already, exploding whatsoever is nice, contentious and meery
fantastical. All which must in some measure be suppressed and brought into
disgrace and contempt with all men.

2. This survey may be made by perusing al Books and taking notice of all
Mechanical Inventions.

3. In this perusal, all the Real or Experimental Learning may be sifted and
collected out of the said Books.

4. There must be appointed able Readers of all such Books, with certain and
well limited Directions what to collect out of them.

5. Every Book must be so read by two several Persons apart, to prevent
mistakes and failings from the said Directions.

6. The Directions for Reading must be such, as the Readers observing them, may
exactly agree in their Collections.

7. Out of all these Books one Book or great Work may be made, though
consisting of many Volumes.

8. The most Artificial Indices Tables or other Helps for the ready finding,
remembering, and well understanding all things contained in these Books must be
contrived and put in practice.

Having thus taken the height or pitch whereunto al Arts and Sciences
whatsoever, are already come; and observed where they now stick, the ablest Men
in every respective Faculty must be set apart, to drive them on further with
sufficient maintenance, and encouragement for the same. Whereunto it is
requisite that two or three, one under another, be employed about each Faculty,
to the end that some of them dying, or any other wise failing, there may never
want men acquainted with the whole Design, and able to carry it on, with the
help of others to be admitted under them; And that at least yearly Accounts be
taken of those men's endeavors, and rewards be proportioned to them accordingly.

And now we shall think of whetting our tools and preparing sharp Instruments
for this hard work, by delivering our thoughts concerning Education, which are,

1. That there be instituted Ergastula Literaria, Literarywork-houses, where
Children may be taught as well to do something toward their living, as to
Read and Write.

That the business of Education be not (as now) committed to the worst and
unworthiest of men, but that it be seriously studied and practiced by the best
and abler persons.

That all Children of above seven years old may be presented to this kind of
Education, none being to be excluded by reason of the poverty and unability of
their Parents, for hereby it has come to pass, that many are now holding the
Plough, which might have been made fit to steer the State. Wherefore let such
poor children be employed on works whereby they may earne their living, equal
to their strength and. understanding, and such as they may perform as well as
elder and abler persons, viz. attending Engines, etc. And if they cannot get
their whole living, and their Parents can contribute nothing at all to make it
up, let them stay somewhat the longer in the Workhouse.

That since few children have need of reading before they know, or can be
acquainted with the Things they read of, or of writing, before their thoughts
are worth the recording, or they are able to put them into any form, (which we
call inditing) much less of learning languages, when there be Books enough
for their present use in their own mother Tongue; our opinion is, that those
Things being withal somewhat above their capacity, (as being to be attained by
Judgment, which is weakest in children) be deferred awhile, and others more
needful for them, such as are in the order of Nature before those before
mentioned, and are attainable by the help of Memory, which is either most
strong or unpreoccupied in children, be studied before them. We wish therefore
that the Educands be taught to observe and remember all sensible Objects and
Actions, whether they be Natural or Artificial, which the Educators must upon
all occasions expound unto them.

That they use such Exercises whether in work, or for recreation, as tend to
the health, agility and strength of their bodies.

That they be taught to Read by much more compendious means then are in common
use, which is a thing certainly very easy and feasible.

That they be not only taught to Write according to our Common Way, but also
to Write Swiftly and in Real Characters, as likewise the dextrous use of the
Instruments for Writing many Copies of the same thing at once.

That the Artificial Memory be thought upon, and if the precepts thereof be
not too far above Childrens Capacities, We conceive it not improper for them
to learn that also.

That in no case the Art of Drawing and designing be omitted, to what course of
Life soever those children are to be applied, since the use thereof for
expressing the conceptions of the mind, seems (at least to us) to be little
inferior to that of Writing, and in many cases performs what by words is
impossible.

That the Elements of Arithmetic and Geometry be by all studied, being not
only of great and frequent use in all humane Affairs but also sure guides and
helps to Reason, and especial Remedies for a volatile and unstedy mind.

That effectual Courses be taken to try the Abilities of the Bodies and Minds
of Children, the strength of their Memory, inclination of their Affections
either to Vice or Virtue, and to which of them in particular, and withal to
alter what is bad in them, and increase and improve what is good, applying all,
whether good or bad, to the least Inconveniencie and most Advantage.

That such as shall have need to learn Foreign Languages (the use whereof
would be much lessened, were the Real and Common Characters brought into
practice) may be taught them by incomparably more easy ways then are now
usual.

That no ignoble, unnecessary, or condemned Part of Learning be taught in those
houses of Education, so that if any man shall vainly fall upon them, he
himself only may be blamed.

That such as have any natural ability and fitness to Music be Encouraged
and Instructed therein.

That all Children, though of the highest rank, be taught some gentile
Manufacture in their minority, such as are

Turning of curious Figures.

Making Mathematical Instruments, Dialls, and how to use them in Astronomicall
Observations.

Making Watches and other Trochilick motions.

Limning and Painting on Glass or in Oil Colors.

Graving, Etching, Carving, Embossing and Molding in sundry matters.

The Lapidaries Art of knowing, cutting and setting Jewels.

Grinding of Glasses Dioptricall and Catoptricall.

Botanicks and Gardening.

Making Musical Instruments.

Navarchy and making Modells for buildings and rigging of Ships.

Architecture and making Modells for houses.

The Confectioners, Perfumers or Diers Arts.

Chemistry, refining Metalls and Counterfeiting Jewels.

Anatomy making Sceletons and excarnating bowels.

Making Mariners Compasses, Globes, and other Magnetic Devices.

And all, for these Reasons.

1. They shall be less subject to be cousened by Artificers.

2. They will become more industrious in general.

3. They will certainly bring to pass most excellent Works being as Gentlemen,
ambitious to excel ordinary Workmen.

4. They being able to make Experiments themselves, may do it with less
charge, and more care then others will do it for them.

5. The Resp. Artium will be much advanced, when such as are rich and able, are
also willing to make Luciferous Experiments.

6. It may engage them to be Mecaenates and Patrons of Arts.

7. It will keep them from worse occasions of spending their time and estates.

8. As it will be a great Ornament in prosperity, so it will be a great Refuge
and stay in adversity and common calamity.

As for what remains of Education, we cannot but hope that those, whom we have
desired should make it their trade, will Supply it, and render the Idea thereof
much more perfect.

We have already recommended the study of the Elements of Arithmetic and
Geometry to all Men in general, but they being the best grounded parts of
Speculative knowledge, and of so Vast use in all Practical Arts. We cannot but
commend deeper enquiries into them. And although the way of advancing them in
particular, may be drawn from what we have already delivered, concerning the
Advancement of learning in general, yet for the more explicit understanding
of our meaning herein, we refer to Master Pells most excellent Idea thereof,
written to Master Hartlib.

In the next place for the Advancement of all Mechanical Arts and
Manufactures, we wish that there were erected a Gymnasium Mechanicum or a
College of Tradesmen (or for more expedition until such a place could be
built, that the most convenient houses for such a purpose may be either bought
or hired) wherein we would that one at least of every Trade (but the Prime most
Ingenious Workman, the most desirous to improve his Art,) might be allowed
therein, a handsome dwelling Rent free, which with the Credit of being admitted
into this Society, and the quick sale which certainly they would have of their
Commodities, when all men would repair thither, as to a Market of rare and
exquisite pieces of Workmanship, would be a sufficient Motive to attract the
very ablest Mechanics, and such as we have described, to desire a fellowship
in this College.

From this Institution we may clearly hope when the excellent in all Arts are
not only Neighbors, but intimate Friends and Brethren, united in a Common
desire and zeal to promote them, that all Trades will miraculously prosper, and
new Inventions would be more frequent, then new fashions of Clothes and
household-stuffe. Here would be the best and most effectual opportunities and
means, for writing a History of Trades in perfection and exactness, and what
Experiments and stuff would all those Shops and Operations afford to Active
and Philosophical heads, out of which, to extract that Interpretation of
Nature, whereof there is so little, and that so bad as yet extant in the world?

Within the walls of this Gymnasium or College, should be a Nosecomium
Academicum according to the most exact and perfect Idea thereof a complete
Theatrum Botanicum, stalls and Cages for all strange Beasts and Birds, with
Ponds and Conservatories for all exotic Fishes, here all Animalls capable
thereof should be made fit for some kind of labor and employment, thaa they
may as well be of use living as dead; here should be a Repositorie of all kind
of Rarities Natural and Artificial pieces of Antiquity, Modells of all great
and noble Engines, with Designs and Platformes of Gardens and Buildings. The
most Artificial Fountains and Waterworks, a Library of Select Books, an
Astronomicall Observatory for celestial Bodies and Meteor, large pieces of
Ground for several Experiments of Agriculture, Galleeries of the rarest
Paintings and Satues, with the fairest Globes, and Geographcall Maps of the
best descriptions, and so far as is possible, we would have this place to be
the Epitome or Abstract of the whole world. So that a man conversant within
those walls, would certainly prove a greater Scholar, then the Walking
Libraries so called, although he could neither write nor read. But if a Child,
before he learned to read or write, were made acquainted with all Things, and
Actions (as he might be in this College) how easily would he understand all
good Books afterward, and smell out the fopperies of bad ones. As for the
Situation, Model, Policy Economy, with the Number of Officers and Retainers
to this College, and the Privileges thereof, it is as yet time enough to
delineate. Only we wish that a Society of Men might be instituted as careful
to advance Arts as the Jesuits are to Propagate their Religion for the
government and mannaging of it.

But what relish will there be in all those dainties whereof we have spoken, if
we want a palate to taste them, which certainly is Health, the most desirable of
all earthly blessings, and how can we in any reason expect Health, when there
are so many great difficulties in the curing of diseases and no proportionable
Course taken to remove them? we shall therefore pursue the Means of acquiring
the Public Good and comfort of Mankind a little further, and vent out
conceits concerning a Nosocomium Academicum or an Hospital to cure the
Infirmities both of Physician and Patient.

We intended to have given the most perfect Idea of this Nosocomium Academicum,
and consequently to have treated of the Situation and Fabric of the House,
Garden, Library, Chymicall Laboratorie, Anatomicall Theater, Apotheca, with all
the Instruments and Furniture belonging to each of them, as also of the whole
Policy and Economy thereof. But since such a work could not be brought to
pass without much charge (the very naming whereof does deter men even from the
most noble and necessary Attempts) we are contented to pourtray only such a
Nosocomium, as may be made out of one of our old Hospitals, without any new
donations or creeping to Benefactors, only with a little pains taken by the
Reforming hand of Authority. For we do not doubt, but that we have so contrived
the business, that there is no Hospital in its corrupt estate, can be more
thriftily managed then Ours. For the Number of our Ministers are no greater
then usual, and absolutely necessary, their Pensions no larger then are allowed
to those, who do not make the service of the Hospital, the sixth part of their
Employment and means of subsistence, and yet we give encouragement enough to
able men to undertake it, without meddling with any other business, which we
strictly forbid. For as the Salaries are but small, so the Charge of the
Ministers is not great (they being all to be unmarried Persons) their
Accommodation handsome, their Employment (being a work of Public and highest
Charity) honorable, and to Philosophical Men, (who only are to have a hand
in this business) most pleasant and delightful. Besides when their respective
times are expired, their profit and esteem in the world cannot but be very
great. For their way of breeding will both procure them practice among such as
are able to reward them, and give them a dexterity and ability, to manage and
go thorough a great deal thereof.

Moreover the smalnesse of the Salary, the long servitude among poor wretches,
and restraint from Marriages, the great pains and natural parts required to
perform duties, will I hope, prevent all intrusions of those, whose Genius
does not incline them to take pleasure in this way of life.

Wherefore being not at leisure to frame Utopias, we shall only speak of the
Number and Salary of Ministers, the time of their service with their
qualifications in general, and Duties in particular, which are to be employed
in this Nosocomium Academicum.

The Nosocomium being fitted with all manner of Necessaries, shall be overseene
by three or four Curators, Men of Learning, Honor and Worth, such as shall
out of Charity and good will to the Public perform this Trust, who are to be
Protectors and Chancellors thereof, as also Auditors of the Stewards Accounts.

Besides these, there shall be a Mathematician for Steward, a Physician,
Surgeon and Apothecary, each well versed both in the Theory and Practice of
their respective Professions. A young Physician capable at least of the degree
of Doctor, who may be called the Vice-physician, and another of about five or
six years standing in the University, who may be called the Student. There
should be also a Surgeon and an Apothecary who have served their
Apprentiships in the said Faculties called the Surgeons and Apothecaries
Mate, with two other young men, the one to serve the Surgeon, and the other
the Apothecary, all understanding at least the Latin Tongue, which may be
called the Apprentices: All these are to be chosen at first by the Curators
(but afterward by the Society it self) being such as they shall be certified
are Pious, Ingenious, Laborious, Lovers of Knowledge, and particularly of the
Faculty of Physic, courteous, not covetous; and lastly such among whom there
may be an harmony of Natures and studies, so as all fear of discords, Envy
and Emulation may be taken away. There ought also to be entertained, as many
honest careful ancient Widows, to serve as Nurses to the sick, as will be
proportionable to their Number, some whereof are to be ordinary and some
extraordinary, whereof the latter may be taken in, and dismissed again, as
Occasion of their help, requires,

There should be allowed out of the Revenues of the Hospital to the aforenamed
Ministers, besides their diets, houseroome, washing, firing, etc. and Exemption
from all Taxes and Employments in the Commonwealth, the several sums
following, viz.

l. To the Steward 80 per annum. To the Physician 120 To the Vice-Physician 50
To the Surgeon and Apothec. each 60 To the Student 25 To the Chirurg. and
Apotheck. mate 20 To each of the Apprentices 10 To each ordinary Nurse 4 To an
Extraordinary by the week 3. shil.

It should be granted by the State, that whosoever has served his respective
time in the Nosocomium, and has a Certicate thereof from the Society, shall be
thereby licensed to practice his profession in any place or Corporation
whatsover, notwithstanding any former Law to the Contrary.

The Steward shall not be obliged to stay any longer then from year to year.
Each of the Faculty of Physic may serve five years in each degree thereof,
each of the Surgeons and Apothecaries but four.

These Circumstances being premised, we now come to the very Essence of the
whole business, that is, to the Description of each of the aforenamed
Ministers their particular Duty and Function, which are as follows, viz.

The Steward shall be a man of approved honesty, able to give order for all
reparations about the house, garden, etc. to agree and bargain with workmen,
and all that shall serve in any Commodities into the house, he is to receive
and pay all moneys, and submit the accounts thereof to the whole Society, and
they again to the Curators. For which and other like duties he ought to be
skilled in Mathematics; chifely in Arithmetic and keeping Accounts, measuring
of Land, timber, board, Architecture, frugall contrivances and the like. But as
to the Advancement of Physic, We desire he may be skilled in the best Rules of
Judicial Astrology, which he may apply to calculate the Events of diseases,
and Prognosticate the Weather; to the end that by his Judicious and careful
Experiments, the Wheat may be separated from the Chafe in that Faculty
likewise; and what is good therein may be applied to good uses, and the rest
exploded. He shall keep a Journall of all notable Changes of Weather, and
fertility of Seasons, taking notice what fruits, etc. have abounded and what
have failed, which have been good, and which bad, with the Reasons thereof,
whether the same were caused by Mildewes, Blasts, Unseasonable Weather,
Caterpillars or other Vermin; he shall take notice of the several diseases, as
Staggers, Murraine, Rot, etc. which in each year have infested each Species of
Annimals, and what Insects have most abounded; all which Particulars with the
Epidemicall diseases befalling man, he may compare with the Aspects of the
Celestial bodies, and so examine the precepts delivered unto us by the
Professors of that Art.

The Physician must be a Philosopher, skilled at large in the Phenomenon of
Nature, must understand the Greek Tongue, be well read in good Authors, and
seen in the practice of all the ministrant parts of Physic, willing to
instruct and foreward all that are under him, his work shall be twice every day
deliberately to Visit and Examine all the Sick, and after due Consideration of
their Condition, to prescribe them convenient Medicines, and shall dictate in
Latin to the Vice-Physician attending him, the History of their several
Diseases (excluding impertinencies) he shall see all Patients in outward
griefs (to whom he administreth any inward remedies) opened and dressed ever
now and then, to the end that himself and the Surgeon may both have the
same Intention and scope in their practice. He must take care that the
Surgeon and Student keep the History of their Cures likewise, and that the
Apothecary and Student do the same in in their Pharmacy and Botanicks. He
shall oversee the dispensation of all compound, and Preparation of all Chemical
Medicaments, giving the Apothecary directions for the making of new Enquiries
and Experiments in his way; and wise to the Surgeon and the rest, in theirs,
when he sees them not otherwise employed. In brief, he shall have an
influence upon all the rest, and all the rest reciprocally upon him, so that he
being made acquainted with all the Histories taken in the Hospital,
Laboratory, Anatomical Chamber, garden, etc. may give the reason of the most
notable Phenomenon happening in either of them. All which he shall commit to
writing and out of them, by the end of the term of his service, shall collect
a Systeme of Physic and the most approved Medicinal Aphorisms; taking notice
by the way where those of Hippocrates are deficient or true, and by how many
several experiments he has so found them. He shall either dissect or overlook
the dissection of bodies dying of diseases, and lastly shall take care that all
Luciferous experiments whatsoever, may be carefully brought to him, and
recorded for the benefit of Posterity.

The Vice-Physicians proper charge is to see the History of Patients most
exactly and constantly kept, he may now and then read some good Author, but
in all other things shall endeavor to assist, and be subordinate to the
Physician in all parts of his duty, still acting by his directions, but shall
not prescribe any Physic without the consent of the Chief, nor in his
absence, upon emergent occasions, without the advice of the Master Chyrurgeons;
he should be always walking up and down from bed to bed, feeling the pulses
and looking on the Urine and other excrements of the sick; that no considerable
punctilio in any circumstance whatsoever escape his observation; for the
completing of the History, He shall apply himself to the making of Luciferous
experiments, and to take notice of such as shall be made by others.

The Student shall assist the Chyrurgeon and Apothecary in making the History
of their Practices, to the end he may have always occasions to instruct
himself in these ministrant parts of physic to read such Authors, as the
Chief Physician shall appoint him, and compare all his reading with the things
themselves, whereof he reads, as herbs, drugs, Compound Medicaments, Anatomy,
Chyrurgicall Instruments, bandages, operations, etc. all which we call the Real
Elements of the Art. He shall by leave from the Physician in cases of need, put
his hand to help the Chyrurgion or Apothecary and sometimes watch by night
with the Nurses, that the perfection of the History may by no means be
hazarded on their Ignorance or carelessness; he may serve the Physician as an
Amanuensis, especially in such things, the transcribing whereof may tend much
to the advancement of his own knowledge.

Of the Chirurgions.
The Master Chyrurgion shall dress every Patient belonging to his care the
first time himself, in the presence of him, to whom he shall commit the said
Cure afterward, and as it were read him a Lecture thereupon. When the other
Chirurgions under him are dressing, he shall, accompanied with the student, go
from Patient to Patient to give them directions pro re Nata in their
proceedings on the Cure, and dictate to the Student the most pertinent passages
happening from time to time, that he may keep a true and uninterrupted History of
them; He shall make Experiments by dissecting sundry sorts of Animals, shall
teach his Mates Anatomy, expound good Authors to them, show them the Manner of
making bandages and making all Manner of operations such as are the
Laryngotomia, cutting for the stone, hernia, dropsy and applying the trepane
both upon living brutes and dead carcases of men to the end that by practicing
upon these, the best places for making incision may be known, and all the
dangerous parts in the way taken notice of, and upon the others, how to avoid
the Inconveniences of haemorrhagies, struglings and the like.

The Mate shall dress all the more difficul griefs, apply Cauteries, make
Fontanels, practice Anatomy, and Manual operations make Sceletons of the
Sundry rare Animals which he shall have the opportunity to cut up, excarnate
bowels, artificially dry the Muscules tanne the ventricle, guts, etc. and do
what else tends to the perfection of Anatomy, he shall also at leisuretimes
transcribe the History of their practice first and originally taken by the
Student.

The Apprentice shall serve the Master in spreading Plasters, letting Blood in
the arm, threading Pease for Issues, whetting Instruments, scraping Lint,
sowing together Bandages (which he shall also learn to apply) he shall see
dissections, read good Authors of Surgery and see the practice of operations
made by his Superiors. He shall also see the Apothecaries make all such
Plasters, Unguents, Balsames, etc. (learning to choose and know all the Herbs,
Gummes and other Ingredients going into them) as are used in their practice.

Of the Apothecarie.
The Master Apothecary being a most exquisite Botanist, shall take care of the
Garden, that store of all useful Plants be kept therein, and also that such as
are for beauty or rarity be not wanting, he shall give order for all
Experiments of Grafting, Transplanting, Meliorating the tastes, smells, etc. of
Plants, accelerating of Germination and Maturation in them, conservation of
Exoticks so, as in time to make them Domestics, to try the effect of all
Artificial Composts, he shall see that all Herbs, Roots, etc. be gathered in
their due seasons, and that all the most proper Courses be used for conserving
them, he shall write of the sensile and evident Qualities of all Drugges, as
of their smell, taste, ponderosity, rarity, friability, transparency, color,
hardness, etc. omitting such as are not discernable by sense, or deprensible
by certain Experiments, declaring the several operations, chymicall or
Pharmacentical by which these Drugges are usually, or may be best prepared; he
shall set down all the Experiments solitary or in consort, that he meets
with, in the mixing or preparing any of them, as that Camphire, will of it
self evaporate, Terpentine washed in water becomes white, Euphorbium in the
beating will cause excessive sneesing, that the seeds of Cucummis Asininus
will of themselves leap out with great Impetuosity one after another. That
spirit of Vitriol mixed with Syrup of Violets, turns it into a fair Crimson
color, and others of the like Nature. He shall with the Student keep an exact
History af all rare and Unusual Accidents, happening in his Operations, he shall
take care that all Medicaments be made according to Art, or the Physicians
particular directions: he shall ever now and then Visit the Apotheca, to cast
out thereof all decayed Drugges and compositions, shall read Pharmaceutical and
Chymicall Institutions to his Inferiors, and teach the plants to any of the
Society that shall desire to learn them.

The Apothecaries Mate shall transcribe the prescriptions taken by the vice
Physician, and see them carefully made up, shall attend the Hospital, in
administering to each Patient his Physic according to directions, applying
Epithemes, cucuphaes Embrochaes, fomentations, frictions, unctions, giving
Glysters, applying Leeches, etc. he shall transcribe the History compiled by
the Master Apothecary, and the student, and at leisure times, when as he cannot
study Things he may read good Authors in his own Art, without meddling either
with Physic or Chyrurgery.

The Apprentice shall read some good pharmaceuticall Botanick and Chymicall
Institutions, shall be much conversant in the Garden to see the curing of tender
and exotic plants where he shall observe the working of Nature in their
growing flouring, etc. he shall see the Herbs, Roots and Seeds gathered
according to directions, he shall work in beating and picking Drugs and on all
other Operations belonging to the preparation of Medicaments.

The Nurses shall be always at hand in the Hospital to help the sick, that by
reason of their absence they may not be put to strain and offend themselves by
often and loud crying and calling. They shall dress their diet and give it
them in Quality, Quantity, Time and order, according to the Physicians
directions, they shall see their Linen conveniently changed so as to prevent
all annoyance to the sick; They shall in watching endeavor to observe all
remarkable Accidents happening in the night, as whether they raved or talked much
in their sleep, snorted, coughed. etc. all which they shall punctually report
to the Physician, showing him the Urines and other Excrements, telling him the
time and manner wherein they were voyded, and in breife, they being the lowest
Members of the house, they shall be in all things obedient to their Superiors.

It is hard so to assign to every Minister his particular duty, as that the
business (which is the Recovery of the Patients, and the Improvement of every
man's knowledge in his proper way) cannot be done better then by this
distribution: And it would be of ill Consequence, if hereupon the Apprentice
having done his own work, should refuse to help his fellow, being perchance at
some time overburthened, wherefore it is to be understood that this contrivance
shall be no warrant to any man, not to help his fellow, in case of Exigence, but
chiefly to show what we desire should be done amongst them all. For we hope
that their common Friendship and desire of helping the sick and enabling
themselves, will tie them enough to perform all these things in the most
advantageous manner to these Ends.

Having now after a fashion gone through the description of such Societies and
Institutions, as we have thought most fit for the advancement of Real
Learning, and among the rest, of the Ergastulum Literarium for the Education of
Children, we now come to speak of such Books, as being well studied and
expounded in those Schools, would lay a very firm foundation of Learning in
the Scholars.

We recommend therefore in the first place (besides those Books of Collection,
by us formerly mentioned, and Master Pells three Mathematical Treatises) the
compiling of a Work whose Title might justly be Vellus Aureum sive Facultatum
Luoriferarum discriptio Magna, wherein all the practiced ways of getting a
Subsistence and whereby Men raise their fortunes, may be at large declared. And
among these, we wish that the History of Arts or Manufactures might first be
undertaken as the most pleasant and profitable of all the rest, wherein should
be discribed the whole Process of Manual Operations and Applications of one
Natural thing (which we call the Elements of Artificials) to another, with the
necessary Instruments and Machines, whereby every piece of work is
elaborated, and made to be what it is, unto which work bare words being not
sufficient, all Instruments and tools must be pictured, and colors added when
the discriptions cannot be made intelligible without them.

This History must not be made out of a farrago of imperfect Relations made to
the compiler, either by too rude or cousening Workmen, but all things thereunto
appertaining must be by himself observed and attested by the most Judicious
and candid of each respective Profession, as well to make the work the more
Authenticke, (it being to be the Basis of many future Inferences and
Philosophations) as the more clearly and distinctly to inform the compiler
himself, by whose Judgment as the Alembick and Industry as the fire, it is
hoped that the Quintessence and Magesteries of all present Inventions may be
extracted and new ones produced in abundance.

Although it be intended to teach the making of all Artificials, yet it is not
to be understood that when there has been taught how to make a stool, or a
nail of one fashion, that the Art of making a Chair or a nail of another
fashion, should belong insisted on. But the Compiler should strive to reduce
the making of all Artificials in each trade to a certain Number and Classes of
operations Tools and Materials, neither need he to set the Figures, or mention
the names of all Artificials that ever were made, but only of such as are most
Known and of Common Use amongst men: He needs not to describe every
punctilio in making all the aforementioned particulars, and yet leave no more
defects, then may be supplied by every common understanding. For we question
whether (if he should engage himself in such an endless labor) a man by the
bare light and instruction of the Book could attain to a dextrous practice of
a trade, whereunto has been required seven years Autopsia. But are confident
that the help of this Book will lessen the former taeditum by more then half.
He should not so abridge the Work as not to distinguish between Instruments of
the same name, as between a Loome to weave Kersies, and another, wherein to
weave silk Ribbands or Stockings.

He should all along give the Mechanical reason of every Instrument Material
and operation, when the same is sensible and clear. He should all along note
his own defects in setting down these Histories, in case he had not at the time
of the writing thereof sufficient information, and withal the deficiencies of
the Trades themselves.

Now whereas there be diverse Ways and Methods of working most Manufactures, he
should in each thing stick close to the way of some one Mr. but note all the
diversities he Knows, and give his Opinion of the use and goodness of each.

Moreover the Economy, Sive Ars augendas rei familiaris in all Professions
ought to be enquired into. viz. What seasons of the year are most proper to
each Work, which the best places and times to buy Materials, and to put off
the Commodities when finished, how most thriftily to hire, entertain, and
oversee servants and Workmen, how to dispose of every excrement and Refuse of
Materials, or of broken, worn, or otherwise unserviceable Tools and Utensils,
with all Cauteles, Impostures and other sleights good or bad, whereby men use
to overreach one another.

There ought to be added to this work many and various indices besides the
Alphabeticall ones, as namely one of all the Artificials mentioned in the whole
work.

Another of all the Natural Materials or Elements of Artifials, by what
Artificers used, from whence they come, where to be had, and what are the
ordinary and middle prices of them.

Another of all the Qualities or Schemes of Matter, as o fall liquifiable
things visced friable, heavy, transparent, abstersive or otherwise qualified
according to all the classes of 1, 2, and 3. qualities, to the end that
Materials for all Intentions and Experiments may be at hand and in sight.

Another of all Operations mentioned in the whole work, as* Sawing, Hewing,
Filing, Boaring, Melting, Dissolving, Turning, Beating, Grinding, Boiling,
Calcining, Knitting, Spinning, Sowing, Twisting, etc. To the end that they all
may also be at hand for the purposes aforesaid. Another of all Tools and
Machines, as Files, Sawes, Chissels, Sheeres, Sives, Loomes, Shuttles, Wheels,
Wedges, Knives, Skrewes, etc. for the same purpose also.

The compiler ought to publish all his conjectures, how old Inventions may be
perfected and new one produceds, giving directions how to try the truth of
them. So that by all those unto whose hands these Books shall come perchance,
all the said suppositions may be tried, and the success reported to the
Compiler himself.

The Compilers first scope in Inventions shall be, how to apply all Materials
that grow in Abundance in this Kingdom, and whereof but in considerable use
and Profits are as yet made to more advantage to the Commonwealth. And also
how all Impotents, whether only blind, or only lame, and all Children of
above seven years old might earne their bread, and not be so long burdensome
to their Parents and others.

There should be made a Preface to the Work to teach men how to make the most
of experiments and to record the successes of them whatsoever, whether
according to hopes or no, all being equally Luciferous, although not equally
Lucriferous.

There ought to be much Artifice used, that all the aforementioned Indices may
handsomely refer One to another, that all things contained in the whole Book
may be most easily found, and most readily attend the seekers of New Inventions.

The way to accomplish this Work must be to enquire what to this purpose is
already done, or in hand, in all places and also by whom, so that Communication
of councels and proceedings, may (if possible) be had with those undertakers.

All Books of this Subject already extant in Print, must be collected and
bought, not to transcribe them, but to examine them per Autopsiam, and
Re-experiment the Experiments contained in them, and withal to give hints of
New Enquiries.

The Compiler must be content to devote his whole life to this employment, one
who (as we said before) has the fire of Industry and the Alembick of a Curious
and rational head, to extract the Quintescence of whatsoever he sees.

He should be as young as sufficient Abilities will admit, to the end that he
may with the concurrence of Gods ordinary Providence, either finish, or very
far advance the Work, while he lives, and also that living long in that
employment, he may heap up the larger stock of Experiments, which how much the
greater it is in one Man, affords so much the more hopes of New Inventions.

The Nature Manner, and Means of Writing the History of Trades being so far
expounded, before we proceed further therein, for the better Encouragement of
Undertakers, we shall now represent such Profits and Commodities thereof, to
the Commonwealth, as we at present more nearly reflect upon. For to Enumerate
or Evaluate them all, will be much above our Capacity.

1. All men whatsoever may hereby so look into all Professions, as not to be
too grossly cozened and abused in them.

2. The Mysteries of Trades being so laid open, as that the Professors of them
cannot make so unlawful and exorbitant advantages as heretofore, Such as are
Cunning and Ambitious will never rest until they have found new ones in their
stead; so that the Respublica Artium, will be so much the more advanced.

3. Scholars and such as love to Batiocinate will have more and better Matter
to exercise their wits upon, whereas now they pusle and tire themselves, about
mere Words and Chymaericall Notions.

4. They will Reason with more alacrity, when they shall not only get honor by
showing their Abilities, but profit likewise by the Invention of Fructiferous
Arts.

5. Sophistry shall not be in such esteem as heretofore, when even Sense shall
be able to unmask its vanity, and distinguish it from Truth.

6 Men seeing what Arts are already invented, shall not need to puslle
themselves to reinvent the same again.

7. All Men in general that have wherewithal will be venturing at our Vellus
Aureum, by making of Experiments: and whether thereby they thrive or no (the
Directions in the Preface being followed) they shall nevertheless more and
more discover Nature.

8. Nay all Nations sensible of this Auri Sacra fames, will engage in this
hopeful business; and then certainly Many hands will make light work in the
said business of discovering Nature.

9. All Ingenious Men and Lovers of Real Knowledge, have along time begged
this work, wherefore it can be no small honor to him that shall satisfy them.

10. A vast increase of honorable, profitable, and pleasant Inventions must
needs spring from the work, when one Man (as the Compiler thereof) may uno
intuitu, see and comprehend all the Labor and Wit of our Ancestors, and be
thereby able to supply the defects of one Trade with the perfections of another.

11. We see that all Countries where Manufactures and Trades flourish, as
Holland, etc. become potent and rich. For how can it otherwise be? when the
Revenues of the State shall be increased by new and more Customs, all Beggars
feeding upon the Labors of other men, and even Thieves and Robbers (made for
want of better employment) shall be set on work, barren grounds made fruitful,
wet dry, and dry wet, when even hogs and more indocile beasts shall be taught
to labor, when all vile Materials shall be turned to Noble uses, when one man
or horse shall do as much as three, and every thing improved to strange
Advantages.

12. There would not then be so many Fustian and Unworthy Preachers in
Divinity, so many petti foggers in the Law, so many Quack-salvers in Physic,
so many Grammaticasters in Country-schooles, and so many Lazy-serving men in
Gentlemen's houses, when every man might learn to live otherwise in more plenty
and honor. For all men desirous to take pains might by this Book survey all
the ways of Subsistence, and choose out of them all, one that best suits with
his own Genius and Abilities.

13. Scholars now disesteemed for their Poverty (what ever other thing
commends them) and unable even for want of livelihood, to perfect any thing
even in their own way, would quickly help themselves, by opening Treasures,
with the Key of Lucriferous Inventions.

14. Boys in stead of reading hard Hebrew words in the Bible (where they
either trample on, or play with Mysteries) or parratlike repeating
heteroclitous nounes, and verbs, might read and hear the History of Faculties
expounded, so that before they be bound Apprentices to any Trade, they may
foreknow the good and bad of it, what will and strength they have to it, and
not spend seven years in repenting, and in swimming against the stream of their
Inclinations.

All Apprentices by this Book might learn the Theory of their Trades before
they are bound to a Master, and consequently may be exempted from the Taedium
of a seven years bondage, and having spent but about three years with a Master,
may spend the other four in Traveling to learn breeding, and the perfection
of their Trades.

As it would be more profitable to Boys, to spend ten or twelve years in the
study of Things, and of this Book of Faculties, then in a rabble of words, so
it would be more easy and pleasant to them, as more suitable to the natural
propensions we observe in them. For we see Children to delight in Drums, Pipes,
Fiddels, Guns made of Elder-sticks and bellows noses, piped Keys, etc. for
painting Flags and Ensigns with Elder-berries and Corn-poppy, making ships
with Paper, and setting even Nut-shels a swimming, handling the tools of
workmen as soon as they turn their backs, and trying to work themselves,
fishing, fowling, hunting, setting sprenges and traps for birds, and other
animals, making pictures in their writing books, making Tops, Gigs, and
Whirligigs, quilting balls, practicing diverse juggling tricks upon the Cards,
etc. with a million more besides. And for the Females, they will be making Pyes
with Clay, making their Babies Clothes, and dressing them therewith, they will
spit leaves on sticks, as if they were roasting meat, they will imitate all
the talk and Actions, which they observe in their Mother and her Gossips, and
punctually act the Comedy or Tragedy (I know not whether to call it) of a
Woman's lying in. By all which it is most evident, that Children do most
naturally delight in things, and are most capable of learning them, having
quick Senses to receive them and unpreoccupied memories to retain them. As for
other things whereunto they are now adays set, they are altogether unfit, for
want of judgment, which is but weak in them, and also for want of Will, which
is sufficiently seen both by what we have said before, by the difficulty in
keeping them at Schools, and the punishment they will endure rather then be
altogether debarred from this pleasure which they take in Things.

This work will be an help to Eloquence, when men by their great acquaintance
with things, might find out Similitudes, Metaphors, Allusions, and other graces
of discourse in abundance.

To Arithmeticians and Geometricians, supplying them with Matter whereupon to
exercise those most excellent Sciences, Which some having with much pains once
learned, do for want hereof forget again, or unprofitably apply about
resolving needless Questions, and making of new difficulties. The number of
mixed Mathematical Arts would hereby be increased.

For we see that Optics are made up of pure Mathematics, the Anatomy of the
eye, and some Physical Principles concerning the Nature of light and Vision,
with some Experiments of convexe and concave glasses, Astronomy is constituted
again of them, and some Caelestiall Phoenomena. Enginry again of them, and
some Propositions de Cochlea ct Vecte. And so certainly as the number of Axioms
concerning several subjects does increase by this work, so the Number of
(their Applications to pure Mathematics, id est,) New Mathematical Arts, will
increase also.

Divines having so large a Book of Gods works added to that of his word, may
the more clearly from them both, deduce the wisdom, power and goodness of
the Almighty.

Physicians observing the use of all Drugs and Operations in the production of
Artificials, may with success transfer them to better Uses in their Art.

And Lawyers when they plead concerning Trades and Manufactures, would better
Know what to say on such Occasions.

A young beginner may Know by this Book how much stock is needful to set him
up in his Trade.

Gentlemen falling sometimes Accidentally into Tradesmen and handicrafts
company, would Know how to make use of such Occurrences to advantage.


