THE Reforming Registry, OR A Representation of the very many mischiefs and
Inconveniences which will unavoidably happen by the needless, chargeable, and
destructive way OF Registries, Proposed to be erected in every County of
England and Wales, for the Recording of all Deeds, Evidences, Bonds, Bills, and
other Encumbrances. Written in the year 1656, when Oliver and the
Levelling-Party made it their Design to ruin Monarchy, the Laws of the Nation,
and the impoverished Loyal party; and is now published to prevent the more then
a few Evils and sad Consequences which may hereafter be introduced by it. By
Fabian Philipps.

Plato lib. 6. de Legibus. Omnes eas leges colunt and Innovare formidant in
quibus educati sunt, si illae divina quadam fortuna longis temporibus
stabilitae fuerint. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for the Author, and are to
be sold by Abel Roper at the sign of the Sun over against St Dunstans-Church in
Fleet Street. 1662.

THE Contents of the CHAPTERS.
Chapter 1. THat the Registring or Inrolling of Deeds of Bargain and Sale,
whereby an Estate of Freehold does pass, is provided for by the Statute of 27
H. 8. cap. 16. wherein it being left to the peoples choice where to Inroll
them, they have rather chosen to do it in Chancery, and at London, then in the
several Counties, p. 3. Chap. 2. The Inconveniences of an enforced Registry of
such, Deeds in the proper Counties. page 8. Chap. 3. The Inconveniences if all
Deeds, of Bargain and Sale shall be Enacted to have the force and effect of
Fines with Proclamations, or of Recoveries, and to Bar as they do: page 20.
Chap. 4. Of the Registring of all men's former Deeds or other Evidences, if but
for ten or twenty years past, under a penalty to be, otherwise of no effect or
less then they would formerly have been. page 31 Chap. 5. Of the Registring of
all Bonds, Bills, Leases Releases Feoffments, Contracts in writing and all
other writings which may incumber real or personal Estates. page 49 Chap. 6.
Of New Courts or Judicatories to be erected in every County, to hear and
determine Causes. page 75 Chap. 7 That it is impossible to provide against all
things which may happen to be Encumbrances. page 87 Chap. 8. That (if it could
be possible) the people will not willingly be at the trouble or charges in all
their Contracts, to search in so many County Registries to discover
Encumbrances. page 92
CHAP. I. That the Registring or Inrolling of Deeds of Bargain and Sale,
whereby an Estate of Freehold does pass, is provided for by the Statute of 27
Hen. 8. cap. 16. Wherein it being left to the Peoples choice where to Inrol
th^^, they have rather chosen to do it in Chancery, and at London, then in the
several Counties.
THe erecting of Offices for the Registring of Deeds and Conveyances Indented
in every County, by which any Estate of Freehold or Inheritance is to pass, or
be conveyed by Bargain and Sale, will be needless.

For that by the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 16. which is yet in force and
unrepealed, it is already provided for.

And being ever since (now almost One hundred and fifty years ago) left to the
Peoples liberty, Whether they will Inrol with the Clerk of the Peace in every
County, or in the Chancery and Courts of Record at Westminster.

They have so much liked of the better and more proper way of Inrolling in
Chancery, being the Officina Justiciae of the Nation, the Repository of most of
the Records of it; and into which, many of the greatest concernment, are by Law
and several Acts of Parliament certified, and disliked the other; as there is
not one Deed or Indenture of that nature, for every Hundred which are in the
Chancery, Enrolled in the Courts of Upper Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer, by
virtue of that Statute.

And not one almost in a year Enrolled with the Clerk of the Peace of every
County where the Lands do lie, either because where it was done in the proper
County, it was by that Statute appointed to be done by the Custos Rotulorum,
and two Justices of the Peace of the County, and the Clerk of the Peace, or two
of them at the least, whereof the Clerk of the Peace to be one; who by their
distances or remote Habitations, were not often or easily to be found or got
together, or that the people were not so willing to trust their Deeds or
Evidences, or the Records thereof, with the Clerks of the Peace, as they are
with an Officer of Trust in Chancery; which being the Registry of the Supreme
Authority, is a Court always open, and kept in a known place of strength and
security.

And was very long before in use and practice amongst them, for the more sure
keeping and memory of their Deeds and Evidences, as Grants and Releases for
Lands, and the like, amongst the Records of their Kings and Supreme
Magistrates, where they thought them safest, as may appear by the close Rolls
in Chancery, ever since the reign of King John; and so frequently in the reign
of King Henry the Seventh, being forty years before the making of the said
Statute of 27 H. 8. as there are many Deeds of Bargain and Sale of Lands,
Releases of Right and Title to Lands, Deeds of Gift, or Bargains and Sales of
Goods and Chattels, Bonds for payment of Money, Acquittances for Money paid,
Letters of Attorney, and Agreements betwixt private persons, to be seen
Recorded and Enrolled in the close Rolls of 8 H. 7. with the now usual Form or
Memorandums, that the Parties acknowledging, did come into the Chancery and
acknowledge them, etc.

And which was anciently held to be so much assistant, and contributing to the
welbeing and preservation of Men's Deeds, by Inrollments, or Records, or
Exemplifications made thereof, as it was in 20 E. 1. Cook. 2 part. Institutes
676. Hill. 20 E. 1. in Banco Rot. ^00. Somerset.
adjudged, That if a Deed be showed in Court, or be in the custody thereof, and
the Seal be by mischance broken off, the Court shall Inroll the Deed for the
avail of the Party:

Which is not only an evident Demonstration of the Peoples long approving of
the one, and disallowing of the other; but of the ease and benefit which they
have had by Inrolling of their Deeds in Chancery, and the Courts at London.

And therefore every man's private Deeds and Conveyances, being to take their
Original and Principal force from the Parties consent, and contract, and the
confirmation and power which the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, and the
Common and Statute Laws of this Nation has allowed them, in making them to be
of force and valid.

The Act of Parliament of 27 H. 8. 16. for Inrolling of Deeds as aforesaid,
being made in the same Parliament when the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. 10. for
transferring of Uses into Possession, was Enacted, did in the supplying of many
defects in Deeds of Bargain and Sale, of and concerning Freehold and
Inheritance, and the want of Livery, and Seisin, and Attornment.

Not forbid or take away the use and force of Fines and Recoveries, Leases with
Releases, and Feoffments with Livery and Seisin, which in the extent and
validity thereof, are far better Assurances; but only ordain, That all Deeds
whereby Estates of Inheritances or Freehold, should pass or or be altered, or
changed from one to another, by way of Bargain and Sale, should not be good,
unless they should be Indented and Enrolled, as that Act appointed; and
restraining only the execution and effect thereof, to the Inrolment within the
time prefixed, did leave the people to Inrol them where it might seem best, or
their own conveniences persuade them. Wherefore an Enforced Registry or
Inrolment of all such Deeds in the proper Counties, if it should keep within
the bounds of that Act, and only enjoin Inrolments of Deeds by Indenture,
where Estates of Freehold and Inheritance are to pass by way of Bargain and
Sale, will unavoidably produce many Inconveniences.

CHAP. II. The inconveniences of an enforced Registry of such Deeds in the
proper Counties.
THey will be illiterately, carelessly, and. 1.
ill-favoredly Registered, and kept in the proper Counties, if either the pay or
number of them, shall not come up to the care and time, are to be bestowed upon
them, or receive no other or greater Fees then are allowed by that Statute for
Inrollments.

As it has demonstrably already happened in the taking and inrolling of Statutes
Merchant, by the Majors of the Staple in all Cities, Buroughs, and good Towns,
and their Officers thereunto appointed, by virtue of the Statutes or Acts of
Parliament of Acton Burnel in 11 E. 1. and the Statute de Mercatoribus in 13 E.
1. which have since the erecting of the Statute Office at London, by the
Statute of 23 H. 8. 6. to attend the Lord Chief Justices of the Court of Upper
Bench, or Common Pleas; and in their absence, the Major of the Staple at
Westminster, and Recorder of London: For acknowledging of Statutes for Debts
have been so much disused, and the course of Statutes Merchant which are yet in
force for Merchandise so neglected, as there are above a hundred such Statutes
entered, to or for every one Statute Merchant: And whereas the Clerk of the
Statutes, who was by that Act of Parliament ordered to reside at London, does
fairly and orderly enter and keep his Books and Records, and after certain
years, lodge and lay them up for safety in the Tower of London, It will upon
search and inquiry appear, that notwithstanding every Statute, whether for
Merchandise or otherwise, is to be duly Enrolled by the Clerks or Officers,
upon pain of forfeiting of Twenty pounds for every Statute not entered or
Enrolled, there can be found very few of the Rolls or Books of the Statutes
Merchant since 23 H. 8. and none at all of those that were taken and Enrolled
in Two hundred years before.

The difference betwixt the now Statute Office, which is inperpetual succession
to such a capital City, and superior Courts, as the City of London, and the
Courts of Upper Bench and Common Pleas, and annexed as it were unto them, and
the Town*Clerks or Majors, or Constables of the Staple in the other Cities and
Corporations, which do so often change, and are by election, as they become
little more then as private persons, giving us the reason why those Writings or
Records in their custody, coming afterward through so many changes, to so many
several hands as they do, can no way, as it seems, escape imbezelling. We may
well enough believe, that the same fate may attend these Country Registers, if
they shall not be made to be as a Court of Record, and in perpetual Succession;
and if they shall be made to be as so many Judicatures and Courts of Record,
will be the cause of more inconveniences to the people, then the loss and
imbezeling of their Records or Inrollments, can come unto.

The City of London which did. 2.
use to Inroll such Deeds in the Hustings, and diverse other Cities, Boroughs,
and Towns Corporate, who did use to do the like, and had therefore their Rights
expressly saved by the Proviso of that Act of Anno 27 Henry the Eight for
Inrollments, and that it should not extend to any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, within the said Cities, Boroughs, or Towns Corporate; for that
they did anciently, and before the making of that Act, use to Inroll such
Deeds, will by these new Registries, without any forfeiture, or cause given to
loose them, be deprived of those their very ancient Rights and Liberties.

Such a constrained way of Registring 3.
of Deeds of Bargain and Sale, which concern only Estates of Freehold and
Inheritance, will be very inconvenient to Purchasors (who most commonly do
reside at or near London, or Trade or come thither, where the richest and most
moneyed men and Purchasors amongst the people are to be found; and whose
Inhabitants or near dwellers, do amount to almost the one half of the
Commonwealth, and added to such as upon Merchandise, or other occasions do come
thither, and pass to and fro from Ireland, Scotland, and other Foreign parts,
will make up in number as many as the whole people of the Nation,) and be not a
little prejudicial to such also as live in the Countries more remote; who for
any thing of value, do usually, either come themselves on purpose to London, or
employ their Attorneys or Lawyers to procure their Conveyances to be there
made, where the best of Lawyers, and most variety are most easily to be found
and advised withal in the Term times) to travel or send to those several
Counties where the Lands do lie, to have their Deeds Enrolled, or for such as
dwell and purchase in remote Counties, either to content themselves at home
with such Counsel o^ Lawyers which the Country affords, and adventure their
Estates and Security upon it, or go on purpose or send to London to have their
Conveyances made; and when they are brought home, send to the Shire-Town to
find the Register, or some before whom to acknowledge the Deed, which may
happen to be many miles distant from him; and for them that buy in London, to
be at the charge to carry those that do sell and live as far as Yorkshire, or
other remote places, or make their bargain in London, for Lands lying in Wales,
or the West part of England, into that Country where the Lands do lie.

And send or travel to Inroll a Deed. 4.
for every parcel of Land in its several County, the Lands therein sometimes
extending into three or four Counties, and many times into more then one, when
as now one uninconvenient charge to Inroll it at London, will serve for Lands
in all the Counties mentioned in the same Deed.

Or upon any Suit or occasion at. 5.
London or Westminster Hall, where all the Suits and Actions of concernment
are, amongst many other businesses most commonly and commodiously dispatched at
one and the same time by the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, Tradesmen, and Seamen
of the whole Nation, and the generality of all the people (except Cottagers and
day Laborers, and the more rustic part of the Yeomandry or Husbandmen) and do
as so many several lines drawn from the circumference, meet in the Term times
or upon other occasions at London in one and the same center, to travel or send
backward and forward; and perhaps to several places at great charges and
distances to take Copies of Deeds or Records, where now they can have them all
in one place, or within little more then a mile of it:

The Records or Registries which. 6.
are to be as men's public evidences when the private are lost, will not in
times of War or trouble (which most Nations at one time or other, do meet with)
be at all or so safely kept as the Records are at London, being the chief City
of the Nation; and as the heart thereof, the residence of the Supreme
Authority, and such a strength, as is not easy to be forced or taken, and most
likely to be the last place that shall suffer by any Foreign or Intestine
Troubles, and which has hitherto in most of our unhappy Civil Wars, for
several ages preserved the Public Records and Evidences of the people, in the
Tower of London, Chapel of the Rolls and Treasuries at Westminster; places not
only strongly built with stone, but so carefully looked unto, as no Candles or
Fire are permitted to be used in the same.

There being always likely to be a vast difference between the safe keeping of
Records and Evidences in a City, that has above Two hundred thousand men, with
a Magazin, and strong hold, and more Ships and furniture for shipping to guard
them, then all the Shire-Towns, Ports, and Havens of the rest of the Nation can
make, and furnish out, if all were put together, and a Shire-Town which has
neither Walls, nor strength, or any considerable number of people to defend
them, there being of Fifty and two Shire-Towns, but Twenty two Cities and
Walled Towns, and those so weak and unfortified, as Hull only and Bristol, and
some few excepted, every Rebel-rout or Insurrection may plunder or destroy them.

The consideration whereof did heretofore put the Kings and Supreme Magistrates
of England, in mind to get from time to time, as much as they could into their
care and custody, the Records of the Iters, Judges, Circuits, the Hundred and
Petty Court Rolls, perambulations of Forests, being the out-lying and scattered
Records of the Nation, and all that could be saved and got together, from the
rage and troubles of former times, and the careless keeping of such as had the
charge of them, and put them into safe custody in the Tower of London, or
Treasuries for Records at Westminster; and to that end, from time to time did
send their Writs to command the bringing in of the Records of several Courts
into the Treasury, which was usually done by Indemures, under the hands of the
Judges that brought them in, and the Officers who received them, and made
allowances out of the Exchequer, for the Kalendring and wel-ordering of them.

The having of which Public Records, Memorials, and Evidences, as so many
Jewels of inestimable value (wherein our Laws and Liberties, and all that we
have concerning our Estates, Lives, Progenitors, and Predecessors do reside,
and are Recorded) so safely preserved for the help and instruction of our
selves and posterities, being justly accounted to be a Blessing.

May teach or give us to understand, what an evil condition the people of
England would have been in, if they had lost those Cabinets and Jewels of their
Estates and Memories, or were but enforced, if they could be found again, to
send from as far as the people of Scotland do now with great trouble and
expenses, from all parts of their Nation into England, to the Tower of London,
to search and take Copies of the Evidences of their Estates or Reconcilers of
their Controversies, or how easily they might have been lost, if in Wat Tylers,
Jack Cades or Ketts popular Frenzies, they had been kept either in Kent or
Southwark, or such like open and unfortified places*

Or what had become of them, if they had lain dispersedly in the Shire-Towns,
in our late harassing and destroying Civil Wars.

And that by such, or some other disasters, we might have had as bad an account
of them, as are now to be had of all the Records and Court Rolls of the
Sheriffs Turns, County and Hundred Courts, Courts Leet, or Courts Baron, and
Justices in Air, since the time of William the Conqueror, and K. Henry the
Second: When as none of the Sheriffs Turns, County and Hundred Courts, can show
us any Records of above Twenty years standing, if so much, the proceedings
therein, being either not entered at all, as they should be, or not well kept or
ordered: And the other Inferior Courts not far above One hundred years, where
any care has been taken to keep them, and many times not so much: And for one
that exceeds One hundred years, there are ten which do not reach to half a
hundred.

And that those Records of the petty and inferior Courts of Ancient times,
which are now to be found in the Treasuries, and amongst the Records at London
and Westminster, do not amount to any more then to about the Ten thousandth
part of those Country and inferior Courts Records, which are lost and not to be
found; and that those that are to be seen, are but as some pitiful scraps and
torn pieces of what have been rescued and taken out of the Jaws of Time and
Antiquity.

Such an inforcement to Register all such. 7.
Deeds in the proper Counties, will without any necessity of War or Public
Safety, take away the Common Right and Liberty, which God and Nature, and the
Laws of the Land, have given to every man; and so far exceed Monopolies, which
never yet reached to men's private Evidences, as that it will too much resemble
the King of Spain's Paper, which every man in Spain is bound to buy at a rate,
to write his Contracts and Assurances upon,

Will be as a selling of Justice contrary 8.
to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the Liberties of the People, who
have of late as well as formerly fought for them, with the hazard and loss of
so many of their lives and estates; and which the Army have so often by public
and private Remonstrances, called God and Men to witness, they would be car^ful
to preserve for them; and if all Deeds of Bargain and Sale Registered, shall be
enacted to have the force and effect of Fines with Proclamations and
Recoveries, and Bar as they do.

CHAP. III. The inconveniences if all Deeds of Bargain and Sale, shall be
Enacted to have the force and effect of Fines with Proclamations, or of
Recoveries, and to Bar as they do.
THat most ancient and strongest kind. 9.
of Assurance, for conveying and passing of Lands from one man to another, by
an undoubted and irrevocable Title, known to be in use long before, and ever
since the Conquest; and which, without any strained guess or conjecture, and
with more probability for it, then against it, may to such as know that our
Fines are Recorded as an Agreement betwixt the Parties acknowledged in the
Court of * Common Pleas, before the Judges, Et multis aliis fidelibus ibi
praesentibus, and many other good people there present; seem either to be
deduced, or very much to resemble that manner of assurance or conveyance which
Abraham had of Ephron the Hittite, when he bought of him the Field of Ephron
for a burying place for himself, and his wife Sarah; where after the Agreement
or Bargain made for it, the holy Scripture says Genesis 23. 18.
it was made sure To Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
of Heth, before all that went in at the Gates of the City, (which was their
Court of Justice) will be taken away, to give place to that, will be a great
deal dearer, and a worse assurance then a Fine; which as to the Indentures of
Chyrograph (if there were no other necessary foregoing Writs and Solemnities to
make it legal, and prevent counterfeiting) would amount but unto about Five or
Six shillings.

And (if it shall be endeavored to be. 10.
made equal with a Fine, with Proclamations, and as safe from Forgeries, and be
a bar as such Fines are, should be read and proclaimed, and hung up in Tables
as Fines are, to be read at the Assizes, in the County where the Land lies, and
be also hung up in Tables at Westminster Hall, and read and proclaimed in open
Court, or some eminent place, in four Terms after the Engrossing or
acknowledging of it; to the end, that such as are for ever to be concluded by
it, may not pretend ignorance.

And yet if that were done, there cannot. 11.
be in a Deed enrolled, reasonably supposed, That Ground or Reason, which
besides the parties agreement and consent, appears to be in a Fine or Recovery,
viz. That it is done upon a Demand, Suit or Action, and Interpleading in the
Court of Common Pleas, whereby the parties are for ever bound and debarred to
say, It was not so by the strength and power of a double Estoppel, in so high a
Court of Record against the Record, whereof there can be no Averment.

For all our former Acts of Parliament do in their Preambles, which are to be
as the Keys to open and expound the mind and intention of the Makers, and to
bring the Act it self unto a reasonable Exposition, most commonly (if the
Reason it self were not obvious) not only take care to express and declare the
reason and cause, of that which was commanded or forbidden, but made every
thing that was to be done in order, to such prohibition or command, to carry
and bring along his reason with it, whereby to make known its consistence and
agreeableness with right Reason.

Which being the ground, foundation, and support of all Laws, is so every where
visible in our Laws, (where time has not made some alteration of that which
was before the basis and reason of it) as every thing therein, if not mistaken
by ignorance, or such as make too much haste to censure or condemn it, before
it be heard or understood, may upon due examination, (some small or very
inconsiderable defects perhaps or redundancies, which the greatest perfections
under the Sun, are to be allowed only excepted) not only justify it self,
but condemn those that have been too busy in finding fault with it, it being a
never failing principle in the Laws, that Ratio Legis is Anima Legis, and gives
life and being to it.

And therefore it will be a dangerous president, 12.
and of ill consequence, that Acts or things in Law, grounded upon several
Reasons, and very much differing in the Magis and Minus, or extent thereof,
should be made to be of one and the same operation and effect; As that a Grant
by Copy of Court-Roll should pass an estate of Freehold as well as Copihold, a
Fine levied by Tenant in Tail, bar a stranger in Remainder, as immediately as
it does the issue of his body; or that a General Plea or Issue, Not guilty (the
manifold inconveniences whereof, have all over England been sufficiently
experimented) should carry and amount to as much, as all other more legal Pleas
and Issues; or that any thing of an inferior consideration shall be of the same
effect, as a superior or more weighty, As that the sign Manual or Privy Seal of
the Supreme Magistrate, shall be as binding as the Great Seal of England; that
an Interlocutory sentence shall be as much as a Decree, Sentence, or Judgment,
upon a full hearing or debate; that an acquittance without Hand and Seal, or
words of Release of all Actions, shall be of the force of a Release of all
Actions under Hand and Seal; a Lease Parol, or by word of mouth, or a Deed Poll
should be as much as by Indenture; that a contract or promise of Marriage,
before two witnesses, shall be as much as a Marriage duly solemnized; and that
things said or spoken without Oath, shall be as much aupon Oath; All which
would be against that right Reason which do usually accompany our Laws.

Women Covert, who upon levying 13.
of Fines, were to be examined, whether they did freely consent, or do it, must
now sign and seal, the Deed to be Enrolled as well as their Husbands, if Dower
be to be barred, and examined as they were wont to be upon levying of Fines;
for by Law they are not barred by a Deed Enrolled, in regard of their Coverture.

Deeds of Bargain and Sale, covinously 14.
or deceitfully gained, by greedy and insinuating oppressors in taking
advantages, and working upon men's necessities, or gotten by cheating Gamesters
of some young Gentlemen, who many times loose their Lands before they find
their wits, or some fawning Cormorant Citizens who gets into such witless men's
Estates, upon kindly supplying their wants with a Knavish bargain of
Beaver-Hats, St. Omers Onions, Brown Paper, Pack-thred, and such like Trash, or
loosing Commodities, shall have no remedy or relief in Chancery allowed them as
formerly. If that such Deeds enrolled shall have the force of Fines and
Recoveries for that against Fines and Nonclaims Doctor and Student 25. and Lib.
1. cap. 1.
and Bars by Recoveries, there can be no releif to be had in Conscience or
Equity, because it might otherwise be a means to impeach and open a gap, to
break into all other Men's Estates and Conveyances. So as that which by these
Proposals is pretended to be a way to prevent deceit, will in such, or the
like case, become the greatest fortifier and defender of it.

Such a transferring of the power of. 15.
Fines and Recoveries into Registered Deeds, may hereafter much prejudice and
terrify such, as by this new way of Registring shall have deserted the suing
out of Fines and Recoveries. If another Parliament, either in this or any
future ages shall happen to repeal, or take it away, or the Inrolments of Deeds
or Records thereof, lying in so many dispersed and unsafe places, should happen
to be lost, and subject them and their Estates to all manner of Claims and
Controversies, which they would otherwise have been freed of, if they had been
permitted to make use of the old and safe way of Fines and Recoveries; which in
all the Commotions of people or Petitions of Parliaments, were never yet found
fault with, or desired to be taken away.

There will be a great difference betwixt 16.
Fines and Deeds enrolled, not only in the manner of passing and acknowledging
of them, but in the benefits, privileges, and safety, which as inseparable
Concomitants do attend Fines, but cannot by any Rule of Right Reason, be simul
and semel, or at all put over to Deeds enrolled or lodged in them, for Fines
which are to be acknowledged in Court, before two Judges, at the least, or out
of the Court, before the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas; and
if by Commission, which is to be signed by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper,
and Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, or by some of the Justices
of Assise or the Circuit where the Land lies, ought to be directed to men of
quality and conscience, and expert in the Laws of the Land, one whereof is to
be a Knight, (the Writs of Covenant whereupon they are grounded, passing the
Great Seal of England, and so many sworn Officers and Judges hands and
perusals,) and have a duplicate or double Indenture of Chyrograph so cut, one
in another, as one must necessarily discover the other, if there be any
variance or falsification in them, and so many places and Offices recording
them, cannot be counterfeited, or if they should, will easily be found out; but
Deeds so to be Registered and Enrolled, which shall not be attended with so many
cares and cautions, may easily be forged, counterfeited, or antidated, and
bring with them more deceits and encumbrances, then they do pretend to prevent;
and fall into all the inconveniences, questions and debates, which Fines and
Recoveries, being the grand and common Assurances of the Land: for Lands
betwixt party and party, have by those many Laws and Cases, which have been
adjudged to indulge and protect them, hitherto avoided and escaped.

The same power and force which are. 17.
granted to Fines, cannot with justice or convenience, be given to Deeds
enrolled against the Bargainor or his Heirs, or those that may claim the Lands,
because in Deeds there are most commonly reciprocal Covenants, and some things
to be performed on the Bargainees part, which may demand equity or performance,
and many times no words of Warranty or Release; but i^ a Fine, there is only a
Grant, Release, and Covenant, to Warrant on the part of the Cognisor, or he
which levieth it.

And if taken away from the people,. 18.
will loose the Supreme Magistrate and his Revenue, Ten or twenty thousand
pounds per annum; which the people having the benefit of such an ancient and
sure way of conveyance, Which had in 19 E. 1. now almost Four hundred years
ago, so great and due respect given unto it, as it was by a Parliament held in
that year, declared, That the Order of Law will not suffer them to be levied
without a Writ Original; and that the cause of the Solemnities then used in
Fines, was because a Fine was so high a Bar, of so great force, and so strong a
nature in it self: And has been settled, confirmed, and brought to the
perfection it now enjoys, by fourteen or fifteen Acts of Parliament, and for
the greatness of the Assurance, and the peace and quiet which it Plowd^ns
Comment. 357, 358.
brings with it, justly said to be Finis sructus exitus and effectus Legis;
the end, fruit, and effect of the Law, and a Fine, because it does Finem
litibus imponere put an end to most Suits or Controversies can arise against
it, did never as yet, or have in all their Petitions in Parliament, which have
been since or before, concerning other grievances, so much as complained of or
grudged. And though they had no cause or reason to complain of Fines and
Recoveries, will not like so well as the Proposers. To be compelled to Register
all their former Deeds or Evidences, if but for Ten or twenty years past, under
a Constraint or Penalty to be otherwise of no effect, or not so available in
the Law as they would have been formerly.

CHAP. IV. Of the Registring of all Men's former Deeds or other Evidences, if
but for Ten or twenty years past, under a Penalty to be, otherwise of no
effect, or less then they would formerly have been.
FOr that were to make any Law which. 19.
should be made to such a purpose, to be guilty of a retrospection, or looking
backwards in its commands or prohibitions, and the penalties ensuing thereupon,
which can have no rule or pattern from the Laws or Word of God, who in the
making of his most righteous Laws, made them to bind, and look only to the
future: And when he might do what he would with his Clay, not only commanded
those Laws to be written very plainly, but was so willing to pardon Deuteronomy. 27.
8. Levit. 4.
sins of Ignorance, as he ordained a Sacrifice to be made for them. And when in
the forbidding the Children of Israel to marry within certain degrees or
nearness of Blood, under the penalty of death, or cutting off from the people,
he had said, After the doings Levit. 18.
of the Land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do. Did not either punish
or call them to account for any former marriages contrary thereunto.

Moses therefore who understood the mind of God, concerning those Laws which
he had received from him, better then all other Legislators or Law*givers which
have been since, (the only Son of God excepted) being to die, commanded them
to be often read unto the people, that they might hear and observe them.

The Wedg of Gold, and Shekels of Silver, Josh. 8.
and the Babilonish Garments, for which Achan was stoned to death, by all 1 Samuel 14. 15.
the people, had not been the accursed things, but the lawful spoils of War, if
the foregoing prohibition had not made them to be so.

Nor had Saul so grievously, or at all offended, or been punished for sparing
Agag, being his prisoner and captive in War, if the command or charge of God
before hand had not made it to be an offense.

Which our English Laws have so much imitated. As the Act of Parliament of 36
E. 3. ordering all pleadings to be in English and Enrolled in Latin, and not in
French, as they had been formerly, did neither order or intend, that all the
Pleas for the years before, should be entered over again, and made to be in
Latin.

The Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 6. for acknowledging of Statutes or Recognisances
for Debts, has an express saving for Recognisances taken before the Major and
Constables of the Staple, though they did not concern Merchandise; which was
the evil sought to be remedied.

The Statute of 27 H. 8, cap. 10. for transferring of uses in possession,
making great alterations in Men's Estates, did after many savings and provisoes,
ordain, That all lawful Wills and Testaments, made or to be made, before the
first day of May, 1536. should be of the same force as they were forty years
before, notwithstanding the said Act; and that Actions then depending, should
not be abated or discharged, by reason of the executing of any Estate by
Authority of the said Act.

The Act for Inrollments of Deeds of Bargain and Sale made in the same year,
and Parliament, was ordained not to take effect, until after the last day of
July, which should be in the said year.

The Statute of 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 16. forbidding the buying and selling of
Offices, concerning Administration of Justice, does expressly provide, That all
Acts or things before done in the execution of such Offices, should be good
until the parties offending, contrary to that Act, be removed out of their
places, and that all Bargains and Contracts made for Offices, before the first
day of March, then next coming, should be in such force and effect, as if that
Act had never been made.

And all our Acts of Parliament which were not private, or by way of pardon for
Offenses past, have until the Act of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, in
Anno 1641. Wherein there was a Proviso, That it should not afterward be made
or taken to be a precedent, been made and ordained for the future; and in all
their Orders and Prohibitions, looking forward, and for the time to come, and
not seldom, prefixing a day or time when the Act should begin to take effect.
And for fear least any particular should be damaged in their intentions, and
care of the general, have besides a saving of other men's rights, been loaded
with as many Provisoes to that purpose, as any their cares or forecast could
possibly put them in mind of.

Wherein we may hope that our no foolish Ancestors (though some of their
ingrate, and less wise Posterity, have been pleased to think them otherwise)
did neither err in following the opinion of Saint Paul, That by the Law is the
knowledge of sin, and Romans 3. 20. Chap. 7. 7.
we had not known sins, but by the Law. And the guidance of Gods Holy Laws and
Ordinances, or that which the Light of Nature, and Laws of all other Nations
(where Justice and Reason had any acquaintance) could as well as their own,
instruct them.

For if Laws which are rightly and generally Cicero Philip. 11. Vida lib. 2. de
dignitat. Reipub.
defined to be Praecepta quaedam a recta ratione tracta and deducta honesta
imperantia and turpia prohibentia, certain Rules and Precepts drawn and deduced
from right reason, commanding good and honest things to be done, and forbidding
the contrary, should like Janus (whose retrospection was but feigned, as a
loving farewell to the year past) look backward as well as forward, and claw and
fall upon all that was past, and behind them, they would as to what is past,
cease to be Laws; and instead of preventing evil, and doing good, prove to be
no better then snares to catch and surprise men in their past and innocent
actions, before such Laws came to be known, or made against them, make the time
past, out of a time to come, and be as to what is past, or had been done
before, as Laws altogether impossible to be kept, and as never known or
published; and the punishments or evils happening upon them, as inflicted *for
Offenses before any Law was made, to make or declare them to be so; and be in
the birth and making of them, like some fierce and pitiless winds, broke loose
into the world, which with some benefit they bring along with them, in other
things do at the same time, break, overturn, and throw down all that are near
or about them, contrary to the care and love which God himself was pleased to
show to his people Israel, in the making and giving of his Laws; to whom
intending to deliver his Laws with great terrors and majesty in Mount Sinai, to
the end they might hear and obey them, he did three days before, give them
warning to set*bounds before them, and take heed that they came not near the
Mountain, least Exodus 20. 12, 13.
they or their Cattle should perish or be consumed. And contrary to the rules
of all the Intellect and right reason, which God has hitherto blessed the
World withal; and the rule and reason of all the Laws of God, Nature, and
Nations, Civil, Common, or Cannon.

But if there were nothing of ill example or consequence which might happen by
this proposed retrospection in the making of other Laws.

Such as enforced Retrospection of Deeds 20.
and Evidences already past and executed, which could never yet deserve to have
any entertainment, or to be so much as heard or mentioned in Senates, will
bring a very great charge and trouble to the people to Register their former
Deeds and Evidences, which were before as strong and valid, as the Law and the
best Council they could get, could make them; and to or from which, such
Registring by Act of Parliament; without a judicial examination of the cause,
and hearing of the parties concerned on both sides, can neither add or
diminish.

Or if they shall be pretended to be only. 21.
enforced to be Registered, to prevent frauds and inconveniences for the future,
by former Bargains or Dispositions (which do so seldom happen to Purchasers and
Money-lenders, as there is not one in every thousand which comes to any loss or
mischances by them, will as to Fines and Recoveries, Judgments, Statutes,
Recognisances, and many Deeds which are Enrolled (without some of which, no
Land, or almost Bargain of consequence, does pass from one man to another;)
Actum agere, and altogether needless for that, they being the greatest
encumbrances to be feared, are better Registered already, then they are like to
be by the Proposers.

And for such Deeds or Evidences which the owners were unwilling to be at the
charge of Inrolling, as not being necessary; they are not like to bring any
disturbance or inconveniences to Purchasors, who by the Fines and Recoveries
only, which in every purchase or mortgage of any considerable value are sure
not to be omitted, may if nothing else were to be found upon Record (though
very many Deeds of Uses, Trusts, Intails, Releases, and of other special
concernments, are for preservation most commonly to be found Enrolled) easily
understand there has been some former disposition or alteration of the Estate,
which is to be suspected or looked after.

And for the greatest part of them, are so little wanting to themselves in
their purchases or lending out moneys, as they do not only then and at all
other times, before hand, summon in and be speak all the cares, diligences, and
jealousies, possible of themselves, and their Counsel learned; but make out all
manner of Inquiries and Scrutinies, concerning the title and value of the
Lands; call for and peruse the Sellers or Borrowers Deeds or Evidences; demand
and require for Assurance, Fines, Recoveries, Feoffments, Warranties, Statutes,
Recognisances, or Judgments, and Counter-Securities for performance of
Covenants; and be sure to have a discharge of such Mortgages, Judgments,
Statutes, and Recognisances, which are found upon Record, or otherwise
discovered, or to enforce the depositing of part of the money in their hands,
to free or discharge Encumbrances or Answers upon oath in Chancery, to discover
them: And besides the usual Covenants of freeing and discharging all manner of
Encumbrances done, or suffered by the Seller or Borrower, and if need be, some
of their Ancestors, or from whom they claim; and of making better assurance
within so many years limited, as the Purchasor or Lender, or their Counsel
learned, shall reasonably advise or require, do for the most part of them, like
some grand Seigniors, or men of Empire in their Wills and Desires, upon such as
are to sell or borrow to defend themselves agalnst some importunate
necessities; and must needs therefore bow down before them, and yield to all
that is demanded of them, rather take too much, then too little Security, to
the great and many times impertinent cost of the borrower or seller, and that
with so great severity, and never almost to be satisfied curiosity, in the
enforcing, obtainning, making, recording and inrolling of their assurances, as
it is to be wished, that they would but employ the tenth part of that care and
deligence, to secure and provide for a Blessed Eternity.

And if amidst all these their cares and industries, they happen to meet with
any former Bargains or other Titles, disturbing their Purchases or Mortgages,
which is very seldom.

Or that such as greedily hunting after cheap bargains, and to have them to be
so, can be content to adventure upon cracked or litigious titles, or encumbered
estates, or in a wilful have, or giddy confidence, think their money or fees
well saved, if they trouble not a Lawyer that is able to advise or make their
conveyance to be safe and legal; but will either do it themselves, or employ
some Scrivener, Parson of the Parish, or young Clerk to make it, or will not be
at the charge of a Fine, or to stay a day or two longer to get a Statute or
Recognisance, or have it done as it ought to be, do come afterward to be
deservedly troubled with defects or controversies in their Conveyances or
Estates, which are for the most part caused or bred only by the rashness,
ignorance, negligence, or carelessness of themselves, or their Attorneys or
Solicitors (those few suits and troubles which sometimes accompany such kind
of Purchasors, having for the most part, besides the knavery of those who
should have been bound faster, no other cause or original, are all of them
notwithstanding, not seldom helped or set right again by those many remedies
which the Courts of Law and Equity do afford them against voluntary or dormant
Deeds, or such as are not made upon good consideration, old sleeping Statutes,
Judgments or Recognisances, not in a long time called upon or put in Execution.

So as to constrain the people to such a Registry of all their Evidences, only
to secure Purchasers, who either will or might be sure enough to secure
themselves without it, (some defects in Title being not by any Registring,
possibly to be discovered, if the Deeds should be over and over, and every
month in the year Registered) may seem to be as little necessary or pleasing to
them, as for every one in a Town, County, or Nation, to be ordered or compelled
to take Physic every year, or keep some costly or tedious way of diet to
prevent Apoplexies or Gangreens, or some such like seldom diseases or accidents
which may happen to their bodies, because some few have died or been much
troubled with it, when as multitudes of them are in health and do not need it;
many fear it not at all, nor are likely to be in any danger of it, some so poor
as they cannot be at the charge, and others not able to undergo the trouble or
distemper of it.

And more especially needless, when every man which does but know any thing in
our Laws, or has ever bought or sold Land, or sought to recover any which has
been aliened from him, or had Intails which his careful Ancestors thought to
have been an unalterable provision for him and his posterity, docqued and cut
off, cannot but confess, That our Laws have from time to time been exceeding
careful, and made it to be a great part of their business, to secure and
protect Purchasors Bona fide, who are already as well (if not more) provided
for in their Conveyances and Assurances, as any Nation under Heaven; and as far
also as the care or wit of man could hitherto conceive it to be necessary by
Feoffments, with Livery and Seisin, Fines and Recoveries, Leases and Releases,
Demise and Redemise, Warranties, Bars, and Non-Claims, Prescriptions,
Estoppels, Entries tolled, Judgments, Statutes and Recognisances, with
Collateral security to perform Covenants, Discovery of Encumbrances upon Oath;
the Statute of 27 H. 8. for transferring of Uses into Possession, the Act of
Parliament for Inrolling of Deeds of Bargain and Sale, an Act to preserve the
Estate of Tenants for years, in a Recovery suffered by one in Reversion; an Act
of Parliament in 2 and 3 E. 6. for saving and allowing of Leases, and other
kind of Estates not found in any Inquisition or Office to entitle the King;
three or four Statutes or Acts of Parliament against fraudulent assurances, or
such as go about to deceive men of their Debts; and another in 27 Eliz.
ordaining a forfeiture of a years value of the Land, by such as are parties or
privies in the same; the Statute of ^3 Eliz. for Inrolling of Fines and
Recoveries, to avoid Errors in them; three or four Statutes or Acts of
Parliament concerning Bankrupts.

The Statute against forging of Deeds, the Statute of 21 Jac. for limitations
of Writs of Formedon unto twenty years after the Title accrued; and another to
quiet the Titles of all men against the King, certain cases only excepted,
which had been in sixty years quiet possession; another, That the Lands of men,
dying in Execution, should be chargeable with their Debts; and another to make
it Felony against such as should levy Fines, suffer Recoveries, or acknowledge
Judgments, Statutes, or Recognisances in other men's names, with the Rule of
expounding Grants, strictly against the Grantors, Debts to be paid before
Legacies, and Trusts void as against Creditors, and many other aids and
assistances not here enumerated, which the Laws have been at all times ready to
contribute to such as shall timely and seasonably require or make use of them.

But if there could be any necessity, 22.
ground, or color of reason, to lay so great and needless a charge upon the
people in general, in Registring their former Conveyances, to prevent a seldom
or far lesser charge or loss which might but possibly happen to some few; in
particular, yet such a Registring will certainly, besides many other evils
attending it, revive and raise Controversies betwixt adversaries, or such as
have been the former owners or inheritors of the Lands, make and multiply
Suits, which were never intended, or encourage others to project or make
designs upon men and their Estates; and so breed and multiply Informers, as few
men's Estates or Titles shall be free from such kind of Vermin, and welwishers
to themselves, more then to the Commonwealth: And if no other troubles shall
break in that way, lessen or take away the credit of those, who were before
reputed to have had a good Title to their Lands and Estates, especially when
the late Wars and Plundrings, have lost or taken away a great part, if not all,
of men's ancient and later Deeds and Evidences; and where some shall appear to
be Registered, and others found to be wanting.

Or if they could be found or produced, 24.
will many times be to seek for those that did seal or execute them, whereby to
have them acknowledged and registered.

Or when those that should be vouched to Warranty, or sued in a Warrantia
Charta, or to perform Covenants, shall be gone beyond Seas, or dead, or
insolvent, and no witnesses to be found, that can tell or remember any thing of
the contents or verification of them.

The want whereof, may be a way to raise again, when courage and necessity
shall meet together, the old way (long ago laid asleep, and disused by our now
more safe then formerly, keeping our Records and Evidences) of gaging Battle in
a Writ of Right, and fighting by themselves or Champions.

To which, and many more troubles and inconveniences which may be hereafter
sadly experimented, there will also be too large an Addition.

If all Bonds, Bills, Leases, Releases, Feoffments, Contracts in writing, and
whatsoever writings else which may prove or happen to be Encumbrances upon Real
and Personal Estates, must also be Registered.

CHAP. V. Of the Registring of all Bonds, Bills, Leases, Releases, Feoffments,
Contracts in Writing, and all other Writings executed, which may incumber Real
and Personal Estates.
FOr it will as to the Debts and Recognisances, Fines, Port-Bonds, Obligations,
(which have the force of Statutes Staple) and Accounts due to the King or
Supreme Coke's 3 Reports, Sir Will. Herberts Case. 7 Reports. Sir Thomas Cecils
Case. And 11 Reports. Earl of Devonshire's Case.
Magistrate; which by their many Privileges, Powers, and Severities, may bring
great Encumbrances and Troubles upon such as shall deal with such Debtors or
Accomptants, by way of purchase or lending of money: And as to Wills and
Testaments (which by disposing and charging of Lands, may sometimes obstruct or
lessen the Estates and Assurances of Purchasers) Decrees in Chancery and the
Exchequer, Fines and Recoveries, Judgments, Statutes, and Recognisances, raise
a new and unnecessary charge upon the people, upon a pretense only that
Encumbrances of Men's Estates and Lands, cannot now be so readily found in
Twelve or thirteen places in London, within half a mile one of another, as they
hope they will be by their supposed better Registring or Kalendring of them in
above Fifty several Shire-Towns, some thirty, some one hundred and twenty, and
the least twenty miles distant one from another.

For the Debrs and Accounts due to the Supreme Magistrate and their discharges,
are already entered and enrolled in the Court of Exchequer, attended by the
Clerk of the Pipe, and his great Roll, the Two Remembrancers, the Tally, and
Pell, and Auditors Offices, and need not to be twice Enrolled and Registered.
Wills and Testaments are Registered in Books of Parchment, fairer and better
kept then any Records of the Nation; and for a small Fee or Recompense, laid
open to the view of such as shall have occasion to seek for any thing in them*
Fines are exactly and without any difficulty to be found in the Fine Office,
and Recoveries in the Clerk of the Warrants Office in the Court of Common Pleas
the Decrees in Chancery, fairly entered by sworn Registers, and their Clerks in
Books of Orders, and so methodically kept and Kalendred, as the search has
nothing at all of hardship in it; and are (if the Clerks of the Six Clerks do
but their duty) enrolled afterward in Parchment, and carried to the Chapel of
the Rolls, where they are most orderly kept, and easy to be found; the
Recognisances acknowledged in that Court, being with as little charge and labor
to be found in the Inrollment Office; and after they are Enrolled, carried in
and laid up amongst the Public Records thereof. The Recognisances taken before
the Justices of the Peace, are, or ought to be duly certified into the Quarter
Sessions, and entered with the Clerks of the Peace of the several Counties.
Statutes (not Merchant) are orderly to be found in the Statute Office. Decrees
of the Exchequer entered into Books, and kept by particular Clerks in the two
Remembrancers Offices; and the Judgments of that Court are, as the Judgments
are in the Courts of Upper Bench and Common Pleas at Westminster, duly entered
and recorded in their several Rolls or Records in Parchment; and for such as
are in the Courts of Upper Bench and Common Pleas, entered upon Posteas and
after Verdicts, have their particular Clerks of the Judgments, to enter and
give account of them: The Searches in all which several places, making no great
charge to the people; some whereof are to be had for nothing, others for Four
pence; some Eight pence, others Twelve pence, and the greatest not exceeding
Sixteen pence; which in a general search, though all those Twelve or Thirteen
London Offices and places, will not altogether be so much as the charge of a
Man and Horse, for one days journey, for a single search to a Registry, if not
much above twenty miles distance.

But if there could be any reason to enter and inrol them over again, and put
them into Fifty two several places and distances, so far of from one another,
or to persuade or enjoin people not to look for them, where with most ease and
less charge they are to be found.

The Clerks or Registers of such new 25.
erected Offices (if either they or their business could be for the good of the
Commonwealth) will be too much exempted, and at liberty, if they shall not
according to the Law and Rule of Right Reason, hitherto observed, be
constituted and made to be under the Survey or Control, and sworn as Officers
or Clerks of some of the Superior Courts; As the Clerks of the Tower Records,
and Chapel of the Rolls are of the Master of the Rolls, the Custos Brevium of
the Upper Bench; of the Judges of that Court, the Custos Brevium; and all other
Officers of the Court of Common Pleas are; of their Judges, the Two
Remembrancers and Clerks of the Pipe, by Act of Parliament; and the Chamberlain
of the Exchequer, and the Keeper of Doomsday Book* and diverse ancient and
miscellaneous Records of great value are of the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Barons of the Exchequer.

For if they shall not be incorporate and subordinate to some one, or every of
these Superior Courts, as to several respects, whereby with less charge to the
people, or trouble to those Courts, to collect and make up their Registers out
of the Records, if there could be any need of it; as the Clerk of the Pipe and
Exchequer Remembrancers are ordered by Act of Parliament, to do one out of
another Rolls or Office, the Decrees and Recognisances in the Chancery and
Exchequer, and the Judgments in the Courts of Upper Bench and Common Pleas at
Westminster, must by this new and unpractised way of Registers, be certified
out of those Superior and Grand Courts of the Nation, to those who are neither
Courts of Record, nor intend to be in any subordination to them, with a great
deal of unnecessary charge and trouble to the people, to procure Exemplications
under the Seal of the said Courts, or authentic and sworn Copies of Records of
them (the latter whereof being to be delivered by the Plaintiffs, or those that
obtained the Judgments, or their Attorneys, or any other interessed therein,
may produce many inconveniences) and send them to and from all parts of the
Nation, one as far as from Kent to Westchester, and another from Oxford to York
to Lincoln; and upon three several Judgments had at London, as it many times
happens upon one Bond for payment of money, wherein three or four several men
of three several Additions or Residence, do stand bound to send into Wales,
Northumberland, Devonshire, Cornwall, or the like, to have them entered in the
proper Registries; where also Judgments in personal and transitory Actions
against men, who have neither Lands or any fixed Residence in one County, more
then in another, and write themselves of several places, will be so much the
more difficult in the search, and finding them; As Fisty two Shire Towns are
most commonly farther distant from those that must go unto them, and at all
times not a little remote one from another, and not so easy or expedite a
search, as it would be with the Registers, or at the Chapel of the Rolls, in
Chancery the Prothonotary of the Court of Upper Bench, the three Prothonotaries
of the Court of Common Pleas, and in the Pipe and Two Remembrancers Offices in
the Exchequer, the Office for Probate of Wills, the Fine Office, and Clerk of
the Warrants and the Statute Office, who are all of them constantly to be found
most part of the Vacation, and all the Term times, within less then a mile of
one another at London, without sending any one on purpose thither.

Or if the Plaintiffs or the Superior 26.
Courts, whose Judgments and Decrees once entered and enrolled, cannot by the
Judges themselves be stayed or arrested, without a Writ of Error in Courts of
Common Law, and a Bill of Review upon a Decree in Chancery, and are sworn not
to deny any man Common Right, shall be ordered to transmit or certify Copies
of such Judgments or Decrees, with an Injunction, That they shall not be
otherwise valid, or put in execution, will not only be unparalelled and
unpresidented, and against the Oath of the Judges, and Common Right and
Justice; but render those ancient and superior Courts to be but as half Courts
of Record, and their Judgments but Interlocutory; or as Offices only of
Inquest and Inquiry, and the Registries to be in effect and power, as their
Superiors.

Mean while the people having obtained 27.
any Judgments or Decrees in those Courts, concerning Lands or Personal Estate,
shall by this new way of Registries, be (if there shall be no provision or
exception for such Cases) necessitated and put to another needless charg^* and
trouble of transmiting Copies of (...) and Decrees, which by a (...),
Composition, or Agreement (which happens so often, as there is not one Judgment
in every twenty in a year, considered one with another, which stands
unsatisfied or unagreed, or remains as an Encumbrance for three Terms after) do
come to be either useless, or not at all to be put in execution or be disabled
by such restraints, to take Executions upon such Judgments, which are not
satisfied, though it be against a flying Debtor, or a wasting estate, or to
acknowledge satisfaction upon any such Judgments, until they shall be
transmitted to the Registries; where unless all Releases, Satisfactions, and
Payments, either in part or in whole upon Judgments, shall be also entered.
(Which with the other troubles of Registring, will be enough to keep all the
men and people of the Nation, from the danger of falling into the Lethargy or
sleeping sickness) they may receive men's moneys for Searches and Certificates,
but never be able to give a certainty or truth of what shall be desired of them.

Bonds, Bills, and other Writings, which 28.
are now usually made upon all occasions, and at all convenient times and
places, in above Nine thousand Parishes, Sundays only excepted, and many of
them in half or a quarter of an hours space, with great dispatch and ease to
the people; cannot, if they must be Registered, be made now, or done as
formerly, without both the parties traveling together to the Registry, or
meeting at 1. or more Shiretowns in fifty and two, to acknowledge and enter
them, which may be Forty, Thirty, Twenty, or Ten miles off from the place where
the Contracts were made; and will so trouble every man's ordinary, and formerly
easy enough, affairs and business in that kind, as to make them to be no less
then extraord nary Encumbrances, and too much discover every man's Estate, and
double every man's misery and wants, in taking away his credit, which might by
degrees be a means to help him out of it.

Unlock and throw open every man's 29.
Closet or place wherein he keeps his Writings and Evidences, and expose them
for the Registers Fees, to the view of every one that shall have a desire to
see and take Copies of them; which the Chancery and other Courts would not
suffer to be done, or so much as to be seen or read by their adversaries,
unless at hearings or trials; nor their Counsel, Attorneys, or Solicitors, to
be examined as witnesses against them, or to discover what they had seen, or
understood by their Writings or Evidences.

Men's wives may by this means be as 30.
privy as themselves, to their Estate and Evidences, which wise and good men
many times find fitting to conceal from them; to the end, that they may not
lavish, and be the more irregular in their desires and expenses.

And their children more prodigal and 31.
wasteful, and less careful to please their Parents, or to be governed by them
in their Marriages, when they shall know what is beforehand settled upon them.

Those that have good Estates, will be 32.
rendered so, more then needs, to be visible; as the Taxers or Assessment-men
shall be sure to over-rate them; for although there be found such Deeds, or
Conveyances, or Bonds, or Bills made unto them, which may seem as a good Estate
or Income they cannot, or at least will not be at leisure to computate their
charges, and outgoings, or be able to judge how much they are trusted or
seized to other men's uses, or how much of those Lands are afterward sold, or
how much they stand indebted to others.

Many thousand Tradesmen and Merchants 33.
in the Land, who live upon credit, diligence and industry, and have of their
own scarce a tenth part of what they trade for, or is in their Shops or
Warehouses, will be so laid open to the view and jealousy of their Friends and
Creditors, or such as they trade with, as they will every one be so afraid of
the poor Debtors, and one of another being not paid first, or that they may
come to be loosers, as they will strive who shall get himself first paid; and
so altogether distrusting and vying who shall be the first, rush in at once
upon them, and be sure to destroy and tear them all in pieces.

No man when he sees a small or no Estate 34.
in a young hopeful Tradesman, will lend him any thing to set up withal: And all
those advantages which men may have by their towardliness, and honest, and
hopeful endeavors will by this Inquisition be taken away and made to be of
little advantage.

Many of the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, 35.
Tradesmen, Mechanics, Yeomen, Farmers, Husbandmen, and even day Laborers,
being two parts in three of the Housekeepers or Masters of Families in all the
Nation, who by the late Wars and Miseries of the times, and decay of Trade and
Merchandise, are come either a great deal indebted, or so far behind hand, as
more then one half of them may be rationally enough believed to be, if their
Creditors did but know the weakness of their Estates, not far from the prison
door, or having their Lands extended; and all of them, if a Statute of Bankrupt
could be sued out against them, irrecoverably thrown into ruin, will by this
means be very much prejudiced in their Estates and subsistence.

Younger Brothers and Soldiers, and all 36.
such as have no Lands, or certain visible Estate, and are a considerable part
of the Nation, will never be able to advance themselves in Marriage, or borrow
money to buy Land, or trade withal.

Such a Registry will make a man that is 37.
but a little going behind hand, to be reckoned as quite undone for that, if
his Payments and Discharges of his Mortgages and Bonds, and every half year or
six months payment of Interest, be not also Registered, or a search made
through all the Fifty two Counties and Registries, what he has paid or
discharged, or purchased, or had Registered in his name in others places, or
which he has in Charter, Parties, or beyond Seas, or in Factories, Retorns, or
Consignments, clearly liquidated or made to be certain and apparent, and will
require a great deal of time and money to travel, or send from place to place
so far distant to inquire of, which envy and ill will, or the saving of
charges, will hardly or do very seldom permit, he shall be given over as a
dead man, or a person infected with the Plague, or some contagious disease
which no man will come at.

And if the party thus wronged or abandoned, 38.
shall go to right or clear himself by proofs or Certificate, it will not only
make it to be an unusual and strange kind of Process or Inquiry, but to be very
chargeable, whilst by the failing of his credit, and falling on of his
Creditors, he shall be sure to be undone, before he can tell how to right or
clear himself from that imputation.

It will too much advantage and encourage 39.
Foreign Kingdoms, States, and Commonwealths, that are at present, or shall be
hereafter in hostility with us, to make or continue Wars, when they shall from
year to year be able to find the poverty and consumption of the Nation; and
will by such an inspection into our Books and Registers, instruct Foreign
Merchants or Bankers, how to raise their moneys exchange or commodities, by
working as they do too much already upon our Merchants, wants and necessities,
who will not be able to send or carry ready money, if they could be allowed to
do it.

Bills of Exchange which have their 40.
ground and foundation altogether upon the credit of him that gives it, and are
as well at home, as in the parts beyond the Seas, a cause of traffic and
commerce, and the swift and sure conveyers of money; and if it could be brought
to a true examen and account, would appear to be so much carried and
communicated to several hands and uses, merely upon Exchange and Credit, as
amounts to half the money and personal riches of the Nation, will not in such a
growth and fertility of distrust and jealousies, as will by this means be in
all men and parts of the Commonwealth, when it shall be known what money
Merchants do ow, or take up at Interest, to Trade withal; be now made use of as
formerly without a search, through all the Fifty two Registers, for fear least
the Bills should not be answered: And where Merchants and Men of Credit are, if
they accept a Bill most careful to perform it, and not only they that send,
but those that do accept it, look upon a protest of not payment, as some mortal
sickness happening to their Trade, Credits, or Estates, will by reason of this
Engine of jealousies or distrust, neither know how to accept or give any Bill
of Exchange

Will be very grateful to the Thieves 41.
and Highway-men of the Nation, who have long taken this way of sending Bills
of Exchange, to be a grievance and hinderance to their employment; when men
being so generally affrighted by these new kind of Registries, shall rather
adventure to keep and carry their money themselves, give them an opportunity of
becoming, as they think the better keepers of it, and save them the hazard and
charges of corresponding with Ostlers, Chamberlains, and Tapsters in the Inns,
ot to employ Sett^rs when by search in the Registries, they may know what money
is stirring, and how to way-lay the payment or Carriers thereof.

The Assurance Office, whereby so many 42.
do daily secure their Fears, Estates, and Adventures at Sea, now more used and
requisite then formerly, will be so much distrusted; as those that were wont to
be afraid of storms and casualties at Sea, will be now not a little afraid of
the Insurers, and whilst they shall stand consulting betwixt Scilla and
Charibdis, spend so much time in it, as the news of their undoing may come unto
them before they can find the way to resolve how to prevent it.

Disgrace and disparage the City of 43.
London, the Mother and Nursery of all our Trade and Commerce, at home and
abroad, shut up the Old Exchange, take away or destroy all our Traffic, by
Land or Sea, and the Shipping and Navigation thereof, and like a general
Beggary cast over all the Nation, make every man afraid to trust or deal one
with another.

Or if to amend the matter, all Bonds and Bills, shall by their Registring have
the force and power of Judgments, Statutes, or Recognisances bestowed upon them.

Such a rigid and binding security which 44.
all men have hitherto looked upon as grand Encumbrances to their Estates, and
did therefore in all their Contracts and Bargains, avoid as much as they could;
and which, the people did so little desire to press one upon another, as though
ever since the Reign of King Edward the First (which is now almost Four hundred
years ago) it was in their power to require it, there is not above one Statute
or Recognisance, or Judgment, entered into or given as security, in or for every
thousand Bonds or Bills which are made, and taken every year in the Nation; and
if they shall now, whether they will or no, have all their Bonds and Bills made
to be so fierce and biting, will upon satisfaction and payment be enforced to a
great deal of charge and trouble in the discharging or vacating of them; and in
stead of taking of Encumbrances, prove to be the greatest and most general in
the Nation.

And not well agree with the Laws of 45.
God; and of this, and many other Nations to bind or captivate the Contracts
of the people, which ( Sundays only excepted) are daily and hourly made to so
much trouble, charges, discredit, and severity, before they can be ratified,
when as a more easy and gentle way of Securities and contracting one with
another have hitherto, and for many hundred years together dispatched them.

Will cause those that with care and discretion 4^.
enough, may have an occasion for themselves or their friends, to stand bound
in twenty several Bonds for payment of money, or performance of Covenants, or
the like, to be so much discredited or distrusted by two or three Bonds, which
shall be found to be entered upon Record, as every man doubting the Priority of
the former Bonds (if they shall be of the force of a Statute or Judgment) will
be afraid to meddle with them, or take them for Security,

Make every man to be little better 47.
then a prisoner in execution, and to renounce the benefit of the Law, which
was his birthright, before he can borrow a little money to satisfy his
necessity or occasions, or to trade withal; and like Esau sell his birthright
for a mess of Potage to pacify his hunger; and every Bond and Bill to be as a
continual and standing Commission of Bankrupt to hover over him, and tear and
pull him in pieces; and every borrowing of money, to be as a rack or torture of
his credit, and a thraldom of his Estate.

Strengthen the hands of the Usurer and 48.
Oppressor, bruise the broken Reed, Stretch out the paws of the Bear, and
sharpen the talons of the Vulture; leave the poor and honest to the cruel mercy
of the wicked, to be gnawn and devoured like Sheep, and teach the Usurers (a
great part of whose trade and cunning, it is already like the Kite to catch the
Chicken) to find out the necessities of the people, and prey upon them; and if
they give not what brocage they please, to lend them money or to forbear or
continue it at Interest upon the same security (which Ten thousand Bonds and
Bills in this Nation, by payment of the Interest, and many times without, have
been for two, three, four, or seven years together, without any suite or
trouble begun, or made upon it) enforce them to all manner of extortions and
hard conditions; which if they will not call a mercy or thank them for it, and
fairly and quietly lie down, and have as many Feathers as they please plucked
of them, and live in as much fear of them, as the Partridges do of the Hawks,
and by so much the more for that the Usuring Hawks can when they please (which
the other cannot) know where to find out their prey, utterly and at once
destroy them by seizing upon their Goods and Lands, and carrying them to prison.

Which will be contrary to those most 49.
righteous and unerring Laws of God, and the mind and pity of the God of
Justice and Mercy; who in his own blessed Laws, says, Ye shall not afflict any
widow or fatherless Exodus* 22: v. 22, 23, 24.
child, If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will
surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot; and I will kill you with the
Sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

If thou at all take thy neighbors raiment to Exodus 22. v. 25, 26, 27.
pledge, thou shall deliver it him by that the Sun goes down: For that is his
covering only, it is his raiment for his skin; wherein he shall sleep. And it
shall come to pass, when he cries unto me, that I will hear. Thou shall not
take the upper or the nether Deuteronomy. 24. v. 6* 10.
Millstone to pledge. When thou do lend thy brother any thing, thou shall not
go into his house to fetch his pledge. Which gives no way or allowance to the
tearing of their credit in pieces, nor agrees with what our Savior Christ, and
his blessed Apostles taught us, To do as we Matthew. 5. v. 7, 9.
would be done unto. And blessed are the merciful. But if ye bite and devour
one another, Gal. 5. v. 13, 14, 15.
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.

Executions cannot be made thereupon, 50.
without Certificate of the Bonds or Bills Registered into the Chancery, as is
provided by the Statute of Acton Burnel, 11 E, 1.

And if they be certified, will make another charge, and may and ought to be
pleaded to; as in the case of Statutes Merchant, or other Statutes allowed of,
and provided by the Statute of 23 Hen. 8. cap 6.

Whereby the Plaintiffs shall throw 51.
down and worry the Defendants, and the Defendants make a shift to get up
again, and beat and take away their weapons from them by giving Bail, to make
proof of their complaints and suggestions suing an Audita Quaerelas out of the
Chancery, which like a Bill in Equity, having a long course of suggestions and
witnesses to attend it, will loose more time, and make more charges upon such
an after game and scuffle, then would have been expended in the ordinary way of
proceeding or getting in money due upon a Bond or Bill, not having the force of
Statutes.

For Statutes Merchant are to have a Capias and a Non est Inventus returned,
before there can be an extent or seizure of his Lands or Goods; and upon a
Statute in the nature of a Statute Staple, the Plaintiff or Cognisee is first
to have a Certificate from the Clerk of the Statute Office, to the Clerk of the
Crown or Commonwealth in Chancery, who upon payment of an half penny in the
pound, for the sum expressed in the Statute, to the use of the Supreme
Magistrate, makes out the extent, upon which the Sheriff by Act of Parliament
takes for his Fee twelve pence per pound for the first hundred, and six pence
per pound for the other hundred, besides other charges: Which Writ of Extent
being returned, and filed in the Petibag, is the Warrant for a Liberate
directed to the Sheriff, to give possession of the Land extended, which is but
many times the beginning of a greater charge, in bringing Audita Quaerela's or
Bills in Chancery,

When as it is in every year to be proved 52.
and acknowledged for a truth, That of Eight hundred Actions or Writs issuing
forth of the Court of Common Pleas or Upper Bench in a year, in some one
particular County for Debt, upon Bonds or Bills or in some other Personal
Actions, there are no Warrants taken out to Arrest above Six hundred of them,
in regard of the Defendants speedy Agreement; and of those Six hundred, not
above Three hundred are Arrested, or come to enter their appearance; and of
those not above a half come to plead or make any defense, and not the on: half
of them do afterward come to trial at the Assizes; and not a fifth part of
those do come to move in Arrest of Judgment, or sue out Writs of Error, or put
in Bills in Chancery: And those that do not proceed so far as to Arrest, do not
put the Plaintiff or Defendant to so much as Ten shillings a piece charges; the
second sort including the former charges not Twenty shillings a piece, if the
Defendant be not a desperate fighter, and hard to be taken; and the third sort,
if there be no special or long Pleadings, not above Thirty shillings in all;
and the fourth sort, or such as come to trial, not above four or five pounds,
with all the charges reckoned together, besides that of Witnesses or
extraordinary Counsel, so little is the expense of time and money, in the
present way or course of suing upon Bonds and Bills, and other Personal
Actions. And so much is like to be the delay, and charges, and vexation of that
which some would so willingly have to succeed it.

But if the trouble and charge of Certificates into. 53.
the Chancery, and suing out of Audita Quaerela's, and such a generation of
Suits as are like to happen by such a severe kind of Securities, shall be
endeavored to be prevented by making every Registry to be a Court of Record,
and to have something to hear and determine, as well as to Write and Register.

CHAP. VI. Of new Courts or Judicatories to be erected in every County, to hear
and determine Causes.
THere will be then Fifty two Judicatories or Inferior Courts more then are
already erected, one of which to be added to every County in England and Wales,
will come before they will be welcome or wanted; for every Shire in England
has already the Summer and Winter Assizes, Quarter Sessions four times in
every year, County Courts every month, Sheriffs Turns, Courts Leet and Baron,
and weekly or three weeks Courts in its City or Towns Corporate, amounting in
every County to no less then Two hundred, one with another; which being in the
wisdom of former ages, and some hundreds of years past, and every years
experience since, sound to be in their due limits and bounds, very necessary
and useful, do make as many Law-days and meetings for the people, as they have
need of.

To help which new Courts or Judicatories. 54.
to work or business, if Bonds and Bills which they would have the Registring
of, or any other of the Causes or Matters, which are and have hitherto been
from time to time, dispatched by the Courts at Westminster (when they had
before the Wars and Troubles of these later times, almost half as much, or as
many again as they have now) with good content and convenience to the people;
and to all who have had occasion to seek for, or attend their Justice (if those
that are ignorant or peevishly selfconceited or discontented, because their
desires or unjust expectations have been frustrated in some Actions or Suits,
which they prosecuted or defended,) would but let Reason or Truth be judge of
their Mistaken-apprehensions, and not lay their own or other men's errors or
failings upon the Courts or Judges, shall be transferred and carried into these
County Judicatories, from the more knowing and Superior Courts and Judges at
Westminster; who besides their well-known learning, and justice in all Causes,
which are brought before them, may for an evidence or testimony of the peoples
approbation of them, call to witness the many causes, which for many ages
together, and in every year are, and have been removed from the Inferior Courts
to the Superior, for want of Justice; and the many Juries and Trials at their
Bars, which by consent, both of Plaintiffs and Defendants, are yearly and
termly brought from the Counties, as well near as remote, to be heard by the
more learned sort of Judges and Courts,

And put unto the Judgment, and determination 55.
of the less, or very little, or not at all able or knowing; will stop Prove. 5.
1* and 2.
up the ways of the places of the paths, where Wisdom and Justice made their
constant habitation; deprive and take away (if they shall not be empowered to
try by Juries) from every man, so much of his part and interest in Magna
Charta, as the want of his trial by his Peers, or a Jury will come to, put the
spear of the mighty into the hands of those that are not able to weild or
manage it, enforce the people to inquire of the blind and deaf, the way to make
an end of their controversies by carrying their causes to such as are not able
to judge or determine them, which may after the expense of much money, time,
and labor, yield them as good a Crop or Harvest, as Ulysses had when he
counterseited himself to be mad by Ploughing the Sand or Shore with his strange
kind of Cattle, and sowing of Salt instead of Corn.

Or if the Sheriffs Turns and County 56.
Courts, shall be put into the power and care of those Judicatures, That
ancient and necessary Officer of Justice, and the execution of the Law, will be
made either to be as nothing, or but the one half of what it was formerly, and
ought to be; and the whole frame of that ancient and useful Jurisdiction put
into disorder, or dissolved; or if the Hundred Courts, Leet and Baron, will
take away the inheritance, right, and property of the Lords of Manors, and the
necessary relations and dependences, which are and ought to be betwixt them and
their Tenants, contrary to Magna Charta, and the whole tenor of our Laws and
Liberties.

Or if these new Judicatories shall as the Systeme-makers had for the setting
up of others, not long ago contrived, be made up of several parts or pieces,
and torn or taken out of that goodly order and frame of our Laws and Body
Politic; or as the Romans did in their original contempt, and poverty, in the
getting the Sabine and Neighbor Virgins to be their Wives, sally out upon other
Jurisdictions, and Ravish and take to themselves what they can get, and no way
belongs to them, will by all, or any of those ways, not only vex and turmoil
all sorts of people; and bereave them as the Members of the Body Politic of
the daily care, influence, and communication of Justice which they used, and
ought to receive from the head and supreme Authority in a place so near unto
it; and those that sit at the Helm of Government of that termly intelligence
which they should have, and cannot well be without at London and Westminster,
concerning the due Administration and Distribution of Justice; besides an half
yearly inspection into the due execution of Justice in the several Counties of
the Nation, and the peoples content and satisfaction in it, by the Assizes
wherein the Judges of the Superior Courts, like so many Stars and Planets in
our Firmament, do keep their circuits and courses, but give them stones instead
of bread, and grievances instead of remedies;

Especially if they shall be guided and 57.
managed by ignorant, though honest wellmeaning men or by tradesmen (whom the
Athenians and Romans, those wise and Sigonius de Antiquo jure Civium Romans Lib.
2. cap. 7. and 18. Et Lib. 1. de Repub. Atheniens. Lib. 1. cap. 7*
great Common wealths-men of the World, did never think fit to employ in the
Administration of Justice) or some small practiced or unmolested Doctors of
Physic, or men of a contrary Profession, to that which should be the rule of
their Judgment, Town Clerks, or such who think they can understand better then
write or read* Committee or Lawyers Clerks, or such as shall be but
Balbutientes, or Novi^es in the Laws, or very little or not at all furnished
with the knowledge, experience, or practice thereof, or be assisted by Sid^smen
of their own capacities, or such as being fantastic or self-conceited, shall
think they speak Law or Reason, or do Justice; when none but such as speed well
by their doing the contrary, can be of that opinion, and would perhaps do
right, if they could understand the way unto it, which to such men will not be
very easy, whilst (like those ignorant Judges, which Plato long ago Plato,
lib. 2. de Legibus.
complained of) they sit as men astonished in the hearing of any difficult
matter, and are to be taught by others; and for want of knowledge in
themselves, or how to distinguish betwixt right and wrong, do not know how to
judge of that which is said or pleaded before them; but whilst every one of
them must have his own discourse, and speak his sense as they call it; will be
sure, too often, to leave the Point, and Reason, and Truth of the Case, like
some house or place infected with the Plague, and a Cross and Lord have mercy
upon us put upon it; and rail against the Law, because it puzzleth them; and
the Lawyers for troubling them (as one of a Country Committee not long ago
said) with their many Reasons. And misuse their power, and make it Arbitrary in
not doing what they might or should do, doing many things they should not do,
and doing every thing they would do in making their Orders as their Vulgar
Reason, or the Byas of partiality or ignorance shall carry them; or if one or
more should happen to be Lawyers, and the major part none, their knowledge can
go no further then their Votes, or what they shall be able to persuade their
misunderstanding, or not at all understanding Companions unto. Mean while the
people (who are sure to suffer by it) are after a great expense of Money, and
abundance of Delays, Attendance, and Trouble, which are usually to be found in
such Courts of later Edition, sent home with the sad stories of their
grievances and complaints, ready to make Affidavit, That Ignorance in the
Administration of Justice, is an Accumulation of Evils; the fruitful parent of
many grievances, and a mighty oppressor.

Which will not be all the evils and mischiefs 58.
neither, which are like to come along with it; For this their design of
cutting, as it were, the Moon into Stars, and erecting these Registries, and
little Tribunals, will by degrees remove into them, the business and being of
the City of London, and Courts at Westminster; which has hitherto, by the
Justice and Trade of the Nation, residing in it, and a concourse of all people
and Nations, been made to be in that flourishing condition, which it was in at
the beginning of the late Wars, in a more near and especial manner, then to the
more remote parts of the Nation, communicated her riches and increase, to above
twelve neighboring and adjacent Counties, who by the raising of their Land and
Commodities, and a daily and nightly vent in sending of it thither, have double
or treble improved their Lands in their yearly Rents, and values; and will not
only bring a great loss, destruction and ruin to the City and Suburbs,
consisting of above Three and forty thousand Houses, above half whereof, with
the several Families and Inmates, which are in the Suburbs, being almost two
parts in three of the number, do depend only or very much, upon the termly
meetings at the Courts of Justice, but impoverish and make a general
disturbance in all the parts and Counties of the Nation, as well near unto it,
as remote.

Which are so incorporate and concerned 59*
in it, as they that know how the Trade and Money of London is diffused, and
communicated to, and over every part of this Nation; and that there is not a
City or Shire-town, except Bristol and Hull, but has most of their Wares and
Commodities from thence, and most of that upon day or trust; and that there is
not a Mercer or Shopkeeper, or Innkeeper, in all other Cities and Borrough, and
little Villages, but are furnished with their Wines and Commodities, and are as
tributary unto them, and depend upon their welfare, cannot deny, but if London
sink, they are not like to swim; or, if London perish, they are not like to be
without the taste or sense of some of their miseries.

For no man can rationally imagine or 60.
believe, that after such a ruin or destruction of this great Emporium, and
only Town of Trade, of the Three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the taking away or lessening the Courts of Justice at Westminster, the
Commerce or Trade of the Nation, can live or subsist in the Cantons, or little
pieces of Trade or Judicatories which shall be erected out of it, or that it
can produce any better effect, then the laying waste of the glory of the
Nation, and the leading into Captivity the Laws and Liberties of the People, or
that half of the Fifty two Shire-towns, or any of them, can be so conveniently
situated as to have business and trade enough, to draw all the people and
commodities from all parts of the Nation to them; or that Lincolnshire Fens, or
Buckingham, or Northamptonshire Pastures, or Essex and Suffolk, Hertfordshire,
Kent and Surrey, should or can find in any of their adjacent Shire-towns or
Registries, the hundred part of the vent which they now have for Cattle, Sheep,
Wool, Hides, Corn, Malt, Butter and Cheese, and all kind of Commodities; or
that it will be any more then to kill and destroy the Heart, the principal part
and seat of li^e; and to hope notwithstanding, that the Liver, Veins, and
Arteries, and all that conveyed Blood, Spirits, and nutriment to it, and
received life in exchange from it, or the Feet and Hands, Stomach and Belly,
that used to supply and be subservient to it, or the Head and Eyes that used to
govern or guide the Body which belonged to it, can be in any good condition,
and enjoy a health or welbeing, when that so eminent, so vital, and principal a
part of the Body shall be cast into a Consumption, languish, or be extinguished.

And yet when all is done, and the sad 61.
effects and consequences of it suffered, the design or pretense of these
Registries of securing all Purchasers of Lands, and Lenders of Money, or to
make Men's Estates to be so visible and transparent, as no man in selling or
borrowing, shall be able to cozen or deceive, or not satisfy one another; will
be no otherwise possible, then to break in pieces, and disturb a whole Nation,
and put them to a great and unnecessary expense, to do that over again which is
already done, and better then they can do it, and leave them open,
notwithstanding to as many hazards and contingencies as they were before*

CHAP. VII. That it is impossible to provide against all which may happen to be
Encumbrances.
FOr Confiscations and Forfeitures of Lands; for Treason, Murders, Felonies,
and Premunires, may be grand Encumbrances to Purchasors, or the Creditors of
those that commit them. Misdemeanors, Fines, Forfeitures of Offices or Places;
Mortgages, Statutes, Recognisances, Bonds and Penal Bills; breach of Penal
Laws, Covenants, Trusts and Conditions, which arising out of the Wills or
Pravity of Men, or the necessities or carelessness of themselves, or oppression
of others; from Causes either in themselves or others, (...) from Actions past
or to come, may be a loss or lessening of men's debts, or great obstructions in
the recovery of them, Dowers, Intails, powers of Revocation (not to mention or
insist upon the various or manifold Encumbrances which may arise or come by
Copihold Estates, which being not chargeable with Debts or Extents, are in
themselves Encumbrances, and were not long ago little less then a sixth or
seventh part of the Lands of England, with their Admissions, Surrenders, in or
out of Court, absolute or conditional, and their many several sorts of
Forfeitures) Lands of Gavelkind or Burgage Tenure, Ioyntures, made after
marriage and refused, Elopements, and unlawful Marriages, Tenancy by Courtesy,
and trusts with other Men's Money and Estates, Moneys insured by Policy of
Exchange, Bills of Exchange accepted; Errors in Matter of Substance, in some of
the Creditors Judgments, which may be a cause of Reversing them, Disherison of
Sons and Heirs Apparent, concealed Illegitimacies, Intrusions, and wrongful
Entries, Actions of Battery and Scandal, and all manner of Actions or Suits in
Law or Equity, which may lessen or prejudice any Man's Estate; Assumpsits,
Promises and Engagements by word of mouth (which may make as many Obligations,
Troubles, and Ties upon Men's Estates, as Bonds or Bills can do, or did before
such kind of Writings or Instruments were invented, Imbargoes, high flying,
gaming or gading Wives, which the Roman Censors would have reckoned amongst
Encumbrances; prodigal Children* losses by Fire, Sea or Land, Wars, Factors, or
bad Servants, Suretiship, or too much trusting, death of those for whose lives
they held Land or Estates, or had any dependancy upon, sickness, decay of
trade, deceits or wrongs done by others, vain and unnecessary expenses; many of
our Actions past or to come, in facto or fieri, esse or posse. And all manner
of casualties, accidents or contingencies, which are not visible beforehand,
or appearing, or possibly to be found in any Registry, may prove to be no small
Encumbrances to Money Lenders upon Bonds, or Bills, Judgments, Statutes, or
Recognisances, especially if the Debtors have no Estates in Lands, or shall be
liable to Statutes of Bankrupt; which all the Lillies, or those which pretend
to be in Commons, or greatest familiarity with the Stars, or the greatest wits
or endeavors of men; can neither perceive before they happen, or tell any one
how to escape, but must be constrained to reckon it amongst the number of the
Grand Impossibles to be done by the sons of men, and confess it to be a work
only sit for Omniscience and Preseience, of which there will be a Non Datur to
these new kind of Registers, as well as other men.

And would in the attempt of it, busy and employ all the Clerks and Writers of
the Nation (though to no-other purpose) then to make the people travel up and
down, vex themselves with fears and jealousies, and spend more then Twenty
times as much again, as they do now in their Writings, Assurances, or
Contracts; whereas all the charge of the Inrollment Office in Chancery, wherein
three parts in four of the Enrolled Deeds of the Nation are enrolled, did never
as yet cost or put them to the charge of above One thousand pound per annum.

The Account and Balance of which vast Registry, and the calculation of the
Riches, Poverty, or Estates of Men, Lands bought or sold, transferred or
settled to Uses; and passed after or involved in two or three other Men's
Estates. And what is become of the Money, with the Payments, Satisfactions,
Profits, Incomes, Losses, Rises or Falls in expenses in Housekeeping, Apparel,
or Recreations, Releases, Acquittances, and Discharges of Lands, Statutes,
Judgments, Recognisances, Bonds, or Bills, Promises, Covenants or Contracts,
with those many numberless Intricacies and Impossibilities which will attend
such a work; will not only confound the Auditor, or a whole College of
Astrologers, if they should undertake it, but give them or any who shall come
to be satisfied or secured by them to understand, that it will be as vain in
the product or expectation of it, as the design of Uttamacomock the Virginian,
proved to be; who being taken at home for a grand piece of Policy, was sent
hither in King James his time, and directed by Powhatan his King Cap. Smiths
History of Virginia* 223.
or Emperor, to take the number of the people of England, and learn their
Estate and Condition; did when he came to Plymouth, stand at his Lodging door,
and upon a long stick cut a notch for every one that came or passed by: But at
last, finding his notches like to wear out his stick, and not being able to
know or distinguish those that passed by, or returned; or for which, he had
made notches before, had the wit to give over and conclude the people to be
very numerous, and the work impossible.

CHAP. VIII. That (if it could be possible) the people will not willingly be at
the trouble or charges in all their Contracts, to search in so many County
Registries to discover Encumbrances.
OR if this Impossible could (as it never. 62.
will) be made Possible, and that all or any part of what is designed could be
feasible, and that there could be at every Shire-Town such a rare Glass or
Perspective, at the peoples charge, as they pretend to make for them; the most
part of the people will, when all is done, be like to do but as they do
already, which is not in one of every 500 Bargains, or lending of Money, or
Contracts which they make (unless where they have to do with some very much
inoumbred, and indebted persons and Estates) to busy themselves or their
purses in searching for Judgments, Statutes, or Recognisances, or Scriveners
Books, or what Fines are leavied, or deeds enrolled, though the searches be not
either very troublesome or costly, but rather tarry at home, and believe one
another, satisfy themselves by private informations and inquiries, and take,
as they have all this while done covenants or collateral securities, to be
freed from encumbrances, or upon any probability of distrust cause them to be
discovered upon oath, or be as unwilling to be at the labor and charge to
prevent such seldom happening frauds or the wrongs which they may receive by
them, as they are in multitudes of deceits, cozenings and cheatings which every
week or oftener are put upon most or many buyers at markets, and in the trading
and commerce of most men one with another, though the Laws have provided
several sorts of remedies and reliefs, and the Court Leets and Sheriffs Torns,
twice a year holden to enquire amongst other things, of those or the like
frauds and some of the Buyers as well as the Sellers, the cozened and the
cozening, those that commit the frauds and deceipts, and those that suffered by
them are not seldom sworn and impannelled in Juries to present them, and every
one, or too many as it is to be feared, do buy by false weights and measures
which the Office of the Clerk of the Markets, and the care which should attend
it, and the punishments of Pillory, and other severities, ordered by our Laws
against the offenders, have not been able to restrain, and yet by course or
custom do too contendedly endure it, or not put themselves to the trouble of
complaining of it.

which until a glass, or Crystal, or window can be contrived in every man's
heart (and head) to be looked into to discern their hearts and purposes (and
their intentions made unalterable) as Thales one of the seven wise men of
Greece, being appointed by Apollo with some other wise men and Philosophers to
reform the world in that Learned and pleasant Mythologie of Traiano Boccalini
had proposed to be made; will render this design of preventing all or many
frauds, and freeing all men's estates and assurances from encumbrances, to as
little purpose as the great care which was taken by Edward the third and his
Parliament in Anno 27 of his Reign, to have Correctors in every City and Town
of the Staple to make and record Bargains between Buyers and Sellers, now and
long since (if ever put in execution) utterly disused, and believed to be more
troublesome then necessary, or or as Mr Henry Robinson's kind Office of
Addresses, or helps to borrow or lend moneys, buy or sell, or rent Land or
Houses, help Men or Maids to services, or any that want Solicitors for their
Suites at Law cum multis aliis etc. which being erected at his own charges some
years ago, the people who thought they could better do their business
themselves (though he was content to take for his Fees, but what they
themselves should think reasonable) so little relished, as he and some others
who have since driven on that design of Public Advice and Assistance, have to
their costs and charges found it to be only an essay of their own invention,
which has neither answered their charges or expectation.

Nor will this Design of Registring at all, or in any thing gratify or benefit
the people, who will thereby have their charge and trouble as greatly as
needlessly multiplied, and their Laws by degrees reduced into many little Courts
and Iudicatories which will be as much for their good as those many grievances
and oppressions heretofore put upon them by Lords and men of power and great
Estates, Sheriffs in their County Courts and Tornes, Bailiffs and Stewards, in
the Court-Leets, and Court Barons, long ago heavily complained of, and by the
care of many good Acts of Parliament, at length remedied, or bring the
Commonalty of our more happy England, into that servile and sad Condition of
the Common people of France, who having at one and the same time many perpetual
Parliaments, or Courts so called, and a multitude of Baillages Seneschauses
resorts, and petty Jurisdictions, with their numberless Presidents and
Lievtenants Criminel and Civil, and as many Appeals as their Contentions can
possibly purchase, are not seldom in the Chase of one another through their
many inferior Courts to the Superior or Dernier resort, with as little money
left them as hopes of gaining any thing more then a repentance, brought to a
loss of much of their time, as well as their estates.

And will gain as much hereby, as to their needless charges, as they would do
if all the people of England from one year old to Fifty, should be ordained to
buy and wear Spectacles at more then the ordinary rate, because such as live
to be Fifty or threescore and upwards, may have need to benefit and help their
Eyes thereby, or as the French do by way of imposition or Gabel of a certain
proportion of Salt enforced upon every Family at the Kings Rates, whenas many
of the Common people have more salt then meat.

Or as to have it ordained that every Town and Village shall all along the
Highways in the bounds of their Parishes keep a strong and constant Watch and
Ward, every day but Sundays, betwixt Sunrising and Sunsetting, to prevent
Roberies and catch Thieves, because sometimes upon Actions brought upon the
Statutes of Winchester, and for Hue and Cry, the Inhabitants of some few
hundreds are but selfom enforced to pay for the money, goods, or Cattle lost,
or that all Villages and Towns, not having (as there are very many) any
Physicians to cure diseases, and Apothecaries with their Shops abundantly
furnished with allmanner of medicaments, to prepare and administer them, should
keep and maintain Physicians and Apothecarie at the chargeof the Inhabitants or
the public, because that one part of three, or a very great part of the people
do die sooner then otherwise they would do, or languish under long and
incurable pains and Sicknesses, and expend much money to no purpose for want of
them, or skill, or care to prevent diseases, or not seeking a cure by
Physicians or Apothecaries dwelling far off before it be either a great deal
more difficult or chargeable, or impossible to be helped.

And as great advantages touching the preservation of their happy and well
known and approved Laws and Liberties, as the now and long ago wandering, and
everywhere despised Jews, had by Crucifying their Savior and letting loose
Barabbas the Murderer.

For the hoped for importation, or our imitation of any such Foreign Customs,
or the expected fruit and benefit by this design of Registring (whatsoever they
shall be fancied to be beforehand, until it shall otherwise be lamentably
experienced) will never be able to Balance or Recompense the charges of one
hundred thousand pounds per Annum, pretended to be raised for the King as a
constant and perpetual Revenue by that way of Registring and Nine or ten
hundred thousand pounds per annum, or a million of English moneys, which the
people must pay for unnecessary Registring of many of their Deeds, Writings,
and Contracts more then they did heretofore; and those other great
disturbances, ruins, and alterations in the Nation, troubles and charges in
all men's Estates, Businesses, and Affairs, which will arise and happen by it;
when as the Registring, supposed to be such an Antidote against Encumbrances
shall prove to be the cause, not of a few, but very many mischiefs and
inconveniences, not incombrances and needless charges only in some one single
case of a hundred, or five hundred, and seldom, but for ever upon all the
people of England, not upon a part only of their Estates, but all, and not
upon all men for life, or in tail, or for a short time, or but upon some of
their Generations, but until some good Angel or Act of Parliament, by the mercy
of him which dwells on High shall be sent to our Pool of Bethesda, to recall
and cure them, remain as an estate in Fee- Simple, and perpetuity to all our
posterities.

Quae procul a nobis Flectat Deus ipse Gubernans
Et Ratio potius quam res persuadeat ipsa.
FINIS.

