Lex Parliamentaria: OR, A TREATISE OF THE LAW and CUSTOM OF THE PARLIAMENTS OF
England,

By G. P. Esquire

With an APPENDIX of a Case in Parliament between Sir Francis Goodwyn and Sir
John Fortescue, for the Knights Place for the county of Bucks, 1 Jac. 1. From
an Original French Manuscript, Translated into English.

(...)

(...)

TO THE Most Supreme Court OF THE KINGDOM, THE PARLIAMENT OF England:
The AUTHOR does most humbly Dedicate this his small Treatise of the LAW and
CUSTOM of PARLIAMENT.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Am very sensible, that as soon as this Treatise is submitted to public View,
'twill likewise meet with public Censure, and not a Few will be apt to start
this Objection against it, that it is only like an Old Piece in a New Dress.
These Things, men will say, have been done before; the same Matter, and much of
the same Form, are to be found in other Writers, and this is but to obtrude
upon the World (...) vain Repetition of other men's Observations. I must
confess, in part, it is so, and it must needs be so, for it is not to be
expected, that I should presume to dictate Rules and Directions out of my own
Fancy, by which to govern or Influence Parliaments: I must be beholding to
Precedents and Records: and though you shall find many of the same Notes
scattered in my Lord Coke, in Elsyng, Hakewel, Scobel, and others; yet I may
adventure to say, you shall no where meet them couched in so compendious, and
so useful a Method.

I have not only culled out of the beforementioned, and several other Authors,
what is proper and pertinent to this Design; but I have gleaned from the
Statutes, Law Books, Reports, and Histories whatsoever I met with in my
inquisitive Re-searches, beyond All that has been before placed in any
Collection, and which may be applicable to this Undertaking.

All Members ought to be thoroughly skilled in Parliamentary Affairs, to know
their own Laws and Customs, their Powers and Privileges, that they may not at
any time suffer Invasions to be made upon them, by what plausible Pretenses
soever: but as it is impossible for men of the most tenacious Faculties to keep
all things constantly in their minds, therefore this is to ease and refresh
their Memories in case of any Forgetfulness, and they may with a very little
Trouble have always this in their Pockets, which perhaps some may not be able
without a great deal of Trouble to carry always in their Heads.

When he that is conversant in Study and Books, cannot carry a Library about
him; he may easily recollect what is expedient for him, from the Supplement of
this Epitome. Such as shall hereafter be promoted to that honorable Station of
being Senators of the Kingdom, will find it much more easy to receive short
Information from this little Manual; than to be obliged on every Occasion to
consult the public Records, and turn over wearisome Volumes. And they who do
not expect Admission into a Parliament House, will yet receive this as no
unprofitable Diversion, to observe and know the admirable method of
Parliamentary Proceedings; the Exactness and Decency of their Orders; the
Wisdom and Prudence of their Customs; the Extent of their Powers, and the
Largeness of their Privileges.

Wherefore, without any Flattering, or Arrogance to my self, I shall make bold
to tell you, I am verily persuaded that what I have taken pains to collect from
several Books, and to digest into this small Compass, for my own Convenience
and Information, will conduce to the general Satisfaction of all that read it;
which was one main Reason that induced me to publish it.

THE HEADS Of the several CHAPTERS Contained in this TREATISE.
CHAP. 1. THE Parliament. Page 1 CHAP. 2. Power of Parliament. Page 18 CHAP. 3.
The House of Lords. Page 41 CHAP. 4. Power of the House of Lords. Page 53 CHAP.
5. House of Commons. Page 61 CHAP. 6. Power of the House of Commons. Page 66
CHAP. 7. Power of Parliament over their own Members. Page 87 CHAP. 8. Elections
of Members. Page 104 CHAP. 9. Who may be Electors. Page 113 CHAP. 10. Who may
be Elected. Page 115 CHAP. 11. Returns of Sheriffs, and Amendments of Returns.
Page 125 CHAP. 12. Election of Speaker. Page 130 CHAP. 13. Business of the
Speaker. Page 141 CHAP. 14. Orders to be observed in the House. Page 148 CHAP.
15. Orders of the House. Page 156 CHAP. 16. Passing of Bills. Page 174. CHAP.
17. Concerning Committees. Page 202 CHAP. 18. The Order and Power of Grand
Committees. Page 215 CHAP. 19. Concerning standing Committees. Page 222 CHAP.
20. A Session of Parliament. Page 229 CHAP. 21. The proper Laws and Customs of
Parliament. Page 235 CHAP. 22. Privilege of Parliament. Page 257 The Appendix.
Page 299
The NAMES of the AUTHORS quoted in this TREATISE.
ATkyns Sir Robert 's Argument of the Power and Jurisdiction of Parliament.
Arcana Parliamentaria. Brook. Brownlow. Coke on Littleton. Coke 's fourth
Institute. Coke 's Twelfth Report. Crompton 's Jurisdiction, etc. Dyer. Elsyng.
d'Ewes Sir Simond 's Journal. Fortescue. Hakewel. Herbert 's Henry the Eighth.
Hollis Lord. Holling shead. Hunt. Hutton. Kelwey. Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae
Leonard 's Reports. Modus tenendi Parliamentum. Moor 's Reports. Nalson 's
Collections. Petyt 's Ancient Rights, etc. Petyt 's Miscellanea Parliamentaria.
Plowden. Rushworth 's Collections. Scobel. Seldom 's Judicature. Smyth Sir
Thomas Commonwealth of England. Speed 's History. Townsend 's Collections.
Turner 's Bankers Case. Vaughan 's Reports.
CHAP. I. The Parliament.
IT is called Parliamentum, Co sup. Littleton, 110.
because every Member of that Court should parler le meant, speak his mind.

Mr. Lambard in his Archion maintains, Sir R. Atkyns Argument, etc. p. 18.
That the Parliament was used in the Saxons time, and then consisted of the
King, Lords, and Commons; as in the Time of King Ina, Ann. 712.

Mr. Prinn says, Mr. Prynn's Truth triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over
Novelty, fol. 69. Pttyt's Ancient Right, etc. p. 68.
by all the ancient Precedents before the Conquest, it is most apparent, That
all our pristine Synods and Councils were naught else but Parliaments: That our
Kings, Nobles, Senators, Aldermen, Wisemen, Knights, and Commons were usually
present, and voting in them as Members, and Judges.

They had many Expressions and Phrases (as, Id. 98, 99.
Omnes Regni Nobiles, Totius Regni Magnates, Proceres and Fideles Regni,
Vniversitas Regni, Clerus and Populus, Communitas Regni, Discretio totius
Regni, Generale Concilium Regni, and many more) varying in several Ages, till
at last they fixed on the word, Parliamentum.

Vide many Records and Precedents touching this Matter in the Appendix to
Petyt's Miscellanea Parliamentaria.

This Court is the highest Court of England, Crompton's Juris. p. 1.
in which the Prince himself sits in Person, and comes there at the Beginning
of the Parliament, and at the End, and at any other Time when he pleases,
during the Parliament.

The Judges in Parliament are the King or Queen, Sir Tho. Smith's Commonwealth,
74.
the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, the Commons represented by the Knights and
Burgesses of every Shire, and Borough-Town. These all, or the greater Part of
them, and that with the Consent of the Prince for the time being, must agree to
the making of Laws.

The King of England, Fortescue, c. 36. p. 84. b.
neither by himself, or his Ministers, imposes Tallages, or any other Burdens
on his Subjects, or alter their Laws, or make new Laws, without Assent of the
whole Kingdom in Parliament.

No Parliament, no Penny, Turner's Case of Bankers, 95.
has been always taken notice of as a principal Foundation of this Government,
even by our Neighbor Princes and States who have in all Ages made their
Approaches upon this Realm, and evermore valued us in Proportion to the
Correspondency they observed between our Kings and their Parliaments. For
(seeing the Power of every Prince is computed from his Treasure and Martial
Men, and those again by the Love of his People) they well enough knew, that as
long as a good Understanding was maintained there, our Princes could never want
the Sinews, either of the Purse, or of valiant men's Arms.

L'Assemblie de Troys Estates, Finch's (...), lib. 2. c. 1. so. 21. b.
Cestascavoir, Roy, Nobility, and Commons, qui font le Corpse del Realm, est
appel un Parliament, and lour Decree, un Act de Parliament; Car sans touts
troys (come si soit fait per Roy and Seigneurs, mes rien parle del Commons)
nest Ascun Act de Parliament: i.e. The Assembly of the three Estates, to wit,
the King, the Nobility, and the Commons, which make the Body of the Realm, is
called a Parliament, and their Decree an Act of Parliament; for without all
three (as if it be done by the King and Lords, but speaks nothing of the
Commons) there is not any Act of Parliament.

The word Parliament is used in a double sense.

1. English Liberties, p. 78.
Strictly, as it includes the Legislative Power of England, as when we say --
an Act of Parliament; and in this Acceptance it necessarily includes the King,
the Lords, and the Commons, each of which have a Negative Voice in making Laws,
and without their Joint Consent no new Laws can pass, that be obligatory to the
Subject.

2. Vulgarly, the Word is used for the two Houses, the Lords and Commons; as
when we say, The King will call a Parliament; his Majesty has dissolved his
Parliament, etc.

This Court consists of the King's Majesty, 4 Inst. 1.
sitting there as in his Royal Politic Capacity, and of the three Estates of
the Realm, viz. the Lords Spiritual, Archbishops, and Bishops, (who sit there
by Succession in respect of their Counties, or Baronies, parcel of their
Bishoprics) The Lords Temporal, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, who sit there by reason of their Dignities, which they hold by Descent,
or Creation, (every one of which, both Spiritual and Temporal, ought to have a
Writ of Summons, ex debito Justitiae) And the Commons of the Realm, whereof
there be Knights of Shires, or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of
Boroughs; all which are respectively elected by the Shires, or Counties,
Cities, and Boroughs, by force of the King's Writ, ex Debito Justitiae, and
none of them ought to be omitted: and these represent all the Commons of the
whole Realm, and are trusted for them.

The King, Id. 2.
and these three Estates are the great Corporation or Body Politic of the
Kingdom, and do sit in two Houses: the King and Lords in one House, called The
Lords House; the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in another House, called The
House of Commons.

That which is done by this Consent, Arc. Parl. 2.
is called firm, stable, and sanctum; and is taken for Law.

All the Judges of the Realm, Towns. Collect. 5, 6. Vid. Crompton 1. b.
Barons of the Exchequer, of the Coif, the King's Learned Council, and the
Civilians, Masters of the Chancery, are called to give their Assistance and
Attendance in the Upper House of Parliament: but they have no Voices in
Parliament, 4 Inst. 4. But are made sometimes joint Committees with the Lords.

Every Englishman is intended to be there present (either in Person, Arc.
Parl. 3. Smyth's Commonwealth, 74.
or Procuration, and Attorney) of what Pre-eminence, State, Dignity, or Quality
soever he be; from the Prince (be it King, or Queen) to the lowest Person in
England. And the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every man's Consent.

No man ought to sit in the High Court of Parliament, 4 Inst. 45.
but he that has Right to sit there: for it is not only a personal Offense in
him that sits there without Authority, but a public Offense to the Court of
Parliament, and consequently to the whole Realm.

It is to be observed, 4 Inst. 2.
That when there is best Appearance, there is the best Success in Parliament.
At a Parliament 7 Hen. 5. of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, there appeared
but Thirty, and there was but one Act passed, of no great weight. In 50 Ed. 3.
all the Lords appeared in Person, and not one by Proxy; and so many excellent
Things were done, that it was called Bonum Parliamentum.

At the Return of the Writs the Parliament cannot begin, Id. 6.
but by the Royal Presence of the King, either in Person, or Representation.

The King's Person may be represented by Commission under the Great Seal to
certain Lords in Parliament, Id. 7.
authorizing them to begin the Parliament, or to prorogue it, etc.

When a Parliament is called, Id. 28.
and does sit, and is dissolved, without any Act of Parliament passed, or
Judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Convention.

It is an Observation proved by a great Number of Precedents, Id. 32.
that never any good Bill was preferred, or good Motion made in Parliament
(whereof any Memorial was made in the Journal Book, or otherwise:) Though
sometimes it succeeded not at the first, yet it has never died, but at one
Time, or other, has taken effect.

Matters of Parliament are not to be ruled by the Common Law. Id. 17.


If Offenses done in Parliament might have been punished elsewhere, Ibid. Vid.
1 Inst.. 108.
it shall be intended, that at some Time it would have been put in Ure.

It does not belong to the Judges to judge of any Law, Custom, Id. 50.
or Privilege of Parliament.

It is the just and constant Course of Parliament to bring the Party accused to
his Answer: yea, Seld. Judic. 95.
though he fly Justice, yet to send out Proclamation into the Countries, that he
appear at a Day, or else such and such Judgments shall be given against him.

What is done by either House, according to the Law and Usage of Parliament,
Sir R. Atkyns Argument, etc. 14.
is properly, and in the Judgment of the Law, the Act of the whole Parliament:
and what concerns the one, must of necessity concern the whole; not merely by
Consequence, but by an immediate Concernment, as being one and entire.

The three Estates of Parliament are one entire Body, Id. 34, 41, 51, 55.
and Corporation: all their Powers and Privileges in the Right of them, and in
the Title to them, are entire, per my and per tout, and belonging to the whole
Body of the Parliament; though in the Exercise of those Powers, and sometime in
the Claim of them, they are distinguished; and in the Practice of their Powers,
they are in many Things distributed into Parts.

All the Estates in Parliament are all called by one common Name, Ibid.
as Commune Concilium Regni, Magna Curia, they are one Body Politic. It is said
by Fineux Chief Justice, That the Parliament at the Common Law consists of the
King, Lords, and Commons, and they are but one Body Corporate.

The Liberties and Franchises of the Parliament, Id. 55.
in the Right of them, are entire, and due to both Houses, for both make up the
Parliament.

Knighton (one of our best Historians) does notably disclose the ancient ends
of calling Parliaments, Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 5. f. 2681. Col. 1,
2. Petyt's Rights, etc. in Pref. p. 43, 44.
in saying, Quod ex Antiquo Statuto, and Consuetudine laudabili and approbata,
etc. That by an ancient Statute, and Custom laudable and approved, which no
man could deny, the King was once in the year to convene his Lords and Commons
to his Court of Parliament, as to the highest Court in the whole Realm, [ In
qua omnis Aequitas relucere deberet absque qualibet Scrupulositate vel nota,
tanquam Sol in Ascensu Meridiei; ubi Pauperes and Divites pro Refrigerio
Tranquilitatis and Pacis, and Repulsione Injuriarum, Refugium Infallibile
quaerere possent, ac etiam Errata Regni reformare, and de Statu and
Gubernatione Regis and Regni cum Sapientiori Concilio tractare; ut Inimici
Regis and Regni Intrinseci; and Hosts Extrinseci destruantur and repellantur,
qualiter quoque Onera incumbentia Regi and Regno levius ad Ediam Communitatis
Supportari potuerunt.] i. e. In which Court all Equity ought to shine forth
without the least Cloud or Shadow, like the Sun in its Meridian Glory; where
Poor and Rich, refreshed with Peace and Ease of their Oppressions, may always
find infallible and sure Refuge and Succor; the Grievances of the Kingdom
redressed, and the state of the King and Government of the Realm debated with
wiser Councels; the Domestic and Foreign Enemies of the King and Kingdom
destroyed and repelled, and to consider how the Charges and Burdens of both
may be sustained with more Ease to the People.

The House of Lords cannot exercise any Power, Sir R. Atkin's Argument, f. 51.
as an House of Parliament, or as a Court for Errors, without the House of
Commons be in Being at the same Time. Both Houses must be prorogued together,
and dissolved together.

By the Law, Parliaments ought to be very frequent. Id. 59.
Before the Conquest (as it is untruly called) by the Law, Parliaments were to
be held twice a year, as appears by King Edgar's Laws. So it was ordained by
King Alfred. By the Stat. of 4 Ed. 3. c. 14. Parliaments ought to be once a
year, and oftener, if need be. And in 36 Ed. 3. c. 10. to be once a year,
without Restriction, if need be. By 16 Car. 2. c. 1. these Acts are declared to
be in Force: and further it is declared and enacted, That the holding of
Parliaments shall not be discontinued above three years at the most.

The Parliament is a Court of very great Honor and Justice, Plow. Com. 398.
of which no man ought to imagine a Thing dishonorable.

An Offense committed in Parliament is a very high Offense; Sir R. Atkyns. Arg.
60.
but the higher it is, the more proper it is for their Judicature; and that
Court is armed with a Power to punish the highest Offenses, and the highest
Offenders.

A Parliament may err, Ibid.
for they are not infallible; but the Law has provided a Remedy against those
Errors, and a way to reform them. A subsequent Parliament may reform the Errors
of a preceding Parliament.

But to say that they will be Partial, Ibid.
or Unjust, or Corrupt, or do any Thing out of Malice, is to raise a Scandal
upon the whole Nation, whose Representative they are.

If any Offense whatever be committed in the Parliament by any particular
Members; Ibid.
it is an high Infringment of the Right and Privilege of Parliament, for any
Person, or Court, to take the least Notice of it, till the House it self either
has punished the Offender, or referred them to a due, or proper Course of
Punishment. To do otherwise, would be to make the Highest Court an Offender,
and to charge them with Injustice.

Their Right and Privilege so far extends, Id 61.
that not only what is done in the very House, sitting the Parliament; but
whatever is done relating to them, or in pursuance of their Order, during the
Parliament, is no where else to be punished, but by Themselves, or a succeeding
Parliament, though done out of the House.

Either House does ever for the most part show it self so careful to keep firm
Correspondence with the other, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 186.
as that when a Bill has passed either of the said Houses, and is sent to the
other, it does for the most part pass, and is neither dashed, nor altered,
without very great Cause upon mature deliberation, and usually also not without
Conference desired, and had thereupon; that so full Satisfaction may be given
to that House, from which the Bill so rejected, or altered, was sent.

Pessima Gens humani Generis always abhorred a Parliament: Preface to Petyt's
Miscel. Parlementar.
and the reason thereof is demonstrative; because they all knew they should
then be called to an impartial and strict Account, and be punished according to
their Demerits.

It was said by the Lord Bacon to Sir Lionel Cranfeild, Ibid.
newly made Lord Treasurer, That he would recommend to his Lordship, and in him
to all other great Officers of the Crown, one considerable Rule to be carefully
observed, which was, Remember, a Parliament will come.

The King at no Time stands so highly in his Estate Royal, Petyt's Miscel.
Parliament. 9. Vid. Cromp. Jur. 10.
as in the Time of Parliament; wherein the King as Head, and they as Members,
are conjoined and knit together into one Body Politic: so as whatsoever Injury
(during that Time) is offered to the meanest Members of the House, is to be
judged as done against the King's Person, and the whole Court of Parliament.

The Prerogative of Parliament is so great, Ibid.
That all Acts and Processes coming out of any inferior Courts, must cease, and
give place to the highest.

Statutes in England are made not only by the Princes Pleasure, Fortescue 40. a.
but also by Assent of the whole Realm: so that of Necessity they must procure
the Wealth of the People, and in no wise tend to their hindrance.

It cannot otherwise be thought, Ibid.
but that they are replenished with much Wit and Wisdom, seeing they are
ordained, not by the Device of one man alone, or of a hundred wise Counselors
only, but of five hundred and odd Men that ought to be freely Elected by the
People.

CHAP. II. Power of Parliament.
THE most High and Absolute Power of the Realm of England, Sir Tho. Smith's
Commonwealth, l. 2. c. 2. p. 72. Arcana Parl. 1.
consists in the Parliament. For as in War, where the King himself in person,
the Nobility, the rest of the Gentility, and the Yeomanry are, is the Force and
Power of England: So in Peace and Consultation, where the Prince is to give
Life, and the last and highest Commandment, the Barony or Nobility for the
higher; the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Commons for the lower part of the
Commonwealth; the Bishops for the Clergy be present to advertise, consult and
show what is good and necessary for the Commonwealth, and to consult together;
and upon mature deliberation; every Bill or Law being thrice read and disputed
in either House, the other two parts, first each a part, and after the Prince
himself in presence of both the Parties does consent unto, and allows, that
is, Ibid. p. 73.
the Prince's and whole Realm's Deed; whereupon justly no man can complain, but
must accommodate himself to find it good, and obey it.

That which is done by this Consent is called firm, stable and sanctum, and is
taken for Law.

The Parliament abrogateth old Laws. 2. Makes new. Sir Tho. Smith. ibid. Arc.
Parl. 2. Vide Crompt. Jur. 3.
3. Gives order for things past, and for things hereafter to be followed. 4.
Changes Right and Possessions of private Men. 5. Legittimateth Bastards. 6.
Establishes Forms of Religion. 7. Alters Weights and Measures. 8. Gives
Form of Succession to the Crown. 9. Defines of doubtful Rights whereof is no
Law already made. 10. Appoints Subsidies, Tallies, Taxes and Impositions. 11.
Gives most free Pardons and Absolutions. 12. Restores in Blood and Name. 13.
As the highest Court condemns or absolveth them who are put upon their Trial.
And to be short, 14. All that ever the People of Rome might do, either
Centuriatis Comitiis or Tributis, the same may be done by the Parliament of
England; which represents, and has the Power of the whole Realm, both the
Head and Body: For every Englishman is intended to be there present, either in
Person, or by Procuration, and Attorney, of what pre-eminence, state, dignity or
quality soever he be, from the Prince (be he King or Queen) to the lowest
Person of England. And the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every man's
consent.

As for the Power of Parliaments over both the Statute and Common Law of this
Realm, Rastal's Statutes, fol 546. 25 H. 8. c 21.
you will be best informed of it from the memorable words of an Act of
Parliament it self, which are as follows, viz. Whereas this Realm recognizing
no Superior under God, but only the King, has been, and is free from
Subjection to any Man's Laws, but only to such as have been devised, made, and
ordained within this Realm, for the Wealth of the same, or to such other as by
Sufferance of the King and his Progenitors, the People of this Realm have taken
at their free Liberty by their own Consent to be used amongst them, and have
bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the Observance of the same; not as
to the Observance of the Laws of any Foreign Prince, Potentate or Prelate, but
as to the Custom and ancient Laws of this Realm, originally established as Laws
of the same, by the said Sufferance, Consents and Custom, and none otherwise.
It stands therefore with Natural Equity and Good Reason that all and every
such Laws Humane, made within this Realm by the said Sufferance, Consents and
Custom, the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons representing
the whole State of this Realm in the most High Court of Parliament, have full
Power and Authority, not only to dispense, but also to authorize some Elect
person or persons to dispense with those and all other Human Laws of this
Realm, and with every one of them, as the Quality of the persons and Matter
shall require. And also the said Laws, and every of them to abrogate, adnul,
amplify, or diminish, as it shall be seen to the King, and the Nobles and
Commons of this Realm, present in Parliament, meet and convenient for the
Wealth of this Realm.

The Power and Jurisdiction of the Parliament for making of Laws in proceeding
by Bill, 4 Inst. 36.
is so transcendent, and absolute, as it cannot be confined, either for Causes
or Persons, within any Bounds. Si Antiquitatem spectes, est vetutissima: si
Dignitatem, est honoratissima: si Jurisdictionem, est capacissima.

The whole Parliament (which should best know its own Power) affirms, Speed's
Hist. f. 914. Rot. Parl. 1 R. 3. In Cotton's Abridgment, f. 713, 714.
That the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, and the People of this Land
of such a Nature and Disposition, as Experience teaches, that the
Manifestation and Declaration of any Truth or Right made by the Three Estates
of this Realm assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of the same, makes,
before all other things most Faith, and certain quieting of men's Minds, and
removes the Occasion of Doubts.

Parliamentum omnia potest, says the 4 Leon. 174, 176.

The Parliament is of an absolute and unlimited Power in things Temporal,
within this Nation. Sir Rob. Atkyns's Argument, etc. 50.


The Parliament has the highest and most sacred Authority of any Court: Ibid.
it has an absolute Power, it is the highest Court in the Realm, as is
acknowledged by our most learned and gravest Writers, and Historians.

A man gives Land to one, Crompton 20. b.
and to his Heirs Males; in that Case his Heirs Females also inherit; and this
was adjudged in Parliament.

One of the fundamental and principal Ends of Parliaments was, Petyt's Preface
to Ancient Rights, etc. p. 41.
for the Redress of Grievances, and easing the Oppressions of the People. And
the Mirror of Justices says, c. 1. p. 9. That Parliaments were instituted to
hear and determine the Complaints of the wrongful Acts of the King, the Queen,
and their Children: and especially of those persons against whom the Subjects
otherwise could not have common Justice.

The greater the Persons are, Sir Rob. Atkyns Argument, p. 45.
if they are in the Rank of Subjects, they must be subject to the King's Laws,
and they are the more proper for the Undertaking, and Encounter of this High
Court. It will not be impar congressus.

King John had resigned up the Crown of England to the Pope, Id. 37.
by the Hand of Pandulphus his Legate, and sordidly submitted to take the Crown
at his Hand again, at a yearly Tribute. In the Reign of our Noble King Edward
the Third, the Pope demanded his Rent, and all the Arrears. The Prelates,
Dukes, Counts, Barons, and Commons resolved, That neither the King, nor any
other, could put the Realm, nor the People thereof, into Subjection, sans
l'assent de eux, without their Assent.

This intimates, Ibid.
that with their joint Consent the Crown may be disposed of. And it was the
highest Resolution in Law, in one of the highest Points in Law, concerning the
King's claim of an Absolute Power, and in a Time, when the Pope was in his
height.

It is the proper Work of this Supreme Court to deal with such Delinquents,
Ibid.
as are too high for the Court of King's Bench, or other ordinary Courts.

Daughters, 4 Inst. 36.
and Heirs apparent of a Man, or Woman, may by Act of Parliament inherit,
during the Life of the Ancestor.

It may adjudge an Infant or Minor to be of full Age. Ibid.


It may Attaint a Man of Treason, Ibid.
after his Death.

It may Naturalize a mere Alien, Ibid.
and make him a Subject born.

It may bastard a Child, Ibid.
that by Law is Legitimate, ( viz. begotten by an Adulterer, the Husband being
within the four Seas.)

It may Legitimate one that is Illegitimate, Ibid.
and born before Marriage, absolutely: it may Legitimate secundum quid, and not
simpliciter.

21 Rich. 2. The Lords Appellants accused the Duke of Gloucester of Treason;
Selden's Judicature 91.
and though they knew he was dead, they prayed the King that he might be brought
to his Answer. The King sent his Writ, etc. they desired Judgment, and had it.

So Robert Possington was impeached at the Parliament at Westminster, Id. 95.
and found Guilty, long Time after he was dead, and so forfeited his Estate.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster had by Catherine Swinford, 4 Inst. 36.
before Marriage, four illegitimate Children, Henry, John, Thomas, and Joan. At
the Parliament holden 20 Rich. 2. the King by Act of Parliament, in Form of a
Charter, does Legitimate these three Sons, and Joan the Daughter.

Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex was attainted by Parliament, Ibid.
and forthcoming to be heard, and yet never called to answer in any of the
Houses of Parliament: and resolved by the Judges, That if one be Attainted by
Parliament, it can never come in question after, whether he were called, or not
called to answer: for the Act of Attainder being passed by Parliament did bind.

Where by Order of Law a man cannot be Attainted of High Treason, Id. 39.
unless the Offense be in Law High Treason; he ought not to be Attainted by
general Words of High Treason by Authority of Parliament (as sometimes has
been used) but the High Treason ought to be specially expressed; seeing that the
Court of Parliament is the highest and most honorable Court of Justice, and
ought to give Example to inferior Courts.

Acts against the Power of the Parliament subsequent bind not. Id. 42.
It is against the Power and Jurisdiction of the Parliament, the Liberty of the
Subject, and unreasonable.

The Stat. Id. 42.
11 Rich. 2. c. 5. That no Person should attempt to revoke any Ordinance then
made, repealed; for that such Restraint is unreasonable.

An Act 11 Rich. 2. c. 3. Ibid.
That no man, against whom any Judgment or Forfeiture was given, should sue for
Pardon, or Grace, etc. was holden to be unreasonable, without Example, and
against the Law and Custom of Parliament, and therefore void.

The High Court of Parliament to be committed to a few (as in 21 Rich. 2. c.
16. Ibid.
) is holden to be against the Dignity of a Parliament, and that no such
Commission ought to be granted.

Though it be apparent, Id. 43.
what transcendent Power and Authority this Parliament has, and though diverse
Parliaments have attempted to bar, restrain, suspend, qualify, or make void
subsequent Parliaments; yet could they never effect it: for the latter
Parliament has ever Power to abrogate, suspend, qualify, explain, or make
void the former in the Whole, or in any Part thereof, notwithstanding any Words
of Restraint, Prohibition, or Penalty in the former. For it is a Maxim in the
Law of Parliament, Quod Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant.

An Act of Parliament does include every man's Consent, Hobart 256.
as well to come, as present.

The Sovereign Power of this High Court of Parliament is such, Hakewel 86.
That although the King's Majesty has many great Privileges and Prerogatives,
yet many Things are not effectual in Law, to pass under the great Seal by the
King's Charter, without Parliament.

The King by his Letters Patents may make a Denizen; Id. 87.
but cannot Naturalize him to all purposes, as an Act of Parliament may do.

If a man be Attainted of Felony, Id 89.
or Treason, by Verdict, Outlawry, Confession, etc. his Blood is corrupted
(which is a perpetual and absolute Disability for him, or his Posterity, to
claim any Hereditament in Fee-simple, either as Heir to him, or any Ancestor
paramount him) and he shall not be restored to his Blood, without Parliament.
And the King may give to any attainted Person his Life, by this Charter of
Parliament.

Id 90.
The King cannot alter the Common Law, or the general Customs of the Realm (as
Gavelkind, Borough-English, or the like) without Parliament.

If a King have a Kingdom by Descent, Ibid
seeing by the Law of that Kingdom he does inherit that Kingdom, he cannot
change those Laws of himself, without Consent of Parliament.

By the Laws of this Kingdom, Ibid.
the King cannot by his Proclamation alter the Law: but the King may make
Proclamation, That he shall incur the Indignation of his Majesty, that
withstands it. But the Penalty of not obeying his Proclamation may not be upon
Forfeiture of his Goods, his Lands, or his Life, without Parliament. Brook
123.98. Vide 20 H. 6.9. Crompton 22. b.


Le Parliament d Engleterre ne lia Ireland, quoad Terras suas, quar ils ont
Parliament la: mes il poient. eux lier quant al Chooses transitory, come
eskipper de Lane, ou Merchandise, al intent de ceo carrier al auter Lieu ultra
Mare.

The Parliament of England cannot bind Ireland, as to their Lands, for they
have a Parliament there: but they may bind them, as to Things transitory, as
the shipping of Wool, or Merchandise, to the intent to carry it to another
Place beyond the Sea.

Sometimes the King of England called his Nobles of Ireland to come to his
Parliament of England, 4 Inst. 350.
etc. And by special Words the Parliament of England may bind the Subjects of
Ireland.

The Lords in their House have Power of Judicature; Id 23.
and the Commons in their House have Power of Judicature; and both Houses
together have Power of Judicature.

This Power is best understood by reading the Judgments and Records of
Parliament at large, Ibid.
and the Journals of the House of Lords, and 6 H. 8. c. 16. Rast. 429, 430.
Vaughan 285.
the Book of the Clerk of the House of Commons.

If Inconveniences necessarily follow out of the Law, only the Parliament can
cure them.

If a Marriage be declared by Act of Parliament to be against God's Law, Id.
327.
we must admit it to be so: for by a Law (that is by an Act of Parliament) it
is so declared.

In many Cases Multitudes are bound by Acts of Parliament, 4 Inst. 4, 5.
which are not Parties to the Elections of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, as
all they that have no Freehold, or have Freehold in ancient Demesne, and all
Women having Freehold, or no Freehold; and Men within the Age of One and
twenty years, etc.

It is declared by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, Id. 14.
upon Demand made of them on the Behalf of the King, that they could not assent
to any Thing in Parliament, that tended to the disherison of the King, and his
Crown, whereunto they were sworn.

The Expounding of the Laws Hakewel 94.
does ordinarily belong to the Reverend Judges; and in Case of greatest
Difficulty, or Importance, to the High Court of Parliament.

Errors by the Law in the Common Pleas are to be corrected in the King's Bench;
4 Inst 22. Vid. Stat. 1. Jac. 1 c. 1.
and of the King's Bench in the Parliament, and not otherwise.

Actions at Common Law are not determined in this High Court of Parliament,
Seldom 's Judicature 2.
yet Complaints have ever been received in Parliaments, as well of private
Wrongs, as public Offenses. And according to the Quality of the Person, and
Nature of the Offense, they have been retained, or referred to the Common Law.

There be diverse Precedents of the Trial of Bishops by their Peers in
Parliament, Id 4.5.
as well for Capital Offenses, as Misdemeanors, whereof they have been accused
in Parliament. As the Archbishop of Canterbury, 15 Ed. 3. n. 6, 7, 8. and
ibid. postea, 44. and 39. and ibid. 17 E. 3.22. And the Bishop of Norwich, 7
Rich. 2. for Misdemeanors: So were the Bishops of York and Chichester tried for
Treason by their Peers in Parliament, upon the Appeal of the Lords Appellants,
11 R. 2.

Anno 21 R. 2. The Commons Acensed the Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason,
and the Temporal Lords judged him a Traitor, and Banished him: But if the
Bishop be accused out of Parliament, he is to be tried by an ordinary Jury of
Freeholders; for his Honor is not inheritable, as is the Temporal Peers out
of Parliament, save that only of their Trial. As no Day of Grace to be granted
against them in any Suit. A Knight to be returned upon the Panel where a
Bishop is Party, and no Process in a Civil Action to be awarded against his
Body, and the like. And by this it appears what Persons are, de Jure, triable
by the Lords in Parliament, viz. their Peers only.

Judgments in Parliaments for Death have been strictly guided per Legem Terrae.
Id. 168.


The Parliament has three Powers; Sir Rob. Atkyns Argument, etc. 36.
a Legislative, in Respect of which they are called the three Estates of the
Realm: a Judicial, in respect of this it is called Magna Curia, or the High
Court of Parliament: a Counselling Power, hence it is called Commune Concilium
Regni.

The Parliament gives Law to the Court of the King's Bench, Id. 49.
and to all other Courts of the Kingdom: and therefore it is absurd, and
preposterous that it should receive Law from it, and be subject to it. The
greater is not judged of the less.

All the Courts of Common Law judge only by the ordinary Rules of the Common
Law: Id. 50.
but the Proceedings of Parliament are by quite another Rule. The Matters in
Parliament are to be discussed and determined by the Custom and Usage of
Parliament, and the Course of Parliament, and neither by the Civil, nor the
Common Law, used in other Courts.

The Judges of all the Courts of Common Law in Westminster are but Assistants,
Ibid.
and Attendants to the High Court of Parliament. And shall the Assistants judge
of their Superiors?

The High Court of Parliament is the dernier Resort, Ibid.
and this is generally affirmed, and held: but it is not the last, if what they
do may yet again be examined, and controlled.

Because the High Court of Parliament proceeds by a Law peculiar to that High
Court, Id. 52.
which is called Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti (and not by the Rules of the
Common Law) and consists in the Customs, Usages, and Course of Parliament: no
Inferior Court can, for this very Reason, judge, or determine of what is done
in Parliament, or by the Parliament.

A Statute, Arc. Parl. 85.
or Act of Parliament shall not be proclaimed, for the Parliament represents
the Body of the whole Realm, for there are Knights, and Burgesses of every
County, and Town. But otherwise where it is ordained by the Act, that it shall
be proclaimed.

A man Attainted of Felony, Id. 100.
or Treason, shall not be restored in Blood without Parliament.

28 Ed. 1. Petyt's Appendix to Miscel. Parliament, n. 38.
A Truce being concluded between the English and French, by King Edward's
Ambassadors (who therein had dishonorably agreed to include the Scots) the
Ambassadors at the ensuing Parliament were sharply rebuked and corrected, not
only by the King himself, the Prelates and Nobles, but by the Commons.

The Court of Parliament was the Sanctuary, Turner's Case of Bankers, 36.
whether the distressed Subject in his Exigence fled for Shelter, and Refuge,
and always found it.

Into the Sacred Bosom of Parliaments it was, Ibid. Vide Several Precedents and
Records.
that they powered out their Sighs and Groans with constant Success: and when in
Cases of high Nature the Common Law was arrested, and stopped in her Proceedings,
Parliaments evermore ran into their Rescue, and in dutiful ways discharged
those Locks and Bars which had been unjustly sastned on the Exchequer.

The Right of the Crown of England, Stat. Provis. 25 Ed. 3. Rast. Stat. 99.
and the Law of the said Realm is such, that upon the Mischiefs and Damages
which happen to the Realm, the King ought, and is bound by his Oath (of the
Accord of his People in Parliament) thereof to make Remedy, etc.

To conclude this Chapter, Le Parliament ad Absolute poiar en touts Cases, come
a fair Leys, d'adjuger Matiers en Ley, a trier vie del home, a reverser Errors
en Bank le Roy; especialment lou est ascun Commune Mischief que l'ordinary
Course del Ley n'ad ascun means a remedier; en tiel Case ceo est le proper
Court. Et touts chooses que ils font sont come Judgments. Et si le Parliament
mesme err, Fincht's (...), l. 2. c. 1. f. 21. b. 22. a
come il poet, ceo ne poet estre reverse en ascun Lieu forsque en le
Parliament. Which, because it is omitted (as several other things are in the
Book translated into English) I will thus give it the Reader that does not
understand French. The Parliament has Absolute Power in all Cases, as to make
Laws, to adjudge Matters in Law, to try men upon their Lives, to reverse Errors
in the King's Bench; especially where there is any Common Mischief which the
ordinary Course of the Law has not any means to remedy, in such Case this is
the proper Court. And all things which they do are as Judgments. And if the
Parliament it self errs, as it may, that cannot be reversed in any place but in
Parliament.

CHAP. III. House of Lords.
THere certainly cannot in the whole World be seen a more Illustrious Court, 2
Nalson 366.
than this High and Honorable Assembly of Peers in Parliament; nor any Thing of
greater Benefit and Advantage to the Subjects of this Monarchy.

No Lord of Parliament can sit there, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 11. Col. 1.
till he be full One and twenty years, unless by special Grace of the Prince,
and that very rarely, unless they be near upon the Age of Twenty years at least.

A Bishop elect may sit in Parliament, Ibid.
as a Lord thereof.

If the King by his Writ calls any Knight or Esquire to be a Lord of the
Parliament, 4 Inst. 44.
he cannot refuse to serve the King there in Communi illo Consilio, for the
Good of his Country.

It lies in the Favor of the Prince to make Heirs of Earldoms Members of the
Upper House, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, (...) Col. 2.
by Summoning them thither by Writ: but then they take not their Place there as
the Sons of Earls, but according to the Antiquity of their Fathers Baronies.

The Archbishop of Canterbury is the first Peer of the Realm. Id. 140. Col. 1.


The Earl-Marshals Place in Parliament is betwixt the Lord Chamberlain, Id.
535. Col. 2.
and the Lord Steward.

No man ought to sit in that High Court of Parliament, 4 Inst. 45.
but he that has Right to sit there.

If a Lord depart from Parliament without license, Id. 44.
it is an Offense done out of the Parliament, and is finable by the Law.

Any Lord of the Parliament, Id. 12.
by License of the King upon just Cause to be absent, may make a Proxy.

43 Eliz. 1601. Towns Coll. 135.
Agreed by the Lords, That the ancient Course of the House is, Vide Sir Simon
d'Ewes Journal, 605.
that the Excuses of such Lords, as should happen to be absent from the House
upon reasonable Occasions, ought to be done by some of the Peers, and not by
other Information.

All the Privileges which do belong to those of the Commons House of
Parliament, Hakewell 82.
a fortiori do appertain to all the Lords of the Upper House: for their Persons
are not only free from Arrests, during the Parliament, but during their Lives:
nevertheless the original Cause is by reason they have Place and Voice in
Parliament. And this is manifest by express Authorities, grounded upon
excellent Reasons in the Books of Law.

A Proxy is no more than the constituting of some one or more by an absent
Lord, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journals 5. Col. 2.
to give his Voice in the Upper House, when any difference of Opinion, and
Division of the House shall happen: for otherwise, if no such Division fall
out, it never comes to be questioned, or known, to whom such Proxies are
directed; nor is there any the least use of them, save only to show, prove, and
continue the Right which the Lords of the Upper House have, both to be
Summoned, and to give their Voices in the same House, either in their Persons,
or by their Proxies.

As many Proxies as any Peer has, Ibid. Col. 2.
so many Voices he has beside his own: and if there be two or three Proxies
constituted by one absent Lord (as is frequent) then always the first named in
the same, is to give the Voice, if he be present; and if absent, then the
second, and sic de reliquis.

It is plain by the ancient Treatise, Id. 6. Col. 1.
Modus tenendi Parliamentum; that if a Peer neither came to the Parliament, nor
sent a Proxy upon his Writ of Summons, he forfeited 100 l. if an Earl, 100
Marks if a Baron, etc.

Towns. Coll. 4.39, 40, 42.
It seldom happens that any Bishop does nominate fewer than three, or two
Proctors; nor any Temporal Lord more than one.

John Archbishop of Canterbury had this Parliament five Proxies. Id. 34.


1 Eliz. 4 Inst. 12, 13.
A Lord of Parliament by License obtained of the Queen to be absent, made a
Proxy to three Lords of Parliament; one of which gave Consent to a Bill; the
other two said, Not Content. And it was by order of the Lords debated among the
Judges and Civilians Attendants, and conceived by them, that this was no Voice;
and the Opinion was affirmed by all the Lords, That it was no Voice.

2 Car. 1. 1626. Rush. Coll. 269.
The House of Peers made an Order, That after this Session, no Lord of this
House shall be capable of receiving above two Proxies, or more, to be numbered
in any Cause voted.

In the Lords House, Arc. Parl. 12. Smith's Commonwealth, 87.
the Lords give their Voices from the Puisne Lord seriatim, by the Word
[Content] or [Not Content.] 4 Inst. 34. First for himself, and then severally
for so many as he has Letters and Proxies.

A Bill had three Readings in one Forenoon, Towns. Coll. 11.
in the House of Lords.

Where a Committee of Lords is selected out to meet with another Committee of
the House of Commons; Towns. Coll. 9.
neither the Judges, being but Assistants, nor the Queens Council, being but
Attendants of and upon the House, were ever nominated as Joynt-Committees with
the Lords. But when the Lords among themselves do appoint a Committee to
consider of some ordinary Bill, especially if it concern Matter of Law, it has
been anciently used, and may still. without Prejudice to the Honor of the
House, that the King's learned Council, but especially the Judges, may be
nominated as Committees alone, or as Joynt-Committees with the Lords.

January 19. 1597. 39 Eliz. It was resolved, Towns. Coll. 94. Sir Simon d'Ewes
Jour.
That the Order and Usage of this House was, and is, that when any Bills or
Messages are brought from the Lower House, to be preferred to the Upper House,
the Lord Keeper, and the rest of the Lords, are to rise from their Places, and
to go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come from the Lower House, and
from them to receive in that Place their Messages, or Bills. Contrariwise, when
any Answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper, etc.

In passing of Bills, Arc. Parl. 5.
if the Not- Contents be most, then the Bill is dash't, i. e. the Law is
annihilated, and goes no further. If the Contents be the most, then the Clerk
writes underneath, Soit bail aux Commons.

3 Car. 1. 1626. Rash. Coll. 365.
Resolved upon the Question, That the Privilege of this House is, that no Lord
of Parliament, the Parliament sitting, or within the usual Time of Privileges
of Parliament, is to be imprisoned, or restrained, without Sentence, or Decree
of the House, unless it be for Treason, or Felony, or refusing to give Surety
of the Peace.

Giving the Lie to a Peer is a Breach of Privilege. 2 Nalson 380.


Ever since the Conquest, the Archbishops, Hakewel 84. Vide Kelwey 184. Vide
Lord Hollis's Letter. Vide Lord Hollis's Remains. Vid. contra Hunt's Argument
for the Bishops Right, etc. Vid. Grand Question concerning Bishops Right, per.
totum.
and Bishops have no Title to have Voice and Place in Parliament, but only in
respect of their Temporal Baronies; where they are present, quousque
perveniatur ad Diminutionem, etc.

When a Question is had of the Attainder of any Peer, Hakewel 84. Vid. contra
Hunt ut supra per tot. Vid. Grand Question concerning Bishops Right, etc. per
totum. Seldom of Judicature etc. p. 150.
or other, in Parliament, the Archbishops and Bishops depart the Higher House,
and do make their Proxies: for by the Decrees of the Church, they may not be
Judges of Life and Death.

11 Rich. 2. Diverse Lords, and others, being appealed of Treason, and other
Misdemeanors, the Prelates absented themselves during the Trial, having first
made Protestation, saving their Right to be present in Parliament Vid. there
the Protestation of the Bishops for ever. Id. 151.
.

The Protestation, I think, intends, That they could not be present by reason
of the Common Law, and by reason of an Ordinance made at the Council at
Westminster, in 21 Hen. 2. by which all Clergymen were forbidden agitare
Judicium Sanguinis, upon Pain to be deprived both of Dignities, and Orders. For
surely, as I think, they might otherwise have been present, both by the Common
Law, and by the Law of God.

All the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Selden's Judicature etc. 39.
11 Rich. 2. claimed as their Liberty and Franchise, that the great Matters
moved in this Parliament, and to be moved in other Parliaments in Time to come,
touching the Peers of the Land, ought to be admeasured, adjudged, and discussed
by the Course of the Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, nor by the Law of
the Land, used in the more base Courts of the Realm: which the King granted in
full Parliament.

The Proceeding against a Peer in Parliament is not necessary. Id. 53.


It appears that the Lords cannot of themselves judge a Common Person for an
Offense, Id. 61.
for he is no Peer, according to that of 4 E. 3. Numb. 26.

1 Rich. 2. Id. 123.
The Lord Beauchamp was sworn, and examined; and the Duke of Lancaster being
one of the Committee, was diligently examined before the rest of the said
Committee, but not sworn ad testificandum. Earls and Dukes are not sworn.

In Judgments on Delinquents in Parliament, Id. 132.
the Commons might accusare, and petere Judicium, the King assentire, and the
Lords only did judicare.

The King's Assent ought to be to Capital Judgments, Id. 141. Vid. id. 144 147,
148, 154, 158.
and the Lords Temporal to be only Judges therein, and not the Lords Spiritual:
but in Misdemeanors, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are equal Judges, and the
King's Assent is not necessary, Id. 136. yet it seems to me, that the King's
Assent is necessarily required in Capital Causes and Judgments.

If a Peer be committed to Prison, the Gentleman Usher has the Charge of him
thither, and the Sergeant attending on the Great Seal.

How Lords of Parliament shall be placed in the Parliament, Vide Stat. 31 Hen.
8. c. 10 Vid. 4 Inst. 362. Rot. Parl. 3 H. 6. n. 10.
and other Assemblies and Conferences of Council.

A Peer of the Realm shall be tried in an Appeal by Knights, etc. and not by
his Peers, Arcana Parl. 70.
because it is at the Suit of the Party, Brook 142, 153. Otherwise it is in an
Indictment of Treason or Felony, for that it is at the Suit of the King. Id. 71.


The Duke of Somerset in the Time of Ed. 6. was tried for Felony and Treason by
his Peers upon an Indictment, for it is the Suit of the King.

When a Lord of Parliament is tried by his Peers, 1 Hen. 4.1. Id. 72.
they shall not be sworn to say their Verdict; but they shall give their
Verdict upon their Honor, and are not charged but upon their Honors.

A Lord of Parliament shall have Knights upon his Trial in every Action. 27
Hen. 8. f. 27.


A Lord of Parliament may be Outlawed for Murder. 27 Hen. 8. f. 17.


If a Lord of Parliament makes a Rescous, 27 H. 8.27.
a Capias shall be taken out against him, if the Sheriff return the Rescous;
otherwise it is in Case of Debt.

A Capias ad Satisfaciendum does not lie against a Lord of Parliament, 11 H.
4.15.
27 Hen. 8.27. for the Law presumes that he has Assets.

An Attachment is not grantable by the Common Law, Dyer 316.
Statute Law, Custom, or Precedent against a Lord of Parliament: and the Lord
Cromwell by Order in the Parliament-Chamber was discharged of such Process.

In a Praemunire against a Lord of Parliament, Arc. Parl. 98.
he ought to appeear in his proper Person, and not by Attorney, unless he has a
special Writ of Chancery.

CHAP. IV. Power of the House of Lords.
A Peer of the Realm being Indicted of Treason, 4 Inst. 23.
or Felony, or Misprision of Treason, may be Arraigned thereof in Parliament, a
Lord Steward being appointed; and then the Lords Spiritual shall make a
Procurator for them: and the Lords, as Peers of the Realm, during the
Parliament, are Judges, whether the Offense be Treason, etc. that is supposed
to be committed by any Peer of the Realm, and not the Justices.

Many notable Judgments by the Lords, Ibid. Vide Rush. Coll. passim. Vid.
Nalson.
at the Prosecution of the Commons, and in later Times.

Error serra sue in Parliament, Vid. Crompton, 18. b.
and Parliament poet prendre Recognizance, Brook 137. Error. Error shall be
sued in Parliament, and the Parliament may take Recognizance.

If a Judgment be given in the King's Bench, 4 Inst. 21.
either upon a Writ of Error, or otherwise; the Party grieved may (upon a
Petition of Right made to the King in English or in French, and his Answer
thereto, Fiat Justitia) have a Writ of Error directed to the Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, for removing of the Record in praesens Parliamentum, etc.

When one sueth in Parliament to Reverse a Judgment in the King's Bench, Id. 22.
he shows in his Bill, which he exhibiteth to the Parliament, some Error, or
Errors, whereupon he prays a Scire Facias.

The Proceeding upon the Writ of Error is only before the Lords in the Upper
House, Id.
Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti.

The Case between Smith and Busby in a Writ of Error, 2 Nalson 716.
decidable in no other Court, but in Parliament.

If any Question be moved in Parliament for Privilege, 4 Inst. 363.
or Precedence of any Lord of Parliament, it is to be decided by the Lords of
Parliament, in the House of Lords, as all Privileges and other Matters
concerning the Lords House of Parliament are.

November 1641. Resolved by the House, Nemine contradicente, 2 Nalson 625.
That it belongs to the House of Peers, by the ancient Laws and Constitutions
of this Kingdom, to interpret Acts of Parliament, in Time of Parliament, in any
Cause that shall be brought before them.

Julij 12, 2 Nalson 381.
1641. An Order of the Lords for Relief of a Feme-Covert, and her Children,
against a Husband refusing to Cohabit.

The Sentence pronounced by the Lords upon Sir Giles Mompesson, Rushw. Col. 27,
28.
and Sir Fancis Michel, for Projectors.

Upon Complaints and Accusations of the Commons, Selden's Judicature etc 6, 7.
the Lords may proceed in Judgment against the Delinquents of what Degree
soever, and what Nature soever the Offense be. For where the Commons complain,
the Lords do not assume to themselves Trial at Common Law. Neither do the Lords
at the Trial of a Common Impeachment by the Commons, decedere de June suo: for
the Commons are then instead of a Jury; And the Parties Answer, and Examination
of Witnesses, are to be in their Presence, or they to have Copies thereof: and
the Judgment is not to be given but upon their Demand, which is instead of a
Verdict; so the Lords do only judge, not try the Delinquent.

28 Hen. 6. Though the Lords refused to commit the Duke of Suffolk upon the
Commons complaint of him of a common Fame of Treason; Id. 98.
yet when they accused him of particular Treason, he was Committed, and brought
Prisoner to his Answer. But in Cases of Misdemeanors it is otherwise; then the
Party Accused, whether Lord, or Commoner, answers as a Freeman.

The Lord within his Place, Ibid.
the Commoner at the Bar; and they are not committed till Judgment; unless upon
the Answer of a Commoner, the Lords find Cause to commit him, till he find
Sureties to attend, etc. lest he should fly. Prout Jo. Cavendish upon the Lord
Chancellor's demand of Justice against him for his false Accusation, was
Committed after his Answer until he put in Bail, Anno 7 Rich. 2. and before
Judgment.

In Cases of Misdemeanors only, Id. 105.
the Party accused was never denied Counsel.

If the Commons do only complain, Id. 163.
and do neither impeach the Party in Writing, nor by Word of Mouth in open
House, nor demand Trial to be in their Presence: in these Cases it is in the
Election of the Lords, whether the Commons shall be present, or not.

In Complaints of Extortion, Id. 173.
and Oppression, the Lords awarded Satisfaction to the Parties wronged, which
sometime was certain, sometime general; but always secundum, non ultra Legem.

It appears plainly by many Precedents, Id 176, 177.
That all Judgments for Life and Death, are to be rendered by the Steward of
England, or by the Steward of the King's House: and this is the Reason, why at
every Parliament the King makes a Lord Steward of his House, though he has none
out of Parliament. And at such Arraignment the Steward is to sit in the
Chancellor's Place: and all Judgments for Misdemeanors by the Chancellor, or by
him who supplies the Chancellor's Place.

In Case of Recovery of Damages, Id. 187.
or Restitution, the Parties are to have their Remedy (the Parliament being
ended) in the Chancery, and not in any other inferior Court at the Common Law.
But the Lords in Parliament may direct how it shall be levied.

The Judges (who are but Assistants to the Upper House) have leave from the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper, to sit covered in the House, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour.
527. Col. 2.
but are always uncovered at a Committee.

3 Car. 1. The Sentence of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Petyt 's Miscel.
Parliament. 212, 213.
pronounced by the Lord Keeper against Ensign Henry Reynde, for ignominious
Speeches uttered by him against the Lord Say and Seal, and for his Contempt of
the High Court of Parliament, was thus: 1. That he never bear Arms hereafter,
but be accounted unworthy to be a Soldier: 2. To be imprisoned during Pleasure:
3. To stand under the Pillory (with Papers on his Head showing his Offense) at
Cheapside, London, and at Banbury: 4. To be fined at 200 l. to the King: 5: To
ask Forgiveness here of all the Lords of Parliament in general, and of the Lord
Say and his Son, both here, and at Banbury.

The Court of Star Chamber ordered by the Lords to put the said Sentence in
Execution, Id. 213.
out of Time of Parliament.

CHAP. V. House of Commons.
THE House of Commons was originally, Sir R. Atkyns Argument, etc. p. 13.
and from the first Constitution of the Nation, the Representative of one of
the Three Estates of the Realm, and a part of the Parliament.

It is affirmed by Mr. Lambard, Lambard 's Archeion, 257, 258.
That Burgesses were chosen to the Parliament before the Conquest.

The ancient Towns called Boroughs, Littleton, Sect. 164.
are the most ancient Towns that are in England: for the Towns that now are
Cities or Counties in old time were Boroughs; and called Boroughs, for that of
such old Towns came the Burgesses to the Parliaments.

Knights of the Shire to serve in Parliament, Sir Rob. Atkyns 18.
and the paying Wages to them for their Service, has been Time out of Mind, and
did not begin 49 Hen. 3. for that is within Time of Memory, in a Legal Sense.

The House of Commons, Id. 34.
as a Member of the High Court of Parliament, have been as ancient as the
Nation it self, and may in the Sense of Julius Caesar, be accounted among the
Aborigenes, and that they have had a perpetual Being (to speak in the Language
of the Law) a Tempore cujus Contraria memoria Hominum non existit, and that
they are therefore capable by Law (together with the rest of the Three Estates
in Parliament) to prescribe and claim a share in all Parliamentary Powers and
Privileges; I do not mean separately, but in conjunction with those other
Estates, which they could not otherwise legally have done, Petyt's Preface to
the ancient Rights of the Commons, etc. p. 3.
if their Original and Commencement could have been shown.

During the British, Saxon, and Norman Governments, the Freemen (or Commons of
England, as now called, and distinguished from the great Lords) were pars
essentialis and constituens, and essential and constituent Part of the Wittena
Gemot, Commune Concilium, Baronagium Angliae, or Parliament in those Ages.

It is apparent, and past all Contradiction, Id. 12.
That the Commons (in the Times of the Britons, Saxons, and Picts) were an
essential Part of the Legislative Power, in making and ordaining Laws, by which
themselves and their Posterity were to be governed, and that the Law was then
the golden Metwand and Rule which measured out, and allowed the Prerogative of
the Prince, and Liberty of the Subject (and when obstructed, or denied to
either, made the Kingdom deformed and leprous).

I may with good Reason and Warranty conclude, Id. 125.
that our Ancestors the Commons of England, the Knights, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, Citizens, and Burgesses of a great and mighty Nation, were very
far from being in former Times such Vassals and Slaves, or so abject, poor, and
inconsiderable, as the absurd and malicious Ignorance and Falsities of late
Writers have been pleased to make and represent them, especially the Author of
the Grand Freeholders Inquest, and Mr. James Howel, as if they were only Beasts
of Carriage and Burden, ordained to be taxed and talliated, and have their
Lives, Estates, and Liberties given away, and disposed of, without their own
Assents.

The Book of the Clerk of the House of Commons is a Record, 4 Inst. 23.
as it is affirmed by Act of Parliament, 6 Hen. 8. c. 16.

If the Commons do only Accuse by any way of Complaint whatsoever, Selden's
Judicature etc. 14.
and do not declare in Special against the Party accused, then the Suit is the
King's, and the Party is to be Arraigned, or otherwise proceeded against by
Commandment, Ex part Domini Regis.

In the Lower House sit the Speaker, and the Knights, Citizens, Cromptona. b. 4
Inst. 1.
Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, who represent the Body of the whole
Commonalty of England.

All Persons, and Commonalties, St. 5 Rich. 2. c. 4. Rast. 140.
which shall be summoned to Parliament, shall come, as has been used and
accustomed of ancient Time; and he that shall not come (having no reasonable
Excuse) shall be amerced, and otherwise punished, as of ancient Time has been
used.

CHAP. VI. Power of the House of Commons.
THE House of Commons is a House of Information and Presentment, Rush. Coll.
217. Vol. 1.
but not a House of Definitive Judgment.

1 Car. 1. Rushw. ib.
1625. Resolved, That common Fame is a good Ground of Proceeding for this
House, either by Enquiry or Presenting the Complaint (if the House find cause)
to the King or Lords.

26 Jan. 28 Hen 6. Selden's Judicature p 29. Vid. id. 38.
The Commons required the Duke of Suffolk might be committed to Ward, for that
the General Fame went of him, etc. The Lords, on Consultation with the
Justices, thought the same to be no good Cause of Commitment, unless some
special Matters were objected against him.

It is certain, and not to be denied, Petyt's Miscell. Pref. etc. p. 5.
That in elder Time the People, or Freemen had a great Share in the Public
Council, or Government. For Dion Cassius (or Xiphiline out of him) in the Life
of Severus assures us, Apud hos (i.e. Britannos) Populus magna ex. Part
Principatum tenet.

It was not in the Power of all the Tenants in Capite in England, Id. 47, 48.
though with the King's Consent, to bind and oblige others, or to make, or alter
a Law, sine Assensu Communitatis Regni, who had Votum consultivum, and
decisivum, an Act of Authority and Jurisdiction, as well in assenting to
Spiritual Laws as Temporal: as may appear for an Instance in their Declaration,
or Protestation to Edward the Third in Parliament, which concludes thus, For
they will not be obliged by any Statute or Ordinance made, without their
Assent. Rush. Coll. 690.


A Member of Parliament may charge any great Officer of State with any
particular Offense.

If any Lord of Parliament Spiritual or Temporal, 4 Inst. 24.
have committed any Oppression, Bribery, Extortion, or the like; the House of
Commons, being the general Inquisitors of the Realm (coming out of all Parts
thereof) may examine the same; and if they find, by the Vote of the House, the
Charge to be true, then they transmit the same to the Lords, with the Witnesses
and the Proofs.

1 Jac. 1. Petyt's Miscel. Parl 64
1603. The Bishop of Bristol publishing a Book, tending to make division and
strife, wrong and dishonor both to the lower House and the Lords themselves,
was complained of by the Commons to the Lords: and he made his Recantation: 1.
That he had erred. 2. That he was sorry for it. 3. If it were to do again, he
would not do it. 4. But protested, it was done of Ignorance, and not of Malice.


7 Jac. 1. 1609. Vide Rush. Hist. Coll. 4 Car.
Dr. Cowel writ a Book perniciously, asserting certain Heads to the Destruction
of Parliaments, and the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom, and was
complained of by the Commons to the Lords, who resolved to Censure his Errors
and Boldness. Ibid. And afterward the Book was burnt by Proclamation.

Vide Dr. Manwaring's Case, Rush. Coll. and Nalson. Vide Petyt's Miscell. Part.
74.

Vide Dr. Montague's Case in Rushworth, Nalson and Petyt's Miscell. Part. 82.

4 Junij, 19 Jac. 1. Petyt's Miscell. Parl. 120.
The Commons House of Parliament this day adjudged Randolph Davenport Esquire for
his Offense in Mis-informing the House, in a Cause wherein he was produced as a
Witness, to be committed Prisoner to the Tower for the space of one whole
Month, and then to be discharged, paying his Fees.

19 Jac. 1. Id. 160.
Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House shall attach the Body of John Churchill, one of the
Deputy-Registers of the Chancery, and him shall take into his Custody, and
bring him to this House on Monday morning next at Eight of the Clock: and the
said Sergeant is in the mean time to keep him so, as none be suffered to speak
with him, but in the hearing of the Sergeant.

Vide ad hoc Rush. Collect. passim. Vide Nalson's 2 Volumes. Vide Selden's
Judicature, etc. Vide Sir Robert Atkyns's Argument, etc. Vide Petyt's Preface
to Miscell. Parliamentaria.

Thomas Long gave the Mayor of Westbury four pounds to be elected Burgess, 4
Inst. 23. Vide Sir d'Ewes Jour. 182.
who thereupon was elected. This Matter was examined, and adjudged in the House
of Commons, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, and the Mayor fined
and imprisoned, and long removed; for this corrupt Dealing was to poison the
very Fountain it self.

Arthur Hall a Member of the House of Commons, Ibid. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes
Jour. 212.
for publishing and discovering the Conferences of the House, and writing a
Book to the dishonor of the House, was, upon due Examination, secundum Legem
and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, adjudged by the House of Commons to be committed
to the Tower for six Months, fined at Five hundred Marks, and expelled the
House.

23 Apr. 1 Mariae, Ibid. Called Monington by Scobel 113.
Muncton struck William Johnson a Burgess of B. returned into the Chancery of
Record: for which, upon due Examination in the House of Commons, it was
resolved, That secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, every man must
take Notice of all the Members of the House returned of Record, at his peril:
And the House adjudged Muncton to the Tower.

Injuries offered to the Members, Scobel 113.
and their Servants, during the Session, have been usually punished by the
House, upon Complaint.

29 Febr. 1575. Ibid. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 251. Col. 2.
One Williams, for assaulting a Burgess of this House, was upon complaint sent
for by the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and committed to the Serjeant's
Ward.

28 Nov. 1601. Ibid.
Complaint being made by Mr. Fleetwood a Member of the House, that one Holland
a Scrivener, and one Brooks his Servant, had evil entreated and beaten the
Servant of the said Mr. Fleetwood in his Presence: they were both sent for by
the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and for the said Offense committed for
five days to the Sergeant.

12 Febr. 18. Id. 114.
Jac. 1. Mr. Lovel a Member of the House, informed, That one Darryel threatened
his Person (that for a Speech spoken by him in the House, he should be sent to
the Tower, during the Parliament, or presently after) Darryel was sent for by
the Sergeant to answer it to the House, and upon Testimony of it, he was
committed to the Sergeant till Thursday following, and then to acknowledge his
Fault, or to be committed to the Tower.

16 Junij, 1604. Ibid.
Complaint being made of one Thomas Rogers a Currier, dwelling in
Coleman-street, for abusing Sir John Savil in slanderous and unseemly Terms
(upon his Proceedings at a Committee in the Bill touching Tanners, etc.) he was
sent for by the Sergeant at Arms to the Bar, to Answer his Offense.

Sir William Aston Sheriff of London, Rush. Coll. 656. Vid. Petyt's Miscell.
Parl. 108. Acton's Case.
being Examined before the Committee, concerning some Matters about the
Customs, and not giving that clear Answer which he ought, and as the House
conceived he might have done, was therefore committed to the Tower of London.
And a Question was made in the House, at the Time, Whether the House had at any
Time before committed a Sheriff of London to Prison. To which Mr. Seldom made
Answer, That he could not call to mind a Precedent of sending one Sheriff of
London to Prison: but he well remembered a Precedent of sending both the
Sheriffs of London to the Tower, and instanced the Case.

One Trussel being in Execution in one of the Compters in London, Towns. Coll.
20. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 438. Col. 1.
was Ordered to be brought before the Committee with his Keeper, without Danger
of an Escape in the Execution.

4 November. 1640. Scobel 16.
Upon a Report from the Committee for Privileges, That several Indentures were
returned for Burgesses for the Borough of Bossinny in the County of Cornwall,
the one by the Mayor of the Town, the other promiscuously; The Committee were
of Opinion, upon view of the bare Indenture, That Sir Charles Harbord (who was
returned by the Mayor) was well returned: but the House declared he should not
sit, till the Election were decided.

44 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Coll. 297.
The Course has been, if the House has been desirous to see any Record, the
Speaker should send a Warrant to the Lord Keeper to grant a Certiorari to have
the Record brought into the House.

December. 1641. Ordered, 2 Nalson 753.
That Mr. Speaker do write his Letters to the Mayor of Berwick, enjoining him
to require such Papists, and suspected Persons as reside there, or make their
constant Repair thither, forthwith to depart the Town: and to tender the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance to such as shall refuse; and to proceed against
them according to Law; and to require him that a Guard be kept at the several
Gates, and that the Arms of that Place be in readiness. The like to the Mayor
of Newcastle, and of Hull.

The Commons upon Imprisonment of their Members, Rush. Coll. 358.
and the Offense taken by the King, resolved to proceed in no other Business,
till they were righted in their Liberties.

Dec. 1641. 2 Nalson 732.
Mr. Long a Justice of the Peace sent to the Tower, for setting a Guard,
without Consent of the Parliament.

A Knight, 4 Inst. 12.
Citizen, or Burgess of the House of Commons cannot by any Means make a Proxy:
because he is elected, and trusted by Multitudes of People.

If the Commons accuse a Commoner of Misdemeanors; Seldom 's Jud. 101.
in such a State of Liberty or Restraint as he is in, when the Commons complain
of him, in such he is to answer.

Sir Francis Michel, Seld. Jud. Ibid.
and Sir John Bennet, were both committed by the Commons, before their
Complaint to the Lords, and so they answered as Prisoners: but that in a sort
may be called Judicium parium suorum.

If the Commons impeach any man, they are in loco proprio, Id. 124.
and there no Jury ought to be: only Witnesses are to be examined in their
Presence, or they to have Copies thereof: and the Judgment not to be given
until the Commons demand it.

The Presence of the Commons is necessary at the Parties Answer, Id. 158.
and Judgment in Cases Capital. Now one Reason for the King's Assent, and the
Commons Presence in such Judgments, may be this: Both King and People are to be
satisfied for the Death of the Subject; therefore all Trials for Life and Death
are public in the full Assembly of the Court; and how can it be said in full
Parliament, when the Commons, one of the States, are absent?

Though the Commons are not present when the Lords do consider of the Delinquents
Answer, Id. 159.
and the Proofs, and do determine of their Judgment: yet at their Return to
their own Assembly, they consider among themselves, if the Proceedings were
legal, and may come again, and show it, and require a Rehearing of the Cause;
as they did at the Judgment of the Duke of Clarence in 18 Ed. 3.

In Judgment on Misdemeanors, Id. 162.
the Presence of the Commons is not necessary, unless they Impeach a
Delinquent, prout 50 E. 3. and then they are present at all the Answers of
those whom they Impeach, and demanded Judgment.

When the Lords had determined one part of the Complaint of the Commons against
William Ellis (touching the wrong done to certain Scottish Merchants) the
Commons prayed a general Inquiry might be made of the Residue whereof they
complained, Ibid.
which the Lords granted.

When the Lord Nevil answered, Id. 163.
the Commons required that one Richard Love might be examined, to prove that
which the said Lord denied, and so departed: but two of the Commons remained,
and heard the Examinations, and told the Lords, That the said Richard had
related otherwise to the Commons the day before, which the said Richard denied.
Then all the Commons came, and justified it again, and thereupon the said
Richard Love confessed it, and on their Demands was committed.

In the 10 Rich. 2. Ibid.
when the Commons had Impeached the Lord Chancellor, they were present at his
Answer, and so often replied, and enforced his Oath against him, and required
him to be committed, and so he was before Judgment.

If the Commons do only complain, Ibid.
and do neither impeach the Party in Writing, nor by Word of Mouth in open
House, nor demand Trial to be in their Presence: in these Cases it is in the
Election of the Lords, Whether the Commons shall be present, or not.

Issuing of Quo Warranto's out of the Court of King's Bench, Nalson 588.
Court of Exchequer, or any Court, against Boroughs, that anciently or recently
sent Burgesses to Parliament, to show cause, why they sent Burgesses of
Parliament, and all the Proceedings thereupon, are Coram non Judice, illegal
and void. And the Right of sending Burgesses to the Parliament, is questionable
in Parliament only; and the Occasioners, Procurers, and Judges in such Quo
Warranto's and Proceedings, are punishable, as in Parliament shall be thought
consonant to Law and Justice.

Where the Articles against the Delinquents are ex Part Domini Regis, Seldom
's Judicature 118.
there the Commons cannot reply, nor demand Judgment: for the Suit is the
King's, and not theirs.

In Trewinnard's Case, Id. 39.
Dyer 60, and 61. The Privilege of the Commons is termed the Privilege of
Parliament; and the Judgment given in that Case by the House of Commons, is
there said to be, The Judgment of the most High, Court of Parliament. Sir
Robert Atkyns's Argument 35. which proves, they are not without a Judicial
Power.

The King cannot take notice of what is done in the Commons House, Id. 53.
or delivered to them, but by the House it self: and that is one of the Laws
and Customs of Parliament.

In 31. Hen. 6. Id. 55.
when the Commons requested the King and Lords to restore their Speaker to
them, etc. The Judges being demanded of their Counsel therein; after mature
deliberation, they answered, It was not their part to judge of the Parliament,
which may judge of the Law.

The Reason, Ibid.
to judge of the Law, signifies that they can judge whether a Law be good, or
not; in order to approve it, and to enact it, or to repeal a Law.

In 1621. Ibid.
the House of Commons made a Protestation against all Impeachments, other than
in the House, for any thing there said or done.

It was said by Mr. Justice Crook, Id. 58. Rush. Coll. Vol. 1. f. 663.
That regularly a Parliament Man cannot be compelled, out of Parliament to
answer Things done in Parliament in a Parliamentary Course. If it be done in a
Parliamentary Course, what Occasion can there be to answer for it? But who
shall judge what is a Parliamentary Course, but a Parliament? not Judges of the
Common Law; for the Parliamentary Course differs from the Rules of the Common
Law.

27 Eliz. 1584. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 347. Col. 2.
Ordered, That the Sergeant of this House do forthwith go to the Common Pleas
Bar, and charge the Recorder, then pleading there, to make his present Repair
unto this House for his Attendance.

Eodem Anno, Id. 367. Col. 1.
John Bland a Currier, for making dishonorable Reflections on the House of
Commons, brought to the Bar, and pardoned upon his Submission, paying twenty
shillings Fee to the Sergeant, and taking the Oath of Supremacy.

Eodem An. Id. 368. Col. 1.
A Warrant for a Writ of Privilege awarded for setting at Liberty John Pepler,
Servant to Sir Philip Sidney a Member of this House, now Prisoner for Debt in
the Compter in London.

28, 29 Eliz. 1586. Id. 397. Col. 1.
Resolved by the whole Body of the House, That the discussing and adjudging of
Differences about Elections, only belonged to the said House: That though the
Lord Chancellor and Judges were competent Judges in their proper Courts, yet
they were not in Parliament.

31 Eliz. 1588. Id 451. Col. 1.
Thomas Drury committed to the Serjeant's Custody, brought to the Bar, and
discharged, paying his Fees; for speaking dishonourably of the Proceedings of
the House.

23 Eliz. 1580. Id. 283. Col. 1.
A Member of the House stood Indicted of Felony. Adjudged, That he ought to
remain of the House till he were Convicted: for it may be any man's case, who
is guiltless, to be Accused, and thereupon Indicted of Felony, or a like Crime.

18 Eliz. 1575. Petyt 's Miscel. Parl. 16, 18
Edward Smalley was upon the Question adjudged by the House to be Guilty of
Contempt, and abusing the House by fraudulent Practice of procuring himself to
be Arrested upon Execution, of his own Assent and Intention, to be discharged
as well of his Imprisonment, as of the said Execution. And Matthew Kirtleton
adjudged Guilty of Confederacy with the said Smalley. Whereupon they were both
ordered to be committed to the Tower. And the said Smalley to remain there for
a Month, and after, till he gave sufficient. Assurance for payment of a hundred
pounds to the Creditor, and forty shillings for the Serjeant's Fees.

4 Ed. 6. Criketoft, Id. 96.
for the confederating in the Escape of one Flood, committed to the Tower, and
afterward discharged paying his Fees.

1 Jac. 1. Bryan Tash, Id. 98.
a Yeoman of his Majesty's Guard, for keeping the Door of the Lobby of the
Upper House against several Members of the House of Commons, brought to the Bar
of the House, and upon his Submission, and Confession of his Fault, dismissed,
paying the ordinary Fees to the Clerk and Sergeant.

20 Jac. 1. Dr. Harris, Id. 104.
for misbehaving himself in preaching, and otherwise with respect to Election
of Members of Parliament; called to the Bar as a Delinquent, and admonished to
confess his Fault there, and in the Country, and in the Pulpit of his Parish
Church.

3 Car. 1. Mr. Burgess a Minister, Id. 104, 105.
for abusing his Function in the Duty of Catechizing, etc. sent for by a
Messenger, committed to the Tower, and upon humble Submission delivered.

In the same Parliament, Id. 105, 106.
Sir William Wray, Mr. Langton, Mr. John Trelawny, and Mr. Edward Trelawny,
Deputy Lieutenants for Cornwall, for assuming to themselves a Power to make
Knights of the Shire, defaming such as stood to be chosen, sending for the
Trained Bands, menacing the Country, etc. were committed, some to the Tower,
some to the Sergeant, till they made a Submission and Recognition in the House,
and in the Country.

In the same, Id. 106, 107.
One Levet, for peremptorily exercising a Patent in Time of Prorogation, which
was adjudg'd a Grievance by the House in the last Session, ordered to be sent
for by the Sergeant at Arms.

CHAP. VII. Power of Parliament over their own Members.
THE Freedom of Speech and Debates be an undoubted Privilege of the House;
Scobel 72.
yet whatsoever is spoken in the House, is subject to the Censure of the House;
and where they find cause, Offenses of this kind have been severely punished;
by Calling the Persons to the Bar, to make Submission; Committing him to the
Tower, (the usual Prison to which the Commons do send Delinquents) expelling
the House, disabling him to be a Member during that Parliament, and sometime of
any future Parliament.

17 Maij 1572. Ibid. Vide d'Ewes Jour. 212 Vid. Petyt's Miscell. Parl. 12, 13,
etc.
Upon sundry Motions made by diverse Members of the House, it was ordered, That
Arthur Hall Esquire for sundry Speeches used by him in the House, and abroad,
should be warned by the Sergeant to be at the House on Monday following, and at
the Bar, to answer Matters charged against him: and all such Persons as had
noted his Words, either in the House, or abroad, were forthwith to meet, and
set down the same words in writing, and deliver the same to the Speaker. On
Monday Mr. Hall was brought to the Bar by the Sergeant, was charged with
several Articles, and confessed his Folly, and humbly submitted himself to the
House, and was remitted.

8 Febr. 1585. Id 73. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal, 244. Col. 1.
Peter Wentworth Esquire one of the Burgesses for Tregony in the County of Cornwall,
was, for violence and wicked words uttered by him in the House touching the
Queen, sequestered: and being brought to the Bar by the Sergeant (to whom he
was committed) received this Judgment by the Mouth of the Speaker, That he
should be committed close Prisoner to the Tower, till the House take further
Consideration concerning him.

4 Febr. 1580. Id 74, 75. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 296, 297, 298. Vid.
Petyts Miscell. Parl. a. p. 20 ad p. 63.
23 Eliz. Complaint was made in the House against Arthur Hall Esquire (spoken of
before) who had caused a Book to be printed, where were published the
Conferences of the House; and in it was contained Matter of Reproach against
some particular Members of the House, derogatory to the General Authority,
Power, and State of the House, and prejudicial to the Validity of the
Proceedings of the same. The Matter was referred to a Committee to examine; and
upon Report thereof, and bringing Mr. Hall to the Bar several Times to answer,
he was sentenced by the House to be committed to the Tower (as the Prison to
this House) there to remain for the space of Six months, and so much longer, as
until he should himself willingly make a Retraction of the said Book, to the
satisfaction of the House, or of such Order as the House should make during
that Session. That the said Arthur Hall should be fined to the Queen Five
hundred pounds for his said Offense; That he should be presently severed and
cut off from being a Member of this House, during this Parliament, and a Writ
to issue for Election of a new Burgess for the Borough of Grantham in his
stead; That the said Book should be deemed and adjudged false and Erroneous.
Thereupon the said Mr. Hall was brought to the Bar, to whom Mr. Speaker, in the
Name of the whole House, pronounced the said Judgment, in Form aforesaid, and
the Sergeant was commanded to take Charge of him, and to convey him to the
Tower, and deliver him to the Lieutenant of the Tower, by Warrant of this
House, to be signed by the Speaker.

It appears by the Journal 21 Nov. 1586. Ibid.
That he was disabled for ever to serve in Parliament.

17 Dec. 1584. Id. 76. Vide Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 340, 341, 342.
27 Eliz. A Bill against Jesuits and Seminary Priests passed upon the Question.
Dr. Parry only gave a Negative, and after inveighed in violent Speeches against
the whole Bill; affirming it to savor of Treasons, to be full of Blood,
Danger, Despair, and Terror or Dread to the English Subjects of this Realm, our
Brethren, Uncles, and Kinsfolks. Upon which he was sequestered from the House
into the outer Room, into the Hands of the Sergeant, and not to confer with
any, while the House was in Debate of that Business. Afterward he was brought
to the Bar, and there kneeling, he was told by the Speaker, If he thought fit,
the House was content to hear his Reasons; but he refusing, was committed to
the Serjeant's Ward. The next day he was brought to the Bar, and kneeling,
confessed he had unduly behaved himself, and had rashly and unadvisedly uttered
those Speeches he had used, and was with all his heart very sorry for it;
alleging withal, he had never been of the House till that Session, and so
could not so well know the Orders of the House, as he should do, and that he
would not henceforth willingly offend the House, nor any one man in it, and so
humbly prayed their good Favor toward him. Whereupon being again sequestered
out of the House, after some Arguments and Debates it was resolved, upon this
Acknowledgment of his Fault, and his humble Submission, he should be received
into this House again, as a Member thereof, and take his Place, as before, so
that he would still afterward behave himself in good sort, as he ought to do:
and thereupon being called again to the Bar, and there kneeling, and directly
reiterating his former Confession of his Fault, and humble Submission, with
promise of better Demeanor, he was admitted.

18 Febr. 1584. Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal 352. Col. 2.
27 Eliz. Upon a Motion by Mr. Diggs, That the same Dr. Parry, a late unworthy
Member of this House, and now Prisoner in the Tower, has since his Submission
and Reconcilement so mis-behaved himself as deserves the said Imprisonment:
Resolved by the House, That he be disabled to be any longer a Member of this
House, and that a Warrant be directed for choosing another Burgess in his stead.

18 Jac. 1. Sir Giles Mompesson, for being a Monopolist, and for other great
and insufferable Crimes by him committed, to the Abuse of his Majesty, and
grievous Oppression of the Subjects; turned out of the House, committed to the
Tower, and after impeached before the Lords, who gave Judgment upon him.
Petyt's Miscel. l Parl. 91, 92


1. To be degraded of the Order of Knighthood. 2. To stand perpetually in the
degree of a person Outlawed for Misdemeanors and Trespasses. 3. His Testimony
never to be received in any Court, nor to be of any Inquisition or Jury. 4. To
be excepted out of all General Pardons. 5. That he should be imprisoned during
his Life. 6. Not to approach within twelve miles of the Courts of the King, or
Prince, not at the King's High Court usually held at Westminster. 7. That the
King should have the profits of his Land for Life, and all his Goods and
Chattels, and should be fined at 10000 l. 8. He was also disabled to hold or
receive any Office under the King, or for the Commonwealth. 9. And lastly, Ever
to be held an infamous Person.
19 Jac. 1. Sir John Bennet, Id. 92.
for receiving Bribes, etc. Ordered by the Commons House to be safely kept by
the Sheriffs of London; to be put out, and no longer continue a Member of the
House; and a Warrant for a Writ for a new choice.

In the same Parliament, Id. 93.
Sir Robert Floyd, for being a Projector of a Patent for a Monopoly; resolved
una voce, That he was a Person unworthy to continue a Member of this House, and
adjudged presently to be put out.

3 Car. 1. Id. 94, 95.
Mr. John Harbor Recorder of Wells, for subscribing a Warrant for the
Quartering of Soldiers; suspended the House, and sequestered, till the Pleasure
of the House be known.

13 Febr. 1606. Id. 77, 78, 79.
Upon a Report made in the House of the Remembrances formerly set down of the
Particulars of a Conference; the Speaker offering to read the Paper, and being
interrupted by some Motions, and Disputes, Whether they should be read one by
one, and so debated, or all at once: in that Difference, one of the Knights for
Buckinghamshire, with a loud Voice (not standing up bare-headed, as the Order
is) pressed to have them read. The House observing his earnestness, and manner
of Sitting and Calling, for Order's sake, urged him to stand up, and speak; He
stood up, and pretending. to offer some Reasons, fell into an Invective against
the Scots, much distasting the House; yet out of a common Care to expedite the
weighty Business then in hand, his Speech was neglected, without Tax or
Censure. But on Monday following it was remembered, and his words of Offense
recited in particular: the Gentleman being absent, was sent for by the
Sergeant. The Sergeant having brought the Offender, it was moved he might be
heard at the Bar, which was assented to, and after he had spoken, he was
commanded to retire; and not long after was called in again to the Bar, where
kneeling, Mr. Speaker acquainted him, Since the Offense was so apparently
heinous, the House did not hold it fit that any Particulars should be named, or
to give any Reason of their Judgment; but the Order was, That he should be
carried to the Prison of the Tower, and there remain, during the Pleasure of
the House; and that he should be dismiss't from his Place of Knight of the
Shire for Bucks, and a new Writ to issue for a new Choice.

15 Febr. 18 Jac. 1. Id. 79.
A Bill being read the second Time, for the better Observation of the Sabbath,
one of the Members made an Invective against it, and something which seemed to
reflect on a Member of the House, who presented it, as savouring of a Puritan,
and factious Spirit; Exceptions were taken at the Words. After he had explained
himself, he was ordered to withdraw out of the House; and Debate being had, he
was called to the Bar, and upon his Knees he received the Judgment of the House
pronounced by the Speaker, That he should be discharged from the Service of the
House; with an Intimation that his Judgment was very merciful, for that the
House might, for so exorbitant an Offense, have imprisoned, and further
punished him.

3 Apr. 1604. Id. 80.
In a Debate upon a Bill, a Member of the House uttered some Speeches highly
distasting the House; but no Notice was taken of it till the Bill was
committed: and then the Words being repeated, he was called to the Bar, where
he made his Excuse, and was pardoned.

26 Apr. 1641. Ibid.
Great Offense was taken by the House at Words spoken by Mr. J. H. He was first
heard to explain himself, and then commanded to withdraw; and was called to the
Bar, and suspended the House, during that Session of Parliament.

27 Maij 1641. Ibid.
A Paper was brought in, containing words spoken by Mr. Tailor a Member of the
House, concerning the Passing the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford:
who being heard to explain himself, and then commanded to withdraw; after some
Debate in the House, it was resolved, That he should be expelled the House, be
made incapable of ever being a Member of this House, and should forthwith be
committed Prisoner to the Tower, there to remain, during the Pleasure of the
House, and to make an acknowledgment of his Offense, both at the Bar and at
Windsor publicly. And he was called to the Bar, and there kneeling, Mr.
Speaker pronounced the Sentence accordingly.

13 Maij, 12 Jac. 1. Id. 82.
Complaint was made, that some Indignities was offered to Sir R. Owen, when he
was in the Chair at the Committee (about the Bill for the due Observation of
the Sabbath Day) by Sir W. H. who told him, He was Partial; and by Sir R. K.
who took him by the hand, and told him, He would pull him out of the Chair,
that he should put no more Tricks upon the House. Sir W. H. being present, made
an Acknowledgment of his Error, which upon the Question was taken for a good
Satisfaction. Sir R. K. was ordered by the House to Acknowledge his Error at
the Bar.

19 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Some Speeches passing in the House privately between two of the Members, and
some Offense taken, which seems was not intended to be given: one of them in
going down the Parliament-stairs, struck the other; who thereupon caught at a
Sword in his Man's hand to strike with it. Upon Complaint made of it to the
House, they were both ordered to attend the House: being come, he who gave the
Blow was called in, and standing (not at the Bar, but) by the Bar, was examined
by Mr. Speaker, confessed the giving the Blow, insisted on the Provocation, and
withdrew: The other was also called in to relate the Truth. After he had made
the Relation, and was likewise withdrawn, and Testimony given by a Member of
the House, who heard the words; the House proceeded to Sentence against Mr. C.
who struck the blow. He being brought to the Bar, there on his knees he
received Judgment, which was pronounced by the Speaker, That he should be
committed to the Tower, during the Pleasure of the House.

1626. Nalson's Introduction 61.
Mr. Moor sent to the Tower for speaking out of Season.

November. 1641. Ordered, That Mr. Fitz-Williams Conisby shall be expelled this
House, 2 Nalson 513.
he being a Monopolist, and that the Speaker issue out a Warrant to the Clerk
of the Crown for a Writ for a new Election for a Member to serve for the County
of Hertford in his Place.

Mr. Hugh Benson a Member of the House, Id. 596.
having granted many Protections for Money, taking for some sixteen, seventeen,
forty shillings, and twenty for ten shillings a piece. Resolved upon the
Question, That Mr. Hugh Benson is unworthy and unfit to be a Member of this
House, and shall sit no longer as a Member of this House That he be forthwith
sent for as a Delinquent, by the Sergeant at Arms attending on this House.

Mr. Jervase Hollis expelled the House for a Speech (made with great strength
of Reason and Courage, Id. 710.
but more Heat than the Times would bear) was restored to his Place, to sit as
a Member of the House of Commons.

Sir William Widdrington and Sir Herbert Price sent to the Tower for bringing
in Candles against the Desire of the House. Id 272.


23 Eliz. 1580. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 309. Col. 2.
Ordered and Resolved by the House, That every Knight for the Shire that has
been absent this whole Session of Parliament, without Excuse allowed by this
House, shall have a Fine of Twenty pounds set upon him to her Majesty's Use;
and upon every Citizen or Burgess for the like, Ten pounds.

1 Jac. 1. 1603. Petyt's Miscell. Parl. 147.
Mr. Lawrence Hide (pretending Business of his Clients, etc.) made known to the
House, that he would go out of Town, and so took his leave in open Audience,
without the Assent or Leave of this House; which was taxed; and Mr. Speaker
warranted to write to him.

It was also moved, and resolved, Id. 149.
That Mr: Speaker should write another Letter to other Lawyers, being gone down
in the same Circuit, where Mr. Lawrence Hide was, advising them to attend it.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Elections of Members.
ALL Persons and Commonalties who shall be Summoned to the Parliament, 5 R. 2.
St. 2. c 4.
shall come, as has been accustomed of old time, and he that comes not,
having no reasonable Excuse, shall be amerced, and otherwise punished.

The King sends Writs to the Sheriffs of every Shire, Arc. Parl. 4 Vide the
Form of the Writ. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 37.
to admonish the whole Shire to choose two Knights of the Parliament in the
Name of the Shire, to hear, and reason, and to give their Advice and Consult in
the Name of the Shire, and to be present at the day.

At every County, Hakewel 47. Vid. Crompton's Juris. 3.
after the Delivery of the Parliament-Writ to the Sheriffs, Proclamation shall
be made in the full County, of the Day and Place of the Parliament; and that
all Men shall attend for the Election of the Knights for the same County for
the Parliament.

Where the Parliament Writ speaks de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius, Arc
Parl. 22 Vid. Cromp. 3.
this intended where the City is not a County in it self. If it be, the Writ
shall be directed to them, etc. as it is to Sheriffs of other Countries.

28 Eliz. 1586. Resolved, That the House of Commons are the only competent
Judges concerning Elections, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 396, 397.
which are duly made, which not.

18 Jac. 1. Petyt's Miscell. Parl. 111.
The Mayor of Winchelsey, for mis-behaving himself at the Election of
Parliament Men for their Town, and making a false Return, ordered to be
committed to the Sergeant, and to make a Submission at the Bar, and an
Acknowledgment in the Town, before the new Election.

20 Jac. 1. Id. 112.
The Mayor of Arundel, for mis-behaving himself in the Election, by putting the
Town to a great deal of Charges, not giving a due and general Warning, and
packing a number of Electors; ordered to be sent for, and adjudged to pay the
Charge to be set down by three of the Members.

Likewise to every City and Town, Arc. Parl. 4. Smith 's Commonwealth, 76.
which of ancient Time has been wont to find Burgesses of the Parliament, so
to make Election, that they might be present there at the first day of the
Parliament.

In 7 Hen. 4. 4 Inst. 10. 2 Inst. 169.
it is enacted, That Elections should be freely and indifferently made,
notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the contrary, sine Praece, without
any Prayer or Gift, and sine Praecepto, without Commandment of the King by
Writ, or otherwise, or of any other.

The King, 4 Inst 4.
de advisamento Concilii, resolving to have a Parliament, does out of the Court
of Chancery send out Writs of Summons, at the least Forty days before the
Parliament begin.

The third Estate is the Commons of the Realm, 4 Inst. 1. Crompton's Juris. 2 b.
whereof there be Knights of the Shires, or Counties; Citizens of Cities, and
Burgesses of Boroughs. All which are respectively elected by the Shires or
Counties, Cities and Boroughs, by Force of the King's Writ, ex debito
Justitiae, and none of them ought to be omitted.

These Represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, Ibid.
are trusted for them, and are in Number at this Time 493. Now above 500.

Whosoever is not a Lord of Parliament, Id. 2.
and of the Lord's House, is of the House of Commons, either in Person, or by
Representation, partly coagmentative, and partly representative.

Every Member of the House being a Counselor, Id. 3.
should have three Properties; First, to be without Malice or Envy. Secondly,
to be constant and inflexible. Thirdly, to be of ripe and perfect memory, as
appears in a Parliament Roll, Rot. Parl. 3 H. 6. n. 3.

The Knights of the Shire are chosen by all the Gentlemen and Teoman (i. e.
Freeholders) of the Shire, Arc. Parl. 5. Smyth 's Commonwealth 77.
present at the Day assigned for the Election: The Voice of any absent can be
counted for none.

Concerning the Writs for Summoning the Knights and Burgesses; and the Return
of the Sheriff, Vide Crompton's Juris. 1, 2.

Every Englishman is intended to be there present, Arc. Parl. 3.
either in Person, or by Procuration and Attorney: and the Consent of the
Parliament is taken to be every man's Consent.

These meeting at one Day, Id. 10. Smyth 's Commonwealth 77.
the two have most of their Voices, are chosen Knights of the Shire for that
Parliament. Likewise by the Plurality of the Voices of the Citizens and
Burgesses, the Burgesses are elected.

The Election ought to be in full County, 4 Inst. 48.
between Eight and Nine (says the Statute of 23 Hen. 6. c. 15.) No Election can
be made of any Knight of the Shire but between Eight and Eleven of the Clock in
the Forenoon, says the Lord Coke. But if the Election be begun within the Time,
and cannot be determined within those hours, the Election may be made after.

Any Election or Voices given, Id. 49.
before the Precept be read and published, are void, and of no Force: for the
same Electors, after the Precept read and published, may make a new Election,
and alter their Voices, Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti.

For the Election of the Knights, Id. 48.
if the Party or Freeholders demand the Poll, the Sheriff cannot deny the
Scrutiny, for he cannot discern who be Freeholders by the view: and though the
Party would wave the Poll, yet the Sheriff must proceed in the Scrutiny.

The Knights shall be returned into Chancery by Indenture sealed betwixt the
Sheriff and the Choosers of Knights for the Parliament. St. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 7 H.
4. c. 1. 23 H. 6. c. 15. Vid Crompton's Juris. 3. 2 Nalson 870.


Jan. 1641. In the Case of Mr. Downs returned a Burgess for Arundel, Ordered,
That he be presently sworn and admitted as a Member into the House, until such
Time as the Election be determined.

A Burgess elected for two several Boroughs may choose for which he will serve.
Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 430, 622. and passim. Petyt 's Miscel. Parliament. 112,
113.


21 Jac. 1. Edward Ingry Undersheriff of Cambridgeshire, for refusing the Poll
(declaring that Sir Thomas Steward promised to defend him against Sir John
Cutts) was brought to the Bar, and kneeling upon his Knees, adjudg'd to be
committed to the Serjeant's Custody, and to make a Submission at the Bar, and
at the next Quarter Sessions, and to acknowledge his Faults.

3 Car. 1. Id. 113. to 120.
Thomson Sheriff of York, for his hasty and precipitate Judgment of an
Election, and denying the Poll, being required; and Alderman Henlow for
advising and abetting the same; adjudged to stand committed to the Sergeant
during Pleasure, to acknowledge their Offenses at the Bar, to pay all due Fees,
to defray the Charge of Witnesses, to be assessed by four of the Committee, to
acknowledge their Faults on their Knees at the Bar, and read a Submission.

After the Precept of the Sheriff directed to the City or Berough for making of
Election; Id. 49.
there ought, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, to be given a
convenient Time for the Day of Election, and sufficient Warning given to the
Citizens and Burgesses that have Voices, that they may be present: otherwise
the Election is not good, unless such as have Voices do take Notice of
themselves, and be present at the Election. Hobart 15. Dungannon 's Case in
Ireland.


When there is a Corporation made by Charter; and by the same an Ordinance,
that the Provost and Burgesses only shall choose, etc. The Law shall vest this
Privilege in the whole Corporation in point of Interest, though the Execution of
it be committed to some Persons, Members of the same Corporation.

The King cannot grant a Charter of Exemption to any man, 4 Inst. 49.
to be freed from Election of Knight, Citizen, or Burgess of Parliament (as he
may do of some inferior Office or Places) because the Election of them ought to
be free, and his Attendance is for the Service of the whole Realm, and for the
Benefit of the King and his People; and the whole Commonwealth has an Interest
therein.

18 Eliz. 1575. Sir Simon d'Ewes, 244. Col. 2. Vide contra Sir Simon d'Ewes
Jour. 281, 282.
Resolved, That any Person being a Member of the House, and being either in
Service of Embassage, or else in Execution, or visited with Sickness, shall not
in any wise be amoved from their Place in this House, nor any other to be,
during such Time of Service, Execution, or Sickness, elected.

CHAP. IX. Who may be Electors.
THE Choosers of the Knights for the Parliament ought to be only of such
Persons as are resiant and dwelling within the said Shire. St. 1 H. 50. 1. 8 H.
6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2.


No Person shall be a Chooser of the Knights for the Parliament, St. 8 H. 6. c.
7. 33 H 8. c. 1. in Ireland.
except he has Freehold Lands or Tenements within the same County, to the
value of Forty shillings per Annum at the least, above all Charges.

The Sheriff has Power given him by the said Statute to examine upon Oath
every such Chooser, St. 8 H. 6. c. 7.
how much he may expend by the year, Crompt. Juris. 3.
if he doubt the value of it.

In many Cases Multitudes are bound by Acts of Parliament, 4 Inst. 4 5.
which are not Parties to the Elections of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses: as
all they that have no Freehold, or have Freehold in ancient Demesne, and all
Women having Freehold, or no Freehold, and Men within the Age of One and twenty
years, etc.

Every Inhabitant choosing or electing in any other manner (than is prescribed
by the Statute) to forfeit an hundred shillings, St. 33 H 8. c. 1. Ireland
half to the King, and half to him that will sue for it.

If any man keeps a Household in one County, Arc. Parl. 25.
and remains in Service with another Family in another County, yet he may be at
the choosing of Knights of the Shire where he keeps his Family; Crompton 's
Juris. 3. b.
for it shall be said in Law a Dwelling in either of those Counties. St. 23 H.
6. c. 15. Vid. Cromptons Jur. 3. b. 4 a.


If the Mayor and Bailiffs (or other Officer, where no Mayor is) shall return
other than those which be chosen by the Citizens and Burgesses of the Cities or
Boroughs where such Elections be, shall incur and forfeit to the King Forty
pounds; and moreover, shall forfeit to every person hereafter chosen Citizen or
Burgess to come to Parliament, and not by the same Mayor or Bailiff, etc.
returned; or to any other Person that will sue for it, Forty pounds.

CHAP. X. Who may be Elected.
5 Eliz. c. 1. NO Knight, Citizen, 4 Inst. 48. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 39, 40.
or Burgess can sit in Parliament, before he has taken the Oath of Supremacy,
and since the 7 Jac. 1. the Oath of Allegiance.

Because the words of the Writ for Election of Knights, 4 Inst. 10.
etc. were duos Milites gladiis cinctos, etc. it required an Act of Parliament,
that notable Esquires might be eligible.

Therefore the Statute says, St. 23 H. 6. c. 15.
The Knights of the Shires for the Parliament must be notable Knights, or such
Esquires, or Gentlemen, born of the same County, as be able to be Knights.

Any man may be chosen Knight, St. 18 Ed. 4. c. 2. in Ireland.
Citizen, or Burgess, though he be not dwelling within the same.

Every Knight, St. 33 H. 8. c. 1. in Ireland.
Citizen, and Burgess shall be resiant and dwelling within the Counties,
Cities, and Towns. Every Knight, Citizen, or Burgess taking it upon him, and
not chosen (in the manner prescribed by the Act of Parliament) to forfeit an
hundred pounds.

Si home n'esteant Inhabitant, Moor fo. 551 n. 741.
ne free del un Borough, poit Eslier, s'il voit seruer a lour Election, ou
nemy, pur le Borough.

If a man be not an Inhabitant, nor free of a Borough, he may choose if he will
serve at their Election, or not, for the Borough.

By the Statute none ought to be chosen a Burgess of a Town, Rush. Coll. Vol.
1. 689.
in which he does not inhabit; but the usage of Parliament is contrary. But if
Information be brought upon the said Statute against such a Burgess, I think
that the Statute is a good Warrant for us to give Judgment against him, by
Whitlock.

The King cannot grant a Charter of Exemption to any Man to be freed from
Election of Knight, 4 Inst. 49.
Citizen, or Burgess of the Parliament.

A Person Outlawed in a Personal Cause may be a Burgess. Towns. Coll. 63, 64.
Vide John Smiths Ca. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 48. Col. 2. 480. Col. 1. Vide Sir
Simon d'Ewes Jour. 481. Col. 2.


If Exception be taken to such an Election, and an Outlawry alleged to
disinable him, the Stat. 23 Hen. 6. c. 15. will disinable most of this House,
for they ought to be Burgesses resident.

Though the Common Law does disinable the Party, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal 482.
Col. 1
yet the Privilege of the House being urged, that prevails over the Law.

A man Attainted, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 482. Col. 1.
Outlawed, or Excommunicated, or not lawfully elected, if he be returned, out
of all doubt is a lawful Burgess.

A Knight Banneret, 4 Inst 46.
being no Lord of Parliament, is eligible to be Knight, Citizen, or Burgess of
the House of Commons, being under the Degree of a Baron, who is the lowest
Degree of the Lord's House.

An Earl's Son may be a Member of the House of Commons. Sir Simon d'Ewes
Journal, 244. Col. 2.


One under the Age of One and twenty years is not eligible. 4 Inst. 47.
Neither can any Lord of Parliament sit there till he be full One and and
twenty years.

An Alien cannot be elected of the Parliament, Ibid.
because he is not the King's Liege Subject: and so it is, albeit he be made
Denizon by Letters Patents, etc. But if an Alien be naturalized by Parliament,
then he is eligible to this, or any other Place of Judicature.

No Alien denizated ought to sit here, Petyt 's Miscel. Parl. 175.
per Sir Edward Coke.

Resolved upon the Question, Ibid.
That the Election of Mr. Walter Steward, being no natural born Subject, is
void, and a Warrant to go for a new Writ.

None of the Judges of the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, 4 Inst. 47.
or Barons of the Exchequer, that have Judicial Places, can be chosen Knight,
Citizen, or Burgess of Parliament, as it is now holden, because they are
Assistants in the Lord's House. Yet read Parl Roll 31 H. 6.

But any that have Judicial Places in other Courts Ecclesiastical or Civil,
being no Lords of Parliament, Ibid.
are eligible.

None of the Clergy, Moor fo. 783. n. 1083. 4 Inst. 47.
though he be of the lowest Order, is eligible to be Knight, Citizen, or Burgess
of Parliament, because they are of another Body, viz. of the Convocation.

The Clergy of the Convocation-House are no Part or Member of the Parliament.
Hakewel 59. Vide Fox's Book of Martyrs f 1639.


A man Attainted of Treason or Felony, 4 Inst 48.
etc. is not eligible. For he ought to be magis idoneus, discretus, and
sufficiens.

Mayors and Bailiffs of Towns Corporate are eligible. 4 Inst. 48. Vide contra
Brook Abridg tit. Parl. 7.


At a Parliament holden 38 H. 8. it was admitted and accepted, That if a
Burgess of Parliament be made a Mayor of a Town, Crompt. 16.
or have Judicial Jurisdiction, or another is sick: that these are Causes
sufficient to choose others.

Any of the Profession of the Common Law, 4 Inst. 48.
and which is in Practice of the same, is eligible.

By special Order of the House of Commons the Attorney General is not eligible
to be a Member of the House of Commons. Ibid.


Egerton Solicitor la Roign fuit command d'Attender en l'Vpper House, Moor f.
551 n 741. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 441. Col 2 442. Col. 1.
and attend 3 Jours, and apres fuit eslie Burgess pur Reading. Et fuit reteign
quia il fuit primes attendant en l'Vpper Meson, devant que il fuit eslie un
Member de lower Meson.

Egerton the Queen's Solicitor was commanded to attend in the Upper House, and
did attend three days, and afterward was chosen Burgess for Reading. And he was
retained, because he was first attendant in the Upper House, before he was
chosen a Member of the Lower House.

Onslow Solicitor esteant Burgess de lower Meson, Moor f. 551 n 741. Vide Sir
S. d'Ewes Jour. 121. Col. 1, 2.
fuit command d'attend en upper. Le lower Meson vient, and luy challenge, and
demand d'aver luy; and fuit grant, quia il fuit Member de lower Meson, devant
que il fuit command per Breve d'attend en le upper.

Onslow the Solicitor being a Burgess of the Lower House, was commanded to
attend in the Upper. The Lower House come, and challenge him, and demand to
have him; and it was granted, because he was a Member of the Lower House,
before he was commanded by Writ to serve in the Upper.

18 Eliz. 1585. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 249. Col. 1.
Concluded by the House, That Mr. Sergeant Jeffreys, being one of the Knights
returned for Sussex, may have Voice or give his Attendance in this House, as a
Member of the same, notwithstanding his Attendance in the Upper House, as one
of the Queen's Sergeants, for his Counsel there, where he has no Voice indeed,
nor is any Member of the same.

23 Eliz. 1580. Id. 281. Col. 1.
Popham Solicitor General, upon demand made by the House, was restored to them
by the Lords, because he was a Member of the House of Commons, and they
possessed of him before he was So licitor, or had any Place of Attendance in
the Upper House.

No Sheriff shall be chosen for a Knight of Parliament, Book of Extr. 411.
Crompton 's Jur. 3. b.
nor for a Burgess.

1 Car. 1. 4 Inst. 48.
The Sheriff of the County of Buckingham was chosen Knight for the County of
Norfolk, and returned into the Chancery; and had the Privilege of Parliament
allowed to him, by the Judgment of the whole House of Commons.

Vide de hoc Pro and Con, Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal 38, 436, 624, 625.

1 Jac. 1. Sess 2. Scobel 96.
Sir John Peyton Knight. returned the last Session, and since chosen Sheriff;
Resolved upon the Question, That he shall attend his Service here.

The personal Residence and Attendance of Sheriffs is required within their
Bailywicks, Rush. Coll. Vol. 1. 684, 685.
during the Time of their Sheriffwick. Mr. Walter Long, being Sheriff of Wilts,
was after chosen Citizen for Bath: and for that Offense was committed, and
fined ( viz. because he sat and served in Parliament.)

Sir Andrew Noel Knight, Towns. Coll. 185. Vid. de hoc Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 38.
Col. 1, 2. and 624. Col. 2.
Sheriff of Rutland, returned himself Knight, and adjudged a void Return, and a
Warrant ordered for a new Election. For (said Sergeant Harris) we know, in Law,
that a man cannot make an Indenture to himself; no more can he here, between
himself and the County; for there are required two Persons. Yet Sir Edward
Hobby said, That the House might well receive him, and vouched a Precedent,
when the Bailiffs of Southwark returned themselves Burgesses, and were received.

The Fee for the Knight of any County is, 4 Inst 46.
four shillings per diem, and every Citizen or Burgess is to have two shillings
per diem.

Where one Person is chosen and returned to serve in several Places; Scobel 18.
Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim.
it is in his Election to make his Choice in the House in his own Person, for
what Place he will serve, and wave the other Election, so as a Writ may issue
for a new Election, that the number may be full.

CHAP. XI. Returns of Sheriffs, etc. And Amendments of Returns.
COncerning the Punishment of Sheriffs for their Negligence in returning of
Writs, 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4.
or for leaving out of their Returns any City or Borough, which ought to send
Citizens and Burgesses. See the Stat.

Every Sheriff, St. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 23 H. 6. c. 15. Vid. Cromton's Juris. 3.
Hakewel 48.
who does not make true Return of Elections of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, to come to Parliament, shall forfeit an hundred pounds to the King,
and an hundred pounds to the Party injured; and be imprisoned for a Year
without Bail or Mainprize. And every Mayor or Magistrate of a Town so
oftending, shall pay Forty pounds to the King, and Forty pounds to the Party.
This Action to be within Three months after the Parliament commenced, or by any
other man who will.

If he so do not, Hakewel 49. Vid. Crompton's Juris. 3. b.
and prosecute his Suit with Effect and without Fraud; any other man who will,
may have the said Suit for the said hundred pounds, as the Knight had, and
Costs of Suit also shall be awarded to the said Knight, or any other who will
sue in his behalf.

The Sheriff shall make a good Return of his Writ, Hakew. 51.
and of every Return of the Mayor and Bailiff, or Bailiffs, where no Mayor is,
to him made.

The Burgesses of Leskard in Cornwall being elected, Towns. Coll. 63.
the Town refused to deliver up their Indenture to the Sheriff; but the Party
elected made his Indenture, and delivered it to the Clerk of the Crown, who
filed it with the rest of the Indentures returned by the Sheriff, the Sheriff
having endorsed it upon his Writ: but this Indenture was never executed by the
Sheriff, nor returned: and yet this Return was held by the Committees to be
good.

Jan. 1641. Ordered, 2 Nalson 870.
That the High Sheriff of the County of Sussex, who has returned two Indentures
for the Town of Arundel, shall be summoned to appear here at the Bar, to amend
his Return.

35 Eliz. 1592. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 490. Col. 2.
It was said by the Speaker, No Return can be amended in this House: For the
Writ and the Return are in Chancery, and must be amended there.

Every Sheriff, or other Officer, St. 33 H. 8. c. 1. in Ireland.
returning any Knight, Citizen, or Burgess chosen in any other manner (than is
prescribed in the Statute) to forfeit an hundred pounds.

If one be duly elected Knight, 4 Inst. 49. It cites in the Margin Rot. Parl. 5
H. 4. n. 38.
Citizen, or Burgess, and the Sheriff return another; the Return must be
reformed and amended by the Sheriff, and he that is duly elected, must be
inserted: for the Election in these Cases is the Foundation, and not the Return.

18 Jac. 1. Scobel 115.
The Sheriff of Leicestershire having returned Sir Thomas Beaumont; upon Report
from the Committee for Elections that Sir George Hastings was duly chosen; the
Sheriff was ordered to return Sir George Hastings to the Clerk of the Crown,
and he to accept it, and file it.

21 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Upon Report from the Committee of Privileges, That in the Election of Mr.
John Maynard for Chippingham, John Maynard was chosen, but by a Mistake Charles
was afterward written in stead of John: It was Resolved, The Return should be
amended, without a new Writ, and that the Bailiff should do it, and not the
Clerk of the Crown, and that it should be sent down to the Bailiff in the
Country, and he to Return John Maynard Esquire the first Burgess.

1 Febr. 1640. It being Resolved, Ibid.
That the Election of Mr. Earl for one of the Burgesses of Wareham, is a good
Election: Ordered, That the Officer, who was the Officer when the Return was
made, or his Deputy, or the Electors, should amend the Return. But the next day
it was Ordered, That Edward Harbin, the late Mayor of Wareham 's Deputy, should
come to the Bar of the House, and amend the Return.

20 Febr. 1640. Id. 116.
The Bailiff of Midhurst in Sussex came to the Bar (being sent for by Order of
the House) and amended one of the Indentures of Return of Burgesses for that
Town, and the other was taken off the File.

If a Sheriff shall return one for a Knight of the Shire, Sir Simon d'Ewes
Journ. 283. Col. 2.
who was unduly, or not at all elected; yet he that is so returned, remains a
Member of the House till his Election be declared void.

CHAP. XII. Election of the Speaker.
THE Speaker is he that does prefer and commend the Bills exhibited into the
Parliament, Arc. Parl. 3. Smyth's Commonwealth 75.
and is the Mouth of the Parliament.

It is true, 4 Inst. 8. Smyth's Commonwealth 75.
the Commons are to choose their Speaker: but seeing that after their Choice
the King may refuse him; for avoiding of expense of Time and Contestation, the
Use is (as in the Conje d'Eslier of a Bishop) that the King does name a
difereet and learned Man, whom the Commons elect.

But without their Election no Speaker can be appointed for them, 4 Inst. 8.
because he is their Mouth, and trusted by them, and so necessary, as the House
of Commons cannot sit without him.

And therefore a grievous Sickness is a good Cause to remove the Speaker, and
choose another. Id. 8.
So in 1 Hen. 4. Sir John Cheyny discharged: and so William Sturton. So in 15
Hen. 6. Sir John Tyrrel removed.

The first Day each Member is called by his Name, Modus tenend. Parl. 35.
every one answering for what Place he serves: that done, they are willed to
choose their Speaker, who (though nominated by the King's Majesty) is to be a
Member of that House. Their Election being made, he is presented by them to the
King sitting in Parliament. 35. So Sir Thomas Gargrave 1 Eliz. So Christopher
Wray 13 Eliz. So Robert Bell 14 Eliz. So John Puckering 27 Eliz. So George
Snagg 31 Eliz. So Edw. Coke 35 Eliz. So Yelverton 39 Eliz. So John Crook 43
Eliz. So Sir Thomas Crew 19 Jac. 1. So Sir Heneage Finch 1 Car. 1 cum multis
aliis.

The Speaker ought to be religious, Towns. Coll. 174.
honest, grave, wise, faithful, and secret. These Virtues must concur in one
Person able to supply that Place.

The long Use has made it so material, Elsyng. 154
that without the King's Commandment or Leave, they cannot choose their Speaker.

Surely the Election of the Speaker was anciently free to the Commons, Id. 155.
to choose whom they would of their own House: which appears in this, that the
King never rejected any whom they made Choice of.

Vide contra Sir Simon d'Ewes Journ. 42. Col. 1. where he says, That 28 Hen.
6. Sir John Popham was discharged by the King: and thereupon the Commons chose
and presented William Tresham Esquire who made no Excuse.

The Cause of Summons being declared by the King or Chancellor; Elsyng. 151
Cook 12, 115. Smyth's Commonwealth 79.
the Lord Chancellor confers first with his Majesty, and then in his Name
commands the Commons to assemble in their House, and to choose one of their
Members to be their Speaker, and to present him to his Majesty on a Day certain.

Upon which the Commons shall presently assemble themselves in the Lower House,
Co. 12.115.
and he is to be a Member of their Parliament.

The Commons being thereupon assembled in their House; Elsyng. 152 Vid. Towns.
Coll. 174.
one of the Commons puts the rest in mind of their Charge given in the Upper
House, touching the choosing of a Speaker; and then does of himself commend one
unto them, and desires their Opinions to be signified by their Affirmative, or
Negative Voices: and if any Man stand up, and speak against him so named,
alleging some Reason, he ought to name another.

Some Person (when the generality of Members are come, Scobel 3. Vid. Towns.
174. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim.
and sit) does put the House in mind, That for their better proceeding in the
weighty Affairs they are come about, their first Work is to appoint a Speaker;
and re-commends to the House some Person of Fitness and Ability for that
Service and Dignity, which usually has been one of the long Robe.

If more than one Person be named for Speaker, Scobel 3.
and it be doubtful, who is more generally chosen; sometime one of the Members
standing in his Place, does by Direction or Leave of the House, put a Question
for determining the same, or the Clerk at the Board.

So it was in the first Session 1 Jac. 1. Scobel 4.
when Sir Edward Philips the King's Sergeant at Law was first named by Mr.
Secretary Herbert as fit for that Place: and the names of others were
mentioned, but the more general Voice run upon Sir Edward Philips; and a
Question being put, Co. 12.115. Vid. Towns. 175. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes, Jour.
passim
he was by general Acclamation chosen Speaker.

When the Speaker is chosen, he in his Place, where he first shall sit down,
shall disable himself, and shall pray, That they would proceed to a new
Election.

When it appears who is chosen, Elsyng. 153 Vid. Towns. 175. Vide Sir S.
d'Ewes Jour. passim
after a good Pawse he stands up, and shows what Abilities are required in
a Speaker; and that there are diverse among them well furnished with such
Qualities, etc. disableth himself, and prays a new Choice to be made; which
is commonly answered with a full Consent of Voices upon his Name.

If the House generally give a Testimony of their Approbation, Elsyng. 153 4
Inst 8. Vid. Towns. 175. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim
two of the Members (which for the most Part were of the Council, or chief
Officers of the Court) going to the Gentleman named, and agreed to be Speaker,
take him from his Place, and lead him unto the Chair ( Elsyng says, take him by
the Arms, and lead him to the Chair) where being set, they return to their
Places.

After a while he rises, and uncovered, Elsyng. 153
with humble Thanks for their good Opinion of him, promises his willing
Endeavors to do them Service.

After he is put into the Chair, Co. 12.115. 4 Inst. 8.
then he shall pray them, That with their Favors, he may disable himself to the
King, that so their Expectations may not be deceived.

Then some (and commonly he that first spoke) puts them in mind of the Day to
present him, Vid. Towns. 175. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour passim
etc. Elsyng. 153 So it was done by Sir William Knowls the Controller in the 43
Eliz.

Two or three Days after the Commons shall present the Speaker in the Upper
House to the King, Co. 12.115. Rush. Coll. 480. Smyth's Commonwealth 80.
where he shall disable himself again to the King, and in most humble manner
shall entreat the King to command them to choose a more sufficient man.

At the Day appointed, Flsyng. 156 Vid. Towns. 175.
his Majesty sitting on his Royal Throne, and the Lords all in their Robes, the
Commons are called in, who being come, the Speaker is brought between two of
them, with low Obeisance to the Bar, and so presented at the Bar to his Majesty.

The Speaker having made his Excuse, the Lord Chancellor consers with the King,
and then tells him, That his Majesty does approve the Commons Choice, and
will not allow of his Excuse. Then the Speaker proceeds to his Speech. But
anciently he made first a Protestation; as you may read in Elsyng. 159, 160.

After he is allowed by the King, Co. 12.115. Vide Rush. Coll. 117. Vi. Smyths
Commonwealth 80.
then he shall make an Oration, and in the Conclusion, shall pray the four
usual Petitions.

The Speaker's Speech is what it pleases himself (having no Direction at all
from the Commons touching the same) making Petition to the King on behalf of
the Commons, Elsyng. 164
some in general words for all their ancient Privileges, and some in
particular.

The Protestation of the Speaker consists of three Parts. 4 Inst. 8. Vid.
Towns. Coll. 4. and 54 Rush. Coll. 484. Vide Elsyng. 164.
First, That the Commons in this Parliament may have free Speech, as by Right
and of Custom they have used, and all their ancient and just Privileges and
Liberties allowed to them. Secondly, That in any Thing he shall deliver in the
Name of the Commons (if he shall commit any Error) no Fault may be arrected to
the Commons, and that he may resort again to the Commons for declaration of
their true Intent, and that his Error may be pardoned. Thirdly, That as often
as necessity for his Majesty's Service and the Good of the Commonwealth shall
require, he may by Direction of the House of Commons, have Access to his Royal
Person.

Some add a Fourth, Modus tenend. Parl. 35.
That they may have Power to Correct any of their own Members that are
Offenders.

And some make a Fifth, Id. 62.
That the Members, their Servants, Chattels, and Goods necessary, may be free
from all Arrests.

Though the Speaker does (upon his being approved of by the King) make it his
humble Petition to have Liberty of Speech allowed the Commons; Sir R. Atkin's
Argument, etc. 33.
from whence Dr. Heylin and Sir Robert Filmer, and others infer, That the
Commons enjoy that Liberty by the King's Grace and Favor: yet they are clearly
answered by the words that accompany that humble Petition, he prays That they
may be allowed that Freedom, as of Right and Custom they have used, and all
their ancient, and just Privileges, and Liberties. So that this from the
Speaker is a Petition of Right.

The Speaker having ended his Oration, Elsyng. 165
the Lord Chancellor confers again with the King, and makes Answer thereunto in
his Majesty's Name, granting his Requests, etc.

That humble and modest way of the Peoples addressing to their Sovereign, Sir
R. Atkyns Argument 33.
either for the making Laws, which has been very ancient, or for granting
Privileges (by the Speaker of the Commons) shows great Reverence, and becomes
the Majesty of the Prince so to be addressed to: but let it not be made an
Argument, that either the Laws thereupon made, or the Privileges so allowed,
are precarious, and merely of Favor, and may be refused them.

The Oration being answered by the Lord Chancellor, Co. 12.115. 4 Inst. 10.
and his Petitions allowed, the Speaker and the Commons shall depart to the
House of Commons, where the Speaker in the Chair shall request the Commons,
That inasmuch as they have chosen him for their Mouth, they would assist him,
and favorably accept his Proceedings, which do proceed out of an unfeigned and
sincere Heart to do them service. Scobel 5. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 43, 44.


The first Business in the House is ordinarily to read a Bill that was not
passed in the last Parliament preceding, or some new Bill, as in that of 10
Jac. 1. But on that Day, before that was done, there was a Motion made for
Privilege of Sir Thomas Shirley, who was chosen a Member to serve in that
Parliament, but detained by an Arrest. Upon which a Habeas Corpus was awarded;
and the Sergeant that Arrested him, and his Yeoman sent for, and a Committee
for Elections and Privileges chosen.

CHAP. XIII. Business of the Speaker.
THE Mace is not carried before the Speaker, Elsyng. 153.
until his Return, being presented to the King, and allowed of. Modus tenend.
Part. 36. Smith's Commonwealth, 84.


The Speaker sits in a Chair placed somewhat high, to be seen and heard the
better of all: the Clerks of the House sit before him in a lower Seat, who read
Bills, etc.

The Speaker's Office is, Modus tenend. Parl. 37. Smyth's Commonwealth 86.
when a Bill is read, as briefly as he may, to declare the Effects thereof to
the House.

That Day that the Speaker, being approved by the King, Haktwel 138, 139. Sir
Simon d'Ewes Jour. 43, 44.
comes down into the Commons House to take his Place, the Custom is, to read
for that time only one Bill left unpast the last Sessions, and no more, to give
him Seisin, as it were, of his Place.

1 Jac. 1. Scobel 19.
Sir Edward Philips was chosen Speaker, and the same Day (before he was
presented to the King) he signed a Warrant as Speaker, by Command of the House,
for Election of another Person in the Place of Sir Francis Bacon, being chosen
in two Places.

A general Order has usually been made in the Beginning of the Session, Id. 20.
to authorize the Speaker to give Warrants for new Writs in Case of Death of
any Member, or of double Returns, where the Party makes his Choice openly in
the House, during that Session.

Where such general Order is not made, Ibid.
Writs have issued by Warrant of the Speaker, by Virtue of Special Order, upon
Motion in the House.

Oftentimes on the first Day of the Meeting of the House, Scobel 18.
as soon as the Speaker has been approved, and sometime before, such Persons
as have been doubly returned, have made their Choice.

43 Eliz. Mr. Johnson said, Towns. 191 192.
The Speaker may, ex Officio, send a Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown, who is
to certify the Lord Keeper, and so make a new Warrant.

The Speaker said, Ibid. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 627. Col. 2.
That I may inform you of the Order of the House, the Warrant must go from the
Speaker to the Clerk of the Crown, who is to inform the Lord Keeper, and then
to make a new Writ.

This Proposition I hold, Ibid. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 627. Col. 2.
That our Speaker is to be commanded by none, neither to attend any, but the
Queen, per Sir Edward Hobby.

The Warrant is to be directed to the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, Socbel
20. Vid. Towns. Coll. 216, 217. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim Scobel 65.
Petyt's Miscell. Parl. 140.
by Order of Parliament 13 November. 1601.

May 1604. Resolved, That no Speaker from henceforth shall deliver a Bill, of
which the House is possessed, to any whosoever, without leave and allowance of
the House, but a Copy only. It is no Possession of a Bill, except the same be
delivered to the Clerk to be read, or that the Speaker read the Title of it in
the Chair.

5 Car. 11. 1628. Rush. Coll. 660.
The Speaker being moved to put the Question then proposed by the House, he
refused to do it, and said, That he was otherwise Commanded from the King. 2
Martij, The Speaker was urged to put the Question; who said, I have a Command
from the King to adjourn till the Tenth of March, and to put no Question; and
endeavoring to go out of the Chair, was notwithstanding held by some Members
(the House foreseeing a Dissolution) till a Protestation was published.

When the Queen made an Answer to the Speaker's Speech, he, Towns. Coll. 263.
Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 659. Col. 1, 2.
with the whole House fell upon their Knees, and so continued, till she bid
them stand up.

35 Eliz. Mr. Speaker was sent for to the Court, Towns. Coll. 61.
where the Queens Majesty her self gave him Commandment what to deliver to the
House.

The Speaker commanded upon his Allegiance not to read any Bills touching
Matters of State or Reformation in Causes Ecclesiastical. Id. 63.


16 Car. 1. 1640. Apr. 16. Rush. Coll. 1127.
The Speaker received Command from the King, That his Majesty's Speech should
be Entered in the Journal of the Commons House of Parliament: whereupon the
House passed a declarative Vote, That they did not expect that this should be
performed by other Speakers, but upon the like special Command, or by the Order
of the House.

Eodem, Id. 1137.
Resolved, That it was a Breach of Privilege of the House for the Speaker not
to obey the Commands of the House; and that it appeared the Speaker did Adjourn
the House by the Command of the King, without the Consent of the House, which
is also a Breach of the Privilege; it was therefore ordered that this should
be presented to his Majesty.

1 Jac. 1. 1603. Ordered, Scobel 65. Petyt 's Miscel. Parl. 140.
That it should be precisely registered as the Judgment of the House, that no
Speaker from henceforth should deliver a Bill, whereof the House stands
possessed, to any whomsoever, without allowance and leave: but that he had
Power, and might either show it, or deliver a Copy (if it seems meet to him.)

But yet it was admitted, Id. 142.
that a Copy may be delivered, or it may be showed to his Majesty.

If upon Division of the House it appear that the Members are equal; Hakewel
145.
the Speaker has always the Casting Voice upon all Questions.

44 Eliz. Upon the Question, Towns. 321, 322. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 683.
Col. 2.
Whether Mr. Speaker had a Voice. It was said by Sir Walter Raleigh (and
confirmed by the Speaker himself) That the Speaker is foreclosed of his Voice,
by taking of that Place, which it had pleased them to impose upon him, and that
he was to be indifferent to both Parties. He was seconded by Mr. Secretary
Cecil.

The Speaker has no Voice in the House, Arc. Parl. 18. Smyth 's Commonwealth
86.
nor will they suffer him to speak in any Bill, to move, or dissuade it.

CHAP. XIV. Order to be observed in the House.
THE Litany is read the first Thing, Towns. 54.
after the Speaker is set in the Chair. So agreed upon the Motion of Mr.
Speaker 13 Eliz. 1571.

When the Speaker is set in his Chair, Scobel 6.
every Member is to sit in his Place, with his Head covered.

No Member in coming into the House, Ibid.
or in removing from his Place, is to pass between the Speaker, and any Member
then speaking; nor may cross, or go overthwart the House, or pass from one side
to the other, while the House is sitting.

23 Eliz. 1580. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 282. Col. 2.
Upon a Motion made by Sir James Croft Controller of her Majesty's Household,
and allowed of by the whole House, That Mr. Speaker and the Residue of the
House of the better sort of Calling, do always at the rising of the House
depart, and come forth in comely and civil sort, for the Reverence of the House,
in turning about with a low Courtesy, as they make at their coming into the
House, and not unseemly to thrust, and throng out.

No Member is to come into the House with his Head covered, Scobel 6.
nor to remove from one Place to another with his Hat on, nor is to put on his
Hat in coming in, or removing, until he be set down in his Place.

39 Eliz. None to enter the House with his Spurs on; Towns. 101, 181. Vid Sir
S. d'Ewes Jour. 550. Col. 1. 623. Col. 1.
nor until he pay the Serjeant's Fees.

While the House is sitting, no man ought to speak or whisper to another, to
the end the House may not be interrupted, Scobel 6. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Journ
487. Col. 1.
when any are speaking; but every one is to attend unto what is spoken; in
which Case Penalties have been imposed.

When any Member intends to speak, Ibid.
he is to stand up in his Place uncovered, and address himself to the Speaker;
who usually calls such Person by his Name, that the House may take notice who
it is that speaks.

Mr. Downold going about to speak about a Bill, Towns. Coll. 224.
the Speaker interrupted him, and arose, without further hearing him, which he
took in great Disgrace, and told him, He would complain of him the next Sitting.

If any man in this House speak wisely, Towns. Coll. 252.
we do him great wrong to interrupt him: if foolishly, let us hear him out, we
shall have the more Cause to tax him, per Secretary Cecil.

If more than one stand up at once, Scobel 7. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 434.
Col. 1, 2.
the Speaker is to determine who was first up; and he is to speak, and the
other sit down, unless he, who was first up, sit down again, and give way to
the other; or that some other Member stand up, and acquaint the House, that
another was up before him, whom the Speaker calls, and the House adjudge it so.

While one is speaking, Ibid. Vid. Towns. Coll. 205.
none else is to stand up, or interrupt him, until he have done speaking, and
be set down, and then the other may rise up and speak, observing the Rules.

21 Junij 1604. Ibid.
It was agreed for an Order, That when Mr. Speaker desires to speak, he ought
to be heard without interruption, if the House be silent, and not in Dispute.

When the Speaker stands up, Ibid.
the Member standing up, ought to sit down.

27 April 1604. Scobel 8.
Rule, That if any Question be upon a Bill, the Speaker is to explain; but not
to sway the House with Arguments or Dispute.

4 Junij 1604. Scobel 8. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 335. Col 1. 640. Col. 2.
Agreed for an Order, That whosoever hisseth, or disturbeth any man in his
Speech, by coughing, spitting, etc. shall answer it at the Bar.

7 Maij 1607. Ibid.
Ordered upon the Question, That in going forth, no man shall stir, until Mr.
Speaker do arise and go before, and then all the rest to follow after him.

He, Co. 12.116. Smith's Commonwealth 84.
who first stands up to speak, he shall first speak, without any Disserence of
Persons.

If in Debate words be let fall, that give Offense, Exceptions should be taken
the same day, and before such Member go out of the House: or he, who is
offended, may move, that such Person may not go out of the House till he has
given Satisfaction in what was by him spoken. And in such Case, Scobel 81.
after the present Debate is over, the words must be repeated by the Person
excepting: and in case he desire, or the House command him, he is to explain
himself, standing in his Place; which if he refuse to do, or the House be not
satisfied with such Explanation, then he is to withdraw.

43 Eliz. It was said by Secretary Cecil, Towns. Coll. 199. Vide Sir Simon
d'Ewes Jour. 630. Col. 2.
If any that sit next the Door, be desirous to sit next the Chair, to give his
Opinion; I will not only give him my Place, but thank him to take my Charge: We
that sit here, take your Favors out of Courtesy, not out of Duty.

Though Freedom of Speech and Debates be an undoubted Privilege of the House,
Scobel 72.
yet whatsoever is spoken in the House, is subject to the Censure of the House.

Febr. 19. 1592. Towns. Coll. 51.
35 Eliz. After the Names of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses were read and
declared to the Clerk of the Crown, and entered in his Book, they entered into
the House.

The House being set, Ibid. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim
the Earl of Derby, High Steward for this Parliament, came into the House to
take their Oaths. All being removed into the Court of Requests, the Lord High
Steward sitting at the Door, called the Knights and Burgesses of every County,
according to the Letters of their Names in the Alphabet. Alphabetically every
one answered, as he was called, and having answered, departed thence to the
Parliament House Door, and there took the Oath of Supremacy, given him by one
of the Queens. Privy Counselors.

The Fee for entering his Name into the Serjeant's Book is Two shillings, Towns.
Coll. 51.
the Rewards to the Door-Keepers, Three shillings and eight pence, the Fee for
returning the Indenture, Two shillings.

Febr. 7. Id. 15.
1588. 31 Eliz. This Day the House was called over, and all those that did then
sit in the House, and were present at the calling of the same, did thereupon
severally answer to their Names, and departed out of the House, as they were
called.

31 Eliz. 1588. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 432. Col. 2.
By Consent of the House (upon the motion of Sir Edward Hobby) admonition was
given by Mr. Speaker, That Speeches used in this House by the Members of the
same, be not any of them made or used as Table talk, or in any wise delivered
in Notes of writing to any person or persons whatsoever, not being Members of
this House, for that they are the Common Counsel of the Realm.

CHAP. XV. Orders of the House.
2 Maij 1610. Scobel 32.
A Member speaking, and his Speech, seeming impertinent, and there being much
hissing and spitting, it was conceived for a Rule, That Mr. Speaker may stay
impertinent Speeches.

18 Maij 1604. Ibid.
It was Resolved, That eight engrossed Bills should be read the next day, half
an hour after eight. The next day about that Time, a Member entering into a long
Discourse, De mera Fide, and sola Fide, etc. was interrupted; and the Question
offered, Whether he should go on, in respect of the Order. But it was agreed
for a Rule, That if any man speak not to the Matter in Question, the Speaker is
to moderate.

April 1604. Idem 31. Vid. Towns. Coll. 276.
He that digresseth from the Matter, to fall upon the Person, ought to be
suppressed by the Speaker.

17 April 1604. Ibid.
If any superfluous Motion or tedious Speech be offered in the House, the Party
is to be directed, and ordered by the Speaker.

No reviling or nipping words must be used, Smith's Commonwealth, 85, 86.
for then all the House will cry, It is against the Order. And if any speak
unreverently or seditiously against the Prince, or the Privy Council, I have
seen them not only interrupted, but it has been moved after to the House, and
they have sent them to the Tower.

If any man speak impertinently, Scobel 33.
or beside the Question in hand, it stands with the Orders of the House, for
Mr. Speaker to interrupt him, and to know the Pleasure of the House, Whether
they will further hear him.

24 Jan. 23 Eliz. Mr. Carleton endeavoring to speak contrary to the Sense of
the House, Id. 31. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 284.
was interrupted: and offering to speak again, urging it was for the Liberty of
the House; the Speaker and the House did stay him.

When a Motion has been made, Id. 21.
the same may not be put to the Question, until it be debated, or at least have
been seconded by one or more Persons standing up in their Places: and then the
same may be put to the Question, if the Question be called for by the House, or
their general Sense be known; which the Speaker is to demand, unless any Member
stand up to speak.

When a Motion has been made that Matter must receive a Determination by the
Question, Ibid.
or be laid aside by the general Sense of the House, before another be
entertained.

28 June 1604. Ibid.
A Motion being made, another interposed a Speech tending to another Business:
but it was answered, That there was no Precedent for that Speech to be used,
before the other Motion, which was made before, had received an Answer, and an
End. And the House did accordingly determine the first Motion in the first
Place.

4 Dec. Ordered, Scobel 22.
That till the Business in Agitation be ended, no new Motion of any new Matter
shall be made without leave of the House.

If the Matter moved do receive a Debate pro and contra, Ibid.
in that Debate none may speak more than once to the Matter: and after some
Time spent in that Debate, the Speaker collecting the Sense of the House upon
the Debate, is to reduce the same into a Question, which he is to propound, to
the end the House in their Debate afterward may be kept to the Matter of the
Question, if the same be approved by the House to contain the Substance of the
former Debate.

After such Question is propounded, Ibid.
any Member may offer his Reasons against that Question in whole, or in part;
which may be laid aside by a general Consent of the House, without a Question
put.

But without such general Consent, Scobel 23.
no part of the Question propounded may be laid aside, or omitted: and though the
general Debates run against it, yet if any Member before the Question put
(without that part) stand up, and desire that such Words or Clause may stand in
the Question, before the main Question is put: a Question is to be put, Whether
those Words, or Clause shall stand in the Question.

The like Method is observed when any other Alteration is debated upon, Ibid.
to be made in a Question propounded: but upon putting a Question for such
Addition, Alteration, or Omission, any Person, who has formerly spoken to the
Matter of the Question, may speak again, to show his Reasons for, or against
such Alteration, Addition, or Omission, before such Question be put.

When the Speaker (the House calling for a Question) is putting the same, Ibid.
any Member that has not spoken before to the Matter, may stand up before the
Negative be put.

13 Junij 1604. Ibid.
A Bill touching a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage having been formerly upon a
third Reading recommitted, was returned: and a Proviso being tendered for
Chester, which was twice read, the Question was put for Commitment, in the
Affirmative: but before the Negative was put, one stood up, and spoke to it,
which was admitted for orderly, because it is no full Question without the
Negative part be put, as well as the Affirmative.

Every Question is to be put first in the Affirmative, Id. 24.
and then the Negative: to which question every Member ought to give his Vote
one way or other: and the Speaker is to declare his Opinion, whether the Yea's
or the No's have it; which is to stand as the Judgment of the House. But if any
Member, before any new Motion made, shall stand up and declare, that he does
believe that the Yea's, or the No's (as the Case shall be) have it, contrary to
the Speaker's Opinion, then the Speaker is to give Direction for the House to
divide, declaring whether the Yea's or the No's are to go forth.

Upon the dividing of the House, Id. 25.
those are to go forth, who are for varying from, or against the constant
Orders of the House (as, that a Question shall not be put, or not be now put;
it being the Course of the House, that after a Debate the same should be
determined by a Question, or the like) or against any positive Order made by
the House; or for the passing any new thing, as reading a Petition, or Bill,
and committing, engrossing, or passing such Bills, or the like.

Those that are for the new Bill (if there be a Question of Voices) shall go
out of the House; Id. 52.
and those who are against the Bill, Co 12.116 Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 505. Col.
1 Vid. contra Scobel 43.
and for the Common Law, or any former Law, shall sit still in the House, for
they are in Possession of the old Law. That in 1604. those for the Bill sat,
and those against it went out. So 7 Aug. 1641.

10 Dec. 1640. Memorials in Hakewel 25. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 505.
It was declared for a constant Rule, That those that give their Votes for
Preservation of the Orders of the House shall stay in; and those who give their
Votes otherwise, to the introducing any new Matter, or for any Alteration,
shall go forth.

24 Mart. 21 Jac. 25. Memorials, ut supra.
The House being divided upon a Question about Election of Members; it was
overruled by the House, that the Noe's should go forth.

This is also the Course upon any Question to agree with a Report in Favor of
the Opinion of a Committee. Ibid.


Upon dividing the House, Id. 26.
the Speaker is to nominate two of those that are in the Affirmative, and two
of the Negatives, to count the House; which four (each of them having a Staff
in his Hand) are to count the number of the Persons who remain sitting in the
House: and then to stand within the Door, two on the one side, and two on the
other, and to count the Number of them who went forth, as they come in.

While the House is thus divided, Ibid.
or dividing, no Member may speak, nor (unless it be to go forth upon the
Division) remove out of his Place.

When the House is thus told, those two of the Tellers, Id. 27.
who are of the number of those who have the major Votes, standing on the right
hand, and the two other on the left hand at the Bar (the rest being all set in
their Places) are to come from thence up to the Table together (making the
usual Obeisance to the House three times; once at the Bar, again in the middle
of the House, and again when they are come to the Table) and that Person who
stands on the right hand, is to declare to the Speaker the number of the Yea's
(who sat, or went out, as the Case is) and of the No's: and then with like
Reverence to depart into their Places; after which, Mr. Speaker is to report
the same to the House.

If the Affirmative have the major Vote by the Judgment of the Speaker, Ibid.
or (in case of Division) upon the Division; the Clerk is to enter the Vote,
Resolved. If the Negatives, then he is to enter it thus -- The Question being
put (setting down the words of the Question) it passed in the Negative.

Upon the Division, Ibid.
if the Members appear to be equal, then the Speaker is to declare his Vote,
whether he be a Yea, or a No, which in this Case is the casting Voice: but in
other Cases the Speaker gives no Vote.

1 Maij 1606. Ibid.
Upon a Question, whether a man saying Yea, may afterward sit and change his
Opinion, a Precedent was remembered by the Speaker, of Mr. Morris, Attorney of
the Wards, in 39 Eliz. that in like case changed his Opinion.

If upon a Debate it be much controverted, Id. 28.
and much be said against the Question; any Member may move, that the Question
may be first made, whether that Question shall be put, or whether it shall be
now put; which usually is admitted at the Instance of any Member, especially if
it be seconded, and insisted on: and if that Question being put, it pass in the
Affirmative; then the main Question is to be put immediately, and no man may
speak any thing further to it, either to add, or alter. But before the Question
(whether the Question shall be put) any Person, who has not formerly spoken to
the main Question, has liberty to speak for it, or against it; because else he
shall be precluded from speaking at all to it.

If in a Debate there arise more Questions than one, Ibid.
and it be controverted, which Question should be first put; the Question first
moved and seconded is regularly to be first put, unless it be laid aside by
general Consent If the first Question be insisted onto be put, and the major
Part seem to be against it, the Question is to be, whether that Question shall
be now put: if that pass in the Negative, then the other Question may be put,
if desired: nevertheless any Person may speak to it again, before it be put. If
in the Affirmative, then it is to be put without any Addition or Alteration, as
before: and after the Question is put, if any Member move to have the other
Question put, every one has leave to speak to it again, as if it were a new
Question.

If a Matter be received into Debate, Id. 29.
and a Question grow, whether the House shall proceed in that Debate at this
time, and it fall out, that the House be divided; in such Case the No's are to
go forth (it being contrary to the course of the House, that any Business
should be laid aside till it be determined by a Question) If the Question be
for an Adjournment of a Debate, the Yea's are to go forth upon the same Reason.

After a Question is propounded, Ibid.
no man may speak more than once to the Matter; but having spoken to the
Matter, when the Question comes to be put, he may speak to the manner or words
of the Question, keeping himself to that only, and not ravelling into the
merits of it.

If a Question upon a Debate contain more Parts than one, Ibid.
and Members seem to be for one Part, and not for the other; it may be moved,
that the same may be divided into two, or more Questions: as Dec. 2. 1640. the
Debate about the Election of two Knights was divided into two Questions.

No Member in his Discourse in the House may mention the Name of any other
Member then present, Id. 30. Vide Smyth's Commonwealth 85.
but to describe him by his Title or Addition (as that Noble Lord, that worthy
Knight; or by his Office, as Judge, Sergeant, Gentleman of the long or short
Robe; or by his Place, as the Gentleman near the Chair, near the Bar, on the
other side; or that Gentleman that spoke last, or last save one, or the like.)

During any Debate any Member, Memorials, ut supr. 30.
though he have spoken to the Matter, may rise up, and speak to the Orders of the
House, if they be transgressed, in Case the Speaker do not: but if the Speaker
stand up, he is first to be heard, and when he stands up, the other must sit
down, till the Speaker sit down.

But if any Person rise up to speak to the Orders of the House in the midst of
a Debate, Ibid. and 31.
he must keep within that Line, and not fall into the Matter it self: if he do,
he may be taken down by the Speaker, or any other Member, calling to the Orders
of the House.

While a Member is speaking to a Debate or Question, Id. 31. Vid. Towns. Coll.
205.
he is to be heard out, and not taken down, unless by Mr. Speaker (as in some
Cases he may) or that he speak of such Matter as the House does not think fit
to admit.

A Matter upon Debate having been once finally determined by a Question,
Memorials in Hakewel 33.
ought not to be again brought into Dispute.

27 Martij 1604. Ibid.
Sir Edward Coke Attorney General, and Dr. Hone bring a Message from the Lords,
desiring a Conference about the Case of Sir Francis Goodwyn. Vide this Argument
at large in the Appendix.
Upon this Message it was argued, That now the Judgment having passed the
House, it could not, nor ought to be reversed by them: and upon the Question it
was resolved, There should be no Conserence.

2 Apr. 1604. Ibid.
A Vote having passed some days past, That no Conference should be admitted
with the Lords, the same Question was again moved, but was carried in the
Negative. And it was then urged for a Rule, That a Question having been once
made and carried in the Affirmative, or Negative, cannot be questioned again,
but must stand as the Judgment of the House.

4 Junij 1604. Id. 45.
Agreed for a Rule, If two stand up to speak to a Bill, he that would speak
against the Bill (if it be known by Demand or otherwise) is to be first heard.

11 Nov. 1640. Id. 69.
It is declared, as a constant Order of the House, That if a Witness be brought
to the House, the House sitting, the Bar is to be down; otherwise, if the House
be in a Committee.

In a Debate about an Election, Id. 70.
it was Resolved, That the Party concerned shall be heard to inform the House,
and then he is to go forth.

When any Complaint is made against a Member, Id. 71.
or Exceptions taken to any thing spoken by him (after he has been heard to
explain himself, if he desire, or the House command it, which is usually done
by him standing in his Place) if the House be not satisfied, but fall into
Debate thereof, such Member is to withdraw.

The Members of the lower House came to the Lords, Towns. Coll. 311.
upon a Conference, as they were sitting at the Table, and going to the upper
end thereof, spoke.

When any Bills or Messages are brought from the lower House to be presented to
the upper House, Towns 95. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 585.
the Lord Keeper, and the rest of the Lords are to rise from their Places, and
to go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come from the lower House, and
from them to receive in that Place their Messages or Bills.

But when any Answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper in the name and
behalf of the House, Ibid.
to such Knights and Burgesses as come from the lower House, the said Knights
and Burgesses are to receive the same, standing toward the lower end of the
House; and the Lord Keeper is to deliver the same with his Head covered, and
all the Lords are to keep their Places.

In the Answer of the Commons House of Parliament to K. James his Objection in
Sir Francis Goodwyn's Case (3 Apr. 1604.) Memorirls, ut supra 33, 34.
) the Objection being, That they refuse Conference with the Lords. The Answer
is in these words, Concerning our refusing Conference with the Lords; there was
none desired, till after our Sentence passed: and then we thought, that in a
matter private to our own House (which by Rules of Order might not be by us
revoked) we might without any Imputation refuse to concur.

CHAP. XVI. Passing of Bills.
43 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Coll. 209.
WHile there were diverse Disputes about a Bill, Mr. Fleming the Queens
Solicitor took the Bill to look a word in it; after he had done, and laid it on
the Board, one stood up and said, Mr. Speaker, after a Bill is engrossed, you
ought to hold it in your hand, and let no man look into it; which was confessed
by all. And so the Speaker took it.

When a Bill is read, Cook 12.115.
the Speaker does open the Parts of the Bill; so that each Member of the House
may understand the Intention of each Part of the Bill.

Such Bills, Hakewel 134.
as being first passed in one House, are sent unto the other, are always sent in
Parchment fairly engrossed.

Public Bills are in due course to be preferred in reading and passing before
private: Ibid. Co. 12.116.
and of Public, such as concern the Service of God and Good of the Church.
Secondly, such as concern the Commonwealth, in which are included such as touch
the Person, Revenue, or Household of the King, Queen, etc. and they ought
especially to be preferred in passing. Lastly, private Bills are to be offered
to be read, and passed in such Order as they were preferred. Towns. Coll. 270.
And they that carry them, to give some brief Commendation of them.

Any Member of the House may offer a Bill for public Good, Scobel 40.
except it be for imposing a Tax: which is not to be done, but by Order of the
House first had.

If any Member desire, that an Act made, and in force, may be repealed or
altered, he is first to move the House in it, and have their Resolution, before
any Bill to that purpose may be offered; and if upon the Reasons showed, for
repealing or altering such Law, the House shall think it fit, they do usually
appoint one or more of the Members to bring in a Bill for that purpose.

All men of Law know, Towns. Coll. 238.
that a Bill, which is only expository to expound the Common Law, does enact
nothing, neither is any Proviso good therein.

But the Speaker is not precisely bound to any of these Rules, Hakewel 136.
for the preferring of Bills to be read or passed; but is left to his own good
Discretion (except he be specially directed by the House to the contrary) and
though he be earnestly pressed by the House for the reading of some one Bill; yet
if he have not had convenient time to read the same over, and to make a Breviat
thereof for his own memory; the Speaker does claim a Privilege to defer the
Reading thereof to some other time.

The Clerk being usually directed by the Speaker (but sometime by the House)
what Bill to read, Hakewel 137.
with a loud and distinct Voice first reads the Title of the Bill, and then,
after a little Pawse, the Bill it self; which done, kissing his Hand, he
delivers the same to the Speaker; who stands up uncovered (whereas
otherwise he sits with his Hat on) and holding the Bill in his Hand, says,
This Bill is thus entitled, and then reads the Title; which done, he opens
to the House the Substance of the Bill, which he does, either trusting to his
memory, or using the help, or altogether the reading of his Breviat, which is
filed to the Bill. Hakewel 137. Vide Scobel 42.


Sometimes reading the Bill it self, especially upon the Passage of a Bill,
when it has been much altered by the Committees, so that thereby it differs
very much from the Breviat.

When he has opened the Effect of the Bill, Id. 138.
he declares to the House, That it is the first Reading of the Bill, and
delivers the same again to the Clerk.

The Bill containing the King's General Pardon has but one Reading in the
Lord's House, Id. 138. Vid. Towns. Coll 29, 44, 126. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Journ.
91. Col. 2.
and one below: the Reason is, because the Subject must take it as the King
will give it, without any Alteration; and yet many times Exceptions are taken
at the Reading thereof, for that it is not so favorable as in former times.

The like of a Bill of Subsidies granted by the Clergy. Hakew. Ib.


The usual Course is to spend the Morning, Id. 139.
before the House grow full, in the first Readings, and to defer the second or
third Reading till the House grow full.

No Knight, Citizen, Co. 12.116.
or Burgess ought to speak above once to one Bill in one day, unless sometime
by way of Explication.

At the first Reading of the Bill, Hakewel 139.
it is not the Course for any man to speak to it, but rather to consider of it,
and to take time till the second Reading: unless it carry matter of apparent
hurt to the Commonwealth, and so to be rejected.

Nor for any Addition, Ibid.
for thereby it is implied that the Body of the Bill is good, which till the
second Reading, does not regularly come to the Trial.

If any Bill originally begun in the Commons House, Id. 140. Scobel 42.
upon the first Reading happen to be debated to and fro, and that upon the
Debate, the House do call for the Question; it ought to be, not Whether the
Bill shall be read the second time (for so it ought to be in ordinary Course)
but whether it shall be rejected.

If a Bill coming from the Lords be spoken against, Hak. Ibid.
and pressed to be put to the Question, upon the first Reading; the Speaker, in
favor and respect thereto, should not make the Question for Rejection (as in
the former Case) but should first make the Question for the second Reading; and
if that be denied, then for Rejection. But usually when any such Debate is, the
Speaker does forbear to make any Question at all thereupon, except he be much
pressed thereto, it being better to consider of it before it be put to such a
hazard.

If the Question for Rejection be made, Id. 141. Scobel 42.
and the greater Voice be to have it rejected, the Clerk ought to note it
rejected in his Journal, and so to indorse it on the back of the Bill; and it
shall be no more read: If the Voice be to have the Bill retained, it shall have
his second Reading in Course. Ibid.


It is against the ordinary Course that the same Bill should be read more than
once in one day, but for special Reasons it has been suffered, that private
Bills have been in one day read twice.

It is likewise done sometimes, Hakewel 142.
when the House lacks other Businesses wherein to employ themselves,
especially if the Bill be of no great Importance, howsoever it is never but
upon Motion and special Order.

When special Committees appointed for the drawing of some one special Bill,
Ibid.
present the same ready drawn to the House, it has been often seen, that the
same Bill has not only been twice read, but ordered also to be engrossed the
same day.

It is not without Precedent that a Bill has been thrice read, Ibid.
and passed in the same day. But this is a President that stands alone.

A Bill was read the fourth time, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 90. Col. 1.
before it passed the House, and though there want not other Presidents, yet it
is rare and worth the Observation.

A Bill was put to the Question, Id. 335. Col. 1.
upon the first Reading, and rejected: but it is not usual for a Bill to be put
to the question upon the first Reading.

27 Eliz 1584. Id 337. Col 2. 415. Col. 2.
A Bill was committed upon the third Reading, having been formerly committed
upon the second; which is not usual.

A Bill may be preserr'd to be secondly read the next day after the first
Reading: Hakewel. 143.
but the usual Course is to forbear for two or three days, that men may have
more time to consider upon it, except the Nature of the Business be such, that
it requires haste.

After the Bill is secondly read, Ibid.
the Clerk, as before, in humble manner delivers the same to the Speaker; who
again reads the Title and his Breviat, as he did upon the first Reading:
which done, he declares, That it was a second Reading of the Bill. And then he
ought to pawse a while, expecting whether any of the House will speak to it;
for before the Speaker has so declared the state of the Bill, no man should
offer to speak to it; and then, and not before, is the time when to speak.

If after a pretty distance of time, Ibid.
no man speak against the Bill for matter or form, he may make the Question for
engrossing thereof, if it be a Bill originally exhibited into the Commons House.

So likewise if diverse speak for the Bill, Id. 144.
without taking Exception to the Form thereof, he may make the same Question
for the engrossing.

The like Question for the engrossing ought to be made, Ibid.
if the greater Voice be, That that Bill shall not be commmitted: for it were
to no end further to delay the proceeding of the Bill, if there be no exception
taken to the matter or form thereof: but upon the second Reading, and after the
Speaker has delivered the state thereof, the House does usually call for
committing of the Bill; and then if any man will speak against it, either for
Matter or Form, he ought to be heard.

After the first man has spoken, Id. 144.
the Speaker ought to rest a while, expecting whether any other man will speak
thereto: so ought he likewise to do after every Speech ended: when he
perceives that the Debate is at an end, he ought then to make the Question for
the committing thereof, in this sort:

As many as are of Opinion that this Bill shall be committed, Id. 145.
say Yea. And after the Affirmative Voice given,

As many as are of the contrary Opinion, say No. And he ought by his Ear to
judge which of the Voices is the greatest: if that be doubtful, the House ought
to be divided.

If upon Division of the House it appear that the Numbers are equal, Ibid.
the Speaker has the casting Voice upon all Questions.

If it appear that the Affirmative Voice be the greater, Ibid.
then ought he to put the House in mind touching the naming of Committees,
which is done thus.

Every one of the House that list may call upon the Name of any one of the
House to be a Committee, and the Clerk ought in his Journal to write under the
Title of the Bill the Name of every one so called on, at least of such whose
Names (in that Confusion) he can distinctly hear; and this he ought to do
without Partiality, either to those that name, or to the Party named.

He that speaks directly against the Body of the Bill, Id. 146. Towns. Coll.
208.
may not be named a Committee: for he that would totally destroy, will not
amend it.

When a convenient Number of Committees are named, Hak. Ibid.
then ought the Speaker to put the House in mind to name Time and Place, when
and where the Committees may meet; which the Clerk ought likewise to enter into
his Journal Book: and when the House is in silence, he ought with a loud voice
to read, (out of his Book) the Committees Names, and the Time and Place of the
Commitment, that the Committees may take Notice thereof.

After a Bill, Ibid.
which is sent from the Lords, is twice read, the Question ought to be for the
Commitment: if it be denied to be committed, it ought to be read the third
time, and the next Question ought to be for the Passage, and not for the
Engrossing (as it is where the bill originally begins in the lower House) for
Bills, which come from the Lords come always engrossed.

The Question for the Passage should in ordinary Course be then made, Hakewel
147.
when the Bill is denied to be committed; but not till the Bill be read the
third time.

In the debating of Bills in the House, Co. 12.116.
no man may speak twice in one day (unless sometime by way of Explication)
except the Bill be oftener read than once; Hak. 148.
and then a man may speak as often as the Bill is read. Otherwise it is at
Committees, or when in the House the Debate arises upon some Motion concerning
the Order of the House.

After the Debate is ended, Id. 150.
the Speaker ought to put the Question for Engrossing.

If the greater Number of Voices be, Ibid.
that the Bill ought not to be engrossed, the Clerk ought to make an Entry in
his Journal, that the same was dashed: and so he ought likewise to note upon
the back of the Bill, and the day when. If the Voice be to have it engrossed,
it is the Office of the Clerk to do it.

It is always to be observed, Ibid.
That when the Bill is engrossed, the Clerk ought to endorse the Title thereof
upon the back of the Bill, and not within the Bill in any Case.

So ought likewise such Bills as come from the Lords to have Titles endorsed
upon the back of the Bill, Ibid.
and not within.

After a Bill has been committed, Id. 151.
and is reported, it ought not in an ordinary Course to be committed, but
either to be dashed or engrossed: and yet when the Matter is of Importance, it
is sometimes for special Reasons suffered; but then usually the Re-commitment
is to the same Committee.

About two or three days after the Bill is thus ordered to be engrossed, Id.
152.
and is accordingly engrossed, it is offered by the Speaker to be read the
third time, for the Passage thereof.

For the most part the Speaker puts not any one Bill to the Passage by it
self alone, but stays till there be diverse Bills ready engrossed for the
third Reading; and when he has a convenient Number (which may be five, or six,
rather less than more) then he gives Notice to the House, That he purposes
next day to offer up some Bills for the Passage, and desires the House to give
special Attendance for that purpose; and then the day following he does
accordingly put them to the third Reading. First private Bills, until the House
be grown to some fullness; and then he offers to be read the public Bills,
which are engrossed.

It has at some times been ordered, Ibid.
That for the preventing of carrying of Bills with a few Voices, that no Bills
shoul'd be put to the Passage until Nine of the Clock, at which time the House
is commonly full, or shortly after.

When the Bill is read the third time, Id. 153.
the Clerk delivers it to the Speaker, who reads the Title thereof, and
opens the Effect of the Bill, and tells them, That the Bill has now been
thrice read, and that with their Favors he will put it to the Question for the
passing: but pawseth a while, that Men may have Liberty to speak thereto; for
upon the third Reading the Matter is debated afresh, and for the most part it
is more spoken unto this time, than upon any of the former Readings.

When the Argument is ended, Id. 154.
the Speaker (still holding the Bill in his hand) makes a Question for the
Passage, in this sort: As many as are of Opinion that this Bill should pass,
say Yea, etc.

If the Voice be for the Passage of the Bills, Ibid.
the Clerk ought to make a Remembrance thereof in his Journal; if otherwise,
then his Remembrance must be accordingly made.

Upon the Bill thus passed (if it be originally exhibited in the House of
Commons) the Clerk ought to write within the Bill on the top toward the right
hand, Brook Abr. f. Edit. 119 n. 4.
Soit baille aux Seigneurs.

If the Bill passed be originally begun in the Lords House, Brook 119.4.
then ought the Clerk to write underneath the Subscription of the Lords (which
always is at the foot of the Bill) A cest Bill les Commons sont assentus.

19 Dec. 1584. 27 Eliz. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 344. Col. 2.
The House of Commons taking Exceptions about endorsing of Bills in the upper
part of them, whereas it ought to be done at the neither and lower part; the
Lords did very respectfully take away their said Grievance, by the alteration
of the Indorsments aforesaid, according to the usual and ancient Form.

No Bill upon the third Reading, Hak. 156.
for the Matter or Body thereof, may be recommitted: but for some particular
Clause or Proviso, it has been sometimes suffered; but it is to be observed as
a thing unusual after the third Reading.

It has been much doubted, Hakewel 157.
whether when a Bill is in Debate for the Passage, it ought not to receive the
Resolution of the House the same day wherein it is first offered to the
Passage: but Precedents are, where the Case being of some Importance, and the
Debate growing long, the Argument has been put over to the next day: in which
Case he that has already spoken to the Bill the first day, may not again speak
the second, no more than he may speak twice in one day, where the Argument is
not deferred to another day.

If a Bill be rejected, Id 158.
the same Bill may not be offered to the House again the same Session: but if
it be altered in any Point material, both in the body, and in the title, it may
be received the second time.

In the time of the Reading of a Bill, Ibid.
the House should not be interrupted with any other Business; and yet in 1 El.
the House adjourned it self till the next day after the Bill for Sealing
Clothes was half read, only to be present at the Conference about Religion in
Westminster-Abby.

Sometimes the House conceiving much Offense against some Bills, Ibid.
does not only order them to be rejected, but to be torn in the House.

When a Bill is thrice read, Id. 159.
and passed in the House, there ought to be no further Alteration thereof in
any Point.

When the Speaker has in his hands a convenient number of Bills ready passed,
as five or six, Id. 175.
or thereabouts, he then puts the House in mind of sending them up to the
Lords, and desires the House to appoint Messengers, who accordingly do appoint
some one principal Member of the House for that purpose, to whom the Bills are
delivered in such order, as he ought to present them to the Lords; which is
done by direction of the Speaker, except the House be pleased to give special
direction therein.

The Order which has usually been observed in ranking of them, Id. 176.
is; First, to place them that came originally from the Lords. Secondly, those
that being sent up to the Lords from the Commons House, were sent back to be
amended. Thirdly, public Bills originally coming from the Commons House; and
they to be marshalled according to their Degrees in Consequence. Lastly are to
be placed private Bills, in such Order, as the Speaker pleases.

Many times the House (with a purpose especially to grace some one Bill)
sends it alone, with a special Re-commendation thereof: Ibid.
the Messenger for this purpose is usually attended by thirty or forty of the
House, as they please, and are affected to the Business.

The principal Messenger, Id. 177.
who delivers the Bills to the Lords, coming in the first Rank of his Company
to the Bar of the Lords House, with three Congies, tells the Lords, That the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House have sent unto their
Lordships certain Bills; and then reading the Title of every Bill, as it lies
in order, so delivers the same in an humble manner to the Lord Chancellor,
who of purpose comes to receive them.

Bills sent from the Lords to the Commons House, Ibid.
if they be ordinary Bills, are sent down by Sergeants at Law, or by two
Doctors of the Civil Law, being Masters of the Chancery, and Attendants in the
upper House, accompanied sometimes with the Clerk of the Crown, an Attendant
there. Id. 178.


Bills of greater moment are usually sent down by some of the Judges Assistants
there, accompanied with some of the Masters of the Chancery; who being admitted
Entrance, do come up close to the Table where the Clerk sits, making three
Congies; and there acquainting the Speaker, That the Lords have sent unto the
House certain Bills, does read the Titles, and deliver the Bills to the
Speaker, and so again departs, with three Congies: when they are out of the
House, the Speaker holds the Bills in his hands, and acquaints the House, That
the Lords by their Messengers have sent to the House certain Bills: and then
reading the Title of every Bill, delivers them to the Clerk to be safely
kept, and to be read, when they shall be called for.

When Bills are thus passed by both Houses, Id. 179.
upon three several Readings in either House; they ought for their last
Approbation, to have the Royal Assent, which is usually deferred till the last
day of the Session.

The Royal Assent is given in this sort. Id. 181. Vid. Towns. Coll. 12, 49.
Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 467.
After some Solemnities ended, the Clerk of the Crown reads the Title of the
Bills in such Order as they are in Consequence: after the Title of every Bill
is read, the Clerk of the Parliament pronounces the Royal Assent, according to
certain Instructions given him from his Majesty in that behalf.

To the Subsidy Bill, Towns. Coll. 49.
because it is the mere Gift of the Subject, the Quens Consent is not required
for the passing it, but as it is joined with her thankful Acceptance: nor to
the Bill of Pardon, because it is originally her free Gift, no other
Circumstance is required, than that the thankful acceptance thereof by the
Lords and Commons be likewise expressed; it being but once read in either
House, before it comes at last to be thus expedited. To all other Bills, either
private or public, the Queens express Consent, though in different words, is
always requisite.

Febr. 9. 1597. 39 Eliz. Id. 127.
Her Majesty gave her Royal Assent to twenty four public Acts, and nineteen
private; and refused forty eight, which had passed both Houses.

If it be a Public Bill, Towns. 13.
to which the King assenteth, the Answer is, Le Roy le veult, The King wills it.

If a private Bill, allowed by the King, the Answer is, Soit fait come il est
desire, Be it done, as is desired.

If a Public Bill, which the King forbears to allow, Le Roy se avisera, The
King will consider.

To the Subsidy Bill, Id. 12.
Le Roy remercie ses loyaux Subjets, accept lour Benevolence, and ainsi le
veult, The King thanks his loyal Subjects, accepts their Benevolence, and so
wills it.

To the General Pardon, Towns. Coll. 13 49.
Les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Commons en cest Parliament assembles au nom de
toutes vous autres Subjets remercient tres-humblement vostre Majesty, Sir
Simon d'Ewes Jour. 467. Col. 2.
and prient a Dieu que il vous done en sante, bon vie, and longue; The
Prelates, Lords, and Commons in this Parliament assembled, in the Name of all
other your Subjects, do most humbly thank your Majesty, and do pray God to give
you Health and a good and long Life.

A private or particular Act is always filed, Sir R. Atkin's Argument, 57. Arc
Parl. 45.
but never enrolled.

Every Bill that passes the Parliament, shall have Relation to the first day
of the Parliament, though it come in at the end of the Parliament: unless a Time
be specially appointed by the Statute, when it shall commence.

If a Bill be admitted to be read, Scobel 41.
it is to be presented fairly written, without any razure, or interlineation;
together with a Breviat of the Heads of the Bill; and unless it be so tendered,
the Speaker may refuse it.

Until the Bill be opened, Id. 42.
no man may speak to it.

An Act was read, Towns. Coll. 187.
to which no man offered to speak; whereupon Mr. Speaker stood up, and said,
That if no man speak, it must be engrossed.

It is the usual Rule of the Law, Towns. Coll. 134.
That where the Numbers of the Affirmative and Negative are equal, Semper
presumetur pro negante: The Negatives by Custom are to carry it.

When Votes are digested into a Bill, Scobel 45.
and that comes to be read, or passed, it is lawful to Debate or Argue against
all, or any part thereof; to alter, or reject it: because Votes in order to a
Bill are no further binding, but that the Bill is to be presented containing
those Votes: and because the Bill gives occasion of a more large Debate, and
being to pass into a Law; every Member has Liberty to offer his Reasons
against it, as well as give his Vote, as often as it comes to a Question.

When a Bill has been read the second time, Ibid.
and opened, any Member may move to have it amended, but must speak but once to
it; and therefore must take all his Exceptions to it, and every part of it, at
one time; for in the Debate of a Bill no man may speak but once the same day,
except the Bill be read more than once that day, and then he may speak, as
often as it is read.

23 Junij 1604. It was agreed for a Rule, Id. 58.
If a Bill be continued in Speech from day to day, one may not speak twice to
the Matter of the same Bill.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning Committees.
COmmittees are such, Sir Tho. Smyth 's Commonwealth 75.
as either the Lords in the higher House, or Burgesses in the lower House, do
choose to frame the Laws upon such Bills as are agreed upon, and afterward to
be ratified by the same Houses.

The proceeding in a Committee is more honorable and advantageous to the King,
Rush. Coll. 557.
and the House; for that way leads most to the Truth; and it is a more open
way, and where every man may add his Reason, and make Answer upon the hearing
of other men's Reasons and Arguments.

For Referring a Bill to Committees, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 186.
it is chiefly for Amendment or Alteration thereof, after it has been penned,
and put into the House by some one or more private men.

June 1641. In the Afternoon, 2 Nalson 319.
it being a considerable time before there were forty Members to make a House:
Ordered, That so soon as the House sits, and that the Sergeant comes to any
Committee then sitting, to signisie to them that the House is sitting, that the
Chairman shall immediately come away to attend the Service of the House.

35 Eliz. 1592. Towns. Coll. 61. Sir Simon d'Ewes Journ 476. Col. 1. Id. 189.
It was held to be against the Order of the House, That a Bill should be
committed before it was read.

43 Eliz. 1601. By Order of the House agreed, When a Bill is returned from
Commitment, the words must be twice read, which are amended, before the
engrossing thereof.

Eodem tempore. Id. 190.
By Order of the House, it was agreed upon, That a Committee once made, and
agreed upon, there shall not hereafter be more Committees joined unto them, for
the same Bill; but for any other there may.

Eodem. Id. 198. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 630. Col. 1.
Sir Walter Raleigh speaking at a Committee, Sir Edward Hobby told him, He
should speak standing, that the House might hear him: to which Sir Walter
Rawleigh replied, That being a Committee, he might speak sitting or standing.

Eodem. Id. 208. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 634. Col. 2.
It is a Rule in the House, That they, who have given their Voice against the
Body of a Bill, cannot be Committees. And it was said by Mr. Wiseman, That by
committing of a Bill, the House allowed of the Body thereof, though they
disallowed of some Imperfectious in the same: and therefore committed it to
some chosen men in trust, to reform and amend any thing therein, which they
found imperfect. And it is presumed, That he who will give his No to the
committing of a Bill, at the Commitment, will be wholly against the Bill: and
therefore the House allowing of this Bill to be committed, are, in my Opinion,
to disallow any that will be against the Body of the Bill, for being
Committees. And so Resolved upon the Question.

Eodem. Towns. 208. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour 635. Col. 1.
Resolved upon the Question, If any Committee speak against a Bill at the
Commitment, he may speak again at the engrossing thereof in the House, and have
his free Voice.

11 Nov. 1601. Ordered, Memorials, 60, 61. Vid. Towns. Coll.
That any Member of this House that has been, or shall be a Committee in any
Bill, may afterward speak, or argue negatively to any such Bill, without
Impeachment or Imputation of Breach of former Order.

Sometimes the House upon Debate does pass some Votes to be the Heads of a
Bill, Scobel 44.
or refer it to a Committee of the whole House to prepare such Heads.

If the Exceptions to a Bill be such, Id. 46.
that it may not be amended at the Table, then the Question is for committing
the Bill: But no Bill is to be committed without some Exceptions taken to it.

In the House of Commons, Towns. Coll. 138.
as well as in the upper House; after any Bill is committed upon the second
Reading, it may be delivered indifferently to any of the said Committees.

No Proviso or Clauses are to be tendered to a Bill upon a second Reading;
Scobel 46.
because if it be committed, it is proper to offer them to the Committee,
without troubling the House: as 16 Jun. 1604. It was moved, That sundry
Proviso's then tendered, be offered to the Committee.

If the Question for Commitment pass in the Negative, Ibid.
then the Question is to be put for the engrossing the Bill. But if the
Question for engrossing the Bill pass in the Negative, then the Question is to
be put for rejecting the Bill.

If the Question for committing the Bill pass in the Affirmative, Id. 47.
then a Committee is to be named: of which all those that took Exceptions at
any Particulars in the Bill (but not those who spoke against the whole Bill)
are to be: and any Member that pleases, may name one apiece, but not more, to
be of that Committee.

10 Nov. 1604. Ibid.
Declared for a Rule, That at the naming of a Committee, if any man rise to
speak, the Clerk ought not to write.

11 Nov. 1601. Resolved, Ibid.
and ordered upon the Question, That such Member as declares himself against
the Body or Substance of any Bill, upon any the Readings thereof, shall not
hereafter be admitted to be of a Committee in any such Bill, according to
former order used in Parliament.

Committees upon Bills have not usually been less then eight, Ibid.
sometimes twenty, seldom more in former times, which engaged them to attend
it, and speed it.

12 April 1604. Id. 48.
Upon a Motion made touching the slow Proceedings and Dispatch of such Bills
and Businesses as were depending in the House, which grew, as was said, by the
non-attendance of the Committees, Ordered, That if eight of any Committee do
assemble, they might proceed to a Resolution in any Business of the House.

When a competent number are named, Ibid.
the Speaker uses to put the House in mind of appointing the Time and Place of
their Meeting: at which Time the Committee are to meet, especially those who
did make any Exceptions to the Bill: eight of the Persons named must be present
to make a Committee (unless ordered otherwise in some Cases) but five may
adjourn.

In some Cases the House has ordered a Committee to withdraw into the
Committee Chamber presently, Ibid.
and bring it back, sitting the House.

Any Member of the House may be present at any select Committee; Id. 49.
but is not to give any Vote, unless he be named to be of the Committee.

35 Eliz. 1592. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 493 Col. 2.
Two or three stood up to speak, striving who might speak first. It was made a
Rule, That the Chairman shall ask the Parties that would speak, on which side
they would speak, whether with him that spoke next before, or against him: and
the Party that speaks against the last Speaker, is to be heard first.

The Committee are first to read the Bill, Scobel 49.
and their to consider the same by Parts.

The Preamble, if any be, Id. 50.
is usually considered after the other Parts of (...) Bill: because upon
Consideration of the Body of the Bill, such Alterations may therein (...) may
also occasion the alteration of the Preamble, Which will be best (...) last.

The Committee may not raze, Ibid.
interline, or blot the Bill it self; but must in a Paper by it self set down
the Amendments in this manner (in such a Folio, and such a Line, between such a
Word and such a Word, or after such a Word; insert these words, or omit these
words.)

When the Amendments are all perfected, Ibid.
every one being voted singly, all of them are to be read at the Committee, and
put to the Question, Whether the same shall be reported to the House: when the
Vote is to be put, any Member of the Committee may move to add to those
Amendments, or to amend any other part of the Bill.

4 Junij 1607. Id. 52.
The Bill touching the Union between England and Scotland having been
committed, when the Amendments were reported, the whole Bill was by Order of
the House first read, and then the Amendments by themselves: which is a single
Precedent used only in a Case of great weight.

In the Journal 4 Junij 1607. Ibid
The Entry is, When a Vote is once passed at a Committee, the same may not be
altered but by the House. Every Question upon the Voices of the Committee
binds, and cannot be altered by themselves. And thus every Thing agreed to be
reported, ought to be reported.

If the Vote of the Committee pass for reporting the Amendments to the House,
then he of the Members of the Committee (which is commonly the Chairman) who is
best acquainted with the Bill, is to be appointed to make the Report: which
being done, that Committee is dissolved, and can act no more without a new
Power.

3 Martij 1606. It was ordered, Ibid.
That every Committee, when they proceed to the Amendment of any Bill committed
to them, shall also amend the Breviat annexed, and make it agree with the Bill.

Reports are usually to be received daily in the first place, Ibid.
after the House is full; except there be Bills engrossed, which are to take
place, and public Bills before private.

The Reporter must first acquaint the House, Id. 52. Hakewel 148.
That he is to make a Report from such a Committee, to whom such a Bill was
committed: and standing in his place, must read each of the Amendments, with
the Coherence in the Bill; and opening the Alterations, and the Reasons of the
Committee for such Amendments, until he has gone through all: and then must
(if he sit not in the Seat next the Floor) come from his place to the Bar, and
so come up to the Table, and deliver both the Bill and Amendments to the Clerk,
by whom he is to stand, while they are twice read, which is to be done by him
(without reading any words that are to be omitted, but only such as are to be
inserted) before any man speak to any of them: and then the Bill, with the
Amendments, is to be delivered to the Speaker.

After reading of the Amendments, Scobel 52.
any Member may speak against all, or any of the Amendments, and desire the
Coherence to be read; but he is to make all his Objections at once to all the
Amendments, without speaking again.

Exceptions may be taken as well to what is omitted out of the Bill by the
Committee, Id. 53.
as to what is amended.

Amendments in Bills ought to be writ in Paper, Sir Simon d'Ewes, Jour. 573,
574.
not in Parchment, and without any Indorsement.

Upon any Report from a Committee, Scobel 53.
the first Question ought to be, for agreeing with the Report, unless the House
generally dislike it.

4 Junij 1607. Id. 39.
Agreed for a Rule, That every Thing directed, and agreed to be reported, ought
accordingly to be reported: but not every thing spoken or debated at the
Committee.

28 Julij 1641. Ibid.
Declared by the House, That no Committee ought by Votes to determine the Right
or Property of the Subject, without first acquainting the House therewith.

6 Aug. 1641. Ibid.
Resolved, That no Vote passed at a Committee, and not reported, nor confirmed
by the House, shall be any Rule or Direction for any Court of Justice to ground
any Proceedings thereon.

CHAP. XVIII. The Order and Power of Grand Committees.
A Grand Committee consists of as many Members (at least) as constitute the
House, Scobel 35.
less may not sit, nor act as a Committee; who have general Power to consider
of any Matter touching the subject Matter referred, and to present their.
Opinions therein to the House, the better to prepare Matters of that Nature, or
Bills therein, for the House: which may better be prepared by the Liberty that
every Member has in a Grand Committee, as well as in other Committees, to
speak more than once to the same Business (if there be cause) which is not
permitted in the House.

Bills of great Concernment, Id. 49.
and chiefly Bills to impose a Tax, or raise money from the People, are
committed to a Committee of the whole House; to the end there may be
opportunity for fuller Debate: for that at a Committee the Members have liberty
to speak, as often as they shall see Cause, to one Question: and that such
Bills being of general Concernment, should be most solemnly proceeded in, and
well weighed.

Grand Committees have their Powers and Rules in other Circumstances given them
in express words by the House: Id. 35.
as to send for Witnesses, to hear Council, or assign them on either part to
send for Records.

When any great Business is in Agitation that requires much Debate, Id. 36.
or a Bill for a public Tax is to be committed, the House does use to Resolve
into a Grand Committee of the whole House: which is done by a Question, and
then the Speaker leaves the Chair; and thereupon the Committee makes choice of
a Chairman.

If more than one be generally called to the Chair, Scobel 36.
any Member may stand up, and by Consent of the Committee, put a Question for
one of those named to be the Chairman.

19 Jac. 1. Ibid.
A Dispute being in the Committee, which of two Members named should go to the
Chair, the Speaker was called to his Chair, and put the Question, That Sir
Edward Coke (one of the Persons named) should take the Chair; and then the
Speaker left his Chair.

The Chairman of the Grand Committee is to sit in the Clerk's Place at the
Table, Ibid.
and to write the Votes of the Committee.

If upon putting a Question, Id. 38.
the Chairman (who is to judge the Voices) have delivered his Opinion, That
the Yea's have it, and any Member stand up, and say, He believes the No's have
it (or contrariwise) the Committee is to divide within the House; the Chairman
directing the Yea's to one side of the House, and the No's to the other, and
then he is to appoint one of each to count the Numbers, and report them: which
is to be done in the same Order, as in the House, saving that the Obeisance is
only twice in the Committee, thrice in the House: if the Number be equal, the
Chairman has the casting Voice; otherwise he has none in the Committee.

When the Committee has gone through the Matter referred to them, Ibid.
the Chairman having read all the Votes, is to put the Question, That the same
be reported to the House: if that be Resolved, he is to leave the Chair, and
the Speaker being again called to the Chair (or at the next Sitting of the
House, if it be then adjourned) the Chairman is to report what has been
resolved at the Committee, standing in his usual Place, from whence (if it be
not in the Seat next the Floor) he is to go down to the Bar, and so to bring up
his Report to the Table.

If the Committee cannot perfect the Business at that Sitting, Ibid.
they may not adjourn, as other Committees; but a Question is to be made for
reporting to the House, and that leave be asked, That the Committee may sit at
another Time on that Business.

But if, as it sometimes falls out, Ibid.
the Matter has received a full Debate in the Committee, and it is judged fit
to be Resolved in the House, the Speaker is again called to the Chair for that
purpose.

In other Things the Rules of Proceedings are to be the same, Id 39.
as are in the House.

4 Junij 1607. Ibid.
Agreed for a Rule, That every Question upon the Voices of a Committee binds,
and cannot be altered by themselves.

Every Thing directed, Ibid.
and agreed to be reported, ought to be accordingly reported: but not every
Thing spoken, or debated at a Committee.

15 Maij 22 Jac. 1. Id. 36.
Upon Complaint from the Grand Committee for Grievances, That they had sent
several Warrants for diverse Persons to bring in their Patents, which they had
not done: the House ordered the Sergeant at Arms to send for them.

The Commiteee for Trade is sometimes made of a Grand Committee of the whole
House, Id. 9.
as in 21 Jac. 1.

The Committees for Religion, Ibid.
Grievances, and Courts of Justice, are always Grand Committees of the House,
which are to sit in the Afternoon, upon such days as the House does appoint to
them respectively.

8 and 13 Martij 21 Jac. 1. Id. 36.
Upon Report from the Committee for Trade (which then was a Grand Committee)
the House was moved for their Order to the Merchants Adventurers to bring in
their Patents, and that the Inventor of the pretermitted Customs should attend
the Committee.

The Commons, Rush. Coll. 225.
upon Debate of what fell from his Majesty, and the Lord Keeper, turned the
House into a Grand Committee, ordered the Doors to be locked, and no Members to
go forth; and that all Proceedings in all other Committees shall cease, till
the House come to a Resolution in this Business.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning standing Committees.
THE Commons being the General Inquisitors of the Realm, 4 Inst. 11.
have principal Care in the Beginning of the Parliament, to appoint days of
Committees, viz. of Grievances (both in the Church and Commonwealth) of Courts
of Justice, of Privileges and Advancement of Trade.

In Parliament there have usually been five standing Committees appointed in
the Beginning of the Parliament, Scobel 9.
and remaining during all the Session: other Committees were made occasionally,
and dissolved, after the Business committed to them was reported.

Standing Committees are for Privileges and Elections. Standing Committees are
for Religion. Standing Committees are for Grievances. Standing Committees are
for Courts of Justice. Standing Committees are for Trade. Ibid.

These Committees when they meet, 4 Inst. 12.
they elect one of them to sit in their Chair, in likeness of the Speaker. The
Committee may examine, and vote the Questions handled by them; and by one, whom
they appoint, report their Resolution to the House; and the House sitting, the
Speaker to determine the same by Question.

The Committees for Religion, Scobel 9.
Grievances, and Courts of Justice, are always Grand Committees of the House,
which are to sit in the Afternoon, upon such days as the House does appoint to
them respectively.

The Committee for Trade has sometimes been a select Committee, Ibid.
particularly named; and all such Members as should come to it, to have Voices,
as in Nov. 1640. Sometimes a Grand Committee of the whole House, as 21 Jac. 1.

The Committee for Privileges and Elections has always had the Precedence of
all other Committees; Id. 10.
being commonly the first Committee appointed, and ordinarily the first day
after, or the same day the Speaker did take his Place.

This Committee is constituted of particular Numbers named by the House. Ibid.


21 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Upon naming a Committee for Privileges and Elections, a Motion was made, that
all that come should have Voices, but insisted on to be contrary to all former
Precedents. A Question was put, Whether all that come should have Voices at the
Committee, and passed in the Negative: Another Question being put, Whether the
Persons nominated only should be of the Committee, it was resolved in the
Affirmative. (...) ters questionable touching Privileges and Returns; and to
acquaint the House with their Proceedings from Time to Time, so as Order may be
taken according to the Occasion, and agreeable with ancient Customs and
Precedents.

And to the end these Questions may be speedily determined, Ibid.
and the House may know their Members; Days are usually assigned, beyond which
there shall be no Questioning a former Election.

So in the Parliament 21 Jac. 1. it was ordered, Ibid.
That all Petitions about Elections and Returns should be preserred to the
Committee of Privileges, within a Fortnight from that day, or else to be
silenced for that Session.

16 Apr. 1640. Id. 13.
Ordered, That those who would question Elections, should do it within ten
days, by Petition.

6 Nov. 1640. Ibid.
Ordered, That all such as will question Elections now returned, shall do it in
fourteen days, and so within fourteen days after any new Return.

Some Questions have been (where there have been double Indentures returned for
several Persons for the same Place) whether all, or any, or which shall sit.
Id. 13.
The general Rule and Practice has been in such Case, that neither one nor
other shall sit in the House, till it were either decided or ordered by the
House.

17 Apr. 19 Jac. 1. Ordered, Id. 16.
That no Petition shall be received by a Committee, but openly at a Committee,
and read at the Committee, before the Party go that preferred it, and the
Parties Name that preferred it, be subscribed.

In the Parliament 21 Jac. 1. Id. 17.
Resolved, That all Affidavits to be taken in any Court, concerning Elections,
Returns, or any Thing depending thereupon, should be rejected, and not
hereafter to be used.

Though the Committee examine not upon Oath, Ibid.
yet they may punish any that shall testify untruly, of which there was an
Instance in the Case of one Damport.

Sir Francis Popham, Id. 14.
being returned a Burgess for Chippenham by one Indenture, and another Person
returned for the same Place by another Indenture; it was moved he might be
admitted into the House, till the Matter were determined. But he was not so
admitted, and it was referred to the Committee for Privileges.

21 Jac 1. Id. 15.
Two Indentures were returned for Southwark: the one returned Yarrow and Mingy;
the other Yarrow and Bromfeild. Upon a Report from the Committee of Elections,
it was Resolved, That the Election and Return for Yarrow should stand good, and
that he should sit in the House.

22 Martij 21 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Sir John Jackson and Sir Thomas Beaumont were both returned for one Bargesses
Place for Pontefract. Ordered, That the Committee take the Election into
consideration to morrow, and that in the mean time the Parties forbear to come
into the House.

CHAP. XX. A Session of Parliament.
THE Passing of any Bill, 4 Inst 27.
or Bills, by giving the Royal Assent thereto, or the giving any Judgment in
Parliament, does not make a Session: but the Session does continue till that
Session be prorogued, or dissolved: And this is evident by many Presidents in
Parliament ancient and late.

14 Ed. 3. Ibid.
On the first Monday a Grant of, etc. being given to the King, was made a
Statute, and passed both Houses, and had the Royal Assent thereunto: yet after
this the Parliament continued, and diverse Acts made, and Petitions granted.

3 Rich. 2. Ibid.
Declared by Act of Parliament, That the killing of John Imperial, Ambassador
of Genoa, was High Treason: yet the Parliament continued long after, and diverse
Acts made, etc.

7 Hen. 4. Ibid.
An Act made for certain Strangers departing the Realm, etc. yet the Parliament
continued till Dec. 8 Hen. 4.

1 Hen. 7. Ibid.
The Attainders of such as were returned Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, were
reversed by Act of Parliament, before they could sit in the House of Commons,
and the Parliament continued, and diverse Acts made.

33 Hen. 8. Ibid.
At the beginning of the Parliament, the Bill of Attainder against Queen
Catherine Howard passed both Houses: yet the Parliament continued, and diverse
Acts passed.

Though Bills pass both Houses, Ibid.
and the Royal Assent be given thereto, there is no Session until a
Prorogation, or a Dissolution.

The Diversity between a Prorogation and an Adjournment, Ibid.
or Continuance of the Parliament, is, that by the Prorogation in open Court,
there is a Session; and then such Bills as passed either, or both Houses, and
had no Royal Assent to them, must at the next Assembly begin again.

Every several Session of Parliament is in Law a several Parliament: Ibid.
Hutton 61. Brook tit. Parl. 86.
but if it be but adjourned, or continued, then there is no Session; and
consequently all things continue in the same state they were in before the
Adjournment or Continuance.

The Titles of diverse Acts of Parliament be, 4 Inst. 27.
At the Session holden by Prorogation, or by Adjournment and Prorogation; but
never by Continuance or Adjournment tantum. And the usual Form of Pleading is,
ad Sessionem tentam, etc. per Prorogationem.

The Adjournment or Continuance is much more beneficial for the Commonwealth
for expediting of Causes, 4 Inst. 28.
than a Prorogation.

The King desired the House of Commons not to make a Recess in the Easter
Holy Days: This Message for Non-recess was not well-pleasing to the House Sir
Robert Philips first resented it, and took Notice, Rush. Coll. 537.
that in 12 and 18 Jac. 1. upon the like Intimation, the House Resolved, It was
in their power to adjourn or sit. Hereafter, said he, this may be put upon us
by Princes of less Piety. Let a Committee consider hereof, and of out Right
herein, and to make a Declaration. Sir Edward Coke said, The King makes a
Prorogation, but this House Adjourns it self: The Commission of Adjournment we
never read, but say, this House adjourns it self. If the King write to an Abbot
for a Corody, for a Vallet, if it be ex rogatu, though the Abbot yields to it, it
binds not. Therefore I desire that it be entered, that this be done ex Rogatu
Regis.

And this Matter touching his Majesty's pleasure about the Recess, Rush. Coll.
537.
was referred to a Committee, and to consider the Power of the House to adjourn
it self.

The Sovereign may adjourn the Parliament, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 318. Col. 2.
as well as the Parliament adjourns it self.

When a Parliament is called, 4 Inst. 28. Hutton 61. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour.
407. Col. 1.
and does sit, and is dissolved, without any Act of Parliament passed, or
Judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Convention.

18 Rich. 2. 4 Inst. 28.
The Petitions of the Commons were answered, and a Judgment given in the King's
Bench reversed, but no Act passed; yet without Question it was a Session, else
the Judgment should not be of force.

Many times Judgments given in Parliament have been executed, Ibid.
the Parliament continuing, before any Bill Passed.

If diverse Statutes be continued till the next Parliament, Hutton 61.
or next Session, and there is a Parliament or Session, and nothing done
therein as to Continuance; all the said Statutes are discontinued, and gone.

8 Apr. 1604. Hakewel 180.
In the last Session of the first Parliament of K. James the first, the House
being desirous to have a Bill forthwith passed, declared, That the Royal Assent
to one Bill, or more, did not dissolve the Session, without some special
Declaration of his Majesty's Pleasure to that purpose.

1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. Ibid.
The King and Queen came of purpose into the Parliament House to give their
Assent to Cardinal Pool's Bill; and Resolved upon the Question by the whole
House, That the Session was not thereby concluded, but they might proceed in
their Business, notwithstanding the Royal Assent given. But for more Security,
it is usual to insert a Proviso to that purpose.

If there be diverse Sessions in one Parliament, Are. Parl. 93. Crompton 's
Jour. 7. b. 12 b.
and the King signs not a Bill till the last; there all is but one and the same
day, and all shall have relation to the first day of the first Session; and the
first day and the last are but one Parliament, and one and the same day; unless
special mention be made in the Act, when it shall take its force.

CHAP. XXI. The proper Laws and Customs of Parliament.
THE Laws, Customs, Liberties, 4 Inst. 50.
and Privileges of Parliament are better to be learned out of the Rolls of
Parliament, and other Records, and by Precedents, and continual Experience,
then can be expressed by any one man's Pen.

As every Court of Justice has Laws and Customs for its Direction, 4 Inst. 15.
some by the Common Law, some by the Civil and Canon Law, some by peculiar Laws
and Customs, etc. so the High Court of Parliament suis propriis Legibus, and
Consuetudinibus subsistit.

It is Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti, Ibid.
that all weighty Matters in any Parliament moved, concerning the Peers of the
Realm, or Commons in Parliament assembled, ought to be determined, adjudged,
and discussed by the Course of Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, nor yet by
the Common Laws of this Realm used in more Inferior Courts: which was so
declared to be secundum Legem, and Consuetudinem Parliamenti, concerning the
Peers of the Realm, by the King, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal: and
the like pari Ratione is for the Commons, for any thing moved or done in the
House of Commons: and the rather, for that by another Law and Custom of
Parliament, the King cannot take notice of any thing said or done in the House
of Commons, but by the Report of the House of Commons; and every Member of
Parliament has a Judicial Place, and can be no Withess. And this is the Reason
that Judges ought not to give any Opinion of a Matter of Parliament, because it
is not to be decided by the Common Laws, but secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Parliamenti: and so the Judges in diverse Parliaments have confessed. And some
hold, That every Offense committed in any Court, punishable by that Court, must
be punished (proceeding criminally) in the same Court, or in some higher, and
not in any Inferior Court; and the Court of Parliament has no higher.

By the ancient Law and Custom of Parliament, Id. 14.
a Proclamation ought to be made against being armed, against Games, Plays, and
strange Shows, etc. during the Parliament; that the Parliament may not be
disturbed, nor the Members thereof (who are to attend arduous and urgent
Business) be not withdrawn.

Dec. 15. 1597. Towns. Coll. 116 Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 505. Col. 1.
Resolved, according to the ancient Custom of the House, that all the Members
of the same, which did speak against passing of the Bill, should go forth of
the House, to bring the Bill into the House again, together with the residue of
the Members which went out before with the passing of the said Bill. All the
Members of the House being gone forth except Mr. Speaker and the Clerk, Mr.
Controller brought in the Bill in his hand, accompanied with all the Members of
the House, and delivered the said Bill to Mr. Speaker.

17 Dec. 1597. Id. 117. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 574. Col. 2.
The same Ceremony on the like Occasion omitted, upon a Motion of the Speaker;
and ordered accordingly upon the Question.

18 Dec. 1601. Towns. 332.
As the Speaker was coming to the House in the Morning, the Pardon was
delivered unto him, which he took, and delivered it to the House: which they
sent back again, because it was not brought according to Course.

The Subsidy of the Clergy was sent in a Roll, Id. 333.
according to the usual Acts: to which Sir Edward Hobby took Exceptions,
because it was not sent in a long Skin of Parchment under the Queens Hand and
Seal: so it was sent back, and then the other was sent.

Si les Commons grant Poundage pur quatre Ans, Brook 119.4. Crompt. 8.
and les Seigneurs grant nisi pur deux Ans; le Bill ne serra re-bayl al
Commons: mes si les Commons grant nisi pur deux Ans, and les Seigneurs pur 4
Ans, la ceo serra redeliver al Commmons. Et in cest case les Seigneurs doient
fair un Scedule de lour Intent, ou d'endorcer le Bill en cest Form, Les
Seigneurs ceo assentont, pur durer pur quatuor Ans: Et quant les Commons ount
le Bill arere, and ne volent assenter a ceo, ceo ne poet estre un Act: mes si
les Commons volent assenter, donques ils endorce lour Respons sur le Margent de
bass deins le Bill en tiel Form; les Commons sont assentuz al Scedule les
Seigneurs, a mesme cestuy Bill annex; and donques serra bayl al Clerk del
Parliament.

If the Commons grant Poundage for four years, and the Lords grant but for two
years; the Bill shall not be sent back to the Commons: but if the Commons grant
but for two years, and the Lords for four years, there it shall be redelivered
to the Commons. And in that Case the Lords may make a Schedule of their intent,
or Endorse the Bill in this Form, The Lords do assent to the continuing for
four years. And when the Commons have the Bill again, and will not assent to
it, that cannot be an Act: but if the Commons will assent, then they endorse
their Answer on the Margin below within the Bill, in this Form; The Commons do
assent to the Schedule of the Lords annexed to this Bill, and then it shall be
sent to the Clerk of the Parliament.

The Custom and Privilege of this House has always been, Vide Sir S. d'Ewes
Journ. 483. Col. 2.
first to make offer of the Subsidies from hence, then to the upper House,
except it were that they present a Bill unto this House with desire of their
Assent thereto, and then to send it up again. And Reason it is, that we should
stand upon our Privilege, seeing the Burden rests upon us as the greatest
Number; per Francis Bacon, 35 Eliz 1592.

The Lord Chancellor in Parliament offered the Commons a Writ to deliver their
Burgess; Petyt 's Miscell. Parl. 4. in Margin.
but they refused it, as being clear of Opinion, That all their Commandments
and Acts were to be done and executed by their Sergeant, without Writ.

It is the Law and Custom of Parliament, 4 Inst. 14, 34 Rot. Parl. 13 E. 3. n.
Cott. Records f. 17. n. 6, 9.
That when any new Device is moved on the King's behalf in Parliament, for his
Aid, or the like; the Commons may answer, That they tender the Kings Estate,
and are ready to aid the same; only in this Device they dare not agree, without
Conference with their Countries; whereby it appears, That such Conference is
warrantable by the Law and Custom of Parliament.

It is to be observed, 4 Inst. 14.
though one be chosen for one particular County, or Borough, yet when he is
returned, and sits in Parliament, he serves for the whole Realm: for the End
of his coming thither (as in the Writ of his Election appears) is general, ad
faciendum, and consent iendum, etc.

If Offenses done in Parliament might have been punished elsewhere, 4 Inst. 17.
it shall be intended, that at some time it would have been put in ure.

As Usage is a good Interpreter of Laws, Coke Litt. 81. b.
so Non-usage, where there is no Example, is a great Intendment, that the Law
will not bear it.

Not that an Act of Parliament by Non-user can be antiquated or lose his force,
Co. Lit. 81. b.
but that it may be expounded or declared how the Act is to be understood.

There is no Act of Parliament but must have the Consent of the Lords, 4 Inst.
25.
the Commons, and the Royal Assent of the King: and whatsoever passes in
Parliament by this threefold Consent, has the Force of an Act of Parliament.

The Difference between an Act of Parliament, Ibid.
and an Ordinance in Parliament is, for that the Ordinance wants the
threefold Consent, and is ordained by one or two of them.

Some Acts of Parliament are introductory of a new Law, Ibid.
and some be declaratory of the ancient Law, and some be of both kinds, by
addition of greater Penalties, or the like. Some Acts are general, and some
private, or particular.

All Acts of Parliament relate to the first day of Parliament, Ibid. 33 H. 6.
f. 18. a. 33 H. 8. Brook Parl 86. and Relation 35.
if it be not otherwise provided by the Act.

The House of Commons is to many Purposes a distinct Court, 4 Inst. 28. Vide
Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 550. Col. 1, 2.
and therefore is not prorogued or adjourned by the Prorogation or Adjournment
of the Lords House: but the Speaker, upon signification of the King's Pleasure,
by the Assent of the House of Commons, does say, This Court does Prorogue or
Adjourn it self. And then it is Prorogued or Adjourned, and not before.

39 Eliz. 1597. Towns. Coll. 101, 102. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 550. Col. 1, 2.
Nov. 5. Through a mere Mistake and Error of the Speaker and themselves, the
House conceived themselves to have been Adjourned by the Lord Keeper, the first
day of this Parliament, to this present day.

When it is dissolved, Ibid.
the House of Commons are sent for up to the higher House, and there the Lord
Keeper, by the King's Commandment, dissolveth the Parliament, and not before.

A Parliament cannot be discontinued or dissolved but by Matter of Record,
Hutton 62.
and that by the King alone.

The King, at the time of the Dissolution, 4 Inst. 28.
ought to be there in Person, or by Representation; for as it cannot begin
without the Presence of the King, either in Person or by Representation; so it
cannot end, or be dissolved without his Presence either in Person or by
Representation.

Nihil enim tam Conveniens est naturali aequitati, Bracton.
unumquodque dissolvi eo ligamine quo lagatum est.

By the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 21. it is declared by Act of Parliament, Ibid.
That the King 's Letters Patents under his great Seal, and signed with his
Hand, and declared and notified in his Absence to the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons assembled in the higher House of Parliament, is, and ever
was, of as good strength and force, as if the King 's Person had been there
personally present, and had assented openly and publicly to the same.

In the Lords House, 4 Inst. 34, 35.
the Lords give their Voices from puisne Lord seriatim, by the word of
[Content] or [Not Content] The Commons give their Voices upon the Question, by
Yea, or No.

Every Lord Spiritual and Temporal, 4 Inst. 43. Crompton 4. b.
and every Knight, Citizen, and Burgess shall upon Summons come to the
Parliament, except he can reasonably and honestly excuse himself, or else he
shall be amerced, etc that is respectively a Lord by the Lords, and one of the
Commons by the Commons.

By the Statute of 6 Hen. 8. c. 16. No Knight, Ibid. Crompton 4 b.
Citizen, or Burgess of the House of Commons shall depart from the Parliament
without License of the Speaker and Commons: the same to be entered of Record in
the Book of the Clerk of the Parliament, upon pain to loose their Wages.

Sickness is no cause to remove any Knight, Citizen, 4 Inst. 8.
or Burgess of the House of Commons.

18 Eliz. 1575. Sir Simon d'Ewes Journ. 244. Col. 2.
Resolved by the House, That any person being a Member of the same, and being
either in Service of Embassage, or else in Execution, or visited with Sickness,
a shall not in any ways be amoved from their place in this House, nor any other
to be during such Time of Service, Execution, or Sickness, elected.

31 Eliz. 1588. Id. 439.
It was assented to by the whole House, That none after the House is set, do
depart before the rising of the same House, unless he do first ask leave of Mr.
Speaker, on pain of paying six pence to the Use of the Poor.

If a Lord depart from Parliament without license, 4 Inst. 44.
it is an Offense done out of the Parliament, and is finable by the Lords: and
so it is of a Member of the House of Commons, he may be fined by the House of
Commons.

It does not belong to the Judges to judge of any Law, 4 Inst. 50. Rot. Parl.
31 H. 6. n. 27.
Custom, or Privilege of Parliament.

Cardinal Wolsey coming to the lower House of Parliament, Herbert's Hen 8.136.
told them, That he desired to reason with them, who opposed his Demands: but
being answered, That it was the Order of that House to hear, and not to reason,
but among themselves, the Cardinal departed.

It any sit in the House, Scobel 84.
who are not returned by the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, it is accounted a
great Crime, and severely punished.

5 Martij 1557. Ibid.
4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. For that Christopher Pern affirmed, That he is returned a
Burgess for Plimpton in Devon, and has. brought no Warrant thereof to the
House, nor is returned hither by the Clerk of the Crown, by Book or Warrant; he
is awarded to be in the Custody of the Sergeant, till the House have further
considered.

13 Eliz. 1571. The House was called, and thereupon Edward Lewknor, Sir Simon
d'Ewes Jour. 156. Col. 1, 2.
John Bullock, Nicholas Plumtree, Edward Goodwyn, and John Garnons were
commanded to attend the Order of this House to morrow, for that the House being
this day called, they had entered into the House, and had not as then been
returned by the Clerk of the Crown; except Garnons, whose Case is, for that he
is said to be Excommunicated.

9 Jan. 1562. Scobel 85.
For that it seemed to the House, being very full, that there were a greater
Number than was returned; therefore the Names were immediately called over, and
as they were called, departed out of the House.

7 Febr. 1588. Ibid.
The House was called, and every one answered to his Name, and departed out of
the House, as they were called.

Chiefly the Calling of the House is, Ibid.
to discover what Members are absent without leave of the House, or just Cause;
in which case Fines have been imposed.

If the House be called, Ibid.
the manner has been to call over the Names, and each Member to stand up at the
mention of his Name, uncovering his head. Such as are present are marked, and
the Defaulters called over again the same day, sometimes the day after,
sometimes summoned, sometimes sent for by the Sergeant.

Upon Calling the House, Ibid.
if the Person be present, he rises up bareheaded, and answers: if absent,
he is either excused (and so entered, Licentiatur per speciale Servitium,
excusatur ex gratia, or aegrotat) or if none excuse him, he is entered, Desicit.

That no man may sit in the House, Id. 86. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. passim
till he be legally returned, appears by several Instances of Persons who were
not Members, and for coming into the House, were brought to the Bar, and some
committed, and some sworn, before they departed, to keep secret what they had
heard there.

5 Apr. 1571. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 156. Col. 1.
13 Eliz. Thomas Clerk and Anthony Bull of the Inner Temple, London, Gent. were
by this House committed to the Sergeants Ward, until further Order should be
taken with them, for that they presumed to enter into this House, and were no
Members of the same, as themselves at the Bar confessed.

18 Eliz. 1575. Id. 248. Col. 1.
Charles Johnson of the Inner Temple Gent. committed to the Sergeants Ward,
till further Order be taken by this House, for coming into this House this
present day, the House sitting, confessing himself to be no Member of this
House.

27 Eliz. 1584. Charles Morgan Gent. Servant to Sir George Carry, Id. 334. Col.
1.
Knight of a Shire, being himself no Member of this House, was found to be
standing within the House next to the Door, and as it was thought of mere
ignorance and simplicity, without any evil purpose or meaning, and therefore
was committed by Order of the House to the Sergeants Ward.

30 Nov. eodem An. ^ichard Robinson being found to be sitting in the House by
the space of two hours (while several Speeches were made) was stripped to his
Shirt, Ibid. Col. 1.
and his Pockets searched; and being brought to the Bar, was censured by the
House (after taking the Oaths) to suffer Imprisonment in the Sergeants Ward
till Saturday next, and then (having sworn to keep secret what he had heard) to
be released.

28 Eliz. 1586. Id. 394. Col. 2.
Edmond Moor and John Turner presumed to come into the House, being no Members,
and upon their Submission discharged, because it was done of simplicity and
mere ignorance. Id. 394. Col. 2. So John Leg, Vide id. 486. Col. 2. So Matthew
Jones, Id. 511. Col. 1. So William Hanner, Id. 288. Col 2.

Petitions are usually presented by Members of the same County. Scobel 87.
If they be concerning private Persons, they are to be subscribed, and the
Persons presenting them called in to the Bar, to avow the Substance of the
Petition; especially if it be a Complaint against any.

18 Nov. 1640. Ibid.
One Vivers presented a Petition in the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen, Burgesses,
and other Inhabitants of Banbury, was called in, and did acknowledge the Hand
to the Petition to be his, and that he did deliver it by Order, and on behalf
of the Town of Banbury, and thereupon it was committed.

The like in the same Parliament, Ibid.
upon reading the Petition of one Ward of Salop; and likewise on reading the
Petition of Henry Hogan.

Though freedom of Speech and Debates be an undoubted Privilege of the House,
Scobel 72.
yet whatsoever is spoken in the House, is subject to the Censure of the House.

Though the Committee examine not upon Oath, Id. 17.
yet they may punish any that shall testify untruly.

In the Parliament, Hakewel 93.
if the greatest part of the Knights of the Shire do assent to the making of an
Act of Parliament, and the lesser part will not agree to it; yet this is a good
Act or Statute to last in perpetuum, and that the Law of Majoris partis is so
in all Councels, Elections, etc. both by the Rules of the Common Law, and the
Civil.

Tenants d'ancient Baronies sont discharge de Contribution al Gages de
Chivaliers del Parliament; Moor fol. 768.
quia lour Seigneurs servent pur eux in Parliament.

Tenants of ancient Baronies are discharged from Contribution to the Wages of
Knights of Parliament, because their Lords serve for them in Parliament.

Apr. 1640. Scobel 14.
It was ordered in that Parliament, That if any sit in that House, that are
returned by more Indentures than usual, they should withdraw till the Committee
for Privileges had further ordered.

In the beginning of every Parliament, Id 40.
some Persons have been appointed to consider of such Laws as had continuance
to the present Session, whether they were fit to be continued, or determined:
as also of former Statutes repealed or discontinued, whether fit to be
reviewed, and what are fit to be repealed.

Any Member of the House may offer a Bill for public good, Ibid.
except it be for imposing a Tax: which is not to be done, but by Order of the
House first had.

A private Bill that concerns a particular Person, Id. 41.
is not to be offered to the House, till the leave of the House be desired, and
the Substance of such Bill made known, either by Motion or Petition.

It has at some times been ordered, Hakewel 135.
That every one that prefers a private Bill should pay five pounds to the
poor, as in 43 Eliz. toward the end of the Parliament, when they were troubled
with much Business, but it holds not in other Parliaments.

Scobel 41.
Nevertheless the Speaker had liberty to call for a private Bill to be read
every Morning: and usually the Morning is spent in the first reading of Bills,
until the House grow full.

If any public Bill be tendered, Ibid.
the Person who tenders the Bill, must first open the Matter of the Bill to the
House, and offer the Reasons for admitting thereof: and thereupon the House
will either admit, or deny it.

7 Martij 1606. Id. 46.
Mr. Hadley being assigned of a Committee to confer with the Lords, desired to
be spared, he being in Opinion against the Matter it self. And it was conceived
for a Rule, That no man was to be employed in any Matter, that had declared
himself against it: and the Question being put, it was resolved, Mr. Hadley was
not to be employed.

CHAP. XXII. Privilege of Parliament.
THE Privilege of Tenants in Ancient Demesne must be as ancient as their
Tenure and Service, Sir R. Atkin's Argument, 18. Vide Coke 9 Rep. in Pres.
for their Privilege comes by reason of their Service, and their Service is
known by all to be before the Conquest, in the time of Edward the Confessor,
and in the time of the Conqueror.

Every man must take notice of all the Members of the House returned of Record,
4 Inst. 23, 24.
at his Peril.

Otherwise it is of the Servant of any of the Members of the House. Id. 24.


A Member of Parliament shall have Privilege of Parliament, Id. 42. Hakewel 62.
not only for his Servants, but for his Horses, etc. or other Goods
distrainable.

The Privilege is due eundo, Scobel 88.
morando, redeundo, for the Persons of Members, and their necessary Servants,
and in some Cases for their Goods and Estates also during that time.

For their own Persons, Ibid.
they have been privileged from Suits, Arrests, Imprisonments, Attendance on
Trials, Serving on Juries, and the like; yea from being summoned or called to
attend upon any Suit in other Courts by Subpaena served on them.

He that does Arrest any Member of either House, Hakew. 62. Vide Dyer 60.
during the Session of Parliament, shall be imprisoned in the Tower, by the
nether House of which he is, and shall be put to his Fine; and the Keeper also,
if he will not deliver him when the Sergeant at Arms does come for him by
Command of the House.

The Servants tending upon their Masters during Parliament, Ibid. Crompton's
Juris. 11.
who are necessary; and also such Officers as attend the Parliament, as the
Sergeant at Arms, the Porter of the Door, Clerks, and such like, and also their
Chattels and Goods necessary, are privileged; so that they shall not be taken,
or arrested by any Officer, if it be not in case of Treason or Felony.

Generally the Privileges of Parliament do hold, 4 Inst. 25
unless it be in three Cases, viz. Treason, Felony, and the Peace.

No Privilege is allowable in case of the Peace, 2 Nalson 450.
nor in Case of Conviction, or disarming of Recusants.

No Minister of the Parliament, St. 3 Ed. 4. in Ireland.
during forty days before, and forty days after the Parliament finished, shall
be impleaded, vexed, or troubled by no means.

That every Minister, Ibid.
as well Lords Proctors as Commons, be discharged and quitted of all manner of
Actions had, or moved against them, or any of them, during the time aforesaid;
and this to endure for ever.

Apres que Members sont returns, Dyer 16. a. pl. 19.
lour personal Attendance est cy necessary al Parliament que ils ne doient pur
ascum Business estre absents, and null un Person poit estre bien mis, eo que il
est un necessary Member: and pur ceo, si ascun morust devant le Parliament, un
novel serra eslieu en son lieu, issint que l'entire Number ne doit failer: and
donque il ensue, que le Person de chescun tiel Member doit estre privilege
d'arrest al Suit d'ascun private Person, durant cel temps que il est embusyd
entour les Affairs del Roy, and son Realm: and tiel privilege ad estre touts
foits grant per le Roy a les Commoners al Request del Prolocutor del Parliament
le primer Jour, etc.

After that the Members are returned, their Attendance is so necessary to the
Parliament, that they ought not for any Business to be absent, and no one
Person can well be mist, so that he is a necessary Member: and therefore if any
die before the Parliament, a new one shall be chosen in his place, so that the
entire Number may not fail: and then it follows, that the Person of every such
Member ought to be privileged from Arrest at the Suit of any private Person,
during the time that he is busied in the Affairs of the King and the Realm and
such Privilege has used to be granted at all times by the King to the Commons,
at the Request of the Speaker of the Parliament the first Day, etc.

Common Reason voit, Ibid.
que intant que le Roy, and tout son Realm ad un Interest en le Corpse de
chescun de dits Members; il semble que le private Commodity d'ascun particular
home ne doit estre regard.

Common Reason will have it, that forasmuch as the King and his whole Realm
have an Interest in the Body of every one of its Members, it seems that the
private Commodity of any particular man ought not to be regarded.

Cest Court de Parliament est. Ibid. Crompt. 7. b.
pluis haut Court, and ad plusors Privileges que ascun auter Court del Realm;
pur que semble que en chescun Case sans ascun Exception chescun Burgess est
privilege, quant l'Arrest n'est forsque al Suit d'un Subject.

The Court of Parliament is the highest Court, and has more Privileges than
any Court of the Realm: for which it seems that in every Case without any
Exception, every Burgess is privileged as to Arrest only at the Suit of the
Subject.

Coment que le Parliament erra en le grant del Brief de Privilege, Id. 61.
uncore ceo n'est reversible en auter Court.

Though the Parliament do err in the Grant of a Writ of Privilege, yet it is not
reversible in another Court.

Fuit dit per Dyer, Moor f. 57. n. 163.
que si home soit condemn en Debt ou Trespass, and est eslieu un des Burgesses
ou Chivalers del Parliament, and puis soit prise en Exeoution; il ne poet aver
le privilege del Parliament: and issint fuit tenus per les Sages del Ley en le
Case d'un Ferres en temps le Roy H. 8. and coment que le privilege a ceo temps
fuit a luy allow, Crompton's Jur. p 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 34 H. 8.
ceo fuit minus just.

It was said by Dyer, That if a Man be condemned in Debt or Trespass, and is
chosen one of the Burgesses or Knights of Parliament, and afterward is taken
in Execution; he cannot have the Privilege of Parliament: and so it was held
by the Sages of the Law in the Case of one Ferrers in the time of King Henry
the Eighth, Petyt's Miscel. Parl. p. 1. etc.
and though the Privilege at that time was allowed him, yet it was unjust.

Hill and Stukely les Viscounts de Londres fueront commit al Tower pur lour
Contemts; Dyer 61. pl. 28.
pur ceo que ils ne voil lesser George Ferrers, que fuit arrest sur un
Execution, d'aler alarge, quant les Sergeants del Arms vient pur luy, sans
ascun Brief.

Hill and Stukely, the Sheriffs of London, were committed to the Tower for
their Contempts, for that they would not suffer George Ferrers, who was
Arrested upon an Execution, to go at large, when the Sergeant at Arms came for
him, without any Writ.

Le lower Meson del Parliament agree, Fitzherberts case. Moor so. 340 n 461.
que entant que un fuit arrest, devant que il fuit eslie Burgess, que il ne
doit aver le privilege del Meson.

The lower House of Parliament agreed, that in regard one was arrested, before
he was chosen Burgess that he ought not to have the Privilege of the House.

Vide Fitz-Geralds Case, Anno 1640. in Ireland. Vide 39 Hen. 6. Walter Clerks
Case, 5 Hen. 4. Richard Chidder 38 Hen. 8. Tyneman's Case, 43 Eliz. Belgrave's
Case, 39 Hen. 6. Ferrer's Case in Holinshead, f. 1584.

Debt upon an Obligation, Brownl. 91. Jackson versus Kirton.
whereof the Condition was, That if A. would render, himself to an Arrest in
such a place, etc. A. pleads privilege of Parliament, and that being Servant
to such a Member, he could not render himself to be arrested. Upon Demurrer,
the Opinion of the Court was for the Plaintiff; for A. might render himself,
and let it be at their Peril, if they will arrest him.

Magister Militiae Templi petit, 4 Inst. 24.
quod distringat Catalla unius de Concilio, tempore Parliamenti, pro Reditu
unius Domus in London. Rex respondet, non videtur honestum, quod illi de
Concilio suo distringantur Tempore Parliamenti; sed alio Tempore, etc.

Bogo de Clare, Ibid. Towns. Coll. 255. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 655. Col. 1 says
he was fined 20000 Marks.
and the Prior of Trinity, for serving a Citation on the Earl of Cornwall in the
Time of the Parliament, committed to the Tower, and Bogo, at whose Procurement
it was done, fined in 2000 Marks to the King, and a thousand pounds to be paid
to the Earl.

4 Inst. 24.
And yet the serving of the said Citation did not arrest or restain his Body:
and the same Privilege holds in Case of Subpoena, or other Process out of
any Court of Equity.

Rex mandavit Justiciariis suis ad Assisas, Ibid.
etc. quod supersedeant captioni eorundem, ubi Comites, Barons, and alii
Summoniti ad Parliamentum Regis sunt Parts, quamdiu dictum Parliamentum
duraverit.

A Citation shall not be served on any Member, Ibid. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour.
435. Col. 1.
nor Subpoena.

Diverse Persons committed to Prison for serving a Citation on John de Thorsby,
Ibid.
Clerk of the Parliament.

22 Febr. 6 Ed. 6. Scobel 110 Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 249. Col. 2.
Ordered, If any Burgess require Privilege for himself, or his Servant; upon
Declaration thereof to the Speaker, he shall have a Warrant signed by the
Speaker to obtain the Writ.

22 Martij 18 Jac. 1. Scobel 110
It was resolved, That no Protection under any Man's hand of this House, is good.

29 Jan. 1557. Id. 89.
4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Thomas Ennys Burgess for the Borough of Thusk, complained
that a Subpoena was delivered him to appear in Chancery, and required the
Privilege of the House: whereupon Sir Clement Higham and Mr. Recorder of
London, were sent to the Lord Chancellor, to revoke the Process.

27 Eliz. Id. 90. Vid. Towns. Coll. 213. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 438. Col. 1, 2.
One Kyrl having caused a Subpoena out of the Star Chamber to be served on a
Member of the House of Commons; and for want of Appearance, taken out an
Attachment, and enforced the Payment of Money to discharge the same: the said
Kyrl was committed, till he had paid Costs to the Party served, and made a
Submission to the House on his Knees at the Bar.

15 Maij 1604. Scobel 90.
The Sergeant was sent to Attach the Body of one, who served a Subpoena on the
Person of Sir Robert Needham a Member.

7 Maij 1607. Ibid.
The Sergeant was sent for Edward Throgmorton, for serving a Subpoena on Sir
Oliver Cromwell.

14 Maij 19 Jac. 1. Id. 91.
Upon Complaint of the Service of a Subpoena on a Member of this House, Sir
Edward Coke vouched a Precedent, 10 Ed. 3. That a Subpoena being served on the
Clerk of this House, the Party was committed for breaking the Privilege of
this House.

4 Maij 1607. Ibid.
A Subpoena out of the Exchequer being served on Sir R. Pawlet a Member; the
House granted Privilege, and ordered the Sergeant by his Mace, to attach the
Parties delinquent, and to bring them to the Bar, to receive the judgment of
the House. And the next day Mr. Speaker writ a Letter to the Lord Chief Baron,
That no further Process do issue against the said Sir R. Pawlet.

3 Dec. 19 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Upon Occasion of a Subpoena served on Mr. Brereton, it was agreed by the whole
House, That the serving of a Subpoena upon a Member of this House, knowing him
to be a Parliament Man, is a breach of Privilege: and Napper, who served the
Subpoena, was committed.

39 Eliz. Towns. Coll. 109. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes 546. Col. 2.
Mr. Combs and Mr. Henry Powle; Members of this House, being served with a
Subpoena ad testificandum, by Mrs. Ann Wye; the Sergeant of the House was
ordered to bring in the said Ann to appear in this House, to answer the
Contempt.

43 Eliz. 1601. Id. 212, 213, 214.
A Subpoena ad testisicandum served on Mr. Johnson, and other Members; Agreed,
That the Sergeant be sent to arrest all those to appear that had procured the
Subpoena, to answer their Contempt with all speed.

44 Eliz. 1601. Id. 246. Sir Simon d'Ewes, Jour. 651. Col. 1.
Sir Edmond Morgan a Member of this House was served with a Subpoena, at the
Suit of one Lemney; who was sent for by the Sergeant. Id. 257.
And because Christopher Kennel, who served it, professed Ignorance, he was
only adjudged to three days Imprisonment in the Custody of the Sergeant, and
pay his Fees.

The same Order with William Mackerless, Ibid. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 656.
Col. 1, 2.
who served a Subpoena on Mr. Pemberton a Member, at the Suit of one Mackerness.

44 Eliz. 1601. Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 655. Col. 1, 2.
Mr. Philips a Member of the House was served with a Privy Seal out of the
Court of Wards, by one Thomas Dean Servant to Mrs. Chamberlain a Widow. The
House ordered that she, and her Servant, should be sent for by the Sergeant.

Vide plus de his Sir Simon d'Ewes Journal 637. and alibi passim.

33 Eliz. The Sheriffs of London were fined by the Commons, Scobel 92.
and sent to the Tower, for not delivering a Burgess arrested for Debt, sitting
the Parliament.

6 Apr. 1593. Id. 92. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 519.
The Sergeant at Mace, who arrested Mr. Neal a Member upon an Execution; and
Weblyn, at whose Suit he was arrested, were brought to the Bar, and both
committed Prisoners to the Tower: and the Sergeant at Arms attending this House
was ordered to deliver them over to the Lieutenant of the Tower.

13 Maij 1607. Ibid.
Nicholas Allen an Attorney, and Palmer, at whose Suit Mr. Martin a Member was
Out-lawed, ordered to be sent for by the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar to
answer their Contempt.

An Attachment for Contempt being taken out of Chancery against Mr. Belingham a
Member: Ibid.
the House ordered to have Privilege, and a Letter to be sent to Mr. Evelyn,
one of the six Clerks, to stay the Suit.

Upon a Writ directed to the Sheriff to levy Twenty pounds Issues upon Sir
Robert Oxenbridge for Nonappearance, it was ordered, Id. 93.
That if the Issues were not discharged before that night, the Parties
delinquent to be brought next Day to the Bar by the Sergeant.

14 Maij 1576. Ibid.
Sir Edward Montague a Member of the House, was warned to attend a Trial in
London, which was to be had against him; and was by Order of the House
privileged: and the Party that gave the Warning was summoned to appear at the
Bar next Morning.

21 Febr. 1588. Id. 94. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 436. Col. 1, 2.
Ordered, That those Members of the House who have Occasion of Privilege
(Writs of Nisi prius being brought against them) do declare their Case to the
Speaker, who thereupon shall direct the Warrant of this House to the Lord
Chancellor, for awarding Writs of Supersedeas.

3 Martij 18 Jac. 1. Ibid.
Upon a Report from the Committee (appointed to consider of a way of staying
Trials against Members of the House) that by several Precedents the Custom
appeared to be in such Cases, That on Motions and Orders in the House, Letters
were written to the Justices of Assize for stay of Trials against Members of
the House, which Letters were entered in the Journal Book, and that it
belongs to the Clerk to write the same. It was thereupon Resolved, That the
former Course of writing Letters to the Justices of Assize, should be held
according to former Precedents.

10 Junij 1607. Id. 95.
Sir Robert Johnson a Member of this House, moved for a Letter to stay a Trial
against him in the Exchequer; which was granted (as appears by the Entry on
the 13th day, when a Petition of Sir Robert Brett was read against that
Privilege.) The Privilege formerly granted was assirmed, upon this Reason,
That no man should have any Thing to withdraw him from his Service in the
House. The like 14 Febr. 18 Jac. 1.

The Privilege of the House is so much insisted on, Ibid.
that it has been a Question, Whether any Member of the House could consent,
that himself might be sued, during the Session; because the Privilege is not
so much the Persons, as the Houses: and therefore when any Person has been
brought to the Bar for any Offense of this Nature, the Speaker has usually
charged the Person in the Name of the whole House, as a Breach of the
Privilege of the House.

3 Junij 1607. Ibid.
Sir Thomas Holcroft a Member of the House, had occasion to sue at Law, and was
sued, with which he was content, and desired the Leave of the House: there was
a Question, Whether the House should give leave for a Breach of Privilege: and
it was resolved, The House might give leave.

7 Maij 1607. Id. 96.
Sir Thomas Bigg and Sir Thomas Love being returned upon an Attaint in the
Kings Bench, it being moved, that in this Case they ought to have Privilege:
it was so ordered, and the Sergeant sent with his Mace, to deliver the Pleasure
of the House to the Secondary, the Court sitting.

22 Nov. 1597. Sir John Tracy a Member of this House, Ibid. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes
Jour. 560. Col. 2.
being at the Common Pleas Bar, to be put upon a Jury; the Sergeant at Arms was
presently sent with his Mace to fetch him thence, to attend his Service in the
House.

Apr. 12 Jac. 1. Scobel 96.
Sir William Bampfield was committed by the Lord Chancellor for a Contempt,
after the Writ of Summons, but before the Election. Ordered upon the Question,
That he shall have his Privilege by Writ of Habeas Corpus.

1 Jac. 1. Sess. 2. Ibid.
Sir John Peyton returned Knight for Cambridge the last Session, and since
chosen Sheriff; Resolved, That he shall attend his Service here.

28 Martij 1542. Herbert's Hen. 8.539
During this Session of Parliament some wrong was offered to their ancient
Privileges, a Burgess of theirs being Arrested: whereof the King
understanding, not only gave way to their releasing him, but Punishment of the
Offenders: insomuch that the Sheriffs of London were committed to the Tower,
and one Delinquent to a place called Little Ease, and others to Newgate.

2 Martij 1592. Scobel 112, 113. Vide Moor so. 340. n. 461. Fitzherbert's Case.
Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 479, 480, 490. Col. 2.
Upon a Report from the Committee of Privileges, That one Mr. Fitzherbert was
returned a Burgess, and accepted against, because he was alleged to be
Outlawed, and detained upon such Outlawry: The House ordered, That Mr. Speaker
should move the Lord Keeper for an Habeas Corpus cum Causa, to bring up the
Body and the Cause of Mr. Fitzherbert. But the Lord Keeper returned, That in
regard of the ancient Liberties and Privileges of this House, the Sergeant at
Arms be sent by Order of this House for Mr. Fitzherbert at his own charge; by
reason whereof he may be brought, without peril of being further arrested by
the way: which was approved of.

1 Jac. 1. Scobel 104, 103, 106, 107.
The first day of sitting, complaint was made, That Sir Thomas Shirley chosen a
Member of the House, Vid. Petyt's Miscell. Parl. 122, 123, 124, 125.
was arrested four days before the sitting of this Parliament: a Warrant issued
to the Clerk of the Crown for a Habeas Corpus to bring him to the House, being
then a Prisoner in the Fleet; and the Sergeant and his Yeoman were sent for in
Custody, who being brought to the Bar, and confessing their Fault, were
remitted for that time. 17 April, Upon hearing Council in the House at the Bar
for Sir Thomas Shirley, and the Warden of the Fleet; it was ordered, That
Simson, at whose Suit, and the Sergeant by whom the Arrest was made, should be
committed to the Tower. 4 Maij, A Habeas Corpus was awarded to the Warden of
the Fleet to bring Sir Thomas Shirley to the House; the Warden denied to
execute it; for which the 7th of May following he was sent for by the Sergeant,
and brought to the Bar; who denying to bring his Prisoner, a new Writ of Habeas
Corpus was awarded, and the Warden was committed to the Sergeant, with this
Order, That if that Writ were not executed, that then he should be delivered
over to the Lieutenant of the Tower, as the Houses Prisoner. 8 Maij, The
Sergeant was sent with his Mace to the Fleet; the House sitting, to require the
Body of Sir Thomas Shirley: but the Sergeant being denied, a Warrant was made
to the Sergeant to deliver the Warden of the Fleet to the Lieutenant of the
Tower, to be kept close Prisoner. 11 Maij, The Warden was again sent for, and
brought to the Bar, and refusing to deliver up his Prisoner; he was committed
to the Place called the Dungeon or Little Ease in the Tower. 14 Maij, A new
Warrant was ordered for a new Writ of Habeas Corpus, and that the Sergeant
should go with the Writ; that the Warrant should be brought to the Door of the
Fleet by the Lieutenant himself, and there the Writ to be delivered to him, and
the Commandment of the House to be made known to him by the Sergeant, for the
executing of it; that in the mean time the Warden to be presently committed to
the Dungeon, and after to be returned thither again. 18 Maij, The Warden did
deliver Sir Thomas Shirley, and so was not put into the Dungeon. 19 Maij, He
attending at the Door, was brought in to the Bar, where, upon his knees,
confessing his Error and Presumption, and professing he was unfeignedly sorry,
he had so offended this Honorable House; upon that Submission, by direction of
the House, the Speaker pronounced his Pardon and Discharge, paying ordinary
Fees to the Clerk, and to the Sergeant.

Mr. Belgrave, Sir Simon d'Ewes Jour. 688. Col. 1.
being a Member of the House of Commons, had an Information exhibited against
him in the Star Chamber by the Earl of Huntington. An Order was entered, as the
Act of the House. 43 Eliz. 1601. That he ought not to be molested in that
Manner.

10 Febr. 4. Rush.Coll. 653. Vid. Petyts Miscell. Parl. p. 107
Car. 1. Whilst the House was in Debate, the Warehouse of Mr. Rolls (Merchant,
and Member of the House then sitting in Parliament) was locked up by a
Pursuivant, and himself called from the Committee, and served with a Subpoena:
This gave occasion of smart Debates in the House. After, Id. 654.
the Attorney General writ a Letter, That the serving a Subpoena was a mistake,
and prayed a favorable Interpretation. Resolved, That Mr. Rolls a Member of
the House, Rush.Coll. 659.
ought to have Privilege of Person and Goods.

16 Febr. 5. Memorials of the Method of Proceedings in Parliament 97. Vid. Sir
S. d'Ewes Journ 85. Col. 1.
Eliz. Robert Parker Servant to Sir William Woodhouse Knight for Norfolk, being
attached in London, at the Suit of one Baker, in Trespass; had a Warrant of
Privilege, notwithstanding Judgment given against him for four Marks.

20 Febr. 18. Ibid. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Journ. 251. Col. 1.
Eliz. 1575. Upon the Question, and also upon Division of the House, Edward
Smaley Servant to Arthur Hall Esquire one of the Burgesses for Grantham, being
arrested upon an Execution, had Privilege.

16 Dec. 44 Eliz. Anthony Curwen Servant to William Huddleston Esquire one of the
Knights of Cumberland, Ibid. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour 680. Col. 1.
being arrested upon a Capias ad Satisfaciendum out of the Common Pleas, for
six pounds Debt, and forty shillings Damages, and detained in Execution; a
Supersedeas was awarded, and he was delivered.

And the House awarded, Towns.Coll. 326. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 680. Col. 1.
686. Col. 1.
the Sergeant should be discharged, paying his Fees, and that Matthews should
pay them: and Matthews to pay his Fees, and remain three days in the Sergeants
Custody, for procuring the Arrest.

11 Maij 19 Jac. 1. Memorials, etc. p. 98.
The Undersheriff of Middlesex was called to the Bar, for causing Alexander
Melling, Servant to the Chancellor of the Duchy to be arrested; he denied he
knew him to to be his Servant: Mr. Speaker let him know, the House had ordered
him to have Privilege; and therefore orders the Undersheriff to discharge
him.

1 Jac. Ibid.
1. Sess. 2. Sir Edward Sandys moves a Breach of Privilege by Sir Robert
Leigh a Justice of the Peace, for committing his Coachman to Newgate. Sir
Robert Leigh was sent for by the Sergeant, and an Habeas Corpus for the
Prisoner. Sir Robert Leigh being brought to the Bar, acknowledged his Fault,
and was discharged, and so was the Prisoner.

3 Martij 1606. Ibid.
Valentine Sire Servant and Bag-bearer to the Clerk of the Commons House, being
arrested upon an Execution, was by Order and Judgment of the House enlarged.

7 Sept. 1601. Id 99. Vid. Towns. Coll 196, 206, 210.
Woodal Servant of William Cook Esquire a Member of the House being arrested, and
in Prison in Newgate: Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 629. Col. 1.
the Sergeant at Arms was presently sent to Newgate to bring him to the House,
sedente Curia: and being brought to the Bar with his Keeper, was discharged by
Order of the House from his said Keeper, and from his Imprisonment.

1 Julij 1607. Memorials, 99.
John Pasmore the Marshal's man being sent for, and brought to the Bar, for
arresting John Jessop Waterman, Servant to Sir Henry Nevil a Member of the
House; he denied that he knew he was Sir Henry's Servant, until afterward;
notwithstanding he took an Assumpsit from him to answer the Action. The House
thought fit to commit him to the Sergeant, till the Houses Pleasure were
further known, and till he had discharged the Assumpsit, and paid the Fees.

17 Junij 1609. Ibid.
Upon a Report from the Committee for Privileges, that a menial Servant of Sir
Robert Wroth was arrested eight days before this Session; the Sergeant was sent
for the Prisoner, and the Sergeant that made the Arrest, one King, who followed
it, and Fisher, at whose Suit he was arrested.

4 Junij 19 Jac. 1. Id. 100.
Johnson, a Servant to Sir James Whitlock, a Member of the Commons Housel, was
arrested upon an Execution by Moor and Lock: who being told that Sir James
Whitlock was a Parliament man; Fulk, one of the Prosecutors said, He had known
greater men's men than Sir James Whitlock taken from their Masters Heels in
Parliament time. This appearing, Lock and Moor were called in to the Bar, and
by the Judgment of the House were sentenced. First, That at the Bar they should
ask Forgiveness of the House, and of Sir James Whitlock, Petyt 's Miscel.
Parliament. 118.
on their knees. Secondly, That they should both ride upon one Horse
bare-back'd, back to back, from Westminster to the Exchange, with Papers on
their Breasts, and this Inscription, For arresting a Servant of a Member of the
Commons House of Parliament; and this to be presently done sedente Curia: which
Judgment was pronounced by Mr. Speaker against them at the Bar upon their Knees.

28 Apr. 22 Jac. 1. Memorials, 100.
A Warrant was ordered to be issued by the Speaker for a Writ of Privilege, to
bring up Andrew Bates Servant to Mr. Richard Godfrey of the House, in Execution
with the Sheriff of Kent, at the Suit of one Hunt.

This Privilege does take place by Force of the Election, and that before the
Return be made, as appears in the Case following.

19 Nov. 1601. Id. 107, 108. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 642. Col. 2. 643. Col. 1.
Vid. Petyts Miscell. Parl. 119.
Upon Information to the House, that one Roger Boston Servant to -- Lanckton,
Baron of Walton, who (upon credible Report of diverse Members of the House, was
affirmed to be chosen a Burgess for the Borough of Newton in Lancashire, but
not yet returned by the Clerk of the Crown) had been, during that Session of
Parliament, arrested in London, at the Suit of one Muscle: the said Muscle,
together with the Officer that made the Arrest, were sent for by the Sergeant,
and brought to the Bar, and there charged by Mr. Speaker, in the Name of the
whole House, with their Offense herein: and having been heard, Boston was
ordered to have Privilege, and to be discharged of his Arrest and
Imprisonment; and the Offenders for three days committed to the Sergeant, and
ordered to pay such Charges to Beston as the Speaker shall set down, and their
Fees.

6 Martij. 1586. Memorials, p. 108, 109. Sir. Simon d'Ewes Jour. 410. Col.
1.414. Col. 2.
This day William White, brought to the Bar for arresting Mr. Martin a Member
of the House, made Answer, That the Arrest was made above fourteen days before
the beginning of the Parliament: the House thereupon appointed a Committee to
search the Precedents. And March 11. the Committee made their report of Mr.
Martin a Member of this House, arrested upon mean Process by White above twenty
days before the beginning of this Parliament holden by Prorogation (mistaken
for Adjournment) and in respect that the House was divided about it in Opinion,
Mr. Speaker with the consent of the House, the sooner to grow to some certainty
of the Judgment of the House in this Cause, moved these Questions to the House,
viz.

First, Whether they would limit a time certain, or a reasonable time, to any
Member of the House for his Privilege. The House answered a convenient time.

Secondly, Whether Mr. Martin was arrested within this reasonable time. The
House answered Tea.

Thirdly, If White should be punished for arresting Martin. The House answered
No; because the arrest was twenty days before the beginning of the Parliament,
and unknown to him that would be taken for reasonable time. But the principal
cause why Martin had his Privilege, was, for that White the last Session
(mistaken for Meeting) of Parliament arrested Mr. Martin, and then knowing him
to returned a Burgess for this House, discharged his Arrest.

And then afterward Mr. Martin again returning out of his Country to London to
serve in this House, Mr. White did again arrest him, and therefore this House
took in evil part against him his second Arrest, and thereupon judged that
Martin should be discharged of his second Arrest out of the Fleet by the said
Mr. White.

12 Martij 1606 Complaint was made by Mr. James a Burgess of Parliament, Id.
102.
That his Horse standing at his Inn was taken by the Post-masters Servant: both
the Postmaster and his Servant were sent for, and brought to the Bar. Moreton
the Postmaster appearing to be ignorant of what his Servant had done, and
disavowing it, was by order of the House discharged: but upon the Testimony of
a Witness at the Bar, that he told the Servant, when he took the Horse, that a
Member of Parliament was owner of it, the Servant was committed.

In Dec. 1606. Thomas Finch, Memorials, p. 101, 102.
a Servant to Sir Nicholas Sandys one of the Burgesses for Quinborough, was
Arrested during the Adjournment; which being conceived to be a great Contempt
to the Privilege of the House, an Habeas Corpus was awarded to bring him to
the House, and he was accordingly brought, and also one Knight, who procured
the Arrest, and Harrison the Yeoman. The Excuse was, that Finch was an Attorney
at Law: but it being avowed by Sir Nicholas Sandys, That Finch lay in his
House, solicited his Causes, and received Wages from him. And it being insisted
on, that all menial and necessary Servants are to be privileged, and instance
given of a Precedent of the Baron of Waltons. Solicitor, and Huddleston's
Solicitor in the time of Queen Elizabeth. Upon the Question, Finch was
privileged, and delivered, according to former Precedents.

During the Adjournment, Ibid. 102.
a Suit was prosecuted in the Court of Wards against Nicholas Pots Esquire and
Francis Wethered Gent. Committees of a Ward which concerned Mr. Nicholas Davys,
Servant to the then Speaker, as Assignee of the Ward. The Speaker writ a Letter
to the Court, to make known, That he was one of his Clerks, and nearest
Servants; and that the Privilege was now as warrantable as in the Time of
sitting, and prayed the Court to take Notice of it.

During another Adjournment in March following, Id 103.
the Speaker (warranted by the general Order) at the desire of Sir Edmund
Ludlow, who was summoned to attend the Execution of a Commission out of the
Chancery, writ a Letter to the Commissioners to excuse his Attendance, and that
he should not be prejudiced by his Absence.

In May 1607 during an Adjournment, Ibid.
the Speaker directed a Letter to the Lord President and Council at York, to
stay Proceedings in a Suit against Talbot Bows, a Member of the House.

29 Febr. 1575. One Williams, Id. 113.
for assaulting a Burgess of this House, was upon Complaint sent for by the
Sergeant, and brought to the Bar, and committed to the Serjeant's Ward.

23 Apr. 1 Mar. One Monington, Ibid.
for striking William Johnson a Burgess, was sent for, and confessing it, was
committed to the Tower.

28 Nov. 1601. Ibid. Towns. Coll. 259. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 658. Col. 1.
Complaint being made by Mr. Fleetwood a Member of the House, That one Holland
a Scrivener, and one Brook his Servant, had evil entreated and beaten the
Servant of the said Mr. Fleetwood in his Presence; they were both sent for by
the Sergeant, and brought to the Bar; and for the said Offense committed for
five days to the Sergeant. And that they should pay double Fees.

12 Febr. 18 Jac. 1. Memorials, 114.
Mr. Lovel, a Member of the House, informed, That one Darryel threatened his
Person, that for a Speech spoken by him in the House, he should be sent to the
Tower during the Parliament, or presently after. Darryel was sent for by the
Sergeant to answer it to the House; and upon Testimony of it, he was committed
to the Sergeant till Thursday following, and then to acknowledge his Fault, or
be committed to the Tower.

16 Jun. 1604. Ibid.
Complaint being made of one Thomas Rogers a Currier, dwelling in
Coleman-street, for abusing Sir John Savill in slanderous and unseemly terms,
upon his Proceedings at a Committee in the Bill touching Tanners, etc. he was
sent for by the Sergeant at Arms to the Bar, to answer his Offense.

1 Car. 1. 4 Inst. 48.
The Sheriff for the County of Buckingham was chosen Knight for the County of
Norfolk, and returned into the Chancery; and having a Subpoena served upon him
at the Suit of the Lady C. pendente Parliamento, upon Motion, he had the
Privilege of Parliament allowed to him by the Judgment of the whole House of
Commons.

43 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Coll. 195. Vide Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 629. Col. 1.
This day a Page was brought to the Bar, whom Sir Francis Hastings had caused
to be committed, for that as he went down the Stairs, the Page offered to
throng him. But upon Sir Francis Hastings his Entreaty, speaking very earnestly
for him, and upon the Pages submission upon his knees at the Bar, he was
discharged.

44 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Coll. 229. Vid. Sir S. d'Ewes Jour. 643. Col. 2.
Mr. William Morris Burgess for Beaumaris, coming on his way to London, his Man
was arrested at Shrewsbury. Ordered, That the Bailiff, and he that procured the
Arrest, and the Sergeant be sent for.

44 Eliz. 1601. Towns. Coll. 225, 226.
The Solicitor of one Langton a Burgess for Newton in Lancashire was arrested
at the Suit of one Musket a Tailor, and committed to the Compter. Agreed by the
House, That both Musket and the Sergeant should pay the Solicitor's Costs and
Damages, and be imprisoned three days in the Sergeant 's Custody, and to pay
the Sergeant attending this House his Fees.

The Parliament shall not give Privilege to any contra morem Parliamentarium,
Rush. Coll. 663.
to exceed the bounds and limits of his Place and Duty. And all agreed, That
regularly he cannot be compelled out of Parliament to answer things done in
Parliament in a Parliamentary Course: but it is otherwise where things are done
exorbitantly, for those are not the Acts of the Court.

16 Car. 1. Id 2d Part of the 2d Vol 1147.
Resolved, That the Lords voting the propounding and declaring matter of
Supply, before it was moved in the House of Commons, was a Breach of Privilege
of the House.

No Privilege is allowable in Case of the Peace betwixt private men, 2 Nalson
450.
much more in Case of the Peace of the Kingdom.

Privilege cannot be pleaded against an Indictment for any thing done out of
Parliament, Ibid.
because all Indictments are contra Pacem Domini Regis.

Privilege of Parliament is granted in regard of the Service of the
Commonwealth, Ibid.
and is not to be used to the danger of the Commonwealth.

All Privilege of Parliament is in the Power of Parliament, Ibid.
and is a Restraint to the Proceedings of other inferior Courts, but is no
Restraint to the Proceedings of Parliament.

Dec. 1641. Resolved, 2 Nalson, 729.
That the setting of any Guards about this House, without the Consent of the
House, is a Breach of the Privilege of this House, and that therefore such
Guards ought to be dismissed.

Resolved upon the Question, Id. 741.
nemine contradicente, That the Privileges of Parliament were broken by his
Majesty's taking Notice of the Bill for suppressing of Soldiers, being in
agitation in both Houses, and not agreed on. Ibid.
Resolved upon the Question, Nemine Contradicente, That his Majesty, in
propounding a Limitation and provisional Clause to be added to the Bill, before
it was presented to him by the Consent of both Houses, was a Breach of the
Privilege of Parliament. Ibid.
Resolved upon the Question, Nemine Contradicente, That his Majesty expressing
his Displeasure against some Persons, for Matters moved in the Parliament,
during the Debate, and preparation of that Bill, was a Breach of the Privilege
of Parliament.

Whereas his Majesty in his Royal Person the 4th of Jan. 1641. 2 Nalson 823.
did come to the House of Commons, with a great Multitude of Men, armed in a
warlike manner, with Halberds, Swords, and Pistols, who came up to the very
door of the House, and placed themselves there, and in other Places and
Passages near to the House, to the great Terror and Disturbance of the Members
then thereof sitting, and according to their Duty, in a peaceable and orderly
manner, treating of the great Affairs of both Kingdoms of England and Ireland;
and his Majesty having placed himself in the Speaker's Chair, did demand the
Persons of diverse Members of that House to be delivered unto him.

It was thereupon declared by the House of Commons, Ibid.
That the same is a high Breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
and inconsistent with the Liberty and Freedom thereof; and therefore the House
does conceive, they could not with safety of their own Persons, or the
Indempnities of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, sit there any longer,
without a full Vindication of so high a Breach of Privilege, and a sufficient
Guard wherein they might confide.

The Lords cannot proceed against a Commoner, Seldom 's Jud. p. 84.
but upon a Complaint of the Commons.

APPENDIX.
The Report of a Case happening in Parliament in the first year of K. James the
First, which was the Case of Sir Francis Goodwyn, and Sir John Fortescue, for
the Knights Place in Parliament for the County of Bucks. Translated out of the
French.
IN this Case, after that Sir Francis Goodwyn was elected Knight, with one Sir
William Fleetwood, for the said County, which Election was freely made for him
in the County, and Sir John Fortescue refused, notwithstanding that the
Gentlemen of the best Rank put him up; The said Sir John Fortescue complained
to the King and Council Table, (he being one of them, to wit, one of the Privy
Council) that he had been injuriously dealt with in that Election, which does
not appear to be true: But to exclude Sir Francis Goodwyn from being one of the
Parliament, it was objected against him that he was Outlawed in Debt, which was
true; scilicet, He was Outlawed for 60 l. 31th of Queen Elizabeth, at the Suit
of one Johnson; which Debt was paid: and also the 39th of Eliz. at the Suit of
one Hacker for 16 l. which Debt was also paid: and that notwithstanding, the
King by the Advice of his Council at Law, and by the Advice of his Judges took
Cognizance of these Outlawries, and directed another Writ to the Sheriff of the
said County to elect another Knight in the place of the said Sir Francis
Goodwyn, which Writ bore Date before the Return of the former.

And this Writ recites, That because the said Sir Francis was Outlawed, prout
Domino Regi constabat de Recordo, and for other good Considerations which were
well cognisant to the King, and because he was Inidonious for the Business of
the Parliament, therefore the King commanded him to elect one other Knight in
his room, which Writ was executed accordingly, and Sir John Fortescue elected.

And at the day, to wit, the first day of the Parliament both Writs were
returned, the first with the Indenture sealed, between the Sheriff and the
Freeholders of Bucks, in which Sir Francis Goodwyn and Sir William Fleetwood
were elected Knights for the Parliament; and also the Sheriff returned (upon
the Dorse of the Writ) that the said Sir Francis was Outlawed in two several
Outlawries, and therefore was not a meet Person to be a Member of the
Parliament House: The second Writ was returned with an Indenture only, in which
it was recited, That Sir John Fortescue, by reason of the second Writ, was
elected Knight.

Both these Returns were brought the third sitting of the Parliament to the
Parliament House by Sir George Copping being Clerk of the Crown.

And after that the Writs and Returns of them were read, it was debated in
Parliament, Whether Sir Francis Goodwyn should be received as Knight for the
Parliament, or Sir John Fortescue.

And the Court of Parliament, after a long Debate thereupon, gave Judgment That
Sir Francis Goodwyn should be received; and their Reasons were these:

First, Because they took the Law to be, that an Outlawry in Personal Actions
was no Cause to Disable any Person from being a Member of Parliament: and it
was said, That this was Ruled in Parliament 35th of Queen Elizabeth in the
Parliament House in a Case for one Fitz-Herbert.

Another President was 39 H. 6.

Secondly, The Pardons of the 39th of Queen Eliz. and 43 Eliz. had pardoned
those Outlawries: and therefore, as they said, he was a Man able against all
the World, but against the Party Creditor, and against him he was not. But in
this Case the Parties were paid.

Also Thirdly, It was said, that Sir Francis Goodwyn was not Outlawed, because
no Proclamation was issued forth to the County of Bucks, where he was Commorant
and Resiant: And therefore the Outlawry being in the Hustings in London and Sir
Francis Goodwyn being Commoran in Bucks, the Outlawry (no Proclamation issuing
to the County of Buks) was void by the Statute of the 31th of the Queen, which
in such Cases makes the Outlawries void.

Fourthly, It was said that the Outlawries were 1. Against Francis Goodwyn, Esquire
2. Against Francis Goodwyn, Gent. and 3. The Return was of Francis Goodwyn, Knight.


Et quomodo constat, that those Outlawries were against the said Sir Francis
Goodwyn; for these Reasons also they Resolved that the Outlawries were not any
matter against Sir Francis Goodwyn to disenable him to be a Knight for the
County of Bucks.

Fifthly, It was said, That by the Statute of 7 H. 4. which prescribes the
manner of the Election of Knights and Burgesses, it is Enacted, That the
Election shall be by Indenture between the Sheriff and the Freeholders, etc.
that the Indenture shall be the Return of the Sheriff.

It was also said, That the Presidents do warrant this Judgment, videlicet, 1.
One President of the 39 H. 6. where Person Outlawed was adjudged a sufficient
Member of Parliament. Another 1 Eliz. and ot that time one Gargrave, who was a
man learned in the Law, was Speaker, and of the Queens Council. 2. Another was
the Case of one Fludd in the 23th of the Queen, who, being Outlaived, was
^^^udged that he should be Privileged by Parliament, and at that time the Lord
Chief Justice Popham was Speaer. And 3. In the 35th of Elizabeth, there were
three Presidents, scil. one of Fitzherbert, another of one Killegrew, being
Outlawed in 52 Outlawries; and the third of Sir Walter Harecourt, being
outlawed in eighteen Outlawries.


But after this Sentence and Judgment of the Parliament, the King's Highness
was displeased with it, because the second Writ emanavit by his Assent, and by
the Advice of his Council.

And therefore it was moved to the Judges in the Upper House, Whether a Person
Outlawed could be a Member of Parliament, who gave their Opinions that he could
not. And they all, except Williams, agreed that the Pardon without a Scire
facias did not help him, but that he was Outlawed to that purpose, as if no
Pardon had been granted.

And upon this the Lords sent to the Lower House, Desiring a Conference with
them concerning this Matter; which Conference the Lower House, after some
deliberation, denied for these Reasons: 1. Because they had given their
Judgment before, and therefore they could not have Conference de re Judicata;
as in like manner they did 27 Queen Eliz. upon a Bill which came from the
Lords, and was rejected by Sentence upon the first Reading; Sir Walter Mildmay
being then of the Privy Council, and of the House. 2. Because they ought not to
give any Account of their Actions to any other Person, but to the King himself.


This Answer the Lords did ill resent, and therefore refused Conference in
other Matters concerning Wards, and Respite of Homages and Purveyors; and also
they sent to the King to inform him of it: but before their Messengers came to
the King, two of the Privy Council, scilicet, Sir John Stanhope, and Sir John
Herbert, were sent to the King by the Lower House, to inform him that they had
heard that his Grace was displeased with the House for their Sentence given for
Sir Francis Goodwyn, as well as in the Matter of the Sentence, which was, (as
they heard) said to be against Law; as also for the manner of their
Proceedings, being done hastily, without Calling to it either Sir John
Fortescue, or his Council, or without making his Grace acquainted with it.

And therefore they desired his Grace to understand the Truth of this Matter,
and also told him that They were ready, with his good leave, with their
Speaker, to attend his Majesty to give him Satisfaction about their Proceedings.

But the King told them they came too late, and that it ought to have been done
sooner, calling the House Rash and Inconsiderate; but yet notwithstanding he
was content to hear their Speaker in the Morning at Eight of the Clock.

Upon this Message Committees were chosen to consider of the Things and Matters
aforesaid, which should be delivered to the King in Satisfaction of the
Sentence given by the House; which afterward were considered of, and digested
by the Speaker, and Committees in Three Points, viz.

1. In the Reasons and Motives of their Resolutions. 2. In the Presidents,
which were those I before have reported. 3. And in Matters of Law.
Which were those Matters of Law also before reported by me; with another
Addition.

That in the time of Henry the Sixth, the Speaker of the Parliament was
Arrested in Execution at the Suit of the Duke of York; and the Question being
put to the Judges at that time, Whether the Speaker ought to have his
Privilege: It was said by them, That they were Judges of the Law, and not
Judges of Parliament.

The Reasons and Motives were the free Election of the County, the Request of
one of the House, the double Return of the Sheriff, with a Commemoration of the
length of the time since the Outlawries, and with that the Payment of the Debts.

To this Report the King answered, That he now ought to change his Tune which
he used in his first Oration, scilicet, Thanksgiving, to Grief and Reproof. But
he said, That it was as necessary they should be Reproved, as Congratulated;
and therefore he cited a parcel of Scriptures, wherein God had so done with his
People Israel, nay, with King David, the People whom he tendered as the Apple
of his Eye, and David, who was a Man after his own Heart.

He said, That since Sir Francis Goodwyn was received by the House upon Reasons
and Motives inducing the House thereunto, so the King upon Reason too, took
consideration of Sir John Fortescue, being one of the Council, an ancient
Counselor; a Counselor not chosen by the King, but by his Predecessors, and
so he found him; and therefore he endeavored to grace him, being the only Man
of them that had been disgraced; the King protesting that he would not for any
thing in the World, offer unjustly any Disgrace to any Man in the Nation.
Besides, he did not proceed Rashly, as they had proceeded, but upon
Deliberation with double Advice, as well with that of his Council, as with that
of his Judges.

And in his Answering the Presidents, he said, That those were his own proper
Records, and to use them against Himself was overgreat Weenings: But in
Presidents, he said, that they ought to respect Times and Persons; and
therefore said, That Henry the Sixth's Time was troublesome, he himself Weak
and Impotent. And as for the other Presidents, they were in the Time of a
Woman, which Sex was not capable of Mature Deliberation; and so he said where
Infants are Kings, whom he called Minors.

For the Law part, he referred to the Answer of his Judges, who by the Lord
Chief Justice gave these Resolutions, they all unanimously agreeing in Them.

1. That the King alone, and not the Parliament House, had to do with the
Returns of the Members of Parliament; for from him the Writs issued, and to him
the Sheriff is commanded to make his Returns; but when a Man is Returned and
Sworn, the Parliament House has to do with Him, and the Sheriff ought to
Return the Outlawry, if he knew it before his Return.

2. They Resolved clearly, That an Outlawed Person cannot by the Law be a
Member of the Parliament House; but for that Cause the King might Refuse the
Return of Him, and for that Cause he was removable out of the House. And
therefore the Lord Chief Justice said, That in the 35th of Henry the Sixth it
was so Adjudged in Parliament; which answers the Presidents vouched by the
Commons of that time. And also he said, That in the first year of Henry the
Seventh it was Adjudged in Parliament, That Persons Outlawed or Attainted could
not sit in Parliament without Restitution by Act of Parliament. And he said,
That though the Books do not warrant his saying, yet the Parliament Roll (which
he had seen) does warrant it, which any Man might see.

3. They Resolved at the Instance of the King Himself, That the Party could not
be Discharged from the Outlawry without a Scire Facias sued against the Party
Creditor, Plaintiff in Debt; and Justice Windam for that purpose recanting his
former Opinion, said, That he upon perusing of his Books, and by the Reasons of
the Law, was of Opinion with his Companions.

4. As for the Statute of the 31th of the Queen, concerning Proclamation to be
made in the County, etc. they all Resolved as before times it had been
Resolved, That no Outlawry by that Statute was void until Judgment; Declaring,
That here was no Proclamation issued forth to the County where the Party was
Resiant at the time of the awarding of the Exigent.

5. As for the Statute of 7 Hen. 4. which Enacts, That the Indenture shall be
only the Return of the Sheriff; the Judges said, That was true, that such was
the Statute, and that that was his Return for so much; but that Statute does
not restrain the Sheriff from Returning any other thing Material which Disables
the Parties chosen.

6. It was held, That the Indorsment of the Writ, comprehending the Matter of
the Outlawry, was Material, and not a Nugation.

7. And lastly, They Resolved that by the Return of the Sheriff, it appeared
that Sir Francis Goodwyn was the same Person who was Outlawed 31 Eliz. by the
Name of Francis Goodwyn Esquire; and 39 Eliz. by the Name of Francis Goodwyn
Gentleman, and that by the Words of the Return, scilicet, Idem Franciscus
Goodwyn Miles Vtlagatus existit, etc. And They also agreed, That no Person
Outlawed ought to have his Privilege of the Parliament House; and that all the
Presidents vouched by the Commons were after the Parties were Members of the
House, and not before they were Returned.

And notwithstanding their Resolutions, scilicet, the Resolution of the Judges,
the Commons House hold clearly that Sir Francis Goodwyn was well Received into
Parliament; and the King commanded them to Confer together, and Resolve if they
could of Themselves, and if they could not Resolve, to Confer with the Judges,
and then to Resolve, and when they were Resolved, then to deliver their
Resolution to his Council, not as Parliament men, but as his Privy Council, by
whose hands he would receive the Resolution; and for that purpose he left them
behind him, he himself being to ride to Royston a hunting And to pursue the
Commandment of the King, the Commons House clearly Resolved, That what they had
done, was well and duly done, and they were of Opinion clearly against the
Judges, as to the Matter of the Outlawry, and that Ratione of the Presidents:
And also that the Parliament only had to do with the Sheriff's Returns of
Members of Parliament, and that the Returns ought not to be made till the first
day of the Parliament, and therefore They would not confer with the Judges: But
they appointed a Committee to consider of the Reasons to be delivered to the
Council for the Satisfaction of the King; which Committee by the Assent of All
the House of Commons, sent to the Lords this Resolution following, videlicet;

As to what the King taxed the House for, That they meddled with the Sheriff's
Return of Members of Parliament, Note, This Resolution was written in
Parchment, and so delivered to the Council of the King, not as Parliament men,
but Representing the King's Person, and a Copy thereof was kept in the House.
being but one half of the Body, the Lords being one, and the Principal Part of
the Parliaments Body.

As to that They Answered, That all Writs for the Election of Members of
Parliament were returned into the Parliament House before 7 Hen. 4. (at which
time it was Enacted, That all such Returns ought to be made in Chancery,) and
that appeared by the Records from the Time of Edward the First, until the said
Year of the Seventh of Henry the Fourth. And therefore the Parliament must of
Necessity have only meddled with the Returns till the making of the said Statute
of the Seventh of Henry the Fourth, at which time the place of the Return was
altered, and Enacted to be in Chancery, but yet that did not take away the
Jurisdiction of the Parliament to meddle with the Returns of the Members of
Parliament, but that remained as it was before: And this was manifest as well
by Reason as by Use. For that Court is to meddle with Returns, where the
Appearance and Service of Members is to be made and used; But in the Parliament
only the Appearance and Service are to be made and used, and therefore in the
Parliament only are the Returns to be examined and censured.

Likewise ever since the making of the said Statute of the Seventh of Henry the
Fourth, the Clerk of the Crown attends the Parliament every day till the end of
it, with all the Writs and Returns; and at the end of the Parliament, he brings
them into the Petty Bag.

The Presidents also do warrant this intermedling with Returns for the
Parliament, as in the Twenty ninth of the Queen, a Writ issued forth to the
Sheriff of (...) who made a Return before the day, into Chancery, and the
Chancellor upon that Return containing such matter, as this Writ now contains,
sent a second Writ to the said Sheriff, who thereupon made a new Election, and
that second Writ was also returned, and both the Writs and Returns brought into
Parliament, and there Censured by the Parliament, That the first should stand,
and that the second Election was void; and that the Chancellor has no Power
to award a second Writ, nor to meddle with the Return of it; and diverse other
Presidents were shown by the Commons to the same Effect, videlicet,

In the Nine and twentieth of Queen Elizabeth One.

And in the Three and fortieth of Queen Elizabeth another.

And in the Thrity fifth of the Queen two.

Whereof one was upon the Return of the Sheriff, that the Party first elected
was Lunatic, and thereupon the Parliament examined it, and upon Examination
thereof they found the Return true, and gave a Warrant for another Writ.

As to the Matter, that they were but One half of the Body; to that they said,
That though in the making of Laws they were but an Half Body, yet as to
Censuring of Privileges, Customs, Orders, and Returns of their House, They
were an Entire Body; as the Upper House was for their Privileges, Customs and
Orders, which Continual and Common Usage has Approved of.

As to their Charge of having used Precipitancy and Rashness; they Answered,
That they used it in such a Manner as in all Other Cases they were wont to do,
scilicet,

To have first a Motion of the Matter in Controversy, and then they caused the
Clerk of the Crown to bring the second day the Writs and Returns, and They
being thrice read, they proceed to the Examination of them, and upon
Examination gave Judgment which was the true Proper Course of the Place.

As to the House's not having used the King well, the thing being done by his
Command; they say, That they had no Notice before their Sentence, that the King
himself took any special Regard of that Case, but only that his Officer, the
Chancellor, had directed the second Writ as formerly had been done.

As to the Matter of the Outlawry, They said, That they understand by his Royal
Person more strength and light of Reason from it than ever before: and yet it
was without Example, That any Member of the House was put out of the House for
any such Cause; but to prevent that, they had prepared a Law, That no Outlawed
Person for the time to come should be of the Parliament, nor any Person in
Execution should have the Privilege of Parliament.

But they said further, That Sir Francis Goodwyn was not Outlawed at the Day of
his Election, for he was not Quinto Exactus, the five Prolamations never had
been made, which Proclamation they in London always spare, except the Party, or
any for him, require it; and that Exigent was never Returned, nor any Writ of
Certiorari directed to the Coroners to certify it, but after his Election,
which was a thing unusual, the Money being paid, the Sheriffs being long since
dead, to Disenable the said Goodwyn to serve in Parliament, that the Exigent
was returned, and the Names of the deceased Sheriffs put thereto. Et ex hoc
fuit without doubt that Goodwyn could not have a Scire Facias, for there was no
Outlawry against him, and by Consequence the Pardons had discharged him.

And They farther showed to the King, That if the Chancellor only could
examine Returns, then upon every Surmise, whether it were True or False, the
Chancellor might send a Second Writ, and cause a New Election to be made; And
thus the Free Election of the County should be Abrogated, which would be too
Dangerous to the Commonwealth.

For by such means the King and his Council might make Any Man, whom they
would, to be of the Parliament House, against the great Charter and the
Liberties of England.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Timothy Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstan 's Church in Fleetstreet.
1. AN Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes, together with
some Animadversions upon a Book writ by the late Lord Chapter Justice Herbert,
Entitled, A short Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was
given in Sir Edw. Hales Case.

2. The Power, Jurisdiction, and Privilege of Parliament, and the Antiquity of
the House of Commons asserted, occasioned by an Information in the Kings Bench
by the Attorney General, against the then Speaker of the House of Commons: As
also, A Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of
England, occasioned by the late High Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes in
King James II.

3. A Defense of the late Lord Russel's Innocence. Together with an Argument in
the great Case concerning Elections of Members to Parliament, between Sir Sam.
Bernardiston Bar. Plaintiff, and Sir Will. Soames Sheriff of Suffolk, Defendant,
in the Court of Kings Bench, in an Action upon the Case, and afterward by
Error sued in the Exchequer Chamber.

4. The Lord Russel's Innocence further defended by way of Reply to an Answer,
Entitled, The Magistracy and Government of England Vindicated.

These four writ by the Rt. Hon. Sir R. Atkyns Knight of the Bath, and Lord
Chief Baron of their Majesty's Court of Exchequer.

5. A New Declaration of the Confederate Princes and States, against Lewis XIV.
King of France and Navar: Delivered in a late Audience at Versailles, July 5.
1689.

6. Politica Sacra and Civilis: or, a Model of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, wherein, besides the Positive Doctrine concerning the State and
Church in General, are debated, the Principal Controversies of the Times
concerning the Constitution of the State and Church of England. By George
Lawson, Rector of More in Salop.

7. The Parsons Councellor, with the Law of Tithes and Tything. In two Books.
The fourth Edition with the Addition of a Table. Written by Sir Simon Degge.

8. The Gentleman's Jockey and Approved Farrier, instructing in the Natures,
Causes, and Cures of all Diseases incident to Horses. The Eighth Edition,
Enlarged.

9. Popery, or the Principles and Positions approved by the Church of Rome,
dangerous to all. And to Protestant Kings and Supreme Powers more especially
pernicious. By Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

10. A Modest Vindication of the Protestants of Ireland, in Answer to the
Character of the Protestants of Ireland.

11. Sir St. John Broderick's Vindication of himself from the Aspersions cast
on him in a Pamphlet written by Sir Richard Buckley, Entitled, Proposals for
sending back the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland.

12. Animadversions on Sir. R.B. Proposals for sending back the Nobility and
Gentry of Ireland.

13. The Justice of Parliament in Inflicting Penalties subsequent to Offenses
vindicated, and the lawfulness of the present Government asserted.


