Elegies, Offered up to the memory of William Glover Esquire, late of Shalston,
in Buckinghamshire.

By Thomas Philipot, Mr. of Arts of Clare Hall in Cambridge.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. and Rich. Cotes. 1641.

To the Right worthy as well by Virtue as Birth, the Lady Anne Glover.
Madam,
THough it be unlawful to offer up sacrifices to the dead, yet license me to
sacrifice these Elegies to the memory of your Son, and permit me to make his
name an Altar, though not his Tomb. Those reciprocal endearments which at
first fed and fomented our friendship, have made such an impression on all
those faculties that officiate to my Soul, on all those functions that hold
Correspondence with Invention and Fancy, that I should not only seem
ungrateful, appear unfruitful, but also supinely forgetful, if I should not
endeavor by consecrating some Trophie (though nere so rude and inconsiderable)
to his remembrance, to redeem and rescue it from the Vault, and so preserve
it, that it might never be raked up amongst his ashes. And though peradventure
those benefits that he shed on others, fell but upon barren and unthankful
ground, yet those he powered upon me, have not languish'd into oblivion, but
teemed with a grateful acknowledgement: Death only by usurping his life too
soon excluded me from enlarging my Gratitude to himself, that I might
profess it to you, who shall be the Delegate to receive the payment of a Debt
I owed to your Son, which shall be done with a Devotion as emphaticall as
that which excites me to send up my Orizons to Heaven for your happiness in
this world, and before inspired me to power forth my prayers for your Sons
glory in the other. Madam, if you think that these low expressions of my zeal
and Monuments of my Affection can improve your Sons memory to any perpetuity,
suffer them I beseech you to give themselves up to your view, since you may
ascertaine your self that they issue from one whose entire study is, whose
whole practice shall be, how he may declare himself,

The humblest of your Servants Tho. Philipot.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
REader thou needst exhaust no Time to look
Within the Pages of the Heralds Book,
And sift that Index to Times past, to see
Whence Glover did deduce his Pedigree
Or search t'instruct thy self to what extent
His noble and Illustrious Descent
Spins out it self, since thou may find him here
Deciphered in a fairer Character
Then any there, and his Descent made good,
By being derived from virtue not from blood.
Thy eye needs not take notice of his Crest,
Nor scan those Metals that his Arms invest;
Nor see if clothed in purple they appear,
Or the pale furre of speckled Ermins wear,
Since these sad lines that only can display
Their Heraldry in Sables, will array
His name with as much eminence and note,
As those rich colors that improve his Coat:
Nor care to be informed what Issue He
Left to convey and waft his Memory
To after Times, and make himself survive
His Ruin; and be still preservd alive
In them, since thou may be advertisd, he
Lives in no Issue but in Elegy,
The Offspring of my Brain; Where thou may view
His face appear more genuine and more true
Than if exactly 'twere limn'd out and set
By Nature in a living Counterfeit.
And if thou passest by where Glovers Dust
Lies in the Casquet of his grave in trust,
And see no Pile or Monument adorn
The bleack and naked surface of his Urne,
Argue not any guilty of neglect
To his Remains, nor Art of a Defect
'Cause she forgot her Trophies to impart,
He needs no Tomb that has one in my Heart.
Elegies offered up to the memory of William Glover Esquire.
Elegy 1.
IS Glover dead? and could stern Death employ
No Sickness but a Surfeit to destroy
The structure of his Earth and make even meat
That should foment, stisle and choke that heat?
Which kindled in the Chambers of the Heart,
Is thence diffused to air and warm each part.
We need not now I see the fatal knife
Of Atropos to cut the twist of life,
Nor shivering Agues to congeale the blood,
Nor Fevers to lick up that purple flood,
Or Rheums in brinie showers to distill
And drown the lungs, when meat it self can kill.
Who then would in his earthly Fabric trust,
Whose brittle Walls are molded out of dust,
Which let good diet plaster nere so well,
Sickness may yet make them dissoluble:
For we are compact of miseries and fears,
Kneaded into a lump with our own tears.
With our first milk our nurses do bequeath,
Diseases to us, and we bed with Death
Even in our Cradles making them become,
Types and Ideas of our future Tomb.
Those eyes whose glances all did seem t'implore,
And superstitiously did even adore
Th'effusion of their radiant beams may be
Enforced to weep vexed with an Opthalmy.
A palsy dares disturb and shake that hand,
That with its Scepter can the world command:
Those seete which proudly walked on Kings may be,
Brought by the Gout into Captivity.
And Glover in whose lineaments appeard
Such Harmony, that Nature seemed to have reared
An Altar to perfection which she meant
It self should farm his polished Tenement,
We see was but an Edifice of Earth,
Within whose Heart as on some oily Hearth
A fire was fed, whose flame was blown about
Each vein and nerve, which Death has now put out.
How much exposd toth Injuries of fate
Is all the glory then a humane state
Can but lie claim to, in accessable
To rest is swelling greatness, a brief Cell
Can shelter and include more solid Peace,
Than the extended Roofes of Palaces.
For those that pillage Nature to invite
And egg on a luxurious Appetite,
Do so encumber all their faculties,
They only hatch a tribe of Maladies,
Which like a progeny of Vipers will
Turn Parricides and their own Parents kill.
Elegy 2.
WE can for every cheap and trivial loss
Condole so much we even se me t'ingrosse
The public stock of grief and at our eyes,
Imbezell our exhausted faculties,
Whilst our dull passions pant with eager throes,
As if they teemed with mountains of vast woes.
Each maime by fire, each shipwreck can induce
Our souls to such intemp'rate and profuse
Resentment, that those Cataracts of Rain
Our eyes diffuse might quench the flame again,
Or in their briny Hurrican's once more,
Ingulph the ruined Bark upon the shore.
But when a friend shakes off Mortality
And his frail Earth drops into ashes, we
Should from th'officious limbecks of our eyes
Distill, as rites due to his obsequies,
Such floods of pious tears that if dull Art,
Should by some lame neglect forget t'impart
Her nard and unctious Balsames to exempt,
His precious Relics from Times rude contempt,
They might embalme his fading mass of clay,
And fortify it so from all decay
It may remain till time shall die, and have
Himself a Habitation in his grave.
Should I then now my melting eyes repreive
From tears, or be too thrifty in my grief,
When he (to whom my soul was so endeard,
So twisted into his, that we even steerd
Two bodies with one Heart, and did improve
By mingling of each others thoughts that love)
Is disinvested of that dross and Earth,
Which did empeach and intercept his birth
To immortality, I then should be
Tainted with scandalous Apostasy
To Friendships sacred vow, and should enter
My short-breathed love within his Sepulcher.
No! such a permanency I Will enstate
On my Affection that neither Fate
Nor Time, shall blast or wither it to Death.
Yet I Will not to his memory bequeath
Some brazen Obeliske whereon shall be
Engrafted some patheticke Elegy,
Which may to a succeeding Age declare
What a strong emphasis my griefs did bear,
Because the Cottage of his clay so soon
Languish'd into a Dissolution;
For It would be trivial since his name alone,
Will prove more firm than either brass or stone.
Yet I Will not depraedate the Phoenixnest,
Or pillage the Exchequer of the East
To gather Balmes or odorous spices thence,
By whose benign indulgent influence
The ruins of the Earth may be so charmed,
They may against all The Assaults of time be armed:
For the kind Earth shall from her womb distill,
Drops of rich gum mixed with a fragrant drill
Of balmy dew, which shall descend upon
His dust, and bail it from Corruption,
So that no bold intruding worm shall dare
To be an Inmate to his Sepulcher.
Nor will I to embellish and adorn
The gloomy Climate of his private Urne,
Rifle the Parian Quarries, and erect
Some gaudy Pile his ashes to protect:
Since that like these will wear away and rust
And mingle both in undistinguish't dust.
No, from the Inlets of mine eyes I Will lave
Streams of unsummond tears out on his grave
Which shall again concentrate and collect
Themselves into a swelling Cataract,
Which shall by th'coldnesse that my sighs shall vent,
Congeale into a Christiall Monument;
And stand a trophee there to propagate,
His memory against all th'attempts of Fate.
But when the world and her gay pomp expire,
And both lie gasping in the general fire,
When God will cancel Times Commission
And call in Fates strict Patent, when the Sun
And all the throng and petty stars like tears
Shall drop in flaming Gelly from their Sphers,
When th'impenitent Earth so long shall burn,
Till it into repentant ashes turn;
And each conspicuous Ornament it weare^s
Falls into dust; this shall resolve to tears.
Elegy 3.
PAle ruins of my friend is there no charm
No Magic that can bridle or disarme
Deaths eager malice and exauthorize
That power by which he seized those faculties
That were thy life's Retinue alas no spell,
No charm can make us inexpugnable
Against his assailements; for when h'eel employ
Some feirce malignant sickness to destroy,
And raze our Tenements of Earth we must
Moulder away into rude heaps of dust*
No! since those sparks of life which first did burn
Within thy breast are dropped into thy Urne,
Where raked up in thy ashes they shall lie
Till Times calcined into Eternity,
And then again a purer light acquire,
Revived and kindled by the general fire.
I Will not invade or pry into that chest
Which shrouds thy ashes to dissolve thy rest;
But may a soft eternal slumber flow
In gentle silence through the Vault below,
Whilst thy immortal part purged and redeemed
From its dull weight of clay which only teemed
With humors and diseases, shall descry
That frame and well composed Economy
That Heavens digested in, and fully be
Acquainted with that modern Colony,
Fancy has planted in the Moon, and know
Whether each star be peopled yet or no,
And shall unvaile those mysteries which we
(Eclipsed by mists of ignorance) can see
(Knowledge being in her Solstice) with an eye,
But blear'd and hoodwinked though we should apply
Nature's faint glimpse to it, which imparts a light
Like that that is shed by glowormes in the night,
And when it has with strict survey ore-run,
Each Province of the starry Region,
Twill with its charming Music, both inspire,
And mingle notes with the Seraphicke Quire;
And its soft aires in sacred Anthems rear,
Set toth' harmonious chiming, some sphere,
And as they there in tunefull accents flow,
My sighs shall be their Eccho's here below.
Elegy 4.
LEt some loose Widow seek to personate
And forge laments, and more to palliate
The scene of her imposture, bribe her eyes
To weep her dead Husbands Obsequies,
And from those Magazins of moisture, dreyne
Such numerous streams of tears, they may again
Swell to a Torrent, that may equal Nile,
Wherein her self shall be the Crocodile.
Let the wild unthrift, who can scarce allow
From his large acres, earth enough to endow
His Fathers ashes with a grave, put on
The crabbed discomposed complexion
Of wrinkled sorrow, when he does transfer
His Sires pale Relics to his Sepulcher,
And ore his Tombe-stone so profusely mourn,
He would e'ne seem to drown him in his Vrne,
And ore his hearse raise a transparent shrine,
Made up out of his humor Christalline.
So have I seen your Marble to distill
Through the close limbeckes of its pores, a Rill
Of unctious moisture, and yet still withstand,
All the impressions of the Carvers hand.
No, I Will not now my friend, by Deaths rude touch
Is scattered into dust, to show how much
His ruinous dispersion I bemoane,
Make my eyes fountains, when my heart is stone,
For those sad tears my sorrow shall dispense,
Shall with that part maintain intelligence,
Which I with such immoderate waste will stre^w
Upon his Monument, that to renew
That bankrupt and impoverisht stock, my heart
Shall from her private Treasury, impart
New moisture, to foment and feed my grief,
But when I have imbereld that relief,
And my too lavish and unthrifty eyes,
Have melted into tears all their supplies,
I fear, I shall turn Marble and become,
My self at once, his Mourner and his Tomb.
Elegy 5.
I Can (dear Friend) no swelling Trophies raise,
To cloathe thy Urne, yet I Will erect thy praise.
Nor can no smooth Egyptian stone impart,
To frame a Tomb for thee, yet in my heart
Thou have one built, I can collect no Jet,
Nor Porphyrie to form thy counterfeit.
For I Am confirmed it is vain, since each may find
Thy figures lodged already in my mind;
Nor will I gather up that balmy sweat,
Which gums lave out when they are assaild by heat,
With its rich odors to perfume thy Hearse,
Since I Will embalme thy memory in Verse:
Which being thus preserved, Fames tainted breath
Shall not with poison blast thee after death.
And though I cannot from mine eyes disburse,
For thy untimely loss, so large a sourse
And stock of tears, as grief exacts, yet they
Which shall their homage to thy Relics pay,
Shall have no double*fac'd Hypocrisy,
Lie bathing there to mock credulity,
But shall be so unfeigned, that Truth shall hide
Her self in them, as over each cheek they glide,
And they will prove so transparent that I fear,
Each vulgar eye will see her naked there:
Whilst Heaven it self in constant dewes shall weep,
And with my grief true correspondence keep:
And my tears be by the enamored Sun,
Courted into an exhalation.
Which being glard on by his searching beams,
Shall be again thawed, and dissolve in streams:
To show, the worlds bright eye it self, let fall
Those showers, as tears shed for thy Funeral.
Elegy 6.
ALl other mourners can some method keep,
(Wherein their griefe's digested) when they weep
They can seduced credulity assail,
By masquing sorrow with the Crystal veil
Of their adult'rate tears, their souls can wear
A grief arrayed with black, like that they bear
In The outward habit, which are both put on,
Only until the Obsequies be done:
But for my Glovers sad departure, I
Will pluck the sluices up in either eye,
And from those storehouses of grief, discharge
Such floods of tears, they shall themselves enlarge
Into an Inundation, and make
With their collected streams, a briny lake,
Which being diffused into a Rill, shall keep
A constant correspondence with the Deep,
So that some Siren, straggling from the Maine,
Shall to the Confines of this Lake attain,
And hearing how with my laments the Day,
Forgot and undistinguished melts away.
She shall some sad and solemn Dirge devise,
To warble forth at Glovers Obsequies:
And raise her Elegiacke notes so high,
She shall her self with real sorrow dye.
But least she should remain forgotten there,
Wholly divested of a Sepulcher,
And want some stable Trophy to dilate,
And amplify the memory of her fate
To after Times, the North Wind shall dispense,
Such keen and gelid blasts, they shall condence
This Lake into a Crystal heap, whereon
Shall be divulged this sad Inscription.
Here lies a Siren who exhaled her breath,
In too profusely mourning Glovers Death,
And whilst in tunefull airs, she straind her tongue,
To chaunt his Dirge she her own Requiem sung.
Elegy 7.
NO gaudy shroud (Friend) shall be framed for thee,
Out of the drudging silk-wormes Huswifry,
For from my eyes two Crystal streams shall run,
Which swelling to an Inundation,
Shall circumscribe thy witherd Earth, and there
Settle, till the inclement North shall dare
T'invade thy Tomb, and with some impious gust
Make a rude Onset on thy hallowed dust,
And seeking to dissolve that precious mass
By his chill breath transform my tears to glass,
So shall thy Clay be wrapped up and enclosed
Within a Christiall shroude, and be exposed
Through that clear Veil, to every glance mine^ eye
Shall to thy Tomhe employ in Embassy
To waft thy species to it, from whe^nce it may
Find by that thorough fare a compendious way
To journey to my Heart, where when it is come,
I Will vent so many sighs to make it room,
They shall benum my Heart it self to stone,
Which I Will beset with this Inscription.
Here lies the figure of a Friend which Fate
Nor Time, nor Death shall ever extirpate,
An Epitaph on Mr. William Glover, being buried in one grave with his daughter
before deceased.
REader, those lie beneath this Stone
Whom life made two first out of one,
But having now resigned their breath,
They will grow one again by Death.
For as before this pretty fair
(Her fathers lesser Character)
From him resulted, so if we
After some mutabilitie
Of Time, should on his grave intrude
To view how much Vicissitude
Attends on Nature, and how she
Masks her self in variety
Of numerous shapes and after dare,
To paddle in his Sepulcher,
Amongst his dust we might infer,
He was shuffled into her,
For Time determines that both must
Resolve into one heap of dust:
But when the world it self expires,
Panting with heat, and God requires
Each gloomy Vault, and hollow Tomb
To open its corrupted womb,
And give their ashes which were pent
And cased up there, enfranchisement,
That being reedified, they may
No more be obvious to delay,
Or Natures Tumults, this last birth
Will dis-unite their mingled Earth.
And as their first life did divide them, so
This second life again shall make make them two.
A Collation between Death and Sleep.
DEath and his drowsy kinsman, Sleep, agree
In all the Symptoms of conformity.
Sleeps caused by eating, for the natural heat,
Entices exhalations from the meat.
Transfused to Chylus, which the brain possess,
With an intoxicating drowsiness.
Death too by fatal eating, first came in,
When our first parents wilfully did sin,
And violated Gods renounced decree,
Tasting the fruit of the forbidden tree,
When from that Apple such a Dampe did creep
It filled their souls with an eternal sleep.
And as when sooty Night her darkness sheds
Through all the Confines of the Air, and spreads
A veil ore bright Hyperion, we divest
Our bodies, to compose our selves to rest.
So our enfranzis'd souls shall likewise be
Disrobed o'th weeds of their mortality,
When Death shall an Eternal night disperse
Through all those functions that with life commerce^.
And as when the great eye o'th Day displayes,
In the illuminated air his rays
The light dispersed in glimpses, does inspire
Our hands again our bodies to attire;
So when the Trumpe at the last Day shall all
By its shrill summons to Gods Audit call,
And Christ the Sun of righteousness shall come,
To distribute to the world a public Doom,
Our mouldred and disbanded bodies must
Quit the close confines of their Beds of Dust,
To cloth again our widdow'd Souls, and be
Made both joint Tenants of Eternity.
You then that Glovers dissolution mourn,
And sigh 'cause he is contracted in his Urne,
Appease that Tempest of your breasts, and weep
In gentle Showers, least you disturb his sleep.
On the thought of our Resurrection.
Who can be of so cowed a Soul heel'd fear
To be regenerated ith Sepulcher,
Since who exactly looks into the Tomb
Shall find it is but the Emblem of the womb
To which wee're not Coufind but trusted, so
As if we lay there in Deposito;
For when our Dust is gathered into th'Urne,
It lies but Hostage till the Souls return.
And as the Phoenix when she gasping lies
Upon her tragic Pile of spice^ries
And glowes with heat, her fleshy Cinders must
By the suns rays be martyred first to Dust,
Before her pregnant ashes can redeem
Themselves from Ruin, or again can teeme
With a new Phoenix; so before this Earth
We bear about us, can improve its Birth
To immortality, its whole compact
Must first be so disioynted and so slack'd
It fall to dust, and then 'twill molded be
To such a body that eternity
It self shall farm that Tenament, which shall
No more be obvious to a Funeral.
And as before men can compile or frame
Their glasses, they their ashes first in the flame
Transfuse to Crystal; so before our dust
Can be assoil'd from Excrements and rust
Ravel'd amongst it by our Tombs, and be
Jmprov'd to such a clear transparency
It shall no more encumber or control
The eye, from taking a survey o'th Soul
It must be by the general fire refined,
And be to a translucent mass calcined.
So Shall each Tomb become Gods Mint, where he
(Our Earth being purged from all impuritie)
Will on it coin the Image of his face
Which Time no more, nor sit ne shall nere deface.
FINIS.

