THE HISTORY OF THE CONQUEST OF CHINA BY THE TARTARS. Together with an Account
of Several remarkable things, concerning the RELIGION, Manners, and Customs of
both Nations, but especially of the latter.

First writ in Spanish, by Sen^or Palafox Bishop of Osma, and Viceroy of
Mexico.

And now rendered English.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and sold by M. Pit, at the White Heart in Little
Britain. 1671.

An Advertisement to the Reader, wherein is an Account of the Author, and
likewise some Observations added for the better Illustration of the History.
THis Relation of the Conquest of China, was first writ in Spanish by Sen^or
Palafox, Bishop of Osma in Spain, and in the year 1639 Consecrated Bishop of
Puebla de los Santos, or Tlaxcala in Mexico, and by Philip the Fourth
constituted Viceroy of Nova Hispania; where from time to time, he received
information from the Philippine ^^sles, of all the eminent Transactions which
happened in the Revolution of the Chinese Empire to the Tartars. Out of which
Memorials (he says himself) he compiled this History, which after his Decease
was found in Manuscript amongst his Papers, and by his Kinsman Don Bernardo de
Palafox given at Madrid ^^o a French Gentleman, Mr. Bertier; who having seen
with what applause the Translation into French of several pieces composed by
the same Author had been received, at his return to Paris, engaged Monsieur
Colle to pub^^ish it in French, which he did the last year. This French
Translation I received from a friend, whose Authority prevailed with me, to
copy after a Copy, being assured, that in probability, the Spanish original
would not be divulged.

This is all the account I have received of the Author, whose Encomium I
nei^^her design to write, nor to pass any censure upon his History, or make any
further Apology for this present Translation. But shall commit both the Author
and his Translators to the favorable judgment of the Candid Reader: Only I
shall take liberty to m^^ke some observations upon some few passages, after I
have first made this acknowledgment, That ^^hereas, when I spoke of Cha,
menti^^ned in this following History, I was almost persuaded by a skilful
Botanist, tha^^ Cha and Te were two distinct Plants, nevertheless I seem^^d to
scruple whether they were or no. I am now fully confirmed by Kircher and other
Authors, that Cha or Cia, Thea, The or Te are but synonima of the same Plant;
which Martinius, and others, who describe it; say, is a species of Rhus, or
Sumach. But Simon Paulus, the great Anti-Theist, must excuse me, if I cannot
credit hi^^ when he would persuade us, that Elaeagnus Cordi, or Rhus Myrtifolia
Belgica, which in English is called sweet Gaul, is the same Plant with Te: For
the infusion of their Leaves (whatsoever outward resemblance they may have)
sufficiently manifests a difference between them; Experience telling us that it
works just opposite effects; that of the first raising in the Stomach most
pernicious vapors, which intoxicate and cause the Headache; that of the latter
allaying all fumes, and thereby remedying the distempers they occasion.

And now I must observe, that our Author the mention he makes of the several
Provinces of China, omits Chikiang, which borders South and Southwest upon
Fokien, which is likewise called Chincheo, and perhaps by him supposed to be
the same with Chikiang. The truth is, all Authors agree, that China is divided
but into 15 Provinces, yet they enumerate 16. But some say that Queichu was not
till of late years, reckoned as a distinct Province of it self: and others,
that Leaotun is not a Province of China, but only a Territory tributary to it.
I shall not undertake to reconcile these disputes, but give you a list of all
the 16 Provinces, with the various appellations, I find them mentioned in the
most approved Writers of China, according to that o^^der which our Author
places those he takes notice of. 1. Pequin or Peking. 2. Xantan, Xantum or
Xantung. 3. Leaotun, Leaotung or Leautum. 4. Honam, Honan or Honnam. 5. Xanssi
or Xansi. 6. Xensi. 7. Nanquin, Nanking or Nankim. 8. Schiamsi, Kiansi or
Kiangsi. 9. Fuquam, Huquam, Huquan or Huquang. 10. Honan, Iunan Iunnan or
Yunnam. 11. Suchuen, Suchuem or Suchuo. 12. Cancheu or Queicheu. 13. Chiki^^ng
or Chekiam, omitted in this History. 14. Foquien, Fokien, Fukien, Foking or
Chinche^^. 15. Canton or Quantung. 16. Quansi or Quangsi. Those Names which are
mentioned in this History, I place first, but I must declare, that many times I
never find them so called in any other.

Though our Author, in general terms, attributes the insurrection and rebellion
in China, which gave the Tartar opportunity to possess himself of the whole
Empire, solely to the treacherous management of affairs by the Eunuchs, who had
engrossed to themselves the Emperors favor: Yet Arnoldus Montanus, the latest
Writer of China, is more particular herein, and therefore I shall acquaint you
what he says. The Rebellion was begun 1644. by the Mountaneers in the Province
Suchuen. and was seconded by the Inhabitan^^s of Queichu, who in revenge of an
unjust Sentence pronounced in a difference between two persons of considerable
quality, rose up in arms, and joining with the injured person, in the first
assault cut the Judges, who pronounced the Sentence, in pieces, and ^^outed the
Viceroy's Army, which was sent against them, but soon af^^er they were
defeated, but not totally quelled, by a new Army. In the interim a great Famine
happened in the Northern Provinces, occasioned by an unheard of number of
Locusts. And now a new Rebellion is raised in Xensi and Xantung, which took its
rise from the discontents of the people, that Emperor Xunchin out of
Covetousness imposing then as high Taxes upon his Subjects, as he did formerly
in fruitful flourishing times: the money all misspent, and the Soldiers not
paid. Whereupon the number of the Mutineers daily increased, and being by
Plunder and Rapine enriched, they now plot against the whole Empire, and choose
the most valiant and experienced amongst them for Generals. Who growing jealous
one of the other, they fall into parties amongst themselves, and then into open
War, where, in several battles, all the Generals were slain, but two, viz.
Licungz and Changien, by our Author called only Ly and Cham: who adds, that he
could never learn what became of Cham; but other Historians say, he was cut off
by a party sent against him by Ly. Semedo likewise in his History intimates,
that the incursions which the neighboring Tartars formerly made upon China, of
which our Author takes notice, were occasioned by the Covetousness of the
Chinese, who by extortion oppressed them. And thereupon he thus glosses, page
101. of the Edition of his History in English; Rebellion is the usual effect of
Extortion and Tyranny, and where the Prince would have more from the people
than they are able to give. Whence (says he) Theopompus King of the
Lacedaemonians, when his Wife told him, that because he had eased the people of
many taxes, he would leave his Son a poorer Kingdom, than he had received from
his Father, answered; Relinquo sed diuturnius; that is, I shall leave him a
more lasting Kingdom. Happy had it been for Xunchin the Emperor of China, had
he been of Theopompus his mind. But I must confess, though I find him, by many
Authors, branded for his Covetousness, yet I am not very apt to suspect him so
guilty of that vice, as of another usually more fatal to Princes; which is a
facile Nature, easy to be wrought upon by others, and too inclinable to favor
and indulge themselves, and not willing to undergo the weight of affairs. From
whence it was, that though during the Reign of his Brother Thienking, who
preceded him in the Imperial Throne, he so opposed his Darling favorite, the
Eunuch Guei, and all the Eunuchs his Partisans, that at last, he prevailed with
his Brother to banish them all his Court, to the great joy and satisfaction of
the whole Empire. And when, his Brother dying without Issue, the Imperial Crown
fell to him, at his first taking poffession thereof, he so persecuted the
Eunuchs, who by abuse of their Authority under his Brother, had made themselves
abhorred by the whole Nation, that Guei in despair poisoned himself. Yet at
last this very Emperor suffered himself, by the crafty insinuation of some
persons about him, contrary to his own judgment, to be prevailed with to recall
these insolent Extortioners, and most imprudentl^^ made his incensed enemies
his reconciled Confidents; And intrusts t^^em with the sole management of all
affairs* who now conce^^l their malice against him, but forgot not to study
revenge; and being backed with his authority, by their extortion they grind the
face of the people, thereby enrich themselves, render their Master odious to
his Subjects, endeavor by all arts to defraud him, keep back the Soldiers pay
and provisions, thereby to occasion Mutinies, hold correspondence with the
Rebels, not acquaint him with the danger that threatened both him and his
Empire, and at last admit the whole Army of the Traitors into the very Walls of
the City Peking; the sad consequences of which, the following History very
particularly relates.

Now that I have, out of other Authors, more fully than Sen^or Palafox does,
acquainted you with the occasion of those Insurrections, which brought that
fatal destruction upon Xunchin the Emperor of China, and so highly contributed
to the advancement of the prosperity of Xunchi Emperor of the Tartars, as he
was supposed to be by our Author, and most others; I must out of Mountanus let
you know, that he was not the Cham, or Emperor of the Tartars, but only a
petty Prince amongst them, whose Grandfather was the first of his Family, who
was advanced to that dignity by the consent of the inhabitants of his Country,
which was only a small Province in Tartary, called Muncheu.

I shall now end these observations, with a brief Narrative of the famous Acts
of Coxinga, Son to Ikoan, or Iquon, as he was called by our Author, and all
Forrainers; but amongst his own Countrymen Chanchilung, or Chincilung, so
renowned by his former name in this present History. This Coxinga was that Son
of Ikoan, who was sent by his Father, as Sen^or Palafox intimates to Iacatra,
to be instructed by the Hollanders in the exercise of Arms, according to the
practice of Europe, where he so improved himself in the knowledge of their
Military discipline, that in the year 1661. assisted by those outlawed
Chinese, who had served under his Father, he took from them the Islands of
Formosa and Tayowan; for the recovery of which, the Hollanders have from their
several Plantations in the East Indies, put out several considerable Fleets,
that they might by force of Arms regain those Isles; but finding themselves too
weak to accomplish their designs, they sent diverse Embassies to solicit the
assistance of the Tartars, but in vain. Coxinga keeping possession during his
life, and since his decease they are delivered up to the Tartars. These
Embassies are at large treated of by Arnoldus Montanus, lately Englished by Mr.
Ogilby; from whom I have borrowed most of these observations.

Many other observable remarks might be added, but fearing lest I have already
transcended the due bounds of an Introduction, I shall say no more.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS HISTORY.
CHAP. I.
THe Beginning of the Troubles of China. Two Subjects of the Emperors Rebel.
They make themselves masters of six Provinces, and of the Imperial Court. The
Resolutions of the Tartars thereupon. page 1
CHAP. II.
The Death of the Emperor Zunchin, and of all the Royal Family. The Tartar
resolves to oppose the Usurper, and to advance his ancient pretensions to the
Empire of China. page 24.
CHAP. III.
The Tartars enter into China. The Tyrant Ly flies. The young Xunchi makes his
entrance into Pequin, and is there crowned Emperor. He declares War against
the King of Corea, and makes his Kingdom tributary. p. 59
CHAP. IV.
The Tartar pursues his Conquest: He reduces five other Provinces bordering
upon Pequin. His Conduct, that thereby ^^e might illustrate his Victories, and
the Orders he prescribed to the conquered. p. 77
CHAP. V.
One of the Vn^^les of Xunchi reduces the City and Province of Nanchin. The
Flight and Death of a King of China, who had been publicly crowned. Six of the
nine Southern Provinces submit themselves to the Tartar. p. 93.
CHAP. VI.
The Tartars find the greatest resistance in the Conquest of the 3 last
Provinces. A Chinese Pirate m^^kes himself very potent: who this Pyrate was. p.
107
CHAP. VII.
The Pyrate Icoan made a Treaty with the Hollanders. His Quarrel with the
Portegueses of Macao, for refusing to restore him his Daughter, which h^^ had
caused to be educated in the Christian ^^eligion. The Tartar sollicits him to
join with him. His Fidelity to the Princes of China. p. 137
CHAP. VIII.
Icoan demands succor ^^rom the Emperor of Japan, who resuses it him. He
maintains a War against the Tartars a whole year. He is taken-prisoner, and
presented to the Emperor Xunchi. What was the end of this Corsair. p. 159
CHAP. IX.
The Tartars pass into the Province of Canton, where a Chinese Prince is
crowned Emperor of China. They enter the City of Canton, finding the Gates
open. A Chinese Fleet, which ^^ame with relief fires the City. The Proclamation
which the Tartarian Viceroy causes to be published in Canton. p. 180
CHAP. X.
The Tartars sack the City of Canton^^ The Viceroys change the Government. The
Death of the King of Canton and all his followers. The Reduction of several
places in the Province. p. 200
CHAP. XI.
At Xaochin the Chinese stand upon their Defense: Guequan King of Quansi comes
into that City. He goes and meets the Tartars, he fights and routs them. A
Division among the Chinese. They are defeated in another fight, and their City
Xaochin taken. p. 218
CHAP. XII.
Disturbances in the Maritine Provinces. Some Chinese Princes retire themselves
into the Mountains. Others by treaty make their peace with the Tartars* One who
had concealed himself amongst the Bonzi, discovers himself to the Viceroy, and
is carried into Tartary. p. 241
CHAP. XIII.
The state and condition of the Portegueses of Macao. They had continued
Neuters between the Chinese and the Tartars. Their fear lest the Victors
should make some attempt upon their City. They are better treated than they
expected. p. 252
CHAP. XIV.
The Tartars put out to Sea, and figh^^ the Corsairs of China. A treaty of
peace is proposed, but broke by the perfidiousness of the Viceroy. He is
discovered to be a Chinese. The natural Genius of that Nation. p. 269
CHAP. XV.
The Viceroy burns the Vessels of the Corsairs; they return in gre^^ter
numbers, pillage and ravage the Country, and compel the Chinese to quit the
Tartarian habit which they had taken. They assault the City of Canton, and are
repulsed by the Viceroy in Civil affairs. p. 284
CHAP. XVI.
The Testimony which certain Christian Negroes gave of their Religion in the
presence of the Tartars. After which God Almighty miraculously pres^^rves them
in a fight. The Corsairs continue to spoil the Country. The Viceroy in
Military affairs drives them out of a place in which they had fortified
themselves, and stood upon their Defense. He ruins the Town, and all the
adjacent Country. p. 300
CHAP. XVII.
The Corsairs trouble and perplex the General. They possess themselves of the
City Tunquam, and maintain it against several assaults. They deliver it up upon
composition. The Cru^^lty of the Generals Soldiers. p. 314
CHAP. XVIII.
A Discourse of the Viceroy in Civil aff^^irs, upon the Cruelty o^^ his
Colleague. The Corsairs still perplex the Tartars. The Chinese improve
thems^^lves in the Art of War. The Northern Chinese are of a different Genius
from the Southern. p. 334
CHAP. XIX.
The Corsairs take a little Fort near Canton, having engaged part of the
Garrison to ^^de with t^^em. The Viceroy in Military affairs discovers a new
plot in anot^^r Fort. The manner how he punishe^^ the Traitors. p. 351
CHAP. XX.
An Allarm in Canton at the approach of th^^ Corsairs. The Consternation of the
Inhabitants. ^^he General arrives, and routs the Besiegers. ^^he Inquisition
after the Conspirat^^rs, and their punishment. The resolution of a Chinese
Cap^^in, his d^^ath and praise. p. 363
CHAP. XXI.
The Corsairs possess themselves of several places, and return to assault
Canton. The General routs them at Sea. The Chinese manage their affairs ill,
and thereby only exasperate the Tartars, and consume the rest of their Forces.
p. 381
CHAP. XXII.
An eminent Prediction of a Chinese Astrologer, that that State should be
conquered by a stranger; which had blew Eyes. The Precautions which the
Chinese observed to divert the effects of that prediction. p. 392
CHAP. XXIII.
The Chinese who traded with the neighboring States are ill usued as soon as
the loss of their Empire was known. The ill reception which the petty King of
Cochin Chine gave to those who came into his territories, to secure themselves.
p. 397
CHAP. XXIV.
The Emperor of Japan uses the Chises very hardly. The jealousy that Prince
has of strangers. How powerful an obstacle this distrust is to the conversion
of those people. He refuses to receive an Embassy from the Portegueses of
Macao. That though the Japanners are very powerful, yet they have reason to
fear the Tartars. p. 411
CHAP. XXV.
Of the Religion of the Tartars. Their Natural Virtues and Vices. p. 439
CHAP. XXVI.
The Government of the Tartars in China. The excellent Endowments of the young
Xunchi. The Reformation which he made of the Mandorins and Eunuchs in the
Court. The virtuous freedom of the Tartarian Women. p. 451
CHAP. XXVII.
How satisfied the Chinese were with the Tartarian Government. The Pride and
Avarice of the Chinese Mandorins. The speedy and exact Execution of Justice b^^
the Tartars. p. 470
CHAP. XXVIII.
The Tartars compel the Chinese to leave their Books, and take up Arms. O^^
the Tartarian Letters and Langu^^ge. The Sciences for which they have the
greatest inclination. p. 500
CHAP. XXIX.
How much addicted the Tartars are to War. Their Arms offensive and defensive.
Their greatest force consists in their Horse. The excellency of their Horses.
p. 518
CHAP. XXX.
The Military Discipline of the Tartars. Their manner of fighting, and how they
lay siege to any place. The aversion they have to dwell in Towns. The security
with which they sleep in their Camp, without placing any Guards or Sentinels.
p. 530
CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Behavior of the Tartars. Of their Natural inclination to War and
Labor. Of their frank and free dealing, without any ceremony. Of their
Divertisements, Occupations, and Employments in general. p. 546
CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Habit and Fashions of the Tartars. Of the Modesty and Virtue of their
Women, who though they ^^ffect to ride on horseback, and go to the Wars, yet
are very chaste and virtuous. The Conclusion of this Narrative of the Conquest
of China by the Tartars. p. 565
The CONQUEST of the Empire of CHINA by the TARTARS.
CHAP. I. The Beginning of the Troubles of China. Two Subjects of the
Emperor's rebel. They make themselves M^^sters of six Provinces, and of the
Imperial Court. The Resolutions of the Tartars thereupon.
THE Inhabitants of China enjoyed all the pleasures of Peace, under the
Government of their lastEmperour, who was called ^^unchin, a deceitful and
unfortunate ^^ame. He was the most absolute Monarch that ever ^^le^^ those vast
Territories; when in the Year 1640. a year Fatal to several States, those
Clouds began to gather, which shortly after produced such a Storm, as ruined
the whole Empire.

I said, the name of Zunchin, after which the Emperor of China was called, was
a deceitful Name; for Zunchin in the Chinese Language signifies Successful
Omen, or Sovereign Dominion; but how false a Prognostic this was, it quickly
appeared. The Emperor was of a most courteous and good disposition; and
certainly hi^^ Subjects who enjoyed great plenty, and all the Advantages of
Peace, lived truly happy under so excellent a Prince* But it is not sufficient
for a Prince to be good, and to govern mildly and peaceably, unless he likewise
takes care, not to have ill Officers, who make use of their Credit under Him,
to gratify their private Passions, and to exten^^ their Ambition beyond all
Limits.

It was in the year 1640. when two R^^b^^ls at the same time, revolted against
their Lawful Sovereign; one of them was called Ly, the other Cham: And though
they were but private Subjects of the Emperor of China, and persons of no
consideration, either by their Quality or Birth, yet they both equally aspired
to the Supreme Dominion. And having drawn to them great Numbers of the choicest
Soldiers in the Empire, they began to make Incursions upon the Northern
Provinces, which border upon Tartary.

The Emperor, in the mean time, did not take sufficient care to stifle this
Revolt. In all likelihood the Complaints and Informations of those Commanders,
who guarded the Frontiers, never entered the Court so far, as to reach the
Emperor's Ears. The Ministers of State, and Officers of the Court stopped the
Passage, having already sold the Empire, and their Master, by abusing his mild
Disposition* The Saying of Diocletian is but too true; That although a Prince
be Good, Prudent, Observant, Careful, and Vigilant, yet he cannot pre^^ent
Treachery, if those who are in Employment under Him, and who ought to serve and
advise Him faithfully, do contrariwise combine together to surprise Him, and to
make ill use of His Authority. Either the Ability and Fidelity of the
Counselors to a Prince, must strike a terror into Rebels, or these Rebels
will in a short time make themselves a terror both to the Prince and Hi^^
Counselors.

The two Chiefs of this Rebellion took such advantage by this pernicious
Negligence, that those Counsels, which if at first executed, would with great
facility have put a period to these troubles, became now both unfit and
impossible to be put in execution. In a short time they gained themselves the
Renown of Great and most Valiant Commanders, and by the advantage of this
Repute, they quickly had Forces enough, not only to defend themselves, but to
enlarge their Conquests; and having fit opportunity to enhaunce the Fame of
their Victories, their Confederates increased every day more and more. The
Applause which is given to Victors, never fails to acquire them new Associates.
And thus these Usurpers did in a very little time by force of Arms, make
themselves Masters of five Provinces.

The Rebel Cham went to establish himself in that Province, which of the five,
was the most remote from the Emperor's Court, and took upon him the Title of
King, with full resolution to extend his Conquests, and to bring under his
Subjection the neighboring Provinces as soon as he had raised Forces enough,
to enable him to put in execution his great Projects.

The other Rebel, who was called Ly, having, as it appeared, framed to himself
greater Designs, approached nearer the Court, and had already in his
Imagination conquered the whole Empire: But judging, from the advantage he had
received from Cham's Confederacy with him at the beginning, how great an
obstacle so powerful a Competitor might be to him in process of time, he did in
all likelihood make him away, either by secret Treachery, or open Violence; for
in all the Relations there was never any more mention made of the Tyrant Cham.

I judge it here very necessary, to advertise my Reader with the necessity
which was imposed upon me, in relating several Passages, to make use of these
Terms, in all likeliho^d, in all appearance, most probably, etc. for the
Instructions out of which this Narrative was compiled, came to me in Letters,
and loose Memorials, which were sent out of China during the Troubles; and
doubtless the great Confusions, in which the whole State was then involved, was
the occasion that the Informations came so brief and disordered, not remarking
the times, and often not sufficiently distinguishing the Names of Persons, and
their Qualities. And being necessitated several times to review and examine
over the Memorials one after another, I observed that what was related in some
of them, was only a continuation and explanation of what was said of others.
And therefore for my Readers better satisfaction, I have digested them into
this Method, which perhaps, notwithstanding the diligence and Assiduity I have
employed herein, may not seem so complete and exact, as might be wished for.

Ly, who had now no Competitor, who could aspire to the Sovereignty, began to
noise abroad his vast Projects, and settled himself in the Capital City of the
Province Xensi, called Singansuase. He caused himself to be crowned, and took
upon him the Title of Emperor of China, kept an Imperial Court, and acted like
a Sovereign Prince. He threatened to pursue in a short time his Resolutions of
subduing the Province of Pequin, and to make himself Master of the Emperor's
Court, and to join Pequin, which is the principal of the six Northern
Provinces, to the five others, which were already in subjection to him.

It is not certainly known what was the first rise of these two Usurpers, only
it is famed, that they were both Generals in the Emperor of China's Armies,
who perceiving themselves, and Soldiers to be neither regarded, nor
recompensed for their Services, but to be ill used by the Ministers of State,
they revolted against their King, and conspired together to be their own
Pay-Masters; resolving to make the Grandees of theCourt understand, that those
who serve their Prince in his Armies, are without comparison better capacitated
to serve or disserve the State, than those whose sole Employment it is by their
Court-Artifices to ingratiate themselves with their Prince.

They began at first with Complaints, and from Complaints they came to Arms,
and having once began their Treachery, they thought themselves engaged most
vigrously to prosecute it.

Without all doubt, they who gave the first occasion to this Rebellion, were
highly Criminal; but this does not render those more excusable or less
culpable, who not only began it, but continued it so outragiously, as to make
an attempt not only against the State, but against the life of their Sovereign.
No Misdemeanour of a Prince, let the Disorders and Irregularities of his
Government be never so public or manifest, can license the Rebellion of his
Subjects; much less can any Subject revenge or right himself on his Sovereign.
If he be injured, let him make his complaint to his Prince, and by Petitions
and Supplications seek for redress; If he receive no relief, let him renew his
Supplications till his Prince be acquainted with his griefs; and if after all
his importunities, he can prevail nothing, let him cease to complain, or rather
let him resign up his Complaints to the King of Heaven, who is the only Judge
of the Kings upon Earth; else if Subjects may upon any pretense whatsoever
rebel against their Prince, and right themselves of their Sovereign, farewell to
Monarchy.

Whilst the Flame of Rebellion and Civil War, which every day blazed out more
and more, threatened the whole Empire of China with a general Ruin and
Revolution, the Tartar did most attentively and vigilantly watch to see, if
according to his wishes, there would happen some overture of an honorable
Pretext for him to enter into some or all the Provinces. Although it be true
that within the 24 years which preceded the Revolution of China, viz. from
1618. to 1642. the Tartars had sometimes passed the Wall, and made Incursions
upon the Frontiers, yet it was only to requite the Chinese for the Irruptions
which they had made into Tartary. The Inhabitants of Asia do, whenever they
judge themselves injured, right themselves by revenge; for if an injury be
done, either from a particular person to a particular person, or from one State
to another, Revenge is their only satisfaction: It being the general practice
of all Asia for any injured person to retaliate upon his Adversary; and I wish
to God, that only these people sought to right themselves by revenge and
violence.

It was this mischievous custom, which induced the bordering Tartars
heretofore to make so frequent Incursions upon their Neighbors the Chinese:
But then they had not so much as the thought to subdue the Empire, and less had
they the force wherewithal to do it. And at this time the Emperor of China
and the Cham of Tartary were at peace: And though it is true that the Peace and
amity which was formerly sworn between both States, and the renuntiation which
the Tartar had made of all his pretensions to China, could not prevent the
frequent Inrodes which they mutually made upon each other, yet to make open war
upon China, neither seemed just nor honorable to the Tartars themselves; and
therefore in their justification they alleged such specious Reasons and
Pretenses, that they may serve for Instructions to many Politicians of Europe.

The Tartar therefore did only watch and observe what passed in China, and kept
himself in a readiness to take advantage of all occasions which might be
beneficial to him; but he resolved to embrace none, but what might seem
honorable, and whereby he might with Glory and Renown do some eminent exploit
in some or other of the Provinces of China, and not thereby draw upon him the
odious Title of Usurper. And in the mean time he contented himself with the
knowledge, that to what side soever Fortune should be favorable, she must
advantage his Interests and should the Sword decide the Justice of the Cause,
that would most expeditiously promote his Pretensions. It must be acknowledged
that these Barbarians had more difficulty to resolve upon what seemed to them
unjust, than many of our Politicians have; for to establish his Right by
violence, seemed to the Tartar to be not the action of a King, but a Tyrant. He
had in readiness a numerous and potent Army, both for Horse and Foot: And
though he had not as yet any Artillery, yet in a short time after he was
provided of great store, and very good, though he did not engrave upon them
Ratio ultima Regum.

He considered likewise that Ly courted him, in expectation by his Favor to be
protected against his Lawful Sovereign, and that upon this account; or at least
not to have him for an Enemy, he would not be unwilling to make him a sharer in
his Conquests. But this Prince had solemnly sworn peace with the Royal Family
of China, and had relinquished all his Rights and Pretensions upon that Empire,
to that Family, the Head of which was now seated in the Imperial Throne; and
therefore he could not resolve with himself, as great an Idolater as he was, to
violate that Oath which he had taken in the presence of his Idols: A great
Example to those who boast of the true Religion, and yet swear and promise,
without regarding the performance of either their Oaths or Promises.

Finally, the Tartar judged very truly, that if he joined his Forces with any
one of the two Parties, he should in a short time make himself Umpire and
Master of one or both. The Troops of the Emperor of China, and those of the
Usurper were quartered along a great part of the Wall through which he must
open his passage, and yet he resolves not to advance: He saw that the lawful
Prince asked no succor from him, and to declare himself in favor of the Rebel
he abominated, being fully persuaded, that to support a Rebel against his
lawful Sovereign, was an action unworthy of a Prince, and that it could not but
redound to the dishonor of those, who follow the pernicious Example of
protecting Rebels. This Prince, though he could not boast at his Coronation to
have been anointed with Oil sen^^ from Heaven, yet he knew full well that he
should sin both against Heaven and Earth, should he declare himself in favor
of the Usurper. It must be granted, that an Infidel and an Idolater, as all
these people are, might have been less moved with these considerations of
Honor and Justice; especially, when his protection of those of a contrary
Religion to that which he himself professed, was not now under debate.

These Deliberations kept the Tartars on the Frontiers; but all this time he
kept his Army under strict Discipline, both because he saw his Neighbors Armed
and engaged in a War, as likewise judging, that he should have some seasonable
and favorable opportunity of passing into China without falsifying his Faith
and Oath, which he desired to keep inviolable.

Ly, in the mean time, was not content to be absolute Master of five Provinces,
but now, having no obstruction from his Competitor Cham, he made himself sure
of the whole Empire; and resolved speedily to take possession of it. But it
could not be so soon done, as wished for. Envy and Jealousy of one side, and
the natural Love which the Chinese have for their Prince on the other, had
already rendered the Tyrant odious to the whole Nation. These people have so
tender and passionate a Love for their Sovereigns, that they seem rather to
idolize, than to love them. And it is reported of this last Prince that he did
both rightly merit, and possess the Affections of his Subjects, being beloved
of them, both as their Father and King; and this made the Tyrant every day more
and more abominated: But the Envy which the Fame of his high Advancement drew
upon him, did likewise increase the public indignation against him. There are
none in China, but the Princes of the Royal Family who are born great and
potent, and therefore it is not persons of Worth and Honor, but the Rascality,
and those who have advanced themselves by the oppression of others, who enjoy
great Honors and Revenues. And being there are no Lands or Possessions there
hereditary, there are few or none in the whole Empire, but are often
dispossessed of their Fathers Estate. And from hence it was, that so many
persons, who from their abject condition beheld the lofty Grandeur of Ly* could
not but be enraged, to see in this Tyrant a most despicable Vileness joined
with so prodigious an Advancement* as approached to the Sovereignty it self. It
is very difficult for men to refrain from indignation and envy, when they see a
mixture of these two Extremes in the same person:

The Tyrant for his own security, took care to pay his Soldiers, and to omit
nothing which tended to their satisfaction; but fearing lest they might not
alw^^ys continue so true to him, and lest they should be moved with respect to
their Prince, before they were brought to despair of his Grace and Pardon; he
resolved with all possible speed, to complete the entire Invasion of the whole
Empire; but first he thought it fit to acquaint his most resolute Commanders
and his greatest Confidents with his Resolutions; which he did in these Terms;

Friends, said he, the Lot is cast; we must now either gain all, or lose all;
we cannot hereaf^^er be greater Rebels than we are already, therefore let us
dispatch with all expedition the Conquest of the other ten Provinces of China,
now that we have made five Provinces ^^eel the power of our Swords, but most
assuredly, when we shall have subdued the rest, none will be so audacious and
rash as to dare to call us Rebels or Usurpers. Rebels if victorious, cease to
be Rebels, and become the right and lawful Lords and Masters. What therefore
now remains? but that I either make my self the Sovereign Monarch of all China,
or lose my Life in these Fields, and there become a prey to the Birds of the
Air, and Beasts of the Field. Yhere is nothing in all this spacious Empire can
gratify me but either a Throne or a Grave, and I will advance my self to such
a pitch of Grandeur, that if I fall, it shall be with such a Crack, as shall
shiver the whole Frame of Government, and bury the whole Empire under my Ruins.

Thus Ly spoke to his Followers, who were entirely devoted to him, and
resolving to run the same Fortune wi^^h him, they desired nothing so much as to
follow him in whatsoever great attempts he should please to embrace; finding
his Soldiers thus resolute, he speedily entered upon a most bold and hazardous
Des^^gn, but of high importance for the speedy accomplishment of his
Pretensions: This was to go directly against the very person of the Emperor,
and with all his Forces to assault the Imperial Court, and Capital City of the
Empire; fully determining to strike off the Emperors Head, and to place the
Crown upon his own. By this eminent Exploit, he knew he should possess himself
of the Kings Treasure, which would highly strengthen his Party; and besides,
cut off all powe^^ from any of the Royal Family, to raise any Forces, or to
head any, who should yet have any sparks of Loyalty in their Breasts.

To execute this grand Attempt, he must make himself Master of the great City
of Pequin, where all the Court resided* But he could not hope to do this by
open force; and therefore resolved to do it by Stratagem, and so to surprise
the Town, that the Thunderclap should be felt, before the Noise was heard.

By this sudden Surprise, he would not leave the Emperor time, to prepare
either for his Defense, or Flight. Otherwise it would have been very difficult
for Ly with all the Force he could have raised, so suddenly to have reduced
this great City: For besides the vast extent of Pequin, it was very well
fortified, and in time of peace, was guarded with 80000 of the Emperors best
Soldiers. The Imperial Palace alone is above two Miles in circumference, and
defended with two or three Walls, with their Ditches and Bulwarks, which are
all distinct the one from another, and which cannot be taken but separately one
after the other; the Guard hereof was entrusted to the choicest Militia of the
whole Empire.

Ly foresaw all these difficulties, which he judged so great, that he despaired
of surmounting them, but by open violence; and therefore resolved rather to
make use of secret Intelligence and Correspondency; for without fraud and
treachery he could never have vanquished all the Obstacles to this grand
Design. To this intent, he had already, by Presents and fair promises, bribed
several of the Grandees of the Court and Council, and by these means, found it
not difficult to engage them in his Interests: A strange thing, that when there
was not any one person of the common people, either in City or Court, who could
be drawn into this Treason, several of the Magistrates and Officers of the
Court made themselves a detestable example, by entering into a Conspiracy
against the State, and the person of their Prince. The chief of the
Conspirators were the Eunuchs of the Imperial Palace, who were then very
potent and considerable in the Court. The Emperor of China presumed much upon
the trust and fidelity of these persons, thus to entrust with them the Guard of
his person, and the Government of his State.

By this we may perceive in what condition those States are, who have no
Nobility amongst them; I mean no persons, who inheriting the Dignities and
Grandeur of their Ancestors, do receive Principles of Loyalty to their
Sovereign at the same moment they receive the first Principle of their Life.
There are some things which men can never acquire by study though they apply
themselves to it assiduously, but they must descend to u^^ from the Blood and
Virtue of our Progenitors; else these studied Duties* which come not to us by
Nature, ar^^ but of a short continuance, nor much to be relied on.

The Tyrant, after he had by the assistance of the Officers and Eunuchs o^^ the
Court, thus laid his treasonable design, he sent into the Imperial City o^^
Pequin, several of his most trusty and valiant Commanders, disguised like
Merchants, with Instructions to keep ope^^shop, and to expose to Sale several
ric^^ Merchandises. These counterfeit Merchants were never suspected to be
grea^^ Commanders, and their Apprentice^^ and Servants choice Souldier^^. It
concerned them though to mind thei^^ Trade, for upon that depended the purchase
of the greatest Empire in the world; and they which put it to Sale, were those
which were most of all obliged to preserve and defend it. When the Bargain was
thus made, and Earnest mutually given, those in the City and Court, who kept
intelligence with the Tyrant, failed not by several pretexts to lessen the
Guards, and to weaken the Strength of the place as much as lay in their power.
Thus in a little time the Treason broke out all of a sudden, to the great
Disorder and Astonishment (as may easily be imagined) of all the Inhabitants
who were not privy to the Conspiracy. For whilst they were uncertain what
Resolution to take, they were under the power, and at the mercy of their
Enemies. Ly presently appeared, and found the Gates of the Town open, and his
men victorious in the Conquest of this great City, before he could attaque it.
See the Success of this Rebel, who in so short a time made himself master of
several Provinces! This of Pequin, the principal of the whole Empire, was the
Sixth now under his Subjection.

CHAP. II. The D^^ath of the Emperor Zunchin, and of all the Royal Family. The
Tartar resolves to oppose the Usurper, and to advance his ancient Pretension to
the Empire of China.
THE Emperor Zunchin did not perceive the deplorable condi^^ion of his State,
till it was not in his power to remedy it. He knew full well that the rage of
his Enemies would not only take from ^^im by violence, his ^^mpire and Crown,
but his Life also. He perceived that the Plot was laid, from that very time,
that his Counselors advised him not to raise Forces, nor send Money nor
Recruits to those Commanders who guarded the Frontiers. He might then have put
a stop to the progress of the Rebels, or at least have gained so much time, as
to have been in a readiness to have fought them, before they had been so far
advanced. But now, poor Prince, when he saw himself besieged in his Palace, he
was fully convinced that he had been betrayed, and therefore judged, that there
remained nothing for him now to do, but to depart out of this Life, by a Death
worthy of his Dignity and Courage. He wa^^ reduced to that extremity, wherein
the meanest of men are to be compassionated. His desperate Condition made him
feelingly reflect, how much in him was to be pitied the too fa^^ile disposition
of Princes, which is usually attended with sad Disasters both to them and their
States.

The City of Pequin being of a vast extent, before the Traitors could by force
enter the Palace, which was very spacious, some of the most Loyal Officers and
Soldiers made a vigorous resistance: These few persons, who did the most
passionately resent the disaster of their Prince, were such who had received
the hardest measure from the Grandees of the Court. This Attempt which they
made in opposition of the Tyrant, gave the King opportunity, if he pleased, to
dispose of his Life himself, rather than to abandon it to the Fury and Outrage
of his traiterous Rebels. This unfortunate Prince looked upon the resistance
which some of his Subjects made to the Tyrant, as the more grateful testimony
of their Allegiance, since thereby he obtained the liberty to have the disposal
of his own Life at his own election; which he considered as his last happiness,
and as the remains of the Respect and Loyalty of his Subjects. To what a
strange excess do the Disgraces of this life penetrate the Breasts of men, when
to kill themselves, is sometimes esteemed of as a Felicity, even to the most
potent of Kings and Princes! We shall always see some Imitators or others of
the Examples, which Histories record to us of Cleopatra, Mithridates, and other
eminent persons, who have made use of both Steel and poison, that by dying by
their own hands, they may free themselves from dying by the hands of others: A
frail and cruel satisfaction, which the pride of man makes him seek out, to be
his own Executioner, that thereby, he may die with the greater renown and pomp.

During the time that this resistance put a stop to the entry of the Rebels
into the Palace, the Emperor of China considered, how speedily to dispose both
of his Royal Family and Person, which was in the most Tragical manner that ever
Histories related: He had but one only Daughter, very young, which till now had
been the Hope and Desire of the Empire. It is true, that a Relation printed in
China, and published 1640. makes mention in two places, that the Emperor
Zunchin had a Legitimate Son, and Heir to the Empire, who was a very hopeful
young Prince, and already gave proof of his capacity for great Enterprises; but
doubtless he was dead before this direful Tragedy was acted; for he is not at
all mentioned in the last Manuscript-relation, which certainly would not, (had
he been then alive) omitted speaking of him, since it gave so ample an account
of his Sister, and made her so g^^at a sharer in this calamitous Disaster, that
her Throat was cut by her own Father, and that at her own supplication, that
she might not see her H^^nour, and illustrious Rank become a shamef^^l prey to
a Tyrant and Traitor, who had nothing great and eminent in him, but his Treason
and Rebellion against his Lawful Sovereign.

After this horrid Execution, the Emperor with his hands yet ^^eeking with the
blood of his Daughte^^* went into the Garden of the ^^a^^ace, accompanied with
his Legitimate Spouse, the Empress. He abandoned six other Wives, who had each
of them the Title of Queen, thirty others who were the most Illustrious Ladies
of the Empire, and three thousand others of lesser Quality. It is very
difficult for the Soul of man, let it be never so great and compassionate, when
it is oppressed with such a tumult of Griefs at once, to extend its care to
each particular Concern. Presently after this, the whole Court ecchoed with the
doleful Cries and Expressions of the Sorrow and Rage of those persons who
perceived themselves thus deserted: Till now the Trouble and Confusion of the
whole Palace had rendered them astoni^^hed and mute; but now they could no
longer undergo the burden of their Afflictions, but sought by Lamentations and
Complaints to ease and relieve themselves. So that now there was a contest
amongst them, who should the loudest proclaim their Grief: Some cried, My Lord
and my Husband; others, My King and my M^^ster; and some, My Father: Every one
accenting their sorrow in a Tone suitable to their part in this Scene of Sorrow.

The heart of this u^^fortunate Prince was penetrated with so great
Afflictions, that it could not admit of any sense of lesser; and it was now too
late ^^o seek for any Consolation. The only comfortable thought which Zunchin
could now entertain, was how to preserve his Honor, and chiefly, that of his
Royal Consort, the Empress. As for his other Quee^^s and Numerous Wives, he was
no longer moved for them; the preservation of the Honor of the Empress, was
the sole and last satisfaction he hoped for in this life; and to preserve this,
he resolved to perpetrate an Act of the highest violence imaginable. What
prodigious Afflictions represented themselves to the Mind of this distressed
Emperor, when the very apprehension of them transcended these Stupendous Real
ones?

Amongst so great a Number of Officers and great persons as were in this Court*
it could not possible be, that they should all generally be perfidiou^^ and
treacherous; there were some yet so generous, as not to forsake the person of
their Master: And it was wi^^h this Loyal Attendance that he entered into the
Garden; but it was not now to recreate himself, as at other times: He went to
die, deprived of all comfort, but a very doleful one, which was, that he yet
had it in his power to be his own Executioner. The Fountains, Flowers, Groves,
Birds, and great variety ofliving Creatures, which were the pleasant
Recreations of this Delicious place, were now no longer the Divertisement of
this Prince. Here was nothing now but Grief and Sorrow; all things had a gloomy
and mournful Aspect: For as it is the property of distempered Eyes to make all
the Objects of Sight appear suitable to their Distemper; so to these persons,
who had all their Faculties and Senses totally possessed with Sorrow and
Affliction, all the pleasures of this agreeable place seemed but as so many Sad
and Melancholy Spectacles.

These afflicted Courtiers, with a doleful silence attended upon the Emperor
and the Empress, who could neither speak a word, nor shed a Tear. When the
Heart is oppressed with Sorrow, Tears do in some measure refresh it, and Speech
seems to discharge the burden of its Grief; but Sorrow had taken such entire
possession of the heart of this poor Prince, that it had stopped all passages
to relief: And it wa^^ requisite for him to retain all his Spirits, lest he
should expire under the weight of his Afflictions.

Zunchin was a young Prince, endowed with all the qualities that might render
him amiable to his people. His Royal Spouse, the Empress loved him with so
tender an affection, that to testify the sincerity of her passion to him, she
resolved to die either with, or before him. It could not certainly but be an
aggravation to the Afflictions of this distressed Prince, to hear the Cries and
Acclamations of those who fought for and against him; the one side invoking the
Emperor, the other the Tyrant: It was like so many Stabs to his very heart, as
often as he heard himself, who was descended from sixteen Emperors his Ancestors
and Progenitors, brought in competition with an infamous Villain. These
Disgraces pierced the deeper, the more he perceived his own party to decline,
and that of the Usurper to be exalted to the very Heavens: The Stars of which,
unfortunate Zunchin execrated, that they were so propitious to a perfidious
Varlet, who so little merited the Fate of a Sovereign. And being by his direful
Calamaties, driven to this Despair and Fury, he poured out more bitter
Imprecations against those cruel and fatal Stars which presided at his
disasterous Birth.

This Prince being very pensive and solicitous how to prevent greater Disgraces
yet, went together with those who accompanied him toward a little Grove, at
the Entrance of which he stopped; and then the Empress guessing at his Design,
approached to him, and giving him her last Embraces, she parted from that
person which was the dearest to her of all things upon Earth, with all the
grief and sorrow that Humane Nature is capable of. She left the greatest
felicity of this life, to go to the greatest of Miseries; she quit for ever an
Empire and an Emperor, an Husband sincerely beloved by her, and who was but
now entering into the prime of his Age, and in whom she solely possessed all
that she esteemed or loved upon Earth; and she departed from him, that she
might go, and by violence take away her own Life, desiring no other
satisfaction to her mind, but to have in her power the choice of her Death, and
to die the Murderer of her self.

Thus she took leave of the Emperor, not being able to express the passion of
her Soul otherwise than with her Eyes; for all Commerce and Communication was
ceased between her Heart and Tongue. And then she entered all alone into the
Grove, and with a Cord hanged her self upon one of the Trees. A dreadful
Spectacle, which might make even those who were more senseless than the Trees,
lament so direful a death of so great an Empress.

Presently after, the Emperor went and placed himself near his Wife, whom he
saw hanging upon a Tree, having finished her Life by a Death as violent as that
which he had inflicted upon his Daughter. Then, poor Prince, he asked a little
Wine of one of the Lords which attended him; not that he was a Lover of Wine;
for on the contrary he was the most sober and moderate in his pleasures of all
the Princes which ever governed that Empire. And as for Women, he was so chaste
toward them, that he never frequented his Seralio; which gave occasion to all
his Subjects to give him a Title, which signifies, The Chaste Prince, or one
who never goes to the Seralio: It was not therefore for the love he had to
Wine, that he asked for it; but he only desired a little to refresh and revive
his Spirits, which were sunk and oppressed. And doubtless he had need of great
Vigor to put in execution the Action he designed. When the Wine was presented
to him, he sipped a little of it, and then biting with violence one of his
Fingers, and squeezing out the Blood, he wrote therewith these following Words:

The Mandorins are all Villains; they have perfidiously betrayed their Prince;
they all deserve to be hanged; and it will be a Laudable Act of Justice to
execute this Sentence upon them: It is fit they should all suffer Death, that
thereby they might instruct those who succeed them, to serve their Prince more
loyally. As ^^or the People, they are not Criminal, and deserve not to be
punished; and therefore to use them ill, will be Injustice. I have lost my
Kingdom which I received in inheritance from my Ancestors. In me is finished
the Royal Line, which so many Kings my Progenitors continued down to me, with
all the Grandeur and Fame suitable to their Majestic Dignity: I will therefore
for ever close my Eyes, that I may not see this Empire, descended to me, thus
ruined and ruled by a Tyrant. I will go and deprive my self of that Life for
which I can never suffer myself to be indebted ^^o the basest and vilest of my
Subjects. I have not the Confidence to appear before them, who being born
Subje^^ts, are become my Enemies and Traitors. It is fit the Prince should die
since his whole State is now expiring: And how can I endure to live, having
seen the loss and destruction of that which was dearer to me than Life.

The Prince, after he had thus wrote what his just grief dictated to him, he
untied his Hair, and covering his Face, presently with his own hands he hanged
himself upon a Tree near to that on which the Empress remained strangled. This
was the Tragical Catastrophe of this unfortunate Monarch.

The Emperor of China remained thus hanging on a Tree, the Prince who was the
Idol of his people, at the very name of whom, Millions of men trembled; the
Sovereign of above a hundred Millions of Subjects; the Monarch of a Kingdom as
spacious as all Europe; he who counted his Soldiers by Millions, and his
Tributes by hundred of Millions. Finally, the potent Emperor of the great
Empire of China is hanged upon a Tree, and his Royal Consort, the Empress, upon
another near him. What a weighty Load did the Trunks of these Trees support?
But of what weight had it need be to make the great men upon earth duly weigh
what is all this terrible and ambitious Grandeur which in so few moments passes
from the height of the Felicities of this Life, to an Abyss of Misery!

This unhappy Monarch finished his Reign at the age of 32 years, or according
as some say, at 35. But a few years to have said he lived, but fewer to say
that he reigned, if compared with his Predecessors; for his Grandfather Vanlie
ruled over China near fifty years, and Zunchin lived but thirty five.

He died very soon; but it was his Misfortune he died not sooner: For true it
is, that whoever it be, King or Emperor, who reckons his years which have been
exposed to such direful Tragedies, cannot be said to have lived such a number
of years, but to have undergone a far greater number of miseries and calamities.

The relation makes no mention how many years Zunchin reigned. And whoever
reads these Tragical Events, has reason to desire that his just Curiosity
might be satisfied herein. But all that can be gathered of a certainty both
from the Printed Relations in China, and those in Manuscript, is that in the
last 22 years which preceded the Revolution of this Empire, there were four or
five Kings and absolute Monarchs, who successively ruled this great State.
Vanlie Grandfather to Zunchin the last King, had in 1618. ruled 46 years, and
continued his Reign some years more. After the Death of Vanlie, his Son Thaicam
succeeded him, but he only reigned some Months: Thaicam had for his Successor
his eldest Son Thienchi; this Thienchi was succeeded by his Brother Zunchin the
last Emperor of this Race, whom the Spanish Relation calls the Don Rodrigue of
China. By this it is manifest that this unfortunate Prince cannot be said to
have reigned many years, though it be uncertain when he began his Reign; for
the Relations only take notice that he reigned in the year 1634. After him it
cannot be said that there was ever any other Sovereign Monarch in China but the
Cham of Tartary; for as for Ly, neither the detestable crime of his Treason and
Rebellion, nor the short space of his Usurpation could give him any right to
take upon him the Title of King of China. Thus this great Monarchy in a few
years has had many Kings; but this does not add to the felicity of a State,
nor are the people the more happy who have experimented the Rule of so many
Masters; but the contrary: For it is Experience and the Art of Governing which
makes Kings deservedly to be esteemed of as excellent Princes, and their
Government happy. Therefore those Nations ought to bless the King of Heaven,
whom he blesses in bl^^ssing their Kings with long Reigns.

Although it may be said, that the Emperor and the Empire did both at the same
time expire in the person of Zunchin; yet it is certain that the overthrow and
revolution of this great Monarchy did not happen on such a sudden as it
appeared: For several years before the Symptoms of a mortal Distemper
manifested themselves in the Body Politic of this State; and the dangerous
Illness thereof was sufficiciently known to cause a general dread of the
Consequences; but no care for the Remedy; so remiss and imprudent a negligence
was there, which served only palpably to discover the weakness of the
Government. The State of China resembled a sick person, who feels an Illness,
fears the Effects, but neglects his Cure: And it may be said to have been
seized upon by Death, when it was too late to act or do any thin^^ but to
behold the inevitable ruin and destruction thereof. The least Aches, if
neglected, often prove mortal: But here the fatal Effects were manifest, and
therefore it was the more important to have remedied the causes. The Empire of
China cannot therefore be said to have been lost by an incurable Illness, but
by an Illness to which due and timely Remedies were not applied; and it will
always be to be feared that that State which is governed with such a supine
remissness, will often be in danger to fall under the like calamities.

The Report of the Emperors death was quickly spread over all the Town. And
then those Loyal Subjects who yet disputed the Tyrants Entrance into the
Palace, hearing of the death of their Prince, for whom they fought, abandoned
their Resolution. And now the Usurpers, who were the more animated meeting with
no opposition, pursued their Victory, which they secu^^ed in all parts. Thus Ly
presently making himself Master of both the City and Court, took up his
Quarters (...) the Imperial Palace, where he saw himself possessed of all the
prodigious Treasures of this vast State; and in general, of all things which
contributed either to the Magnificence or Pleasure of Zunchin. The Relations
made no mention what became of the three Royal Corpse. They only say that the
Tyrant losing no time, caused himself to be Crowned in the Court at Pequin, and
to be proclaimed the Sovereign Emperor of China.

After his Coronation he issued out a Proclamation enjoining all the Mandorins
to give in their Names and Qualities, that in his new Gover^^ment he might
bestow amongst them such Employments as he judged requisite. Whereunto several
of the Mandorins gave Obedience; but diverse others of the most considerable in
the whole State, that they might (though it was too late) manifest the
Allegiance which they owed to their Lawful Prince, entered into a very barbarous
and unprofitable resolution, by death to follow him. By which they thought they
should appear very Loyal to him whom they had most treacherously served in his
Lifetime and Reign. All these persons, who were the most eminent of the whole
Empire, acting like so many Barbarians and desperate men, who saw themselves
surrounded with so many inevitable Calamities which would render their Lives
both disgraceful and burdensome to them, did without any hesitation destroy
themselves by diverse sorts of violent Deaths. Some cut their own Throats,
others strangled themselves, and others praecipitated and drowned themselves in
Wells and Holes.

As for those Lords and other Officers of the Court, who attended on the
Emperor and the Empress into the Garden, though there be no certain
information of their death, yet probably they either all or the greatest part
of them died with their Master, and by the same kind of Death that those
persons had made choice of for whom they had so great a veneration; for diverse
others who had never declared so great Constancy and Courage, did not forbear
to give this testimony of their Loyalty, when the Tyrant required their Names.

The rest of the Mandorins, who were not minded to show themselves so zealous
for the memory of their Prince, according to the Tyrants Orders, delivered in
their Names, persuading themselves that by this ready Obedience they should
make themselves very considerable in this new upstart Court. But they found
themselves much frustrated in their expectations; for so far were they from
being thereby the more considered by the Usurper, that on the contrary, as soon
as he had received their Names and Qualities, resolving to take an advantage of
their base unworthiness, he condemned them in the payment of several great Sums
of Money, in proportion to the Estates and Offices every one of them were
pos^essed of, pretending that they ought to make restitution to him of all
which they had defrauded their Lawful Sovereign of. And upon this pretension,
whoever either would not, or could not pay his Fine within the prefixed time,
was instantly condemned to Death; and no day passed in which some or other of
these wretched persons did not by cruel Torments lose their Lives. Nor did the
Tyrant stay here, but published new Declarations, that those pretended Debts,
Fines and Taxes which the Fathers had refused to pay, were payable by the
Children, upon the same pain of death. Thus the Tyrant Ly dealt with diverse of
the Mandorins, as well those who declared themselves for him, as those who in
some measure testified a respect for the memory of their Prince. It was a just
Recompense to these Traitors, and Chastisement to those who too late regarded
their Loyalty to their King and Country.

This was the miserable condition of the Empire of China during the years 1640,
41, and 42. The Tartar entered not to make open War till the end of 1643;
hearing then that Zunchin the Lawful Emperor, had lost both his Empire and
Life. The Fame whereof could not be kept within the Walls of the City, but was
quickly dispersed all over China, and from thence through Tartary; in each of
which States it made different Impressions in the minds of men, according to
their good or ill Affections to the Emperor and Empire.

The Tartar did not make any show of Joy at the News of Zunchin's death. He
rather seemed very much moved at it, as a very deplorable Accident, of a most
pernicious Example, and therefore ought to be severely and condignly punished:
But he was not displeased at the new right to that Empire he judged did thereby
accrue to him. He began not only to discourse of it, but to argue it very
hotly: He maintained that he was now freed from any Obligation which lay upon
him from the Oath by which the Tartarian Princes had tied themselves to the
Royal Family of China, never to make any Attempt upon that State; forasmuch as
that Family was now extinct in the person of Zunchin, and had left the Empire
to the power of the Usurper and Tyrant. He pretended it was now very just and
right for him to enter upon the ancient Rights which the Tartars had heretofore
to that Empire, seeing that these Rights had only been yielded up to the Royal
Family which then reigned, and that those only are to be understood to be
comprehended thereby who were descended in a direct Line from Father to Son.
Else if all the Kindred of the Emperor of China were to be understood to be
preferable to the Tartars, in their pretensions to this Crown, it was both very
insignificant and fruitless to have inserted this Restriction; That they did
only renounce their Right to the Family which then reigned. For Kings and
Princes can never fail of Kindred, and thus the Empire could never have
revolved to the Tart^^rs, who had treated very clearly and sincerely, always
supposing that the Sovereignty might pass, as is very usual in all Monarchies,
from one Family to another.

He pretended further, that admitting there should yet remain any of the
Kindred of Zunchin, it must be granted that they were all in so weak and low a
condition, that they could never be in a capacity of acting any thing
considerable for the Liberty of their Subjects, and therefore ought to be
reputed as persons dead and lost, rather than living, and in any probability of
obtaining the Crown. That it was also to be considered, that the Rebel who had
found so little opposition in raising himself from a private Soldier to be
Master of the Imperial Court, and six of the principal Provinces of the Empire,
had already overcome the greatest difficulty, in making himself the Sovereign
Monarch of that great Empire; and now that he was possessed of the Forces and
Treasures of China, no Prince of that Nation could hinder him from confirming
his Authority, and triumphing in his Rebellion: That it was of dangerous
consequence, to leave in this Usurper an example to other Rebels of oppressing
their Kings, and subduing their States and Subjects.

Thus they argued in the Council of the Cham of Tartary, and at last concluded;
That as it was on the one side of high importance to go and revenge a Prince
and State oppressed; so on the other side, it was neither just no^^ equitable
that his Highness should leave his own Empire in danger to become a prey to his
Enemies, and consume all his Forces and Treasury to regain by Conquest the
Empire of China, that he might afterward deliver it up to any one who was
descended from the Kings of China, or perhaps to some not at all allied to
them; for it was no^^ to be doubted, but many would falsely pretend themselves
to be of the Royal Family. Therefore since the main and principal Branch of
that Royal Stock was now extinct, and that the lesser were all brought under
the power of the Tyrant, who daily shed the Royal Blood yet remaining, it must
be granted by all persons that though Conques^^ could never rightly entitle a
Rebel to the Sovereignty, yet it might a second time confer the just and lawful
possession of China upon the Tartars.

Having with these Arguments justified their Claim to the Empire of China, it
now remained that they should confirm it with the power of their Sword. And for
this they prepared with all possible expedition, and the more eagerly, for
being a warlike and generous Nation, they were persuaded that not only the
Justice of their pretensions, but their Honor engaged them in it, that thereby
they might avenge the quarrel of all Kings, ^^n making this per^^idious Traitor
(who ^^y his Treason had possessed himself of ^^he Empire, by reducing his
lawful Sovereign to that extremity, that out of despair he became his own
Execu^^ioner) an example and terror to all ^^isloyal Subjects.

All these Considerations fixed the ^^artars in their resolutions for the
con^^uest of China, and presently they is^^ued out all convenient Orders for
this ^^xpedition. They recruited theirtroops ^^ith new Levies, and in a short
time ^^hey raised several potent Armies* But ^^ill they were unwilling to pass
over ^^he Wall, or make any Irruption upon ^^at Empire til they were called in
by ^^me of the Heads of the Loyal Chinese, persuading themselves, that if they
deferred their entrance into China till they were importuned thereto from them,
they should thereby both bette^^ secure and justify their Conquest, and clear
themselves from all reproaches of breaking their League, which till then they
had preserved with that Empire. They were staying in expectation of some such
Overture, when it presented it self to them as favorably as they could have
wished; for one of Zu^^chin's Generals, to whom he had committed the Guard of
the Frontiers toward Tartary, sent to the Tartars to solicit them to enter
into China. Thi^^ possessed the Tartars of all the advantages which they had so
long wishe^^ for, as judging them absolute necessary for the accomplishment of
their designs.

The General, who was called Vsangu^^, had always kept his Loyalty to hi^^
Prince unspotted, though in this las^^ occasion he could not render him an^^
important Service; for the Rebel^^ were so numerous, and the Loyal Subjects so
fe^^ in comparison, that they could make no confiderable Attempt. But now this
Vsangue did most passionately desire some opportunity to revenge both the death
of his Master and of his Father, who was a great Officer in the Emperor of
China's Court, and was put to death by the Tyrant, for the approved Loyalty
both of himself and his Sons, therefore Vsangue, who wanted neither Zeal to
revenge his King, nor sense of his own Injuries, considered that there was not
in the whole Empire Forces enough to attempt the bringing the Tyrant to his
condign punishment; that it was not to ^^e hoped that any of the Princes of the
^^loud Royal could ever regain the Em^^ire; that the whole State in all
like^^ihood would become the prey and ^^poil of some new upstart Traitor; and
^^herefore he judged, that it would be ^^ess dishonorable for that Nation to
^^ubmit to the Dominion o^^ an Empe^^our who had won it by Conquest, ^^hough he
was a Forreigner, since there ^^as no probability for the Chinese to imagine
ever to be able to shake off the yoke of Tyranny. For these considerations, he
judged it expedient to address himself to the Tartars, whom he knew to be both
powerful, and courageous, and therefore believed that i^^ must be them only who
could the soonest reward the Tyrant according to his deserts. And therefore
resolved to call them in to the Conquest of this Empire, and obliged himself to
give them entrance through that part of the Wall which was committed to his
Guard.

Without all dispute this was a mos^^ pernicious resolution, and such as could
only tend to the completing of the entire ruin of the whole State. In all
appearance this Vsangue was more in^^ent upon revenging his private quarrel
than successefully to serve his Coun^^rey; or else his Zeal to discharge hi^^
duty in taking vengeance of the Tyrant, blinded him so, that he did no^^
discern that this way of revenge woul^^ inevitably procure the irreparable
ruin of his own Country. It is true the Tyrant had already made himself very
potent; but it was to be considered that he was by birth a Chinese, as likewise
were all his Soldiers; that time does daily produce various alterations in the
state of all affairs; that it was more facile for those of the same Nation to
equalize the Tyrant in power, and by watching their opportunity, to suppress
him, than to support the force of so warlike a Nation as the Tartar. And
moreover the Tyrant became every day more and more odious to the people, and it
was easy to imagine that this hatred would in a short time produce some
Conspiracy powerful enough to ruin him.

But that which was yet more considerable, was, that the Southern Provinces,
which were the richest and the most powerful of all China, had already crowned,
and acknowledged for their Lawful King, a Prince of the Royal Family, who might
in a short time raise Forces as potent as those of the Tyrant; and having the
advantage of Right and Justice on his side, be quickly in a condition to fight
him* or if he was desirous to spare the blood of his people, he might easily
find out some other way to cut him off.

The Government of this new King was already very plausible to his Subjects. He
was very mild and prudent in his Conduct of Affairs, and neglected nothing
which might either establish or enlarge his Authority. His manne^^ of
Government was accompanied with Qualities directly opposite to those of the
Tyrant, which made him every day more beloved, as the Tyrant daily became more
odious for the insupportable Insolency and Arrogance with which he treated the
principal persons of the Empire. Thus the Renown and Grandeur of the Royal
Blood on the one side, and the despicable Vileness of a Rebel on the other, had
made such an Impression in the Spirits of the people, that there was great
reason to hope that the whole Empire would within a short time be reduced under
a Lawful Prince.

But the too precipitate Zeal of the General Vsangue would not permit him to
take so far a Prospect, or else (as it is very probable) he was not
sufficiently informed of what passed in the Southern Provinces, till such time
as the Tartar was already entered into China; for the Relation which came then,
though it be very obscure in this point, as in diverse others, not sufficiently
remarking the time, yet it seems to intimate that the Prince was not Crowned
nor submitted to as Lawful King, till after the Tartar had passed the Wall.

This inconsederate Proffer and Demand of Vsua^^gue was most acceptable to the
Tartarian Court, being it was that great advantage to their Interest, which
they had so long coveted. And they judged to be thus called in, was a full
acknowledgment of their Right, and that now there remained nothing but taking
possession, to make themselves the Lawful Masters.

The Tartars thought this would exempt them from all just reproach of either
invading or surprising the Chinese. And though it be true that their so long
forbearance to enter into China, and the importunity with which they were
called in, even by some of the Chinese themselves, cannot sufficiently
justify the Conquest of the Tartars, being there were so many Princes of the
Royal Family of China, then living, yet it is admirable to consider how
solicitous these people were to justify themseves, and to give a plausible
account of their management of this Affair, with which many Politicians would
not so much have troubled their Consciences: And yet these people who had all
this regard to Justice, are Barbarians. Our Politicians of Europe, who have so
little, are Civilized, that is to say, persons instructed in all the Duties of
Humane and Civil Society. But if the name of Politician signifies only an able
civilized person, it may very well be said that the Tartars in these latter
days have been as Politic, and as Civilized as most Politicians elsewhere.

CHAP. III. The Tartars enter into China. The Tyrant Ly flies. The young Xunchi
makes his entrance into Pequin, and is there Crowned Emperor. He declares War
against the King of Corea, and makes his Kingdom Tributary.
THE Tartars resolving to enter into China, being importuned thereto by the
General Vsuangue, omitted nothing necessary for the execution of so great an
Exploit. Orders were issued out in all parts for all provisions for War, the
preparations for which were suitable to the Grandeur of the Enterprise.

Their Prince was called Xunchi, and was not above 10, or 12 years old, but
endowed with so much Wit and Courage, that they supplied the default of his
years. This young Monarch resolved to pass into China, at the head of his Army.
As his presence must needs more animate the courage of his Soldiers, retain
them in their Loyalty to him, prevent Differences and Disorders amongst his
Commanders, so it could not but at the same time excite an ambition in his
Subjects, to go and serve in that War, where they should see their young Prince
in the Field, and in so tender an age undergo all the Toils of War.

The Tartars having now made sufficient provision of all necessaries for their
Expedition, they entered into China, by that part of the Wall, through which the
General Vsuangue had opened them a passage. They were not displeased that the
Northern Provinces which were in subjection to Ly, underwent the first
Inconveniences of the War, as it may be judged, by their going straight against
the Tyrant, persuading themselves that thereby they should render their
entrance less odious, and their Designs less suspected by those who had not as
yet sided with them.

It was in the year 1643. that the Tartars made this irruption into China;
neither the Day nor the Month is set down; but it may very well be supposed,
that it was toward the latter end of that year; for the Relation says, that
in the space of three years and some odd Months that vast Empire was entirely
conquered, and that the last of all the Towns which submitted to the Tartarian
yoke, was Canton, of which the Tartar possessed himself in the beginning of
January, 1647. Neither is the number of the Forces which went upon this
Expedition very certainly known; we only know that their Number both of Horse
and Foot were almost incredible.

They divided their Army into several distinct Bodies of Foot and Horse, some
of a hundred, some of two hundred thousand men, which at the first did very
much incommodate one another; for some of them advanced, plundered, and subdued
that part of the Country which was designed the Prey and Conquest of others.

The Cham of Tartary was accompanied with three of his Unkles, who supported
this young Prince, and served him with Valor and Loyalty, rarely to be
paralleled. Their care was from the very beginning to gain a Repute to the
power of their Sword, and by mildness and moderation to ingratiate their
government with the people. The elder of these three Princes, who was very
eminent for his skill and ability in the Art of Government, kept himself always
close to the person of the Emperor, and instructed him with prudent Counsels,
and took such care of his Person and Fame, as if he had been his Son rather
than his Nephew. The two other Unkles of the Emperor, who were younger,
commanded his Armies, and by their Loyalty and Valor they caused the
Emperor's Arms to triumph in all parts. One of these did more eminently
signalize himself in this Conquest, by which he gained the Fame of the most
Valiant Captain of the whole Nation, and acquired the Title of the Conqueror
of China.

The War in a short time extended it self into the Province of Pequin, the
Capital City whereof had for the last Ages been always the Seat of the Court of
the Emperors of China, and there the Tyrant had established himself, and drawn
to him all the Grandees of his Party. But the Fame and Success of the Tartars
quickly displaced him. There were only some few places, which did render
themselves by force; all the other yielded to the Threats of the Tartars, out
of the fear and apprehension they had, that they should be as severely
chastised as those were who made any Resistance. Thus, though in some few
places the Chinese were so obstinate as not to submit to a Foreign Power, and
in others they made some show of resistance, yet generally they all presently
yielded themselves up to the strongest, and few or none did firmly adhere to
the Ty^^ant.

The Tartars having thus prosperou^^y began their Conquest without meet^^ng
with any considerable Obstacle, which might put a stop to their progress,
resolved to lose no time, but to march with their whole Army toward Pequin.
The desire they had to find the Usurper there, made them hasten, that they
might with all possible speed pluck the Crown from off that unworthy Head.

The Tyrant had in Pequin a very gallant and numerous Army, who were very well
paid, and such as in all appearance would have made a very resolute Defense.
This made it generally be believed, that if convenient order was taken, should
the Enemy gain the Victory, the purchase thereof would cost him much Blood. But
this Usurper being but a cowardly Traitor, and all his Soldiers so many
treacherous Villains, their huffing Vapors quickly vanished. Till now they
only contended with Deceit and Treason: They had only overcome naked men,
people disordered, and so surprised, that they had not time to prepare for
their Defense; but now they were obliged ^^o face an Enemy, who came prepared
to give battle, in search after them, and such an Enemy which was fleshed in
the Victory of all those who ever durst oppose them. Ly knew there was no
safety for him so near his Enemy; for as it would be rashness to run the hazard
of a Battle, so the danger was equal, to stay and expect his Enemy, and to
think to defend himself, being blocked up in the City of Pequin, therefore he
resolved to retreat, and to abandon his Capital City as soon as the Enemy was
within three days journey from it.

The Tyrant, before he discamped, discharged some of his Choler upon the
people, and executed most horrible Cruelties in the City. This was to punish
them for the respect which in some measure they seemed to retain toward their
Lawful Sovereign: It being most true, that they always showed a greater
abhorrency to his Treason, than any Zeal or Inclination to his Interests.
Therefore as soon as he had revenged himself on the Inhabitants of P^^quin,
presently with his Associates he took his flight, and carried along with him
the Treasures of all the Emperors of China: But he was not so loaded with
Riches, as with the execration of the People, which have eternized his Memory
amongst the Chinese as the most detestable Villain which ever breathed.

The Tartars presently appeared before the Walls of the City of Pequin, and
made their entrance without any resistance; but as soon as they perceived that
the Tyrant had made his Escape, they made no stay, but instantly followed him;
but it was not possible for them to overtake him; therefore the young Xunchi
returned to Pequin, into which, as soon as he had made a most magnificent
entrance, they judged it convenient with all expedition to declare him the
absolute Monarch of all that Golden Kingdom; for so the Tartars call China.

This young Monarch, after he had caused himself to be Crowned Emperor of all
those vast Territories, judged it convenient to settle his Court in the Palace
of Pequin, whither he summoned all the Nobility of Tartary, and did most
eagerly prepare for the prosecution of his Victory.

As for the Tyrant Ly, that we may never have occasion to mention him more, all
the further mention which the Relation makes of him, is only, that he retreated
into the Province of Xensi, which is in the Northern parts of China, and one of
those six Provinces which he had reduced under his Subjection. Thither he went
with all his Forces and Treasure, and made a stay with all his Retinue in the
Capital City, fortifying himself therein as strongly as he could possibly. This
is all which the Relation informs us concerning the Tyrant, and it makes no
farther mention, neither concerning his Person, Army, or prodigious riches. It
is no small trouble to me that I should have so often occasion to complain of
the defect of the Relation. But the person who furnished me with the Memorials
relating to this part of the History, knew no more, and satisfied himself with
acquainting me, that at the time of his Writing, all thing^^ were in such a
confusion in the whole State, that he could not possibly clearly inform himself
concerning diverse Particulars.

This is most certain, that the Tartar^^ did in a short time after conquer all
the Provinces, even that of Xensi, whither Ly was retreated; but whether or no
he was there seized upon by the Tartars, or what became either of him, his
Army, or vast Riches, is not at all mentioned. It is strange they should be so
negligent in the Tartarian Court, as not more particularly to inform themselves
herein! For the Relatio^^ from the Information of diverse persons who came from
Pequin, since the Coronation of the Cham* makes mention of diverse Passages less
remarkable, bu^^ takes no notice of the last Adventures of the Tyrant.

That which is most credibly famed* is, That his Followers, when they more
seriously reflected upon the Enormity of the Crimes which this execrable
Traitor had perpetrated against his own Country, and the numberless calamities
which he had drawn upon that once so flourishing an Empire, and after all this,
that he should be so infamous a Coward, as not to dare to oppose the Tartars,
nor so much as to face them at their first approach, when he migh^^ more
advantageously have fought them, having then a very gallant and numerous Army,
which now every day mouldered away, and did not only renounce his Authority,
but detest his very Person; and that he should yet keep to himself those vast
Rich^^s, which they judged to be a Spoil more due to them, than to so cowardly
a Vagabond. They combined together to make away his person, and to seize upon
those Treasures which he was then possessed of, and which the Emperors of
China had been many generations collecting. And when they had executed their
Design, and divided the Prey, the whole Army disbanded, and dispersed
themselves up and down the other Provinces.

But should his Soldiers have spared him his Life, it would have been very
difficult for him to have escaped some disasterous end or other, from the rage
of the rest of his Countrymen; fo^^ Don Julian was never more abhorred by the
Goths, who dwelt in Spain, than Ly was generally by all the Chinese. But I
shall speak no more of him, and may what I have now said be sufficient to
strike a horror into all such Villains whose punishment can never adequate
their Crimes.

I shall only add that this Traitor ruined both his Prince and himself, bu^^
the Calamities which he drew upon his Country did not expire with him. He had
advanced himself by the Fall of his Sovereign. All that ambitious men can
aspire to, is only to ascend by the same steps by which others descend; but how
little do they consider with what peril they advance themselves, that by the
height of their Fall, they may purchase to themselves the greater repentance,
that they were ever mounted so high? If so potent an Emperor could fall so
low, what could so base a Tyrant expect, but quickly to be reduced to that
extremity, as to search out a Precipice to fling himself down headlong? Yet so
fatally mischievous was the Destiny of this vile Wretch, that he acted these
Villainies, though he could not but know, that the Empire and his Country would
remain only to those who were the least buried in its Ruins. It was at the
last manifest to all persons, that the Attempt of this perfidious Villain was
to ruin the whole State, and there was none but abominated both his Person and
his Actions. But the Mischief was done, and his death and punishment would not
remedy it. So true it is, that all things are with no great violence
discomposed, but not so easily reduced into order again: And f^^om hence it is,
that there is nothing more faulty, than to begin a Mischief; nor nothing more
difficult, than to put a period to the progress of it.

There was now no more mention made of Ly at Pequin. Xunchi the young King of
the Tartars was absolute Sovereign, and so active a Prince was he, that after
his first Victory, he woul^^ take no respite, or stand still so muc^^ as to
take breath, but resolved wit^^ all speed to exercise his magnanimou^^ Courage
in subduing the whole Empire. And that he might the mor^^ successfully begin
his Enterprise, he considered that the King of Corea wa^^ his Neighbor, and
that it would no^^ be secure for him to leave one so potent behind him. The
Kingdom of Corea lies on the East of China, and is little less in extent than
all Spain: It is only separated from China by a great River, and was Tributary
thereto heretofore, when China was in subjection to the Tartars; but since the
Coreans have refused to submit themselves to the Dominion of the Chinese, and
have chosen to thems^^lves a King of their own, who only sometimes sent Presents
to the Emperors of China; the Tartars therefore now laid claim to it by right
of their former possession, and upon this pretense they marched toward those
parts with their whole Army.

But it was not so easy to conquer the Coreans as to subdue Pequin; for they
are a more warlike people than the Chinese, and have for a long time been
engaged in a hereditary War with the Inhabitants of Iapan, who are naturally
very fierce, and much addicted to War, and hereby the Coreans have learned how
to handle their Arms in their own Defense; and besides, they were not divided,
either by Faction or Treachery, but firmly united in their Councils, and
steadfastly resolved to defend themselves. They were governed by a Prince who
was unfeignedly beloved, and cheerfully obeyed, and who led them into the Field
himself; and for these Reasons they gave a greater check to the victorious
progress of the Tartars, than ^^he Chinese could yet do. But the Tartars
overpowering them in Force, and being animated by their success, gained great
advantages over them in all parts. Fortune declared her self so favorable to
the Tartar, that she did thereby evidence she destined him only for Victory and
Triumph. But though in a short time he reduced a great part of this Kingdom,
yet it was not without the loss of his best Soldiers.

The King of Corea, perceiving that his Forces were neither for number nor
strength sufficient to oppose so powerful an Enemy, thought he should more
successfully by submission defend himself. There is nothing which Ambition will
not do to support it self; if it be convenient to do any abject or low action,
then there is nothing so humble or vile which the proudest spirited man will
scorn to act. This Prince, since his Grandeur would not avail him against his
Enemy, resolved to seem willing to submit himself to him. As for the Tartar, he
resembled the Magnanimous Lion, or one of those Hero's, of whom it is said,
that they will grind their Enemies to powder, if they refuse to submit to their
power; but make it their Glory to spare those who prostrate themselves at their
feet.

The King of Corea sent therefore to lay his Crown at the feet of the Cham of
Tartary, assuring himself that it would be returned back to him, conditionally
that he would acknowledge himself a Tributary to the Tartar, who accordingly
accepted of his Offers, a^^d assented to treat upon those terms. Thus the King
of Corea abased himself, that thereby he might be the higher exalted; the
readiest way for any person to disentangle himself out of any troublesome
affair, and in conclusion, to gain himself an advantage thereby, is to know how
subtly to dissemble; for all men are easily deluded with false Appearances.

In the Tartarian Court they considered that they had already their hands full
in China, and that they could never want employment there, and therefore this
Treaty with the King of Corea upon these terms, must needs be very advantageous
to them; for thereby the Emperor without lessening his Forces would increase
his Fame. Thus the Cham returned out of Corea with all his Army, to Pequin. And
in the Interim he gave order to the King of Corea, without any Arms to follow
him to his Court, that there they might better draw up, and conclude upon the
Articles of Peace. Accordingly the King of Corea confidently relying upon the
Parole of this young Monarch, failed not to observe these Orders, and rendered
himself at Pequin, presently after the Arrival of Xunchi, and was received and
treated according to his Grandeur, and the Magnificence of that Court. After
the King had solemnly made his Homage to the Cham, according to the Conditions
of Peace, which were concluded upon these Terms, That henceforth the Kings of
Corea should by Homage and Fealty hold their Kingdom with all the Dependencies
thereof from the Emperors of Tartary; (Which were almost the very same
Conditions with those which were formerly made with the Late Emperors of
China) he returned with his Diadem and Royal Scepter to his own Kingdom, to the
public Joy, and his private satisfaction, which did the more exalt the Fame of
the Grandeur and Generosity of the young Emperor of Tartary. All that is here
reported was concluded in the year 1643. and the beginning of 44.

CHAP. IV. The Tartar pursues his Conquest. He reduces five other Provinces
bordering upon Pequin. His Conduct, that thereby he might illustrate his
Victories, and the Orders he prescribed to the Conquered.
PResently after, the Tartars had entered into China, their powerful Armies
overran all parts thereof, and like a violent Torrent carried all before them.
Their young Monarch never failed in his own person to appear in all eminent
Enterprises. We have already seen that as soon as he had subdued the Province of
Pequin, which is the principal of the whole Empire, and one of the six which
the Tyrant had reduced under his power, how prudently he secured himself
toward Corea, which he had made Tributary to him. But this was but as an Essay
of his Heroic Actions. Now he resolves with all expedition to strike the
terror of his Arms into those five other Provinces of the North, which yet
seemed to side with Ly. These were Xantum, Leautum, Honam, Xansi, and Xensi.
This young Prince entered at the Head of his Troops into these Provinces in the
beginning of 44, and the same year subdued them all. There was at the first
some few places which made a vigorous resistance, but of no long continuance.
The heat of the Chinese did not long last, and their great Flashes quickly
blazed out, and served only to consume themselves therein. But it is strange
that the Tartars should overrun and reduce all these Provinces, without
meeting with the Tyrant, or seeing any appearance of either his Army or
Treasure; at least the Relation is silent herein.

The Conduct of the Tartar in so swift an Expedition is very remarkable. He
went directly with the main Body of his Army, and fell upon the Capital City of
the Province, without ever dividing his Forces, or diverting them upon any
other Design. His Opinion was, that no General of an Army, though he should
leave behind him some places less considerable, which he might have possessed
himself of, and some Bodies of the Enemies Forces, which he might have
defeated, yet he need not distrust his Victory. Thus this Prince with the
terror of his numerous and potent Army, presented himself before the Capital
City of the Province, which in a short time he always either carried by Storm,
or else presently obliged it to render upon Articles. By these means, as soon as
he had made his entrance into the City, he took possession not only of it, but
of the entire Province; and then he established all convenient Orders both for
War and Peace: And from thence he issues out his Summons to all other Towns and
places in the same Province, either without all delays to submit themselves to
his power, or to prepare for their Defense, and at the same time he gave them
assurance that he would receive them into his Favor and Mercy, if without
making any resistance, they rendered up themselves: But if on the contrary, they
resolved to defend themselves, then he denounced a bloody War against them.
Thus the places which submitted before they were compelled to it by violence,
were received and treated with all the Grace and Favor they could expect from
so generous a Prince; but as for those places which prepared to make
Resistance, he sent his whole Army to summon them the second time; and so
numerous and formidable were his Soldiers, that they brought Terror and
Desolation in all parts wherever they came, and laid their Sieges so close,
that those who at first appeared most ^^esolute, after they had felt the rigor
of the first Assaults, quickly repented themselves; but it was now too late;
for the Tartar had determined by their example to teach others to yield
themselves to his Mercy, before they put him to the cost of blood; and thereby
he likewise designed to instruct their Neighbors, that they might not be
deceived, but know what upon the like occasion to expect.

This was the Conduct and Success of the Tartar in the conquest of these five
Provinces, where the young Prince in his own person commanded in the head of
his Troops, as he did likewise in Corea. This Expedition concluded with the
year 1644. after which he returned to Pequin Crowned with Laurel.

This Prince had made choice of this great City for his Court, and the place of
his Residence, and had published his Proclamation, that all the Officers of his
Court, and the Nobility of Tartary, should appear there. And having already
given so many eminent proofs of his undaunted Courage, he thought it would be
now more suitable to his Grandeur to remit the Conquest of the Nine other
Southern Province^^ of China to the Experience and Loyalty of the Generals of
his Armies: Either he judged that in all that spacious Country ^^here was no
Enemy glorious enough for him in person to contend with; or else, having been
so often victorious, he thought the very Fame of his Arms sufficient to carry
Victory with them wherever they came. Thus we see in all times Examples,
which evidence that the common Saying, That the Fortune of War is variable and
uncertain, holds not always true. And as this Maxim has been falsified in the
persons of Alexander, the two Caesar's, Julius and Augustus; the Scipio's, and
many such other Conquerors; so it may very well be said to have been confuted
by young Xunchi; who for his Valor may justly be paralleled with all these
Hero's, and like th^^m seems to have been born only for Victory and Triumph.

But that which me^^its the greatest Admiration, and which ought to be
recorded, that it may serve for an example to other great Princes, is, that
amidst so tender an Age, and so profound a Darkness of Infidelity, it could not
be discerned, that so numberless Victories had rendered this Prince either proud
or vainglorious: And yet it must be acknowledged, that should this young
Monarch, have like those other Conquerours, been puffed up with pride or
vanity, yet the Tenderness of his Age, his Valor, Power, and Success,
considering likewise that he was a Barbarian, void of the knowledge of the true
Religion, might very well have pleaded in his excuse: But the Relation in all
his grand Exploits, makes him appear as a Prodigy of Moderation; and Remarks
that he never attributed his Victories either to his own Valor or Power, but
solely ^^o the Sovereign power of the God of Heaven, according to the knowledge
he had of him; as for himself, he said he was only the Executioner of the
Pleasure and Decrees of Heaven, and unless from thence he had been most visibly
favored, he declared he should have despaired of success in diverse
Ente^^prizes, the execution of which proved most facile and easy to him. And
for proof how much he was favored from above, he recited several Prodigies
which he assured himself were pre-ordained by Heaven, that thereby his Arms
might be rendered Victorious* Perhaps the Devil, that he might the more blind
these people, did by some extraordinary means bring to pass those Adventures
which they related; as amongst other things, the Tartars do with great
assurance affirm, that at their first entrance into China, they found a Ford
over a River which was very deep, and never before fordable in any part, much
less at that place, where the Tartars Army marched over. This River they call
the Yellow River, because the waters thereof are very much troubled and muddy.
The head of it arises beyond China, into which it enters by the North, and
waters several Provinces thereof, and in all parts is very large and deep, but
more especially at that place where the Tartars marched over with their horse
and foot, without any difficulty at all.

The like Accident, they say, happened to this Prince, and his whole Army, in
their passage over another River. These great Rivers are very frequent in all
parts of China, and in some places they are of a very extraordinary breadth and
depth.

From all these adventures the Emperor of Tartary concluded, that the Heavens
approved of his Conquest, since to gain him the possession of China they acted
in such an extrordinary manner. The Chinese themselves (which may seem
strange) confirm these relations, and say it was decreed from above, that the
Empire of China should be subdued by the Tartars. This they publicly proclaim,
hoping thereby to palliate the shame of their Nation, that they have so
infamously and cowardly submitted to their Enemies. The Heavens (say they)
decreed it should be so, ^^nd they preordain'd the confusion and destruction of
China, that thereby it might the easier be conquered by another Nation, else
the Chinese would in another guess manner have received any who should have
dared to assault them, and would never so wretchedly have suffered themselves
to be subdued by their Enemies. Thus the conquerers and the conquered do
equally pretend to have pursued the decrees of Heaven. The Tartar hereby makes
his advantage, and the Chinese likewise thinks to excuse his base cowardliness.
Thus men all the world over ridiculously strain their brains to make God
compliant with their pleasure, and so enamoured are they with their fond
fictions, that to gain credit to them, they fear not to authorize them upon the
supreme reason of the Universe, and the sovereign Truth it self.

The whole Tartarean Nation hearing the renown of the victories of their young
Xunchi in China, quickly flowed in. And now that their Countrymen were
masters, no walls were sufficient to stop their passage; the love of fame, the
desire to share with their companions in the remains of the pillage of so many
fine Cities, and rich Provinces, would not let them sit still, but drew them
thither from all parts.

Great need had the Emperor of them all; for besides that he was obliged to
maintain great Garrisons in all the Towns and strong places, which in each
Province are very numerous, it concerned him likewise ever to keep in the field
several potent Armies: some to reduce those people, which as yet had not
submitted to him; others to secure what he had already conquered. And it
likewise highly imported him to have an Army in readiness to prevent revolts
and insurrections of the people, which are very ordinary in a Nation lately
conquered; and especially in a Nation, which having been accustomed to the
dominion of Princes of their own Country, see themselves brought under
subjection to Forraigners.

It was this consideration which induced the Tartar to engage as many as he
could possibly of those Chinese soldiers, who were borderers upon Tart^^ry, to
take employment in his Army; for these are the most warlick and the skilfullest
at their arms of all China. And principally he endeavored to draw into his
party the heads of the most eminent families, and the most considerable persons
of the whole country* These persons served both as hostages to him, for the
Loyalty of all their dependents, and increased the number of his Soldiers,
which he daily raised more and more, that he might with all convenient speed
send them to the conquest of the more remote Provinces: but still he took care
that the chief Commanders and principal Officers of his Troops were Tartars.

As for all other employments which were not Military, though there were many
very considerable offices and dignities, the Tartars bestowed them amongst the
Chinese, with less precaution. And herein at the first they proceeded in a
method very proper to gain the affections of the people, they continued all the
Mandorins in their places, only some of them they advanced to more
considerable employments, according to the knowledge they had of their merits.
These proceedings did render their dominion less odious: But it must also be
confessed, that some time after they turned some out of their employments,
reformed and limited the power and jurisdiction of others, and to others they
left them only their naked Titles, but deprived them of their Authority.
Neither did they think it convenient any longer to permit the Chinese to be
the dispensers of Justice to the people, or to have the power of punishing
them. And without all doubt* they deser^^edly merited to be thus chastised, for
having formerly made such ill use of their Authority. For it was visible, that
the state and Empire of China were brought to ruin only by this; that the
interpretation of the Law, and the dispensation of Justice, was confided, or
rather abandoned to the Eunuchs, who were both corrupt, and neither qualified
nor capacitated for their employments.

As for the military charges, the Tartars were more diffident of entrusting
them in the hands of the Chinese, though sometimes they disposed of the
commands of some of their Troops to such as they could most rely on, and as
they judged most capable; but they always set over them some General, or other
considerable Officer of the Tartars, who with a greater body of men kept a
strict eye over these Chinese Troops, and had a more absolute and particular
command over them.

But that which did most exasperate and deepest pierce the heart of the
Chinese, was the Edict which the Tartars published, whereby they enjoined them
to cloth themselves after the Tartarean fashion, and to cut off their hair,
which the Chinese love most passionately, and take great care to spruce and
perfume it. And generally that which they esteem the most gentile and handsome,
is to have their hair, like women's, hang down to their very feet: and therefore
this ordinance seemed to them most severe and rigorous. But the Tartars judged
it highly important, pretending that conformity in habit would infallibly
produce a greater correspondence and conformity in the affections and
inclinations of persons, so that a foreign dominion would not be so
displeasing, nor seem so uncouth and strange, when this external diversity of
habits did not offend the sight. Use and custom makes all things supportable.
And whereas the Empire of China contains several spacious Countries, which
could not all be conquered at once, they saw no way how to avoid several
inconveniences, which would otherwise happen, but by making this distinction of
those who were conquered, from those who were not; and for this reason obliging
those whom they had first conquered, to cut off their hair, thereby they were
easily distinguishable from those who were not. And now there yet remained some
mark to be put upon the Chinese who had submitted themselves, to know them
from the real Tartars; and this was very necessary, for it was not very easy
to distinguish them by their faces, there being so great a resemblance in the
features of these two Nations* Therefore they judged it requisite to give to
the conquered Chinese some particular Mark, which was, by enjoining them to
wear a bigger tuft of hair on the top of their heads, just as in Europe they do
to their Gally-slaves, to distinguish such who are Christians, from such who
are not,

Nothing so cut the Chinese to the heart as this did, and they could not
possibly prevail with themselves to obey this severe Order. The Tartars
perceiving they so much scrupled it, reiterated their Injunctions, strictly
requiring all persons, without any restriction or exception, upon pain of life,
to give a speedy obedience thereto. And now some of them chose to lose their
heads with their hair; for they made so great a difficulty to comply with the
Edict, that their disobedience cost them their lives. They knew full well their
peril, if they were refractory, and yet they were so obstinate, that they would
rather dye, than be deprived of their hair.

CHAP. V. One of the Uncles of Xunchi reduces the City and Province of Nanchin.
The flight and death of a King of China, who had been publicly crowned. Six of
the nine Southern Provinces submit themselves to the Tartar.
THE young Xunchi, when he had taken all convenient order for the confirming
and securing of his Authority over his new Subjects, had disposed of all
Offices in the State, and settled strong Garrisons in all parts of the six
Northern Provinces; being resolved not to stir from his Court at Pequin, he
remitted the conduct of his Armies to one of his Unkles, with order to proceed
with all speed to the conquest of the other Provinces. This Prince in a short
time after departed from Pequin with a very powerful Army, and marched directly
toward the great City of Nanquin, which City had been formerly the residency
of the Imperial Court, and was now the Metropolis of one of the best Provinces
of the whole State.

It was in this Province, nay in this very City, that the Mandorins had crowned
and proclaimed Emperor a Prince of the Royal Family. As soon as they were
informed of the death of the Emperor Xunchin, they thought they could do
nothing more important for the welfare of the State, than to oppose this lawful
Prince to the Usurper. This was the best present remedy for the afflictions and
calamities of their Country, which they could then think upon. This new King
was Son to a Cosen germane of the Emperor Zunchin, in whose Court he had been
educated, and was ever considered as a Prince of the Blood Royal; nay, the
Emperor himself, at such time as nothing disturbed the tranquillity of his
Government, took a particular care of him.

This young Prince, who wanted not abilities, quickly pe^^ceived, from whence
the Storm was to be feared; for from the very time of his Coronation there was
a great rumor that the Tartars advanced with a very potent Army; and this took
up his thoughts more than all the Enterprises of Ly. Therefore probably this
Prince was not crowned Emperor, 'till after that the Tartars had passed the
wall. This it was which induced him to refuse the Government, and the stately
pomp and luster of the Imperial Crown. But the Mandorins were so importunate
with him, and his Soldiers did so confidently assure him victory, that at last
he suffered him to be prevailed with to accept of the Crown, though he soresaw
that the weight of it would crush him to pieces.

This new King at his Coronation, took upon him the name of Hunguan, which
signifies splendor. But his Reign should have been more prosperous to have
verified his Title, and made him an Illustrious and splendid Prince. As soon as
he had the Crown upon his head, he took all possible care for the preservation
of his Empire and Subjects; he provided all conveniences for the most urgent
necessities of the Provinces, he raised and repaired the Fortifications of all
the towns and places of greatest importance. But he was in a more especial
manner careful to secure the Passes, and to obstruct and block up the passage
of his Enemy. As for his Army, he made choice of his stoutest men for his
Soldiers, and placed over them experienced and valiant Commanders. And for his
people, he was resolved to increase their privileges, and to heap upon them
his Acts of Grace: and that he might entirely gain the hearts and affections of
his Subjects, his carriage toward them was very different from that of the
former Emperors of China; for he condescended to a kind of familiarity with
them, and when ever any eminent action was to be done for the public benefit,
he ever in his own person gave them the first example what they were to do,
that thereby he might both instruct and encourage them; and this did so
conciliate him the inclinations of his people, that they all voluntarily vowed
to pay him all the Loyal Observance and Obedience he could expect from them.

There was just reason to have hoped, that if the General Vsangue had not so
precipitately called in the Tartars, all the Southern Provinces, which make the
greatest and best part of China, might have been retained under their Obedience
to their Lawful Sovereign, who was powerful enough to have suppressed the
Usurper; and it would have been no more difficult for him, than it was for the
Tartar to have dissipated the vain projects of the Traitor; nay, he might
peradventure have driven him to that straight, as to have obliged him by a
voluntary death to prevent the ignominious Execution due to his perfidious
Treachery.

But the Reign of this new Emperor was never destined to be blessed with so
great Felicity, nor with any long continuance; for he reigned over the nine
Southern Provinces little more than a year; But during that small space of time
in which Xunchi was taken up in the Conquest of the six Northern Provinces, and
the Kingdom of Corea.

As Soon as the Cham began to taste the first fruits of his Victory, the entire
Invasion of the Empire did no more disturb his Conscience, than did the breach
of the peace which he had sworn with the Royal Family of China. He did not now
consider that it would have been but natural Justice to leave to this Chinese
Prince, at least that part of the Empire where he had been chosen King, and the
Tyrant had never extended his Dominion. He knew that Hunguan was publicly and
undoubtedly acknowledged to be a Prince of the Blood Royal; but Fortune and
Victory had now new Modeliz'd his Conscience, and made Justice transformed. Now
he publicly declared that his Right to the whole Empire was sufficiently
justified by this pretext, That those persons of the Blood Royal, to whom the
peace was sworn, were only to be understood of such who were immediately
descended from the Emperors in a direct Line from Father to Son, as the
Succession of the 17 last Emperors had been continued in that Family. He was
desirous to have it thought that this explanation ought to be made of the Oath,
that hereby he might be freed from it, as likewise from all Obligations which
lay upon him to any who might ever pretend to be of the Royal Family of the
Emperors of China.

See now what was the Tartar's Justice. But when we reflect upon the practice
of many Christian Princes, th^^re is less reason to wonder that a Barbarian
Prince, an Idolater and Infidel, should with all his might advance his
Conquest, since now it was so facile, so glorious, and of so high importance to
his Grandeur and Interest. He had began too successfully, to stop in the midst
of his Course. And the young Xunchi proceeded too swiftly to be stayed now,
with these initial considerations, whether he had or he had no Right; whether
he was, or he was not obliged to be a punctual Observer of the Oath and the
Peace which his Ancestors had sworn with the Emperors of China.

The Emperor's Uncle, whom he had employed in the entire Conquest of all
China, did with all possible speed advance with all his Forces toward the
province of Nanquin; he went directly against him whom the Chinese had crowned
their Emperor, and was by his Instructions commanded with all diligence to
endeavor to seize upon his person, and take from him both his Crown and his
Life. These were Reasons of State, but they were cruel and barbarous Reasons,
which because th^^y did exclude all of the Blood Royal from any Right of
Succession, must likewise adjudge to Death this Prince, who was called, and in
a manner compelled to it; but this was to cut off at the first all occasions of
Revolts, which might distrub the Tartars in their possession of the Empire of
China.

As Soon as the General of the Tartars was entered into the Province of Nanquin,
at the first he met with a somewhat vigorous resistance from the Chinese, but
after they had seen those vast Armies, they did not long persevere in their
Resolution. All began to bend and yield to the Success and Valor of his
Forces. And proportionably as he went further into the Country, he met with
fewer Enemies to contend with. Many who saw how dear it had cost their
Neighbors to have endeavored to stop the progress of the Victors, thought
they should be more secure by being less obstinate. The General therefore
advanced on his Road, and having by the force of his Arms subdued all Obstacles
which did impede his March, he came and lodged with his whole Army within sight
of the great City of Nanquin.

The Emperor Hunguan resided there with all his Court, and lived in all the
Splendour suitable to his Person and Dignity; but he was now confirmed that he
was not deceived in his apprehension of the weight of the Imperial Diadem, and
now he was convinced that it would have been more advantageous to him to have
persisted in so Honorable a Refusal. His Captains and his Soldiers who did so
vapor when the Tartars were at a greater distance from them, were not now they
were near them, so courageous; though now, if ever, it was the time for them to
give proof of their Resolution and Courage; but in stead of Valor, there
appeared nothing but Timorousness in all parts. His best Commanders, on whom he
most relied, were all defeated, and those Posts abandoned from whence he hoped
most to have annoyed the Enemy: Seeing himself therefore in so ill a posture of
defense, and no better upheld, he resolved not to stay till the Town was
battered and assaulted by the Tartars, but with his choicest Troops departed
out of Nanquin in the night time; and presently all the most considerable
persons in the City followed him; so that there was none staid in it, but a
great Rabble ^^f persons very incapable of defending a City.

In the Morning the Tartar came to view the place nearer, and as he was
distributing the Scaling Ladders, and giving Order for the Assault, he spied
all the Gates open, and without any further delay entered in. Thus without
drawing his Sword, he became Master of this strong City, which was fortified
and def^^nded with so many Walls and Bu^^warks* ^^hat ^^ccording to the Account
the Re^^^^on gives of it, two thousand men of ^^rope might therein for several
years h^^ve maintained a Siege against a very powerful Army. It was sufficient
for the Tartar, only to present himself before it, to win a City of that vast
extent, that a man on Horseback could ^^carce in two days time surround the
Circumference and all the Outworks of the first Wall.

The General was not a little puffed up with his Victory, but being vexed and
impatient that the Emperor Hunguan had escaped him, without any intermission
he pursued after him with all his Horse. His diligence gained him the Success
he so eagerly desired; for he quickly overtook the unfortunate Prince, and
having met him in disorder, and not able to make any Defense, being abandoned
by the greatest part of his Retinue, he presently seized upon him, and (as it
is generally reported) put him to death at the very instant.

This was the end of the Life and Reign of this Monarch, who caused himself to
be styled Hunguan, the Bright and Splendid Prince; but all his Splendor and
Brightness was only like Lightning which quickly vanishes. All these glittering
Flashes are but of a short continuance, and like an Ignis Fatuus, quickly
disappear.

After the death of Hunguan, the Victor returned to Nanquin, having constituted
a Chinese Mandorin Viceroy and Governor of the whole Province. This Mandorin
had been formerly one of the chief Ministers of State to two or three of the
Emperors of China, and was called by a Name which signifies Ape or Monkey,
because ordinarily in his Discourse he used many affected Actions and Gestures
with his Hands, Head and Mouth. But he was ever esteemed of generally as a
great Statesman, and reputed a very able and intelligent person in the Art of
Government.

The General of the Tartars committed to this Mandorin the sole care of all the
Affairs and Concernments of that entire Province, and after he had levied some
Recruits, and given his Troops some time to refresh themselves, he proceeded to
the Conquest of the two Neighboring Provinces Schiamsi and Fuquam, and with
the same Fortune and Success which did usually attend the Arms of the Tartars,
in a little time he subdued them both. Some places, as in the other Provinces,
made a resistance, but a very short and ill-managed one* The other places
taking advantage by the Misfortune of their Neighbors, presently submitted to
the Victors.

These three Provinces were all reduced under the Dominion of the Tartar in
less than a year, which was 1645. Now as the General was determining to advance
his Troops toward the other three Provinces which bordered upon these, which
were Honan, Suchuen and Cancheu, News was brought him that he was already
Master of them, without being necessitated to draw his Sword. They testified
the more readily their Obedience to all Orders his Highness should please to
impose upon them, because they had leisure to consider to how many inevitable
Calamities they should expose themselves, should they think to stop the
Triumphant progress of their victorious Enemies: Therefore they resolved to
prevent their ruin, and if by submitting they could not secure themselves from
all the sad Inconveniences which in all Wars are unavoidable, yet they hoped
their Oppressions hereby would be but light in comparison of such as they must
infallibly expect in a War with an exasperated Enemy, where there is no Mercy
to be expected by the Conquered.

CHAP. VI. The Tartars find the greatest resistance in the Conquest of the
three last Provinces. A Chinese Pyrate makes himself very potent. Who this
Pyrate was.
OF all the fifteen Provinces into which the vast Empire of China is divided,
twelve of them were in the year 1645. entirely subjected to the Dominion of the
Tartars; there only remained the reduction of three, viz. Foquien, otherwise
called Chincheo, Canton, Quansi, to complete the entire Conquest of all China:
B^^t it was more difficult to subdue these than all the rest; for some of these
Countries did not only border upon the Seas, but were also rugged and
mountainous, and the people very warlike; more particularly those of Foquien or
Chincheo; and being thus advantageously seated, they were likely more to
exercise the Valor and Warlike Discipline of their Enemies, than as yet any of
the Chinese had done. But besides the Ruggedness of the Country, and the
Martial Gen^^us of the Inhabitants, there were two other Obstacles which
presented themselves, and for some time put a stop to the Tartars in
completing their Victory.

The first, but least considerable, was a new Prince of the Blood Royal, who
had retired himself into these Provinces, and in the City of Foquien was
Crowned Emperor of all China. This Prince at his Coronatio^^ styled himself
Ianvan. All these Titles have some ^^llustrious signification; but I could
never be informed what this last meant. If Hunguan was only a flash of
Lightning, this latter was only a Vapor or Exhalation. All these people with
their great Emperor did but a little affright the Tartar. But they persuaded
themselves, that if their new Prince was not powerful enough to recover that
part of China which was lost, he might yet secure to himself these three
Provinces, of which he was now Master. And that which did most encourage them,
was, their Princes having employed under him a most eminent Chinese Captain,
who was highly reputed for his Valor, and till now had ever been very
successful in diverse adventures both by Sea and Land.

The second Obstacle I intimated before, was this Renowned Captain, and he was
the greatest and last which ever the Tartars met with in all their Conquest.
Upon this very man's Account they were obliged to change their usual method in
the management of affairs, and to go to work a different way than yet they had
done: Before they threatened, and imperiously commanded all people to submit
unto them upon pain of severely feeling their displeasure* but now, since they
prevailed so little* even by force and violence, i^^stead hereof, they did not
(contrary to thei^^ usual custom) think scorn to come to Proposals of
Agreement, Treaties, nay Entreaties to a person of no quality, a very Pirate.

This man, who had made himself such a Terror to the Tartars, was by birth a
Chinese, and was called Icoan, a Name which then made a great noise even in
very remote Countries. And for the better Intelligence of the state of Affairs
in China, as they then stood, I judge it will much satisfy the Readers
curiosity to recite some of the Adventures of his Life. He was born in a little
Village near the Seaside, not far from the City of Annay; the place of his
Birth was not more obscure than his Parents were poor and miserable; when he
was very young, he went out of his own Country, to try if elsewhere he could
not better his Fortune; and being a bold witty Fellow, he did not despair to
raise himself in time to be some considerable person, which that he might, he
judged it necessary for him t^^ travel abroad, see the world, and to seek out
some convenient employment; upon this account he came to the City of Macao, and
there, as it is usual for persons of his years and condition, he placed himself
in the Service of some Workman or Tradesman, and from thence he came to serve a
Chin^^se Merchant: This was no very high preferment, neither did he resolve to
stay here. And as he wanted not for wit; he every day improved himself, grew
more and more cunning, and capable of higher advancement. And here in this City
being instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion, he was baptized,
and called Iaspar; but for what reason he took this Name, I cannot tell, unless
perhaps he imagined it very fortunate. Icour or Iaspar seeing himself at Macao
but in a mean condition, and not much considered, returned into his own
Country; but not being advanced there, nor contenting himself to live low and
obscure, he went from thence to Iapan, where at that time there was great
freedom to all Nations to come and Trade, and for this reason he fixed himself
there, and got employment under a very rich Chinese Merchant, whom he served
with great fidelity and diligence in all his Concerns, and was very well
approved of by his Master, who found him daily more and more intelligent in all
things relating to Traffic, and so confided in him, that he sent him with some
Ships, and a great part of his Wealth entrusted to his care, to Trade in the
Kingdoms of Cochinchine and Cambaye: Iaspar acquitted himself so well of his
employment, that he returned with great profit to his Master, and much credit
to himself. Afterward he so improved the repute and opinion which his Master
and several other rich Merchants had of his capacity and fidelity, that many of
them did gladly entrust him with the greatest part of their Stock. Once he went
from Iapan to Cambaye with two Ships laden with very rich Merchandise, the
Factorship of which was commissionated to him by his Master and several other
Merchants. He arrived safely at Cambaye, and as he was busied in unlading and
disposing of his Merchandise, News was brought him that his Master and all or
the greatest part of those by whom he was employed, were dead of the Plague,
which that year raged terribly in Iapan, and followed after a Famine, which had
much afflicted and desolated the whole Country.

Now was a fit season to verify the proverb, which says Opportunity makes the
Thief; and a more favorable one Iaspar could not wish for. By profession he
was a Christian, but he was not so sincere in his Religion as long to show
forth the works thereof, in observing the Eighth Commandment. At length he grew
weary of having been true and faithful to those who confided in him. And now
had he a very seasonable occasion to practice Machiavel's Maxim which says,
That he had best be a l^^ng time a good and an honest man, who would be a good
time ^^ Cheat and a Knave; that is to say, he that would long gain by fraud and
deceit, must first gain Credit and Repute by a lo^^g show of Truth and
Integrity; Icoan therefore now forges a Will for his Master and the other
Merchants by whom he was employed, and therein he declares himself sole Heir of
all the Lading of those two Vessels: And yet he pretended not to forsake the
Law of God, or to renounce the Christian Religion; for he was willing to
persuade himself that the true Heirs of these Merchants ought in Conscience,
for a reward to his Services, to let him enjoy all that he was then possessed
of at Cambaye; and there it was easy for him thus to clear his Accounts. But
it would be more difficult for him to account with the Mandorins of China, who
are more exact in taking Accounts for the Dead than for the Living; for these
Lordly M^^ndorins make themselves the Executors of the Wills of all dead
persons, that thereby they may make themselves their Heirs. They observe great
Forma^^iti^^s of Justice, out of pret^^nce to prevent all Frauds which might be
imposed upon lawful Heirs; but in reality, it is only thereby to advantage
themselves. Iaspar, who understood very well the Customs of his Country,
judged he should be much perplexed there, in making up his Accompt^^; for the
Mandorins had very exactly informed themselves of all the particulars with
which he had been commissionated; and therefore seeing his Life and Fortune in
such eminent danger, he thought that the best course he could take was that if
he must die like a Thief, not to let it be for his first The^^t, nor like a
common Rogue, since he k^^w how to advance his Fortune, and make hims^^lf the
General of the Thieves. Th^^ principles of the Christian Religion in which he
had been instructed, might something disturb his mind* in the^^ courses: But by
Thieving he enriched himself; and by restitution he impoverished himself; and
besides, he was likely to meet with great vexation in accomp^^ing with the
Mandorins of China; therefore he judged, the most expeditious way of freeing
himself from the vexatious trouble of making up his Accounts in this world; was
to reserve these matters till he should make up his Reckonings for all in the
next. Thus as for Religion, Icoan did not much trouble his thoughts, which were
now wholly employed in contriving how to secure and advance his Fortune; for
which the readiest and surest way, he thought, was to turn Pyrate.

Icoan, by the Sale of these Goods and Merchandises, of all which he had now
made himself the proprietary and Master, raised so considerable a sum, that
therewith he purchased several Ships, and raised a little Naval Army; and now
he had made himself Commander in chief of such a Squadron as might make the
Mandorins of China have no great mind to come and call him to account. But out
he puts to Sea, and in a short time meets with so many successful Adventures,
that (as the Relation says) the Barbarossa's and other eminent Corsairs could
not come in comparison with this famous Pyrate. The Name of Icoan was as much
famed as feared; and he was not less valiant than crafty and subtle. But above
all, he showed himself most liberal when any prize was to be shared. The Fame
and Renown he hereby purchased, encr^^ased daily the number of his Followers:
All persons who were either desperate in their Estates and Fortunes or of such
loose principles as himself, crowded into his party. Thus the number of his
Ships so increased, that at last he made himself Admiral of a very considerable
Navy.

Icoan does no longer now content himself to prey upon private Vessels, but not
doubting of Success, he has the audacity to go and fight the whole Chinese
Fleet, as soon as he was informed it was preparing to come in pursuit after him.
Several other Corsairs had diverse time been roving about those Seas, but
ei^^her they never kept out at Sea, but whilst the King's Ships were in
Harbor, and neglected to scowre the Seas, or else it was not long before they
were surprised and seized upon by those who were encouraged thereto by the
great reward which the King promised to any who should bring in the Heads of
these Pirates. Nay, it sometimes happened that these Rogues destroyed one
another* as he was who came against Icoan. But this Fellow ^^arried himself so
cautiously, managed all things with so excellent an order, and was so
punctually observed and obeyed by all his Followers, that he was not to be
surmounted either by Force or Stratagem. Thus he became Ma^^ster of all the
Seas upon the Coast of China. But he did not stop here, but that his Soldiers
might not be idle for want of Employment, he landed, and made Invasions upon
the most rich Provinces, pillaged and sacked the people, desolated the Country
wherever he came, neither did he meet with any remarkable opposition against
his great Forces, which were then so numerous, that he was able to put out to
Sea a thousand Vessels. What can we attribute all this to, but mere Fortune?
Icoan was but yesterday a small Officer to a poor Handicrafts-man, and to day
is Sovereign of the Seas, the Dread and Terror of people and Provinces. The
King, or rather the Kings of China, for this Corsair upheld his power under the
Reign of several Kings, were fully informed of all which passed upon the
Coasts; but it was no easy matter to undertake the suppression of Icoan. And
there were very few who had so much Courage as to venture near his Squadrons;
for his Ships were so well furnished with excellent Cannon, and he had aboard
them so many bold desperate Fellows, and so great plenty of all sorts of Arms
and Fireworks, that there was no body who had any mind to go in chase of him.

The King, who searched out all possible means to put a period to the Rapine
and Violence of this Corsair, at last thought of a very pretty way to suppress
him, and this was by a stratagem, which was both Warlike and Politic; but it
had not the success which was hoped it might. The Fortunate Destiny of I^^oan
prevailed as well against the policy as power of his Enemies. There was at the
same time a great rumor in the Kings Court of another Pyrate who roved about
the Coasts of some of the Provinces, and behaved himself with that resolution,
that he likewise was looked upon as invincible. There happened some Interviews
between these two Pirates, and they agreed together not to oppose or undertake
any thing one against the other; and by this League they supported themselves.
The King therefore purposed, and did really write to each of them, giving
strict charge that his Letters should be delivered to them both at the same
instant of time, and with great secrecy, so that one of them when he received
his Letter, might not know that the other had been sent to upon the same
account.

The purport of the King's Letters ^^o each of these Corsairs was to this
effect; That being informed of his Valor, he was desirous to make use of his
Service in an Affair of high importance to the good and welfare of his State;
and therefore offered Icoan a General Pardon and Indemnity for all that was
past, and to acquit him from the restitution of any thing of which he had been
possessed of, appertaining either to the King or to any private person
whosoever: And that he would not only receive him into grace, but make him High
Admiral or Captain General of all the Sea Coasts, give him the Office of Great
Mandorin, and abundantly shower upon him his Favors and Rewards. But to merit
these Graces, he commanded him with all speed with his whole Fleet to attaque
the other Pirate, who disputed his sovereignty over the Seas; and therefore it
highly concerned him not to suffer any longer such an Enemy to his State; and
that Icoan was the person he had made choice of to quell and suppress so
eminent a Pirate.

The Letter which the King writ to the other Corsair was to the same effect;
That he might receive him into Grace, etc. he enjoined him to go, assault and
defeat Icoan.

This Stratagem of the King was highly approved of, and it was imagined that
the issue thereof would have been of great importance to the public welfare;
for in all likelihood each of these Pirates would with great joy have received
these Proposals, and should these so powerful* Fleets engage each other, it was
expected that either they should ruin themselves, or if one should gain the
Victory, yet in the Conflict he should have been so shattered and torn, that
the Navy Royal which was setting forth upon this occasion, finding him in that
condition, might with ease defeat and vanquish him, and thus entirely complete
the destruction of both these Pirates.

It is not known what operation the King's Letter had upon the inclinations of
the other Corsair, the Competitor of Icoan; but as for him, he very readily
entertained these fair propositions; and whatsoever the Design of them might
be, yet hereby he saw an honorable way (which he so ambitiously desi^^ed) laid
open to him to dissentangle himself from the toils and ^^urmoyles of the Sea,
and the perils in which he was involved, and from which it is very difficult
for any man, pursued by a powerful King, long to secure himself, And should any
disaster happen to him: by giving obedience to these Orders, he knew that his
endeavor faithfully to serve his Prince, would Crown his Misfortune with
honor. But should he gain the Success he hoped for, he should thereby elevate
his power higher than ever, make himself glorious in hi^^ own Country, and
free himself from the fear of being called to an Account by the Mandorins.

See now Icoan transformed into a Loyal Subject to his Prince, upon the
Reception of his Letter and Commission, which did as much blemish the Fame of
the King, as it did illustrate the renown and glory of the Pyrate* who to be
received into the Grace and Favor of his Prince, was only to destroy his great
Adversary, which did import his private concern as much as the public; for
there being then no^^e left who could contend with him at Sea, or disturb him
in his Enterprises, he knew he should have it in his power to make himself
feared and beloved by whom he pleased.

Thus this Corsair was sure to make his advantage every ways, but mistrusting,
as he had reason, that he with whom he was to engage, might have received the
like Order; for this is the usual practice of the Politicians of China, and
therefore their Countrymen are the less surprised with it; he judged by delay
he should endanger his Success, and therefore resolved with all expedition to
put his Design in execution, and at the very instant issued out all convenient
Orders to his whole Fleet, and immediately went in search of his Enemy.

Icoan knew that his whole Fortune depended upon the Success of this
Expedition; therefore he omitted nothing which was expedient to be done. After
he had visited all his Ships, seen that they were very tight and trim, his
Canons right pointed, his men in good order, and in general had put all things
in a readiness for Battle, he went and faced his Enemy, who likewise had drawn
together all his Force, without all doubt upon the same Design, but had been
more remiss and delatory in making his preparation; and yet he fitted himself
for fight as well as the diligence and eagerness of his Enemy would give him
leisure, who pent him in so clo^^e, that he would not give him liberty to make
out to Sea, but charged and assaulted him with all the fierceness and violence
imaginable.

Nothing could be added to the Valor and Conduct with which Icoan managed the
whole Battle, in which he showed a Courage and Judgment worthy of an excellent
Commander. The Victory was long disputed between both parties, and with all the
Valor and great Exploits which can be imagined; and doubtless that which is
said of the Combats of Pirates, that they make a great noise with ^^heir Guns,
only waste their powder, and do no grea^^ Execution, held not true here; fo^^
most certainly this was a very bloody ^^ight, in which two fierce and sto^^
Pirates did most obstinately resolv^^ neither to give nor take Quarter, bu^^
either to conquer or to die; but the Success, or rather the Courage and Conduct
of Icoan quickly gained him the Victory; which he secured by leaping into his
Enemies Ship, and with hi^^ own hand killing him, and cutting off his head, and
thereby quickly put an end to the Battle, in which the Victor's Ships were so
little endammaged o^^ disord^^red, that they were ready fo^^ a fresh Fight; as
for those who had taken part with his Enemy, and escaped the Fire and Water,
they presently struck Sail and submitted to the Victorious Icoan; nay, they
immediately sided with him, for they were persons, who though they had changed
thei^^ Master, yet they changed neither their Quality nor Condition. Thus Icoan
increased both the number of his men and Ships, and his Fame likewise, and
thereby became after the victory both much more powerful and formidable. Then
even presently he issued out fresh Orders to all his men to be i^^ a readiness
to receive the Kings Fleet, should they make any Attempt upon him.

But this great Success and Conduct of Icoan had frustrated all the Designs of
the Chinese Court. He was more potent than ever, and con^^equently more to be
feared: He never yet had so gallant an Army, nor so numerous a Fleet under his
Command. So tha^^ the Kings Ships which came in search after him, wi^^h design
to have fought him, imagining to have found him half conquered already, when
they had made up nearer to him, and di^^covered in what condition he was in,
pretended now they came with a quite different Design. They came not now to
assault Icoan, but to congratulate and give him joy of his Victory. This subtle
Corsair, who was perfectly well versed in the Art of Dissimulation, did conceal
his distrust, and made no show as if he had prepared to receive them as his
Enemies, but made to the Shore, and when he was Landed, he went and presented
to the Viceroy the Kings Letter, wherein he gave him assurance of those great
Recompenses if he freed the State from that Pyrate, whom he had defeated, and
whose Head he then delivered to the Viceroy, showing him the Ships he had
taken, and the men who had delivered themselves up to his Mercy. The Viceroys
could not refuse Icoan the Honors and Dignities he laid claim to, since he had
so express a promise of them from the King their Master. He presently therefore
took possession of the High Admiralship, and being backed and supported with so
many powerful Forces, which made him so dreaded, he resolves to maintain
himself in that Office.

Thus is the Grandeur and Fortune of this Pirate now firmly established: He is
now rich and powerful, a most Illustrious Person, and highly considered of by
the people: Of a great Thief, he is now become the great Mandorin of all China;
but it is true, in that Country Thief and Mandorin differ only in Name: But he
is not now feared as he was before; but on the contrary, he is loved and
honored by all the Provinces; for he promises them in recompense of the
Mischiefs he had brought upon them, to make them flourish in wealth and
prosperity.

He now begins to make the Seas open and free for Trade and Commerce. It was
not very difficult for him to scowre the Coasts, and to clear the Seas of all
Pirates; for which he need only with his Followers quit the Seas, and stay
ashore; for all the Corsairs which used to rove about and ravage those Coasts,
had listed themselves in his Squadrons, and were under his Command; but Icoan
and his Followers were too much allured with a Pirates Life, not to put out to
Sea again with all speed. The difference between his former being at Sea, and
his present, is only this, that now he robs with the Kings Flag, and under the
pretext of his Authority. There are in all parts of the world honorable
Thieves and Robbers, who rob and steal with Royal Authority; but Icoan robbed
the King himself, and that with greater audacity than he plundered private
persons. There were no Vessels which went out of China laden with Merchandises
for the Neighboring Kingdoms, but he made pay their whole Duties to him; nay,
and more than their Duties. And as if Icoan had been King, the Merchants took
all their Pasports from him, and esteemed of them much more than they did of
those from the King. Thus the Commerce of China availed this Officer much more
than it did the King himself; and besides all this, he laded several Vessels
for Iapan and the Philippines, with the richest Merchandises of all China,
which he had either plundered, or bought at his own price: And this Traffic
brought him in yearly Millions of Silver; so that in his Palaces he had several
Halls and other Rooms covered over with Plates of Silver, which was become as
common with him as the most ordinary Materials.

The King of China was highly displeased that his design to destroy this
Pyrate, should succeed so contrary to his expectation; for he saw that instead
of having ruined and destroyed him, he had confirmed him in his authority, and
made his power more dreaded than ever; and therefore now all his Contrivance
was how to draw him from the Sea, and the best way of doing this, he thought
was by employing him against the Tartars, who then made Incursions upon the
Frontiers of China; for this end he declared him General of his Armies, and
sent him Commissions to levy new Troops in those Provinces where he was
already Captain General of the Coasts.

He caused likewise several great and considerable sums of Money to be
delivered to him for the payment and subsistence of his Army: But the
intentions and designs of the Court were only hereby absolutely to cut off the
Tyrant, either by causing him to be destroyed by the Tartars, or else by
seizing and arraigning him when he should be further advanced into the
Country, where they might more easily secure his person.

Icoan very readily obeyed the Kings Orders, but he was too clear-sighted not
to see through all this policy, and too subtle not to evade it, and turn it to
his own advantage. He delivered out his Commissions, called together all his
Troops, and appointed his Field-Officers, and began to march into the Field.
But all this time he had laid a Contrivance with his Friends and Confidents,
that when he was upon his March, they should in all parts give an Alarm, and
should publicly come and inform him that several Dutchmen and other enemies to
the State of China did rove about, and ravage the Seacoasts, the Guard of
which was committed to his care. Icoan upon the advice hereof made a show of
much trouble and concern, and seemed very much perplexed. He instantly sent
advice upon advice, to acquaint the King with all that had passed upon the
Coasts. At last he remitted the management of the war against the Tartars to
his Lieutenant-Generals, and he himself presently put out to Sea, to go in
chase of these Pirates which had made such havoc upon the Coasts. This was all
the desire and intention he had of approaching near the Court.

Icoan understood full well how all Affairs were there managed, and knew that
the King did not of himself cause these Orders to be issued out; for it was not
he that governed the State, but his Officers and Counselors, and therefore
conceived that it was they who had laid these designs against him, resolving
thereby to ruin him. Neither was he ignorant that the Viceroys and the Kings
Commissioners in the Provinces where he was, were ready upon all Ooccasions to
do him all the ill Offices they could, being instructed thereto by the
Ministers of State, who had likewise commissionated them to watch and observe
him, and not to let slip any opportunity, whenever time and place should give
them any advantage against him; foreseeing therefore the vexations and trouble
in which he should perpetually be involved by these persons, he apprehended
that there was no other Expedient to free himself from so many Enemies, but to
resolve to win them to his party, and to engage them in his Interests. This was
not very difficult for him who was so well furnished with Money, with which he
knew how to supply himself upon all occasions; for he need only lay new Taxes
upon the Country: By this he knew he should open the mouths of the poor people
whom he oppressed, and raise their Cries against him; but at the same time he
should stop the mouths, and appease the clamours of those who sought to oppress
him. This he thought was the best way to secure and advance himself; and this
he resolved to put in practice, and did so successfully, that in a short time
he was one of the chief Ministers of State. And there was no body hereafter at
the Court that ever gave Icoan any disturbance, but all persons there were
highly satisfied with him; for he failed not to supply them with Gold, Silver
and Pearls, all which he came easily by.

The poor afflicted Provinces did incessantly make remonstrance to the Court of
the Grievances they suffered from Icoan; but his Gold, Pearls and Bribes had so
stopped all passages into the Court, that their Complaints and Supplications
could never reach the King. The Ministers of State and Eunuchs of the Palace
were so satisfied with the liberality of this Corsair, that now he never was
mentioned at Court as a Pirate; but as a Loyal and Faithful Servant of his
Prince; and all the discourse there was of the eminent Exploits he had done,
and the great Services he had rendered the State. It is a strange thing, but it
is incident to the Courts of all Princes, that Kings, who ought to be best
informed of the state and condition of their Subjects, know less than all other
persons the oppression and desolation of their Provinces. Thus the people
without any relief or remedy groaned under the extortion of this Tyrant; for so
far was the King from relieving them, that he was utterly ignorant both of
their Afflictions and Complaints. It was not to be expected that the Ministers
of State or Counselors to the King should acquaint him with the oppression of
his Subjects, since thereby they reaped so great profit to themselves, and
being that Icoan now robbed and plundered for them, they encouraged him to rob
and plunder the people more boldly than ever. Thus are Kings served, and thus
are Affairs governed. Those who have all their Livelihood and maintenance out
of their Exchequers, are the persons who serve them least faithfully: They
devour the Labor and Subsistence of the people, but matter not how their
Master discharges himself of the care which he ought to take of the
preservation of his Subjects.

CHAP. VII. The Pyrate Icoan made a Treaty with the Hollanders. His Quarrel
with the Portugueses of Macao, for refusing to restore him his Daughter, which
he had caused to be educated in the Christian Religion. The Tartar sollicits
him to join with him. His Fidelity to the Princes of China.
AFter that Icoan had rendered himself thus potent both by Sea and Land, he had
a mind to make the Hollanders, who were in the Isle Formosa, stand in awe of
him. This Isle is the nearest Land to the Province of Fokien, from whence it
may easily be discovered when the Sky is clear. He began to menace the
Hollanders, that he would drive them away, unless they retreated of their own
accord. But it was not so easy to effect this as he imagined: All that lay in
his power to do, was only to put a stop to their commerce with China, and this
alone was to do them no small injury; for this would exclude them from the
greatest profit and advantage which they made by their Trade to the Indies.

The Hollanders, should they be deprived of Liberty to trade with China, would
lose a great part of their Treasure; for they meet in no parts, no not in
Europe, with so considerable Merchandise as the Chinese, with which they
traffic to Iapan and other places, and in exchange thereof, receive present
Money. At the first they vilified Icoan's prohibition, but they had quickly
cause to repent them; for he burnt eight of their best Ships, three at one
time, and five at another; of the loss of which eight Vessels the Intelligence
was certain, and doubtless they los^^ many more, but what or how many, we are
not so well informed. The Hollanders perceived to their cost, with how
troublesome and fierce an enemy they had to deal, and therefore they resolved to
proceed in a new Method; for nothing could be gained of Icoan by force; but
Money could do all things: And it is most true, that whoever is able to contend
with Weapons of Gold and Silver, may the cheapest and least expensive way be
victorious.

At last the Hollanders made their peace with Icoan, obliging themselves to pay
him yearly, as a Tribute, about six or seven thousand pound sterling, and by
this means they had free liberty to traffic and pass from Formosa to China.
The Sum was not great in comparison of the grand advantage and profit which did
accrue to them by this freedom of Commerce: Yet did their Money purchase them
the Friendship of Icoan at so cheap a Rate. Afterward the good Correspondency
between them produced so firm a Friendship, that he was desirous to commit to
them the care of his Sons Education, and sent him to them to Iacatra, of which
they are possessed in the East Indies, that he might be instructed in the
Politeness and Martial Discipline of Europe.

By the Sequel it will appear how much Icoan was esteemed of by the Hollanders,
who for several years before the War had used their utmost endeavors to
obstruct the Portuguezes of Manila in their Commerce with China; and to this
intent, their Men of War did incessantly rove about those Seas, and seized upon
all the Chinese Vessels they met; but now if any Vessel had a Pasport from
Icoan, or was freighted with any Merchandise appertaining to him, they suffered
it to pass by with all freedom, though it was bound for their Enemies Country,
and hereby did much prejudice their Trade; and all this they did solely out of
consideration to Icoan; for if they met with any other Vessel, though it
appertained immediately to the King of China himself, and was laden with his
Houshold-Goods, or any thing else which belonged to the very person of the
Prince, it was not the less plundered, but all things were presently seized
upon, and all the men who were found aboard, made Slaves. Thus Icoan by the
Hollanders was looked upon as more King of China than the King himself.

But this Pyrate did not pretend to be less considerable upon the Land, and in
the Provinces of China, than he was upon the Sea. The King was once in Arrears
to him about the value of some five or six thousand pound sterling for his
Pension, which was placed upon the Royal Revenues of Canton. The King's
Officers did not take care to give him satisfaction herein soon enough; he
presently came ashore, accompanied only with five or six thousand men, in whom
he most confided, and though there was in the Town more than two hundred
thousand Inhabitants, yet there was no person so bold as to dare to deny him
entrance. Neither did he commit any violence, but as soon as he was entered with
his men, he caused a Tribunal to be erected in the midst of the Town, and
summoned all the Kings Officers and public Notaries to appear before him, made
the Kings Officers pay him what was due, and acknowledged the Receipt thereof
before the public Notaries, then departed out of the Town, leaving all things
very orderly and peaceably. These were the Courses which Icoan used to make
himself be paid, even by the King of China himself.

Now as the Hollanders more considered the power of this Pyrate, than even of
the King, so likewise hereafter they sent all their public Embassies to Icoan,
and not to the Court at Pequin; all Honors were paid, and all Presents were
made solely to him; nay once they presented him with a Scepter and Crown of
Gold, thereby to excite his Ambition to the Royalty; and that they might
further engage him to take it upon him, they offered him the assistance of all
their force and power: But as to this point, Icoan remained a very Loyal
Subject to his Prince, which in the Sequel he further manifested; for he never
made any ostentation of this Scepter and Crown, he caused it only to be put in
his Wardrobe amongst his other Goods, and l^^id up as a present which he
esteemed and valued, but not as a Royal Ornament, nor as an Ensign of his
Grandeur and Dominion.

But a greater scandal to the dignity and person of the King was this, after
Icoan had obtained his pardon, all the Armies and Troops which he Commanded
were paid and maintained out of the Kings Exchequer, the King was at all the
Charge and Expense, Icoan had all the honor and advantage. It was the
Misfortune of China not to have had Ministers of State more zealous of the
Grandeur and Interest of their Sovereign. The Money of a Pirate had so
corrupted them, that though they might have obstructed the Commerce of the
Hollanders in Formosa with China, and thereby have obliged them to have
received the permission of the King rather than of a Pirate, yet there was
nothing which they thought less of, than upon this occasion to support the
Power and Majesty of their Master. But these Officers did solely concern
themselves for their private Interest, not at all for that of the State and
their Prince. And this is not very extraordinary in all Courts of Kings, so
that it may very well be said, that either Princes should be content not to
Reign, or that they should make such use of their Authority, that those who
should only execute their Orders, should be content, nay glad that their Master
did solely Reign and Command.

I judge it now necessary to say something of a difference which happened
between Icoan and the Portugueses of Macao. He had always made show of an
inclination and value for that Town, where he had lived when he was young, and
when he did not so much as hope ever to have been raised to his present height.
Now happened there a very remarkable Accident, which had likely to have induced
him (as he threatened) to have fallen very foul upon the Inhabitants. The
occasion was this: Being at Iapan at the beginning of his Rise, he had there a
Natural Daughter, which was then baptized, and brought up in the Christian
Religion. The Christians after being driven out of Iapan, she amongst the rest
fled, and came to Macao, where she was received by charitable persons, who took
care of her pious Education in the Exercises of the Christian Religion. Icoan
being now informed that his Daughter was at Macao, sent to the Portuguezes to
demand her as his Child. They considered that it was the Father who demanded
his Child, but yet they did not think fit to restore him his Daughter, because
she was a Christian, and as for him, though he had been baptized in, and made
profession of the Christian Faith, yet he lived like an In^^idel, and conversed
with no others; but they were desirous duly to examine and consider of so
weighty an affair; and for this intent, they called an Assembly of
Ecclesiastical, and other pious persons, who did conclude, that they ought not
to restore the Child to its Father. Upon this Icoan menaced them most terribly,
that he would come and besiege Macao with a Navy of five hundred or a thousand
Ships, that he would fetch away his Daughter by force, ruin and extirpate all
those who had retained her from him, and that from that very instant he would
begin to reduce them to the extremity of Indigency and Necessity, by putting a
stop to their Receipt of any provisions or Commodities from China: But for all
his threats they did not restore him his Daughter, neither did God permit him
to bring the mischief he intended upon that City.

It is not known what occasion did afterward calm Icoan; but all persons were
surprised, and did much wonder when they were informed that some time after a
Vessel which was bound from Macao to Iapan, being by storm driven upon the
Coast of China, where Icoan was in person, that he should most courteously
receive all the persons belonging to the Vessel, presently supply them with all
Necessaries, and furnish them with pasports and all the safeguards which they
could desire for their return into their own Country, and did not so much as
offer to retain any person, to oblige thereby the Portuguezes to restore him
his Daughter, which he did not so much as mention. That all Icoan's rage
terminated, and he never after gave any disturbance to the Inhabitants of Macao.

The Portuguezes, who upon this occasion had been so well received, observed
that Icoan had a very curious Oratory, in which they remarked amongst other
things, the Statues of our Savior and the Virgin Mary, and of diverse other
Saints; but it must not be imagined that these were any Marks of Christian
piety: It was only a testimony that those of that Nation do easily approve of
any sort of Religion; for not being tied to believe a Unity in the Deity, they
do indifferently receive a multitude of false Gods, neither do they fix the
number of them, but leave all persons free to adore fewer or more at pleasure.
Thus since they are so indifferent as to Religion, and any seems to them good
enough, they scruple not amongst their Pagods or Idols, to place the Images of
Saints, without making any distinction, or paying more or less honor to those
of Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary, and of other Saints, than to their own Idols.
But they equally adore them all as their Gods, and this is the Sum of their
Divinity. It is very credible, that though Icoan had been baptized, yet he was
ignorant of the Principles of the Christian Faith; for the Portuguezes could
never observe that he ever rendered more honor to Jesus Christ than he did to
his Idols; neither did they perceive him to do the least action of a Christian,
though then he was amongst the Christians, and then, if ever, it might well be
expected he should show at least some Sparks of his Christianity; but they did
not remember to have heard him ever so much as speak either of the Gospels,
Sacraments or Commandments either of God or his Church; and as for the manner
of his Life, that was less Christian; either this wretched man was so impious,
or so ignorant, that he equally burnt Incense to Jesus Christ and his Idols.

The Portuguezes having been thus obligingly received by this Corsair, and
knowing how much it imported them to embrace his Friendship, they then
commenced to treat with him in relation to their own Concerns as far as
Prudence and their present Occasions required. They had experience that he was
a terrible Enemy, a crafty, subtle Thief, and very often too near a Neighbor
to them: They thought likewise they were obliged to have some regard to him,
because he had formerly lived in their Town amongst them; and therefore they
made a Treaty with him upon very honorable terms, and after confided so far in
him, as to entrust him with their Merchandises, to transport them in his
Vessels to Iapan; for the Portuguezes were deprived of all liberty of commerce
thither, by their Edicts, which did severely prohibit the admittance or
entrance of any Christian into Iapan.

Thus Icoan made great advantage with trading with the Inhabitants of Macao,
not but that they were sensible what a peril they run; for they knew how great
reason they had to suspect, that either this Pyrate, or those employed under
him, might some time or other appropriate all the Portugueze Merchandises to
themselves, and be discharged with pretending only that they were either cast
away, o^^ else made prize by the Corsairs. And should such a Cheat as this be
put upon them, they had no Remedy whereby to relieve themselves. But Icoan
proceeded with so much honor, that the Merchants never perceived any of their
goods to have been embezell'd with which they had entrusted him. They only
observed that their Gain was less; from whence they concluded, that he
contented himself only to be a sharer with them therein. But of this they
acquit Icoan, believing, that it was only those he employed under him, that
thus pilfered. All this they passed over, being desirous to continue on their
Trade, though it was with the less profit.

For several years together there was nothing spoke of but how powerful Icoan
was both by Sea and Land: And certainly he deserved to be numbered amongst the
other Tyrants of China; nay, even then when he passed for a very faithful
servant to his King, because he was so to the Mandorins; and his Gold and
Silver prevailed so at Court, that there his Tyranny was never spoke of, but
only the grand Services he had rendered the State. His Authority was so great,
that he wanted nothing of being King or Emperor of all China, but the Title,
which he did not judge convenient for his condition; for as he wanted not for
prudence, he could not but know that the Title of King or Emperor would both
render him odious, and ruin him in his Affairs; therefore he contented himself
with having obtained from the Court the Dignity of Gaucum, which is one of the
greatest and chiefest of all China. It is true, that though he ever pretended
to this Charge, yet he was not possessed of it, but under the Reign of the last
Emperors of China, at such time as the Tartars had already conquered a great
part of the Empire.

Having taken a view of the progress and height of the Fortune of this Corsair,
it remains, that we should now observe what use he makes of it. The Relation
gives large testimonies of the Fidelity which he did ever inviolably retain to
the Chinese Princes of the Royal Family, which was such, that it might well
have served for an example to the Grandees of that State. For when he was most
potent, he did not only pay all due reverence to the Emperor's person, his
Orders and Injunctions, but likewise ever highly respected all the Princes of
the Blood Royal. If Icoan would have taken up Arms against his Prince, he was
far more powerful than the Usurpers, ^^ha^^ or Ly. So many men he had at his
command, the vast Treasure he was possessed of, did incomparably more
capacitate him, either to begin or carry on any Enterprise of that Nature; but
it may well be said, that his Loyalty was greater than either his Forces or his
Riches. Thus he did not only continue a faithful Subject to his King, but even
after the death of Zunchin, and when the Tartars were already entered into
China, instead of placing the Crown upon his own head, as he had then a fair
opportunity, and as several others did; he on the contrary, seated upon the
Imperial Throne that Prince whom we before mentioned to have been crowned in
the Province of Foquien; and he it was who undertook his Defense and Support,
and after that he had firmly engaged all his Forces by Sea and Land to serve
that Prince, he came himself and constantly attended upon his person. Icoan
might have employed all this Force in the conquest of a State and Monarchy for
himself, or else he might highly have advanced himself by siding with the
Tartars, and thereby might have secured his Fortune; for from the Chinese he
needed then fear nothing: But his Duty to his Prince was dearer to him, than
the security of his Fortune, nay than of his Life it self could be amongst the
Tartars. He saw that he hazarded all by endeavoring to defend a Prince whom it
would be very difficult to protect against so powerful Enemies; but probably he
was ambitiously desirous of this occasion, to make himself as eminent by his
Loyalty, as he had been by his Pyracy.

Icoan now prepared against all Attempts of the Tartars, resolving to attend
them in the Province of Foquien, one of the three last of the whole Empire,
which remained yet unconquered: Hither he had drawn his choicest Troops, which
were composed of persons whose courage he had approved both by Sea and Land,
and he Headed them with the Prince who was newly crowned Emperor of China.
This Prince and Icoan were two the greatest Obstacles which the Tartars ever
met with in their whole Conquest, which made them now to caress and solici^^e
Icoan, who before used only to brave and menace all persons into a submission
to their authority.

I was necessitated to make this Digression, that I might discover what Force
the Chinese then had, and who this great Commander was, whose power it was
hoped might have preserved some part at least of that Empire from the Invasion
of the Tartars.

But now I shall return back to the progress of the Victors, who after they had
in the Year 1645. reduced to their subjection the City and Province of Nanquin,
with the two other Neighboring Provinces of Schiamsi and Huguan, and that the
three other which bordered upon them, Honam, Suchuen and Iuana had voluntarily
submitted themselves, and all this in the space of eight Months, the Cham of
Tartary's Uncle, who commanded his Armies, retreated to Nanquin, and there
constituted a Chinese Mandorin Viceroy; but still the Flame of the War was not
quite quenched, but blazed out in all parts of the Empire, and therefore it was
not the intention of this Prince only to pass away his Winter Quarters at
Nanquin, but to consult there the securing his present Conquest, and to
contrive the most prudent way of reducing the three last Provinces. And there
he concluded, that it would much advance his intended Expedition into these
Provinces, if he could engage Icoan to side with the Tartars; and the best way
of accomplishing this would be by entreaties and promises. To this intent he
caused a Letter to be writ by the Chinese whom he had ordained Viceroy of
Nanquin to Icoan, who had a great value and esteem for that person.

The Mandorin wrote in his own Name, and as it were to a Friend, to whom he
judged himself obliged by the Bond of Friendship, to send advice of this
Importance; but it was well known that he only did it by the express Order of
the Tartar. The Subject of the Letter was to let him know, That he would
inevitably ruin himself and his Affairs by endeavoring to oppose the
Triumphant Victors; and that if he would repose any Credit in him, he should
without any hesitation or delay deliver up those three Provinces to the
Tartars; That he engaged to him his word, and promised him all the assurance he
could desire, that this Prince would constitute him Viceroy of Foquien and
Canton; or rather that he would make him Sovereign and King thereof, if he
would only acknowledge that he held that State from the Emperor of Tartary. It
is most certain, the Sovereign of those two Provinces would have been no small
King; for they are as spacious as all Spain, and the most wealthy of all China.
And as to Icoan, these Countries did more suit his Concerns, than any other,
since all his Force and Wealth was there.

Icoan by his Answer to this Mandorin, gave him to understand the Loyalty he
resolved ever to retain to his lawful Prince. He sent him word, That he was not
so credulous as to entrust himself in the hands of such Thieves; nor so
treacherous as to betray his Country to such Tyrants: That he was so far from
delivering up those Provinces, whose protection and defense he had undertaken:
That he was most steadfastly resolved to employ the Remainder of his Life, and
all his power and wealth to drive these Usurpers out of China: That this was
his Design, and that he should find he would lose no time, nor omit any thing
necessary for the Execution thereof.

CHAP. VIII. Icoan demands Succor from the Emperor of Japan, who refuses it
him. He maintains a War against the Tartars a whole year. He is taken Prisoner,
and presented to the Emperor Xunchi. What was the end of this Corsair.
ICoan understood very well what it concerned him to do after the Answer he had
returned to the Viceroy of Nanquin. He expected that all the Fury and Might of
a triumphant Enemy should presently thunder upon him; he therefore mustered up
all his forces, and prepared to receive the Assaults of his Enemies. And that
he might not be negligent in any thing, he judged it convenient to send an
Embassy to the Emperor of Iapan, to demand Succor from him: He conjured this
Prince that he would please to send over some of his Troops into China, upon
whose Valor he could more rely than upon his Chinese Soldiery.

The Emperor of Iapan, like the Princes of China, is wholly buried in Luxury.
If ever he goes abroad either to hunt or course, it is always in a Sedan or
Litter, where he is, as it were shut up in a Crystal Cage; he pretends, that it
is thereby to command the greater respect and veneration from his Subjects, not
that he is afraid to be seen. The Answer which this Prince returned to Icoan's
Ambassadors, was this; That his Highness never treated, but with Kings his
Equals. That if Zunchin the Lawful Sovereign of China had asked Aid from him
when his Occasions required it, he should have sent a considerable number of
his best Soldiers to his Relief: That he should have been as readily disposed
to have done the like, had any Prince his Legitimate Successors demanded
Succor from him; but upon the importunity of any particular person he could
not grant it: That his weighty Councils were taken up with the Considerations
of the Affairs of Kings, and that they well merited the Addresses of Kings.

The Answer of the Emperor of Iapan was not so unreasonable; but Icoan did not
expect that he would have so much stood upon his Grandeur with him, and was not
inclinable to make use of any other Applications, lest thereby he should debase
himself in the esteem of the Grandees of his Court. He pretended that he ought
to be considered as the pillar and support of the Empire of China, and that he
might well take upon him thus to speak in the name of the whole State at that
time, when he was, as it were, the Life and Soul of it: Therefore he resolved
to have no more to do with the Emperor of Iapan; and all his thoughts were now
wholly busied to put those Forces he had at home, in readiness to receive the
Tartars.

Who when they had understood the resolution of Icoan, saw that it concerned
them to lose no time, but with all expedition to push on their Victory; in the
carrying on of which, it was necessary for them to employ prudence, as well as
force. In the first place therefore, they judged it convenient to take care,
better to secure to themselves the City of Nanquin: And this they did by
constituting a Superior Authority to that of the Mandorin, who was Viceroy,
ordering the Cham's Uncle, who had conquered these six Provinces, to reside
with his whole Court in that City. And that he might appear with greater
Luster, and be more absolute, they gave him the Title of King. Thus the City of
Nanquin, which had been formerly the Court and Residence of the Kings of China,
returns now to the Court of a Tartarian King: But yet itnever appeared that
this Prince, who had the title of King, had greater Authority than if he had
been only Viceroy; and perhaps there was some Mistake in the Relation, and that
really he was only Viceroy. The Sequel will clear this Point, which to me seems
considerable.

The Council of State to the young Xunchi, did do two things of great
importance, by the establishment of this Prince at Nanquin: The first was by
limiting the great power of the Chinese Mandorin, who was a very subtle and
able Statesman. The second was, by constituting the Cham's Uncle King in this
great City, they did thereby honorably withdraw him from the Command of the
Army, that he might remit to a new Commander the conquest of the three last
Provinces. They knew that the War which they were now entering upon, was more
rough and difficult than any they had been yet engaged in: Therefore though
this Prince was valiant and successful, yet because there was a younger Uncle
to the Cham, called Pelipaouan, who was more considerable in the Army, and more
knowing in Martial Affairs, they judged it very important to empower this
latter with the Command in chief of the Army. I could not learn the Name of the
Cham's Uncle first here mentioned; but as for this Pelipaouan, he was a great
Hero amongst the Tartars, who did unanimously declare, that the Emperor his
Nephew ought to acknowledge the conquest of China to his Valor and Prudence.
He it was who was chiefly employed to inspire Valor into the young Emperor,
and to animate him to these great Enterprises. By the Tartars he was styled the
Conqueror of China; which Title he thought he had well merited by the share he
had in the Conquest. To this Pelopaouan was committed the remaining Expedition,
that is to say, the Reduction of the 3 last Provinces, in which the War was
likely to be more rough than it had been in the others; both because the
Country was very Mountainous, and there was likewise a powerful Army of
experienced Soldiers fully resolved to make a resolute Defense.

The Prince did with great joy receive his Commission and Instructions. As
there was nothing he desired more passionately than to answer and maintain the
Fame of his Valor, so nothing so much satisfied him as to see that he was made
choice of to carry on the conquest there where the Victory was most difficult:
And as for all the difficulties and obstacles, he only made a sport of them.

In the beginning of the year 1646 he marched into the Field at the head of an
Army of two hundred thousand men, all choice Soldiers; for there was an
emulation amongst all ^^he Troops who should serve under this Prince. He had
fifty thousand Horse, and a hundred and fifty thousand Foot. He had a Train of
Artillery of five hundred pieces of Ordnance, with a suitable proportion of
Ammunition, and all other provisions for so great an Enterprise. Amongst
several Armies of the Tartars, which had ravaged the State of China, there had
been many as numerous, but never any composed of such choice and stout men as
those whom Pelipaouan commanded; and it concerned the Tartars now to employ his
best men. As for the number of men which the Emperor of China and General
Icoan had under their command, it is not certainly known: But without all
scruple there was in those Provinces above a Million of armed men, those who
were at Sea, not being included in the number; for besides the old standing
Troops, and the Soldiery which appertained to Icoan in particular, there was
an incredible number of men retired thither out of the other Provinces.

Pelipaouan entered first into the province of Foquien, where he expected to
meet with the greatest Obstacles in the narrow passages of the Mountains. The
Prince who had been there crowned, had for six Months enjoyed the splendid
Grandeur of his Royalty; Icoan the General of his Armies, was likewise there
attending on him with his choicest Troops. Both the Armies quickly joined and
engaged. The numbers and the particularities of the Combats and Battles which
were then ^^ought, are not remarked in the Relation: But both parties being
more than ordinarily animated against each other, it is easy to imagine that
there were many eminent Exploits performed on each side. Pelipaouan spent a
whole year in subduing this province: He was confirmed that he had not done
amiss in having so briskly begun the War whilst his men were fresh and in their
first heat.

It was a very bold Attempt, and might seem even presumptuous that this General
should at the first enter into this Country, where he knew they were best
prepared to defend themselves: But the consequence manifested that he had
reason so to do. The Cities and Strong places of this province did not of their
own accord open their Gates, as in other parts. They all resisted against the
fierce assaults of the Tartars, and never yielded, till thereby they were so
debilitated, they could make no longer resistance. Notwithstanding all the
diligent inquisition I have made, I could never be particularly informed what
Icoan did; only in general I have learned that he was present in all eminent
Enterprises, and never turned his back to his Enemies* but at last he fell
unfortunately into their hands, and was made a prisoner of War; but whether he
was taken in a Battle, or in the defense of some place, I cannot tell: But most
certain it is, he never quit his station, nor delivered himself up into his
Enemies hands, whom he had offended so outragiously, till he had for a long
time fought most manfully.

All things were now easy to the Tartars after they seized upon Icoan. There
was nothing of any great importance remained to be done in that province, but
to possess themselves of the person of the King; and this they did in a short
time after, and as the Relation says, presently put him to death; yet by the
following Narrative he seems to have defended himself a considerable time; but
as to this particularity, it shall be cleared in its due place.

As for Icoan, they thought it convenient to spare his life, that they might
present him to the Emperor Xunchi. From henceforth we shall see nothing but
the Disgraces and Misfortunes of this person, who had so long been the
Favorite of Fortune; he that for so long a time had as it were, been
intoxicated with prosperities, shall hereafter see the frailty and
deceitfulness of Fortune. But though Icoan was ca^^t down in his Fortune, yet
he was not dejected in his spirits; his Chains and Imprisonment had not abated
his fierceness and courage; he seemed to show a very great animosity against
the Chinese, and therefore he presently put himself into the Tartarian Garb,
and caused his Hair to be cut, and with this new face he went with his old
boldness, as if he still had several Armies at his command, to present himself
to the Victor, and to desire him to employ in his Service him, and all the
Soldiers which he pretended yet to have at his disposal both by Sea and Land.
See what the audacity and fidelity of a Pyrate can do! Icoan has now neither
Prince nor Country left; but methinks this confidence to dare to make these
proffers to his Conqueror of what he had dispossessed him, and at the same
time as he was his prisoner, was not very seasonable. If he would not appear
more constant and faithful to his Country, at the least he should have showed
himself more subtle and prudent in Timeing these proposals more advantageously
to himself.

The Tartar did not reject these proffers of Icoan: He had occasion for Ships
and Seamen to reduce the two other provinces: And it was not so easy for him
quickly to be furnished with Sea-stores and Naval provisions requisite for a
Fleet, unless Icoan did at least interest himself in calming and gaining to the
Tartarian Service those persons who had served under him, and were most
horribly averse to the Tartars, who had dispoyled him of all his Goods and
Treasury, unless what he had hid, and they could not find. After they sent him
prisoner to Nanquin, where the Cham's Uncle then was; and some time after he
was conducted to Pequin, and presented to the young Xunchi.

As Soon as Icoan was brought before the Prince, he failed not to take notice to
him of the Answer he had returned to the Mandorin who writ to him from Nanquin.
He repeated to him the injurious terms with which he had spoke of the Tartars,
how he called them Thieves and Tyrants. In truth, they did not object to him as
so great a crime that he had engaged himself with all his might in the defense
and maintenance of the King who had been Crowned in the province of Foquien.
They judged that his Loyalty to his King and Country extorted this duty from
him; and the young Xunchi, how much soever he was exasperated against Icoan,
could not but readily acknowledge, that however Treason may please, it always
makes the Traitors odious; and on the contrary, though Loyalty be never desired
to be very eminent in Enemies, yet it always renders their persons the more
estimable.

Icoan, when he saw how vehemently the Tartars urged his Letter against him,
boldly denied that ever it came from him; he positively averred, he never wrote
it, nor any thing like it; and that it was a forged piece, produced by his
enemies, to blacken him in the opinion of that Court, thereby to consummate his
Ruin.

From this they passed to another Head of his Accusation, in which they
pretended he was guilty of High Treason, in having by his Authority opened
Silver Mines, and compelled by violence the people to work in them.

Icoan maintained he never opened any Mines of Silver, and declared that what
Silver he had was so far from having been taken out of the Mines in China,
without the Emperor's permission, that on the contrary, it came out of the
Possessions of the King of Spain, and out of the Territories of the King of
Iapan, with the leave of those Princes. And at the very instant he confuted
those who objected this crime against him. Certain it is that the greatest
quantity of Silver he had, came to him (as he said) partly out of Iapan, by the
way of Na^^gasaque; partly from Mexico and Peru, out of the Mines of the King
of Spain, by the Vessels of Manila.

After he had cleared himself as well as he could from the most weighty
accusations, there was produced against him a great number of Informations and
Complaints of several Grievances, with which he had oppressed the provinces:
And that which is very strange, those very persons who presented these
Accusations against him, were the same Officers of the late Emperors of China,
who after Icoan had gained them by his Bribes, had retained them, and impeded
their presentment to the Emperor. These Traitors were so impudent as to
produce before the Tartar those very Papers which evidenced their having sold
themselves to Icoan; and because they sold their perfidiousness at so dear a
Rate, that thereby they obliged him to grate and pole the provinces, they
attempted to cause him to be punished, because he did for their profit and
advantage pillage these very provinces. None surely but the Kings of China
could have such Officers. From hence the Tartar might infer how Loyal they were
likely to be to a Foreign Prince, who had so often betrayed their lawful
Master, and a Prince of their own Nation. How are such Kings and such States to
be bemoaned! And how are those people to be lamented who have not wherewith to
purchase the favor of those who have so great credit with such great Princes!

As for Icoan, he had yet left him wherewithal to gratify the Avarice of those
who imagined there was nothing more to be expected from him: He had hidden
Treasures, which were not yet discovered; and whether he was or he was not
criminal, he knew nothing could give a better gloss to his Affairs, and
therefore he judged that he must resolve to pay new Contributions to his
Accusers: And now he applies him to re-purchase the favor of those same
Officers whom the Policy and Mildness of the Tartarian Government had continued
in their Charges and Offices. By these means all his Accusations fell to the
ground, and he appeared innocent in proportion as he distributed his Money and
Presents. Now Witnesses were produced, who gave in evidence for his
justification; and all that was ever alleged against him, was ^^only false
suppositions and black calumnies. Thus Icoan, by declaring himself liberal, was
declared innocent, dismissed and fully discharged. This was the Justice which
this Pyrate's money obtained him from the Chinese Justices and Magistrates.

Icoan was not only cleared, but continued in his Charge of Gaucum. But it is
probable this was no longer than his Money and Bounty lasted; for when that
failed, he must expect to be deprived both of his Office and his Life.

The Tartar knew what he had to do, when he found it was no longer his
advantage to let live so declared an Enemy, and one who had treated him so
disgracefully. Icoan dissembled with all the Art he could possibly; but it was
manifest to all, that he was stripped at once of a great power and vast riches.
As for the Charge which remained to him, it was only a Name and Title, which
conferred some honor upon him but nothing else. And besides, his presence grew
daily more and more insupportable to those who not only perceived there was
little left to be racked from him, but most earnestly longed to be rid of such
a person who could so authentickly and clearly evidence their Extortions. Thus
the unfortuate Icoan was on all sides in danger of his Life, unless, as some
have believed, he was already cut off by the Stratagems of so many Enemies.
This Pyrate who had been so successful in the former part of his Life, now saw
that his misery was reserved for his latter days. This Apostate of the
Christian Religion, this Tyrant and Oppressor of so many people and provinces,
went now to account for all his Villainies; yet as the height of his Fortune
created Jealousy and Envy in all those who were Spectators of his Advancement,
so his Fall cannot but move the compassion of all who shall cast their eyes on
the precipice.

It may well be said that the Tartars, when they had s^^bdued the province of
Foquien, thereby made themselves absolute Masters of the entire Empire of
China; for though they had not as yet entered into the provinces of Can^^on and
Quansi, yet there they met with so few Obstacles to their Victory, that this
Expedition did not much perplex them.

The Emperor Xunchi presently sent several Grandees of his Court to
congratulate with his Uncle Pelipaouan for his having reduced that province,
and taken prisoner the General Icoan, which he apprehended to be the most
considerable Enterprise. And at the same time he constituted him Viceroy of
these last provinces. This makes it credible that he never gave the Title of
King to his other Uncle, who resided at Nanquin; for it is not probable, that
that Prince who neither had the Merits nor excellent Endowments of Pelipaouan,
should be made King of six provinces, and he who was styled the Conqueror of
China, and much more considered of at the Court, should only be Viceroy of
three. Neither is it rational to believe that this young Prince should be
willing to share out his new Monarchy, or to suffer any to be partners with him
in his Royal Dignity, lest thereby they should grow so powerful as to contend
with him for the whole. It is most true, that the ambition of Reigning will not
admit of partnership; no not upon the consideration of Kindred or Affinity.
Remus was nearer related to Romulus, who scrupled not to shed his Brothers
blood, lest he should have a Companion in his Royalty. All the occasion there
was to suppose that the young Emperors Uncle who resided at Nanquin, was a
King in reality, was only this; he had Viceroys subordinate to him; but so had
Pelipaouan. We may therefore conclude that this was no Remarque of Sovereignty,
but only a permission which they had from the Court to constitute inferior
Viceroys, reserving to themselves the Superiority and chief Authority in the
Government.

CHAP. IX. The Tartars pass into the Province of Canton, where a Chinese Prince
is Crowned Emperor of China. They enter the City of Canton, finding the Gates
open. A Chinese Fleet which came with Relief, fires the City. The Proclamation
which the Tartarian Viceroy causes to be published in Canton.
ALthough there remained two great provinces to be subdued before the entire
Conquest of China could be completed, yet Pelipaouan^, after he had defeated
and seized upon Icoan, did not think it glorious enough for him in person to
proceed further in that Expedition, in which he saw so little difficulties and
few Obstacles which might add Luster to his former Victories. He settled himself
in the province of Foquien, that he might there provide all things necessary
for the reducing the remaining part of the Empire of China under the Subjection
of the Tartars: He resolves to begin with the province of Canton, into which he
passes over an Army of two hundred thousand men, as he did the preceding year
into Foquien: And as if he had already brought all the Inhabitants of Canton
under the Tartarian yoke, at the same time as he empowered a General or Viceroy
in Martial Affairs, with the Command of his Army, and the direction of all his
Military Concerns, he likewise constituted a Lord chief Justice or Viceroy in
Civil Affairs, who had the administration of the Civil Government of that
province.

The General of the Army was called Ly, as the first Tyrant was, of whom he
came little short in his Cruelties. And it was the violence and fierceness of
this Commander which made these people the more dread the Tartarian Dominion.
Till now they hoped they should have been treated by the Victors with Clemency
and Mildness, public Fame having informed them of the Moderation and exact
Distribution of Justice which the Emperor Xunchi and his Unkles had observed
wherever they came: But the violent and fierce procedure of this Viceroy made
them quickly change the good opinion they had of this new Government. As for
the Lord chief Justice, he was a moderate person, and fitter to command; he
endeavored all he could possible to cherish in the people the esteem they had
of the young Emperor's Indulgency and Clemency.

This province being nearer to Macao, from whence the Relations came to Manila,
and from thence were dispersed into other parts, has been the occasion that we
have been more exactly informed of all the most remarkabl^^ passages in the
reduction hereof. And therefore by observing what manner of Defense the
Chinese here made, the truer measure may be taken of the Valor and Martial
Exploits, or rather of the ill Cond^^ct and little Resolution of that Nation.
But from the hard usage with which the Tartars treated these people, it must
not be concluded that they made the like waste and spoil in the other
provinces; for this part of China being very remote from the Court and person
of the Emperor Xunchi, notwithstanding all the care and precautions of this
Prince, it was not possible to retain the Soldiery under exact Discipline.
They were not now paid as heretofore; but that they might subsist, their
General, a violent and rash man, by his own example, instructed them in all
manner of Licentiousness. And this is the true reason that the desolation in
the Southern provinces was beyond comparison greater than in the other parts of
the Empire.

The numerous Army which General Ly commanded, began to march out of their
Quarters the beginning of January, 1647. And it being the custom of the Tartars
to fall on with all their force upon the Capital City of the province, all the
several Troops Rendezvouzed the 19th. of the same Month, within half a days
Journey of the City of Canton. It is easy to imagine what a General
Consternation there then was. But that we may observe how fondly ambitious men
are of the Title of King, we must here remarque that in this City, which could
expect nothing but to be quickly reduced under the Dominion of the Tartars, a
new Prince of the Bloud-Royal had in the preceding Month of De^^ember caused
himself to be Crowned Emperor of China, though he had but lately seen that
several far more powerful Princes than himself had purchased their own
destruction by assuming to themselves the Royal Dignity, yet he could not
Master the impatient desire he had to be styled Emperor: His whole State was
circumscribed in the Walls of that City; and all his Revenues and Treasury
consisted only in vain Expectations. A Moorish King ^^f Cordiva once said, Let
me reign today, though I die to morrow; and that was the Destiny not only of
that Moor, but of this Chinese. The pride of men must strangely blind and
bewitch them, to make them imagine it so great a felicity to die with their
Brows encircled in a Royal Diadem.

This great Emperor of Canton had under him several Soldiers, but ill armed,
and as ill paid. They were all fully resolved to fly from the Tartars before
they ever engaged in the defense of their Prince. It is true that they had been
in several Skirmishes, and had always come off safe, but it was because they
took care to secure themselves by running away; and without doubt they had
reserved themselves for this last time. See what Forces this Emperor had, of
whose Name the Relation takes no notice, his Victories having never
sufficiently signalized him.

As for the City of Canton, it is said to have been very well fortified; and
the vast Riches which were in it made the Tartars earnestly wish that it would
make some resistance, that they might thereby be licensed by the Law of Arms to
pillage it. They knew there was a great commerce of all Nations, that several
Merchants even of Europe, had their Magazines and Factories there. They pleased
themselves with the hopes of the rich plunder they should have if so strong a
City should make any opposition. There were then two hundred thousand
Inhabitants in it, who were defended with two strong Walls, which were well
flanked with Towers and Bulwarks, and fortified with several Outworks, in a
very good condition of Defense, and furnished with great store of Cannon well
fixed. It concerned them to defend a King whom they had newly crowned, who had
Soldiers enough under him, and though a great part of them were Run-aways, yet
certainly he could not but have a considerable number of men knowing and
experienced in Martial Affairs. And besides all this, the Town was situated
upon a great Ri^^er, and at the very foot of the Walls there was a very
powerful Fleet of strong Ships well armed, and ^^ufficiently provided both with
Men and Ammunition. Finally, there was in the City of Canton both Men, Arms,
Ammunition, and Provisions; and all things necessary to hold out a long siege:
And yet notwithstanding all these advantages, which might make a Town
impregnable, only twenty Tartars made themselves Masters of it; these were some
Light-Horsmen who had advanced themselves before the Army; and these alone took
possession of the vast City of Canton: Certainly this is not to be paralleled
in any History.

The Army of the Tartars made a halt half a days journey from the Town, when
these twenty Horsemen advanced themselves upon this great Design; for there the
Soldiers are not under so exact a Discipline, and stay not, as in other parts,
for the word of command. They went up to the very gates of the old Town, which
they found open, and presently entered in, and rid through all the Streets till
they came to the new City, where they did the like. They only let fly some
Arrows here and there, to strike a terror in the people, and cried out to them
that they should not stir, for the whole Body of the Tartars were at the Gates;
but that they need fear nothing if they were quiet and peaceable.

The Rumor of the approach of the Tartarian Army was scarce divulged in the
Town, when the greatest part of the Soldiers, instead of putting themselves in
a posture of defense, abandoned their Stations, and quit their Arms. These
Braves would no longer now endure any Mark or Badge of their Profession, but
plucked off quickly their Coats lined with yellow, which is the usual Habit of
the Soldiers there, and having flung away their Arms, went and thrust
themselves into the crowd of the common people. The Emperor of Canton remained
all alone in his Palace without any Guard, but that of his Wives and
Concubines, and some few Eunuchs; goodly Troops to dispute for victory with the
Tartars! And in this extremity his Exchequer was so empty, and his Credit so
low, that having occasion for about some six hundred pound sterling, he could
not find so much in all his Coffers, nor in the Pockets of all his Courtiers.

This small number of the Tartars run about all the streets and places of the
City without meeting for a long time with any person who offered so much as to
make them stand. At last some Chinese drew together, and surrounded four of
them, who were the most negligent in standing upon their Guard, and having
seized them, they carried them to their Emperor, who as soon as he saw them,
ascended upon his Throne, and sentenced them to be executed in his presence.
This was all the Blood which the Tartars here lost; and at this easy rate they
purchased the Defeat of the Emperor of Canton, and the Surprizal of this vast
City.

There was not any of the Inhabitants who did in the least think of the defense
of the City; all their thoughts were taken up in contriving how to save their
Lives as well as they could: And for this intent, the wealthiest and chiefest
persons of the City judged their greatest security would be in disguising
themselves like poor Folks, and in this Equipage to thrust themselves into the
crowd of the distressed and miserable people. God be praised that it sometimes
happens that the rich envy the condition of the poor; for both Friends and Foes
always design upon the Wealthy; and it was at these which the Tartars aimed;
and therefore it the more concerned them to conceal themselves. As for the
poor, they had nothing to lose, and therefore might very securely stay in their
houses. It was some satisfaction to them that they could now laugh at the
Fortune of the rich, who had so often derided their Misery. It was little
available to those who were very wealthy to have been so sollicitous to
disguise themselves: The malice of the common people would not let slip so fair
an opportunity to revenge themselves by letting these persons know who it was
the Tartars searched for. The Populace cried out in all parts, Let these
Villains come and show themselves; Let these Thieves and Robbers who have sold
their Prince, that they might heap up such vast Wealth unto themselves, come
now and enrich the Tartars therewith; let them now a^^compt with their new
Masters. They have for a long time oppressed and abused us; but they shall now
fare no better than we; they shall be now no greater Lords than we are: Shall
they be poor only in disguise, and we miserable in reality? Shall they have
ruined us, and shall we save them? etc.

The Army of the Tartars came before the Town toward the Evening, and was not
a little surprised and astonished to find the Gates op^^n, as if it were not an
Enemies Town. The Tartars went and took up their Quarters where they best
pleased; rested themselves, and slept very securely, no body offering to
disturb them, or so much as ask who they were, or what they came for. The
General and Lord chief Justice went and lodged themselves in the old Palace of
the Viceroys of the Emperors of China, and were as well accommodated as if
they were in their own Houses.

Thus the King of Canton was dispossessed of his whole State the four and
fortieth day of his Reign, which he resolved not long to outlive: And therefore
as soon as he saw himself abandoned by his Subjects, he went and seated himself
upon his Imperial Throne with as severe and grave an aspect as became his Royal
Dignity. This may represent to our view the Roman Senators when Brennus and the
Gauls sacked Rome. In this condition this poor Prince expressed himself to this
effect;

The Tartars are possessed of my City, and my Subjects have abandoned me; what
can I now expect but death? But I will die like a King. I am mounted upon the
Throne, and upon the Throne I will end my days. Here I will have the
satisfaction at the same time to cast a vi^^w upon my short Prosperity, and to
face my present Adversity. Here I will attend and see how Heaven shall please
to dispose of me; I make no resistance against its Decrees; I patiently submit
to its Ordinances, etc.

Some of his Wives whom he had loved the most tenderly, that they might
testify their passion to him, killed themselves in his presence; a strange
effect of Love, that should make hatred to our selves transcend our Love! As
for the King, he staid upon the Throne till night; but then he wa^^ no longer
minded to tarry there for death; either Fear or Drowsiness made him descend. He
had reason not to persist in acting so serious and grave a part, when all his
Gravity was so soon likely to terminate; but whatever he did, he could not long
escape his Enemies, who searched too diligently for him, not to discover him
quickly.

This same night a great Chines^^ Fleet of strong Ships came from Sea up the
Channel to the very City, and brought a very considerable Relief; but they were
so mad and surprised to find that the Tartars were Masters of it, that they
assisted to consummate the ruin of it; for they were so enraged both against
the common Enemy, who was possessed of the City, and the Inhabitants, who had
so cowardly delivered it up, that they fet fire to that part of Canton which
was called the New City, and was the most beautiful of the whole Town. The Fire
catched so fast upon the Houses, which were only built of Timber, that they
were in a very short time consumed in the flames.

It is said the Fire was so great, that in the Old City, which was four Miles
distant from this, one might see all that night as clear as if it had been
Noonday. Some believed it was the Tartars which set fire on the City, and after
laid the blame upon the Chinese Fleet: But there is little probability that the
Victors would deprive themselves of the fruit of their Victory, by reducing the
best part of this great City into Ashes. They had not as yet began to sack the
Town, which they fully resol^^ed to do, not mattering, whether they could or
could not justify their intended Act. The Fleet after they had fired the City,
and though it was night, had by the brightness of the Flames shown themselves,
they tacked about, and sailed away; and by morning it was discernable to what a
deplorable condition the Fire had reduced the greatest part of that City.

The Sequel of these Disorders was the beginning of those outrageous Violences
and horrible Oppressions by which the Tartars have since quite ruined and
desolated those once so flourishing Provinces. They did now no longer show any
observance to the Orders and Prohibitions of the Emperor Xunchi. It was one of
the Injunctions of this Prince that those Towns and Places which made no
resistance, neither within nor without the Walls, should receive no ill usage;
but that only a Tartarian Governor should be placed there with some Troops, if
it was judged necessary, to keep a Garrison there, that he might be able by
force of Arms to reduce and chastise the Inhabitants, should they offer to
revolt. The City of Canton had not made the least resistance, and of all the
Cannon which were placed upon the walls, there was not one Gun fired. As for
the death of those four Tartars who had so rashly hazarded themselves, perhaps
the Viceroy was not as yet informed of it; or if he was, it is manifest these
Straglers entered the Town without any Orders: And whatever is done by any party
without the License of their Commanders cannot oblige the contrary party as to
this regard, to show any regard to the Military Orders which the King or his
Generals have established.

But notwithstanding all these Prohibitions of the Emperor, ^^he General, who
had so passionately wished that the City of Canton would have made some
resistance, that thereby he might have been privileged to plunder it, would
not either rightfully or wrongfully let slip so rich a Booty. He was so
transported by his Avarice and Cruelty, that he had already made sure to
himself of the riches of Canton: He now therefore contrives to pillage it,
though it was against the express Order of the Emperor Xunchi, and against the
Parole which he himself had given both before and after he was entered the Town.
For this effect, he caused to be fixed up in all the Streets and public
places, several Proclamations to this Purport;

1. Lest any of the Inhabitants should apprehend any violence, he assured them
they should not be damnified in the least*

2. That all Persons without any exception, should upon pain of Life, within
three days cut their hair after the Tartarian Mode.

3. That within these three days the Masters of all Families should present
themselves before the General and Lord chief Justice, and bring in Writing
their own Names, and an exact List of all persons in in their Family, so that
whose Name should not be found therein, should be reputed an Enemy and Traitor
worthy of death.

4. That all Shopkeepers and Workmen should apply themselves to their ordinary
Vocation, to gain their Subsistence by their Art and Calling, as they did
before the entrance of the Tartars.

5. That the Trade and Commerce should continue as before, and for this intent,
that all places where Merchants used to assemble, all Shops, Magazines,
Custom-Houses, and generally all places relating to Trade and Traffic, should
be open and free for the public Benefit and Convenience.

These were the Proclamations which the General published; and I shall now let
you see how they were put in execution.

CHAP. X. The Tartars sack the City of Canton. The Viceroys change the
Government. The Death o^^ the King of Canton and all his Followers. ^^he
reduction of several places in the Province.
THe twentieth day of January in the year 1647. proved not very fortunate to
the Inhabitants of Canton; for after all these fair promising Proclamations,
the General began to sack and pillage the Town, which he continued for three
days. At first the Tartars found so rich Booty and Prey in all parts that they
thought scorn to burden themselves with any thing but ^^ither Gold, Silver,
Pearls, Musk, or such other like things of high price: But afterward they were
not so nice, and did not forbear ^^o accommodate themselves with Silk either
raw or wound, woven or unwoven; and at last they took whatever else best
pleased the Fancy of these pillagers: And what but this could be expected from
such persons who had all things at their discretion.

But it must be acknowleged, that as in all parts some men are more just and
honorable than others, so amongst these Tartars some of the Captains, which
are the persons of the highest quality in that Nation, did treat the
Inhabitants of Canton with something more of Humanity; for they only went to
the Houses of the Mandorins, who presented them either with a Sum of Money, or
something else of a very confiderable value. And if they were satisfied with
this Present or Ransom, they then withdrew themselves, and search^^d the House
no further. And the anxious care with which they keep up their Wives and Women,
made them look upon this as a most obliging action. When the Tartars went from
this house, they always left some Signal to notify that it had been pillaged,
that it might not be plundered the second time: But if the Mandorins Present
did ^^ot satisfy them, as not being proportionable to the Account they had
received of his Wealth, then the poor Wretch his house was ransacked all over;
he lost not only his Present, but all that he had which was good for ought; or
at least all the Tartars would please to take; for from that moment he mu^^t
expect no mercy; all places in his house were broke open, they rifled and
searched every Corner; and seized upon whatever they had a mind to, both Goods
and Persons.

This engaged the Mandorins to be most bountifully free of all that they had
which was either rich or valuable; for they must now resolve to be very
liberal; and the most avaritious persons were not unwilling to appear prodigal
upon this occasion, where nothing but profu^^eness could protect them. And yet
there were some who with all the Presents they could make, could not save
themselves: This proceeded from the malice of the common people, who that they
might have the satisfaction to avenge themselves on the Mandorins, were not
afraid to give wrong information to the Tartars, persuading them that some
were more rich than really they were. Therefore some of th^^ Mandorins fared no
better for all their Presents; for the Tartars held to their informations,
pretending always tha^^ they who were so able might give mor^^ bountifully.

As for the persons of lower condition, and the common people, they were left
to the mercy of the Soldiers, and there is little to be found amongst them.
The miserable Inhabitants felt during these three days to what a deplorable
condition that Town is reduced which is abandoned to be sacked and pillaged;
for the Tartars were not content to take from them all they had, but proceeded
to those excesses and violences as transcended all ^^he patience of these poor
Wretches; for th^^ Chinese, who are the most jealous people upon earth, were
sensible of nothing so much as to see the Tartars impudently rush into the
Lodgings, or rather the Prisons and Cages where they kept their Women shut up.
I call them Prisons and Cages, as thinking these the most proper names for the
places in which they enclose their Wives and Women, being they are close and
strictly watched. And this is evident whenever any Families remove by water
to any place; for then all their Women are transported in Sedans, the Doors and
Windows of which, though they are very little, are so fortified with strong
Iron Wire, that they are not easily broke open. And as for their Lodging in
their houses in any Town, there is never any Window in them toward the Street,
nor toward any place from whence they may be seen. And notwithstanding all
these precautions, the Chinese do not think their Wives are kept sure enough;
perhaps it is because some things are lost by being kept too st^^ictly.

But all the strict Guard with which the Chinese kept their Wives, was little
available to them now: The Tartars quickly broke open these prisons; and now
there was nothing but Massacres and Murders in all places, which was occasioned
by the endeavors of Fathers and Husbands, to preserve the Honor of their
Daughters and Wives; for violences of this nature are insupportable to all
Nations. The Tartars were not content to commit these Disorders in the Houses
of the Chinese; but to complete their Outrages, they carried away their Women
into their Camp, and there they told that they came purposely into China to
show them once in their lives the Sky, and that not through Grates and
Lattices, and to set them at liberty after they had been Captives and prisoners
all their Lives. Thus they took pleasure with these Ralleries to insult over
these miserable Wretches. It is said, that the first day the City was sacked,
they carried away great numbers into the Camp, without showing any more regard
to the rich than to the poor; and that the Ladies of the highest quality were
compelled to suffer the highest Indigni^^ies.

Th^^s in the City of Canton there was nothing but Rape and Murder, and in the
Tartarian Camp nothing could be heard but the Groans and Cries of Women, who
bemoaned and lamented their Fathers, their Husbands, their Honor, their
Liberty, their Country* and several other innumerable calamities, which made
them abominate both their Lives and themselves. In the midst of this desolation
the people ceased not to cry and complain to the Viceroys; Is this that which
you pro^^ised us? Is this the performance of the assurance you gave us, that no
damage should be done to those who quietly and voluntarily rendered up
themselves, as we have done, we who have ruined our City and Families by
rendering up our selves too credulously?

The Lord chief Justice or Viceroy in Civil Affairs, showed a dislike of these
disorders; but as he was not Master, so he did not much trouble himself to stop
the progress of them. As for the Viceroy of Military Affairs, he less concerned
himself herein; he only published some new Proclamations, by which he
prohibited the Soldiers to enter i^^to any houses, or to offer any violence to
the Inhabitan^^s, upon pain of punishment: But these prohibitions were but weak
remedie^^ for so great calamities; he only did this out of policy to amuse th^^
people* for he himself did most viol^^te these Injunctions, and had the
greatest share in the plunder* and the Viceroys causing whatever was most rich
and valuable which was found in the City to be publicly carried into the
houses, which they had taken up for themselves, did clearly evidence that they
were the most culpable of these Disorders: They pretended, that not having
Money to pay the Army, they were necessitated to permit the Soldiers to
pillage the Town, that thereby they might have wherewithal to subsist.

The Chinese seized upon some of the Soldiers, and carried them before the
General, and there accused them of Murder, and Rape, and several other heinous
Crimes committed by them, whereby they had reduced the whole City to a very
desperate condition. He then caused some of them to be chastised, but their
punishment was not proportionable to the enormity of their crimes; so that
during the three days of the Sack of the City of Canton, there was no stop put
to the violence and fury of the Soldiers. It is believed there was more than
fifteen thousand Inhabitants massacred, and the greatest part in the defense of
either their Wives, Daughters or Sisters; neither their Wealth, nor their
Honor upon any other occasion but this, could prevail with the Chinese to
hazard their Lives thus freely: But they were willing to sacrifice themselves
in the defense of their Wives; so powerful an influence have Women upon men,
that they are able to inspire Courage and Resolution into the Breasts of the
most timorous Cowards.

In these three days was utterly ruined and desolated that great City, the
Riches whereof did befo^^e surpass the wealth of diverse Kingdoms and Nations.
And after all this barbarous inhumanity, the Tartarian General said, he wished
the Inhabitants would have made some resistance, that he might have been
provoked to hav^^ treat^^d them with less moderation: But if this was the
moderation of the Tartars, what can we imagine should their Rigor and Severity
have been?

After the days were expired, du^^ing which time the City was abandoned to the
Rapine and Violence of the Soldiers; the General was willing to put a check to
the disorders, and then he concerned himself in putting a stop to the
insol^^ncies of the Soldiers; which he did with no great difficulty: By which
it is manifest that there are few disorders in any Army to which the Commanders
in chief may not put a stay if they will so generously engage themselves herein
as they ought. But oftentimes the Licentiousness in Armies takes both its Rise
and Continuance from the remissness of the Generals in the execution of their
Charge; nay, many times by their own example and authority they license these
Violences. To prevent the further progress of these disorders, they commanded
all the Soldiers to depart out of the Town, and not to return thither again
till they were commanded, but to stay in the Camp. They should have hanged up
whoever transgressed these Orders. The Tartars were then encamped round the
Walls of the City, under Leather Tents, as their usual custom is, which were so
numerous, and ranked in so handsome an order, that they looked like a portable
Town, or another Canton.

Thus the Complaints and Violences were appeased; not but that there was still
cause to complain. And it is rarely otherwise in an Army. If in Europe it is
not possible to hinder the Soldiers from plunder and rapine, in which they
place their great happiness ^^nd delight; much less is it possible amongst
these Barbarians: But all the violence in Europe is moderation in comparison of
what we have now seen. The unfortunate Inhabitants of Canton began now to
breath again; and it was a comfort to some that they were not the most unhappy.
A strange consolation! and yet this induces us all to bear our afflictions the
more patiently.

It now remains that we should admire, or rather be moved with compassion, to
see on the one side, with what fierce haughtiness the Tartars tre^^ted the
Chinese, and on the other, how crowchingly and submissively these behaved
themselves before their Victors: If any of these afflicted Wretches did but
mutter in the least, the Tartar began to speak big and loud, or rather to
thunder, and at the same instant clapped his hand upon his Cimeter; the Chinese
only stooped down his head, heaved up his shoulders, and presently be^^ame
mute; nay, they kept in their very breath as long as they could; or else they
prostrated themselves upon the ground, and upon their Knees they studied for
Complements how in the most obliging language to reply to the outrages of their
persecutors. The miserable creatures sometimes used such impertinent flatteries
that they gave the Title of Highness to the meanest Soldier in the Army; and
as for the Viceroys, they dignified them with the style of Majesty, nay,
Divinity if they pleased.

Whenever any of these Commanders went through the City, always some of their
Guard cried out aloud to the people, Have you submitted your selves to the
great Emperor of Tartary? The Chinese repeated several times, We have most
readily submitted; and testified their submission with all the demonstrations
they could possibly invent. And if the meanest Soldier had met in the streets
any Chinese, though he was a person of he highest quality in the City, he
treated him like a Slave or a Porter, and presently made him carry his Baggage,
and without any authority but force and a Tartarian insolence, he compelled the
Chinese to do the most servile and vilest drudgeries, and that most patiently.
But alas, what a cutting and desperate trial was this of the patience of these
miserable persons! For the Chinese, especially the persons of Quality, are so
nice, so averse to any thing of labor or toil, and so prone to vilify and
contemn others, that nothing so much pierced them as these unheard of
Insolences.

After that the Viceroys had taken care for the government of the City, by the
establishing of several Magistrates, who were under their authority, to render
Justice to the people, they thought it further convenient to distribute amongst
the people several little Tickets of colored Paper, about the breadth of two
fingers, in which were writ in Chinese Characters these words, People subjected
to the Emperor of T^^rtary: All persons might securely pass and go where they
pleased by the protection of these Tickets, which were, as it were, so many
Declarations of submission and subjection; which they were obliged to have
always in a readiness in their hands, or fastened upon their Clothes. There were
other Tickets of a different form for persons of higher quality; these were
four square, about a hands breadth, in which were writ the same words, but in
larger Characters, and these were not of Paper, but of some kind of Stuff. The
Soldiers much respected these Tickets, especially the latter, which was all
the privilege the great and most considerable persons of the City had.

After they had thus settled all things, there remained nothing now but to
secure the person of him who was crowned King of Canton. Till now the Viceroys
contented themselves with the knowledge that he was still in the City, for they
had placed so strict a Guard, that neither this Prince, nor any other Chinese
could possibly escape; but now they did with all diligence search out for him,
menacing all persons who concealed him any longer with death; and by this means
he was discovered to them, by those who had been his greatest Confidents, and
had not till now deserted him. As Soon as the Tartars had seized him, they
instantly cut off his Head. This was the Catastrophe of this great Monarch, who
reigned only four and for^^y days: A short glory to have cost so dear; but at
this rate are the Vanities of this Life esteemed of; and there will never be
want of those who will yet most ambitiously court them. After this they put to
death all who were discovered with him, and till then had adhered to him: Their
crime was only that they durst yet retain some Loyalty for their Prince; and
for this the Tartarian policy condemned them to death: A barbarous and cruel
policy, which renders those more criminal who practice it, than those whom it
condemns.

All things began now to be settled in their usual method under the government
of the Tartars, and those they employed under them, having turned out, changed
and reformed the ancient Mandorins. These new Masters of Canton began now to
apply themselves to repair the damages which the Fire had done to the
Buildings of the City, and the Fury and rage of the Soldiers to the
neighboring places. And now they took under their consideration the restoring
and securing the ancient commerce, by encouraging all Tradesmen and Workmen to
apply themselves to their ordinary Trades and Employments, that all persons for
the future might for the public necessity and benefit follow their usual
Vocations.

There remained yet several Cities and places in that Province to be reduced
under the power of the Victor. That province contains several great Cities; the
most considerable of which after Canton, are Xaochin, Xuochen, Nanchium and
Hochi^^heu. The Tartars, as their custom is, sent to summon them all to submit
voluntarily and peaceably, or else, they gave them to understand, they would
send an Army to besiege them, and then they must expect no Quarter. Upon these
Summons, the greatest part, not staying for compulsion, did readily yield
themselves up; but some put themselves in a posture of defense, whereby they
did not advantage themselves, and were subdued in a very short time. Those who
resisted; quickly learned that they had much better have complied with the
times, and have prevented even the Summons to Obedience and Submission; for
either voluntarily, or by violence, they saw they must of necessity come under
the subjection of a new Master: If they did but refuse to pay obedience to the
Summons, they were presently surrounded, and the Fields all covered over with
innumerable Troops, which made them soon feel the rigor of those penalties
with which they had been menaced; for the most barbarous and insolent of the
whole Army presently cast themselves into that party which came against them,
and were headed with Commanders not less averse to desolation and destruction;
neither Honor, Justice nor fear of punishment could put any bounds to their
Rage and Fury. Those who stood upon their defense must resolve to suffer most
direful calamities. By these means they completed the entire Conquest of the
whole province, except the City of Xaochin, which as yet could not resolve to
submit to so cruel a Dominion.

CHAP. XI. At Xaochin the Chinese stand upon their Defense. Gueqan King of
Quans^^ comes into that City. He goes and meets the Tartars, he fights, and
routs them. A Division amongst the Chinese. They are defeated in another
fight, and their City Xaochin taken.
THe City of Xaochin is eminent above all the places of China, by being the
first which is known to have worsted the Tartars. The Inhabitants had the
resolution not only to defend themselves, but to go and meet the Enemy before
he approached their Walls, and compelled him to retreat, after they had routed
and defeated him in open field. The City Xaochin is distant from Canton about
three days journey; it is very spacious, and strong, both by its situation, and
by several Works and Fortifications, which made it very tenable: It is situated
in the furthest parts of the province of Canton, upon the Confines of Quansi,
which was the last province which remained unconquered of fifteen, into which
the Empire of China is divided.

There was in the province of Quansi two Kings newly Crowned, both of them
Princes of the Royal Family, of the ancient Emperors of China. This was, that
the Tartar might have both the Glory to conquer two Kings, and the pleasure to
make these unfortunate Princes experiment what a grand satisfaction it is to
die with Crowns upon their heads. But that which is very pleasant, these two
Princes were at war together; or rather, they had a Dispute and Contest
concerning the Rights and Jurisdiction which each of them pretended to this
province; so little did they think of letting the Tartar have any share with
them, who was coming to make a better accord between them, by seizing upon all
from them.

One of these two Kings was called Sinhianuan, a young Prince, about twenty
years old, raw both in Years, Resolution and Conduct. The other was called
Guequan, who, it is probable was not so young, but as to his Age the Relation
is silent. It only says, he was a man of great courage, and till now had been
ever successful in Martial Exploits, and that if at the beginning of the War
the Chinese had crowned him Emperor, so that he might have had time to draw
together his Troops, and rally up all his Forces, as several Princes had who
were crowned in the other provinces, he might probably have kept the Tartars in
play, and put a stop to their progress before they were advanced so far into
the Country.

This Guequan marched into the field, and being resolved manfully to oppose the
Enemies, he went toward the Borders of Canton, there to expect their entrance
into Quansi. This is the first time the Chinese durst ever venture to go meet
the Tartars* And this was the first man in all China, who had so much
resolution as not to content himself ^^o expect them, but went in search after
them, to stop them in their March, And to fight them. The City of Xaochin is
situated, as I said, upon the confines of the two provinces Canton and Quansi,
and was the only City in the province of Canton, which had not submitted to the
Tartars. Guequan who was advanced so far, sent to offer to the Inhabi^^ants the
assistance of his person, and engaged to them that he would hazard all in the
defense of their Liberties, if they would acknowledge him for their King. Those
of Xaochin embraced the proposals of Guequan, and presently proclaimed him
their King. He then entered into the Town, which he found very well furnished
both with Arms and Ammunition, and a great number of Soldiers, who were fled
thither from all parts, and they all seemed resolved courageously to fight for
their Liberty and Country, and to lose their Lives rather than to enjoy them
in slavery to the Tartars.

Guequan brought with him several considerable Troops into the Town. Amongst
his Soldiers, he had some who called themselves Wolves; these were bloody and
desperate Fellows, and generally all his men were very brave, resolute, and
more zealous for their Liberty than their Lives. The eager courage of the
Soldiers did so elevate the Kings resolution, that he thought he was able to
do any thing. And that he might take the advantage of their present heat, he
resolves to lose no time, but with all speed to give battle to the Tartars. He
therefore takes the Field; but his resolutions and counsels were not so secret,
but the Tartars were informed of them. But they could not persuade themselves
that so little a corner of the Empire, which they looked upon as conquered
already, could be able to form any Enterprise which could retard their Victory.
Pelipaouan himself did so vilify all the resistance these provinces could
make, that he would not so much as stir from Fochien. He judged it unworthy of
his Grandeur to appear in this Expedition, being willing to remit the glory
thereof to the Viceroy of Military affairs in the province of Canton: He only
sent him some new supplies of men, with order, that as soon as he had taken
sufficient care for the security of the City and Province, he should with all
expedition go with a very powerful Army before the City of Xaochin, and make
that and the province of Quansi submit; commanding him withal, that wherever
he came, he should leave no crowned Head alive, nor man breathing who could lay
any claim or pretension to the Sovereignty.

The Viceroy departed from Canton at the head of an Army of near two hundred
thousand men both Horse and Foot. He caused likewise a numerous Train of
Artillery, with all necessary provision and ammunition to be drawn into the
Field along with him. And as for the Government of all affairs of the City and
Province, both Civil and Military, he committed it to the management of the
Viceroy in Civil Affairs. And for his better security, he left him a sufficient
Guard of Soldiers. This great Army came in a very few days within view of
Xaochin; but before he could approach nearer the City, he met with Guequan, who
showed himself very ready to engage him; for he had drawn up his numerous and
gallant Troops in very good order, ready to give Battle. The Tartars, as soon as
they perceived them, began to vilify this show of courage so little usual in
the Chinese, and look upon this fine Muster as only an effect of a very vain
and frivolous audacity, which would be but ill maintained, and therefore he
instantly came up to them, and fell on with the main Body of his Army, but
disorderly enough, as they usually do. They thought they should at the very
first encounter, without any difficulty have routed them; for having so often
beaten the Chinese, they looked upon them as already defeated; but the first
Charge had not that success they promised themselves: The Chinese did make no
great Noise, being mad and ashamed to see themselves thus vilified by these
Barbarians: But when those who charged them thus scornfully, came close up to
them, they let them see they knew how to fight. The Tartar Horse more
especially found the Body of the Chinese Pikes so firm and close, that they
could not break in so soon as they imagined; now they came to their Lances and
Cimeters, and here the Chinese showed themselves as firm and as resolute as
the Tartars; but they did not much make use of their Bows and Arrows, but fired
continually, and played very briskly upon them with their great Guns. This
Charge was managed very resolutely and stoutly on both sides. The Chinefes kept
their ground, by which those who so assured themselves of the Victory, began to
understand that there is no Law that one party should ever conquer, and the
other always be conquered. The Field began to be covered with the Tartars who
lay dead and wounded, and their Blood began to stream out in all parts. The
Chinese now advanced, but could not persuade themselves that the Victory could
be theirs, nor could the Tartars imagine they could be defeated; so much do men
from custom claim authority over that which they acknowledge to be Fortune and
Hazard. Thus in that famous Battle in Spain, than in which Victory was never
more hotly disputed; Caesar could not imagine young ^^ompey could defeat him.

But at last the Tartars and Chinese both began to believe what they saw so
evidently, and the Tartars being routed, fled away in great disorder. The
Chinese hereby being fully convinced of the advantage they had, pursued very
close after the conquered. The one side now confessed they had lost the Day,
and the other cried Victory. Thus the Chinese should have defend^^d themselves
in the first provinces: If they had there fought thus valiantly, it is
manifest, all the Tartarian Force could never so soon have completed their
Conquest. Troy for ten years held out a Siege managed by other-guess Soldiers
than these.

The Chinese returned after their Victory to Xaochin, and entered the Town in
great Triumph and Glory, and were received by the Inhabitants with Tears of
Joy, and for several days there was nothing but Feasting and Entertainments;
for the people could never satisfy themselves with embracing and applauding
those whom they looked upon as the Liberators and Avengers of their Country;
but this was to proclaim a Triumph before the the Victory. The advantage which
the Chinese had now gained might have put a stop to the progress of their
Enemies, had they known how to make use of it; but the fond vanity and pride of
that Nation presently created Discord amongst them, and thereby sacrificed them
to the Vengeance of their enemies.

There was in the great Fight Soldiers of both Provinces, both of Canton and
Quansi: Those of Canton were in Xaochin when Guequan was acknowledged, and
received as King. The one and the other had equally signalized themselves that
day; but when they were returned into the Town, neither the one nor the other
would yield that there ought to be any equality in the praise and applause
which was due to them, each party pretended that they alone had routed the
Tartars, and that they were able singly to make head against that terrible
Enemy. So great a haughtiness was there in this Nation, that a contest amongst
them for praise and glory divided them into two distinct parties, whereby
neither the one nor the other long subsisted.

The Tartar was touched to the very quick that he had been routed, and
therefore now busied all his thoughts in contriving how to efface that blemish
which did so discredit the Fame of his Arms: Therefore without losing any time,
he marched again into the Field, being extraordinarily animated against the
Town of Xaochin. He was sensible that he was defeated before, by having made
too sure of the Victory, and having too inconsiderately undervalued his Enemy;
he therefore now resolves to take his advantage more prudently; he drew up his
Army in that order of Battle which he judged most convenient, and gave out all
Orders necessary both for the assaulting and routing his Enemy more assuredly.

The Chinese failed not to come and present themselves to a fresh Battle, but
they were not now so numerous as before. The Militia of the two Provinces stood
upon their punctilio's of Honor; and they had chosen forsooth a very
seasonable time to dispute these points. Those of Canton maintained most
obstinately, that all the Glory of the Victory ought to be attributed to them
solely. And upon this they of Quansi thinking they ought not to put up this
Affront, refused to march into the Field: If (say they to those of Canton) you
alone defeated the Tartars the last time, you may do it again the second time;
see how they come now to present you with a new Victory: Go and rout them
again, and then return in triumph into the City.

Guequan with all his credit could not accord this difference; he foresaw the
mischief, which did hereby threaten both his Army and the City; but as he was a
King only by Courtesy, and stood in need of those from whom he held his
Grandeur, to support it, he could not so absolutely command, for he was not so
absolutely obeyed. Those of Canton went singly to present themselves to the
second Fight. The Tartars came against them extraordinarily animated, and in so
good order, that the Militia of both Provinces would very difficultly have
undergone the first Shock, and the Battle was scarce begun, when it was quickly
perceived to which side the Victory declined. The brave Cantoners, quickly
fled, hoping to save themselves within the walls of their Town; but such was
their Misfortune, that the T^^rtars pursued them so close, that they entered
pel-mel the City with them.

Guequan, when he saw himself as ill obeyed by those whom he led into the
Field, as by those who refused to follow him, being surprised that the one run
away so cowardly, and that the others to revenge themselves on those of Canton
and Xaochin, neglected to sucour them as they might have done, he only now took
care to escape himself from the fury of the Tartars: He knew they would lose no
time in endeavoring to seize upon him, and therefore he resolves to lose none
in securing himself, but with all possible speed he retreats into his Province.

As Soon as the Tartars had entered the Town, being in a rage, they fully resolve
to satiate themselves with the blood of their Enemies, and thereby they reduce
that unfortunate City to a mere Shambles of Humane Flesh. The Massacre
continued for several days; and the Victors who were exasperated upon several
accounts by their Revolt, Resistance, Presumption, that they they durst come
and fight them, and by the Victory they had obtained, to the great disrepute of
the Tartars, and by the Blood of their Nation which they had spilt in so great
a quantity, they took all the vengeance which they thought ought to satisfy
their Choler and Fury. Miserable City, which after so successful a beginning
ought not so unfortunately to have drawn upon it self its own unhappiness and
ruin!

As Soon as Guequan was returned into his province, he presenty reconciled
himself with the King Sinhianuan. They were neither of them of opinion to let
their private differences disunite their Forces, of which they had equally
occasion; having to contend with so powerful an Enemy. Each of them thought now
only how to defend himself in the Succincts of his Sovereignty; but scarce were
these two Monarchs united in their friendship, when two new Kings start up in
the same province: They were two persons who had nothing which could recommend
them either by their Birth or Quality; and their whole Sovereignty was limited
in the Jurisdiction of three or four towns, which acknowleg'd their Dominion.
Thus the Royal Dignity heretofore so adored in China, was now become a prey to
the Ambition even of the meanest persons. In the single province of Quansi
there was at the same time four Kings; and these who were only like so many
Kings in Cards, or in a Play, yet they took upon them high Titles and
Pretensions.

It is believed that the two Kings last mentioned were Mandorins, who after
they had scraped all the Money they could possibly from the people upon pretext
of making warlike preparations, finding their Extortions would be no longer
suffered, thought themselves necessitated to cry and stand up for liberty. They
thought they could not better stop the complaints of the poor people, but by
declaring that they were ready to sacrifice themselves for to defend their
Country, and revenge themselves of the Tyrant; and for this they offered to
hazard their persons and their Fortunes; but that they might be better enabled
to serve their Country, they must be Crowned Kings of China; to which the
people readily assented, and now instead of Complaints, there was nothing heard
but Applauses and Acclamations: But these Impostors did not much consider
either their Country or Liberty, when they saw how rashly they had engaged in
a business which surpassed their ability to manage, they quickly abandoned
their Crowns. They considered not only how to benefit themselves by their Royal
Dignity, by abandoning it to the Tartar, and deserting those who had declared
them their Protectors. It is not to be wondered, that this miserable Nation
should amidst such Treacheries and Deceits be so ruined. The Reign of these two
Monarchs was not of a much longer continuance than in that Country a Comedy is
acting; and these did not play their parts ill. They recollected together all
they had pillaged, which made up a very rich Booty, and then retired
themselve^^, being laden with the spoil of those whom they had not only
oppressed, but sold to their Enemies. Able and subtle Knaves know how to
disentangle themselves out of any troublesome affair, and it is only weak and
innocent persons who are miserable in this world.

The other Kings, Guequan and Sinhianuan, who were Princes of the Blood Royal,
though in a very remote degree related to the last Emperor, continued more
faithful to their Country; being endowed with more generous souls, they
resolved to run the same hazard both of Life and Death with those who had
acknowledged them for their Kings. Against these 2 Sovereigns the Tartar now
marches. He was already entered into the province of Quansi, and in a little
time possessed himself of the great City Vecheu: It made some resistance, but
as it usually did, it proved very fatal to those who undertook its defense. The
City was sacked and pillaged; but the Tartar spared, as much as he could the
Lives of the Inhabitants, because they had not very obstinately resisted; so
that if any Murder was committed, it was only by some Accidents which are
unavoidable in a Town which is sacked, and that by Barbarians.

From hence the Tartars passed to the other Cities in that Province, in which
there was none which did not instantly upon the appearance of the Tartars, open
their Gates. They made the more have to submit, because it was reported that
another Army of the Tartars was entered into the Neighboring Provinces, and
advanced with all speed toward them. These were Supplies which were sent to
recruit and strengthen the Army which they had heard was defeated before
Xaochin: But the Viceroy sent now orders to the General of that Army to retreat
back into the Province whither he was commanded before; for he had no occasion
for these new Forces, those he had being sufficient to complete the entire
Conquest of that Province, had it been greater than it was. The General upon
the Receipt of these Orders, marched another way with his Army.

I must here take notice that there was a Rumor that since that, Guequan was
again entered into the Field, had obtained a new Victory over the Tartars, and
retaken the City of Vecheu, in which the Viceroy then was; after which, he
pursued him so close, that he obliged him to retreat to the very Borders of the
Province, where he staid expecting Relief, that he might be able to regain what
he had lost. I could not possibly learn the truth of this Story, and therefore
it is the less to be credited: But however it was, it is most certain that
Pelipaouan had sent very great Supplies both of Horse and Foot, and that upon
the Rumor of the Resistance which was there made, so great a number of Tartars
ran thither, that it is little likely the Chinese could gain any great
advantage.

Neither have I been informed what these great Armies did in that Province;
only in the General, that after they had overrun the whole Country, as a
Torrent overthrows and carries away whatever opposes its Current, so nothing
could withstand the fury of the Victors. This is all which the Relation says,
which was writ toward the end of 1647. But it does not set down any
particularity, but only that there was no more Chinese Kings after these two
Princes dyed with their Sword^^ in their hands, for the defense of their
Coun^^ry. This was all they could do, to prevent the oppression of their
Subjects: But the People were not relieved, though the Princes thus readily
laid down their Lives to endeavor to preserve some part of the State. Guequan
only gained a great Name and Reputation, which can never dye in the Memory of
the Chinese, neither can their Grief, that they did not declare him King at
the very beginning of the Irruption of the Tartars; yet there have been some
Chinese who have pretended that Guequan was still living, and that he had
expelled the Tartars out of the Province of Quansi. There can only be in the
Kingdom of Castile a Don Pelage, nor can there be another Garcia Ximenes but in
the Kingdom of Arragon.

The Tartars by the reduction of this Province, completed the Conquest of
China: And the young Xunchi was Master of all the Fifteen Provinces which
compose that vast Empire. This Prince at the Age of thirteen or fourteen years,
was Sovereign of three most vast and puissant States, Tartary, China, and
Corea, which though they be of so great an Extent, yet are contiguous one to
the other, and are at present united into one State. All these spacious
Countries were Conquered in less than four years; so that as it was formerly
said of Alexander, so it may be said in our days of the Tartars, That they have
not made so many Conquests, as they have overrun and robbed Countries: It is
most certain, that if these great Armies were only to have Marched over these
vast Countries, it would have taken them up as much time, as it did to Conquer
them: And if Alexander had ever heard of another Xunchi before him, he would
with as much reason have envied him, as Caesar did Alexander: Caesar was
troubled, that he began his Conquests only at that Age, before which Alexander
had finished his: But that Conqueror himself, might have had as great occasion
to complain, that he had done nothing at that Age, at which we hear our Xunchi
had ended his Glorious Conquests. And if this Prince lives long, and still
marches on as fast as he has begun, either the World should be greater than it
is, or else some new one must be discovered; for, according to the vast
projects with which this Conqueror flattered himself after his Victory, the
whole Earth is too little to give sufficient employment to his great Courage.

CHAP. XII. Disturbances in the Maritime Provinces. Some Chinese Princes retire
themselves into the Mountains. Others by Treaty make their peace with the
Tartars. One who had concealed himself amongst the Bonzi, discovers himself to
the Viceroy, and is carried into Tartary.
AFter that the whole Empire of China was entirely conquered, the Victors yet
for some time, both by Sea and Land found sufficient employment for all their
Forces. The people who were newly subdued, but especially those of Fochien,
Canton and Qu^^nsi, made diverse Insurrections in several places. The Tartars
did with greater facility retain under their obedience, and dissipate the
Conspirators of the Inland Countri^^s: But as for those Rebels who took the
Sea, and roved about the rivers, these gave them so great a disturbance, that
they thought they could never have surmounted it. It is not that all the
Attempts the Chin^^ses could make did much affright the Tartars; but these
Incursions did continually disquiet and trouble them: These Rovers did not only
disturb the Tartars, but they preyed upon their own Countrymen, robbed and
pillaged the Lands of the Neighboring Princes, and the Allies of China.

As for the other provinces which were more advanced up into the Country, and
lay nearer to P^^quin, where the Tartarian Emperor resided with his Court,
there was not any commotion since those people first submitted themselves: But
they lived as peaceably and as quietly as if there had been no alteration in
the Government. But as for the 3 provinces of Fokien, Canton and Quansi, they
being more remote from the Court, and the Soldiers which were commanded
thither, having by their inhumane violences brought a most horrible aversion to
their new Dominion, it was not possible to reduce things there into any order
or peace. It is true, that as for Quansi, I cannot tell what should have so
prolonged the War there, as in the other two provinces, unless it was the
pretension that Guequan was up still; and that he might the better watch his
advantage, he had retreated with his Soldiers and Followers into the
Moun^^ains: But it would have been very difficult for this Prince long to have
subsisted; and being surrounded with so great a number of Enemies, it was not
possible he should escape, being met with by some or others, but must soon have
been defeated, having no Forces to defend himself.

It was also reported that the King Tanv^^n did with some Troops still defend
himself in the province of Fokien, where Pelipaouan then was. This was that
Prince whom the Corsair Icoan had caused to be Crowned after the death of the
Emperor Zunchin, and undertook his support and defense against all the Force
of the Tartars. This King of China was said to be still living. But the
Relation calls him Luvan instead of Tanvan; which at first sight might give
occasion to believe that these were two distinct Princes: But by the sequel it
is manifest that this could be no other than the first Tanvan who was Crowned
six Months before the Tartars entered into that province; for the Relation
remarks, that the Prince who still supported himself, was the same who had
governed that province in great tranquillity the space of six Months; which can
be understood of none but Tanvan, who was Crowned much about that time before
the arrival of the Tartars. And there is little probability that after they had
made themselves Masters of the Country, there should be any Prince who should
reign peaceable six months, no not six hours. There could not therefore be any
other King then in those parts but this Tanvan, who was believed to be dead,
because he disappeared ^^fter ^^o^^n was taken prisoner, though here the
Relation takes notice that there was still mention made of him; and perhaps
this Prince had two Names, and this might occasion his being spoke of as two
different persons: But this was the Prince whom the Chinese said to be still
living, and that he was retired into the Mountains, where he secured himself by
often changing his Station and place of Retreat. It was also said he had with
him Icoan's Son; as for the Father, there was no more mention of him: This
young man is spoke of as a person who did his Prince very eminent Service: It
is verily believed, he was a stout and courageous person, and gained a great
repute, both upon his Fathers account, and having been instructed by the
Hollanders at Xacasia, in the exercise of the Art Military, as it is practiced
in Europe.

This is said to have been the State of affairs in the province of Foquien; but
it is scarce to be believed, that Pelipaouan, who was so puissant, should let
things long run thus: And this clearly appears by the same Relation, which
remarks, that the Governor did incessantly send very considerable Forces both
Horse and Foot, out of this province into Canton; from whence it is evident,
the King of China did not much disquiet him. All these Rumors, which had no
very good ground, proceeded only from the shame the Chinese had to have
behaved themselves so cowardly; for seeing themselves thereby reduced to that
sad condition, they invented several Fictions, that they might be thought to be
very courageous: But this Arrogance benefited them but very little, nor those
small Attempts they made that they might not seem quite subjected. The truth
is, they were so very low, and in a condition so far from being able to restore
themselves to their pristine Liberty, that to dare only to turn their head
against the Tyrant, served only to exasperate him, and make him shed their
Blood afresh, and show them no Mercy.

It was in the province of Canton, where the Tartars found the greatest trouble
and resistance, even after they believed themselves Masters thereof. And there
was reason to believe that the Concern of the Chinese might yet have a more
favorable success. The City of Hunchicheu is one of the most considerable of
the whole province* and there a Conspiracy suddenly broke out against the
^^artars. They had chosen for their Head a King whom they had Crowned upon this
D^^sign. This person had made himself very eminent by his Thieveries and
Robberies, and these were his sole qualities for which he was considerable* For
even Thieves and Robbers, if they grow potent, are so far consid^^red of, as to
be regarded as Sovereign Princes. Those of Huchicheu did very unfortunately
fail in their expectations: They took up Arms upon the belief that the other
Towns would have done as much in the absence of the General, who was gone to
conduct some Troops into the province of Quansi; but none of the other Towns
stirred, and they did herein very wisely; for that City which did so
unseasonably declare it self, was quickly sensible both of its Error and
Misfortune. The Thief whom they had acknowledged for their King, played the
Thief still. He only now robbed these miserable and unfortunate people with
greater authority; for he pretended they were obliged to support his Grandeur;
and now he designs, if he can, to rob the Tartars; for this intent, he treats
with them, and covenants to sell them his Crown, and his whole State, the City
of Huchicheu; he comes and renders up himself to the Viceroy of Civil Affairs,
who governed that province in the absence of the Viceroy of Military Affairs,
and resignes up to him his Regal Ornaments, and was by the Viceroy received
with all the Honor and Favor he could expect.

The honorable reception which the Tartar gave to this person, who came and
thus rendered up himself, induced a Prince of the Blood Royal to take a
Resolution to treat for the like accommodation for himself. He had concealed
himself in the Province, and had refused all Ensigns of his Royal Dignity,
though he merited them much better than the King of Huchicheu. He preferred the
Crown of a Bonzi, by which he did some time disguise his Quality; for he was
acknowledged by the whole Nation for a Prince of the Royal Family: But seeing
with what danger the Regal Dignity was attended, he was not much ambitious of
it. He withdrew himself into the City of Canton, and there stayed till the
Tartars drew very near it; then he judged it more secure to retire himself
elsewhere, and went and placed himself in the Monastery of the Bonzi, by whom
he was very kindly received. These Chinese Monks seemed much moved at his
Misfortune, and promised to conceal him with all the secrecy he could wish for.
And to this intent, they cut off his hair, leaving him only a Circle round his
head, which is that which I called his Crown, which I said he preferred before
all others, and then they put on him the Habit of a Bonzi; this is the name of
several miserable persons, whom the Devil deludes, and prevails with them to
retire themselves into solitary places, that they may there pay the greater
honor to their Idols. In one of these Monasteries this Prince had now lived
concealed, and the Bonzi proved very faithful to him, none of them offering to
discover him to the Tartars; but he was not secure from fears and perpetual
Alarms: He believed a Secret could not long be kept amongst so many of the
Bonzi; for in some of these Monasteries there are sometimes five hundred or a
thousand persons, and the greatest part of these kind of persons are not too
much to be trusted or relied upon, though they make such an extraordinary
profession of Virtue and Sanctity. This Prince therefore having heard that the
Viceroy was a person of so much Honor, and so punctual to his word, resolves
after he had first treated with him by some of his Friends, to go and render up
himself to him. This he did, and the Viceroy failed not to receive him with all
the Honor he could wish for: But all this kind reception did not secure him,
that no attempt would be made upon his person; for till now the Tartars had put
to death all the Princes of the Blood Royal of China, whom they could discover.
It is true there was not any yet, who relying upon their Parole, had delivered
up himself to them; and perhaps upon this consideration, they thought fit, that
they might better secure him, only to conduct him safe into Tartary; but he was
still in hazard some time or other, to lose his life, that they might be out of
all fear of him; a strange Justice which makes a man criminal, because those of
the same Blood with him have been so unfortunate as to lose their Empire and
Lives!

CHAP. XIII. The State and Condition of the Portuguezes of Macao. They had
continued Neuters between the Chinese and the Tartars. Their Fear lest the
Victors should make some Attempt upon their City. They are better treated than
they expected.
BEfore we leave the Shore of China, to see what the Rebels did, who had taken
Sea, I judge it convenient to give some account what was then the state and
condition of the Portuguezes of Macao. This is a place of which they are
possessed in China, and is one of the best and wealthiest Plantations they have
in all the Indies. The City of Macao is situated in an Island some fourscore
Miles distant from Canton, threescore of which are gone upon a large and
beautiful River, and the other twenty by Sea. Macao is suff^^ciently known by
the Relations of those who have made several Voyages thither from diverse places
in Europe. But perhaps it may not be unacceptable to have a Relation how the
Inhabitants behaved themselves in this great Change of the Government of that
State on which they must always on necessity have dependence. The City of
Macao cannot subsist but by keeping peace and a good intelligence with China,
and with the Ruler in chief whosoever he be; for besides the great advantage
and profit they make by their Commerce thither, which occasioned the building
it about a hundred years ago, and has since enlarged and enriched it, it can
have no provisions for its subsistence but from China; so that if no Army
should besiege it, and none should come to scale and undermine the walls
thereof, yet of necessity they must perish, if the Chinese would but have the
patience to reduce it by want of Necessaries. Macao is built upon a heap of
Rocks; the Fields, Vineyards, and Olive-Gardens, and whatever places else
furnish it with necessary provisions, are in China: All must come from thence,
and it can no ways receive from any place else those things it stands in need
of for its daily subsistence.

Therefore for all these Reasons the Portuguezes did very discreetly manage
their Affairs with the Chinese. And it concerned them to be very prudent and
circumspect, to keep fair so long with a Nation which is not to be paralleled
in the whole world for diffidence and distrust; yet the Portuguezes lived so
well with these people, that they were as well esteemed of as the Chinese
themselves, and they are the only Strangers with whom the Chinese could ever
be prevailed with to have any dealings or confidence. But so great was the
Friendship which the Chinese have showed to those of Macao, that it had almost
quite ruined the Town; for diverse times they have been just upon declaring
themselves, in favor of the Chinese, against the Tartars: yet during the late
War, they always kept themselves in a Neutrality, having considered what
danger they had formerly run by being willing to succor the Chinese against
so potent Enemies; which is manifest by the ancient Relations from China. But
in this general revolution the peril was infinite greater; for all those
persons who had caused themselves to be crowned the Kings of China, failed not
ever to demand aid and succor from Macao, and there were always some of the
Inhabitants who were inclinable enough to favor their Interests. But they had
a more particular regard for that Prince who was Crowned at Canton; for there
ever was a very close correspondence between these two Towns. Those of Macao
had received diverse Favors from those of Canton, and for this reason, the
Portuguezes seemed obliged not to abandon their Friends in their distress; yet
they consider all the Succor they could send would signify little, and it
would infallibly draw ruin and destruction upon their City; therefore they
resolve not to run the hazard of exasperating so dreadful and ^^nemy. It is
good to consider upon weighty Affairs more than once; and whoever would not
repent quickly, should not resolve suddenly.

The Tartar did so highly esteem of the Prudence of those of Macao, in not
having, during this war, declared against him; that upon this sole
consideration, he was stopped from making any attempt upon their Town: It is
not but that they were in perpetual alarms: They knew that the Viceroy in
Military Affairs at Canton, was very potent, that he was one who grasped at
all, kept his Design very close, and one who was very perfidious, and therefore
not to be relied on. He often appeared at Sea with a very great Fleet: He
pretended it was only to go along the Coasts in chase of the Chinese Pirates,
but he often approached very near the City of Macao; and they themselves heard
the Soldiers in the Tartarian Army declare publicly that it was not very
difficult to pillage Macao; for nothing could hinder them whenever they
pleased. The Viceroy was not less zealous than his Soldiers to enter upon any
Enterprise which might equally redound both to his profit and honor. This did
not a little disturb the Inhabitants of Macao, who were upon this account
diffident of his Intentions. But of several things which this great City had
reason to apprehend, there were two which did principally seem to render its
ruin inevitable.

The first was, the Fame of the great Treasure and Riches in Macao, which in
former times there really was; but the War in China, and those Calamities which
ever attend it, had now reduced it to a far different state. The whole wealth
of that City consists in several rich and precious Merchandises which the
Inhabitants yearly receive from China, and transport them from thence into
Iapan or the Philippine Islands, and there in exchange they receive Ingots of
Silver: But for the eight preceding years, the Commerce had quite ceased; by
reason of the war, they could receive no Commodities from China: And after the
breach between Portugal and Spain, they had no liberty to go to the Philippine
Isles. And the Emperor of Iapan had throughout all his Dominions most
rigorously prohibited all commerce with the Christians. Thus the Inhabitants of
Macao were at a loss in all parts; for the profit was very inconsiderable,
which they gained by any other Traffic; and without the Money of Iapan and
Manila, it was not possible to make any great advantage; so far was Macao then
from being rich, that on the contrary, ever since those eight years, during
which, the Trade ceased, it was brought to so low a condition, that it was
believed that great City could not long subsist.

To this condition are the Towns and Factories in the Indies often reduced; for
their whole Income and Harvest consists in the Transportation and Vent of their
Commodities. If this commerce should fail for two or three years, they are then
brought to great misery and necessity: And this would be the state of Spain it
self, should it for some years be disappointed in the arrival of its Fleets;
for I may well take the liberty to say, that the Dew from Heaven does not so
liberally contribute to the making that a fertile Country, as the Water of the
Sea, which brings so great a number of Vessels thither from all parts. But it
is true, these Merchandising Towns do without any great difficulty, in a short
time recover themselves; for there needs only two or three years of good
Trading to supply them with plenty of all things, and by this hope and
expectation, the Inhabitants of Macao subsisted.

But how poor soever the Town was* it was still reputed to be very rich,
because it really had been so a few years before. For in the year 1640. there
came thither so great a quantity of Silver from Iapan, that the King's Duties,
which were Ten per Cent. amounted to a hundred thousand pound sterling. And
according to this Computation there must have been a Million sterling, which
was more than came ever after from Iapan. What Silver came from Manila is not
computed in this Calculation, though there came some years above three hundred
thousand pound from thence. The Renown of the wealth and riches of Macao, did
endanger the Ruin of it; for the Tartar easily suffered himself to be
persuaded into a belief of the truth of this Report, and without any further
information, he did verily believe there was great Treasures hid there, and did
not at all scruple, but that the pillage of that opulent City would enrich him
for ever.

The other reason the Inhabitants of Macao had to apprehend their Ruin, was
the knowledge they had that it was not necessary that the Design of forming any
Enterprise against them, should be concluded upon in the Emperor's Council of
State; for they ^^w all things depended upon the Capriciousness of the General,
who was very ambitious, undertaking and successful, and whose Soldiers were
nurtured up and accustomed to Outrages and Violences. Thus they were in
continual fears, lest they should quickly see the Tartars come and assault
their walls, and attempt to sack and pillage their City, and if they were
attaqued, it was impossible for them to make any resistance, without utterly
ruining themselves; and should they not with all their might defend themselves,
they must expect inevitable destruction.

Macao was very well fortified and furnished with great store of Artillery, the
Inhabitants and Soldiers were all Europeans, and persons of great Courage and
Resolution; they resolved, not to render up themselves to the Tartars upon the
first flight of Arrows, as the Chinese had done. If the Tartars got the
Victory, they would make them pay for it; for the Portuguezes were fully bent
to maintain the honor of their Nation, in not easily submitting to these
Barbarians, who understood so little the Art of War. They determined to make
the Tartars know, that the reason why they gained so many Victories, was
because there was so weak opposition made against them, and to let them see
that they must not expect to march over the world with the same speed they had
done over China.

But if Macao resisted, it must infallibly perish: The Ta^^tar was Master of
all China, and as I said before, it must depend, for its subsistence, upon the
supreme Governor of that State; for it can expect no relief from any place
else, nor any Succor sufficient to protect it against so puissant an Enemy.
When they were dri^^en to extremity, Necessity would compel them to deliver up
themselves upon Articles, if they could obtain any; and if they could, they
must resolve to open their Gates, and let in the Viceroy, and depend upon the
pe^^formance of his Engagement to them.

But this Barbarian, who because he was twelve hundred Miles distant from the
Court, did not trouble himself with the observance of the Instructions he
received from the Emperor to curb the Licentiousness of his Soldiers, would
less have cared to sack and pillage Macao, and bring upon it all the mischief
lay in his power. And though the peril was thus great to receive him into their
Walls, it would have been greater not to admit him: See how the safeguard of
Macao depended upon the Mercy of the Tartars, that is to say, up on persons who
have very little, who acknowledge no Law, nor any Obligations, but what they
please to impose upon themselves, who seldom enter into any Treaty or League
with Strangers; and if they do, it is in such a manner, that they resolve at
the same time to observe nothing that they promise.

Thus the Portuguezes had reason on all sides to dread the Tartars, who showed
them every day what mischief they could do them. They came often and presented
themselves before the Town, sometimes by Sea, sometimes by Land, on that part
of China which lies nearest to it. And they being Masters of all the Country,
except this place only, the Inhabitants judged the Tartars would think that one
Town ought not to render imperfect the Victory they had made of so vast an
Empire.

But God Almighty, who knows how to keep the City, even when all other power
watches but in vain, showed that in the midst of so many perils he would
preserve Macao. Though all we frail Creatures can do, comes short of what we
ought, yet God is often graciously pleased to accept of and reward our weak
Endeavors, though they are but the operation of his Grace in us. The City of
Ma^^ao had received and bred up several Faithful Labour^^rs, who were gone to
serve in Christ's Vineyard which he had planted in Iapan and China, and had
dispersed themselves amongst several other Idolatrou^^ Nations. Thus this City
was a means ^^o reveal the Name of God to several Nations who sat in darkness;
and it may very well be said to have been a sanctified Academy, a glorious
Amphitheather, where several holy Champions exercised themselves, that they
might overthrow Idolatry, and obtain a Crown of Martyrdom. It was not full ten
years since it pleased God to crown with Martyrdom in one day more than sixty
persons, who all went from Macao: And if it may be permitted to say so, the
Divine Providence was pleased by the defense of Macao, when it was in so
eminent danger, to recompense the service the Inhabitants thereof had done to
the Church of Christ. And certainly the protection of Gods faithful Servants
there, did much propagate the Glory of his Name. The Churches aforementioned,
and several other Kingdoms depended upon Macao, to be furnished from thence
with able Laborers, who might implant and strengthen their Faith. Should Macao
have been destroyed, the Fountain and Streams would have been ruined, from
whence their Instruction and Consolation flowed to them; and according to all
humane probability, it may be said, that those Churches there newly planted,
would have been all lost, the Gospel no longer preached in those places, and
the glorious Beams of Gods Name would in a manner have remained eclipsed to
these people.

But at last, by the Omnipotent assistance of the Almighty God, the Inhabitants
of Macao* began not to be in such dread of the Tartars, who now declared they
intended no War against their City; but on the contrary, they desired that the
Commerce should be continued between both Nations, as it had been formerly with
the Chin^^ses. And for their further s^^curity, shortly after they sent to
Macao an authen^^ick Act or Instrument, whereby they did declare that all
things r^^lating to the Trade and Traffic should be established as before; and
to this effect, they then granted all liberty and security to the Portuguezes
to come to Canton, and there negotiate all their Concerns relating to Trade;
and permission to the Tartars to carry all sorts of Wares and Merchandises to
Macao.

The Portuguezes were then t^^inking to have sent an Embassy to the Viceroys
of Canton, or if it had been necessary, to the Emperor himself, that they
might more solemnly have settled the peace and liberty of Trade, and thereby
have rendered their security more inviolable; but they considered, that all that
Seacoast, and the very Rivers were so infested with Pirates, that there would
be no safety for their Embassy without a strong Convoy; and they were not then
in a condition to put out to Sea so great a Fleet as would have been necessary
upon this occasion; but they were in hopes that their condition would improve
daily. The Tartars seemed to be extraordinarily satisfied with the Portuguezes
that they had not declared against them in favor of the Chinese; and upon
this account they were ready to make them any Return, or show them any
Civility, so great a value they had for their Friendship. Thus God preserved
the City of Macao, and has been pleased ever since to continue his protection
to it; for God is not like man, who begins, and grows weary of well doing: The
Goodness of man is quickly drained, and their patience expired; but God is
inexhaustible in the Riches of his Goodness and Patience, and his first
Benefits are as so many Marks, or rather as so many Pledges and Assurances that
he is still preparing new ones for us.

CHAP. XIV. The Tartars put out to Sea, and fight the Corsairs of China. A
Treaty of Peace is proposed, but broke by the perfidiousness of the Viceroy. He
is discovered to be a Chinese. The natural Genius of that Nation.
Though the Tartars had reduced under their subjection all the Continent of
China, they were not yet Masters of the Sea. But that they may; we shall see
them now engage with the Chinese Pirates: And now they will have their hands
full, nor will they so easily subdue these new Inhabitants of as many floating
Towns as they had Squadrons of Ships, with which they roved about, and scowred
the Coasts. But before the Tartars would undertake the Pirates, they determine
to conquer the Isle of Hain^^m.

All along the Coast of Canton there are very many little Isles, which are only
separated from the Continent by Rivers, and many of them are great Rocks
uninhabited, and so near the Shore, that they are judged by many to be part of
the Main Land of China. The most considerable of all these Islands is called
Hainam, distant some eighty miles from the City of Canton, but so near the
Shore of that Province, that in a clear day it is easily discernable from one
end to another. The earth is so fertile, that it very plentifully produces all
things necessary to the use of man: They fish likewise for Pearls, which are
found there in great numbers; and besides, there comes from thence several
other choice and rare Curiosities, as all the Relations of China remark. All
the Island is not inhabited, neither are all the Inhabitants of the same
Nation; for the Southern people are more rude, and do not acknowledge the
Sovereignty of the Chinese over them, nor will they have any Commerce with
them: But in the Northern parts there are several Chinese, three Cities, and
eight Towns, besides sev^^ral other Houses and Habitations scattered up and
down, and this part of the Isle is the most populous and rich.

The Tartar resolves to make himself so much Master of this Island, that there
should be no Town or Habitation of the Chinese but should acknowledge him for
their Sovereign; and for this effect he commissionated a General; and issued
out Orders to him to pass over with a very considerable Fleet of Ships:
Notwithstanding the little knowledge the Tartars had in Sea-affairs, yet they
did with the same facility subdue this Island as they had done the rest of
China. The General, after this, settled a Tartar Governor there with a strong
Garrison of Soldiers, and returned into the Province of Canton, laden with
Wealth and Honor; for he had much enriched himself in this Island; and though
he was well paid for his pains with the plunder he got, yet in recompense of
his services there, he had conferred upon him the Office of High Admiral, which
the Chinese call Haitao, and in execution of his Command, he presently put out
to Sea with a Navy of sixscore Ships.

After he had conquered the Isle of Hainam, his design was to clear all the
Seas of the Pirates, who did most horribly ravage all the Coasts; but more
especially the Province of Canton, that being the richest and best Province of
all China; the Corsairs were thereby invited to make such havoc there. The
Tartars fully determined to extirpate them all; but though they did their
utmost endeavors, yet it was not so easy to accomplish this Enterprise. At
the first, when they were not very able Seamen, this Naval War seemed terribly
laborious to them; for the Tartars principally those of the North, had never
seen the Sea till they had conquered China, and traversed over that great
Empire. And having so little experience of the Sea, the very imagination of
fighting upon that Element, struck a strange dread and apprehension into them;
but valiant men will fight any where. The Romans were no better acquainted with
Sea-affairs in the first Punick War, when they were necessitated to get an old
Ship of Carthage, that they might build according to that Model; yet after they
became so able Seamen, and so powerful at Sea, that Augustus and Anthony, at
the Battle of Actium had a greater number of Ships than ever the Carthaginians
had had in several years. The Tartars likewise presently accustomed themselves
to all the Toils of the Sea, and were no longer sick, nor to seek how either to
manage a Seafight, or to go in chase of their Enemies; nay, they became very
skilful Pilots.

The Chinese Corsairs did not only rove about the Seas, but they went up the
Rivers, which in those parts are very deep and large. The first Ringleaders who
began to infest the Coasts, were four eminent Pirates, who divided their Ships
into four Squadrons, in each of which it is thought there was above ten
thousand men: The greatest part of these kept upon the Rivers, where they
plundered and seized upon all they could find on either side the Rivers, and did
as much mischief to their own Contrymen, as ever the Tartars had done; who
now began to believe that it would be more advantageous to them to gain upon
the Corsairs by Treaty and Proposals. To this effect, they propounded to them
an Act of Oblivion if they would come to any reasonable agreement. The Pirates
did not reject this Offer; for there being little now left for them to plunder
or pillage, either from their Enemies or Friends, they were content enough to
make peace: But the Tartarian General was not of so peaceable a disposition,
and therefore the Favor and Friendship he promised the Corsairs, was of no
long continuance. During the time of this Treaty of Agreement, two of the
principal Pirates came ashore, that they might conclude upon such Articles
which might equally redound to the satisfaction of both parties: But there yet
remained something upon which they could not agree, and thereupon the Tartarian
General began to use violence, and seized upon the two Captains of the
Corsairs, and enjoined them upon pain of death to oblige all the other Pirates
to surrender themselves to his Mercy. This unreasonable procedure was not
according to the approbation of Xunchi, who never intended his Captains should
deal so perfidiously; but the Viceroy, as has been already remarked, was a
person from whom greater Justice was not to be expected. His rash and violent
nature would not permit him to hear reason. It is also reported, that by bi^^th
he was not a Tartar, but a Chinese, of the Province of Loa^^tum, which borders
upon Tartary, and the greatest par^^ of his Soldiers were also as himself,
Chinese; but yet they endeavored to pass for Tartars. It would be scarce
credible, that the Tartars shou^^d grant to a Chinese the Command of so potent
an Army, in which the grea^^est part of the Soldiers were likewise Chinese;
for few wise men approve the policy of putting so many enemies into Military
Employments, and giving them so great Command in such remote Provinces; but
this may be thus salved, the Chinese of Loaotum were distant from Canton more
than twelve hundred miles, and were near Neighbors to Tartary, and
consequently better acquainted with the Tartars, with whom they often
conversed, than with the Cantoners, with whom they had no Commerce; therefore
they looked upon them rather as Countrymen, than those whom they only knew at
so remote a distance, and that only by hearsay. This consideration may make it
less to be wondered at, that the General should be a Chinese, and so likewise
the greatest part of the Soldiers he commanded; for the Inhabitants of this
Province looked upon those of another as so many strangers and foreigners, and
therefore the Tartars the le^^s apprehended that these should revolt in a
Province so far distant from their own Native Country, in which they had left
their Wives, Children, Parents, and all the rest of their Relations, as so many
Hostages, under the power of the Tartarian Garrisons. which they had there
established to secure their new Conquest. It was likewise rumoured that the
Viceroy of Civil affairs was also a Chinese, of the same Province of Loaotum;
but this is not so certain as that the General was, whose inhumane cruelty is
the more to be abominated, seeing he was most fierce against his own
Countrymen.

It was not by any order from the Tartarian Emperor, nor to ingratiate himself
with him, that the General took these violent courses. That Prince was in his
nature very far from commanding, approving or permit^^ing them: But the
Chinese are naturally inclined to be very insolent and fierce, even to their
own Countrymen; and therefore there is no mean or moderation in their
comportment toward one ano^^her. They are all either Kings or Slaves: They
will adore as a God, a man, of whose assistance they stand in n^^ed; and they
will trample upon, like a Worm, any one who has occasion of theirs; either
they do with a most abject vileness crouch and crawl before their Superiors,
or else with a most insolent haughtiness tyrannize over their Inferiors: The
poor man is only regarded as a slave to the rich; and the rich acts, as well as
he can, the Petty King or Tyrant. But that which is most to be admired at, is,
that every particular person should be able to personate either the one or the
other of these Extremes, according as it is most comformable to his present
condition; for if one of these miserable Wretches of a sudden gains any Wealth
or Repute, it is admirable to see how he will Lord it, as if he had been born
and bred so all his life; and the like does the rich man if he happens to be
impoverished, they will most wonderfully suit themselves to their present state
and condition, though it be never ^^o un^^c^^ustomed to them.

By this you may perceive that the Genius and humor of the Chinese is to be
inflexible and unmerciful to those who depend on them, which is just opposite
to the nature of the Tartars: This may be evidenced by the General at Canton,
who was the more outrageous, by being by birth a Chinese. As for the humor of
the Tartars, it does much resemble that of diverse people in Europe; they are
very passionate, hot, and quickly incensed; sometimes they are transported with
passion, if they meet with any opposition, especially if it be in any thing
which relates to their Pleasure and Luxury; for then their Choler transcends
all the bounds of Reason; and this has cost the lives of several Chinese, who
endeavored to prevent the rape of their Wives; but these disorders are very
ordinary, even in the Armies in Europe. As to any thing else, the Tartars
delight not in shedding Blood; they are not of so sanguinary a Spirit, nor were
they ever inclinable to do any hurt or violence to any who gave them no
offense, by making resistance, or defending themselves. But the General and his
Soldiers did incestantly, without any provocation commit Massacres in all
places; and therefore it was observed, that the Soldiers who we^^e the most
mild, staid and reasonable, were those who were the real Tartars, and these
were esteemed of as the most valiant and courageous; and the unreasonable
Cruelty of the others was accounted a testimony of their base, cowardly and
degenerous spirit.

The Viceroy with all his fierceness did thereby do no very good service to the
Emperor his Master; for those who undertake to carry all things by the utmost
rigor and severity, seldom prove very successful in the management of Affairs.
A more calm and generous procedure is much more prevalent than all this
passionate and precipitate violence. B^^ute beasts, who are void of all Reason,
are mastered and tamed with force and violence; but certainly Man, whose Glory
it is to be endowed with a reasonable Soul, well deserves that Speech, Reason
and Entreaties should be employed to persuade him. It is scarce credible what
Mischief this ill Conduct of the Viceroy did, attempting by these violent
courses to reduce the Corsairs: They did (as I have already said) rove about
the Sea and Rivers, to the number of forty thousand, divided into four
Squadrons; but now they had ceased from all Acts of Hostility, and had
submitted upon those Proposals of peace which were offered them. Two of the
most principal amongst them came ashore to sign some Articles to which they
were agreed, when the General, a man of neither Faith nor Honor, did contrary
to the parole he had given them, seize upon them, and without either sense or
reason demanded of them upon pain of death to oblige all the other Pirates to
submit themselves: It was not in their power to reduce the others; nor was this
the Peace which was tendered them. Thus the perfidiousness of the Viceroy
kindled those Embers which shortly after made such a Flame, that neither he,
nor many more could quench it, though it was in the midst of the Waters.

There was no Bull nor Tiger exasperated, nor Serpent trampled on, more enraged
than these Corsairs were as soon as they were informed of this Action of the
General. They wanted nothing now, but to know how to moderate their passion;
and to execute their resolutions as firmly ^^nd courageously as they were hot
and eager to declare them; they now renewed their first Acts of Hostility, but
more violently and frequently than ever. This last perfidious Act of the
Viceroy had alarmed them in all parts, so that on the Land there was nothing to
be seen but Houses burning, and on the Sea and Rivers, Ships roving about: It
is thought there was above two thousand; so that supposing there were but a
hundred men, Mariners and Soldiers, in each Vessel, thus there was in these
two thousand Ships two hundred thousand men; which is a very formidable Navy,
and surpasses most ordinary Fleets. The design of this great Army was, to free
their Country from the Tyranny of the Tartars, who by the late Treachery of the
Viceroy, were become very terrible and dreadful to them. Thus an imprudent
Officer in power, by his ill management of Affairs, rendered a whole Nation
odious, though before it was in good esteem.

The Viceroy, that he might not acknowledge that he had done amiss, seemed not
to be concerned at the great preparations the Corsairs made against him; it was
his humor to be glad of any occasion to show his Valor; and lest he should
want, to create new. To give him his due, he was both valiant and successful in
all his Enterprises; but his cruelty and perfidiousness did both blemish and
discredit the Glory he acquired thereby.

CHAP. XV. The Viceroy burns the Vessels of the Corsairs; they return in
greater numbers, pillage and ravage the Country, and compel the Chinese to
quit the Tartarian Habit which they had taken. They assault the City of Canton,
and are repulsed by the Viceroy in Civil Affairs.
THE General at Canton was now engaged by force of Arms to reduce the Corsairs;
and therefore because he perceived that their Forces increased daily, he did
with all possible speed put out to Sea with a Navy of fifty Ships* each of
which carried sixteen piece of Cannon: And having provided all things
necessary, he imbarqued himself with those Soldiers, on whose valor he most
confided. The Tartars went now to a War, of which they had little experience;
but h^^ving the example of their Viceroy, they went aboard very resolutely,
that by their valor they might supply the little intelligence they had in this
way of fighting, which was so new to them. They imbarqued so speedily and
secretly, that the Corsairs had no information of it. The Viceroy favored by
the good Fortune which did usually attend him in all his Enterprises, surprised
the Pirates in the Channel of a River, where the multitude of their Vessels did
more inconvenience, than advantage them against the small number of those who
came against them: they were so surprised, that they could not possibly make
out to Sea as they desired, that they might have surrounded their Enemy. The
Tartars, though they were but fresh water Soldiers, yet they came in very good
order, and assaulted the first they met with so vigorously, that they quickly
disabled them for fight: The rest had neither the leisure to recover, or put
themselves into any order; or had they any place either to retreat or fly to;
for the Viceroy had blocked up the mouth of the River, and thereby stopped
their passage. And that he might expedite his Victory, he presently set fire to
their vessels; and the Pirates being in this disorder, and seeing no way left
for their escape, they quickly routed themselves; for now they did in great
confusion cast themselves into the water, that they might, if possible, save
themselves by swimming to the sides of the River. And of all this great
multitude, none but those who thus saved themselves, escaped either being
drowned or burnt.

The Viceroy when he had assured the Victory, endeavored to preserve a hundred
of the best Ships, and bur^^t the rest. From thence he returned to Canton,
where he had imbarqued, and to illustrate his Triumph, he caused the hundred
Ships he had taken from the Pirates, to be haled after him. At his Arrival the
Town was filled with Acclamations of Joy, with which all the Inhabitants did
congratulate and salute him as their Liberator, and as one who had for ever
secured them from all fear and apprehension of the Corsairs.

It is strange that the Chinese of Canton should thus applaud the Tartars for
the Victory they had obtained over the Chinese who combated for the Liberty of
their Country: And these Acclamations may seem to have been only feigned and
base compliances of the servile people; but it is certain their Joy was not
counterfeit, but sincere, and they did without any dissimulation felicitate the
Tartars for their Victory: The reason proceeded from the horrible mischiefs
they suffered from the Corsairs, who not only roved about the Sea and the
Rivers, but desolated the Fields and Towns, leaving no respite to the
Inhabitants of this Province, who were then all submitted to the Tartars. But
for these Corsairs, after the Chinese had suffered all the Calamities to which
Towns sacked and pillaged by Barbarians are reduced, yet every one began to
look upon his Misfortune as a Tempest which was now ceased. As for those who
were dead, they were no more thought upon than dead people usually are; and all
the Troubles they had undergone, were only now considered as a thing without
remedy. There was nothing now to be seen all over the Country but bald Pates,
and all the Inhabitants were clothed after the Tartarian mode; willingly or
unwillingly they must submit to the Law of the Victor; and if they governed
themselve^^ peaceably, for the future they need not fear to suffer from the
Victor so great Afflictions as they had already undergone.

Though their troubles from the Tartars seemed to them to be at an end, the
outrages they suffered from the Pirates did but now begin. These were new
Tyrants, and a new sort of Barbarians, which did incessantly renew the
afflictions of these miserable people: At the first they only reviled and
reproached them, calling them cowardly Traitors, for having abandoned their
King and their Country to these Tyrants, as if they had voluntarily made
choice of these new Masters: From injurious Words they came to Blows, and
treated them with all the ill usage imaginable. In their fury and rage they
perpetrated acts of that violence as transcended all the inhumane actions of
the Tartars: They compelled the Chinese to retake their ancient Habit; and to
show their authority the more, they obliged them to wear their Liveries. After
they had p^^llaged and sacked all parts, they then fortified themselves in such
Posts as they judged most advantageous, pretending they would there defend the
Chinese against all Assaults of the Tartars; but this only served to give
occasion to the Tartars to return and plunder and spoil the unfortunate
Inhabitants a second or third time; for the Viceroy was no sooner informed of
what passed in those parts, but he instantly returned, and did more Mischief
than ever he had before. And if the Cors^^irs made any resistance, then he was
the more outrageous, and obstinately resolving to go through with every thing
he undertook, he was sooner or later still victorious. As for the Pirates, when
they saw they could not defend those whom they ought to have better protected,
they presently retook themselves to the Sea, and so abandoned these poor
Wretches to the fury of an Enemy, who was the more outrageous, because he
thought he had so debilitated them, that they had not strength enough left
them, so much as to crawl about. And when the Tartar missed of the Corsairs, on
whom he might avenge himself, he punished the Innocent instead of the Nocent.
It was in vain to allege any Reasons to pacify him, or justify themselves:
It was sufficient to make these miserable people criminal, because he had in
his fury and rage declared them so.

The Corsairs returned twice or thrice, and made the Inhabitants of the
Province of Canton change their Habit; and the Tartar as often pursued after
them, and renewed all the Cruelties and Inhumanities which can be imagined they
should exercise against Rebels. This gave occasion to the Inhabitants of all
the Towns and Villages which bordered upon the Rivers, to manifest such an
aversion to the Corsairs, and after their defeat, to give such demonstrations
of their Joy, believing, that from thenceforth they should be freed from them:
For as for the Tartars, after the Calamities they had undergone from them, they
expected to suffer no more from them: Therefore they evidenced all they could
possibly that they did participate in the advantage which did accrue from this
Victory; and for this reason, they received the Viceroy with such applause at
his entry into C^^nton, when he returned in Triumph for the Victory he had
obtained over the Enemy they most dreaded.

The great Defeat of the Corsairs happened presently after the reduction of the
City of Canton: But it is not related in the Memorials which came from China,
till after the Relation of the entire Conquest of the whole Continent of China;
to make some distinction, I suppose, between the Sea Fights and the Land-fights
which the Tartars had with the Chinese. The Tartars took the City of Canton
the 20th. of January, 1647. And after some days spent in providing for all
things necessary for the Government of the City and Province, the Viceroy then
put out to Sea, where he gained this great Victory over the Pirates toward the
end of February in the same year, and finding no Enemy in that Province to
engage with, he passed from thence to the City of Xaochin, that he might subdue
that, and the Province of Quansi, with all its Dependents. There it was that
Guequan defeated the Tartars; but the Prince gained but little advantage by his
Victory; for in a second Battle the Viceroy was victorious, and thereby made
himself Master of the City of Xaochin.

It was much about this time that P^^lipaou^^n, who commanded as a Sovereign
Prince in these Provinces, recalled the General of Canton out of the Province
of Quansi; the Conquest of which he had before commi^^ted to his Management: He
pretended his presence was necessary in the Province of Canton, to reduce the
Corsairs there; for the Relation remarks, that the Viceroy returned in the
beginning of April, 1647. And it does not appear, that he ever after went to
the Conquest of Quansi: Therefore it was another General who drove Guequan out
of the Field, and completed the reduction of that Province. The Tartars, who
were not accustomed to be beaten by the Chinese, were highly en^^aged at the
defeat of the Viceroy at Xaochin; and Pelipaouan, who was the Roaland of
Tartary, was more incensed than any; and therefore he recalled the General: It
is believed, he would not so soon have recovered the Advantages which he lost
by that Defeat, if he had not testified his Resentment by presently employing a
new Commander in the reducing and governing the Province of Quansi.

During the time in which the General of Canton was absent from that Province,
the management of all Affairs both Civil and Military, was commi^^ted to the
Viceroy in Civil Affairs, who was a more intelligent and prudent person; but
above all, eminent for his Zeal for the Service of his Prince, whose Authority
over his new Subjects, he was very capable of maintaining. He was not less
valiant than his Colleague, though not so hot and passionate: He had with him
as many Troops of Horse and Companies of Foot as were necessary for the Guard
of his Person, and of securing the peace of the Province. But the Corsairs, who
were exasperated and enraged by their late Defeat, were now rallied together,
and ready to enter upon some great Exploit; and being certainly informed, that
the General was engaged in other parts, with the greatest part of the Forces,
they believed the Viceroy in Civil Affairs was not able to defend the City with
those few Soldiers were left him; therefore they resolved to go and assault
it; and one Morning by One of the Clock, they came up to the City, and
presently fired a great number of Vessels which lay in the River, some of which
belonged to the Tartars, and the others to the Inhabitants of the Town. In a
short time the Fire was so great, that to those who were near, it seemed rather
to be clear Day than Night. All the Vessels which were either in the Haven or
River, were all consumed, except some few which were sheltered by the
Artillery, which was planted upon a Bulwark, to which they durst not approach
so near.

The Corsairs were now so certain of their Victory, that they were ready to
make Bonefires: And that they might show they were Masters of the Town, they
sent to declare to the Townsmen, that they were come to fire all their Houses,
and put all the Inhabitants to the Sword, and that they would not leave a man
alive, to teach them what they had got by submitting to the Tartars, contrary
to the Faith and Loyalty they owed both to their King and Country.

The Inhabitants thereupon, gave themselves for lost; but yet they resolved
man^^ully to defend themselves: They received very courageously those who came
to assault them; but especially the Chinese of the Province of Foquien, of
which there were many then in Canton, fought with a more than ordinary
resolution* for they were the more animated, because they knew the greatest
part of the Corsairs were of Canton, and there is a mortal Feud between the
people of these two Provinces.

Upon this occasion, the Prudence and Valor of the Viceroy in Civil Affairs,
made it evident that those who are employed in the management of Civil Affairs,
are capable of managing Martial Affairs, and to obtain Victories in Battle. He
presently took care to hearten and encourage the Common People, who gave
themselves for lost: And therefore commanded them to go every one to his own
house, and to sleep securely.

It is my Duty (said he) to take care of your Safety; therefore rely upon my
Care: I will go and draw up all my Soldiers in Battalia between the Walls of
the Town and the Pirates; and I engage to you they will not approach near your
Walls so long as one Tartar is left alive; and do not believe they will easily
destroy us all.

And to show how much he confided in those Forces he had with him, at that very
instant he went out of his Palace, drew off all the Guards, and commanded that
the Gates should be left open; from thence he went to the Gates of the Town,
which he caused to be all opened; and at every one placed such Commanders as he
knew would defend them courageously. After he caused all the Streets to be
cleared, that nothing might impede the March of his Horse to and fro. Having
provided for all things necessary within the Town, he got up a Horseback, and
at the Head of his Men he placed himself by the River side, fully resolved,
that whoever came to assault him, should be well received. They began to
skirmish presently, and both parties were very hotly engaged: The Canons and
Muskets played very fiercely; but especially those from the Bulwarks of the
Town, which in a short time sunk several Barks and Ships belonging to the
Pirates, to their great loss. The Corsairs, who did not expect to have been so
warmly received, had no great mind to prosecute their Enterprise, but
retreated, or rather fled away; which was no small Joy to the Inhabitants, as
likewise to see they had a Governor, who was as able to defend their City, as
to distribute Justice.

It is said, that amongst the Ships which in this Engagement were burnt by the
Corsairs, there was a Vessel which belonged ^^o a King who was Tributary to
China, and maintained the Liberty of his Subjects by paying every three years a
small Tribute, only as a Mark of Homage and Fealty. This Ship, which was then
going to carry the Tribute to Pequin, was unfortunately in the Port at Canton:
There was in it about some sixscore persons with the Ambassador, forty of which
were either burnt or drowned, ten or twelve were taken by the Corsairs, who
made them Slaves, and presently put them to the Oar, that they might ^^sist
them in making good their Retreat; the seventy others saved themselves by
swimming. The Tartars received them very courteously, furnished them with all
Necessaries, till they had convenience of returning securely into their own
Country.

CHAP. XVI. The Testimony which certain Christian Negroes gave of their
Religion in the presence of the Tartars. After which God Almighty miraculously
preserves them in a Fight. The Corsairs continue to spoil the Country. The
Viceroy in Military Affairs drives them out of a place in which they had
fortified themselves, and stood upon their Defense. He ruins the ^^own, and
all the adjacent Country.
AMongst those Forces which defended the City of Canton against the Corsairs,
there happened to be more than two hundred Negroes, of different Nations, but
were all Christians, who had made their escape into China, from Macao, where
they had been Slaves. At the beginning of the War, these Negroes were more than
three hundred, and had all carried Arms against the Tartars, under the Command
of the Famous Icoan, who confided more in them, than in the Chinese; and
always kept them near his person, and they served him with all the Valor and
Loyalty he could expect from them, till such time as he was defeated by the
Tartars; at which time, several of them died with their Swords in their hands,
fighting near his person. Those which remained, which might be about some two
hundred, afterward took Arms under the Victors, and so happened to be amongst
the Forces which were in the City of Canton. The Viceroy and diverse other
Tartars, who had been Spectators of several gallant Actions which they did in
the Combat, in which they repulsed the Corsairs, did in public highly applaud
them. The Viceroy was not only content, by the praise he gave them, to show the
esteem he had of their Valor, but he likewise invited them to a public
Entertainment: And here it was that these Negroes gave such a Testimony of
their Religion, that the Relation thought not fit to omit it. The Viceroy
having caused to be served up before them several sorts of Flesh-meats;

May it please your Excellency, say they, you must know we are Catholic
Christians, and the H^^ly Catholic Church commands her Children to eat no
Flesh during Lent, which is a Term of forty days every year; and it being now
that Season of the year, we cannot eat those Flesh-Meats your Excellency has
presented us withal: We highly esteem, and are sensible of the Honor your
Excellency has been pleased to do us; but we beseech you to permit us to obey
the Holy Ordinances of our Religion; for we must declare, we have such a
Reverence for those Holy Sanctions, that we believe we ought rather to die than
fail in the Observance of them.

Though this Particular does not much import the present History, yet it is
related, that it may manifest to Christians the great impulse of their
Religion, which can create such courageous and generous notions in the Breasts
of such despicable persons. Those Heretics which hold the abstinence from
Flesh which the Church commands at certain times, as an unnecessary Ceremony,
and an Abuse, though they pretend to be Reformers of Religion, may yet learn
Religion from these Negroes; or at least be brought with them to confess, that
it is the property of Vultures and Ravens, and such other like ravenous Animals
to live only upon Flesh; but Man, who is created for a more noble Life, ought
in reason, at some certain times, to abstain from gratifying his Palate and
Appetite: This the very Tartars acknowledged from the Light of Nature, though
it did but obscurely glimmer to these Barbarians, who had neither a God, nor
Religion. The Viceroy did not at first comprehend what the Negroes meant; but
when he fully understood upon what account they refused to eat Flesh, he had
the higher value for them, and now he applauded the faithful Obedience they
paid to the Injunctions of their Religion; all the other Tartars did the like,
and declared that they had a greater esteem for this Declaration of the
Negroes, than for all their gallant Exploits in the Combat.

God did not leave the Generosity of these Christians without recompense; for
shortly after, in their favor, he showed a Miracle, of which the Tartars took
notice, and admired, to the Glory of the Catholic Christian Religion: Thus it
was; Four days after the Corsairs were repulsed from Canton, they returned,
and gave a new assault, but much more furious and fierce than the former; for
before the greatest part of them fought only in their Ships, but now they
Landed, and with all their Forces stormed the town. The Tartars who were
commanded by the Viceroy in Civil Affairs, received them with their accustomed
Valor. The Combat was fought with an equal Obstinacy by both sides, from
Daybreak until Noon. There was a great number slain upon the place; for all
the time the Artillery played incessantly, and the Arrows showered down
continually.

The Negroes who fought amongst the Tartars, failed not to maintain the
Reputation of their Courage; and that they might do something for the glory of
that Religion which they pro^^essed, they desired amidst so many brave and
valiant Soldiers, to signalize themselves; and therefore they presented
themselves in all places where the peril was greatest. At last the Tartars got
the Victory; the Pirates retreated in disorder to their Ships, and fled away.
After which, the Field where the Battle was fought, was difcerned to be covered
all over with Blood and dead Bodies. There were great numbers of the Tartars as
well as the Corsairs slain. The Negroes all assembled together, and seemed to
have been invulnerable that day; there was none of them hurt or injured in the
least: It did not appear that the Enemies weapons had touched them in the
least; and yet they were two hundred, who all fought where the Arrows, Musket
and Cannon Bullets flew thickest, and where the greatest numbers had been
slain. This did extraordinarily astonish the Tartars, who were eyewitnesses of
their gallant Actions. This prodigy did not give a little repute amongst them
to the Christian Religion.

The Negroes failed not to declare that it was from God alone that they had
received this protection; and at that very instant, before they put off their
Arms, they went from the place where the Battle was fought, to the Jesuits
Church in Canton, to give praise to God for their preservation. Thus it pleased
God to manifest his Glory, in not deferring longer to reward the Faith which
these new Christians had shown forth by their observance to the Ordinances of
his Church. It is not that God was indebted to them this Miracle: God owes
nothing to his Creatures, who are all his Vassals and Slaves, and of themselves
incapable of acquitting themselves of the Duty they owe to the Almighty.

Ten days after this second Defeat of the Corsairs before the City of Canton,
which happened in the beginning of April 1647. there appeared before the same
City a Naval Army of Soldiers, which had been formerly commanded by the
renowned Icoan. This was part of those Forces which he had offered the Tartar
when he was taken prisoner, as has been intimated before. There were only
seventy Vessels, but they were all in very good equipage, furnished with all
Necessaries, and sufficiently provided with both Soldiers and Seamen. These
men came to present themselves with all their Vessels to the Tart^^r, to serve
him in the War which he h^^d with the Cors^^irs; these were but the least part
of Icoan's Soldiers: All the rest, who had made their escape from the Tartars,
had joined themselves with the Pirates. In the time that this Fleet arrived at
Canton, the General returned from the Province of Quansi, from whence
Pelipaouan had recalled him. After this, he was only employed against the
Pirates, who gave him his hands full; and for the reducing of them, Pelipaouan
could not possibly do any thing more advantageous than engaging this General
against them.

The General was no sooner arrived at Can^^on, but he was informed the Corsairs
had reunited their strength, and had Landed, and possessed themselves of a
great City called Xunte, distant a days journey from Canton; that they had
fortified this City, and seemed to be fully resolved to stand upon their
defense. This was sufficient to make the General quickly take the Field: He
presently issued out Orders for the equipping of fifty Vessels with all speed;
but he would not make use of any of Icoan's Vessels or men; for he was willing
to show that by his own valor he could subdue them without the assistance of
Strangers. He presently put out to Sea, accompanied with his best Soldiers,
and engaged he would so handle the Corsairs, that they should have no great
mind to come and visit him so near another time. He was not gone far before he
met with a hundred of their Ships, which were Chinese Men of War, great
Vessels, but of little strength to maintain a fight: They were laden with
Straw, and other combustible Stuff, proper for the Design they had in hand,
which was to fire those Ships of Icoan which they knew were entered into the
Service of the Tartar; but they had but bad Suocess; the Vessels which they
came to fire, were secure, and they themselves were only burnt; for the Viceroy
with his accustomed success, boarded them, and made use of that Stuff to burn
them, with which they had designed to fire their Enemies.

The General swelled with Glory for the advantage which he had now gained
without much hazard or toil, or loss of time, pursued his course, to overtake
the main Body of the Pirates: He found that they had possessed themselves of
the City of Xunte, that they had there fortified themselves, and made a show of
resolutely defending themselves. He presently Landed, and without loss of time,
and consulting nothing but his Passion, he fell on to storm the Town. At this
first Assault the Corsairs out-braved all their fierceness, and obliged them to
take more leisure how to make a second. They returned a second time, but in
more order, though with much heat and animosity; yet by these two Assaults he
gained nothing, but on the contrary, lost many of his men.

The Tartar grew desperate to see himself thus received and handled by a
company of Raskally Free-booters; for the Chinese as well as the Tartars gave
them no other Title, though they fought in the defense of their Country
against its Usurpers; but in all places the strongest are best esteem^^d of.
Though the Viceroy had hi^^herto still been so victorious, yet now he was at
his Wits end, to see that one single Town, in which there was neither a King,
nor any considerable person, who commanded in chief, but defended only by some
pilfering Raskals, should be able to maintain it self against two Assaults, and
kill a great number of his men: But notwithstanding, he resolves either to
carry the place, or perish in the attempt. Thus the Tartars by their firm
resolution were always victorious; and the Chinese were ever overcome,
because they were neither steadfast nor constant in the management of their
Enterprises.

The Viceroy assaults it the third time, and now he did it with all the might
and force he and his men were capable of. The Corsairs did but weakly defend
themselves; for the greatest part were already thinking of making their
Retreat. At last the Tartars enter the Town, which they did most horribly
desolate: They thought it not sufficient to sack and pillage it according to
their usual custom, unless they massacred likewise all sorts of people they
found therein, as well the Inhabitants as the Corsairs, who had entered the
Town, and those whom they had compelled in by force. There was an innumerable
multitude slain in that place; but the General did not think himself
sufficiently avenged by the ruin of that City; but that he might fully
discharge his Fury and Rage, he pillaged and ruined ten other neighboring
Towns, though they had not at all assisted or contributed to the Rebellion of
this place.

The spoil and plunder of this Town was very rich; for several who expected, it
should have defended it self better, had brought all their Wealth thither. The
Tartars herewith enriched themselves, and likewise seized upon the Pirates
Ships: They preserved the best, with which they increased their Fleet, and
burnt all the rest, which were very many in number.

The barbarous Cruelties which th^^ Victors executed even upon them who gave
them no provocation, served only to raise them up new Enemies, who saw they had
as good die as suffer more misery. This is the third time that the
Neighborhood of Xunte had been successively pillaged by the Tartars and
Corsairs. And it is certain, that if the Emperor had been made acquainted with
all these Oppressions of the people, he would have chastised the General, that
he kept no better order; but this Commander had such interest at the Court,
that the Emperor was only informed what Towns he had taken, knew not that he
had ruined and desolated the Country; and therefore, the General, instead of
hearing that he was complained of there, saw he was the more considered, as if
thereby he had merited much, and done his Prince good Service. This gained
credit to the report that the General was rather a counterfeit Chinese, than a
natural Tartar; for this manner of making war, and enhancing the fame of his
Victori^^s, was more like a Chinese, than a true Tartar.

CHAP. XVII. The Corsairs trouble and perplex the General. They possess
themselves of the City Tunquam, and maintain it against several Assaults. They
deliver it up upon composition. The Cruelty of the Generals Soldiers.
THE Corsairs hereafter never left the General in quiet: It was in vain to hope
to conquer them; for his abominable Cruelties made them ever return both more
potent, and more numerous; for one Bark which he destroyed, there returned
thirty, and for one man, a hundred or two. These are the very Terms of the
Relation, which remarks that the Sea and Rivers were covered with ships and
men, as if it had rained armed men from Heaven. Some fled to the Pirates for
refuge, not being able to be longer spectators of the Cruelties which were
exercised upon their Contrymen; others came to avenge, if they could, the
death of their Fathers, their Children, and other near Relations, the loss of
their Estates, and the honor of their Wives, Daughters, or Sisters. And
innumerable other persons came in to them, who knew not how to put a more
acceptable period to their burdensome Lives, and consolated themselves, that
they should there meet with a death more desirable, or a life less miserable:
They hoped at least whilst they were at Sea, they should be at liberty for some
time to take breath; and they did not despair, but they should be able to do
some eminent exploit, whereby at last they might ave^^ge themselves on the
Tartars.

The Viceroy likewise seemed, as if he designed to give these miserable people
no respite. He presently put out to Sea, as if he was resolved not to let one
escape him; and being informed that they were betwixt Lautao, which is a little
Isle just opposite to M^^cao, and the City of Anslan, in one week he thrice
went into this Road in search of them; but still returned without meeting them.
It is believed, he had no great mind to meet with them, though he went to seek
them out. This is a Stratagem often practiced by Politicians. There was a great
report that the Pirates were extraordinary powerful, that they had a well
regulated Army, that their Vessels were filled with desperate men, who were
resolved either to conquer or perish, after they had sold their Lives at a dear
rate; therefore the Viceroy, not thinking it would be for his advantage to have
such a rencounter, he returned thrice without finding them, or rather without
seeking for what he had no mind to meet wit.

Once at last, when he was just ready to enter into the City of Canton, he had
intelligence that the Corsairs had possessed themselves of a place distant some
two days journey from that City. Then being necessitated to put out to Sea, he
returned at that very instant, with a great many Vessels and Men, and presented
himself before that Town: There he found that the Alarm which had been given
him, was false; therefore he returned highly displeased (as he said) that he
had found no Enemy to fight with; but perhaps he was not so much afflicted at
it, as he pretended: This was only the subtilty of the man, who was willing to
disguise his fear.

The Number and Forces of the Pirates increased daily, and the Relation says,
that they were almost as innumerable as the Sand of the Sea. These terrible
Armies did incessantly rove about, and infest all parts of the Province of
Canton, and gave the Viceroy more business than he desired. Now he is not so
hot and resolute as he was before: He learnt by experience that he must be
necessitated to change his conduct; to which he was inclined by the advice of
the Viceroy in Civil Affairs, who was a prudent person, and understood better
than he to deal with the Pirates. These two Chiefs concluded that it would be
more available, to be less fierce and hot, and more circumspect and prudent in
the manageing of the War. They placed Guards at the Gates of all the Towns in
the Province, where there were none before; there they examined all who came in
or went out; for they knew that the Corsairs had Intelligence in all the Towns,
and that their Confederates were busily employed in hatching some great
Conspiracy. Thus the Tartars, who before made a mock at all the Chinese could
do, were not now so confident and courageous as they had been. They had reason
not to be so; for the League and Combination of these Corsairs was like a
terrible Hydra, which instead of seven heads, had more than seven hundred
thousand.

They judged it likewise convenient, to make a new renumeration of people in
all the Towns; but especially in Canton, that they might see if there was more
or fewer than in their first Registers. After which, they made an Order that no
Master of a Family should retain any more Domestics than what they should
allow of, and whose Names were registered, and these were no more than were
precisely necessary for each Family.

This War of the Pirates had brought most miserable calamities upon the whole
Country, in which the Tartars, as well as others, had their share; for the
Land lay waste and uncultivated, and there was none in the Country, who durst
venture to carry that small Crop they had into the Towns; for let them go which
way they would, they could not avoid meeting either with the Tartars by Land,
or the Pirates by Water. The Contrymen therefore would not carry any
provisions into the City, which occasioned great want and scarcity there. The
Soldiers, by the General's permission, were scattered and dispersed all over
the Country, and seized upon all the provisions they could meet with. This
completed the ruin of that Province. And if at any time some of the Country
people to preserve any thing from those which persecuted them at home, run the
hazard to carry it into the Towns, they were no sooner entered, having escaped
all the dangers of the ways, but they were seized upon to row in the Navy; and
many times before they could reach the City, the Corsairs had apprehended them
upon the same account; for on both sides there was a prodigious number of
Vessels, which both sailed and rowed; and for this they stood in need of a
great number of men to tug at the Oars.

These Outrages could not be committed without very frequent Murders and
Massacres throughout the whole Country; and these were so numerous, that the
description of the desolation of this Province, would require a whole History.
The putrid bodies did so infect the Air, that it occasioned a cruel Plague.
Thus these miserable people were afflicted with War, Pestilence and Famine; all
these calamities came upon them at the same time, each of which would have been
sufficient to have ruined this once flourishing Province, so that the richest,
plentifullest, and most delicious of all the Provinces in China, lay most
dismally ruined, in comparison of what it was formerly, and so it remains to
this very day; and it is said all this mischief arose only from the ill conduct
of the General; for this rash man, by his cruelty drove the people to despair;
and he was not only content to give an ill example, but he gave such license to
his Soldiers, that thereupon they flew out into the height of wickedness, and
committed the most enormous Villainies. I remarked before that he was called
L^^, who first began the destruction of that vast Empire, and reduced the
Emperor Zunchin, out of despair, to destroy himself. The word Ly from
henceforth will be remarkable in China, for having been the name of two such
eminent Tyrants; yet the Chinese pretend, that the name of Ly, from the two
Letters of which it is compo^^ed* signifies High Endowments of Wit and Virtue.
But the Viceroy had no better a repute for having had so fine a Name: And it
might have been said to him, as a Soldier once said to Alexander, that he
should either change his Name, or change his Actions.

This Commander, who some few days before was returned so discontent, that he
had neither met by Sea nor Land any Enemy to fight with, had quickly occasion
to come out of his ill humor; for he received News that that the Corsairs had
Landed at a place distant some two days journey from Canton, and had made
themselves Masters of the City of Tunquam. This was a place the best fortified
and furnished with provisions of any in the whole Province. He was likewise
informed, that they had begun new Works, and were putting themselves in such a
posture of defense, that they might annoy whosoever made any Attempt against
them, and receive little damage within their Walls. The Chinese are very
ingenious, and will take pains: And having observed that the Tartars in all
their Assaults, came exposed to all d^^ngers, and took no care to cast up Works
to shelter them from the Cannon-shot; they made their Fortifications in that
manner, that their Enemie^^ should have no great desire to approach very near
them: they built their Walls with Battlements, and pierced them ^^hrough with
diverse Loopholes like the Port-holes in ships, for the Great Guns to play
through. In some places of the Wall they cut down Sl^^s from the top to the
bottom, and built up several Scaffolds, upon which they placed several Tire of
great Guns, just as in a man of War.

The Viceroy no sooner received this Information, but he put out to Sea with a
very potent Fleet. The number of his Vessels is not known; but promising
himself that he should quickly put a period to the War, he came to that intent
with his greatest force. He presented himself before the City of Tunquam, and
Landed his men, resolving presently to fall on; but neither he, nor his
Sould^^ers, who were to give the Assault, were well pleased to see so many Tire
of great Guns so well Manned, and so many Gunners standing just ready to give
fire upon them; but not being accustomed to show any fear, and having ever made
his brags that he would raise Mountains where before there were Valleys, he was
not now backwards, with his usual animosity, to give the Signal for the
Assault. The Tartars fell on very resolutely; but they were no sooner
approached near the Wall, but they perceived it was the stronger and better
fortified, by the more Holes it had in it. Now all the Artillery played against
them, and made a most horrible Massacre amongst the Assailants, who were come
up to the very mouth of the Cannon, and did not believe they were prepared to
give them such another Discharge; when not leaving them time to consider how to
make good their Retreat out of all these Crannies, there showered amongst them
such a storm of Bullets and Arrows, that the Ditch was presently filled up with
dead and wounded men, and those within the Town received no damage.

The Viceroy was so obstinate, that during the first days he lay before
Tunquam, he gave several Assaults to it; but thereby he only lost both his
Time, Credit and men. And though he attempted it with all his might, he could
not lodge himself upon any part of the Rampart: He had now need of all his good
fortune to enhearten him; for he was mad and enraged, he knew not either what
measure or resolution to take: He saw he advanced but little either by strength
or Stratagem; and he knew he should lose both his Reputation and dignity, if he
did not with honor succeed in this Enterprise. He began now more calmly than
was usual with him, to take a prospect of his Affairs. He perceived he had lost
many of his best Soldiers, and that those which he had left were neither
numerous nor valiant enough to carry the Town; he sent therefore to demand
recruit from the Viceroy of Civil Affairs, and some great Guns to batter and
make a Breach in the Wall, with some Canoneers of Europe.

These Canoneers which the Viceroy sent for, were eight or ten men of Europe,
who some few years before went from the City of M^^c^^o, to serve the Chinese
against the Tartars. After, when they saw in what a low condition the Chinese
affairs were, and not knowing what to do in the remo^^est parts of that Empire,
being more than twelve hundred Miles distant from Macao, they resolve to take
employment under the Tartars: And they did such eminent Service, that they were
highly esteemed of by all that Nation. It is very remarkable, that though the
Tartars knew that they went from Macao to serve the Chinese, yet for all this,
they did no injury to the Portuguezes. They considered that so few persons
ought not to make them think that the whole Nation had declared against them,
but that these were Soldiers of Fortune, and only such, as for their
particular advancement, had cast themselves into the Chinese Army. It happened
also that these Canoneers discoursing with the Tartars of the state and
condition of Macao, the Tartars expressed a great affection for the
Portuguezes, and for all the Europeans in general; and having after gained
great repute with the Tartars, by the great Services they did them, they were
thereby enabled to do, and did several good Offices to the Inhabitants of Macao.

The Viceroy in Civil Affairs received the Letter from his Colleague in the
Evening, and the very next Morning he dispatched away a considerable Supply of
both Soldiers, Gunners, Artillery, Ammunition, and all other provisions; and
this he did with that diligence, that the difficulty of having Ships for their
transportation, and necessary stores so soon in a readiness, did not retard
them. These Recruits must be sent by Sea, and therefore they ought to be strong
enough, not to be stopped by any Squadrons of the Corsairs, should they meet
with any in their passage: With this expedition do Recruits march in Tartary,
where they are not so long a making ready as in Spain, where they seldom
arri^^e at the place to which they are designed, till it be delivered up, or
too late to execute the Enterprise they go upon. The disadvantages which have
sometimes ac^^rewed to Spain, from their wasting too much time in their
Deliberations, may give just occasion to say, That their too slow resolutions
ha^^e only served to expose them to the derision of those other Nations whom
they know to be the most jealous of their Glory and Grandeur.

The Supplies were no sooner arrived, but the General caused several strong
Batteries to be raised, with which he incessantly battered the Walls, and made
a terrible breach. The great Guns from the Town played as briskly* After this,
the Tartars gave a new Assault, and now the besieged did not only drive them
from their Walls, but resolutely sallying out against them, they routed and
pursued them to their Ships* into which, that they might get, they were forced
to go up to their very Necks in water.

Now the Chinese had the satisfaction to deride the Tartars: These invincible
Victors (say they) are now d^^feated, and forced to run away to their Ships.
The Conquerors of China have the Courage to turn their Backs to the Chinese.

Thus they scoffed at the Viceroy; and for all his eagerness to avenge himself
quickly, he was forced to take it patiently now; but he lost no time; for
as soon as he had reproved his Soldiers for running away so cowardly, he
encouraged and animated them, that they would with all possible expedition wipe
off this dishonor to their Nation. He Landed again, and at the the very
instant gave order to his Gunners to take such care in traversing their Guns,
that they might answer his expectation. His Orders were executed with the
success he desired; for the Cannons were pointed with that exactness, that in a
short time they dismounted several pieces of the besieged's Artillery; and they
fired incessantly till they disenabled all the rest.

Now the Corsairs began to sink in their Courage; and this made the General
take heart, and hope well: But y^^t he wished they would come to some
composition; for having experienced the besieged to be both valiant and skilful
Soldiers, he did not desire to drive them into a desperate condition. The
Pirates, who had now almost spent their Powder, did as earnestly desire to
capitulate, and to gain fair Terms; and they themselves sent to the Viceroy, to
offer to deliver the place up to him, to put what Garrison and Governor he
pleased into it; only upon this condition, that neither he, nor the rest of his
Soldiers would come into the Town. The General having engaged his whole
Reputation upon the success of this Enterprise, was ambitious of nothing more
than to come off with honor; and therefore received the Proposals very
joyfully. He appointed presently what Garrison and Tartar-Governour should
remain in that place, and took order for their entrance the next day; but the
Pirates were not satisfied that they might rely upon the General's word, and
fearing lest he should take some pretext or other to revenge himself on them
for their resistance, they resolved to make their escape that night: All in the
Town who were able to carry Arms, followed them, and there only remained in
Tunquam Women, Old men and Children, and such persons who were unfit for War.

The Tartar expected the next Morning the Keys of the Town should have been
brought him, that the Garrison he designed to place there, might march in; but
the Gates were already open, and the Town abandoned to his Discretion. He
entered into the Town, and showed no violence or ill usage to any person he
found there. It was not his nature to be so mild, especially after he had been
so incensed as he had been before this place; and therefore lest he should
forget his own natural disposition, he failed not to discharge some part of
Choler upon the Neighboring Towns and Villages, which he sacked and pillaged.
He committed such horrible Cruelties, that thereby he more than ever
exasperated the whole Province against him. One of these Villages stood upon
its defense; but at last, upon the engagement that they should receive no
prejudice, they surrendered themselves; but the Soldiers which marched into it,
did most treacherously violate the parole which had been given them: They began
to injure and abuse the poor Countrymen, at which they were so enraged, to see
that the promise which had been made them, was not observed, that they took up
their Arms, and fell on upon the Tartars; and in their fury they killed diverse,
and routed the rest, who made their retreat with what plunder they could carry
away, to a Hill not far distant. The General sent his men a recruit, that they
might entirely subdue the poor Countrymen; but they had made their escape to a
place where they could receive but little damage. The Soldiers dispersed
themselves all over the adjacent Towns, and pillaged and massacred the
miserable people, who had already submitted themselves, as if they had been
declared Enemies, or rebellious Subjects. The Viceroy saw all this Disorder,
and contented himself to say, he had no Money to pay his Army, and therefore
was necessitated, for their subsistence, to let them do so. Therefore it was to
no purpose for those who suffered, to make their Complaint. Rome burnt, and
Nero in the mean time diverted himself with the Cries of the miserable
Inhabitants.

CHAP. XVIII. A Discourse of the Viceroy in Civil Affairs, upon the Cruelty of
his Colleague. The Corsairs still perplex the Tartars. The Chinese improve
themselves in the Art of War. Th^^ Northern Chinese are of a different Genius
from the Southern.
THE Viceroy in Civil Affairs, who knew what horrible Mischief th^^ Soldiers
did, was as much concerned at it as the Chinese; but it was not in his power
to remedy it. He saw plainly that these violent actions did not do so much hurt
to the Chines^^s, as they prejudiced the Affairs of the Tartars. Once he opened
his heart to Father Sambiase, Superior to the Jesuits at Canton; to whom he
spoke in these Terms;

The Rebel Cham (this was the chief of the Corsairs, who had the same Name with
one of the firs^^ Tyrants, but was not the same person. The Chinese took great
notice of the conformity of the Names of those persons who began, and of those
who continued the desolation of that Empire; for the Tartarian General was
called Ly, and the chief of the Corsairs, Cham;) The Rebel Cham (therefore said
the Viceroy) commands the Army of the Robbers by Sea, and the General Ly the
^^obbers by Land. The one does as much mischief as the other; the Province is
ruined, and all places therein are utterly desolated; and I cannot imagine what
will become of either it or us: All places revolt and conspire against us, and
they have reason to do so: For my own part, I shall endeavor to justly acquit
m^^ self in that Office in which the Emperor, my Master, is pleased I should
serve him. I will serve him faithfully ^^o the loss of my life, rather than
fail in discharging my Duty: I know I shall perish in the end; but if so, that
my death cannot be available to reduce Affairs into better order, you shall see
that after my Life is taken away, and my Colleague Ly shall have the sole
disposal of the Province, what care he will then take for the subsistence of
the Soldiers, and preservation of the People.

This Declaration the Viceroy in Civil Affairs made of his displeasure to see
how things were governed; but he had done better, had he opened his mind to the
King his Master, who was neither locked up so close, nor so difficult of access
as the Chinese Kings used to be. And it may be he did write; but those Letters
which the General sent to the Court were more prevalent, and biased all
Affairs contrary to the Viceroy in Civil Affairs. The General pretended he was
necessitated to use Rigor, but he did it only toward the Rebellious Corsairs,
and not to the People, which had submitted themselves: And the Court being
tired out with this obstinate War of the Corsairs, they did not believe this
Rigor was prejudicial; but on the contrary, that nothing could have been of
greater advantage than the employing so inflexible and fiery a man as the
General was. To put this gloss on things, was the ready way to increase the
Mischief* and make the Cure hopeless. Those who oppress others, never want
persons to applaud them; and those who are oppressed, never find any to protect
them: We are wrongfully informed of the truth of things, either because we will
not give ear to it, or else because it is wrongfully represented to us. Deceit
and Falsehood marches in triumph in all places, that being generally managed
more dexterously and subtly, and listened to by most persons with more
pleasure. Thus States and Nations are often disturbed, nay, ruined, and it
cannot be discerned, that it was, or was not occasioned by the fault of the
Prince who governed.

The General could not yet bring the War with the Corsairs to a period. They
continually so alarmed him; that he knew not which way to turn himself* but
tormented him so, that it was able to have distracted him; sometimes they came
in search of him up to the very Gates of Canton; and after they had pillaged
and plundered all the night, the next morning they were all vanished: Their
Vessels being lighter, they had the boldness to surround his Ships, and assault
them, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other. They alarmed him one
place, whilst they were executing their Project in another. And sometimes he
was scarce returned from the Chase of them, but they returned to the same place
from whence he had expelled them; for that they might the better take their
advantages, they had placed very trusty Spies in all places. Thus they always
succeeded in some part of their Enterprise, whilst the General was gulled and
abused, in being persuaded to go in search of them where they never were. This
was a very pleasing divertisement to this fierce Fellow, who thought to carry
all things by his turbulent and capricious humor. There were in this province
some people who were ever so unfortunate as to be on the wrong side; these bore
the brunt of the fury of both sides. Thus all those great and gallant Cities
all along the Coast, have been ruined, their Buildings reduced into a heap of
Rubbish, and are become the deplorable remains of desolation and destruction:
They were deserted and abandoned by their Inhabitants, the greatest part of
which, were either killed or murdered, and the rest chose to forsake all, and
retire themselves for their security, up higher into the Country.

The Tartars themselves suffered in part by that mischief which they themselves
had occasioned; for besides the Affront and Vexation to see the Corsairs for
their pleasure, thus abuse and torment them, they stood oftentimes in need of
Necessaries. They thought there would never be an end of imbarquing
continually, which was to them a new exercise, to which they were not very well
accustomed. The General in one of these Incursions happened to seize upon a
very eminent Pyrate, who was of great repute for his Valor: He took him by
surprise, and the cowardliness of his Followers, who then deserted him* and
brought him to Canton, and in the open place there, shot him to death with
Arrows. This was no great loss to the Corsairs, who had persons enough as
valiant as he whom the General had now put to death; and the Tartars no more
advanced their interest thereby, than he did, who thought to diminish the Sea,
by taking a drop of Water out of it.

The General did not stay in Canton above four and twenty hours after he had
taken this Corsair, before he put to Sea again. He was no sooner aboard, but he
commanded to set Sail without any other Declaration what Course he would steer.
He did thus several times, that the Pirates Spies might not discover his
Designs; and sometimes, not believing he could be precautious enough, he took
the Helm himself, and ordered his Navy to follow him whatever Course he should
steer. He was most certainly a person highly endowed with all the qualities
befitting a Soldier, was indefatigable, and took no rest: But his violent and
bloody Actions often lost him more than he gained by his laborious Toil. And it
is manifest, that in the late Combats, the Tartars were often worsted, and the
General himself beaten and defeated, which did both embolden the Pirates, and
increase both their number and Forces. It is likewise reported, that in this
Province they had possessed themselves of several Villages, Towns, and Cities,
which before had submitted to the Tartars, and that the General could not gain
any considerable advantage against them either by Sea or Land, though he
assaulted them with a very strong Army of both Horse and Foot.

By this it is credible, that had the Chinese been trained up in Martial
Discipline, they might have made as good Soldiers as other Nations. They are
generally very strong and vigorous, active and Industrious, will undergo Labor
and Toil, love to be employed, and are generally mortal enemies to Idleness,
which is particularly remarked in the Provinces which are adjacent to Tartary,
where they are most commonly engaged in War. This is related by several persons
of Europe, who say, they could never have believed them capable of doing such
extraordinary actions as they have seen them do, had they not been Spectators.
And it is believed, the Tartars would not with so much facility have made
themselves Masters of those Provinces, had they not found the people in
disorder and division, occasioned by the Troubles of a Civil War; where instead
of a Lawful Sovereign to rule over them, several Tyrants had brought a horrible
confusion and disorder over the whole State* in which all persons were divided
into several Factions, by their different Tenants of Loyalty and Rebellion. The
Tartars finding these people so little able to make any resistance, and they
having strengthened their own Forces with diverse Chinese Troops, who sided with
them, under their General Vsangue, from hence it happened that they conquered
those Provinces with greatest facility, which else would have cost them most
Blood and Difficulty.

As for the Chinese in the Southern Provinces, which are more remote from
Tartary, they are soft and effeminate, beyond all the Inhabitants of Asia; and
that which did produce this Effeminacy in them, and was a great cause of the
ruin and destruction of their Empire, and ever will be to all other States,
was the profound Peace and Security in which those Provinces had been so long
involved; for several ages there was no mention of War i^^ all the Relations
and Histories of those Provinces. They were so ignorant of Navigation, that
they only knew what Tempests and Shipwreck signified, by seeing the description
of them in Pictures. This Nation which so little troubled themselves with Arms
and War, passed all their life in indulging their ease and their pleasures.
Vicious Crimes were all their occupation, neither could Ignominy nor Correction
check these Disorders; for they considered nothing but plenty and prosperity in
this Life, having neither a God nor Religion, at least such a one as did not
restrain them from giving themselves wholly to their luxurious passions.

But it is credible it was not so much Peace and Effeminacy, which ruined the
Empire of China, as the little esteem that Nation had of warlike Discipline and
Soldiers. The Chinese valued nothing but Literature and Sciences. Any one who
was accounted a learned man, would have trampled upon twenty of their Captains,
who were obliged to suffer patiently this injurious Affront. There always went
with the General who commanded their Ar^^ies, some Learned Doctor, on whose
direction all things depended* The whole Army obeyed this Learned Mandorin: It
was he that gave out all the Orders, and not the General. They were all
Scholars, and persons eminent for Learning, who composed the two Councils of
War of that State: And they only were admitted who were best able to plead some
Argument in their Law, and not those who knew how to draw up an Army in
Battalia.

The ill Consequences of this manner of governing were foreseen long before.
The Histories which were many years since printed in China, took notice hereof,
and hereupon gave advice of such importance as deserved to have been listened
to: But this advice was little available to those who would not believe the
mischievous consequences hereof till it was too late to remedy them. Military
employments and exercises were so vilified, that most persons scorned to accept
of them. This Profession was totally relinquished to such miserable Wretches as
could get no other employment; and these persons never hoped to be advanced
thereby. They knew too well there was neither Honor nor Profit to be expected
in the Army; for both these were totally engrossed by the Learned men, who
gained higher promotion by the explication of some point in their Law, than by
gaining a great Battle; so that those who came to have any employment in their
Army, were persons of little worth: Those who were, out of anger to see
themselves thus unworthily dealt with by those, whose employments they judged
of far less importance, quickly deserted the Service, and quitted their
employment, without concerning themselves for the interest of either their
Prince or Country. Nay, it is well known that some Generals have declared,
they had rather assault a Fort in Tartary, than to go and present any Memorial
to the Emperor of China's Court; and that they more dreaded to appear before
one of their Mandorins, than to be in the midst of an Ambuscade of their
Enemies.

It cannot be denied, but that the destruction of the Empire of China arose
from hence. The Tartars have several times declared it: And for this reason,
as soon as they were possessed of the State of China, they instantly entered into
a Method of Government just opposite: It is not, but that they knew that each
of the Extremes were faulty, but that they might at last fix themselves in the
true Mean, they judged it necessary to pass from one Extreme to the other,
which the Chinese likewise did; who from so ill Soldiers as they were at
first, by their effeminateness, and of so little esteem for any Military
Achievements, became at last to be all Soldiers and Warriors. And those who
would not submit, did so totally relinquish their Effeminacy, that all their
delight was now in War and Arms. They thought that was only to be accounted
Honor and Glory, which was acquired by gallant and great Exploits. The
Chinese, though late, manifested, that naturally they wanted neither courage,
dexterity, nor ability to be excellent Soldiers. And in the last Engagements
they had with the Tartars, the Relations report that they vilified and despised
their Bows and Arrows, and relied more upon the use of their Muskets and
FireArms, which charged and discharged very readily, and handled their Pikes
and Halberds most advantageously, and with all this they were well versed in
the Art of Artillery; but this was the Misfortune of the Chinese, that they
did not sooner put themselves in a condition to have given their Enemies some
considerable Defeat.

They killed and slew wherever they came, and failed not to fame abroad, and
pursue the least advantage they gained in the Late War. The Tartars likewise
did their utmost endeavor to support the reputation of their Arms: But Fame is
too talkative to make them conceal the Actions of the Chinese. The Inhabitants
of those Towns which had submitted, from whence the Intelligence of all that
passed, came, did not move at all; but were struck with amazement and silence,
which gave occasion to many to doubt whether it was fear or hope whick kept
them in such suspense. They saw some little glimmering hope of Liberty, but
they saw great occasion to make them apprehensive lest the Corsairs should
advance higher up into the Country; for wherever they came, they drew after
them the Tartars, and with them all the Afflictions and Calamities which had
desolated and depopulated those Towns which bordered upon the Sea.

The Viceroy Ly was not satisfied to see that his Affairs did not succeed
according to his wish. He did his utmost endeavor to prevent the increase of
the Mischief; but the Pirates were so numerous, and so dispersed in all parts,
that he could not be with them in all places; neither could he raise as many
Forces as were requisite; for he saw that at every Engagement, he had need of a
complete Army: Therefore he did all that lay in his power to keep them as far
distant from Canton as he could, that thereby he might still remain Master of
the Sea. He happened once to have advice, that the Corsairs had taken a place
very near that City; he instantly went toward them with a Navy of a hundred
and seventy Ships: And according to his usual custom, he threatened to die the
Sea and Land with the Blood of the Corsairs. But the Effects of this great
Choler fell only upon some miserable wretches, who little thought they had done
any thing to have exasperated him against them. The Corsairs having notice that
he was coming toward them, sacked and abandoned the place. This was all the
diversion they designed at this time to give the Conqueror, who presently
poured out all his fury upon this unfortunate place; which he reduced to Ashes,
that it might never serve again for a retreating place to the Pirates.

CHAP. XIX. The Corsairs take a little Fort near Canton, having engaged part of
the Garrison to side with them. The Viceroy in Military Affairs discovers a new
Plot in another Fort. The manner how he punished the Traitors.
THE Corsairs after they had been driven from the Neighborhood of Canton, left
this City in quiet for some time; but not the General Ly, whom they kept in
continual exercise on one side or other. One day, when he was absent, being in
pursuit of some of their Squadrons, others of them returned presently to
Canton: The fourth of August, 1647. in the Evening, seventy of their Barks came
and cast Anchor at the foot of the Wall of one of the Bulwarks of the City.
They had already secured to their party some of the Guard which kept the Fort.
And therefore they were not discovered till Sunrise, at which time several of
the Great Guns were discharged against them from the Fort. The Traitors within
had persuaded the other Soldiers that they were the Kings Ships, which came
from pursuing the Corsairs, and therefore no body took the Alarm sooner. But
the Pirates, who stormed the Fort at several plac^^s at the same time, quickly
made themselves Masters of it. The greatest part of those who kept it,
presently sided with the Victors, and quit the Tartarian Habit, and put on a
Coat edged with yellow, and a high crowned Bonnet edged so likewise, which is
the usual Head-covering of the Chinese Soldiers. The rest, who would not do
so, were all put to the Sword. There was in this Fort great store of Artillery,
and other Arms, with Powder and all sort of Ammunition. The Pirates took some
part of the smallest pieces to furnish their Ships with, and flung the rest
into the River. As for the greater Pieces, which they could not so easily
remove, they disabled them from ever doing them any hurt. This Fort could not
be very near the Town; for the noise of the Cannon was not heard thither, and
it was not known that it had been assaulted till eight of the Clock the next
morning, when a Boy who had made his escape, brought the first News thereof.

The Viceroy in Civil Affairs, who then commanded in Canton, could not credit
the surprizal of that place, till he was better informed by those he sent
thither to that intent. They presently brought him back word, that the Corsairs
had made themselves Masters of the place, and that they were endeavoring, with
the loss of no time, to make it very tenable: The Viceroy instantly marched out
against it, with a very numerous Army of both Horse and Foot, fully resolving
to regain that Post. He stormed it several times, and in all the assaults which
were made by both sides, fought very resolutely: Great Numbers were slain upon
the place, but still most on the Tartars side, who came on without taking any
care to shelter themselves. At last the Tartars are obliged to retreat without
obtaining the least advantage. And it is manifest, though the Re^^ation is
silent herein, that after the Pirates abandoned the Fort, as they had already
done in several other places, that they might betake themselves again to the
Sea, they showed they had no mind to keep it, when they took out part of the
Artillery, and disabled the rest. Had they not retreated already, the General,
who was now returned to Canton with his Army, would not have failed to have
employed all this Forces to dislodge them from that Post. But though he
returned very triumphantly, it does not appear he did any eminent exploit in
those parts.

The Viceroy in Civil Affairs stood very diligently upon his Guard, whilst he
saw the Enemy so near him; and mistrusting that the Pirates might hold
intelligence in the City, as they really did, he was so fortunate, as to
apprehend a Spy, who was a Servant to the General o^^ the Corsairs; he put him
to the Torture, where he confessed that there was really a Conspiracy against
the Tartars, and the chief Manager thereof was the great Calao: This was one of
the highest dignities in Chi^^a, and superior to a Viceroy. This Calao was
called Chim, and was aboard one of those Vessels which had surprised the Fort,
where he staid expecting a numerous Supply of Soldiers, who had all by an Oath
obliged themselves either to perish in the Attempt, or restore China to its
pristine Liberty.

From henceforwards the Viceroy in Civil Affairs, and all the other Magistrates
were very cautiously watchful, lest they should be surprised; for this effect,
he appointed such Captains to command the Guard at all the Gates, of whose
fidelity he was most secure. And he himself undertook the guard of the
p^^incipal Gate of the City, and went night and day thorough the City, to visit
all the other Guards, exhorting them both by his words and example to watch
over their Enemies, who slept not. He commanded out several other Captains with
their choicest Soldiers in their Companies to guard those Posts and Places
from whence he foresaw the enemy might likeliest attempt the Town.

The indefatigable diligence of the Governor, and the deposition of the Spy,
occasioned other Chinese to be apprehended, who were suspected to be Accomplices
in the Conspiracy. As Soon as these were put to the Torture, they presently
avowed that all that the Spy had averred was true; that really they had
conspired to deliver up the City to the Corsairs; that the Fort which they had
lately seized upon, was delivered up to them by the treachery of those who kept
it; that the like would happen at a Fort near that, where two hundred Soldiers
of the Garrison were contriving to let in the Chinese. All these commotions did
not at all disturb the Viceroy, but by his prudence he mastered all. It is
certain, that the ability of this man prevented more Mischief, and preserved
the Tartars more Towns than the General with all his Valor could conquer. And
there is not less ability requisite to retain and preserve what we are
possessed of, than there was at first to acquire it.

The Governor of Canton being informed that there was a Plot laid in that
other Fort, went thither with all diligence; but without showing that he knew
any thing: He entered with a Countenance seeming to be fully satisfied; and then
he declared to the Soldiers, that because the present urgency of Affairs
obliged them to keep such strict Guard, because the Enemy was so near, he
would, to encourage them, gratify them with an Augmentation of their
Assignment, and increase their Pay; and that therefore they should come one
after another to be entered in the Register, and received their Pay. They went
the more readily, imagining their Treason was not discovered, because the
Viceroy, who might have seized them if he pleased, bestowed this Liberality
amongst them, to engage them, as they thought, to serve him the more
faithfully: And by his Aspect and manner of speaking to them, they could not
collect any thing which might give them the least occasion to suspect him. They
entered by one Gate, at which they received part of their Pay, and they went out
at another where they were paid for their Treachery. The Viceroy had placed at
the last Gate his greatest Confidents, and those whom he had entrusted with his
secret Designs, and such as he knew would resolutely execute the Order he gave
them; so that as fast as the Traitors came to this Gate, they met with those
who stabbed them, and cut their Throats. And this Execution was managed so
subtly, that the two hundred Conspirators, who should have delivered up the
Fort, all lost their Lives in such a manner that they did not perceive the
Misfortune of their Companions. The Guard of this Fort was entrusted to new
Officers and Soldiers, who were both more numerous, and such as the Viceroy
was more secure of their Fidelity. This was not ill-contriv'd for a Gown-man;
and if all the Lawyers of China had been as able as he was, perhaps the
Emperor and the Empire had not been lost so soon.

It was quickly known how necessary it was that the Viceroy should have
employed all the diligence and resolution which he made use of in this
Expedition; for scarce had he concluded the punishment of the Traitors, but but
besides the sixty Vessels which lay before the Forth first mentioned, there was
seen under sail a new Navy of more than two hundred Ships. These were they to
whom the Conspirators should have delivered up the place. As Soon as they
perceived that they could do nothing, they came enraged up to the very City,
and threatened to put all to the Fire and Sword, and leave no man alive. The
Tartars were well prepared to receive them, and made up to them as soon as they
were Landed. They instantly engaged, and the Encounter was managed with great
animosity on both sides. The Tartars at last gain the advantage, and the
Assailants retreat, but not far from the Town, only out of the reach of
Cannon-shot; there they lodged themselves, and kept the Town besieged on that
side next the Water. This was the greatest mischief they could then do the
Cantoners; for being Masters of the River, they put a stop to all their
Provisions, which they could receive no other way.

The Viceroy, who was now surrounded with secret and declared Enemies, and at
that time when the General was absent with all the best Soldiers in the Army,
thought himself now necessitated to employ all his Abilities to maintain and
defend himself; for this effect, he thought he must secure the Brother and
Cozen of the great Calao, who was the Head of the Conspirators: And therefore
he seizes upon, and imprisons them, and obliges them to write to the great
Calao, that if he did not within three days retreat from before the Town, they
were condemned to lose their Heads. He summoned likewise all the ancient
Mandorins to appear before him, whom he enjoined to stay near his person* that
he might employ their Credit, and that he might by all ways imaginable
endeavor to prevail with the Calao and the Rebels to retreat and leave the
Town in peace and quiet. If the Viceroy only threatened them that he might
affright them, he was not blameable; but if he intended to execute his Menaces,
doubtless he was both unreasonable and unjust. He exacted that from the
Prisoners which lay not in their power to accomplish, and he condemned them to
death though they were innocent. No Law commands an Impossibility; and can it
be a crime not to do it? It was not in the Prisoners power to do what the
Governor desired. The Calao, and the other Conspirators knew, that if they
retreated, they exposed both their own Lives, and the Lives of all their
Relations to more eminent danger; and therefore they thought they ought not to
abandon their Enterprise: This procedure of the Viceroy struck a great terror
all over the City, and all the Inhabitants staid very silently within doors,
expecting what the Issue would be of all these Treasons.

CHAP. XX. An Allarm in Canton at the Approach of the Corsairs. The
Consternation of the Inhabitants. The General arrives, and routs the Besiegers.
The Inquisition after the Conspirators, and their punishment. The resolution of
a Chinese Captain, his Death and Praise.
THE Viceroy in Civil Affairs gained nothing by his Rigor and Severity, by
ceasing to carry himself with moderation and equity, and making use of those
violent courses which he had so often condemned in his Colleague; he only
increased the number and strength of his enemies; for he had scarce begun his
violence, but he saw a much greater number of the Barks and Vessels of the
Pirates come thundering against him, instead of sixty which came before the
first Fort, and two hundred which approached near the other. There might now be
counted a thousand Vessels either before or near the Town. And all this
numerous Army, by the continual discharge of their Artillery, made such a
terrible Thunder, that all the Houses in Canton seemed ready to be shaken in
pieces. The Bells rung, the Drums beat, and the Air resounded, and all the
Elements in general seemed to be in a commotion, and to hold some part in this
terrible Consort. But the better to imagine the horror of all this jangling
noise, let us reflect upon the noise of the Cannon in some Merchants, or other
ships, when they celebrate any Festival, and then consider what was the thunder
of all the great Guns in above a thousand Vessels, which fired incessantly,
what was the clashing of Arms, and other warlike Instruments in two potent
Armies, which contended who should strike the greatest terror into their
enemy; and what a hideous jangling there was of an infinite number of Bells of
different Sounds, some louder, some lower, some sounding hoarse, and some sharp
and shrill, that they deafned the Ears of all the Inhabitants and Neighborhood
of the City.

The Cantoners gave now their City for lost; and the fright into which the
Pirates put them by their late menaces, made such a horrible impression in
their imagination, that though they were Chinese, and their own Contrymen,
yet they expected no succor but from the Tartars, whom they looked upon as
their Protectors and Avengers. The whole City was in Arms, by the order of the
Viceroy, who issued out a Command, that no person should appear, upon pain of
death, but in the Tartarian Habit; and commanded all his Officers to kill
immediately all they found in the Chinese Habit. He caused all encumbrances to
be removed out of the Streets, that his Horse might freely march without any
hindrance up and down the Streets. The Gates, Bulwarks and Walls were all
covered with Soldiers, who did incessantly discharge their Muskets and
Firearms, that they might make the greater show of Resolution in the face of
their Enemies: But of a sudden they were surprised at the arrival of the
General. He returned conducted by his good Fortune, with his Army whole and
entire, and entered the City with the Sound of Trumpet. He met not with the
Enemy, the greatest part being encamped on the other side of the City; and he
did not perceive them till he was passed by them; for they were retreated into
a place where they were covered by some Hills which hindered the sight of them.

The Corsairs were not less surprised to see the General return with all his
Army at that time, when they believed him so far distant: And being in great
disorder, and so not in a condition to give Battle, they durst neither go up to
him, nor stay for him, though they were the stronger. The first Resolution they
took, which usually is not the most generous, was to run away. Some of their
Vessels began to retreat in disorder, and the others, which thought they must
do so too, followed them with that haste, that they fired not one of their
great Guns against the Viceroy's men, who pursued them, to the incredible
satisfaction of all the Inhabitants of Canton; and now the Cantoners prepared
for triumphal Recreations, and to see the sport of the Bulls, in as great
security as before they were in fear and dread.

The Run-awayes fled with such haste, that they left behind them their greatest
and best Vessels, out of which they withdrew the Soldiers and Seamen, and what
else they could, because these were too heavy and slow to follow the rest. The
Viceroy pursued them with all the Sail he could make, but could not possibly
reach them; for their Vessels were much lighter, and their Rowers more expert,
and in better breath, and did beyond comparion exceed those of the Tartars, who
were poor miserable Countrey-Fellows, compelled to it against their will.

The General, after he had for some time been in chase after them, returned
back again, and then seized upon those Vessels they had left* and entered in
great glory and triumph into the City, where he was received as their
Liberator; and as if he had been sent from Heaven to succor them in this their
urgent necessity. The Viceroy in Civil Affairs, who had likewise delivered them
out of a very intricate danger, went before him, and accompanied him through
all the streets of the City, which they passed through in the midst of a great
Crowd of People, who could never weary themselves with praising and applauding
him. And though it was broad Daylight, yet there were Torches lighted in all
the streets and places through which he passed, and Odors and Perfumes were
burnt in all places, as if some of their Pagods or Idols had been marching
through the Streets. But to what a person do they burn Incense? And what does
not Necessity and Flattery induce miserable people to do?

After all these public Rejoycings and Feastings were over, the Viceroys busy
themselves in searching out the Accomplices in the Conspiracy; which was not
like that of Cataline: For they did not design to oppress, but deliver their
Country; and yet there was very exact and diligent Inquisition made. The
Chinese are very dexterous in concealing and dissembling the Affairs of their
Nation, and speak very sparingly and advisedly of things of the least
importance: And whoever discloses a Secret, is accounted a public enemy, and a
persecutor of his Country. But as soon as they are put to the Torture, the
first pain makes them proclaim all they know: They love themselves too well, to
love their Friends to that degree, as to suffer any pain upon their account.
They do not intend to pay so dear for their Friendship.

Therefore as soon as the first who were apprehended, were put to the Torture,
instantly ^^ll the Conspirators were discovered; some were only privy and
consenting to the Conspiracy; others were Sticklers and Principal^^; but the
Tartars presently cut off the Heads of both the one and the other. This is
their ordinary way of punishing all criminal persons, without making any
distinction of either Crimes or persons; it was sufficient they had all
deserved to die.

After this first Execution, the Tartars looked more narrowly to keep ^^ strict
Guard at the Gates of the City. And ^^o this effect, they appointed new
Captains with Soldiers of approved Fidelity: They used all imaginable
circumspection in shutting and opening the Gates; they altered and changed
often both the time and manner of doing it, that they might the better be
as^^ured they were kept close shut, that thereby they might manifest to all who
should yet entertain any thought of a new Conspiracy, that they were not remiss
in keeping strict Guard. They carefully examined all who went in or out, and
made them discover what either they brought in or carried out.

All these Precautions, and the sudden Execution of the Conspirators, kept all
the people in amazement, and made them that they knew neither what to think or
say. Each of the Inhabitants was in a continual apprehension that some or other
who designed to do them mischief, should publish their Names amongst the
Conspirators; for there needed no other manner of proceeding to make any man
lose his Life. And there is great reason to believe, that several very innocent
persons fared no better than those who were most Criminal. It is a very usual
way of taking revenge in that Country, for those in distress to go and hang
themselves at the Gate of their Enemies, to declare thereby, that they deserved
the like punishment if Justice was done upon them. At this rate some base
spirits have purchased the satisfaction of revenge. All this troublesome time
the Inhabitants of Canton remained prisoners in their own houses: They saw and
heard what h^^d passed, but durst say nothing. They dur^^t scarce open their
Mouths in the most retired and secret places of their Houses. They explained
themselves, by lifting up their shoulders, and such like Gestures; and in so
dismal a time this was the best Expedient to avoid greater mischief.

Although the Chinese, as soon as they are put to the Torture, confess all they
know; yet in all parts of the world there are some extraordinary persons who
may pass for prodigies in regard of other men. And it may well be counted a
very great one, when one single man dares approve himself resolute and generous
amidst a multitude of timorous Cowards. This h^^ppened amongst the great
numbers of those who were declared to be either Principals or Accomplices in
the Conspiracy. A Chinese Captain, not one of the Pirates, or a Sea-Commander,
but a Land-Commander, whom they call a Mandorin of Martial Affairs, was put to
the Torture, and interrogated whether he knew any thing of the Con^^piracy or
Conspirators? He thus replied; That whether he knew any thing or nothing, he
was not a man to make any of his Contrymen lose their Liv^^s by the hands of
their enemies: That the resolution of those of the same Country to unite
themselves together against their Tyrants, to free their Country from
Oppression, ought not to be called a Conspiracy. If this was that which they
called a Conspiracy, he was in truth the chief and principal Conspirator in the
whole Empire, and that he would most willingly lay down his Life to gain
success to that Conspiracy. That this was all he had to say to them; and this
he knew most certainly. These words spoken so resolutely and pertinently, were
not very plaisant to the Tartars, who were not accustomed to receive such
Language from the Chin^^ses: And they having the Law in their own hands, made
this free and resolute Discourse a very criminal Offense. They ordered that he
should be racked with greater Tortures; and scoffingly told him, He should
reserve all his fierceness till he was so tortured upon the Rack, that he
should have need of all his Courage to support the anguish thereof.

He was no more moved at their Scoff^^s than at their Menaces; neither was he a
man to be estimated according to the rate of the other Chinese. Rome her self,
even in the time of her Cato's had few to be compared with him. It was the
misfortune of China, not to have had many such Captains who might have hindered
the Tartars from advancing so far. They put him again to the Torture, which was
extraordinary cruel: He endured it with the same Constancy* without changing
his Opinion, or so much as his Countenance. Several Chinese, who judged how
far they themselves were from being able to give so generous an example, were
troubled to see so much resolution in one of their own Nation. But the Tartars
were enraged to find a Chinese who mocked at them, and all the torments they
could afflict him with. Amidst his greatest tortur^^s, he told them very
boldly, That they tormented themselves in vain: That he was fixed and resolved
to endure the torments, even to death, and that he would b^^ content not only
to die once, but often, if he had as many Lives as he would will^^ngly lay down
for the Service of his Prince and Country: That he should believe them happily
lost, or rather gloriously employed, to pay thereby so lawful, nay so
indispensable a Duty to a valiant man.

The Viceroys caused his Wife and his Son to be brought to him, threatening to
kill them before his face, unless he discovered the Conspirators. They were
desirous to see if that which is most tender to a Father and a Husband, could
mollify his Courage. They thought, though he cared not to lose his own Life,
yet perhaps he might be concerned, that those for whom he ought to have the
greatest affection, should lose theirs upon his account. They had scarce
brought them before him, but casting a fierce and angry look upon his Son and
Wife, in a slighting scornful manner he replied to the Tartars; This is not my
lawful wife which you bring before me; No, my wife was not so unfortunate as to
fall into the hands of the Tartars; I my self at her own request, killed her
some days since, though I had no reason to complain that she had violated her
Honor or mine, and she was fully satisfied in the esteem I had of her conjugal
fidelity; yet seeing amidst your Violences we can be secure of nothing, we
would not longer leave that in hazard, which was dearer to us both than our
Lives. As for this woman, you may do with her what you please; I never lawfully
married her, and my Honor or Dishonor does not depend upon her. I acknowledge
the young man you bring before me, is my Son* but if he had not been taken from
me, he had not staid in the world after my ^^ ^^ife; and therefore I fear so
little to see him die, that on the contrary, you will do me a great pleasure to
dispatch him quickly. Let him di^^, I entreat you: Either do you kill him, or
give me liberty to do it. I shall die content, when I shall know that he does
not live under the Dominion of Tyrants, and be assured that he shall neither
prove a Traitor to his Country, nor no longer live to see those Treacheries
and Oppressions under which she now groans.

But this Father could neither kill his Son himself, nor prevail with his
Executioners to do it. He neither had Weapons, nor liberty to use any; which if
he had, it is probable, he would have performed all he said, and perhaps
something yet more barbarous, with pleasure have torn out the very Heart and
Bowels of his Son, which certainly no person but an Infidel and Idolater could
have been capable of.

What Cato, of whom Antiquity makes such boast, did formerly, comes far short
of what this Chinese Captain would have done. Cato, when he was in Vtica, had
courage enough to kill himself, but not enough to endure to see his Son die; on
the contrary, he sent him to C^^sar, with this Recommendation to the Tyrant;
That as for himself, h^^ had made choice of death, because he could not prevail
with himself to live under a Tyrant, after he had so long lived in a free
Commonwealth. As for his Son, ^^e was young, and might in time accustom
himself to Slavery; and therefore he recommended him to Caesar, desiring him to
receive him into his Protection. But this Chinese Captain, instead of enslaving
his Son, and recommending him to the Tyrant of his Country, as that Roman did;
He was resolved to have killed his with his own hand, that he might not live
under Tyranny or Slavery. It is therefore no Hyperbole, to say tha^^ China in
her last Misfortunes had some extraordinary persons, and greater than Cato
himself.

The Viceroys ought to have showed a greater esteem than they did, of the
Generosity of this Chinese; but either they did not regard i^^, or else he
thereby struck such a terror into them, that he made them dread him: And this
perhaps induced them not to suffer such an Enemy to live longer. They took away
his Son and Wife, to whom it does not appear, that they offered any further
violence; and the next day they put him to death. This was much magnified
amongst the Chinese. Gallant and Heroic Actions are approved by all persons,
even by those of the most timorous and lowest Spirits. But this is the ill,
that those who praise, nay envy Goodness and Virtue, will neither take the
pains to imitate or pursue it.

A little time after the death of this Chinese Captain, it was known t^^at he
was a Commander under the King Guequan, who was retreated into the Mountains,
and had sent several persons throughout all the Cities of China, to animate the
people to declare against the common Enemy, for Liberty. And this Captain was
then employed upon this account, and gave out that Guequan, the Lawful
Successor of the Chinese Emperors, would command and head them. But this
Negotiation had not a more fortunate success, though the ^^aptain by his rare
and unparalleled Loyalty, made it evident, that Guequan, who was certainly one
of the best Princes that was ever Crowned during the late Tar^^arian war, could
not possibly have employed a person of higher Merit and Capacity, to serve him
against his Enemies. His Courage and Valor gained great Renown amongst all his
Contrymen, and his last Adventures gave occasion to discourse of them, and
enlarge upon them in this present History.

CHAP. XXI. The Corsairs possess themselves of several places, and return to
assault Canton. The General routs them at Sea. The Chinese manage their
Affairs ill, and thereby only exasperate the Tartars, and consume the rest of
their Forces.
I Must now draw to a Conclusion the Information I have received concerning the
Atchievments of th^^se Pirates, who did daily afresh toil and torment their
Enemies. The General was almost at his Wits end: This man who seemed so
indefatigable in War, found out those now who gave him sufficient employment
both by Land and Sea. They had now made themselves Masters of three or four the
best places in all the Province of Canton, and there they defended themselves
in spite of all the Tyrants Fury, and all that the Tartars could do to drive
them out. They laid siege to several other Places, and blocked them up very
close. But they were much more powerful at Sea, and highly dissatisfied, that
they had so precipitately and inconsiderately made their last retreat. at that
time when they did both in men and strength overpower the ViceRoy: Therefore
with all possible expedition they rendezvouz'd again, and at the same time gave
a new Allarm to the City of Canton; they cast Anchor at the foot of that Fort
which they had taken a little time before, and there in the presence and sight
of the Viceroy, after their usual custom, they menaced the Inhabitants. The
approach of these Pirates, who were ever apprehended as such dreadful enemies,
put the whole City into a great perplexity and commotion. The Tartars were no
less disturbed to see the Corsairs come thundering upon them from all parts with
such numerous and potent Forces. All the Citizen^^, as at other times, armed
themselves, and continued all night under their Arms, making a most terrible
noise and horrible uproar. The Corsairs made no less a clamor without, than
the Tartars within the City; for whilst they were drawing up their Horse, they
made a continual shouting. The Soldiers within the City had each of them taken
up their Posts upon the Walls, and at the Gates, and the Captains went the
Round incessantly. Amongst these Barbarians they go not the Rounds with so
great a silence as they do in the Disciplined Armies in Europe, but they
continually shoot, shout, and make a clamor with their warlike Instruments.
Nay, their very Guards and Sentinels do incessantly fire their Guns at night;
whereas in Europe, they would not fail to take the Alarm at the first Gun which
discharged: But these are Barbarians, and most barbarous in making war, where
they imagine that a noise does encourage them, and make them the more valiant;
perhaps it is because with shouting and making a noise, they usually supply the
defect of Company, and being accustomed thereto, when they are in company, they
make the greater clamor to engage their companions to stick the firme^^ ^^o
them.

As Soon as day began to ^^ppear, ^^eneral Ly resolves to go and fight them at
Sea. And being fully persuaded that they now designed to engage him, and that
for this intent they waited for him; he therefore prepares a very potent Fleet
to assault them, and presently hoises Sail, and makes up to them: He found them
ranged in order of Battle, and ready to fight him, and as soon as he had divided
his Fleet into the several Squadrons, and issued out the Orders which were to
be observed in the management of the Fight, he gives the Signal to fall on:
Each Party engaged with great animosity. The Fight was very bloody, and the
Victory a long time disputed, inclining some time to one side, and sometime^^
to the other.

The Tartars fought with more Valor, and in better Order, and defended
themselves better; but the Corsairs had the advantage by their number, and
their Ships were lighter, and tacked quicker about, and came up, and charged
oftener, and being more numerous, they extend th^^mselves out further,
surrounded their Enemy, and charged them at the same time both before and abast.
It is most certain, that if there had been as good a union and accord amongst
them, as there was amongst the Tartars, they had not only won that day, but
several others; but these were only persons who were assembled together, and
divided into different Squadrons, under distinct Commanders in chief; amongst
whom there was not that good correspondence as was necessary; for though they
had a General, they gave him only the Title, but no Obedience and Observance
but what they pleased, not what was due to a Sove^^aign and absolute
autho^^ity; so that if in the midst of the Engagement, any Commander in chief
of one of the Squadrons, who wanted Courage, and had a mind to run away, all
the rest of the Ships in that Squadron followed him, as Cleopatra heretofore
deserted Anthony. This was the consequence hereupon, that although some of the
Squadrons fought it out stoutly, yet at last, for all their Valor, they must
submit; for the Tartars, as soon as they perceived any of the Pirates Ships to
run away, incessantly cried out Victory, and thereby animated their men to fall
on with greater violence upon those who yet stood it out. There being so little
union, and so great a misintelligence amongst the Corsairs, one of their
Squadrons had no sooner run away, but presently there followed a general
confusion and disorder amongst all the rest: And the Tartars to secure their
Victory, failed not to press the closer upon them. It was the Misfortune of the
Chinese, that though they were as nimble in running away as the Parthians, yet
they were not so dexterous in fighting whilst they run away, and thereby
gaining the Victory. This was the Event of this great Battle; the Corsairs were
all routed, and the Tartars, as they usually did, gained the Victory with all
the advantage imaginable,

The Corsairs had several such like Engagements with the Tartars as this was;
but there will be no end to relate them all; and besides, being it would almost
be the rehearsal of the same thing again and again, the relation thereof would
prove tedious. But to say something in the general of the War which these
Pirates made, it is certain they toiled and tormented themselves to little
purpose. They did not consider, that it was not now either a time or season to
let their Enemies see, they were to be feared; for thereby they only obliged
them to stand the stricter upon their Guard, and to be always ready armed, and
to keep very strong Armies ever in the Field; neither did these Pirates do any
considerable damage to the Tartars, or gain any advantage, which might
encourage them to hope to regain the pristine Liberty of their Country; but on
the contrary, they consumed what Forces they had left, and by ruining the
Country, they made themselves incapable of ever undertaking any thing against
the Tyrants. And admit they should have won some considerable Victory, and cut
the Viceroys and all their men in pieces, and by this means recovered the City
and Province of Canton; yet they had reason to expect new Armies of the Tartars
to fall upon them, who would not long let them enjoy their Victory. And that
they did not now come, was only because that all these Risings of the Corsairs
were not now looked upon at Court as so considerable a War. There they believed
them to be only some Mutineers, or some Rovers, which might give some
disturbance to to the Viceroys, but did not merit the care of the Tartarian
Emperor, no more than the presence of Pelipaouan the Conqueror of China,
under whose Government that Province was.

It would have been more advantageous for the Chinese to let the Tartars taste
and enjoy for some time the Pleasures and Luxu^^ies of China, which if they
had, it is probable that it might have succeeded with them, as it did with
Hannibal at Capua, and that they might not have been so invincible after as
before. They should have let the heat of such victorious Enemies cool a little:
And if they would not have staid fourscore years, and let the Tartars again be
so long Masters of China, as they had been once before; yet they should have
given them leisure to recall their Troops, and let them withdraw their potent
Armies; and by giving those Soldiers which were left there, occasion to
believe that they need fear nothing in their new Conquest, thereby have induced
them to stand upon their Guard more remissly; but on the contrary, to
necessitate so powerful an enemy to keep the Field continually, and to be
always in Arms, and by the Victories they obtained, to grow more fierce and
insolent. This was not the way to regain the Liberty of their Country, but to
disenable it for ever freeing it self from Oppression and Slavery. As there is
but one Phoenix in the world, so there is but one Country, and that is Spain,
which has the virtue from its ruin to rise aagain; whilst that which ruined
it still subsists. It is said of the Phoenix, that the Flame which consumes it,
does at the same time re-animate it; that from the Fire in which it dies, it
receives a new life, and that it could never regain but from its own Ashes, and
the Coal^^ of its Funeral Pile, those sparkling Colors in its Feathers which
shine like Emeralds and Rubies. And thus has Spain regained a new Birth and
Resurrection out of its own Cinders, and those Embers which had consumed it.
The Moors had in a manner ruined and destroyed that State, and reduced it to a
languishing condition; but at the same time it recovered its vigor again. For
whilst the Moors fell upon the ^^othes, they gave opportunity to Spain to come
to it self again, and to arrive at the height of Grandeur, in which that great
and puissant Monarchy has ever since remained. In the destruction of China
there is some resemblance with what has happened heretofore to Spain. The
Emperor Zunchin may be compared to Dom. Roderick, not so much in the loss of
his Empire, as in the sudden destruction of that Prince and State at the same
time. But it will never be so easy for China to reestablish it self, as it was
for Spain; for those great Exploits, in which the Spanish Valor and Constancy
surpassed it self, are not to be expected from the Chinese Levity and
Effeminacy.

CHAP. XXII. An eminent ^^rediction of a Chinese Astrologer, that that State
should be conquered by a Stranger which had blew Eyes. The Precautions which
the Chinese observed to divert the effects of that Prediction.
THE Chinese, who have ever been much addicted to Arts and Sciences, had
amongst them some very famous Astronomers, and some very eminent in Judicial
Astrology; but one of the most renowned of all the Astrologers, of the greatest
Credit and Repute amongst them, whom they called the great Cahorri of the
Stars, had some years before, left behind him a ^^rediction, which made a great
noise in the Country. The Prediction imported, that time should come, when the
Empire of China should devolve to the power of a Foreign Nation, and that he
which should conquer it, should have blew Eyes. It was a rare thing in that
Country to see a man with such colored Eyes. There are so few that in these
hundred years, during which the Spaniards have frequented the Philippine Isles,
where there is a great confluence of all the Eastern-Nations, they have
remarked, that they never saw any persons with blew eyes but either Europeans,
or those, whose Parents were of Europe. If it could have been remarked in any
other, it would have been looked upon amongst those people, as a Prodigy, and a
monstrous thing: But the Chinese above all other Nations, testified a great
abhorrence for blew Eyes, both because it was a thing extraordinary, and that
thereupon they presently reflected upon the Prediction.

This was one of the principal Reasons that they were ever such declared
Enemies to the Hollanders: And because of their blew Eyes, they would never
suffer them to enter their Havens; and upon the same account they denied
entrance both to the English and Danes, whom they observed generally not to
have their Eyes so brown or black as those of their own Nation.

But it was little available to the Chinese to have such regard to the Eyes of
men: They should more strictly have regarded that which was of greater concern
to them. But herein they were negligent; and the effect of the Prediction
arrived from whence they did not at all expect it. He that was foretold he
should have his Skull broke by the fall of a House, found little security by
avoiding going near any Houses or Ruins, since he could not escape the Eagle
which let fall a Tortoise upon his Head.

The Chinese, who were so jea^^ous of the Eyes of the Hollanders and English,
did not mistrust that more fatal ones should come out of Tartary; for by the
Tartars they pretend the Prediction of their Astrologer was verified. The young
Xunchi was designed to be the Conqueror of their Empire, with blew Eyes. But I
must here declare that the Relation does not expressly say that that Prince had
such Eyes as the Prediction intimated, only that he had a most beautiful Face,
that his Complexion was very fair, with a most agreeable mixture of red, and
that it was difficult to find either an Englishman or Flemming more fresh or
beautiful: Therefore from this Description it must be concluded, that he had
such Eyes as the Chinese apprehended; for usually they are inseparable from
such Faces.

This the Chinese pretend was the accomplishment of their Famous Prediction,
which was no less renowned in that nation, than the Prediction of Antichrist
amongst the Christians, if it may be permitted to make a comparison between the
Verity of one of our Prophets, and the Vanity of a Chinese-Astrologer. But thus
these miserable people were prepossessed with the Impression of their future
calamity. They are not so much to be blamed that they were so cautious in not
admitting the Christians to Land, as that they were so negligent in keeping
Guard there where they had reason to be most apprehensive. They took no care
for the pay and subsistence of their Soldiers, which were to guard the Wall;
and yet from those parts they ought to expect their greatest and most dreadful
Enemies: But see the Misfortune of this blind Nation; they believed themselves
sufficiently advertised of their afflictions, and assured themselves they had
taken all necessary precautions to prevent them, and yet little regarded the
knowledge of him who weighs in his just Balance their Crimes, and the
Chastisements which thereby they merit. They consolated themselves that their
Astrologer had not been deceived, and could not but confess, that it was the
Decree of Heaven, that the Empire of China should fall under the power and
subjection of another M^^aster. But they could reach no further. They had not
the knowledge of him who cites before his Tribunal both Kings and People, the
great Judge of all Mankind, who hides his Anger and Justice by his patient
Long-suffering of man's Injustice; but yet when he pleases, he reveals and
manifests it by visible Chastisements of men, for their Infidelity and
Iniquities.

CHAP. XXIII. The Chinese who traded with the neighboring States, are ill
used as soon as the loss of their Empire was known. The ill reception which the
petty King of Cochin-Chine gave to those who came into his Territories to
secure themselves.
AFter I have related all that I could inform my self of concerning the
Conquest of China, from these brief Memorials and Relations I received, it
remains, that I should say something how the Neighboring Nations treated those
Chinese which were in their Territories, when they received the News of the
Loss of the Empire of China; for the Chinese made so ill a Defense, that it
was scarce known that they were assaulted, before the News came that they were
subdued, and had subjected themselves to new Masters. Of all the Asiatick
Nations there were scarce any but the Chinese who transported their Wares and
Merchandises into the adjacent Countries and Nations; and for this intent, as
well as for the defense of their Coasts, they had several Ships out at Sea:
Some little time before the Iapanners likewise went to trade into foreign
parts. But then all their Foreign Trade was interdicted by their Prince, who,
upon pain of Corporal punishment, had forbid all his Subjects to go out of his
Territories; but he permitted all Strangers, excepting Christians, to come to
Iapan, and buy and sell what they pleased. As for the Chinese, they went in
great numbers into Foreign parts; especially those of the Province of Fokien,
where they are most addicted to Navigation. They went to export their
Merchandises into several parts, as Iapan, the Isle of Corea, Tunking,
Cochin-Chine, Champa, Cambodia, Siam, Patany, Macassar, Solor, Sumatra, and
sometimes even to Iacatra, which is a Factory of the Hollanders in the
East Indies: But they cannot go farther, being their Vessels are not proper for
greater Voyages, though some of these places are little less than five or six
hundred Leagues distant. And the policy of that Nation will not suffer them to
build Vessels of greater Bulk, and of strength to endure greater Voyages,
fearing lest the Merchants should settle themselves in remote Countries, from
whence they would not transport to China the gain and profit of their Trade and
Commerce.

The Chinese were always very welcome to Strangers, by reason of the great
profit they brought by their Traffic; and all their Merchandises being highly
esteemed, and consequently very vendible at Manilla, and all the Philippine
Isles, there was always in those Islands great Numbers of Chinese Merchants.
During the late Wars, there came fewer, but still some, to keep up the Trade;
and as soon as they perceived their Affairs in China to grow desperate, and that
there was no hope to recover their lost Empire, yet they failed not to give
out, that now they should return thither in as great numbers as ever.

The Chinese did with no great difficulty dwell and settle themselves amongst
Foreigners; nay, they made Alliances and Marriages in Foreign parts. Some of
them took Plantations apart, and there inhabited, as in so many distinct
Colonies of Chinese. Several others dispersed themselves throughout the
Country, and busied themselves in cultivating the Lands and managing the
Tillage and Husbandry of the Lords and Gentlemen of those Countries in which
they lived; and others employed themselves in other Vocations, and several
Mechanic Arts, by which they rendered themselves very serviceable to those
people amongst whom they inhabited. It is believed, that during the late Wars,
there was above a hundred thousand Chinese, who were settled with their
Families in the adjacent States and Countries; and there was in one single
Island of the Philippines, which made an insurrection against the City of
Manilla, in the Year 1649. more than forty or fifty thousand.

The Neighboring Nations were not more surprised at the News of the loss of
China, than the Chinese who were then there, were astonished and dejected; for
being out of their own Country, whither now perhaps they might never return,
they must expect to suffer several Reproaches, to the Disgrace and Dishonor of
their Nation: And they themselves were at the News hereof so transported with
Passion, that they could not endure to hear it spoke of. Though they would not
believe that the Tartars were so ablute Master of China, as was reported; but
they endeavored by all means possible to conceal their shame and infamy; and
for this intent, they invented all manner of Fabulous Stories, to gain a belief
abroad, that the Chinese had done, and did still do seve^^al great Exploi^^s
and very gallant Actions for the defense of their Country. These were fine
Fictions which the Chinese writ out of China to their Contrymen in Foreign
parts. And upon this account a Christian Chinese, who had from the time he went
out of China, which was then twenty years, been settled with his Wife, Children,
and Family in a very remote Country, and now never hoped to return back, had
the confidence to give out, that the Chines^^s had defeated the Tartars, and
cut them all in pieces; that they had freed China, and the rest of the world
from those Tyrants, and that now there was no War there, but onlo amongst the
Chinese themselves, who contended who should be the absolute Monarch of that
great Empire. The person to whom the Chinese recited this Fabulous Story,
endeavored all he could possibly to disabuse him. But he instantly produced a
Letter, which he said he had received from his Brother in China, which informed
him of all he reported; upon the sight hereof, they observed one thing, very
worthy of Remark, which was, that that Letter bore the same Date with the
Relation, which gave a particular and accurate account of all passages which
had happened. And of the Truth of this Relation there was no scruple; for the
very time was set down when ^^he Tartars had completed their Conquest of that
Empire; and therefore he to whom the Chinese made this Report, could not but
smile, and was ^^ery desirous to convince him that no^^hing was more false; but
he was not ^^o be confuted, but would still stand ^^o what his Brother had
writ. He pre^^ended, that because he was a Chinese, ^^nd zealous for the
Religion of his Country, it could not possibly be, that he should send him
such a Lie. These Qualities, forsooth, must needs render him a very credible
person in a business of this nature. The poor man hereupon went his way very
discontentedly and melancholy; which gave occasion to suppose that he gave
more credit to the Discourse of the other person, than to the Letter of his
Brother: But he was angry and ashamed to agree to a Truth which did not please
him.

But yet the hardest usage which the Chinese, as well those who were already
there, as those who came after in the Tartar Habit, met with in most of these
Countries, was only to be mocked and derided, and to be treated with injurious
terms, as to be called Traitors to their King, and infamous Coward^^, for
defending their Country no better. Though these Reproaches were very piercing,
yet it was but a small matter to what they merited.

They were used more mildly by the Subjects of the King of Spain, who o^^ the
contrary, did very much compassionate their Misfortune. They must have been
very hard-hearted not to have been grieved and troubled to see the deplorable
condition of that vast Empire, which some few years before, they had seen so
flourishing. The Spaniards ought especially to be moved with compassion toward
them; for thereby they might be minded of what had heretofore happened to
themselves at home. But it is true, that generally people were not displeased
to see the Chinese so humbled as they were; for they treated Strangers with so
much diffidence and Jealousy, and the Landing there was encumbered with so many
difficulties, that there was no approaching near their Coasts. This was the
occasion that that great Empire was in a manner secluded from the Commerce and
Society of Mankind; and thereby from the Light of the true Faith and Religion,
which was there so horribly persecuted, only for this reason, that those who
came to reveal it to them, were Strangers, who came into their Country,
notwithstanding they were prohibited by the Laws thereof. But all this
Inhumanity proceeded only from a pa^^nick Fear, and a base Distrustfulness of
that jealous Nation. The Tartar was very far from these timorous suspicions of
the Chinese; but having a better opinion of his Valor and Strength, he is
willing the entrance into his Provinces should be open and free to all Na^^ions
of the Earth. He does not much concern himself at the arrival of Strangers. He
is so little apprehensive that any should come, that on the contrary, he is
conceited that the Fame of his great Exploits has made him formidable all the
world over. And by how much the Tartars are more generous and courageous than
the Chinese, they are so much the more frank and free in their Actions and
Dealings, and of easier access, and herein they have a greater resemblance to
the dispositions of the Eu^^opeans. They could never suffer nor endure that
people should approach them with those Ceremonies, and prostrate themselves
before them, as they use to do before the Chinese-Mandorins, as shall be seen
when I come to treat of their manner of Government. Therefore as soon as there
was any hope that the change of the Government of that State would make open
and free the Commerce of not only the goods of the Earth, but that which is of
higher esteem and value, the Riches of Faith. There were none b^^t the Chinese
who were troubled that the State Affairs of that great Empire was changed.

I must now relate the manner how the petty King of Cochin-Chine, near
Neighbor to the Chinese, received them after the ruin of their Country.
This Prince is the Grandchi^^d of a Viceroy who revolted against the King of
Tunking, together with all those people who inhabited in a small Canton of that
State; so that Cochin-Chine is but a small part of ^^he Kingdom of Tunking,
bounded by the Sea toward the South and the East; but toward the North
contiguous as the whole State of Tunking is with the Continent of China. The
Viceroy by this Revolt still upheld himself in the quality of Viceroy or Prince
of Cochin-Chine, as likewise did his Son, and Grandchild after him. And this
last is at present the petty King of that Country, which for these sixty years
has been a small distinct State. Ever since the first Revolt, the King of
Tunking has incessantly made war against Cochin-Chine, still pretending to be
the Lawful Sovereign thereof. But this war has not been very hotly prosecuted
by either party; for the Rebels have supported themselves by the power and
interests of the Friends and Allies in Tunking; and the war by State Policy
prolonged, and at the end it served only to waste and consume so much Money for
the keeping up so many Soldiers, without any great advantage or loss to either
party. This was the state of Cochin-Chine: But if the Tartars had had any
inclinations to turn their Arms toward those parts, they might quickly have
decided the quarrel of those two Princes; for each of them were Neighbors near
enough to those Conquerours to tremble at the very Fame of their Victories.

But to return to the pretty King of Cochin-Chine; he was not very potent, yet
he was very fierce and troublesome, and showed himself very splenetick to those
Chinese driven out of Iapan, for some Reasons which you shall shortly know;
and he treated with all the ill usage he could possibly all the other Chinese,
because they had defended themselves so cowardly against their Enemies.

This Prince, with his whole Court usually resides in that place where the
great River called Tayfy rowles it self into the Sea. All foreign Ships which
come to trade in that Country, enter there without any difficulty. Two Leagues
from the Mouth of the River there is an Island called Champailo, which frames a
Bay or Harbor, in which Ships may ride secure. He sent order, that all the
Chinese who fled thither, thinking to find refuge in his Country, should pass
no further; for he would not let his Territories serve for a retreating place
to those who had been such Traitors to their King and Country. He kept them
two Months in the Bay of that Isle, and would not permit them to enter into
the Channel of the River. He was willing to make them sensible that they
deserved to be treated no better by his Highness. They comprehended his
meaning, and understood that he expected Money. This was the design of this
great Monarch, who did not think it unworthy of his Grandeur to make his profit
from the misfortune of these miserable people. The reason that he durst thus
treat the Chinese, was, because he saw them so low; at another time he would
not have dealt thus with them: But they who perceived what they must do,
presently presented the petty King of Cochin-Chine; and hereby they o^^tained
liberty to enter into the Channel of the River; after which, he continued to
them the advantage of that Favor; but they understood very well that they owed
the Obligations thereof to their Presents.

CHAP. XXIV. The Emperor of Japan uses the Chinese very hardly. The Jealousy
that Prince has of Strangers. How powerful an Obstacle this distrust is to the
conversion of those people. He refuses to receive an Embassy from the
Portuguezes of Macao. That though the Japanners are very powerful, yet they
have reason to fear the Tartars.
THere is none of all the Neighboring Princes of China who have showed so much
inhumanity toward the Chinese as the Emperor of Iapan did. This Prince, as I
have already remarked, had his head full of fantastic Chimera's; which if
rightly considered, were only vain Fears, which disquiet a base and timorous
soul; but which yet were a powerful Obstacle to the Preaching of the Holy
Gospel, and the propagation of the Christian Religion, which began to make a
considerable progress in all parts of that spacious Country; but
notwithstanding he would be thought a very valiant and puissant Monarch. And he
might have been esteemed so, were it not, that for all his power he is so
apprehensive of Foreign Princes, even those who are above five thousand
Leagues distant from him; but above all of the King of Spain, that he seems
even when he is broad awake, to be disturbed with Dreams and Visions. These
ridiculous fears made him imagine, that all those who went thither to discover
to them the Mysteries of Christian Religion, were only the King of Spain's
Spies. And this was the only reason which induced him to expel all the
Christians out of his Territories, and to put all those to death who either
remained there concealed, or returned back again to prosecute the Enterprise
they had begun; which was to reveal to those people the Light of Faith. He made
a prodigious number of Martyrs, even those who were his Natural Subjects, who
had been converted to the Faith of Christ, he put to death upon the sole belief
that they were so many Adherents to the King of Spain. Finally, the fear in
which he ever is le^^t the Spaniards should come and dispossess him of his
Empire, has occasioned him to make such rigorous prohibitions to all his
Subjects, not to go out of this Territories; for he imagines that they may go
and convert themselves to the Christian Religion in Foreign parts, and then
return with the Spaniards, and assist them to conquer his Empire.

The Portuguezes, in the Year 1647. sent a very honorable Ambassie. The
Ambassadors with all their Retinue and Equipage, were transported in two
Galleys. Their Instructions were to treat concerning the re-establishment of
Trade and Commerce with the City of Macao. But it was impossible to prevail any
jot herein with that Prince. On the contrary, he renewed his former
prohibitions with greater severity; and pretended that he showed the
Ambassadors great Favor and Grace, that he suffered them to live. The
Ambassadors staid before Nangasacke about forty days, from the six and
twentieth of July to the sixteenth of September, in the Year 1647 I cannot
express the precautions the Iapanners made use of during that time, to secure
themselves, keeping a most strict Guard, out of the Distrust and Jealousy they
had of every little trivial thing. And all this while they made a show as if
they had a desire to treat the Portuguezes most obligingly, and with all the
Civility they could expect in other parts from their best Friends, yet made
them content to bring ashore all their great Guns and Ammunition, nay the very
Sails and Sterns from off their Ships, and to deliver them all up to be kept by
them; assuring the Portuguez^^s they would faithfully restore them as soon as
they were ready to go out of the Harbor.

The Portuguezes at the first were not of opinion to submit to this Demand;
alleging in their excuse that they had no Instructions from those by whom they
were commissionated to act in this manner; but it was rather out of the
apprehension they had that the Iapanners had a design to disarm them, that
after they might with less danger take away their Lives, as they had done to
the Ambassadors which went from Macao in the Year 1640. After a little time,
they yielded to this demand, being convinced that they might do it securely,
and that thereby they need fear nothing; seeing every day that the Vessels of
the Hollanders, which came to Nangasacke, made no difficulty to deliver up to
their custody all their Tackling; for in Iapan they used all these precautions,
even to the Hollanders, out of the fear they generally had of all Strangers;
but they apprehended the Spaniards above all others.

There is no visible reason to be given for these pannick fears, but only that
it is the artifice of the Enemy of the Salvation of Mankind, to prevent thereby
the knowledge of the true Religion; for it is certain, that if we well consider
Iapan, there is no Sovereign in Europe, no not the King of Spain himself, can
conquer a Country of that strength, so far distant; or should he possess
himself of any place therein, could he long keep it. To manifest this, let us
but reflect of what a vast extent, and how populous Iapan is, which contains
sixty Kingdoms. In truth they are not so spacious as the Kingdom of Naples; but
according to the relation of those Spaniards who have seen both; they are not
less than either Granada, Marcia, Valentia or Anduluzia. Therefore there cannot
remain the least doubt, but that a Prince who absolutely commands sixty such
Kingdoms, is a most puissant Monarch. And all this spacious Country is very
populous, and a most warlike Nation, and so little afraid of death, that only
to evidence what they would do, either out of affection to their Friends, or
for the service of their Prince, they will instantly strike a Dagger into their
Breasts. These people are also very united amongst themselves, and obedient to
their Governors. And besides all this, they are very well armed with all
manner of Arms and Weapons which are used in Europe: From hence we may judge
whether or no a foreign Prince, though he had taken or fortified some place,
could long maintain it, though it was never so strong, or well furnished with
all Necessaries; nay, though he should employ herein all that was requisite for
the subsistence of a complete and entire Army, he must expect to be quickly
assaulted very fiercely from the Land, and to have all his Works ruined and
laid flat by strong Batteries; and let him make all the resistance he can, he
shall be sure to be besieged and blocked up, not only in the midst of great
Armies, but of Walls and Mountains, if it be necessary; and from the Seaside,
though he should over night, have it open and free, and be in a convenient Port
to receive Succors and Supplies, yet before morning, he must expect to have
the Haven blocked up, and the Sea excluded by Mountains transported thither by
the Iapanners, if need be. There is a sufficient number of both Men and
Vessels, and all Necessaries for a greater Enterprise, the Conqueror would
quickly find himself immured up in his Fort, and all hope of Relief cut off;
and though he should have a recruit of Men and Ships at Sea, if they were not
already entered the Port, he would find there would be no possibility for them
to enter in; nay, there would be no Haven; and so his Ships would be
necessitated to abandon themselves to Tempests and ill Weather, to the Banks
and Shallows, which are mor^^ frequent in those Seas, than in all parts of the
world besides; and if they were in the Haven, they must never expect to come
out, but to remain there likewise besieged and block^^d up.

It must not be imagined, that it is a Hyperbole to say that the Iapanners
transport Mountains; for it is most certain they do by pieces and parcels, but
not as the Saints did heretofore, by Miracles, remove whole Mountains. To
evidence this, I need only relate what the Governor of Nangasacke did during
the time that the two Portugueze Galleys were in the Haven. After several
Demands and Replies to and fro, at last they went up the Channel of the River,
which near the City, is half a Mile over: But some few days after, those who
were aboard the Galleys, where much surprised one Morning, to see the River
blocked up by a Bridge, which went quite athwart the Channel, between which,
and the Citadel of the Town, they were made prisoners. The Iapanners staid not
here, but another Morning, two or three days afterward, there was discovered
upon the same Bridge four Forts, at an equal distance, furnished and provided
with both Soldiers and Artillery: And besides these Forts, there was at each
end of the Bridge, but a little lower, two Squadron of Ships, or rather two
entire Navies, in each of which there was a thousand Vessels and Ships great
and little, with an incredible number of Soldiers aboard. After the Relation
of all this diligence, it is easy to see that the Iapanners can do such
prodigious things, that they cannot be reported without subjecting the Relater
to the suspicion of Hyperbolizing.

It was after known that the occasion of the Governor of Nagasacke's making
all this preparation, was, that after he had sent advice to the Court of Iapan,
of the Arrival of the Portugueze Ambassadors, he had observed, that they had
entered into that diffidence, that it might well have induced them to return
speedily back again. And he apprehended that he should both offend the
Emperor, and be accounted at the Court an imprudent person, if after he had
given notice to the Court of these Ambassadors, they should have returned
without receiving any Answer or Order from the Emperor, and therefore he made
all these Preparations to retain the Ambassadors there.

If the Governor of one single Town could upon a Concern of so little
importance, make such an Expense, and such an Oftentation of his power, as to
build in less than a fortnight a Bridge with Forts, furnished with great Guns,
over so great a River, and put out two thousand Sail of Ships, manned and
fitted for Fight; and besides all this, keep an incredible number of Soldiers
under their Arms in his Garrison; What might not his King and Master do to
expel out of his State and Terri^^ories a Foreign Enemy, though never so
potent and formidable, who should come to make an Invasion? It is therefore
most certain, that there is no Prince or King in Europe, who would much
advantage himself, should he make any Conquest in that remote Country; yet
some Iapanners have said that ten thousond stout Spanish Soldiers might
conquer all Iapan. But the Spaniards would be very vain, should they imagine it
was spoke seriously; ten thousand men without ten thousand more to assist them,
if occasion should require it, would signify so little in an attempt to do any
great Exploit in so powerful a Country, that they would scarce be able to
defend themselves from one Ambus^^ade of the Enemy. And if Famine and Sickness
occasioned by the change of Air and the Climate, and the want of good and
wholesome nourishment, should destroy some part of them; if by the difficulty of
passing the Rivers, and forcing their passage, another part of them should
perish or be drowned; If the Assaults, Ambuscades, Skirmishes and Fights with
the Enemy, should consume another part; How many at last would there remain of
these ten thousand men? Nay, if we further consider, that though there was
neither Enemy nor War, yet a great part would quickly be lost. Common Sense and
Reason would convince us, that he would be very ridiculous, who should give
credit to any such Expressions of the Iapanners, and so would he likewise be,
who should believe he had done some great matter toward the entire Conquest,
if he had defeated t^^n thousand, or a hundred thousand men in Iapan, though
they would not part with their Lives at an easy rate to any who should assault
them.

By this it is manifest, that the Iapanners have little reason to be afraid;
but the Devil thus disturbs them, that thereby he may stop the entrance of the
Light of the Holy Gospel into that Country; which he has already done, by so
horrible a per^^ecution, that excepting that of An^^ichri^^t, the Histories
record few more cruel; nay, there is no hope that the Servants of the Living
God should of a long time be permitted to approach near that Country, unless
as he holds in his hand the Key of the Bottomless Pit of Destruction, he should
shut the Mouth thereof, and open a way which we are yet ignorant of; we can
only see, that if there is any humane means or way left to make Iapan free for
the Christians to come thither, it is by making that Prince better understand
both his strength and power; and ass^^ring him that he who is able to make all
his Enemies upon Earth tremble, needs fear no Conqueror; that Foreigners
would get but little by coming to assault him; that he knows already his
Neighbors cannot equal^^ him in force or power; and as for the other Princes,
who are at a greater di^^tance, though they be never so powerful, yet it would
be in vain for them to come to gain any Victory or Triumph in that remote
Country. The Iapanner is so haughty a Prince, and the whole Nation so vain
glorious, that if this Vanity could once enter into their heads, they would
presently grant liberty to all Foreigners to come into their Country; and
then they would so little care whether they were, or were not Spies to other
Princes, that they would send to defy and brave them in their own Territories.
Those who better understand the humor and genius of that Nation, and how
potent they are, may judge, whether they may not probably change their Conduct
in the management of their affairs, when they come to understand better their
own strength.

I have enlarged my self the more in my Discourse of Iapan, out of the desire I
have, if it be possible, that these miserable people might cease to be
apprehensive of their own felicity, and might at last give liberty to those to
come into their Country, who are ready to reveal it to them: But at present
there is no possibility; on the contrary, their Fears increase daily.
Heretofore they were only afraid of very remote Enemies; but at the present,
they dread their Neighbors most of all, and that not without cause. It is the
just punishment of those who are afraid, and torment themselves without cause,
to have afterward a true and real occasion of both fear and perplexity. The
Iapanner is a very near Neighbor to the Tartar; for the Kingdom of Corea, of
which he is Master, is not above thirty Leagues distant from the Islands of
Iapan: Therefore if any variance should happen between these Princes, and the
Tartar should invade Iapan, as he has done China, it would be no little
testimony that God would again reveal himself to that Nation. All the
Precautions which the Iapanners could then take, would be no more available
than those were which the Chinese^^ took. And those miserable people would at
last be brought to acknowledge, that they have a Master, whose entrance they
cannot stop into their Territories; for he knows how to make himself a passage
when he pleases, and how he pleases; but by ways and means they know not of.

The Emperor of Iapan, who after the ruin of his Neighbors, was struck with
a new fear, treated most barbarously all those Chinese who were in his
Dominions; even those whom he knew had not at all contributed to the loss of
their Empire. There were very many Chinese in Iapan, who had taken Wives of
that Country, and married their Daughters to the Iapanners; some went
incessantly, upon the account of their Trade between China and Iapan; others,
the more wealthy Merchants resided continually at their Shops and Warehouses,
where they sold their Merchandises, and drove a great Trade with the Merchants
of Iapan. All these persons were no way^^ either consenting or assenting to
those Treacheries which had been committed in China; they had not contributed
to the Misfortunes of their Country, from which they were then absent; having
as soon as they perceived War and Disturbances in those Provinces in which they
usually trafficked, retired themselves into Iapan; and though there the
innocence of these persons were well known, yet the loss of China was no sooner
divulged, but they were condemned as so many Traitors, and cowardly Villains,
who had shamefully delivered up their King and Country to the power of their
Enemies. It did not appear that these poor people had done any ill, yet the
Emperor of Iapan, by his Edict, declared upon very severe penalties, that the
Chinese being unworthy to live amidst his people, should with all speed depart
out of his Territories and Dominions; and go they must, without having liberty
to make any Reply; for none are suffered to make any Remonstrance against the
will and pleasure of this Prince, or the Decrees of his grand Council at Tenza.
It was a sad Spectacle to see so many miserable people, thus destitute of all
relief, put out to Sea, and necessitated to seek out unknown Countries, not
daring to return to their Native Country, which was totally ruined by the
Tartars; nor suffered to stay in that Country, which for so long time had been
to them instead of their own Country. Nay, they must be gone with all speed;
and in this haste, they could not obtain permission to carry with them some of
their Merchandises, as their Leather and Arms, the exportation of which, was
prohibited: Some of them only, who were married in Iapan, left their Families
there, in hopes to return when things were not carried with that extremity and
rigor. After they obtained liberty to go and come with their Ships, only to
trade, not to stay in the Country, as they did before.

The other Chinese-Merchants who came after to continue their Trade and
Traffic* were much worser used. They being then in subjection to the Tartars,
had their Hair cut short, and were habited after the fashion of the Tartars.
This new mode was not very taking in Iapan; for they were commanded and
enjoined not to stir out of their Vessels, nor to unload any of their
Merchandises, but to go back with all speed to the place from whence they came,
and never to return to Iapan in the Tartarian Habit; which if they did, they
must expect a very ill reception, and severe punishment; but they could not
return with the same wind which brought them thither: And in those Seas the
Winds do in an unvariable order succeed each other all the year long, according
to the Seasons of the year with us; and to have a contrary wind to that which
brought them, they must stay several Months. Thus the Chinese were
necessitated to wait for an opportune season to return from the place where
they could not Land; but must remain prisoners at Sea in their Ships; and after
they had suffered so much at home, the Inhumanity of the Iapanners made them
know they were not yet arrived at the end of their afflictions.

They were used with such cruelty by these Barbarous people, that when the
Tartars heard of it, they declared a high resentment of it, and threatened to go
to Iapan to revenge them, and to let those base and cowardly spirited people
know, they were able to conquer another Empire. The two Viceroys of Canton, who
were more particularly offended, that the Iapanners should thus insult, had a
great mind not to let it rest thus, but to carry their resentment further yet;
but they could not of themselves make any attempt upon that State; but the
young Zunchi must first concern himself in the quarrel: And it is certain, that
if he had taken a resolution to carry the war into Iapan, in a little time he
would have given great trouble and disturbance to that Prince. It was not far
for the Tartar to pass over with his Troops from China and Corea, which was
likewise in subjection to him. And these two Nations, which have ever been
mortal Enemies to the Iapanners, desired nothing so much as a war against
Iapan. This would have disturbed the thoughts of that Neighboring Prince, and
have made him abate something of his haughty fierceness, especially if
Pelipaouan the Conqueror of China, should have appeared at the head of those
who would have served under him in the Conquest of Iapan. We cannot tell what
^^esolution the Emperor Xunchi may hereafter take: As we are not permitted to
wish ill that good may come of it, so we ought not to wish that a Prince may
turn Usurper or Tyrant; but if God, who disposes and orders Kings and States as
he pleases, should ever permit the Tartar to carry the war into Iapan, in
probability this would be a means to give an entrance to the light of the Holy
Gospel into that Country where it is now so resisted.

See in the general how the Chinese were treated by their Neighbors after the
loss of their Empire; the greatest part of which contented themselves to deride
them, and to speak of their Nation with injurious terms and contempt. The
Iapanners only treated them with all the hardship and fierceness they could
possibly. The Tartars accused them of Cowardliness, that they defended
themselves so ill, and by way of reproach called them mild and peaceable
people. Afterward, in the Laws and Ordinances which they enacted for the
Government of that State, they spoke of them in terms which manifested that
they had no great value or esteem for them. In all places the unfortunate are
insulted over; and those who stand and flourish, trample under foot those who
are cast down; not confidering that one day the like misfortune may happen to
them. But they were Barbarians who thus treated the Chinese; whereas Civilized
and Reasonable persons would have regarded the ruin of that Empire with the
same reflection as Scipio did heretofore contemplating upon the Destruction of
Carthage. This wise and prudent Roman taking a view of that renowned City,
which was at the same time, abandoned to the Fury of the Fire, and the
Roman-Souldiers, its irreconcilable Enemies. He hea^^d the joyful Acclamations
of the Conquerers, and the doleful Groans of the Conquered, which through the
Flames which surrounded them, pierced the very Heavens. He saw the miserable
people, who flung themselves down headlong from the Walls and Houses, that they
might escape the Fire, either received upon the points of Lances of the
Soldiers, or bruised and trampled upon by the Horses Feet which marched
through the Streets. He beheld the Bodies of some men half covered over with
Wounds, and the other half burnt with Flames, as if the poor wretches were to
die two deaths at once: Scipio taking a prospect from an Eminency, of the
direful Disasters of that City, could not refrain shedding Tears; which being
remarked by some Knights of Rome, they demanded of him the reason why he so
bewailed the Ruin of that City, which had been so dreadful an Enemy to the
Commonwealth of Rome? This man, who saw farther into the event of things, than
others, returned an Answer worthy, without all doubt, both of a Philosopher and
a Roman.

I do no^^ (said he) shed Tears out of any Tenderness or Compassion for
Carthage; but I cannot refrain from it, when I reflect upon the Transitoriness
and Instability of humane affairs: I do not let fall these Tears for the Ruin
of Carthage; I know too well the Mischiefs it has done to my Country, and to
the Family of the Scipio's; I understand full well that by the Law of Arms, no
Quarter is to be given to those who have so often manifested themselves such
Rebels and inveterate Enemies. And now it is the third time that Carthage has
taken up Arms against Rome: I am not therefore moved at the destruction of that
City; Nay, I am so far from it, that I commanded it; but I lament and bewail
Rome it self; And I cannot stop the Torrent of my Tears, having so clear a
foresight that time will come when my own Country will have no more favorable
a Destiny. I cry therefore for the afflictions and calamities which will fall
upon Rome; and I see them most evidently in the Ruins of this City, once so
Renowned all the world over, and for these seven hundred years so potent both
by Sea and Land. I cannot but reflect upon its once so flourishing condition.
It is not seventy years since it gained those glorious spoils in the Battle of
Canna. I recollect with my self how formidable it was to us whilst Hannibal
fought for it; that Hannibal who planted his Standards at the Gates of Rome,
and might have made himself Master of the Capitol, if he had known how to make
use of his Fortune and Advantage. Behold now that Town which cost the Lives of
so many of our Roman Consuls, which has been so often victorious over our
Armies and our most famous Generals: Was it not in this very place, and upon
that Theater which we see now covered with Flames, that heretofore they
measured out by Bushel-fulls the Rings of the Roman Knights, those valiant men
who fell by the Victorious Arms of Carthage? But I see the Fortune of Carthage
is very different from what it was heretofore. By which it is evident that
there is no permanent prosperity upon Earth: There is therefore no Empire so
powerful, but we must expect that sometime or other it will be overthrown and
destroyed: And time will be when my Country, Rome it self shall only be the
Ruins of that Rome, which now that it is Crowned with Glory and Triumph, over
its most Formidable Enemy, makes such Boast and Ostentation of its Grandeur and
Power.

Thus in the present destruction of Carthage, did Scipio see, as in a Glass,
the Ruin of Rome. And to know whether he was deceived or no in what he did
presage should happen to his Country, let us hear what a Father and Doctor of
the Church says. Saint Jerome makes no scruple to interrupt his Exposition on
the Holy Scriptures, that he may deplore the Sack and Pillage of Rome, which
happened in his time. Carthage (says he) was once ruined, but Rome several
times: The Enemies of Rome have several times entered victoriously into the
principal City of the whole world: And it once happened that a little small
Creature was the occasion of the Loss of Rome, which gave occasion to an
Historian of those times, to say, That the Mistress of the Universe might be
remarkable for every thing, it was necessary it might be said that Rome was
taken by so inconsiderable a Creature as a Hare. It is fit therefore that men
should rationally ponderate and consider the Revolutions of States. He that
would reflect with himself, that those Calamities which he sees to happen to
others, might likewise fall upon himself, might hereby avoid those Cheats which
are imposed upon most men by the fallacious Smiles of Fortune, and better arm
and prepare himself against those Misfortunes and Disgraces which are equally
incident to all Mankind. Those Princes and Nations who were Neighbors to the
Chinese, ought to have made these Reflections upon the Ruin of that great
Empire, and not to have insulted over those unfortunate People, as the
Iapanners did, who treated them most barbarously and inhumanely. With this
Remark, I shall conclude the Narrative of the most considerable Passages in the
Conquest of China. It only now remains, that I should say something of the
present condition of that State under its new Masters; of their management of
Affairs, and manner of Government; of their Religion; of their Armies and
Military Forces; and lastly, of the Manners and Customs of the Tartars.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Religion of the Tartars. Their Natural Virtues and Vices.
IT may truly be said that those Tartars which conquered China, are men who
have neither the knowledge of God or of any Religion: For it does not appear
that they apply themselves to the knowledge of any Deity, or that they show
forth the Notions of any particular Religion. But they indifferently receive
all Religions and Superstitions which they are acquainted with, refuse none,
but conform to all. As it may be said, that he who is every man's Friend, is no
man's Friend, and that none can be reputed good men in the esteem of that person
who is of opinion that there are no ill men; so it may likewise be said of the
Tartars, that they are of no Religion, because they are of every Religion; for
though from their outward actions they may pass for Idolators, yet to speak
properly they have no Religion; for they neither know nor care to know, what it
is they adore: Nay, it does not appear, that they retain or receive those first
notions which the sole instinct of Nature, without the assistance of any
supernatural light, impresses into the breast of every man; by which
Philosophers demonstrate a sovereign Being, and a first Cause of all things
which move, and of all the products of Nature.

The Tartars have no knowledge of the Idols and Deities the Ancients adored.
They only worship, or rather admire the Heavens, just as it presents it self to
their view, without making any reflections upon that great and admirable
brightness and splendor which they behold, and the wonderful effects which it
produces: And yet to this they pay their greatest adoration, and this makes the
greatest impression in the minds of the people. But you must not imagine, that
they much disturb or disquiet their thoughts with the due observance of that
adoration which they pay to the Heavens; their devotion has not so great an
impulse upon them: They have their Bonzi, which are their Priests, which offer
their Sacrifices; and these are their Philosophers and Learned Men; but yet
they have no great esteem for them. Their Women (as devotion in all places
whether true or false is most natural to that Sex) seem to be somewhat more
devout than the Men, and this appears by the veneration they have for their
Bonzi. As this Nation embraces no particular Religion, so it rejects none, but
easily are induced to believe a Divinity in that thing to which they see any
other person pay any adoration; which they manifested in all parts of China
through which they passed: For in all that Country there is an infinite number
of Pagods, which are the Idols and Gods of the Chinese, which are placed in
the Temples, very magnificently built, richly adorned, and very numerons; and
these were the Monasteries or Convents of their Bonzi, who lived lazy and easy
Lives; for notwithstanding that it was reported that these poor men forsooth,
lived such austere Lives, and did such strict Penance, they did not much
mortify their Bodies, or afflict themselves; neither did the Tartars find them
so pale, lean, or disfigured as the common people gave out; but on the
contrary, they found they looked very fresh and well, were fat and lusty; which
easily indu^^ed the Tartars to believe that their Lives were not very strict or
austere: And yet they did no injury to their Persons, the Temples or Pagods.
But it is true, that it cannot be determined whether it was out of Religion and
Superstition, or State Policy; for though they neither plundered the Temples,
offered any violence to the Bonzi, nor took away any of those Lands and
Revenues which the Emperor of China had given them, though they were very
considerable, which Moderation might be thought to proceed from some sense of
Religion, and Veneration which the Victors had for their Persons or Temples,
yet on the other side, they were not very scrupulous, for they made Stables of
the Temples, and tied up their Horses to the Pagods. And as for the Bonzi, they
spoke scornfully enough of them; they called them lazy idle Fellows, who would
neither labor nor take pains; and cheating Knaves, who gulled and deluded the
people, and whilst they enjoyed plenty and a fluency of all things, eat and
devoured the Bread of the poor; sometimes they would say to them, Come out you
lazy Knaves, come and fight, and a^^ter you have so long lived idly, and done
nothing, come now and take a little pains. Thus they reproached and reviled
them; but they did not force or compel them to quit their Cells or manner of
Living. And this made it be believed, that they had express Order from the
Emperor Xunchi, to offer no violence to the Bonzi, nor to commit any disorder
in the Temples.

But yet many are of opinion, that in time the Tartar will either extirpate all
these idle and unprofitable fellows, or else that he will reform them; for the
Tartars have a great aversion to the manner of life which the Bonzi lead, which
is no ways suitable to their Genius or Humor. But they judged fit to proceed
with this moderation, lest if they should at the first have undertaken an
Enterprise of that Concern, they should thereby have rendered their Government
odious. But they could do nothing of greater i^^portance than this, for the
admittance and propagation of the Christian Religion thoroughout the whole
Country; for hitherto the Bonzi have been the great opposers of the Preachers
of the Holy Gospel; and these are they who have been the great obstacle to the
conversion of those people. But after all, they do not this out of any great
zeal to their false Religion, but only because they imagine, that that is more
efficacious and conducible to maintain them in that quiet and easy life they
now lead.

I must now say something how the Tartars have carried themselves toward the
Christians which they found in China. There was diverse Priests of the Christian
Religion in several places, and it is certain, that they had beyond all
comparison, a greater respect and esteem for them, than for all the Bonzi. But
amidst the Disorders of the War, the Sacking and pillaging so many Towns, the
Jesuits, who are ^^he sole Preachers and Propagators of the Christian Religion
in China, have suffered very much both in their Persons and Goods, from the
Insolency of the Soldiers, but chiefly from the Chinese who marched amongst
the Tartars: But this was contrary to the express Orders of the Viceroys and
Generals of the Armies, who were far from authorizing those Violences; which
they sufficiently testified by the obliging reception which they ever after
gave to those Fathers; for they gave them all the Safeguard and Protection
which they could desire; and with great familiarity and confidence they
consulted with them about their Affairs. And this must likewise be said, that
whatever the Jesuits suffered, it was not upon the account of their Religion;
for the Tartars (as has been already remarked) do not much concern themselves
with those Matters. And it would have been very strange, should not the
Insolenee of the Victorious Soldiers have transported them to those Excesses
which are so usually practiced by them in all parts; but much more amongst the
Barbarians.

The Tartarian Women seemed more inclinable to our Religion; for they
frequently resorted to the Churches of the Christians in Peking; but in truth,
this was rather out of Curiosity than Devotion, though they showed a great
respect to the Images which adorned the Altars in the Churches. Perhaps they
went out of compliance to the Jesuits, whom ehey saw so considered by the
Emperor and all the Grandees of his Court; for the whole Nation is very
courteous, and wonderfully compliant to the Humors of all persons, which cannot
be denied to be a very apt disposition to incline them to receive the first
Principles of the Christian Religion, and afterward to induce them to give
credit to those Truths which it teaches, when upon examination they shall find
them so conformable to the most refined Light of Reason.

But to speak something of the Virtues and Vices of the Tartars; it must be
acknowledged, that they are not so effeminate and sensual as the Chinese. They
are not allowed to have so many Wives, and do detest and abhor those infamous
and abominable Vices which are not fit to be named, and yet were frequently
committed by the Chinese; which gave occasion to the Emperor Xunchi, as soon
as he had taken possession of the Empire, and was informed thereof, to publish
and Edict, wherein he declared, that whosoever should but attempt to commit
those abominations, should have his Hand cut off; and whosoever should
perpetrate them, should lose his Head without any grace or favor. As for
Theft, they hold it so high a Crime, that the very first time they punish it
with death.

As for the rest of their Virtues, to speak of them in general, the Tartars are
endued with many excellent Qualities, and show themselves to be very noble and
generous in all their Actions. They are very frank and open, and observe the
performance of their word and promise very punctually in time of Peace, when
they are out of fear of an Enemy. Those to whom the Administration of Justice
is entrusted, must be very disinteressed persons; for they are very strictly
prohibited to accept, or take any thing from any Party; and if they do, are
very severely punished. They do not there as in other places, call that which
the Judges take, their Fees, or a Present, or Gratuity; but Theft and Robbery,
which is the Name which the Law of God imposes upon whatsoever is given to buy
or purchase Justice. As for their other Moral Virtues, we shall see what they
are, when we come to speak of their Government.

The greatest Vice of the Tartars is, their Cruelty in War, where they are very
sanguinary. And it is reported, that they have been transported to that excess,
as to eat the Flesh of their Enemies, which is a most barbarous Inhumanity; but
of this, there is no certain proof, neither does it appear, that the whole
Nation is guilty of that Vice; perhaps this was only the rage of some few of
the most barbarous, and the very Dregs of the people.

I must likewise declare, that their word is not to be relied on too much;
especially if it redound to their profit and advantage to falsify it. But it
must be considered that they are Barbarians, and near enough Neighbors to the
Mahometans to have learnt this Vice from them, who are so easily absolved from
it by the Law of their false Prophet. And I wish to God that this Vice was
peculiar to the Mahometans and Tartars, and that Machiavel had not propagated
the practice of this Doctrine more than ever Mahomet did. It is not the Turks
and Tartars only who violate their Oaths and Promises, unless we must repute
all perjurious and false persons to be Turks, Barbarians, and mere Infidels.

This is the best information I could receive of the Religion of those Tartars
who conquered China; and this is all ^^he Account I have of their Virtues, and
Vices. And now I shall say something of their Form and manner of Government.

CHAP. XXVI. The Government of the Tartars in China. The excellent Endowments
o^^ the young Xunchi. The Reformation which h^^ made of the Mandorins and
Eunuchs in th^^ Court. The Virtuous Freedom of the Tartarian Women.
THE Tartars, though they are Barba^^ians and Infidels, yet their method of
Government may give very good Instructions to our wisest Politicians. These
people, who as I have already remarked, do in a manner surround the whole
Continent of Chin^^, are possessed of a very vast Country, which is divided
into several States and Kingdoms, which the Chinese make mention of according
to the General Division of the whole world into four parts, calling them the
E^^s^^ern, Western, Northern and Southern Tartars. And the truth is, that
Nation is possessed of so vast a Country, that it seems to be a little World.
The most potent of these people are the Eastern and Northern: And it was these,
who under the Command of their young King Xunchi conquered China. They had for
a long time been at war with those Tartars who are more advanced to the Western
and Southern parts. And it is very remarkable, that having made a Truce and
Accord amongst themselves, which gave opportunity to young Xunchi to pass into
China with the greater Forces, they observed and kept it so inviolably, that
there did not appear the least jealousy of the Victories of that Prince and
Party, who had so long been their Enemies. We are (said they) all Tartars, why
should we therefore destroy one the other, thereby to give occasion to a
Foreign Enemy to triumph over us? Let him rather perish; and let him who can,
be Victor: But let us assist each other. This action of these Barbarians is
just opposite to the practice of the Christians, amongst whom a Prince can
never attempt any considerable enterprise against the Tur^^s and Infidels, but
he shall instantly have occasion to fear, lest whilst he is engaged against
them, his Neighbor should enter with an Army into his Territories. This
doubtless proceeds from this Maxim, that all Christians do not repute the Turk
to be the common Enemy. And yet those are Tartars and Barbarians, Infidels and
Idolaters. These forsooth, are Christians, Politicians and Civilized persons;
but God will in his due time confound these Politicians, much more barbarous,
than the Tartars.

As Soon as Xunchi had possessed himself of the Cities and Provinces, he
consulted how to frame such Laws and Ordinances, by which he might conserve
what he had acquired by force of Arms. And first of all, (as I have already
noted) he ordained that all the Chinese should cut off their Hair, and shave
their Heads, lik^^ the Tartars, only leaving a greater Tuft on the Crown of the
Head, to distinguish them from the Natural Tartars* This Edict seemed very
rigorous to those people who were almo^^t as wil^^ing to lose their Lives as
their Hair. It was said, that it was a Chin^^se of Peking who gave this advice
to the Prince as soon as he was Crowned, as a thing of high importance to secure
his Victory. In all parts there are miserable Villains, who are willing to
expose their own Country, to suit to those persons from whom they can hope for
more considerable advantage to themselves.

This Prince published a second Order of higher importance, to retain his new
Subjects in peace; and in this, his Policy appeared very judicious and prudent.
A great number of Tartars went and settled themselves in China long before the
War; as it is usual in all Countries which are very populous, for some of the
Inhabitants to pass into another; especially out of a worser into a better and
richer, as China is in regard of Tartary; and as several persons often go out
of France into Spain, where Money is more plentiful. Xunchi therefore commanded
all the Tartars, both men and women of all Ages and Conditions whatsoever, to
come without any delay, out of the Provinc^^s were they were settled, and
inhabit in one of the two principal Cities, Peking or Nanking, where the Kings
of China usually resided with their Courts, and where several Tartars newly
came out of their own Country, beg^^n to ^^stablish themselves, and had order
to furnish the others with all Conveniences which were requisite upon this
occasion. And on the other side, the Chinese who inhabited in these two
Ci^^ies, were enjoined to go from thence, and dispose of themselves elsewhere.

This Ordinance was very inconvenient and troublesome, even to the Tartars
themselves; but it was of as great importance for the welfare of the State, as
the enjoining the Chinese to cut off their Hair. And the Tartars considered
that these Discontents would quickly wear away; and besides, the Emperor
Xunchi signified his Will and Pleasure to his Subjects in the most mild and
obliging terms and manner he could possibly, that thereby he might convince
them, that he did not design to treat them like Slaves. After he had thus
secured these two Capital Cities, which were as the two Keys of that Staff,
upon the safe custody of which depended the security of his new Conquest. The
City of Peking commands all the Northe^^n Provinces, and Nanking the Southern,
and each of these Cities were so strong and potent, that either of them, upon
occasion, would have been able to have defended it self against all the
Provinces which depended on it. But when they should be inhabited with Tartars
only, and defended with a strong Guard of old and experienced Soldiers under
the Command of Officers of approved Fidelity, from thenceforth there could not
be the least ground to apprehend any Sedition or Treason. And the Tartars
having thus secured these two great Cities alone, and sent some considerable
Forces to guard the Wall, that he might, when he judged in necessary, bring
fresh Forces out of Tartary, he need have no other Forces in any other part of
China; no not if he should return into his own Country: For, should any Revolt
or Insurrection happen, the Chinese could not raise Forces sufficient to make
any resistance as soon as the young Xunchi should appear at the Head of his
Armies. And besides, it was not to be feared, that the Chinese, who by the
late Wars and Insurrections had suffered so much, should not out of dread of
new calamities remain quiet and submiss. But yet this Prince, that he might
omit nothing which might tend to his absolute security, placed strong Garrisons
in all the fortified Towns and Places through the whole Country, and judged it
not his Interest to stir out of China. He resided always at Peking, though he
would not suffer that either this City, or Nanking should be called the Court,
pretending these ought only to be reputed two particular Cities, and that he
would not have any other Court but that in Tatary, of which the Relations give
us no account.

Those who have ^^een the young Xunchi a^^ ^^king, report, (...) he is a most
courteous ^^nd ob^^iging Prince, and of a sw^^et (...) mi^^ disposition, bu^^
wit^^al very quick and active, discreet an^^ prudent, and of g^^eat ability for
the management of affairs; and that he was very careful and circumspect in all
things which related to the government and welfare of his Subjects. He had ever
near his person one of his three Unkles, who passed over with him to the
Conquest of China, who was said to be a very prudent person, and most
passionately zealous for the Glory of this young Monarch, and the Honor of his
Country. This Prince stayed ever at the Court, and took as particular care of
the young Xunchi as if he had been Father to him.

But that which did most illustrate the tender nature, and good disposition of
this Prince, was the strict Injunction he laid upon all his Officers to do all
the good, and to show all the favor they could possibly to his people. To this
intent, he enjoined them to carry themselves fairly and mildly toward all
persons, and to treat them kindly and obligingly, and with all possible
expedition to dispatch all those who addressed themselves to them; but above
all, he commanded them to be disinteressed and incorrupt, upon pain of losing
both their Offices and Heads. How strictly this was observed and practiced, we
shall see, when we shall come to treat of their Justice in particular. And the
Emperor Xunchi, that he might by his own example instruct his Officers to be
kind and favorable to their Fellow Subjects, caused a Proclamation to be
published through all China, wherein he declared that he remitted all those
Taxes, Impositions and Tributes which remained due to him, and had not been
raised or collected in the three years of the War, which were 1644, 45, 46. It
is true, the Chinese did not acknowledge they were due, because all China had
not then submitted to him: But he pretended, that having been Crowned Emperor
of all China in the year 1643, and never having had any lawful Competitor,
these Duties were as rightfully payable to him, as if he had been in possession
of the entire Empire. And though this reason was not prevalent with the
Chinese, yet it is most certain, whether it was or it was not his Right to
exact the payment of these Duties, yet if he would, he might have compelled
them to pay him. He was absolute Master, and there was nothing to be gained by
contradicting his Will. It cannot therefore be denied, but that he having very
urgent occasion to Levy Moneys, the remission of so great a Sum to his People,
was a most magnificent and Royal Bounty and Liberality, by which he manifested
to them, that his Affection to them was more prevalent with him than his
Interest. It is not, but the greatest part of the Towns and Provinces of China
had by their Losses and Damages suffered more than the payment of these
Tributes several times paid over, would have amounted to: But the Tartars said
that the Chinese had themselves drawn these Calamities upon them, being the
Authors thereof, by their rash and vain Insurrection, by which they exasperated
the Insolence of the Soldiers, whom it was not possible to curb or restrain at
so great a distance from the Emperor's presence: That it was contrary to his
express Orders, that any of these Violences had been committed; and that the
severe chastisements and punishment which was inflicted upon all persons
convicted of these Crimes, were convincing Proofs that he did not approve or
allow of them.

It is most certainly true, that all those Soldiers who were convicted to have
robbed or plundered any person, were so severely punished, that if all Thieves
and Robbers were so dealt with in all parts, there would quickly be none left
in the whole world. And in a very short time the Roads and Highways were so
safe and secure, that all Posts, Carriers and Messengers went their Stages and
Journies with the same liberty as before. Trade and Traffic quickly was
restored and settled, so that all Wares and Merchandises were brought from the
most remote parts to the Seaports with all the safety the Merchants could
desire. It was a mark of the good Order and Government of this Prince, that all
things were so quickly composed; that the people lived so submiss and quiet
under their new Masters, and never so much as attempted to make any revolt or
insurrection. To maintain this good Order and Discipline amongst his Soldiers,
he issued out a Command, that wherever they should be, even in those
Provinces where there should be any War or Disturbance, they should keep
themselves encamped under their Tents in the Fields, and not enter into any
Towns or Villages, without the express Leave and Order of their Officers. A
young Prince of but fourteen years of Age, an Idolater and Barbarian, might
have less observed the exact Rules of Reason and Justice, and perhaps he might
yet have made a great bluster, and have done greater actions: But we rarely see
those who are neither Idolaters nor Barbarians, do any Exploits either of
greater Gallantry or Renown.

Af^^er the Remission of these Tributes which had not been raised during the
years of the late War, the Emper^^r began to cause to be Levied those which
were due for the following years; and this was with such moderation, that
though the ordinary Taxes whic^^ were paid to the Chinese Emperors w^^re but
very reasonable, yet the Emperor Xunchi was willing to remit a third part even
of them also; as he manifested by his Declaration which he publish^^d; which
imported, that the Emperor would only take the two Thirds of those Tributes,
which were accustomed to be paid to the Kings of China; and that he was
graciously pleased to discharge the people from the payment of the other third
part.

The Emperor Xunchi judged it likewise necessary to reform the Mandorins All
Magistrates, both Civil and Military, are called in the Chinese Tongue Quonfu,
which signifies men fit for Counsel; and for their Quality, not Office, are
styled Lavie, Lavisy, or Lavias, which signifies Lord or Master: But the
Portuguezes, and in imitation of them, all the Europeans call them Mandorins;
derived (as Arnoldus Montanus says) from the Portugueze word Mandarim, a
Commander or Governor; or as Kircher intimates) from the Latin word Mandare,
to Command.
, which in China were very numerous, and enjoyed great Privileges, upon no
other account, than of their Office, which many of them were not permitted to
exercise. All Mandorins were exempt from paying any Subsidies or Taxes, and
were only obliged to send to the Emperor what Information they judged
necessary concerning the Affairs of the Provinces and Towns; of which Duty and
Obligation they discharged themselves so negligently and remisly, during the
Reigns of the late Chinese Emperors, that though they did for a long time
plainly discern those Disorders and Disturbances in the Provinces, visibly to
threaten and presage the General Ruin and Destruction which fell upon the
State, yet they did not concern themselves in the discharge to their Duty, but
by a cowardly and slothful Treachery let both their Prince and Country perish.
Xunchi understanding what disservice these persons had done to their Prince,
resolved to make them know and feel that they deserved rather Chastisements
than any Favors or Immunities; and therefore he deprived them of their
Dignities, and took from them their Privileges, and would not permit them to
have any advantage above the rest of the people, but to pay equal shares with
others in all Tributes and Impositions. Is it not fit (said the Emperor) than
henceforth the M^^ndorins should assist their King with their Money, since
hitherto they have ^^ssisted him so ill with their Advice and Counsel? This was
a slight punishment for those Traitors, who had been so unfortunately negligent
in the execution of those Employments and Injunctions which they had received
from their Prince. But this light chastisement was a severe affront, of which
they were the more sensible, because it gave so great a pleasure and
satisfaction to the people, to triumph over them, and to rejoice that the
Tyrants were disgraced, and pulled down from their insolent and haughty
Grandeur; yet it was reported, that Xunchi would employ under him some of these
Mandorins, though but few, and those of the greatest Merit and Reputation.

It was expected and wished that he would have done as much to the Bonzi, who
were possessed of very great Revenues throughout the whole Empire. And many are
of opinion, that though he does not quite extirpate them, yet he will make a
strict Reformation amongst them. There was then three distinct Orders of them;
and there was heretofore reputed to have been above 3000000 Bonzi of only one
of these Orders. Had all these been sold for Slaves, they would have raised a
considerable Sum of Money. Since then, their Number and Revenues are both
decreased; yet there are still too many of that idle and unprofitable
generation through all China, which would be no loser if the whole Race of them
were destroyed; but on the contrary, would be a great gainer, to be thereby
delivered from the great Obstacle at present to the Conversion and Salvation of
those people.

But the most eminent and acceptable Reformation which was ever made in China,
was that which the Tartar made of the Eunuchs which had so great power and
credit in the Court of the late Chinese Emperors: Though their Employment was
only to be a Guard and Watch to the Wives of the Prince, and other great Lords,
yet they advanced themselves to so considerable Estates and Fortunes, that the
most eminent persons in the whole State looked upon it as a high advantage, if
they could promote several of their Children to so honorable a preferment; so
that there was great emulation for the procurement of those places. It being
observed that many Families had enriched and advanced themselves to the highest
Honors and Dignities by having had a Child preferred to be one of the Princes
Eunuchs; but the Emperor Xunchi judged it not convenient to have the Offices
and Dignities in his State disposed of amongst that kind of men, but was minded
that they should remain only in the same incapacity they were, naturally
unprofitable persons in their generation, who were so far from having served as
they ought the late Emperor Xunchin, that on the contrary, the greatest part
of them had been so many Traitors, who had perfidiously sold both their Prince
and Country.

The Wives of the Tartarian Lords would not consent that any of these Eunuchs
should be placed as a Guard over them. They pretend to have no need of those
Guards; for (say they) Women are not the truer and faithfuller to their
Husbands, nor the more chaste, by having a strict Guard and Watch put upon them;
but on the contrary, ma^^y have been false and unchaste, only because they were
watched too narrowly; and as for them, their Honor was a securer Guard than
any which could be set over them. Nor were the Tartarian Women, like the
Chinese, immured up as so many prisoners; but when they pleased, walked about
the Streets in the Cities and Towns, and in the Country into the Fields. They
ride on Horseback, and have the Courage to go to the Wars, and hazard their
Lives in Fights and Battles. They execute any Action better than they speak or
discourse. The sole Employment of the Eunuchs being only to be as a Guard to
the Women, whom the Chinese kept in a perpetual Imprisonment; this Office was
of no regard or consideration amongst the Tartars. And in all probability there
will be very few Eunuchs made hereafter in China, and those who are so already,
will be ashamed of themselves, and of the Affront and Injury which Nature has
received in their persons.

CHAP. XXVII. How satisfied the Chinese were with the Tartarian Government.
The Pride and Avarice of the Chinese Mandorins. The speedy and exact Execution
of Justice by the Tartars.
IT may truly be said, that Princes by their Actions do not only invite, but
command and oblige their Subjects to follow their Examples. And thus did the
Ministers of State, and Officers of the young Xunchi so exactly conform
themselves to the Model of Justice and Equity, which he had prescribed them for
the Government of his people, that the Chinese themselves could not look upon
them as Usurpers and Tyrants, but presently began to applaud and extol them,
and ingeniously to acknowledge, that they merited to have the Command and
Dominion over them. This Content and Satisfaction of the people under their new
Masters, was no less a Testimony of the good inclinations of the Prince, but of
the Loyalty of his Officers; for it is but too ordinary for men to find fault,
and to be offended at all that is done under any new Government, though it be
never so well managed. But that which did most satisfy and content the
Chinese, was to see that the Tartars let them have their share in the
Government, and admitted them to several Charges and Dignities. This they did,
that thereby they might win the Affections of the people, and because they
foresaw that the Multitude of Affairs in so vast a Country would give
sufficient employment to both Tartars and Chinese; and likewise because the
Chinese were better instructed in the Affairs of that State, and knew better
how to suit and comply with the humor and Genius of their own Countrymen,
they daily sent them into the Provinces, to exercise the Charge of Mandorin,
and made them Governors of several Towns and Places, but still dependent and
subordinate to the Tartarian Lords, who were the supreme Governors, and had
the inspection over the Conduct of all Chinese-Officers, and by their
Instructions were obliged to watch and observe that the Chinese, who had not
the reputation of Integrity, should not in their Employments act and do all
things according to their own will and pleasure: But the Tartars did not think
it convenient to suffer the Chinese-Mandorins to wear, as before, those rich
Girdles, nor their square Caps, nor several other Marks of their Majesty and
Grandeur, which rendered them so venerable to the people. For heretofore,
whenever a Mandorin went to give Audience, he was followed by a Crowd of
People with all the Majestic Stateliness, as if it had been the highest
Concern of the State. The Streets must be cleared through which he passed, and
all persons must place themselves in rank and order. Silence must be kept, and
none suffered to call aloud, or make any noise. But when the face of Affairs
was changed, the Tartars mocked at them, whenever they saw them only carried
in their Sedans through the Streets. They called out to them, and told them,
they should leave those for their Wives and Women, for whose use they were
invented and made. And though they did not hinder them for making use of their
Sedans, yet by deriding them thus, and by comporting themselves with a
behavior just opposed to this Effeminacy, these Chinese-Mandorins quickly so
dis-accustomed themselves, that it was not necessary to prohibit them. The
Tartarian Lords, the Viceroys of the greatest Provinces, nay, the Emperors
Unkles went through the Streets on horseback, attended only by five or ^^ix of
their Domestic Servants, as the most inconsiderable Mandorins of China were.
The Retinue of the Lords rid on Horseback likewise, as their Masters did. The
Viceroys and principal Officers of the State were of so easy access, and
treated so civilly and obligingly all persons, who had any business with them,
that the Chinese were surprised at it. No body was commanded to keep silence
in the streets and places where they were; but they received Petitions and
Addresses, gave audience, and dispatched affairs, without any difficulty, or
much Ceremony; and besides, the entrance into their Houses and Palaces, was
free to all persons, and at all hours. The Chinese were struck with admiration
at these actions and proceedings of the Tartars, and esteemed them the more,
when they reflected upon the haughty pride and arrogance of their Lordly
Mandorins, from whom they could never have Audience but at a great distance,
and to whom they must never speak but on their K^^ees, and then bowing down
their Heads so low as to kiss the very ground.

The gentle and fair reception, and the free access which the Tartarian
Officers gave to all persons, was not less powerful to maintain and secure
their Conquest, than their Arms had been to gain it: which may be made evident
by this, that there being only the Populacie in China, who could frame any
Conspiracy, the common people, were so far from entertaining any such Projects
or Thoughts, that on the contrary, they were so well satisfied with the
Government of their new Masters, that they could not but with horror now think
on the hard servitude they groaned under the fierce arrogance of their former
Mandorins. It is doubtful whether the Chinese were sufferers by the change of
Government; and to clear this Point, it is necessary to show how the former
Chinese Mandorins treated all criminal persons, who had the Misfortune to be
brought before them, though the Crime of which they were accused was never so
slight.

The Pride of a Chinese Mandorin, seated in his Tribunal Seat, was
insupportable, says a Relation out of China; for after he had for a long time
turned and rolled about his Eyes, that he might prepare himself to look sternly
and austerely upon the poor wretched Criminal, he afterward looked very
fixedly upon him, and in such a manner as if he had already been going to
pronounce upon him some horrid Sentence of Death: He wrinkled up his Eyebrows,
so that under his square-Cap they looked as hideously as those do through the
Vizor of the Helmet of an armed man, who is just going to charge his Enemy: He
seats himself in a settled posture, and is very watchful and careful over
himself, not to stir or move in the least, but keeps his hands and all his body
without any action or motion; he speak^^ some few words, but they fall from him
with that weight and gravity, as if they were made of Lead, and as leisurely as
a proud Animal when he walks, lifts up his feet, and stately sets them down
again upon the ground. He is likewise attended with two Pages, on each side
one, with great Fans in their hands, to cool and refresh the Air, and drive
away the Flies: For it would be inconsistent with the Gravity of the Mandorin
to move his hand upon this occasion. Such grave Majestic Mandorins would in
ancient times have done well at Rome, to teach even the Cato's Rigor and
Gravity. But that which is the most pleasant, this Fellow who has the good
Fortune to be a Mandorin, and is so rigid and severe, is the greatest Villain
in the whole Country, or rather a most subtle Thief, who practices more
cheating Tricks in one day, than a Troop of Mountebanks can do in a whole Year.

But the lamentable condition and posture of the unfortunate Criminal who is
brought before the Mandorin, is more extr^^ordinary than the pride and gravity
of the Mandorin himself. The poor wretch is brought into a great Hall, and
there he must not fail to deport himself most demurely, and to look most
dejectedly; he creeps barefoot and bare-legg'd upon his knees; and at every
moment prostrates himself, and bows down his head till he touches the very
ground with hi^^ Face. In this posture he presents himself, and puts himself
into that form and shape which he thinks may move the greatest compassion: His
Eyes are fixed on the Ground, as if they were fastened to it; his Head appears
as if it was ^^hrust into his Shoulders; his Voice is low and whining, and he
dares neither blow nor breath; his hands are so close joined, that they might
be thought to cleave or grow together, but that he is forced sometimes to
separate them, that he may so employ them, in paying the greater Obei^^ance and
Adoration. All the rest of his Body remains so constraint, that if it was
possible, his very Bones, for fear lest they should appear, might have been
suspected, to have crept one into ^^he other. If he should dare to spit or
cough, this would be so high a Crime, that he must instantly be severely
puni^^hed for it. In this state and condition, the sad wretch expects to
receive his Sentence from his Judge; who for this purpose has a table placed
before his Tribunal, and upon it lie several Tallies, which he takes up and
flings upon the ground, more or fewer, proportionable to the correction to
which he condemns the Crimi^^al for the Crimes he stands accused, which very
often are but slight ones. Each of these Tallies is a Sentence or Condemnation
for a hundred slashes with a Whip, which does so tear and flay off the Skin,
that the miserable wretch often dies under the hands of his Executioners. And
yet to make the least reply or intercession after Sentence given, is but to
increase the punishment, by the addition of a new Crime. The Criminal person
therefore durst not open his mouth, or move in the least, for fear he should
exasperate his Judge. The Executioners, who constantly attended, immediately
after Judgment, seized upon him, and quickly dispatched him; but first they
stripped him stark naked, and then in presence of the Mandorin, without any
fear of offending thereby his Gravity, gave the condemned person the number of
Stripes, to which he was sentenced by the Tallies. He who would not drive away
a Fly, lest he should violate his Formality, thought it no disrepect to him to
see a naked man whipped in his presence. This was the ridiculous and
Ceremonious affectation of those haughty Mandorins, by which they pretended to
maintain and keep up their Gravity, but as several other men do, they strained
at a Gnat, and did not observe that they swallowed a Camel. And that is most
certain, that the Chinese Mandorins did so tyrannize over the miserable people,
that there is no Hyperbole in this Relation of their fierce and cruel Arrogance.

The people therefore, when they saw their new Magistrates, and the Grandees of
Tartary; nay, the very Unkles to the Emperor, to manage affairs without all
this Ceremonious affectation, and with a deportment so opposite to the
ridiculous pride under which they had so long suffered. When they saw the
Viceroys receive Petitions and Informations in the Streets and public places,
and to answer them, and do Justice as they passed by on Horseback; and that at
all hours of the day the Tartarian Magistrates gave audience, and at the very
instant dispatched the Parties concerned, without obliging them to any
Ceremony, or permitting them to prostrate themselves on the ground, or creep on
their Knees to them. When the Chinese saw a face of Government, which seemed
to have a smiling and more favorable aspect toward them, they could not
desist from admiring and highly esteeming their happy Change.

They were so far from being grieved, that they were reduced under the Dominion
of the Tartars, that they persuaded themselves, that they now began to enjoy
their Liberty, after they had so long groaned under so cruel a thraldom. Thus
Xunchi employed all his Mildness and Goodness, hereby the better to secure to
him his new Subjects* And in all parts, the Art of gaining the Affections of
the people, does no less complete and secure Conquests, than that of gaining
Victories, does give a beginning and progress to them. Finally, the Ruin and
Preservation of Empires and People dep^^nds much upon the different management
of Affairs, by those who are the Supreme Governors.

The Tartars had their Councils and Justice-Seats in the same manner as the
Chinese had, but not in so great a number. They kept up the Dignity of Calao
The Colao's were superior to all other Magistrates in the Kingdom, and had in
a manner a Jurisdiction over them: Therefore Semedo calls them the Supreme
Presidents in all Councils, and of the whole Government; and says they are
commonly but four, and may never exc^^ed the n^^mber of six.
and Mandorin; but none attain thereto, but by Merit and Election; and these
ought all to be persons of high Reputation and Merit, of which the Tartars
would be first well satisfied and informed.

As for their Laws and Policy, the manner of proceeding in their Courts of
Judicature, and the Officers appertaining thereto, and their administration of
Justice, as well in Criminal Causes, as in Actions of Debt, and Trials of Right
between party and party, conformable to those Ordinances and Regulations which
the Tartars have made; we have not as yet been particularly informed herein. We
only know in general, that herein they act just opposite to what the Chinese
did. And that they might quietly introduce and establish these new Customs,
which are so contrary to the ancient, they have the more industriously employed
the Ch^^neses, whom they have put into several Charges and Offices. And the
people on their part, that they may ingratiate themselves to their new Masters,
have the more readily conformed in all things to these new Laws. And thus in
all probability there will not be left in a short time, the least appearance of
the ancient Chinese Government.

In all Suits and Trials the Tartars never make use of any long Writings,
neither have Practitioners in Law any great Employment there. In all Trials
between party and party, the parties concerned justify by word of mouth only
their claim to the thing in contest; and by word of mouth alone the cause is
decided. All other Ceremonies are counted a frivolous and expensive loss of
time. They were yet more quick and expeditious in the dispatch of criminal
causes, and yet they did very diligently examine all charges and accusations
alleged against the party accused. They have this Maxim, That Guilt or
Innocence do presently manifest it self, when judicious persons, who manage the
Examinations, proceed impartially. Neither do they make use of Prisons, Chains
and Fetters, saying, that thus to torment men, is to put them twice to death.
When any criminal person is seized upon, at that very instant of time he is
brought before the Judge, if the Crime be sufficiently proved against him, he
is immediately punished; if the proofs are defective, he is set at liberty.
There is but two sorts of punishments for all criminal persons. When the crime
does not deserve death, they take two Arrows and strike them through the Ears
of the Criminal, and turning the shafts upwards, they tie them together on the
top of his head, and in this posture they make him march through the Streets
and public places of the Town or City; and an Officer goes before him, and
proclaims aloud, that whoever has committed the like Crime, shall receive the
like punishment. But if the Crime deserves death, his Head is cut off, without
making any distinctions between either the quality of persons, or the nature of
Crimes. It is sufficient that they have deserved to die. When they execute the
condemned person, they first strip him as naked as when he was born, to the end
(say they) that he may go out of the world as he came into it. When he is thus
stripped, the Executioner with a Cimeter or short Sword strikes off his Head,
and when the Body is fallen down, he hacks it to pieces; fo^^ which reason they
stripped it at the first. And usually they leave the dead Body upon the place,
pretending thereby to make others dread and abhor the like crime. It is said,
that heretofore the Executioner used to take home with him a Thigh, to make
therewith an Entertainment for his Friends: And this perhaps gave rise to the
report, that the Tartars eat Mans-Flesh. But as it has been already observed,
there are none except the most savage, barbarous and brutish persons of that
Nation, who can be judged capable of committing so horrid a crime. Neither
would the Tartars so honor the Carcasses of criminal persons, as to give them
living Sepulchers.

That which seems most strange in the administration of Justice by the Tartars,
is that they can so soon go through all necessary Proofs, and Exa^^inations in
criminal causes, and private contests between party and party. But Xunchi by a
Law which will admit of no Gloss or Comment, pretends to have taken away all
impossibility or difficulty in these quick and speedy Trials; by which he
ordained that all Suits and Contests between party and party, should be decided
ass^^on as the parties concerned had been heard; and that in criminal Causes,
the party accused should either immediately be punished or acquitt^^d; but if
the party accused were really guilty, and the accusation not verified, nor the
party convicted, that then the J^^dge who acquitted him, should undergo the
penalty of the Crime committed; for Xunchi pretended, that then the fault must
be in the Judge: But if the fault was proved, the party accused was punished at
the very instant of time, though never so inconvenient, and ^^hat either by a
pecuniary Mulct, or corporeal punishment. Thus there was no possibility of
prolonging Trials: Nor was there any way to evade the due Execution of the
Emperor's Law, which he designed, to oblige thereby the Judge to be as much
concerned to sift and impartially examine the Evidence, as the accused person
to make his Defense. This Law he caused to be executed and observed most
rigorously. The consequence whereof was this, that afterward there was in all
Offices and Courts of Judicature such persons, who though they were not rich,
yet they* discharged their Employments with such integrity, that the people
were much better satisfied with these Judges, than with those under the Chinese
Emperors, though they were very rich and Majestic.

Such precipitation in the dispatch of Affairs may seem somewhat barbarous, and
not very politic; but the contrary excess of prolonging Trials by perplexing
Causes with Tricks and frau^^ulent Nicet^^es, and going through all those Terms
and Punctilio's, and Orders of Courts, which serve only to delay Justice, and
make Causes to be so long depending, that they can never come to be decided;
This, I say, may perhaps seem not less barbarous to those people. Happy is that
Nation where Causes are not so precipitately determined as amongst the Tartars,
nor yet so delatory as in other places. But this Moderation is the operation of
a Virtue which humane Policy does not always consult.

Xunchi has also given to all those Officers and Mandorins, who are actually
in possession of those Employments, all those Pensions and Allowances which the
ancient Emperors of China settled upon them; and has continued several of the
most ancient amongst them in their former Offices and Employments, or else has
put them into other places not less honorable than their former. And yet these
have never ceased to complain that they had only the Name and Title of Mandorin
left them. They had reason to say so, if they considered, that they were now
really obliged to gain and maintain at least a better Fame than they had
before. Nothing can better capacitate any public Officer or Magistrate, to
serve his Prince in his Employment, than to have the reputation of Merit and
desert, which may render him considerable in the esteem of the people: But the
Officers who did most murmur and complain, were those who had the management of
the Exchequer, and the Revenues of the Emperor. They were not satisfied that
they could not enrich them by those vast Sums of Money which passed through
their hands: The Tartars derided them, and scoffingly asked them, if they were
not called the Officers of the Emperor's Exchequer; if they were so, they must
then acknowledge, that the Exchequer was not theirs, but the Emperors; but if
they appropriated it to themselves, by enriching themselves thereby, they were
not then the Officers of the Emperors Exchequer, but of their own; that they
should either be satisfied with the Pensions were allotted them, or resign up
their place^^ to others: That the Emperor would not want Officers to discharge
those Employments, and yet be well content with the same Pensions and Allowance
they had who murmured, and were so discontented at them.

After the Xunchi had strictly enjoined his Officers not to sell Justice, he
punished very severely those Judges, against whom it was proved that they had
received any Bribes or Presents. And he was the more vigilant to put a Check to
this disorder, knowing that the Ruin of China was at first occasioned by the
Avarice and ^^orruption of the greatest part of the Judges, and those who were
i^^ the most eminent Offices and Employments in that State. For as for
Pilfering Extortion, and Bribery, the Chinese Officers and Ministers of State
were scarce to be paralleled in the whole world. And upon this very account,
long before the loss of that Empire, they were so detested and abominated by
all their Neighbors, that by their Books and Writings it plainly appears, they
could neither speak nor write of the Mandorins without bitter expressions of
indignation against them.

It was they who managed and disposed of all the Emperors of China's Revenue,
but in such a manner, that the Emperor, whose Revenue amounted yearly to more
than thirty Millions sterling, was ever in want and indigency. At least in
appearance he had not wherewith to supply the necessary Expenses of his State,
which was occasioned by the fraud of the Mandorins, who diverted to their own
private occasions the greatest part of those Moneys, which should have been
employed upon the public account; and never concerned themselves with
thinking, or contriving how the Soldiery should receive their pay and
subsistence, and less how to reward those who had faithfully served their
Prince and Country. And yet the people were compelled to pay Taxes, Subsidies,
and Impositions, to maintain the pride and grandeur of the Mandorins, and other
Officers, who had advanced themselves by the decay of the State; and yet they
were so weak and cowardly, that they durst not attempt, to preserve either it
or any part thereof from utter ruin and destruction. Whereas before a Mandorin
would have trampled upon, and treated with scorn and contempt the most
considerable Officers of the Army, now on the contrary, the sight of one poor
Soldier would have made a great number of Mandorins run away and hide
themselves. Thus by the avarice of these Officers, the Princes Guard was
composed only of some poor distressed Soldiers, who were both ill paid and
maintained, and being scorned and vilified, to advance their Fortune and
Condition, sided with the Rebels. Zunchin perceived, but too late, that
Soldiers have a great share in the support and preservation of Empires, and
the greater, by the impossibility there is that great Empires should not have
potent Enemies. In his greatest exigency and distress, he found he had not any
Soldiers whom he had by the least recompense engaged to stick firmly to the
defense of his Person and State. He then understood, that his Treasure and
Revenue had not been employed in those things which were necessary and
important for his preservation. He was fully convinced, that his Imperial
Grandeur was but ill supported, when he saw his Royal person abandoned, his
Life and Empire reduced to its last period, and that there was now no remedy
left, but that both he and the Empire must both perish together.

The Tartarian Emperor Zunchi saw clearly all these Disorders in the
Government of China, and judging by the actions of the Chinese, that these ill
Customs were strongly inrooted, he judged it the more important utterly to
extirpate them. He therefore entered upon this Affair, with that care and
resolution that it was not his fault, if afterward Justice was not well
regulated and executed in China. His Ministers of State and the Officers whom
he employed were likewise very diligent herein. And certainly nothing could
more effectually put a stop to these disorders, than to see the prudence and
fidelity of the Officers concur with the good intentions of their Master.

It wa^^ a thing very extraodinary to see with what uprightness and integrity
all the Officers, both those who were really Tartars, and those who desired to
be thought so, proceeded in the execution of their Charge. Ly, the famous
Viceroy of Canton, who boasted that he was a Tartar, though he was believed to
be a Chinese, when he was Commander of the Army, pillaged and plundered all
places and persons; yet after, he was transformed to a very grave Magistrate,
and acted as a most incorruptible Judge in all Causes which were brought before
him, gained thereby a public repute and esteem, as a most zealous person for
the due execution of Justice and Equity. And as for the Plunder which he took
in those Towns and Places which he had subdued, he justified himself as well as
he could by the Law of Arms, which always allows the General and Commanders in
Chief a considerable part of the Booty, because they have so great an one in
the peril and danger. And if the Soldiers under his Command took advantage of
any opportunity to take what they could get, it was to be considered, that they
had then no other way to subsist, there coming no Money from the Court to pay
them with. Thus he endeavored to put as fair a gloss as he could upon all his
former actions, and endeavored to excuse all that was past; and for the
future, he acted so uprightly, and proceeded with so much honor and
impartiality in the management of all Affairs, and obliged all the Officers
under him to demean themselves so plausibly toward the people, that they
willingly accepted of this fair Deportment, in recompense of all those
mischiefs he had formerly done them.

The better to manifest the ability of this Person, I shall relate some
Passages, which passed between him and a Chinese Mandorin, who was accused of
Misdemeanor. An Inhabitant of Canton came, and presented himself before the
Viceroy, and demanded Justice of him, in a Cause wherein he was concerned. The
Viceroy told him, that he could not take cognizance of his Cause, until a
Chinese Mandorin had first heard it, and given Judgment therein; that he should
go and demand Justice first of the Chinese Mandorin, and i^^ after he desired
to appeal from his Sentence, he might have recourse to him. May it please Your
Highness (says the Plaintiff,) it is true, such a Mandorin should first judge
my Cause, and I have already addressed my self to him, that I might have
Justice done me: But I have for a long time prosecuted my business before him,
and cannot obtain of him to decide or determine my Cause: And though I have
very earnestly solicited him, yet it does not appear, that he so much as
thinks of me, I come therefore to supplicate Your Highness, that you would be
graciously pleased either to do me Justice your self, or to cause the Mandorin
to do itme. Ly, who was not of a humor and disposition to suffer things to go
contrary to his will and intention, having hea^^d this discourse, and being
convinced of the truth thereof, Bring (says he) this ^^octor before me, and
seeing him afterward in the presence of a great number of persons, he severely
reprooved him, saying to him, Mr. Doctor, y^^u believe you are still under the
ancient Government of China, and in a Trial for Three hundred Pounds, you will
make the parties concerned expend Six hundred or a Thousand: That in all Causes
the Judges shall be the only gainers; and that whenever any person obtains a
Judgment or Decree in his favor, he must first have wasted both his Time and
Estate. But I Will make you know the times are changed, and that you have now to
do with another Master Xunchi, the Tartarian Emperor. How comes it to pass,
you have not determined this affair? How happens it, that you are pleased to
prolong this Suit so long? You expect to bribed you infamous Villain? And you
believe I do not understand that meaning. But I swear by the head of Xunchi,
that if I ever hear the like complaint of you again, it shall cost you both
that Place and your Head. Therefore if you have a mind to live any longer,
dispatch this affair quickly.

The Mandorin withdrew himself, fully determining to do justice therein, but he
was forced and compelled to it. And all the other Mandarins and Officiers, who
were advertised hereof, resolved to take advantage hereby, and to demean
themselves so as not to deserve the like reproof* The common people, when they
had heard what had passed, highly extolled their Governor for his Justice
herein. This action of his was not only famed about the City, but throughout
the whole Province, and all persons did admire and applaud the Person and
excellent Qualities of the Viceroy of Canton.

This is all I could know in general of the Government of the Tartars in China,
and in particular, how the young Emperor Xunchi, and his Officers managed
affairs. These are men who are reputed dull and barbarous; but it is to be
wished, that many in Europe, who are esteemed of, as the most refined and
polite persons, had the Justice and Humanity of these Barbarians.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Tartars compel the Chieses to leave their Books, and take up
Arms. Of the Tartarian Letters and Language. The Sciences for which they have
the greatest inclination.
LEarning and Arms may be considered in a State, as the two Poles upon which
the Government turns, and by which it subsists; so that either of them cannot
be laid aside, but it must in a manner occasion a vacuum, and thereby
debilitate the body Politic. But it is most certain that the want of Arms and
knowledge in Military affairs, may have more dangerous consequences than the
want of Books, and ignorance in the learned Arts and Sciences, which stand in
need of Arms and Soldiers to protect and defend them. Which is clearly
manifest by the late Revolution of China, which the Tartar understood so well,
that he thought himself obliged to remedy that ill, as well as he could,
knowing that that which had given him so great advantage, might prove as much
to his disadvantage, if he did not shun and avoid it. We have seen several very
potent Monarchies which have had no need of Learning to confirm and strengthen
their Dominion. The Spaniards have fought above five thousand Battles in those
times, when they did not think of writing of Books. And we may easily perceive,
that they have not made much use of them in those remote Conquests which they
have made of later years. The Tartars said very well, a State cannot be
maintained without Arms, but it may without Books. For it is most certain that
neighboring Princes are too jealous of the Power and Grandeur of each other,
to let one another long be at quiet: Nay, the very rumor that any one of them
raises Soldiers or makes warlike preparations, necessitates in a manner all
the others to arm likewise. It is their Sword which must do them right and
justice. And they know full well, that it is no matter to those who have that
power in their hands whether their right be grounded or no upon the most
plausible and strongest reason.

Yet the Tartar, not to render himself odious to the Chinese, thought he ought
not quite to prohibit them to apply themselves to Books and Study. He thought
this was a point which must be touched but nicely since the whole Nation was so
addicted to, and had so great an esteem for Learning. T^^erefore in the
beginning of the year 1647 t^^ere were above three hundred Scholars who took
the degree of Doctor, in the City of Nanking, as heretofore they did at Peking;
and above 600. others were admitted as Licentiats, besides a great number of
those who took the degree of Bachelor. It is not in Europe only, that there is
such store of Doctors and Batchelors.

Xunchi was willing to give the Chinese this satisfaction, though the expenses
hereof were very great, and were to be defrayed out of the Emperors Exchequer.
This was no small mark of his Liberality, and his condescension in being
pleased to gratify the Chinese herein: But withal he gave them to understand
that he should be necessitated to reform their Studies, and their over
bookishness: and that now Scholars must give place and precedence to Soldiers
as heretofore Soldiers were slighted, and Scholars only esteemed and rewarded.

As in all States and Countries men voluntarily apply themselves to those
employments by which they may attain the greatest Honor and Profit. So the
Chinese seeing Learned men the only rich and honorable persons in Chin^^,
they ambitiously applied themselves to the studious and learned Sciences.
Xunchi therefore thought fit solely to honor and gratify the Soldiery. This
was sufficient to enduce the Chinese to quit their Studies, and turn
Soldiers. Let every one according to their reason and inclination pass their
censure upon these two Professions: yet this must be granted, that all that can
be said by those, who by their manner of Life have declared themselves partial
to Learning, is only this; that esteem and merit should equally be divided to
persons of each of these Professions proportionable to their skill and industry
in either of them. But then this must be granted, that Gown-men and Pen men,
who are freest from danger, are in the readier way to Preferment. Whereas a
Soldier, after he has hazarded his Life in several Fights and Seiges, usually
has no other recompense than to lose his Life at last in some other
engagement. Very many persons, even those who, for their eminent services, have
deserved to be highly recompensed: have had no better fortune.

The Tartarian Emperor was of opinion, that Military Employments were most
meritorious, because they were exposed to so great perils. Therefore though he
still encouraged Learning in China, and sent into each Province thereof two
Viceroys (as there was before) the one a Gown-man, to whom was entrusted the
administration of Justice in Civil affairs, the other a Soldier, who had the
direction of all Military concerns: yet he manifested a greater esteem for
those, who embraced the Military Profession, even so far, as to make several
Scholars, whom he judged were fit to make Soldiers, quit their Gowns and take
up Arms. He was likewise very careful to reward his Soldiers, if he knew they
had merited it, though they were in places very remote from his person, yet
when they least expected it he sent them Presents and Gratuities. Upon this
account, in the year 1647. in the Month of August, he commanded a very
considerable Mandorin, who was assistant to the royal Council at Peking, to go
from thence to Canton, to carry Presents to the two Viceroys thereof. Though
it was a thousa^^d Miles from one of these Cities to the other; yet the
Mandorin having no other business, in obedience to his Order, went so great a
journey. The Presents were two Gold Cups, set with Precious stones, and two
very rich Suits of Clothes. Xunchi, knowing that the two Viceroys had equally,
in the Reduction of that Province, upon all occasions, and in all engagements
with the Enemy, given great proofs of their Valor, designed to give equal
Honor to their persons and merits. It is not therefore to be wondered at, that
that Prince had so many gallant and brave Soldiers, since he was so careful
and sollicitous to re^^ompense the services of his own Commanders, that he sent
such magnificent Presents to those, who were at such a distance from his Court,
and for this intent alone he employed the principal persons in his State to go
and acquaint them how satisfied His Majesty was with their Fidelity and
Courage. Princes can never want brave Soldiers, if they carefully reward them,
but it will be difficult for them to retain such in their Services, unless by
their actions they show, that they know both how to value and reward them.

Several Gown-men, even those who were in very considerable employments, when
they saw that it was not likely they should advance themselves, if they applied
themselves solely to the study of their Laws, presently put them selves into
Military commands. We have already seen the Conduct of the Lord Chief Justice
of Canton, or the Viceroy in Civil affairs. But that it may be known, what
opinion this Gown-man had at that time of his own Profession: I shall relate
how he expressed himself upon this Subject to a Friend of his. This person
though he was not very Learned, was made Justice or Mandorin in Civil affairs
in the City of Canton; Every person in China, who had but the least smattering
in Learning, yet he thought himself a great Doctor if he was advanced to the
dignity of a Mandorin. But this person showed he had more worth in him than the
rest, since he did so ingeniously acknowledge and allow his disability. In all
parts there are very few that pretend to be Scholars, who will acknowledge a
deficiency in Learning: but there are fewer, who will make a sincere Confession
of their Ignorance. Yet this man did very ingeniously tell the Viceroy that he
had not Learning enough to qualify him to be a Mandorin, and and therefore if
his Excellency would please to give him an employment more proportionable to
his capacity, he should acknowledge himself the more obliged. The Viceroy
demanded of him wherein he thought himself insufficient? he replied, that he
could not write or form the Chinese Caracters fair enough; Go (says the
Viceroy) you have but too much Learning for these times: when all persons who
hope to make themselves any ways considerable, but leave their Books and turn
Soldiers. Do not believe, or fancy, that hereafter in all Suits or Trials at
Law, it will be thought necessary to write so much, or examine so many Writings
and Deeds. You must only attentively hear both parties, and give them a verbal
dispatch: be exact in this and resolve to do justice. Truth and Justice are not
so concealed and hid from our knowledge and sight, that we shouldsearch for them
in places where they are scarce ^^ver to be ^^ound, in the Whirle-pooles, and
bottoml^^ss pits of Lawsuits. The Mandorin understood full well the Vice Roys
meaning, and thanked his Excellency for the Charge he was pleased to bestow on
him, and the good Advice he gave him, and taking leave of him, he told him, My
Lord, I am sufficiently qualified, if diligence and good intentions do
sufficiently capacitate me for the execution of my Charge.

Thus Xunchi very calmly, and without any violence refo^^med the abuses and
frauds of the Chinese Penmen and Gown-men, and was well enough pleased that
the Soldiers and Officers, did publicly deride and speak against that lazy
and unnecessary Occupation; Nothing did more advance, than this did, the
alteration which that Prince designed to introduce. And this occasioned several
very pleasant passages: Once a Chinese Mandorin was obliged to quarter in his
house a Tartarian Captain, a person highly considered amongst those of his own
Nation, and he had a very good lodging in the Mandorins house, and all the
accommodation he could wish for. The Mandorin, who was very ambitious of the
fame and repute of a very learned man, had a very fine Library, which doubtless
was furnished with more Learning than his head was. The best and most Lightsome
Rooms of his were filled with Books, and he called those Lodgings Xufan, which
signifies a very airy place, and it was in truth cooled with a very refreshing
air which prevented dust and worms which spoil Books.

When the Tartar saw this place, he judged it a more convenient Lodging than
those he had, and that they made very ill use of it to lodge only the dead
there. He went therefore to his Landlord, and said to him, Mr. Mandorin, you
must quickly cl^^ar me this place, and turn out these learned Lawyers and
Lawbooks, or else I and my Soldiers will make wadds for our Guns with them, or
make use of of them for P^^pers to put our, Tobacco in. And you shall see that
we know better how to employ them than you do. This was to show no great esteem
for that which the Mandorin so highly boasted of. But he must not argue in
their defense, but quickly remove his Books. And in truth he had no reason to
make any great complaint, if he made no great use of them, but kept them there
only for show and ostentation, and for the fame of having a great Library.
Though the Tartar scoffingly boasted all over China how he had made the
Mandorin displace his Books.

This was all the esteem the Tartars had for Books or any learned Sciences, to
which they little applied themselves, unless it was out of a desire to have
some knowledge in the Mathematics and Astrology. For whereas they adore the
Heavens, they were well enough pleased to be able to discourse of the Stars,
and to entertain themselves with that, which is the very ground and
fundamentals of their Religion, but they mattered not much for any deep
Learning herein. The Tartars publish every year their Almanacks or Calenders,
which are little different from the Chinese. That in the year 1647. was the
first which was set forth under the name, and by the order of the Emperor
Xunchi. This was a very curious piece, and the Author thereof was Father Adam
the Jesuit, who was very skilful in the Mathematics, and was then in great
favor and credit with the Emperor.

The Tartars did not more villifie or contemn the Political and Moral
Philosophy of the Chinese, though they thought it not worth their time to
study it. They often very rationally said to them, That it was much better to
have fewer Laws, and to observe them better. That there was no need to make so
many Statutes and Ordinances, but to give good examples; for to know good, and
not to practice it, serves only to heighten and aggravate men's iniquities.

The Letters and Characters which the Tartars make use of, resemble those of
Iapan; and both of them are only some traces of the Chinese Characters: but
they are much plainer, easier, and not so mysterious as those of China: And are
therefore more approved of, nay than any which are used by the Asiatick people,
or even by the Europeans, who dwell in the Indies and the Philippin Isles, who
because they have learnt the manners and customs of those Nations, make use of
such fantastical Characters, that they can scarce read their own Writing, and
are often obliged to guess at the greatest part: They point all their Letters
at the top and bottom, as the Hebrew Characters are, and this makes them
Ciphers and Hieroglyphics, rather than Letters.

It is remarked that the Tartarian Language has something in it very grave and
majestic, It has many vowels as the Spanish has: And naturally they pronunce
it with force and violence, and with a Warlike accent, which makes it appear
rough and rude. But because it isso pronounced by Soldiers, who usually speak
more fiercely than others, especially those who desire to be reputed Hectors,
we cannot draw from them a general rule. Doubtless the Courtiers speak with a
more polite and refined accent, as as they do in all Courts, where, it is to be
wished, they were as careful to do well, as they are accurate to speak well.

Strangers e^^sily learn this Language, because it has not so many
Determinations and Accents as the Chinese has, which render it the most
difficult and troublesome Language in the whole Uni^^erse. In all the Relations
I have seen, there was no term or expression in the Tartarian Language, which
might give us some example or essay thereof, except the word Pelipaouan, which
was the name of one of the Ki^^gs Uncles; Peli is a Tartarian word, and of no
rough or rude pronunciation, unless compared with the softness and smoothness
of the Italian and Spanish Tongues: it signifies Prince. And Van, which is a
Chinese word, has the same signification; so that Prince is twice comprehended
in that name. If in Corea, or in any other place Pao signifies the same thing.
Then Pelipaouan is as much as to say thrice Prince, or the thrice great Prince.
This repetition may seem superfluous, and though it be expressed in three
different Languages, yet the signification may be thought not to be altered.
But in the Chinese Language, and perhaps it is the same in the Tartarian, these
repetions add a great weight to the signification: Which may be confirmed
herein by the Histories of China, in which it may be seen, that they called by
the name Chium all the Princes and Monarchs upon the Earth, except their own,
to whom they reputed all others far inferior; and they gave the title of Van
to the Princes of the Blood Royal of China. But because they did not esteem
either of these two names sufficient to express the majestic Grandeur of their
Emperors, they thought by joining these two words together, and thereby
composing the word Chiumval, it would much better suit the Grandeur of their
Monarch: Therefore they invented a Title worthy of their King, whom they call
Chiumval, thereby to render him the greater honor.

Thus we may discern that this Nation, by adding together several words which
have the same signification, intend thereby to frame a word of a higher and
fuller signification, and a supereminent Name, which may comprehend them all in
one. This was the weight and signification of the word Pelipaouan, which was as
illustrious a Title, as that person was amongst those people, who was dignified
with it. It Is very worthy of remark to observe, that the Emperor Xunchi was so
far from being offended, that these high Titles were given to Princes, who,
though they were his near Relations, were yet his Subjects; that on the
contrary, he confided much in them, and made them Governors and Rulers over
several great Provinces, with a Power and Authority suitable to their quality.
It was a great argument that Xunchi by giving so great a power to Pelipaouan,
who by birth was a great Prince, and likewise took upon him the title of
Conqueror of China, did not much matter those reasons of State, which might be
alleged against this Conduct: or else he wa^^ highly convinced of the fidelity
of the Tartarian Princes. Or finally, that the Tartarian Kings are less jealous
of their Sovereign Power than other Princes are, and that the Princes who are
their Subjects, are not so passionately affected with Glory, and ambitious of
reigning.

CHAP. XXIX. How much addicted the Tartars are to War. Their Arms offensive and
defensive. Their great^^st force consists in their Horse. The excellency of
their Hors^^s.
THe Tartars cannot live out of Arms and War; they affect and desire nothing so
much as to be always in the field, and have Enemies to fight with, which is the
joy and pleasure of their Life. They never think themselves so graceful and
handsome as when they appear with their faces full of seams and scars; whereas
other Nations are so careful to keep their Faces smooth and beautiful, their
Complexions clear and fair, their Hair, or rather their Periwigs, curled,
poudred, and perfumed, to the shame, not only of their Nation, but nature too,
who made them Men and not Women, whom they do so much imitate, and like whom
they so strive to appear. The Tartars are far from this effeminacy, and are so
transported with a violent passion for Arms and Soldiery, that all the
beautiful Provinces of China have been turned into forges, in which the Tartars
employ an infinite number of Workmen in making incessantly all sorts of Arms.
All the Black-smiths and all sorts of Workmen, who work in either Iron or
Metal throughout that vast Empire, have been solely taken up with making Arms.
If any one should be so curious, as to be inquisitive wherefore the Tartars
make so many Arms? I know not how to answer them, but that to believe they
design to make Arms enough for the whole world. All the fine Libraries in China
were turned into Armories and Magazines, for Warlike provisions. Heretofore it
would have been difficult to have found a Sword, though old and rusty, unless
amongst the Soldiers. If the Chinese were engaged in any quarrel, they
contented themselves with plucking one another by the hair of the Head, or the
Beard, or else scratching; and those who were not armed with Nails long
enough, decided it at fisticuffs. The Chinese did so naturally make use of
their Nails instead of A^^ms, that those who would be reputed hectoring
Gallants, thought it an ornament, to have their Nails as long as the Talents of
a Hawk or Eagle. It is so true, that they never ma^^e use of Arms in China,
that though they had very many able and expert Physicians, they had not one
Surgeon in the whole Country; for they had no Wounds for them to practice
upon. As for all accidental Hurts, outward Swellings, Imposthumes, and such
like Distempers, Physicians undertook the Cure thereof. But after the Tartars
had subdued Chin^^, all sorts of persons wore Arms: Nay little Children of
eight years old, ^^specially if their Parents were of quality, had a Hanger or
Scymitar begirt about their waste, which gave occasion to the Chinese both to
laugh at, and pity the little Children, that in so tender an age they should be
troubled to carry so unnecessary and useless a burden.

The Tartars exercised their Soldiers every day before the Palaces of their
Viceroys: There they drew up the Troops in Battalia, and fired at one another
with their Muskets and Guns as eagerly, as if two Armies had been contending
for Victory. They had likewise Prises, and persons appointed to take notice of,
and recompense the address and expertness of those who shot with Bows and Guns
every day at a mark. Whosoever hit the mark with three Bullets, or three
Arrows, had given him, as a reward, a little piece of Siver Plate, fashioned
like a shell, worth about four Iulio's; (a Iulio is in value about six pence
sterling:) He who hit the mark twice had one worth about two Iulio's; and he
who hit it but once had one only of the value of one Iulio. But they who missed
the mark thrice were instantly bastinado'd. And to disgrace them the more, were
publicly hooted and hissed at, or else had some other affront put upon them.
The Tartars were not obliged to these exercises, but the Chinese of those
Provinces, who had submitted them^^elves, that by custom they might learn not
to be afraid of Guns or Arms. They designed by this continual exercise, to
disaccustome them from that Effeminacy and Lazines^^, in which they had lain so
long buried. These idle Fellows would very willingly have been excused from
this trouble. But they deserved to be learnt by their Enemies the exercise of
Arms, th^^t they might carry them in their Service, since they so little
concerned themselves, to make use of them in the defense of their own Country,
and for the preservation of themselves.

As for the several sorts of Arms the Tartars make use of: The Defensive are,
Breast-plates and Back-pieces, Head-pieces, Shoulder-pieces and Vambraces,
which are in a manner like the defensive Arms in Europe, but their Armor is
not so bright, nor so well wrought, which makes them who wear them look the
more terrible and dreadful. The Viser of there Helmet is not fastened and rivited
to the Cask as in Europe; but is only a loose pla^^e of Iron very strong, which
covers the face, throat, and shoulders, and is separated from the Helmet when
they please. They likewise have several other pieces and plates of Iron, with
which they cover the head, throat, neck and shoulders. These are to defend them
in Fights from showers of Arrows, which fall thick, and might pierce an Artery,
or wound them so deep in those parts as might cause so great an effusion of
Blood, as might be very dangerous. And therefore they defend those parts with
all the caution imaginable; for the defense of the rest of their body, they
make use of certain Buff Coats m^^de very wide and large, and quilted in the
inside with Cotton. When they are at their own houses and in peace, they wear
these Coats, but then they are not so well lined.

Their Offensive Arms are Bows and Arrows, short Swords and Lances: Their short
Swords are pointed in the fashion of the Turkish Scymitars. They are usually
very short but heavy, they have very sharp edges, and are excellently well
tempered. They make use likewise of another sort of Swords, which are very
broad, and are by the Chinese and Iapanners called Catanes; there are some of
these very great, and are two handed like the Swissers Swords: The fashion of
the Handles both of their short and broad Swords is not extraordinary, but they
are made of Gold, Silver or Brass, according to the Riches or Curiosity of the
owners* they have no Pikes, judging them not convenient for their manner of
fighting. Their Lances are very short, and they use them as we do Haltbards or
Partisans But their Bows and Arrows are their most honorable Weapons, of which
they are very proud, and take pleasure in showing how skilfully they can shoot
with them, which they do so dexterously, that several persons with one draught
of the Bow will let fly three or four Arrows at a time, with that force and
violence, that should they at a due distance hit any man, the lightest would
pierce him quite thorough. Their Bows are rather little than great. They are
light but very strong and solid. Their Arrows are some long, some short, but
all so strong, that they will pierce through a stiffboard: The Iron heads are
made four square, or triangular, but long and extraordinary well pointed and
tempered.

They had no Fire Arms, when they first entered into China: But as soon as they
had possessed themselves of some places, they took out all the great Guns,
Muskets and Fire Arms, which they found, and made use of them ever afterward.
But they never employed any Tartars as Cannoneers and Gunners, but only
Chinese, and some few Europeans: Nor suffered any to carry Muskets or Fire
Arms, but only the Chinese of those Provinces which had submitted themselves,
with whom they increased their Army, that they might the sooner complete their
Conquest. As for Petards or Fireworks, they neither know how to make them or
use them, nor how to spring a Mine. It may seem strange, that the Tartars would
thus put their best Weapons into the hands of their new Subjects, and not learn
how to handle them themselves. That they should train up both Citizens and
Country people in their Military Discipline: For which several persons censure
the Conduct of Xunchi, as likewise for entrusting the Princes of his Family
with so great a Power. But this Monarch was convinced that the more he confided
in his Uncles, the more he engaged and secured their Loyalty; and by
manifesting how little he feared, and how much he slighted the Chinese, he
made them the more dread his valor, and the courage of the Tartars. It is very
true* that a long time after the Chinese trembled if they did but hear his
Name mentioned. And perhaps this great confidence and security of Xunchi did
not prejudice his affairs. But this is most certain, that if it should have
proved pernicious and fatal to him, he would not have been the first or sole
Prince who was ruined and lost by being too secure, and confident of his own
power and force.

It remains that I should speak of that in which the chief strength and force
of the Tartars consisted, and by which they did almost solely conquer the
Empire of China. And this may well be said to have been their Horses. There are
indifferent handsome Horses in China, but they are but weak, and they tire and
lose their Wind at the first Course. Neither are they so fit for the War as
those of Tartary, which are long winded, stout, strong, well set, and
excellently shaped, and are all fit to make War-horses; and withal they are so
nimble and swift, that it is a great pleasure to see them gallop over the most
ragged Hills and Mountains, as if it was in a plain Meadow. As for shape and
strength, they come not short of the Horses either in Europe or Arabia. But all
the Horses upon Earth; yield them the advantage of a certain highness of mettle
and spirit, which cannot be described, and keeps always in heart. As for those
who ride them, they are seated as firmly, and as gracefully, as if their Horse
and they were of one piece. But they apply themselves to this exercise when
they are very young, and never quit it as long as they live. There are several
Tartars who will tie the Rains of the Bridle to their Girdles, and only by the
motion of their Body guide and govern their Horses as they please, make them
turn upon all the Volts, and go any kind of Manage. By this means they have
their hands free to make use of their Bows and Arrows. Others will hold their
Bow with the same hand they do their Bridle, and at the same time draw their
Bow and guide their horse with great facility. It was these Tartarian horses
which overthrew all the Chinese which durst oppose them. And it may be said,
that these were the Conquerors of China; for the Chinese having no Pikes to
defend themselves, and keep off the horse; fifty thousand Horse, as there was
in the least Army of the Tartars* and in that in which the Emperor commanded
in person, above a hund^^ed thousand, did presently break through, and rout all
the Chinese Armies. These Horses, so bold and high mettled, broke through all
opposition, and made a clear p^^ssage where ever they went; and besides they
we^^e so numerous, and spurred on by so resolute men, that there are f^^w
Armi^^s which can resist them, much less thos^^ of Chin^^, and such like, where
they have no stands of Pikes, nor close Battalions, nor Horses equal to ^^hose
of Tartary.

The Tartars ride with their Stirrups very short, and all the furniture of
their horses is not ^^sually ^^ither cu^^i^^u^^ or rich, but durable and
serviceable, for their manner of fighting. The greatest force of the Tartars
consists in their Horse, their Foot are nothing in comparison: which is not so
in the Armies of Europe. Their Horse goes on first upon all occasions, and they
are ever the first and last at all assaults. Finally, it was they who began and
completed in so short a time the entire Conquest of the vast Empire of China.

CHAP. XXX. The Military Discipline of the Tartars. Their manner of Fighting,
and how they lay Siege to any place. The aversion they have to dwell in Towns.
The Security with which they sleep in their Camp, without placing ^^ither any
Guards ar Sentinels.
IT is only for the disorders and confusion which is in the Armies of the
Tartars, that that Nation can pass for barbarous: For they observe so little
order, that it is rather by the number of their men, and their boldness and
resolution, than by any skill or knowledge how to draw up their Armies in
Battalia, or to fight their men, that they obtain so great Victories. There is
nothing regular in all their warfare, either when th^^y fight any Battles, lay
siege to, or storm any place: whereas the Chinese did usually defend
themselves with all the order and regularity they could possibly. The T^^rtars,
on the contrary, to conquer and vanquish them, made use only of force and fury,
with a great contempt of Death, to which they run with a joy and eagerness, as
if they went immediately to glory and triumph. During the four years of their
War with the Chinese, they had continually several Armies on foot at the same
^^ime. They passed incessantly from ^^ne Province to another, either to
^^nlarge their Conquests, or s^^cure ^^heir Victories; so that nothing was seen
throughout that vast Country, but Troops of Horse, or Companies of Foot. Each
of these Armies were usually composed of two hundred thousand men, fifty
thousand Horse, and the rest Foot. But there was not that distinction of
Officers, as there is in the Armies of Europe. There was only a certain number
of Captains, and instead of those several Colors, and Standards, which are
displayed in other parts, there was only one Standard, under which the whole
Army, both Horse and Foot, served. Therefore, whenever there is any mention
made of the Standards and Colors of the Tartars, it is only according to the
usual custom of speaking by th^^ Soldiers in Europe, to intimate a certai^^
number of their Forces, to avoid the often repetition of Troops and Armies.

The Tartars march with no bette^^ order, than they draw up their Armies in
Battalia. They go divide^^ into several little Bodies together, without
observing either ran^^ or file, and march either more open or close, as the
ways will permit them. The Horse marches first as the vantguard, and the Foot
follow after as a reserve. When they are ready to march, as a signal, the harsh
sound of their Trumpet is heard; and afterward it fo^^nds no more, no not when
they give battle, or charge their Enemy. They have neither Drum nor Fife, nor
any such like Instrument. But it is only the sound of this Trumpet which is a
signal to them to begin their march, and this is the occasion of so great a
commotion, that it may well serve to mind us of that at the last day of
Judgment. Before the Army is carried a Banner, or Standard, indifferent large,
for which all the Troops have a great veneration. This is the only one th^^y
have in the whole Army, and it is something like those which in the Church of
Rome they have in their Churches. Whenever they either charge their Enemies,
or storm any place, they are obliged to follow this Standard which way soever
it goes. Therefore as soon as he who carries it, who is ever some eminent
Captain, and is always accompanied with the most courageous Soldiers of the
Army, begins the assault, the whole Army at the same time falls on. The Horse
makes ever the first attempt, then the Infant^^y follow, without any order or
conduct, but tumultuously and conf^^sedly, according as each ^^erson can close
with his enemy. There is neither right nor left wing, main bat^^el, nor
reserve. They have no distinct Squadrons or Battalions, ^^either do they regard
to keep either rank or ^^ile: Nor do they observe any distinction of time in
shooting with their Bows, or making use of their Lances and short Swords. But
all this numerous multitude move together, and do precipitately fall on at the
same time; that they may break ^^hrough all opposition, like a Sea toss^^d with
a violent storm, when the Waves press and drive on each other so inc^^ssantly,
that the first are no ^^ooner broke, but they are continually seconded by
others, with a new violence and impetousity. Whenever the Tartars have begun
the Charge, they never think of taking breath, or making a retreat; nor are
they discouraged to see any fall down dead or wounded; for they count it no
loss to see a great number of their men lie dead in the Field, esteeming it the
greatest glory to dye with their Arms in their hands, and knowing that they
have men more than enough, to supply the place of the dead. They never sound
any retreat, and mind nothing but either to conquer or dye. And this the sole
order is given them to observe, unless they are totally defeated; for then it
is free for them to run away, as they do in all other parts. If he who carries
the Standard is either overthrown, or killed in the engagement, which happens
very often; for he is always to present himself where the greatest danger is,
then he who is n^^xt him, fails not to take up the Standard, and thus in one
fight, or in one assault, it often passes through the hands of several persons;
neither is there ever wanting gallant and brave fellows, who strive and contend
who shall take it up, and carry it, than which nothing can be more honorable
and gloriou^^.

But the manner how the Tartars besiege and take Towns, is both more
extravagant and extraordinary than their way of fighting. The first thing they
do when they lie before any place, is to storm it, and the last to raise their
Batteries. The Horse make th^^ first approach, and gives the first assault,
which is just opposite to the practice of Europe, without any manner of shelter
they go and present themselves before a place defended with strong Walls and
Bulwarks, lined with all sorts of great Guns and Ordnance, ^^ufficiently
supplied with men, provis^^ons, and ammunition: In this condition were several
places in China when the Tartars assaulted them. Whereas in Europe, an Army
which came to ^^ay siege to any place, would begin with opening their trenches,
raising batteries, and after they had made a breach, then give the assault. The
Tartars on the contrary began with storming the Town, and after batter it. It
is the Horse, headed with the Captain, who carries the Standard, which makes
all assaults, for which they make no great preparations. They only tie a great
number of Ladders to their horses tails. And though these ladders are only one
single piece of timber, with several peggs struck through: yet the Tartars make
use of them as readily as we can of our ordinary Ladders. When they are thus
prepared, the Standard Bearer claps spurs to his horse, and fiercely rides up
to the very foot of the wall, and is presently followed by all the rest of the
Troops, who shout and cry out most hideously, thereby to strike the greater
terror and dread into their enemies. This they do in all fights and assaults.

Though the Artillery of the Enemy play incessantly upon them, though great
numbers of their men are cut off, yet all this does not hinder the assailants
from hotly pursuing their enterprise. The heaps of dead bodies do on the
contrary facilitate their approach by filling up the ditch. In this manner they
advance to the very foot of the wall, and then those who are nearest, light
from their horses, which serve them afterward as Gabions and ^^arapets. And
then having raised their ladders against the wall, with an unparalleled
resolution and courage they mount up to the very top thereof. Now the besieged
are almost in as great danger as the assailants. For those under the wall, who
are to second those on the top, do incessantly shower down an infinite number
of Arrows upon those within the walls. And they let fly their Arrows with that
ex^^ct^^ess, that they make ^^hem fall where they will, and they f^^y with that
strength, that they strike quite through those who think them^^elves most
s^^cure and best defended. Thus those upon the Ladders quickly gain the top of
the Wall, and there either lying flat down, or kneeling on their knees, with
their Arrows, they ply so warmely those within, as well those who man the Guns,
as all those who attempt to defend the walls, that they quickly beat them from
their Artillery, and disenable them from making use of any of their Arms. In
the mean time fresh Troops draw near the place, and whilst some are attempting
to scale the Walls, others endeavor to possess themselves of a Gate, and to
gain a passage into the Town; and in a little time, that is to say, as soon as
any horses can get in, by the noise and neighing they make, they quickly
discover, that the Town is taken, and that all is now at the discretion of the
Enemy. Thus the Tartarian horses first proclaim the Victory. These assaults,
where the assailants do thus precipitately fall on, without the defense of any
Arms, and without facilitating their assault by fi^^st making a breach, did
usually cost them the loss of many men, for which they revenged themselves upon
those who could no longer defend themselves. Then the fury of the Conquerors
was boundless, Revenge is the joy of their hears, from which they never desist
till they have satiated themselves with the blood of the conquered.

But if by storm the Tartars make themselves not masters of the place, then
they make use of their Artillery and batter the walls: And so conclude where
the Europeans began, till after they have made all possible attempts to carry
the place by storm, they fire not one Cannon, though they march into the field
with a train of five hundred pieces of Ordnance, as ^^elipaouan did. Thus
Tartars practice three things just opposite to what is done by those who better
understand the Military Art. They begin first to storm, after they raise their
batteries; and thirdly, they employ their Horse to storm Towns and scale Walls.
There is nothing in human affairs which seems so irregular and extra^^agant to
some persons, but is practiced by others, who yet allege arguments to justify
it, which they pretend to be solid and rational.

As for their march, of which we began to speak, toward night the Trumpet
sounds, and then all the whole Army take up their quarters. Till this signal is
given, they never make halt all the day long, but they either march or fight:
Therefore as soon as they hear the Trumpet sound, every man prepares to set up
his Tent, which he takes out from the rest of the baggage. Each Captain has a
Wagon for the baggage appertaining to himself, and to all those under his
command. The baggage of the whole Army never marches together: The Tents are
either made of strong Leather or raw hides, which are sewed together, and made
up indifferent handsomely. Each big and habitable enough, which it had need be,
for it is their usual habitation. These Tents they pitch in great order with
Marketplaces and Streets, like as in great Towns, and are placed after the
manner of the houses of the Turks in the Country. The Tartars choose rather to
live in these Tents than in Cities and Towns, in which they say, they are
choked up in a crowd, and have not their health; whereas when they are
encamped in the fields under their Tents, and breath in the clear air, there
they are strong and lusty. It is most certain that all things to which men will
accustom themselves, by continuance will become pleasant and agreeable; nay,
even labor and toil; it is but enduring it some time: whereas idleness and the
effeminate pleasures of this life grow at length wearisome, and burdensome to
those who have any long time enjoyed them. There are some Gally-slaves, which
would not be pleased to be taken from the Oar, time and custom has so sweetened
the hardship to them. Custom is very potent, nay it works miracles. This it
was which prevailed so far with the Tartars, that it induced them to esteem
^^he palaces and fine houses in Cities inconvenient for their health. They
never were better in heal^^h, and more at ease, than when they were encamped in
the most vast and spacious fields, and were necessitated to suffer all the
incon^^eniences of the air and ill weather; from hence it was, that they were
so averse to live in Towns. But pe^^haps they have now changed their humor;
for though they were so well content, to toil and take pains during the time of
their Conquest, yet it being but too true, that we do with greater facility
accustom our selves to ease and pleasure than to hardship and labor; it is
probable, that in time they will accustom themselves to the luxury and
effeminacy of the Chinese.

But we must now return to visit the Tartars in their Tents; whither they
withdraw themselves to feast and make merry. Their meat is usually young
Horseflesh, which they dress after their fashion; and as for their Horses,
they feed them with Rice, which is better meat than the flesh th^^y eat: They
drink and eat with as good a stomach, as they fight and take pains, and
presently after fall asleep with as little disturbance as if they had no
enemies in the World. They never regard to place any Guards or Sentinels: And
the Rounds they go never wakens any body. Thus all night there is a profound
silence in their Camp, without the least noise, but sometimes the neighing of
Horses. In the very heat of the War they slept as quietly, and with as little
disturbance. It is only Barbarians who are capable of this arrogant
presumption, to sleep thus securely amidst Arms and War, as if all was their
own: For they are intoxicated with s^^ch an opinion of their valor, that they
think there is no person upon earth has the courage to give them an alarm.
They are no more diffident, and have no stricter a Guard in the Towns, where
they keep garrison, unless in Canton, and some few other places, where the
Corsairs did incessantly allarm them, and thereby necessitated them to keep
some Soldiers always under their Arms. This was not the custom of the Chinese,
for they for above two hundred and eighty years, kept the strictest Guard they
could possibly in all their Towns, and were in such a continual fear, that with
their instruments and shooting, they made such a horrid noise all night, that
no body could sleep in quiet: yet after they had watched so strictly for so
many years, when their Enemies were above twelve hundred miles from any of
their Provinces; they were unfortunately asleep when it concerned them to have
been most watchful. The Chinese made a great noise when they saw no body, but
when the Enemy was near them, they scarce durst lift up their voice so loud as
to call out, Arm, arm; so far were they from going to meet their Enemy, or
disputing with him the entrance into their Provinces. Finally, they were no
more safe for having kept so good a guard; whereas the Tartar conquered all
their vast Empire, and yet slept in quiet, confidently relying on his own
strength, and knowing that his valor was so dreaded by his enemies, that they
durst not attacque him; which verifies the vulgar saying, that he whose
Reputation is up may lie in bed.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Behavior of the Tartars. Of their Natural inclination to
War and Labor. Of their frank and free dealing, without any ceremony. Of their
Divertis^^ments, Occupations, and Employments in general.
THe Tartars, who conquered China, are generally proper men, and well shaped,
only their shoulders are broad, but the rest of their Limbs are well
proportioned. But they are very sturdy and strong, which makes ^^hem appear
rather rough and unhewn, than nice or effeminate. Neither are they affected
with neat and fine clothes, and by the brawnyness of their hands, it may be
seen, that they can go very well without Gloves. All their Gallantry is to be
in action, and make a bustle: Naturally they love to takepains, and they may be
compared to those ancient Roman Soldiers, born and bred in the Country, of
whom one of their Poets says; That after they had died the Sea with the blood
of Africa, after they had defeated Antiochus, Pyrrhus, and Hannibal, they
returned to their Country life, and went out in the morning with a spad^^ upon
their shoulders, and returned at night with a burden of wood, which their
Mothers, who bred them not up nicely, had taught them to carry.

The Tartars have not ordinarily their complexions so fair as the Chinese;
there is not much difference usually in their faces, unless it be that some are
more black and tanned. They have thicker bea^^ds, which, for the most part, are
either black or red, but they cut it quite off, leaving only a tuft on the
middle of their chin. They have no Mustaches, but for all that, they are very
gallant fellows. Which is an argument that men (at least in that Country) may
have courage, though they have no Mustaches. They wear their hair very short,
or rather none at all, being willing to discharge themselves of that, of which
they have so little need. Their Behavior and outside is not at all warlike,
nor does it show any great mark of courage or resolution: they make a sport of
work and labor, to which they have been accustomed from their Infancy, which
make them, that they cannot live without it. They are not charmed with the
pleasures of an idle and easy life, which they account dishonorable and
ignoble; and that which is yet more, they are as indefatigable, dexterous, and
as able to go ^^hrough with their enterprises, as they are hot and fierce to
enter upon them. Man's Life requires labor, and dexterity, as well as several
other things, and we must sometimes incline to one side, that we may
counterpoise the other. The Tartars are as fit for contrivance as execution:
And though they do not break their brains, with scratching out crafts and
subtilties, or studying the artifice, or rather malice, which is accounted
hability and strength of Wit; yet they understand very well their affairs, and
discern, as far as man's capacity will reach, what is, and what is not according
to the right rule of reason.

But it is remarked that there is a great inequality in their humors; for in
time of peace they are like other men, and very different from what they are in
time of war, when they are fierce, cruel, unmerciful, and take delight in
shedding the blood of their enemies: whereas at other times they are mild,
courteous, affable, and strive to be civil and complaisant to all persons. It
is not strange, that men should not always be of the same temper, though they
do not manifest such a contrariety of their humors, which some persons do so
disguise, that it cannot be known either when they are angry or when they are
pleased* But the Tartars do not at all resemble these persons; they never
conceal anything that li^^s in their breast, they ^^n neither counterfeit a
false joy, nor hide a true one: If they laugh it is heartily, and if they are
displeased their face will show it. Therefore they ^^y it is better to be
passiona^^e than ^^^^cherous; for which reason they will not compliment and
cringe to a ma^^ whom they ^^urse in their heart: and will sooner cut off a
man's arms than embrace him in th^^irs, if they love him not. Where^^re they may
pray and wish sincerely, that sincerity might prosper and be practiced, and
that treachery and dissimulation (the enemy to human ^^ociety) might be
ex^^irpated. As for ou^^ poli^^i^^k dissi^^ulation in E^^rope, th^^y mock and
scorn at it: If they were addicted to Fables and Fictions, they might say that
Saturn's R^^ign and the golden Age was gone from Europe in^^o ^^artary.

That i^^ which they take the greatest pride is to have fine horses, about
which they usually busy themselves: and this may be said to be their greatest
vanity, and their sole occupation from their very cradle. There is nothing
which they will not make their horses do, and they do as exactly perform all
that their riders put them to, as if they had the very same intellectuals with
them; for they are trained up, and managed to that accurateness, that they may
be thought to obey not only the motions of the bridle, but the very thoughts
and intentions of their riders.

As for the actions of the Tartars in their conversation, they are such as
manifest them not to persons who stand so much upon ceremony as the Chinese
did: there is not that cringing to them, nor those prostitutions to the very
ground as the Chinese^^ Mandorins compelled all persons to do before them. The
Tartars will scarce pay such adoration to their Gods, and therefore think it
not fit to be done to men: When ever the Chinese, who were accustomed to these
sordid Flatteries, come to make all these low submissions to the Tartars, they
either reproved them, or else they scoffed and derided them so, as thereby to
let them understand they expected no such ceremonies.

The Civilities which are used amongst the Tartars do somewhat resemble those
which are practiced in Europe; when they salute any person* they stretch out
their right hand and then bow their bodies a little, and when they have raised
themselves upright again, they put their hand toward their mouth. When they
would return thanks for any Present, Compliment, or any obliging expression,
they stretch their right hand toward their knees, especially if they are
sitting, and then they lay the handle of their Sword upon the same knee, and
raising up themselves a little, they bow their head, as if they would kiss
their right hand: when two friends meet in the streets, they never uncover
their heads; which would be there as ridiculous as if any one in Europe should,
upon the like occasion, pluck off his shoes. T^^ey only salute each other,
either with the ordinary civility of stretching out their arm, bringing it back
to their mouth, or else kissing their hand; and then they discourse of their
affairs; or if there be a more than ordinary friendship between them, and that
they are much joyed to see one another, they then embrace, and by the kind
reception they give each other, they testify their joy.

The Chinese men had always Fa^^ in their hands, as Women have in other
Countries: If they were either in their own houses, or making visits, or in the
streets, or Temples, they were never without Fans, even the common sort of
people. The Spaniards in the Philipine Isles, who were used to see them with
these Arms in their hands, did no longer wonder at it. But the Tartars could
not refrain breaking out into laughter, as at a thing which they thought very
ridiculous; and they asked them scoffingly, If these were not the Arms of their
Women which they used not so much to beat and cool the air, as to defend them
from the heat of the Sun, left it should melt the paint upon their faces? The
Tartars were not prohibited to use Fans; but though the heat was so excessive,
that it almost stifled them, none of them could be persuaded to make use of a
Fan.

For three or four years after the Conquest of China, the Tartars refused to
marry any Chinese Women, great numbers then followed them out of Tartary. It
is not known what induced them to take this resolution, unless it was that they
desired that China should be peopled with inhabitants, who were real Tartars,
both by blood and birth. But this was difficult to ^^ccomplish in so vast a
Country, so well inhabited and peopled as China was. And it was not probable,
that the aversion, which these two Nations had ^^o make any alliance between
each other, should last long. The contrary of which quickly appeared; for this
animositie calmed every day more and more, and they contracted Marriages and
Alliances with each other: and this union of blood and alliance, within a few
years, will make them become one people and nation.

Amongst the Divertisements to ^^hich the Tartars are inclined, they ^^em to
affect Music, but theirs is not very charming: they are only delighted with a
warlike and loud tune; all soft Aires are so displeasing to them, that they
count them not only vain, but intolerable. And this makes them think no Music
more pleasant than the harsh sound of their Trumpet: And generally no Harmony
is more agreeable to the ears of Soldiers, than the sound of Trumpets and
Drums, with which Music they are most delighted.

I have already remarked, that these people do eat and drink heartily; and it
is a usual saying with them, that they who will work well must eat and drink
well. But they are not very nice and curious what their meat is, reguarding
more the quantity than the quality. They account young Horseflesh their
greatest dainty, which they serve up at all their Feasts. But their ordinary
food is Mutton, and they have great flocks of Sheep: They eat likewise all
sorts of Venison; as the flesh of Staggs, wild Boars, and of such other
Creatures, which they hunt and take in the mountains; and sometimes Fish, when
the fancy takes them to go a fishing, but they regard not whether their meat is
fat or lean; which they roast or boil, and that but a very little; for according
to the custom of Barbarians, they eat their meat very ^^aw. They are not
curious to have variety of Dishes, contenting themselves with one Dish, if they
have enough. They like best solid substantial meat, and for that which is not
so, they are very well content to be without it. Whilst they keep out in the
field, they do usually live upon Rice, f^^nding that less troublesome to carry
along with them, than any other kind of provision. But if they are fixed in any
place, then they make Wheaten Bread, and prefer that to eat with their meat,
before Rice. When they drink Water, they drink it cold, as we do, and not hot,
as the Chinese and Iapanners do. As for Cha is a Plant growing in Japan and
China, the Leave^^ of which the Japanners grind to Powder, and drink it infused
in warm Water. But the Chinese i^^fuse the whol^^ Leaves, in the same manner
as they do Thee. And the resemblance of the Leaves of these two Plants to each
other, when they are expanded in warm water, makes me question, whether Cha is
not the tops of Thee, ^^r else some species thereof. Though Gaspar Bauhinus
places it amongst the Fennels; for which he is reproved by the most ^^earned
Botanis^^ Dr. Morrison.
Cha, which is the Drink, that in ceremony they present to all persons
throughout the whole Country, they drink that hot, according to the custom of
all other people. And so likewise they do C^^colat, though they have some kind
of Chocolat, which is drunk cold. But that which they drink with most delight,
is Wine, either white or red, or of any sort whatsoever. They will scarce
believe that Mahomet did so severely prohibit Wine, but if that Imposter did,
they are apt to think, that he delighted so much in it himself, that out of
envy he denied all others the liberty of drinking it. And perhaps Wine has
been a preservative to them against those damnable pestilent opinions, with
which all their Neighbors are infected. And peradventure upon the same account
they chose that Religion which obliges them to adore the Heaven as a God; for
though they see that water falls from heaven, yet from thence they have no
prohibition to drink Wine, and therefore they think they have reason not to
make it a principle of their Religion, to drink only water.

But though the Tartars drink Wines, yet we do not see, that either rich or
poor fall into those Excesses by drinking, as they do in other Countries; which
are so great, that from thence some have taken occasion to say, That unless
Mahomet had prohibited the drinking of Wine, the whole World had been
intoxicated with it: Yet at their Meals they invite their Friends to drink
Healths, almost in the same manner as they do in Europe: I say almost, because
they do not expect any man should prejudice his health with pledging; or,
according to the French Phrase, doing reason to the health of another: For
this, they say, is to undo reason, not to do reason. Therefore they laugh at us
in Europe, when they hear say, that a man is not counted good company, unless
he pledges all the Healths are drunk to him. They ask, if in Europe it b^^
thought Treason, or a crime against the State, to refuse to pledge a Health.
For (say the Tartars) if as amongst us, it be only ^^t^^med of, as a less
complian^^y; then ^^t i^^ far more convenient, to appear not so compliant,
th^^n for an^^ man to m^^ke himself a Beast, by drowning his reason and
judgment. We p^^ise (say they) far more the enjoyment of our health, our senses
and reason, than all the compliancy imaginable. Thus they do not then esteem a
man to be less civil, or no good companion, if he excuses himself from
drinking, when he is afraid of prejudicing his Health thereby. But what would
these Barbarians say, if besides the Law of Nature and the rule of Reason, in
the sole observance, to which they are so averse to drunkenness, they had the
Law of God, and the Gospel of Christ, which upon so severe penalties prohibit
all excess? And yet Christians are more intemperate than Infidels and
Barbarians.

Having given you an account what Meat the Tartars eat, I shall now acquaint
you how they serve it up: And this is either in Dishes of Silver, Tin, Brass,
or such like Metal, according to each man's state and condition. They make
li^^tle use of earthen Ware, though in China they have so fine, so cheap and
common. They only make use of little plates and cups, high and narrow, the best
and finest they can procure, to drink Cha in. But though their cups and dishes
are of such different metal, they are all of the same form and fashion, which
costs not much, being not very curiously wrought, but very strong, as if they
designed they should last forever. The Tartars are like the men in ancient
times, according to the notion we have of them, as plain, blunt persons, averse
to all Luxury and Pride, which so impoverishes the World, it not being possible
to supply the expenses of such persons; whereas the Tartars are rich, and
content at an easier and cheaper rate. It is likewise remarked, that all the
cups the Tartars use, stand upon feet like our old fashion cups and bowls: And
perhaps it is not now thought fit that our cups should have any feet, because
they have made so many men, by drunkenness and excess, lose theirs.

They make use likewise of Spoons to eat with, for they know not how to serve
themselves with those eating-sticks the Chinese use. The Tartars must be born
again before they can be brought to the neatness of the Chinese, which
requires a long application to it, before they can conveniently practice it.

The Tartars generally are indifferently well inclined to trade and commerce,
and are very reasonable and fair dealing persons. Their usual way of trade, is
by bartering one commodity for another; as Corn, Wool, Cattle, and other
Merchandise, which are common there, for others that are of higher value; which
make China the wealthiest Country in the World. They seem not very covetous of
Silver or money; and are ignorant of those subtilties which are usually
practiced by Tradesmen, who are guided and governed by Avarice, and desire of
gain. They would willingly have commerce with all Nations, and wish they would
come thither to traffic and trade: and are not much concerned if any
forraigners come to dwell in their Towns; nay they suffer them to wear Arms,
having a good opinion of their own strength and courage, they laugh at those
panick fears with which the Chinese and Iapanners are so possessed. On the
contrary, they declare, that whosoever will come into their Country, ^^hall not
be treated like strangers, if so be they will live quietly and orderly: but if
they offer ^^o make any disturbance, then they must expect, either to be driven
out, or punished according to their deserts. Thus they propose to deal with
Strangers, by which it clearly appears, they act herein more judiciously and
rationally, than the Iapanners, who were frighted with their own dreams and
imaginations.

The Beasts which they make use of for Tillage, or for their other occasions,
either in time of Peace or War, are, as in Europe, either Horses, or such like
Beasts, ordinarily employed for Carriage; which are very numerous throughout
the whole Country.

As for Voyages by Sea and Navigation, it is observed, that the Tartars which
Conquered China are naturally averse to the Sea; perhaps it is because that
part of Tartary in which they inhabited, is remote from the Sea: Nor is it
strange, that any one should at the first dislike that which they have no
experience of. Yet we saw that in the Province of Canton, they quickly became
very good Mariners, and fought very well at Sea. Men of Courage will master any
thing: And no habit or custom can resist them, who resolve to accustom
themselves to any thing, though never so difficult and strange to them at first.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Habit and Fashions of the Tartars. Of the Modesty and
Virtue of their Women, who though they affect to ride on horseback, and go to
the Wars, yet are very chaste and virtuous. The Conclusion of this Narrative of
the Conquest of China by the Tartars.
ALl the Tartars, except the meanest and poorest of them, are clothed in Silk;
which now they can do more conveniently, being masters of a Country where Silk
grows: the others wear Stuff, either Woollen or Cotton, or else Linen. The
Fashion of their Clothes is in part peculiar to that Nation, in part much
resembling that of the Eastern Mahometans. They like better to follow the
fashion of their Clothes, than to observe their Law by drinking no Wine. And
now you shall see, how they are clothed from head to foot.

They wear little boots, or buskins, which never come so high as the knee, and
usually but to the calf of the leg, sometimes their Buskins have no soles, and
then they wear shoes with them, but sometimes they have soles just like a
little boot, and then they wear no shoes.

Their Shirts are very short, which they begirt about their waste with Drawers.
These Shirts are usually made of flaxen or cotton cloth: But they who are the
most neat and gallant in their Clothes, though they are not of any high
quality, have them of a certain sort of Silken stuff, almost like Satin, or
else of strong Taffaty, but always very white.

Over this Shirt they wear a Vest, which comes a little below the knee, made
very tite and straight to the body, but lined with Wat is the Down which covers
the seeds of the Apocynum Syriacum, called in English Silk-grass.
Wat, or Cotton, from top to bottom. The Sleeves are very strait and narrow,
but so long as to come over their hands; they are slit up as far as the wrist,
and they turn them up, to make their hands appear the more graceful. These
Sleeves are usually embroydered from the elbow to the shoulder, but from the
elbow downwards plain. This Garment is buttoned down the sides to the waste,
and from the top to the bottom. The buttons are ordinary of Plate, either
Silver or Gold, or some other metal; and sometimes of Precious stones, of
greater or less value, according to the pleasure or capacity of the owner, not
according to his quality; for there, as in other Countries, they who are rich
take upon them to be persons of quality. These Buttons are not put on strait
down before, but side-ways: for they fold the left side of this Vest over the
right, and along the edges of the fold the buttons are fastened in an oblique
line, to keep it more straight and fit to their body as far as the waste; which
appears gracefully enough upon them. Some have buttons fastened upon their
right shoulder, and along their collar. But this is a fashion not much followed.

They tie this Vest about them with a girdle, of which they have several
fashions, and usually these are more gallant and brave than any part of their
habit; yet some have only a Silken cord about the thickness of a finger, which
they put several times about them. Others have a piece of Taffaty, or very fine
Cotton Cloth, about four fingers broad, and adorned with Gold, Silver, Ivory,
or Precious stones: And those who would appear more Souldier-like, have a piece
of a Beast's skin, which they bedeck with Ornaments suitable to their genius
and fancy.

Over this habit, which comes down very low, they wear a shorter Coat, but much
wider and larger. These two habits are ever of different colors, but the
uppermost coat being most visible, is ever of the most gaudy and lively color:
and being wider than the other they let it go unbuttoned and loose, though it
is garnished with rich buttons like the other, but these serve only for
ornament; and at the most, they button not above one or two. It has no
Sleeves, or else so short they come not below the elbow. This, like the other
Coat, is lined with Wat or Cotton. These are their habits in Winter, but their
custom is to wear as many Clothes in Summer, as in Winter; but probably having
changed their climat, they will be necessitated to change this custom. Tartary
lying more to the North than China, and consequently being rather a cold, than
a hot Country, the inhabitants might well endure there to wear all the year
long clothes, more suitable in China for the Winter than Summer season. But it
is probable, when they shall have more experienced the temperate climat of that
Country, and the heats in the Southern Provinces, they will proportionably wear
cooler Clothes, and lay aside their present fashion of lining them with Cotton
or Wat. Some persons have disliked the shape of their loose Coats, which they
wear uppermost, because they have no neck-piece, or collar, and are neither
raised higher, or cut away in the neck; but are seamed in the same manner at
top, as at the bottom; so that they are shaped something like those frocks
which, in some Countries, criminal persons wear, when they go to execution. But
the Tarta^^s will not yield, that their habit is a^^ all ungraceful, perhaps it
is because they are accustomed to it. And we see, that those faces which at
first do in ^^ manner affright us, do not appear deformed, when we have for
some time been conversant and acquainted with them.

And it is less to be wondered at, that we should approve of those fashions and
habits, when we are accustomed to them, which first seemed fantastical and
ridiculous to us.

I have now shown you the Habits of the Tartars from the feet to the neck and
shoulders; but it yet remains, that I should let you see what they wear upon
their heads, which is more extravagant than any part of their habit. And though
the relation enlarges much upon it; yet perhaps it would be better to say
nothing at all of it, than to conclude the relation with so displeasing a
Subject. But lest any should complain, that their curiosity herein is not
satisfied, I shall give some account of it. And if any persons deride and scoff
at the Bonnets, or Hats, which the Tartars wear, let them consider, that a
great part of the world laugh at them, for the fashion of their Clothes; and
how often their own Nation have changed, and altered their fashion, and
imitated, at last, those fashions of another Country, which, at first, they
themselves thought very ridiculous and fantastical. And therefore that perhaps,
at some time or other, they may likewise come to take up that for a fashion,
which now they most of all dislike in the Bonnet of the ^^artars.

I shall now first observe to you, that these people have a different covering
for their Head in Winter, from what they have in Summer. And though they are
not all very exact in this change, yet the greatest part of them seldom fail.
In Winter they wear a certain round Bonnet, very high crowned, which stands
out, as if it was of a very solid substance, and yet it is only ^^ade of a
certain Silk Stuff, or else of very fine Cloth, lined within with the same, and
quilted with Wat or Cotton, as their Vests and loose Coats are: This Bonnet
comes very close to the Head, but it is surrounded with a border so thick, that
it appears bigger than any part of their Body: All this border is covered over
with tuffts of Silk, which are usually of light colors, according to the fancy
of the owner. In the crown they are much about the bigness of the Priests Caps
in Spain: And those which the Tartars wear are covered all over, ex^^epting
only a little round place before about the breadth of a Crown piece: this is
left uncovered, that they may put in a plate of some kind of Metal, with a
button in the midst, either of Gold or Silver. The Mandorins and other persons
of quality, which are in any place or employment, are distinguished by these
Plates, which they ever wear, either of Gold or Silver, with some Jewel set in
the midst. And it does not depend, either upon any man's fancy or wealth, to
take what kind of Plate he pleases; but the bigness, color, form, and fashion
of the Plate, Button, or Jewel, must of necessity distinguish and mark out the
rank and quality of him who wears it. By this mark of honor they avoid all
occasions of disputes, which often arise in other Countries, for the rank and
precedence of Magistrates and public Officers. For it would be high treason
there, for any one to dare to wear the mark of a dignity, which he cannot
justify to belong to him. In any other part of their Clothing, either in
Winter or in summer, there is no distinction between persons of the highest
quality, and the very dreg^^ of the common people, between the most learned and
the most ignorant. Their Caps, or Bonnets are all generally of the same form
and shape; only they, who are most rich or most curious, make choice of the
finest Stuff. As for any thing else, the meanest tradesman will have upon his
head a Bonnet tufted all over, as well as a person of the highest quality.
Therefore, in that Country, to distinguish persons according to their rank and
degree, you must look, and that very narrowly, upon the mark of distinction
which they wear: For being every person wears the Plates with a Button in the
midst, and that all the Magistrates have them of Gold or Silver with a Jewel,
it is not easy to make a distinction afar off.

As soon as Summer comes, the T^^rtars lay aside these Bonnets, and then they
wear Hats, not made of Wool wrought close together, as ours are, but either of
the Leaves of the Palm or Date Tree, or of some very rare and curious Plant
growing there. The form and fashion of this Hat is more fantastical than their
Bonnet. The brim is very broad and large, and the crown very little, but that
it is adorned, and set out with tufts of Silk. This likewise before has a
place for the Medal, or mark of distinction, as their winter Bonnet has. Some
wear these Hats of a pointed shape, others quite flat, and these have no tufts,
which makes them appear the flatter. To the lining of the crown of this Hat are
fastened several Silken strings, two of which hang down lower than the rest, to
fasten it with, on their head, which they do by tying them to a button under
their chin, in such a manner as they can slacken or streighten them at
pleasure. But to return to the description of the brims of these Hats; which
look like a broad ill shapen dish. They are lined on the inside, and hang
flapping down, in the same manner as you may have seen a broad piece of Lead
hang down at the end of a large gutter, to carry off the rain from houses. And
as for the tufts of Silk, in rainy weather, they are flatted down upon the
Hat-brims, so that they reach within two or three fingers breadth of the very
edge, which is bordered about with a very ill-favored embroidery.

You must likewise know, that the tufts on the Hats of ordinary persons, and
poor people, are of Silk; but the rich, and those who are most curious, make
them of a certain yellow or gold colored herb, the flowers of which do much
resemble, those of the Mais, or Indian Wheat. The stalk of this Plant is about
the thickness of a finger, and is long and pliable enough, to be wound several
times about their Hats. And being it produces great number of Flowers and
quantity of seed; it is so full of tufts, that several persons pull them off
diverse of them. The convenience of this Plant for Hat-bands is this, that it
does not soak in the water, as the Silk does, and when it is wet it loses
nothing of its luster; but, on the contrary, appears more beautiful and lively,
and glittering as if it were enamelled. And therefore this Plant is highly
esteemed of in the very place where it grows; for a Hat with a band thereof is
not sold under two A Ducat is worth about six shil^^ings eight pence sterling.
Ducats, which is a very high price, according to the rate that things are sold
for in China. Where for the same price a man may buy as much Velvet or Damask,
as will make make him a Suit of Clothes. They therefore who cannot go to the
price of this Plant, make use instead thereof of Silken tufts of the same
color: So that in that Country, they are counted poor when they are reduced to
wear Silk. But Herbs and their stalks are esteemed of, as a very brave ornament
for the most rich and honorable persons. See how great men's vanity is, when
they are proud of a little chaff and straw*

At present all the Chine^^es conform to the modes and fashions of the Tartars.
To which they have been compelled by very rigorous and severe Ordinances, which
condemned every man to death, who did not obey and observe them; but the Women
were treated with more civility. Nothing could be more opposite than this new
Tartarian-mode, to the fashion of the habits of the Chinese, which for a long
time they had kept to without the least alteration. And therefore the more
satisfied they were with the fashion of their Cloths, and their custom to wear
their Hair long, so much the more discontent they were to part with either;
which some so highly valued, that they chose rather to be stripped of their
lives, than to be clothed after the Tartarian mode. But the Women found more
civility from the Conquerors, than their Husbands did. Neither does it appear,
that they ever failed to show ^^ll respect to that Sex, in any place, except it
was in the Province of Canton. Where the violent outrages of the Vice Roy in
Military affairs, did transport him beyond all bounds of honor or humanity:
but we are not to presume, from the hard usage which the Chinese Women
received in that Provnice, that they were treated with no greater favor in the
others: In which the Soldiers were kept in better discipline, under the
command of Officers, who by their actions endeavored to make a more
advantageous impression in the minds of the people, both as to the merits of
their own persons, and the honor of their Nation. Yet notwithstanding the
great care they took to make their orders be punctually observed, they could
not possibly prevent the great violences, which were committed in Towns taken
by storm. It is scarce to be expected it should be otherwise in War: for we see
that these outrages are not less frequently commi^^ted in Europe, even by
Christian Soldiers, the Commanders in chief not being able to remedy all
disorders: Yet it is certain, that all the Provinces in China, except that of
Canton, the Tartars demeaned themselves toward the Women with all the honor
and respect the Chinese could wish for. The Emperor particularly, the Princes
his Uncles, and the other Grandees of Tartary, by the severe punishments they
inflicted upon all persons convicted of any disorders, of that nature,
manifested how averse they were from allowing or countenancing them.

Seeing the Tartars treated the Chinese Women thus obligingly, it is not to be
imagined, they would by force and violence compel them to change the fashion
of their Clothes. And the truth is, they made no order or injunction herein,
but lef^^ them free liberty to follow their own inclinations, to choose whether
they would be in the Tartarian mode, or keep to their old fashion. And in every
thing else the Officers in the Tartarian Army, and the Mandorins showed all the
observancy and respect to that sex, as is usually done in Europe, which was not
heretofore practiced in China; where, when any man spoke to a Woman, he would
never have vouchsafed her the title of Madam; though by her quality and
condition she had been far superior to him, and though at every word, she
spoke to him, she had treated him with Sir, and my Lord.

We must now give some account of the Habit of the Tartarian Women, though
herein we have not been so particularly informed. They wear Hats as the Men do,
but they are not so finely adorned; for many of the Women count it gallantry to
go negligently. Sometimes it is a great piece of artifice, to have no artifice:
For most things are the more handsome, by how much the more natural. And Nature
has very just reason to complain, that those very women whom she has endowed
with excellent Beauty, have notwithstanding, many times, recourse to Art, and
seems to acknowledge, that it is from it they have received all that is either
graceful or agreeable in them. But the Tartarian Women use not these arts; they
wear their Hair long, as in Europe, and let it hang curling in a negligent
manner upon their shoulders, not tying it with any string, but that which
fastens on their Hat. And their Habit is either a certain Vest, or Simar,
pretty long, without any collar; or else one somewhat less, like a short
wast-coa^^, very little different from those which the Chinese women use; these
Vests are of several colors, but ever ^^ery gay and lively, usually they are
of Sil^^, unless it b^^ those of the meanest and poorest persons: as for the
shape of them, they are made exactly fit to the body, have but little compass,
and are not trimmed with those modish vanities, as are i^^vented in Europe.
They likewise wear buskins, and sometimes boots and spurs, when either they
ride for their recreation, or go a journey; their horses are their living
Chopino's are high Cloggs, which the Women use in Spain, to make them appear
tall.
Chopino's, which they manage so gracefully, as no dress sets them off so
advantageously. Their Bows and Arrows are thei^^ Rings and Jewels; and the
places where they meet to discourse in, and receive company, is the open field,
where they run and skip about like so many of the ancient Tyrrhian Nymphs, or
the Amazonian Scythians, their Neighbors: At which the Chinese women, who had
been immured up in prisons, and caves all their lives, were so highly
surprised, ^^hat it is not to be expressed; for they were so amazed at it, that
they kn^^w not whether they should believe them to be men or women, and could
never cease to admire them, though they were as much afraid of them, as of the
men. Yet for all this, we m^^st not suppose, that shooting and riding is the
sole employment of the Tartarian women. But they only use these exercises, to
show, what by their valor and courage they are able to do, if occasion
requires it And the truth is, they accompany their husbands in the Wars, and
many times charge wi^^h them into the very midst of the enemies battalion. But
nothing is more admirable in these women, than their dex^^erity in governing
and managing their horses, which they do so skilfully, it is beyond all
expression: and there is none, but understand how to to ride and manage a Horse
better than most men in other Countries. It is not there as in Spain, where
only Gentl^^men and Persons of Quality ride on Horseback. All the Tartarian
women, poor or rich, do it daily. Their Horses serve them instead of Coaches
and Sedans: And they have each of them their Horses in particular, which they
train up and manage, so that it would be as great a disparagement to a Woman in
Tartary not to know how to ride on Horseback, as in Spain not to know how to
go upon Chopino's.

Doubtless whatever transcends its due bounds and measure, is deservedly
blameable. And as we cannot excuse men, who in effeminacy, and a sollitous care
to trick and trim up themselves, exceed even women: So neither can we approve,
that women should surpass men in those Exercises which are more proper for the
masculine than feminine Sex. But usage and custom may render those things
excusable, which in themselves are neither contrary to religon or honesty: Or,
at least, from the custom and us^^ which is made of them, we are to pas^^
judgment whether the practice of them is to be tolerated or condemned. And as
for those actions and customs* of several people and nations, which have regard
only to ^^n outward decency, and decorum, which serves only to make them be
esteemed of by others, either more or less civilized or polite, these I say,
depend very much upon opinion* As for modes and fashions, every ma^^ passes his
censure upon them according to his own vanity and capriciousness* Some applaud
and approve of that, which others dislike and vilify: Somethings are thought
very decent and graceful in the opinion and fancy of some persons, and yet to
hear othe^^s speak of them nothing is more ungraceful, or ridiculous. Thus men
scoff at and deride one another, and yet at the same time each man thinks he
has reason on his side. But it is certain, that though all men are not
rational at all times, yet the Tartars have reason to love their own Country
women the better, since they so sympathise with them in their Martial genius,
and apply themselves to those exercises, which suit and agree so well with
their inclinations. The women there do both spring from, and are made of a
wa^^like blood and spirit, and from their very cradles they both recreate
themselves by the practice of those quali^^ies with which nature has endued
them, and in which they have made themselves by habit, and custom, so expert,
and likewise hereby they render themselves agreeable to the men: And therefore,
either they are not very blameable to follow those exercises which are not so
usual for women in other Countries; or if herein they commit a fault, it ought
to be esteemed a very pardonable one.

This is all the information I have received concerning those Tartars, which
have conquered so vast and rich an Empire. After I had given you account of
their Military power, I thought my self obliged, to add something concerning
their customs and management of civil affairs: for seeing they now govern, give
Laws, and introduce what customs they please, throughout all that spacious
Country, we may from thence take some measure of the present state of China,
under its new masters. But that which yet remains the most deplorable, is, that
such an infinite number of people, both the conquered and the conquerors should
still remain under the tyranny of Infidelity and Impiety. There has been some
hope that the Tartars, who have not yet shown themselves so rebellious to the
Gospel of Christ as the Chinese were, might give freer entrance and a better
reception than they did, to those to whom it should please God to inspire, to
go and reveal the glad tidings thereof to them. But as yet these are only the
desires and wishes of those, who daily pray to God* that his Kingdom may come;
we must therefore all incessantly offer up our prayers and supplications to
him, that he would shower down his Graces and Benedictions upon the hearts of
those Christian Princes, who have had, or shall have, any part in that great
work. It has been the glory of the Kings of Spain, to have sent over, and
maintained several Laborers to work in that vast harvest: And this great and
glorious attempt has deservedly gained them the title of Apostolic Princes,
from one of the Sovereign high Priests of the Roman Catholic Church, Gregory
XIV.

FINIS.
The Booksellers Advertisement.
LEst the Faults which have escaped the Press might be imputed to the person of
Honor, who gave himself the trouble of rendering the foregoing History into
English; I thought my self, in gratitude, obliged to acquaint the Buyer, that
the worthy Author's more weighty occasions would not allow him the leisure to
revise or correct any part thereof; and therefore, if some words have been
mistaken, or omitted, I hope they are not so numerous, but they may procure
pardon from the Candid Reader.

M. P.

These Books are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the White Heart in Little Britain.
Folio.
CAssandra, the famed Romance, 1667.

Brigg's Logarithms.

Francisci Suarez Metaphysica.

Quarto.
Dr. John Pell's Introduction to Algebra, Translated out of High Dutch into
English by Thomas Branker, M. A. 1668.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive Methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668.

Iacobi Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668.

Dr. John Wallis Opera Mechanica, pars prima and secunda, 1670.

Pars tertia now in the Press.

Banister's Works of Chyrurgery.

Hugh Broughton's Consent of Scripture.

Snellii Typis Batavus, Lugd. Bat. 1624. Snellii Observat. Hussiacae.
Petrus Paaw, de Ossibus Amstelreod. 1633.

Lex Talionis, sive Vindiciae Pharmaco^^oeorum.

Octavo.
The History of the Heathen Gods, 1671.

A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion:
and withal to prove that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Descartes on
this Subject, he has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671.

The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great, Mogul, together
with the most considerable passages for five years following in that Empire.
1671.

Biblia Hebraea, Iosephi Athias, 1661.

Gualteri Needham, Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foetu, 1667.

Buxtorfiu^^'s Epitomy of his Hebrew Grammar, translated into English by John
Davis, 1658.

Crow, Scriptores in Scripturam: Now in the Press.

The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of the Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670.

The Adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turks
of Argiers, and carried into the Inland Countries of Africa; with a Description
of the Kingdom of Argiers, and of all the Towns and Places thereabouts; 1670.

Contemplations on Mortalitity, 1669*

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing, that
the System of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all that he has written of both,
seems to have been taken out of the first Chapter of Genesis: To which is
annexed the System general of the Cartesian Philosophy.

The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marseilles, by the French Kings Order, 1666. To Muley Arxid King of Taffaletta,
etc. With a Letter, in answer to diverse Questions concerning the Religion,
Manners, etc. 1671.

A Genuine Explication of the Visions in the Book of Revelation, full of new
Christian Considerations: by the Learned and Pious A.B. Peganius. Englished out
of High Dutch by H. O. 1671.

Prodromus to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within
Solids; laying a Foundation for the rendering a rational Account both of the
Frame and the several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various
Productions of the same. By Nicholaus Steno. 1671.

The Second Volume of the History of the Great Mogul, by F. Berneire. Now in
the Press.

Nicholas Mercators's Tables of Logarithms. Now ready for the Press.


