Restauranda: OR THE NECESSITY OF Public Repairs, By settling of a certain and
Royal yearly REVENUE FOR THE KING. OR The Way to a well-being for the KING and
His PEOPLE, proposed by the Establishing of a fitting Revenue for him, and
Enacting some Necessary and Wholesome Laws for the PEOPLE.

London, Printed by Richard Hodgkinson, for the Author, and are to be sold by
Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun, over against Saint Dunstons Church in
Fleetstreet, 1662.

REGI ET PATRIAE VERISQUE HONORIS ET FELICITATIS ANGLIAE CULTORIBUS, HASCE
VELUTI MATERIARUM SEEDS, DICAT DEDICATQUE FABIANUS PHILIPPS.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. REvenues of the Kings of England. Page 6 CHAP. II. Supplies and
Additions to the Royal Revenues, and the many cares taken therein by
Parliaments and otherwise. p. 14 CHAP. III. Ruin and decay of the Revenues. p.
30 CHAP. IV. The Remedies. p. 58
Some Errata's or faults escaped the Printer, which the Reader is entreated to
correct and amend in this manner.

PAge 2 line 15 dele by, p. 7. l. 10 dele may, p. 27 l. 26. for their read the,
p. 68. l. 14. interfere, had in principio, and dele, in fine, p. 69. l. 5. for
and worser. or worse, and l. 29. for which r. and p. 58. for Chap. l. r. Chap.
IV. p. 81. l. 23. dele that, p* 83 l. 31. dele and and (...).

Restauranda, OR The necessity of Public Repairs, by the settling of a certain
and Royal yearly Revenue for the KING. OR The Way to a well-being for the KING
and his PEOPLE proposed, by the establishing of a fitting Revenue for Him, and
Enacting some necessary and wholesome Laws for the People.
A Long course of time, and Annosa vetustas, which wears out and subdues the
most stubborn Rocks and Marbles, and crumbles into dust and ruin things of
long duration, together with the necessities, cares and affairs, which do
usually busy Crowns and Princes and their Royal Revenues in the protection
and welfare of themselves and the people committed to their charge, may without
the inconsiderate censures of those who think much of every Aid and
Contribution which they give toward the effecting or support of their own and
their posterities happiness, be well supposed to be no small cause of wasting
and lessening those Royal supports or means which our Kings of England have
heretofore had to do it withal, and as streams running far from their springs
and fountains without the help or company of other waters to augment or go
along with them, may be allowed more then a little to dry up or languish, and
might silence the murmur and complaints of those who can be content to beg and
get all they can from the King, and by too often by false pretenses concealing
the worth or value of what they ask of him, do gain thereby ten times more
then they seem to request, or he intends to give them, and making no scruple to
deceive him, which our blessed Savior never taught them when he commanded to
give to Caesar that which was Caesar's, think it is Kingly to be cozened, and
that he can never give, or be deceived too much; yet when he comes to demand
any help or assistance from them, though it be but for a public good and their
own preservation, can cry out, burdens and oppressions, and as if he were some
Ocean, never to be drawn dry, or Mountain never to be dug down or
exhausted; an Elixir to transmute and enrich others without any wast or
diminution of its self, or the Sun in the firmament, which can enlighten, heat,
and nourish all things and be never the worse for it, marvail how he can come
to want; and if they do believe him to be in any necessity, are ready to lay
the cause or blame of it upon his Officers for taking more care of their own
Estates then his, and for a thriving way of Arithmetic, by substracting from
his to increase and multiply their own; whilst many who have but lately tasted
of his bounty, or whose Fathers, Grandfathers or Ancestors have lest them
goodly Inheritances, which were either of the gift of the King or his
Progenitors; or purchased and gained by beneficial offices and places or
employments under them, can look upon every Subsidy, Tax or Assessment as a
blast, or mildew of their corn, some plague or epidemicall disease, or a
greater national calamity, and give them no better an aspect or entertainment
then the children of Israel did their Egyptian Tax-masters when they were
commanded to make their Tale of Brick and gather the straw, though they never
repine or grumble at the same time at ten times a greater sum to a
Merry-meeting or a Feast, or spent in a horse-race, a thousand or five hundred
pounds lost in a night at dice, three or four hundred pounds spent in a
Treatment or Banquet, or the large or sinful expensive vanities of themselves
and their wives and children.

And too many, who would be thought to be better Subjects and Patriots then
others, can seem to hate a Civil war, shrink at the imagination of the
miseries thereof, tremble at a foreign Invasion Freequarter, Plunder, and the
Outrage of Soldiers; complain of want of Trade, or the guarding of the Seas;
boast of the ancient honor and glory due unto their Nation, and take a
pleasure to recount it to their children, or read it in their Histories, and
not a few also who in our late twenty years rebellion, and the spoils and
afflictions which attended it, could drive honester men then themselves into
Taxes and Assessements, and think a million and a half in yearly Assessements
for some years together, besides a fifth part of their real Estates, a
twentieth of their personal, and many other of their Depredations amounting to
more then all the Taxes and Aids put together, which for five hundred years
last past were imposed by our Kings and Princes, to be little enough to
sacrifice to a mistaken godliness, will notwithstanding do as very little as
they can to contribute any thing to the procuring and enjoying the blessings of
peace and plenty, or avoid the contrary.

And do never so well esteem of their own policies, as when they can by
pretenses of debts, poverty, or charge of children, shift of necessary and
public duties, and by undervaluing of their own Estates, or overvaluing
others, make as small an offering as they can to their oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and necessities of their Prince and Defender of their Faith as well
as their Estates.

And too too many whilst they cannot but acknowledge if Scripture and the Laws
of God and man may be their guide and directors, that he has lately by Gods
mercy and a miracle redeemed them and their Laws and Liberties out of a slavery
which stuck like a leprosy, and was like to be entailed upon them and their
posterities, rescued Religion, and gave them their Lands and Estates again
which the just Laws of the Land once called their Birthright had forfeited
unto him, can by an unheard and not easily to be believed ingratitude, after
his Act of Oblivion and Free-pardon, neither deserved nor purchased, and
preferments bestowed upon them, fall into such an oblivion as nature abhorres,
and humanity must needs blush at, and not offer any thing in a benevolence
ordered by Act of Parliament instead of a Tax or Subsidy. And very many of
those which did give any thing (some loyal and right-hearted excepted) having
obtained of the King to give away the principallest Flower of his Crown, by
releasing of his Tenures in Capite and by Knights service, and promised him
Tenures in Cord in part of satisfaction, would not be pleased to find the way
afterward to give him so much as the twentieth part of their yearly vain and
unnecessary expenses toward the relieving of the public and his private
necessities.

For the better information therefore of all such who are unwilling to part
with a Fancy, that the Revenues of our Kings of England are immense or largely
sufficient for their occasions, and to dispose them to the duty which the Laws
of God and Men have commandded and directed; and evidence the reason and
necessity which the King now has to demand a supplement of his Revenue, and
for his good people of England not to deny it him, and that the decays and
ruins thereof have not been occasioned only by an heretofore ill-management of
the Finances, but by time, and an age of many ages, multiplicity of expenses,
indulgences to the people, and necessity of affirs and government, which
exhausting the radical heat and moisture, have so spent the spirits of the
body politic, as they have brought it to that feinting, languishing and weak
condition it is now in.

It will not be inconvenient from the mountains and hills of time to look down
into the valleys of the ages past and take a short view (for a longer would
better become the design of a Volume then what is here briefly to be
represented) of the Revenues of our Kings of England before and since the
Conquest.

CHAP. I. Revenues of the Kings of England.
IN the Prospect whereof it will be more then a conjecture, that those of the
Saxon race, before the Norman Invasion, had in their Heptarchy (except Wales,
and the barren and mountainous part of our Britain, to which the distressed
Relics of that Nation had for shelter and safety retired) the most part of
the Lands and Revenues of the British Kings; that Egbert King of the West
Saxons, and Alured, and after them Edgar sole Monarch of Albion and the Saxon
Dominions, and his Successors, having possessed themselves of all the other
Kings Estates, could not probably be without very large Demeasnes and Revenues,
and that not only they, but all the succeeding Saxon Kings have made the
support of themselves Regality, Government, and Affairs in and by the constant
and certain Revenues and profits of their Lands in Demeasne and Service, which
as a Sacrum Patrimonium and concomitant of the Crown, may by the ancient
Charters of many of our Kings before the Conquest, the grant of the Manor of
Malling in the County of Sussex by Egbert King of the West Saxons, in An. Dom.
838. distinction of Crown Lands and Terra Regis (a great part of which were no
other then what was since, and is now called Ancient Demeasne) mentioned and
recorded in Doomesday book, that Liber censualis and grand Register or Survey
of the Lands of the Kingdom precedented by the Book or Roll of Winchester,
made by King Alfred or Alured, a resumption of some of the Crown Lands in the
reigns of King Stephen, Henry the Second, and Henry the Third, and several of
their Successors the Articles enquired of in the succeeding Eyres, a Judgment
in 6 Edw. 1. against the Abbot of Feversham for some of the Crown lands which
were aliened by King Stephen. And the opinion of Bracton, a Judge in the later
end of the reign of King Henry the Third lib. 2. de legibus and consuetudinibus
regni Angliae, that, Est res quasisacra res fiscalis quae dari non potest, nec
vendi, nec ad alium transferri a principe, vel a rege regnante, and quae
faciunt ipsam coronam and communem utilitatem recipient, may be understood to
be unalienable.

And by the casual and uncertain profits and revenues of the Crown Jure
superioritatis, which to such as shall acquaint themselves with the Saxon
Laws, Customs, and Antiquities, will appear to be Escheats and Forfeitures,
Mines Royal, Herriots, Reliefs upon the deaths of Tenants in Capite, and by
Knights Service (which in those more grateful times amounted to very much) the
benefit of Tolls and Customs, Manbote, Blood^ite, with many other Wita's and
Wera's Capitis estimationes, mulcts, penalties, and fruits of the Kingly
Prerogative, which then, and with Wardships, Liveries, Profits of Annum diem
and vastum Fines, Assart lands, and Fines for Encroachments, Purprestures, and
diverse other things in many Kings reigns after the Conquest were used to be
exactly and carefully collected by the Comites, or Earls and Governors of the
Shires or Provinces who had the third penny, then accounted so much as to
become an honorable allowance for their collecting it; and the Praepositi,
Shire Reeves, and other Officers of the Crown, and in the Courts of Justice, as
well great as small, and the Iters and Circuits of the Justices: and that when
the sins and miseries of our Saxon Ancestors had enriched William the
Conqueror, and entitled him to the Directum Dominium of all, and the utile
Dominium of the greatest part of the lands and possessions of England: and he
had given away much of it to his great Commanders, Friends, Allies and
Soldiers (many of whom were not without their own patrimonies and great
possessions in Normandy and other transmarine parts) and glutted them with the
spoils and inheritance of the English; and had to those large Territories and
Demeasnes which he reserved to himself, and the Terra Regis and ancient
Demeasnes of King Edward the Confessor, which he united to the Crown a further
increase by the no small Estates and Inheritances of some of his after unquiet
great Nobility, as Edwin Earl of York, Ralph Earl of Suffolk, William
Fitz-Osberne Earl of Hereford, Edric surnamed the Forrester Howard le Exul,
Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, and diverse other of the English and Normans.

That which most concerned him and his successors in the reigns of William
Rufus and Henry the First, the former of whom had his Estate augmented by the
temporalties and vacancies of Bishoprics, Abbeys and Priories, and the later
by the Attainders and great Estates and Inheritance of Robert Mowbray Earl of
Northumberland, Robert de Belesme Earl of Arundell and Shrowsbury, William
Earl of Mortaigne and Cornwall, (both of them having much in demeasnes, and a
great deal more in service for Aids in war, holden of them, their Coloni or
Glebae adscriptitii, socage Tenants, which did most of their servile works
without money, and paid them besides an annual Rent in corn and other household
provisions,) was to quiet the ruined English, and by intermarriages of them and
the Normans and Foreigners and other establishments, to assure what was gained
to their posterities, the plenty and abundance whereof continuing through the
reigns of King Stephen and King Henry the Second, who greatly enlarged his
Dominions by the Duchy of Aquitain, Earldomes of Aniou, Main, Poictou
Touraine, and other Provinces and parts of France, the Lands of Henry de Essex
his Standard Bearer by inheritance, forfeited for the treason of throwing it
down and flying, and reporting that he was slain; the Earldome of Lincoln
(Earldomes being then and long after not without great Possessions and Revenues
belonging to them:) the Lands of William Peverell Lord of Nottingham; Conquest
of Ireland, and whole Counties and Provinces thereof coming to be the Kings
Demeasnes and the forfeitures to Richard the First of many of his Nobility and
others who had taken part with his Brother John in his usurpation of the Regal
authority.

All which with the Escheats and Forfeitures of the Terra Normanorum in
England, upon the loss of Normandy by King John unto the French, confiscated
Lands of a great part of the English Nobility and Gentry, after the misfortune
of Henry the Third, in the unquietness of many of his Barons and People, his
better fortune in the battle of Evesham, and subduing them in the forty ninth
year of his Reign, the accession to the Crown of the Earledoms of Derby,
Leicester, Salisbury, and the County Palatine of Chester, with the vast
Territories and Estates which belonged unto them, and many other lesser
Escheats and Forfeitures; the Forfeiture of Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk and his
Earldome, and great Possessions with diverse other Escheats and Forfeitures, the
Principality of Wales and the Conquest of Scotland in the Reign of King Edward
the First, confiscating of the lands of inheritance (for from the making of the
Statute de Donis or Entails in Anno 13. of Edward the first, until Anno 5 and
6 of Edward the sixth, Lands entailed were not forfeited for Treason) of Thomas
Earl of Lancaster, Lincoln and Derby; Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and
Essex; of the Lords Clifford, Warrein, Lisle, Tutchet, Cheney, Mowbray, Teyes,
Aldenham, Badlesmere and Gifford, and many other men of great note and
eminency to King Edward the second, the lands of Mortimer Earl of March,
Edmund Earl of Kent, and the Escheat of the great Estate and Inheritance of
Hastings Earl of Pembroke to King Edward the third, with several other
confiscations and forfeitures, and his Conquest of a great part of France, the
forfeitures of Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael dela Pooli Earl of
Suffolk, of the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and diverse
other great Inheritances to King R. 2. the marriage of John of Grant fourth son
to King Ed. 3. to Blanch the sole daughter and heir of Henry Duke of Lancaster,
Earl of Derby, Leicester and Lincoln, making that of Lancaster to be as a
Principality or little Kingdom, which by Henry 4, 5, 6, and 7th Kings of
England coming afterward to attend the Royal Dignity, accompanied by the
forfeitures of the Dukes of Exeter and Albemarle, Mowbray Earl Marshal, Earls
of Kent, Salisbury Huntington, Northumberland, Stafford, March and Worcester
Owen Glendour; Lords, Hastings, Despencer, Falconbridge, Bardolph, and many
others to King H. 4. and the lands of the Earldome of Oxford long detained by
him, confiscation of the lands of the Prior Aliens, and all France conquered
and in possession, and many other great Estates coming to Hen. 5. by the
Attainders of Richard Earl of Cambridge, Earl of Northumberland, Henry Lord
Scroop; the lands of Widevill Earl Rivers, and diverse other Barons, the
Dukedomes of Exeter and Somerset, and Earldome of Devonshire, and many other
Lands and Inheritances forfeited to King Edward the Fourth, the Lands and
Estate of Henry Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Stafford and Northampton, and Lord
of Brecknock and Holderness, Henry Earl of Richmond, and Jasper Earl of
Penbroke, with some other to King Richard the Third, accumulated by the great
and Princely Inheritance of Richard Duke of York, and all the partakers of him
and King Edward the fourth his brother, with the Lands and great Inheritance of
the Countess of Warwick, gained by King H. 7. his fortune at Bosworth-field,
and the marriage and inheritance, of the Royal and principal heir of the white
Rose; the confiscations of the lands of John Duke of Norfolk, Earls of Surrey,
Warwick, Lincoln, Lords Lovel, Wells, Audley, and diverse others, like many
great rivers running into the Ocean of the Crown revenues, made its Lands and
Estate to be as vast in Demeasnes, and Service, as they were Princely and
honorable.

Which being likewise abundantly enlarged by King Hen. 8. by the unprosperous
dissolution of the Abbey and religious Lands, which the envy of the Laity in
the reign of King H. 4. had (over and above (as they said) what would serve for
the remaning Clergy) computed to be sufficient and enough to maintain fifteen
Earls (which after the rate of Earls in those days and their grand revenues,
could not be a little) fifteen hundred Knights, six thousand two hundred
Gentlemen, and an hundred Hospitals, besides twenty thousand pounds per annum
to be given to the King (which was then more then one hundred thousand pounds
per annum is now) and were at their dissolution six hundred forty and five
Abbeys, Priories and Nunneries, ninety Colleges, one hundred and ten
Hospitals, and two thousand three hundred seventy and four Chanteries and free
Chapels, then valued at one hundred-eighty six thousand fifteen pounds eight
shillings penny farthing per annum.

And together with the forfeited Lands and Inheritance of Empson and Dudley,
George Lord Rochford, Edmond de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, the Duke of
Buckingham, Earl of Surrey Lord Dacres, and diverse others and the confiscation
of his two great Favorites Wolsey and Cromwell, the former of which left him
the stately Palaces of Hampton Court and Whitehall, and the recontinuing of
diverse liberties withheld from the Crown by the Lords Marchers of Wales, made
so great an accession and increase as the Court of Exchequer was not thought to
be comprehensive enough for the care and governance thereof without the
short-lived Courts of the Survay, and Augmentation, and First Fruits erected by
Act of Parliament for the separate management of the Ecclesiastical Revenues.

By the dissolution whereof shortly after, and not trusting the Exchequer with
the better care thereof, the regal revenues if Mr. Christopher Vernon, a late
ancient and expert Officer of that Court has not been mistaken, or miscast it,
were not so little damnified as six hundred thousand pounds sterling; or if
plenty had not as it most commonly uses, introduced profusion, and
carelessness, might otherwise have been saved.

Which with the Lands and Inheritance of the Duke of Somerset, and others
attainted, added by King Edward the sixth, the forfeitures of the Duke of
Northumberland; William Parr Marquess of Northampton, John Earl of Warwick, Sir
Thomas Wyat and others to Queen Mary; the Lands of the Duke of Norffolk, Philip
Earl of Arrundel, the Earls of Westmerland, Essex and Southampton, Sir John
Perrot, Leonard Dacres, and others in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and hers as
well as King Edward the sixth's ill advised and unhappy clypping and lessening
the Lands and Revenues of many Bishoprics, Deans and Chapters; forfeitures of
the Lord Cobham and Sir Walter Rawley, and of Winter, Grant, and other the
Gunpowder Traitors; the great revenues of the Earls of Tyrone and Desmond, and
other large confiscated Escheats and forfeited Estates in Ireland, which came
to King James (for before his reign and the subduing of Tyrone, that Kingdom
as to the public was a greater charge then profit) addition of Scotland and
all the Appennages and Lands of the royal Brethren and Princes of the blood of
England in their several times and ages, falling into the Regal Revenues, would
have made a plentiful support for the Crown of England, if they had tarried
(as they did not) one for another, and continued unwasted and unaliened.

CHAP. II. Supplies and Additions to the Royal Revenues, and the many cares
taken therein by Parliaments and otherwise.
WHich could not be prevented by a thousand sixty one pounds and three half
pence per diem revenue ex justis reditibus, which William the Conqueror had in
daily revenue, after his Knights Fees and his large gifts and rewards given to
his friends and followers (which in the now value of money and rates of
provision would a great deal more then treble that sum) as Ordericus vitalis,
who was born in his reign, and died in the beginning of the reign of King
Stephen, has informed us exceptis muneribus regiis, and reatum redemptionibus
aliisque multiplicibus negotiis quae Regis Aerarium quotidie aduagebant,
besides, Gifts, Presents, Confiscations, and other things which did daily
increase his riches, nor by sixty thousand pounds sterling, (...) by him in his
Treasury, his Censas Nemor^m, rents or profits of Woods, Escheats and incidents
of Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, Hidage, Danegeld, Sponte oblata,
for all Grants or Favors which passed from him, Cambium Regium, or benefit of
Exchanges, rating of the Fees of the Officers of his Household to a certainty
per diem, taking accounts upon oath for all his moneys issued out or impressed
for repair of his Castles and Houses, and fines for granting of Privileges and
Liberties, Contributions to William Rufus toward the building of
Westminster Hall, three shillings upon every hundred Acres or Hide of Land in
England to King Hen. 1. and his providence in making every third year a survey
of his Woods and Forests, changing of the penalites of mutilation of members
into pecuniary mulcts, turning of his rents which were formerly paid in corn
and other household provisions, into money, and six pence overplus in every
pound for any loss or abatement which might happen in the value of money, which
being then by reason of his often absence and residence in Normandy reckoned to
be good husbandry, proved shortly afterward by the change of times, and dearer
rates of provision to be the contrary, and a great disadvantage to his
Successors; one hundred thousand pounds in money, besides Plate and Jewels left
by him in his Treasury, and possessed by King Stephen, resumption of diverse Lands
aliened from the Royal Revenue; reforming of the Exchequer by Hen. 2. revoking
of all Grants of Lands aliened from the Crown, of the Castles of Clebury,
Wigmore and Bridgnorth from (...) Mortimer, City of Gloucester and Lands
belonging unto it from Roger, Fitz Miles Earl of Hereford, Castle of
Scarborough from William Earl of Albemarle, with many other Lands, Towns and
Castles; and from William Earl of Mortain and Warren, base Son to King Stephen,
the Castle of Pemsey and City of Norwich; notwithstanding that himself had
granted them to the said William Earl of Mortaign in his agreement with King
Stephen, alleging that they were of the Demeasnes of the Crown, and could not
be alienated, calling of certain of his great Ministers of Estate to account,
and imposing a Tax of two pence upon every yoke of Oxen in Ireland, and two
pence in the pound by Act of Parliament of every man's Lands and goods in
Normandy, to be paid in the year 1166. and a penny in every pound to be paid
for four years following, for the relief of the Christians in the Holy war,
enquiring by his Justices Itinerants, and Articles in Air in England of the
rights of his Crown and Exchequer, taxing in the 32. year of his reign all his
Dominions in France, with the Tenth of the Revenues for that year of all, as
well Clergy as Laity but such as went in person to the Holy war, the tenth of
all their movables, as well gold as silver, and the tenth of the movables of
two hundred of the richest men in London, and of one hundred in York,
banishment of William de Ipre Earl of Kent, with his Countrymen and followers,
when they grew to be a burden to the Kingdom; nine hundred thousand pounds in
money besides Plate and Jewels inestimable left in the Treasury to his Son King
Richard the first, great sums of money gained by him by renewing Charters and
Fines imposed upon Sheriffs and Accomptants, and such as had taken part with
his Brother John in his usurpations, the tenth of all movables granted to him,
and the City of London giving him a voluntary contribution toward his voyage
into the Holy Land; banishment of Otho Earl of York, the Son of his. Sister and
all the Bavarians; a fourth part given him by Parliament of all spiritual and
temporal Revenues, as much for movables, and twenty shillings for every
Knights Fee, resumption of many Grants of Lands and Annuities, two shillings of
every plough land taken for preparation of a journey to Normandy; examination of
the Accounts of his Exchequer Officers, five shillings laid upon every plough
land for another foreign voyage, and a general survey made of his Lands and
Profits.

Three shillings for every plough land granted by Parliament to King John for
his affairs in Normandy, one hundred thousand pounds taxed upon the Clergy
toward his charges in Ireland, a thirteenth of all Spiritual and Temporal
men's goods, twenty six shillings eight pence for every Knights Fee two
shillings upon every plough land, an Aid of twenty six shillings and eight
pence of every Knights fee toward his wars in Wales, with Escauge of such as
held of him besides Benevolences, Escheats and Americiaments; twenty shillings
of every Knights see toward his charges in Normandy, forty shillings at
another time, and an Aid for the marriage of his Sister Isabel to the Emperor
Frederick.

The fifteenth part of every man's movables to King Henry the third for a
confirmation of Magna Charta and Charta Foreste, fortieth part of every man's
goods toward the payment of his debts, and a thirtieth part afterward granted
by Act of Parliament, much of his Forests and Woods converted to errable land,
his Parks of Woodstock and Gillingham ploughed, many Grants made in his
minority revoked, his great Officers as Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, Chief
Justice of England, and others called to account, Ranulph Britton Treasurer of
his Chamber fined in one thousand marks, a great sum of money given by the
City of London to be made Toll-free, every one that could dispend in land
fifteen pound per annum ordered to be knighted or pay a Fine; great sums of
money gained by composition with Delinquents at seven years value of their
Lands by the Dictu^ de Kenilworth, his household charges lessened, a meaner Port
kept, less Alms given, his Jewels and the Crown royal pawned, Plate sold to
pay his debts at no greater a value then the weight though the workmanship did
cost as much, and the golden Shrine of Edward the Confessor, forty shillings
for every Knights see twice assessed for his wars in Gascony, great sums of
money raised of the Jews, the banishment of the Poictouins and his
half-brothers who had made it too much of their business to beg what they could
of the Revenue, and by his own sometimes sitting in the Exchequer to preserve
it; thirty two thousand pounds sterling received of Leolin Prince of Wales
propaee habenda, and a resumption of diverse of the Crown Lands which had been
aliened.

Nor by an Inquiry in Anno 4. of King Ed. 1, by Act of Parliament of the
Castles, Buildings, Lead and Timber of the Kings, his Demeasnes, Parks, Woods,
extent of Manors, foreign Parks and Woods, Pawnage, Herbage, Mills, Fishings,
Freeholds, Cottages, Curtilages, customary Tenants, Patronages, Perquisit^s of
Courts, Liberties, Customs and Services; a Subsidy in Anno 6. of his reign of
the twentieth part of every man's goods toward the charges of his wars in
Wales, the Statute of Quo warranto in Anno 18. to inquire and seize into the
Kings hands all liberties usurped; a Subside in anno 22. of his reign upon
Woolfels and Hydes transported, a tenth of all goods, the eighth of the goods
of the Citizens and Burgesses, a twelfth of the rest of the Laity, and a moiety
of the Clergy; in anno 25. and in anno 26. the ninth penny of the Commons, the
tenth penny of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, and the fifth of York,
taking away much moneys from the Priors Aliens, payment by the Clergy in anno
23 of all such sums of money which they had promised to pay to the Pope
toward the maintenance of the Holy wars, and half a years value of their
Ecclesiastical livings and promotions, abased moneys, four hundred and twenty
thousand pounds fifteen shillings and four pence raised from the Jews, and a
far greater sum afterward, contribution of ships and ship money by the
maritime Coasts and Counties in case of danger and invasion, sixty five
thousand marks of silver received for Fines of some corrupt Judges, and great
sums of money likewise for forfeitures by an Inquisition or Commission of
Trail Baston.

A fifteenth of the Clergy, and a twentieth of the Temporalty to King Edward
the Second, in anno primo of his reign, the movables and personal Estate of
the Knights Templers in England, Contribution of ships and ship money by the
maritime Counties; a fifteenth in anno 6. and the great and rich confiscated
personal Estates of the two Spencers, Father and Son, and an Ordinance made
pro Hospitio Regis, concerning the regulation of his Household.

Thirty thousand marks paid to King Edward the third in anno 2. of his reign by
Robert Bruce King of Scots, to release his Soveraignity to that Kingdom; a
tenth of the Clergy Citizens and Burgesses, and a fifteenth of others granted
in anno 6. of his reign, Aids of ships and ship money by the Seacoasts; and in
an. 13. the tenth sheep of all the Lords Demeasnes except of their bound
Tenants; the tenth fleece of wool, and the tenth lamb of their store to be paid
in two years; and that such of them or their Peers as held by Baronie, should
give the tenth of their grain, wool and Lamb, and of all their own Demeasnes,
and two thousand five hundred sacks of wool given by the Commons anno 14. the
ninth of the grain, wool, and lamb of the Laity, to be paid in two years; the
ninth of the goods of the Townsmen, and the fifteenth of such as dwelt in
Forests and Chases anno 17. forty shillings for every Sack of wool over and
above the old rate anno 18. a Disme by the Clergy of Canterbury for three
years, two fifteenths of the Commons, and two dismes of the Cities and Towns to
be levied in such wise as the last in an. 20. two fifteens to be paid in two
years anno 21. two shillings upon every Sack of wool, granted by the Lords
without the Commons in anno 22. three fifteens to be paid in three years: All
such treasure as was committed to Churches throughout England for the Holy
war, all the goods of the Cluniacques, Cistercians, and some other Orders of
Monks, half the wools of the Laity, and the whole of the Clergy; the jewels of
the Crown pawned, imprisonment of his Treasurer, abasing some of his (...) and
ordaining some of his Exchanges of money to be at London, Canterbury and York,
moneys abated in weight and made to pass according to former value, and the
profits which the foreign Cardinals enjoyed in England during their lives,
taken into his hands; one hundred thousand pounds received for the ransom of
John King of France, great sums of money for the ransoming of David King of
Scotland, Philip afterward Duke of Burgogne, Jaques de Bourbon, and many of
the French Nobility; fifty shillings granted by Parliament in anno 43. for
every sack of wool for six years (by which imposition only, as the Trade of
Wools and Clothing then flourished, the King, as it was computed, might
dispend one thousand marks per diem) fifty thousand pounds by the Laity, and as
much by the Clergy, granted him by the Parliament in anno 45. to resume his
right in France: a Poll-money by Act of Parliament of four pence for every
person of of the Laity that took not alms, of every Clergyman beneficed
twelve pence, and of every Religious person four pence, in anno 50. and a
resumption of diverse of his Crown Lands.

A Subsidy in the first year of K. Richard the second levied upon the great
men, to spare the Commons, Poll-money of every person above fifteen years old,
Fines of seaventeen shires in anno 21. and causing them to pay great sums of
money for aiding the Duke of Gloucester, and Earls of Arrundel and Warwick;
the Bohemians which pestered his Court banished, and a resumption of diverse of
his Crown Lands.

A tenth of the Clergy, and a Subsidy of twenty shillings upon every Knights
Fee, twelve pence of every man and woman that could dispend twenty shillings
per annum above reprises by their Lands, and so proportionably according to
their land revenues, twelve pence of every one whose goods were valued at
twenty pounds, and proportionably to what it exceeded, granto King Henry the
fourth; seven hundred thousand pounds found in King Richard the second's
Treasury, two fifteenths of the Commons in the sixth year of his reign, a tenth
and a half of the Clergy, and of the Commons two fifteenths in the ninth, a
Subsidy by the Laity, and half a mark a piece of the Stipendary Priests and
Friars, in the tenth a Subsidy to be levied through the Realm, and in anno 11.
a fifteenth, a resumption of many Grants and Annuities, regulation of his
Household, and banishment of the Gascoigners and Welsh, impoverishing him and
the Kingdom by Petitions and Suits.

Great sums of money given to King Henry the fifth by the Clergy, a Subsidy
by the Clergy and Laity, a double Disme, and a fifteenth by the Laity, and in
the 9th year of his reign two tenths of the Clergy, and a fifteenth of the
Laity, and another fifteenth in the same year, his Crown Royal and Jewels
pawned, and a resumption of diverse Lands and Annuities granted to unworthy
persons.

To King Henry the sixth in anno primo of his reign a Subsidy of five Nobles
upon every sack of wool transported for three years, forty three shillings of
every sack of wool carried out by Merchant strangers, a Subsidy of twelve
pence in the pound of all merchandise imported or exported, 3. shillings upon
every Tonne of wine for three years granted by Parliament, in (...) 3. a
Subsidy of three shillings upon every Ton of (...) and of all other
Merchandise twelve pence per pound, except woolfell and cloth or every Benefice
of ten marks per annum, ten of that parish to pay six shillings and eight
pence, of every Benefice of ten pounds per annum, ten parishioners to pay
thirty shillings, and four pence, and so rateably for every Benefice: And of
the Inhabitants of Cities and Boroughs every man worth twenty shillings above
his Housholdstuff, and his own and wives Apparel four pence, and upwards after
that rate or proportion; in anno 8. a Disme and fifteenth of the Laity.

Great sums of money raised by King Edward the fourth by penal Laws and
Benevolences, resumption in the seventh year of his reign of all manner of
gifts which he had given from the first day of his reign; A Subsidy in anno 8.
of two fifteens and a half, and in anno 13. a Subsidy.

Some Taxes laid upon the people by King Richard the third, and a resumption of
all Lands and Estate granted to Elizabeth Gray Queen of England.

A Subside to Henry the seventh in an. 2. of his reign at a tenth of every man's
goods toward the setting forth an Army into Britain anno 4. two fifteens of
the Laity, and two Dismes of the Clergy, Poll-money, of every Duke ten marks,
every Earl five pounds, every Baron four pounds, every Knight four marks, of
every one worth forty shillings, twelve pence, of every one that took wages
twelve pence, of every man above fifteen years old four pence; anno 6. great
Benevolences, anno 11. a Subsidy toward his wars in Scotland, anno (...)
Benevolences and great Fines upon penal Laws, (...) ^^ghteen hundred thousand
pounds left in his Treasury* say the Historians, but as the Lo^d Treasurer
Cecil Earl of Salisbury, informed King James four Millions and a half.

Diverse Subsidies granted to King Henry the eighth in anno 6. of his reign, and
in anno 14. another Subsidy upon goods, a years value for one year of all the
Clergies spiritual livings, a great sum of the Laity in the Parliameat
following; anno 25. a Subsidy of four pence per pound in goods from twenty
shillings to five pound, from five pounds, to ten pounds, eight pence, from ten
pounds, to twenty pounds, sixteen pence, from twenty pounds and upwards, two
shillings, of all strangers double, of all Strangers not Inhabitants four pence
a head, of every one that had Lands, Fees, or Annuities* eight pence the pound,
from twenty shillings to five pounds, and so doubled according as they did for
goods by several proportions, and of the Clergy three shillings in the pound;
great sums of money and treasure by the confiscation of Cardinal Wolsey: Anno
26. tenths and first fruits of the Clergy formerly paid to the Popes granted
unto him; An. 36. a Benevolence; An. 37. a Subsidy of six shillings per pound
of the Clergy, two shillings eight pence of the goods of the Laity, and four
shilligs per pound of Lands, tenths of all Abbey and Religious Lands reserved
upon his Grants, two hundred thousand pounds paid by the Clergy of the
Provinces of York and Canterbury to be excused from a Praemunire, and the vast
and inestimable treasure in Money, Plate, Shrines, Jewels, Copes and rich
movables upon the spoil of the Abbeys and Religious Houses.

An Aid given by Parliament to King Edward the sixth, in the 2d. year of his
reign, of twelve pence per pound of the goods of his natural Subjects, two
shillings per pound of Strangers for three years, of every Ewe kept in several
pastures three pence, of every Weather two pence, of every Sheep kept in the
Commons three half pence, and eight pence per pound of every woollen Cloth made
for sale throughout England, anno 6. Commissions given out for sale of Church
goods, an. 7. one Subsidy and two fifteens granted by Parliament, and the gain
for some years made by the Coynage of Bullion sent from Sweden and returned in
Merchandise.

One Subsidy of the Laity given to Queen Mary in anno 2. of her reign, eight
pence in the pound, from five pounds, to ten pounds, from ten pounds, to twenty
pounds sixteen pence per pound, and of all strangers double.

To Queen Elizabeth in anno primo, a Subsidy and two fifteens of the Clergy,
and a tenth of the Temporalty: Anno 5. a Subsidy of the Clergy and two
fifteens of the Temporalty; Anno 8. a Subsidy of the Clergy, and a subsidy,
fifteenth and tenth of the Temporalty; Anno 13. a Subsidy of the Clergy, one
subsidy, two fifteenths and a tenth of the Temporalty, anno 18. a subsidy of
the Clergy, two fifteenths and tenths of the Temporalty; Anno 23. the like,
Annis 27. and 29. the like; Anno 31. two subsidies of the Clergy and three
subsidies and six fifteens of the Temporalty; Anno 39. three subsidies of the
Clergy and Temporalty, and six fifteens of the Temporalty; An. 43. four
subsidies of the Clergy, and four subsidies and eight fifteens of the
Temporalty, the pawning of many of her Jewels, and mortgaging diverse of her
Lands.

A Subsidy of Poundage and Tonnage, Wools; Woolfels and Leather anno primo
Jac. two parts of Recusants Lands convicted; in anno 3. four Subsidies in the
pound by the Clergy, and three entire Subsidies, and three Fifteenths and
tenths, and three hundred and fifty thousand pounds for Subsidies unpaid to
Queen Elizabeth; Anno 7. an Aid to make his Son Prince Henry a Knight; Anno 18.
two Subsidies of the Laity and three of the Crergy; Anno 21. three Subsidies
and three fifteens of the Temporalty and some Subsidies of the Clergy.

Primo Car. primi, three entire Subsides by the Spiritualty; 3. Car. five
entire Subsidies granted by the Spiritualty, and as many by the Temporalty;
great sums of money raised by Ship Money, and by an Act of Parliament for
Poll-money, pawning all his Jewels, and the benefit for some years of Coynage,
of two hundred thousand pounds of Spanish Bullion, and returning the value in
English Commodities.

All which being great supplies and easements to the charges and burdens of our
several and successive Kings and Princes (and were not without some charge in
the collection) would have been much greater if the people of England, keeping
close to a long custom of not only getting all that they can from their Kings
and Common Parents, but returning as little as they could of their Aids or
Thanks unto them, would have permitted them to arrive to a just or true
valuation, or any more then a small part of what they should be content to rate
one another at, having by an Act of Parliament in 6. Ed. 3. obtained of the
King, that from henceforth all Aids should be taxed after the old manner; and
not otherwise (the Subsidies being most commonly rated but at two shillings
eight pence in the pound for goods, and four shillings in the pound for lands,
with consideration of debts and other diminishing circumstances) and put in the
Balance and compared with that which was given to the people, by the
Confirmations of diverse Kings and Queens of Letters Patents and Lands given
therein, Coronation Pardons, the General Pardons of 21 Jac. those in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, and of some of our later Kings and Princes (for in the
Reigns of many of the former, they were not so frequent, general, or usual.)
The Act of Parliament of 21 Jacobi Regis, for debarring the Kings Title to
concealed Lands after sixty years possession, where nothing within that time
had been answered or paid to the Crown, or was in super, and the last
all-surpassing Act of Indemnity and General Pardon granted by King Charles the
second, would be far surmounted by those and many other beneficial Acts of
Parliament, granted in every King and Princes reign, of liberties and benefits
to the people.

And were not enough or sufficient to repair the decays of the Regal Revenues,
or keep them from a consumption occasioned by their vast charges of our Kings
as well in times of war as peace, to keep their people in safety, peace and
plenty, nor to cure the Revenue of a Hecticque Fever of almost 500 years
continuance, though some of our Kings and Princes took some parts of Trade into
their own hands to supply their necessities, as the Wool by King Ed. 1. Tin
by Ed. 3. that and corn by Hen. 6. and Beer transported by Queen Elizabeth, and
notwithstanding the care and provision of diverse Parliaments to have the Crown
Lands not alien'd or wasted and the care of the Laws of England, that the
grants of the King shall be void where he is deceived or not truly informed:
The Ordinance in the 21 of Richard the second that whatsoever should come to
the King by Judgment, Escheat, Wardship, or any otherwise, should not be given
away: That of primo King H. 4. ca. 6. that in a Petition to the King for Lands,
Offices, or any Gift the value thereof shall be mentioned, and of that also
which they have had of the Kings gift, or of other his Pregenitors or
Predecessors before; and in case it be not, their Grants shall be void and
repealed; the Ordinance of 21 R. 2. that the Procurer of any gift should be
punished, continued until 7 H. 4. until the King should be out of debt, under
penalty of forfeiting the double value for moving or procuring any such suit:
The Statute of 4 of H. 4. cap. 4. that the King grant no Lands or other
Commodities but to such as shall deserve them; and if any make demand without
desert he shall be punished by the Council, and not obtain his suit: In 11
Hen. 4, That Petitions for any such Grants delivered to the King be examined by
his Privy Council lest the Kings wants should light upon the Commons; and in 2
H. 6. That all the profits by Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, Escheats, and
Forfeitures should be expended in helping to defray the charges of the Kings
Household, an account of the Kings Revenue in 1. Hen. 6. in England, Ireland,
Wales and Aquitaine, and of his charges and expenses delivered into Parliament
by Ralph Lord Cromwell Lord Treasurer of England, and the Dukes of Bedford and
Gloucester, and diverse of the Lords of the Kings Council appointed to consider
thereof; the Acts of Parliament in 18 and 43 Eliz. That the Queen should be
answered for the overplus, of the value of Lands granted by her Letters Patents
after the rate of threescore years purchase: The abating in several Kings
Reigns the expenses of Household and of their Retinue Favorites Gifts and
Rewards, and lessening of charges in War by Tenures in Capite and Knight
Service; Aids to make their eldest Sons Knights; and for the marriage of
their eldest Daughters, Profit of Annum diem and vastum, Aides and Assistances
by Grand and Petit Serjeanties, Aurum Reginae, or something presented to the
Queen in former Kings Reigns upon Grants of Lands or Estate, Licenses to Trade
with prohibited Merchandise, raising their Customs, and sometimes farming out
their Ships, Fines upon licenses of Alienation or Pardons, Espargne of the
Royal Revenue by the Marriages of the Heirs of the Nobility and Gentry of
great Estates, and transplanting and inoculating of great and Noble Families
and Estates into one another, not only for their good and advancement, but the
peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and the checque which King James gave to
suits and importunities at Court after that he had given away too much of his
English Crown Lands to his craving Countrymen of Scotland, publicly declaring
what kind of Suits or Requests might be demanded of him, and what he would not
grant; his orders to have once in every quarter of a year Certificates or
Accounts of moneys issued for his Household, Wardrobe, Jewel-house, Chamber,
Navy and Stables, and his care and advice with his Privy Council for supplies
of his Revenues and regulating his expenses, for that the Exitus was every year
by affairs, troubles and cares of State, disturbances, and accidents often
happening, a great deal more then the Introitus, the disbursements far
exceeding the incomes, the ordinary receipts coming far short of the ordinary
disbursements, and the extraordinaries very much out-going the ordinaries.

CHAP. III. Ruin and Decay of the Revenues.
BY reason of the great charges and expenses which the Kings of England were at
through their several Generations, to protect and defend themselves and their
people (though some of them, as in all other conditions and sorts of men were
sound to be less provident then others, and more easy to the flatteries of
Courtiers, or the necessities or importunities of Favorites or Followers, as
King Edward the second and King Richard the second) sixty thousand Knights
Fees, or maintenance for them given away by William the Conqueror of which the
Religious Houses then, or in the near succeeding times, came to be possessed of
28115. the yearly value of which number of Knights Fees, if now they should be
estimated but at ten thousand, and valued but at the rate of twenty pounds per
annum, as they seemed to be at the making of the Statute of 1 Ed. 2. would be
worth two hundred thousand pounds per annum, and if at three hundred pounds per
annum, which is now the least of the improvement (Sir Edward Coke reckoning
eight hundred, and others six hundred and eighty acres to a Knights Fee, and
others at the least allowing a large proportion) would make three millions per
annum sterling, two hundred and eighty Manors given to Godfry Bishop of
Constance, which he left to his Nephew Moubray, the Isle of Wight, Earldome of
Devon, and Honor of Plimpton given by Henry the first to Richard de Ripariis
or Rivers, Earldome of Gloucester to Robert Fitz Henry; great possessions given
away by King Stephen to purchase love and fidelity, the great Estates in Land
which Maud the Empress was enforced to grant, and her Son King Henry the second
afterward to confirm to diverse of the great men and Nobility, as the Earldom
of Oxford to Awbrey de vere, Earldome of Arundel to William de Albeney,
Earldome of Hereford to Miles of Gloucester, and of Essex to Jeofrey Magnauile
to forsake the usurping King Stephen, and the great charge which those twenty
years wars expended; the wars of King H. 2. in France, and with his own Sons
there and at home, and of seven and forty thousand three hundred thirty three
pounds six shillings and eight pence expended and given toward the wars of
the Holy land, great somes of gold and silver sent to the Pope, charges of the
voyage or expedition which King Richard the first made in person into Asia and
the Holy Land and his ransom; the Earldomes of Mortaigne, Cornwall, Dorses,
Somerset, Nottingham, Derby and Lancaster with all their great possessions
being a great part of the Crown Revenues given to his brother John, and a great
part of the remainder sold: The troubles of King John with his boisterous
Barons, the Stanneries Castles and Honor of Barkhamstead and County of Cornwall
granted by King Hen. 3. to his Brother Richard his great wars and turmoils in
the Barons wars, which drove him to such wants and perplexities as he and his
Queen (as Matthew Paris tells us were sometimes enforced to seek their daily and
necessary sustenance from Monasteries, charge of endeavoring at a great rate
and price, though unsuccesfully to make his Son Edmond King of Sicily, and
furnishing his Son Edward afterward King. E. 1. with an Army to Jerusalem,
that of King Ed. 1. in his wars against the Scots, and subduing that Kingdom,
the raising and advancing the unhappy Favorites, Gaveston and the two Spencers,
Father and Son, by King Edward the Second, and his troubles, great expenses of
Edward the Third, in his Conquering of France, the Dukedom of Cornwall, and
Earldoms of Chester and Flint, settled upon the Black Prince his Son, and the
eldest Sons and Heirs of the Kings of England successively, preferring of
Lionel Duke of Clarence, and his many other Sons, restoring of Don Pedro to the
Kingdom of Castile, by the aid of the Black Prince, the Earldom of Salisbury,
Isle of Man, Castle and Barony of Denbigh, given to Mountacute, and one
Thousand Marks Lands per annum besides, to him and his Heirs for taking Roger
Mortimer Prisoner at Nottingham Castle, one thousand pounds per annum with the
Town and Castle of Cambridge, to William Marquess of Juliers and the Heirs of
his body, Honor of Wallingford and Earldome of Cornwall escheated, given to
John of Eltham his Brother, the penalties and fines of Laborers, Artificers
and Servants in anno 36. of his reign given to the Commons for three years to
be distributed amongst them the maintaining and humoring of several Factions
of the great Nobility by King. Richard the second his voyage into Ireland, and
after misfortunes, raising of John Beaufort Earl of Somerset and John Holland,
his half-Brother, to be Earl of Kent and Duke of Exeter; dissentions and
troubles in the Reign of King Henry the fourth, preferring another of the
Beauforts to be Earl of Dorset, and his establishment as well as he could in
his own usurpations, Chirk and Chirk Lands in Wales given by King Henry the
fifth to Edmond Beaufort second Son of John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, the
charge of his Conquest of France, the seeking to preserve and keep it by Henry
the sixth, long and bloody Factions and Wars of York and Lancaster, Kendal,
and other great possessions given to John de Foix, a Frenchman, in marriage
with Margaret the Sister to William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, the Earldome
of Shrowsbury to the high deserving Talbot, the Isles of Guarnsay and Jersey,
and the Castle of Bristol to Henry Beauchamp Duke of Warwick, the charge of
King Edward the fourth in his getting the Crown, the Earldome of Pembroke given
by him to William Lord Herbert, the making of friends and parties by King R. 3.
pacifying of Interests by King. Hen. 7. his gifts and grants to Stanley. Earl
of Derby, and the dying the white Rose into the Red, or uniting of them, the
voyages and wars of King H. 8. in France, preferring of Charles Brandon to be
Duke of Suffolk, Seymour to be Earl of Hertford, Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex,
Thomas Manors Earl of Rutland, Sir Thomas Bolein to be Viscount Rochford and
Earl of Wiltshire; his contest with the Pope and other great Princes, large and
great quantities of Religious and Ecclesiastical Lands given away to diverse of
his Nobility many of whom had been the former Donors thereof, and to diverse of
the Gentry to corroborate what he had done, bring them into a better liking of
that action, and to be the more unwilling to leave those Lands which he had
given them, a remission of all debts without schedule or limitation in anno 21.
of his Reign, endowing six Bishoprics and Cathedral Churches, Pensions for
life to many which were turned out of their Cloisters, a perpetual maintenance
to the Professors of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, Civil Law, Divinity and
Physic in both the Universities, and to twelve poor Knights at Windsor; the
wars of King Edward the sixth in Scotland, creating of John Dudley Earl of
Warwick Duke of Northumberland, Seymour Duke of Somerset, Russell Earl of
Bedford, St. John Earl of Wiltshire, Rich, Willoughby, Paget, Sheffeild,
Barons; his giving away great quantities of Ecclesiastical and Chantry Lands,
Viscount Mountague, Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord North advanced by Queen
Mary, the Subsidy of four shillings in the pound for Lands, and two shillings
for Goods granted to King Edward the sixth in the last year of his Reign,
remitted by her, and nine thousand two hundred pounds land per annum of the
Crown given away, paying at the same time twelve pound per cent. Interest for
twenty thousand pounds borrowed of the City of London, and the greater charges
and Expenses of Queen Elizabeth, in protecting the Neatherlands and United
Provinces, which cost her five hundred thirty four thousand pounds, and four
hundred thousand pounds in succouring King H. 4. of France, besides what was
disbursed for other Protestant Allies, guarding the Backdoor of Scotland,
relieving and guarding the young King, who was afterward her Successor,
endeavoring to reduce Ireland to its former obedience, which in a few years
cost her, as the Lord Treasurer Cecill Earl of Salisbury in the Reign of King
James informed the Parliament, nineteen hundred twenty and four thousand
pounds, and defending her self from the Assaults and machinations of the Pope,
King of Spain, and other Catholic Princes, advancing and enriching Cecil L.
Burghley, Sackvile L. Buckhurst, Charles Blount Lord Mountjoy, Knowles, Wotton,
Sidney, Carew, Petre, Compton, Cheney, Norris, and Stanhop, to be Barons; and
creating of the Earls of Essex, Leicester, Lincoln and Warwick: Remission of a
Subsidy granted to Q. Mary, Farming of her Customs to Smyth but for thirteen
thousand pounds per annum, afterward to forty two thousand pounds, and raising
them after that only to no more then fifty thousand pounds per annum, five
hundred thousand pounds spent by King James in a total subduing of Ireland,
three hundred and fifty thousand pounds paid for Queen Elizabeth's debts to the
City of London, for which some of the Crown Lands were mortgaged, and for debts
to the Army, Admiralty and Wardrobe, and discharging the reckoning of brass
money in Ireland with the same sums in silver; his vast expenses by Treaties
and Ambassadors, amounting in the seventh year of his Reign unto five hundred
thousand pounds, to keep us in our envied peace and plenty; four hundred
thousand pounds disbursed in relieving the Dutch, besides what was spent in
satisfying the greedy cravings of the Scottish Nation, preferring and raising
of the Duke of Richmond, Ramsey, Earl of Holderness, Earls of Carlisle, Kelley,
Morton and Dunbarre, Howard Earl of Northampton, Carr Earl of Somerset, Herbert
Earl of Montgomery, Villers Duke of Buckingham, Cranfeild Earl of Middlesex,
Cecill Earl of Salisbury, Howard Earl of Suffolk, Mountague Earl of
Manchester, Ley Earl of Marleborough, and Digby Earl of Bristol.

All which and many more which might be here enumerated, did not only as was
usual in the Reigns of our former Kings, by necessary bounties encouraging of
virtue and valor, rewarding of merits and high deservings of Ministers of
State, and great Achievements of men of war through a successiion of ages,
accidents, occasions, and reasons of State, draw and derive their honors from
those fountains of Honor, but large Revenues and Lands many times likewise, to
support and maintain their Dignities, and sometimes upon the Petitions of the
Commons in Parliament, as to confer upon John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the
Dukedom of Acquitaine in the reign of King Edward the third, to make John
Holland the Kings half-Brother Earl of Huntington in the reign of King Richard
the second, and to prefer and advance the Lords John and Humphrey, Sons of
King Henry the fourth: and sometimes great Pensions and Annuities were given
for life until Lands could be provided to support them, in reward of virtue
and their services done or to be done for the good of the Nation, and to
continue them and their posterities as props and pillars of the Royal Throne
in a grateful acknowledgment of the favors received from it; And besides
those former rewards and Ennoblishments, puts it at this day for Creation
money, paid to the Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, to no less a charge then one
thousand pounds per annum, by which the people were in all ages no loosers,
when the Honor strength and defense of the Kingdom was maintained and
increased by them, and themselves kept in peace and plenty, the manner of
living in ancient and better times, being with little money and small rents,
great services, by the thankful and ready duty and affections of Tenants to
their Benefactors and mesne Lords, not only made them great in power, but
enabled them to imitate their Princes, as much as they could in great
hospitalities, deeds of charity and alms, building and endowing of Churches,
Abbeys, Priories and Religious Houses, and giving large Inheritances to their
Servants, Friends and Followers pro homagio and servitio, and other
dependances, Common of Estovers and of great quantities of Lands to several
Cities, Towns and Villages and in such a plentiful manner distributed and gave
their Lands, as if the Lands in Capite and by Knight Service, Coppyhold Lands
and Commons, which our King's Nobility and Gentry bestowed heretofore upon the
inferior sort of people, and what they dedicated to God by giving to Churches,
Religious Houses, Colleges, Churches and Chapels, should be surveyed and
measured, they would amount to no less then two parts in four of the Lands of
the Kingdom.

The quondam lethargy, sleepiness and unactivity of many of the Officers of
the Exchequer who should be as the Argus eyes to guard the Royal Revenue; the
indulgence heretofore,. 1.
or neglect of some of her Officers, and their not remembering that they were to
be the Kings and his Treasurers Remembrancers, respiting or nichiling of his
debts upon feigned Petitions, which can tell how to deceive the most careful
Barons or Judges of that Court, when their Sovereign suffered in the mean time
very great damage for want of the money, the not duly estreating of all Fines
and Amerciaments, corrupt compounding for such as were estreated by under
Officers at easy rates, granting to the City of London their Fines and
Amerciaments, want of looking after, as they do in other Nations, the
execution of those multitudes of penal Laws (which otherwise will be to
little purpose) and assisting the collection of the Kings legal profits
arising thereby, the heretofore carelessness or corruption of some of our former
Kings Officers, who for fees of favor enlarged their Charters and Grants to
bodies politic, Cities, Towns and Corporations, and to as many private
persons as would petition for them, and decked them with the flowers of the
Kings Crown which were not to be parted with so easily.

So as what by Grants or Prescription which in many cases is but the
incroachment or filchings of liberties and privileges, concealed or not well
looked after, covered and drawn into a property by a time beyond the memory of
man upon a mere supposition, that there might possibly have been a loyal or
good grant or commencement for them, every little Manor of those multitudes of
Manors and Franchises (which the Commons in a Parliament of King Edward the
third complained off) and proportions of Lands in England (many of which are
called Manors by supposed Titles or reputation only) as so many little
Seigniories, Jurisdictions or Royalities as they are improperly called, have
Courts, Leet and Baron and free warren, some of whom enjoy the honor and profit
of the King in trying and executing Felons, and many using all manner of
inferior justice upon the Tenants, correction of the Affize of Bread and Beer,
have Tolles, Fairs, Markets, Fishings, Waives, Estraies, Felons goods, and of
persons outlawed, and waived, Issues, Fines and Amerciaments, Wrecks of Sea,
Deodands, Mortuaries, Treasure, Trove, and punishment of breach of the peace,
etc. granted or claimed as belonged to them.

The not having a Clerk for the King besides the Clerks of the Assizes,. 2.
to keep a Roll of all Fines Amerciaments and Profits due to the King in the
Iters or Circuits, to estreat and certify them into the Exchequer, as was
usual in the Reigns of Henry the third, Edward the first, and the elder Kings,
and many of the Justices of peace not duly certifying their Recognizances.

The letting the Greenwax to Farm with defalcations of such as the King shall
grant away,. 3.
which breeds no small neglect in the payment or gathering of it, the not duly
making or sending the original Roll of the Chancery into the Exchequer, the
posting off many of the Kings Farms, and debts de anno in annum by some of the
former Clerks of the Pipe, not holding the Sheriff to a strict opposal, nor
enforcing them to pay the moneys levied of the Kings before their discharge or
departure out of the Court, not drawing of debts down into the Cedule Pipae,
being a more forcible process; the heretofore Stewards and Bailiffs of Manors
belonging to the Crown, not justly accompting in the Exchequer as they ought,
the not awarding (as there shall be occasion) Commissions to worthy Gentlemen
of every County to enquire of the Kings debts not levied, and of the Sheriffs
and other his Officers; false Accomps, ordained by the Statutes of 3 E. 1. c.
19. and 6 H. 4. cap. 3. neglect of the former Clerks of the Estreats, and many
other abuses crept into evil customs by some Officers or Clerks of that Court:
and in anno 1641. discovered and published by Mr. Vernon; the superfluous
number and charge of many Stewards, Bailiffs and other Officers employed, which
besides the many deceits used by some of them to the King, and exaction upon
the people, did, as was informed, in their annual Fees paid and allowed by the
King, yearly exceed three thousand pounds more then what they accounted for,
the selling or granting away and dismembring many Hundreds, Wapentakes and
liberties from the Crown, and bodies of the Counties, which the Statutes of 2
and 14 Ed. 3. do prohibit to be aliened.

The falsehood of such as did formerly make kind and easy particulars to such
as were to buy or have any of the Kings Lands given them;. 4.
knavery and abuse of Under Sheriffs, carelesnes and covetousness of the High
Sheriffs in appointing them, and not looking better to the performance of their
own oaths as well as theirs.

The not duly accompting for prizes taken at sea,. 5.
and other maritime profits: the heretofore sleepiness or slugishness of
Justices of Peace in all or most Counties and Cities, who being entrusted by
the Law to take care of the observation of some scores of Statutes and Acts of
Parliament would, though their eyes and ears might almost every day persuade
them to a greater care of their oaths and the good of their Country, too often
suffer gross and numberless offenses to increase and multiply, and neither
punish, molest or trouble them, or so much as give any information of them, and
too many of the Clerks of the peace, Clerks of the Market, and others, not duly
recording or certifying their Estreates.

The customs which in all civilized Nations, and even amongst the Heathen are
de jure Gentium,. 6.
to be paid to Kings and Princes, and by the Laws of England and Parliament
assent, are due to the King who is the Sovereign of the Sea, keeps the keys of
his Ports, gives safe conduct to foreign Merchants to come hither, and by his
power, friendship and treaties with his Allies, neighbor, and other Princes,
obtains the like with many privileges for his own Merchants to go and trade
thither, prevents, with no small charges by his Ambassadors, kept in their
Dominions all injuries, procures them right and justice, and in case of denial
forces it, are now so daily cosened, and put up into other Pockets, as
notwithstanding all the care taken in the farming or collecting of them, though
the people upon the retaile are sure to pay them to the full, the King as it is
believed does not receive above a third part thereof, by reason of the
treachery and connivance of the former Searchers or Waiters, and the Merchants
defraying (as they can sometimes confess) the pompous charge of their City and
Country Houses, Wives and Coaches, with their purloined Customs; and that the
cosenning of the King in his Excise yields them many times more then their
Merchandise, and their Apprentices now not taken under three or four hundred
pounds a piece, can live more like Gentlemen then Servants and purchase all
kind of vanities, vice and pride with what they likewise filch and take from
him and when the Customs are let to farm though the Farmers take them as they
are capable of such kind of losses, can abuse their consciences, and persuade
themselves that they do no wrong to the King, who is to have only his Farm or
Rent: And that howsoever the more they cozen him, the better they may be
enabled to trade, and the more they trade the more may be his Customs.

The not improving of their Lands and other Revenues by raising of their Rents
and rates according to the rise of money and provisions which the Subjects have
exceedingly,. 7.
and to their great advantage done in their own Estates and Revenues, and ten
to one more then what was formerly.

The heretofore demising and letting to farm very many of the Kings Manors and
Lands at the old;. 8.
and small Rents for three lives, 21. 31. or 40. years in Reversion, bespeaking
a continual wasting and weakening of his Revenues before hand.

Discoveries of information of deceipts or wrong done to his Revenues seldom
made,. 9.
and then not without an allowance or gratification; craved of three parts in
four or a great share to begiven to the discoverers or prosecutors.

Many men's pretending service to the King,. 10.
but doing all they can to enrich themselves, and deceive and lessen him, and
having by indulgence or cunning escapes from punishment, made vice look like
virtue; and their wickedness to be successful; or been brought off when not
often catched by a gentle composition or some money or recompense given to a
friend at Court or Conniver, are so habituated and used to cosen the King; as
notwithstanding the severity of our Laws if they were let loose, and not too
many of them laid, as they are, to sleep, they do as frequently continue their
practice in it, as they dress themselves and put on their clothes, and can as
little forbear or live without them, insomuch as some having been known to have
been men of an otherwise strict morality, life and conversation, and dealing
very punctually and honestly with all men but the King, can no more resist an
opportunity or temptation of cozening of him, then a Child at a Basket of
Cherries can forbear eating of them, or a Cutpurse not to be nimble in a crowd.

Disuse of the duties of Sheriffs and Escheators,. 11.
which by their then few conduit Pipes, did better look after the collecting
the Kings Revenues, and with less trouble and charge to the King and people,
bring it into his Cisterns, then those, who being under no oath or control,
are, as it is to be feared, by a too often respiting of the Kings debts, or
laying them to sleep for some years, until they be grown ancient, many times
the occasion of their being drowned in a General Pardon, begged by Courtiers,
or made to be a new discovery, desperate or insolvent; and by undertaking, more
then they should do, have to the greater charge of the King and his people
disheartened and caused the more ancient, more diligent, and powerful Officers
of the Exchequer for a great part of what belongs unto their Offices to be
ineffectuall.

Discontinuance of the Laws and Customs for the collecting of the Regal
Revenues,. 12.
and the many excellent cares and orders of the Exchequer, as good as any
Prince in the world can have or devise for the speedy and orderly getting in,
issuing out, and accounting for the Revenue.

A succession and improvement of knavery in some whom our former Kings
trusted,. 13.
occasioned or encouraged, by our wars abroad in France, after 4 Edward the
first, for then there was an endeavor of an Extenta Maneriorum, and an enquiry
after many of the Rights and Regalities (which are not returned or certified in
Chancery, nor any where else to be found, but by time and the troubles thereof
are lost or carried away: And after the Statute of Quo warranto in 12 Ed. 1.
for then also the great care and good husbandry of our Kings in preserving or
improving their Revenues was not laid aside, or by the troubles of King Edward
the second, and the irregularities of his Favorites; for much about that time
there began to be a quitting of the former cares of the Revenue, or by our
successful wars abroad in France by Edward the third and Henry the fifth,
the unhappy Quarrels of the York and Lancastrian Families for almost sixty
years together, and the hatching or breeding of them in the unquiet and
unfortunate reign of Richard the second, or the short reign of Hen. 7. who had
not time enough to reduce things into their former Channel, but was busy in
gathering the treasure which he left to his Son Henry the eighth or being newly
settled in his Throne, did not think it safe or seasonable to make alterations
or put them into their former or better order; or the great increase of Revenue
as well as treasure in Money, Plate and Jewels to Henry the eight by the
dissolution of the Abbeys and religious Houses, or that the fragments not given
away or disposed by him, employed the bounty and munificence of his Successors
Edward the sixth and Queen Elizabeth during their several reigns, and her many
great cares and affairs of State otherwise busying her, or our Halcion days,
peace and plenty in the reign of King James, and a great part of the reign of
King Charles the Martyr, and the hearkening to pretenses, and erecting more
Offices to hinder the cheating and knavery of others, when as the proposers
either by intending it at first, or easily learning to imitate or exceed them,
did afterward draw from the King and People more money then what their
undertakings ever amounted unto, and proved to be as little for the Kings good
as Sir Simon Harvey's design of Reformation in the Reign of King James, for the
better ordering of the Expenses of his House, where after many dishonorable
essays and retrenchments, casting many of the Kings Servants into ruin and
discontents, and serving some of the Tables with half a Goose instead of a
whole one, he could at last, when he had gained a pension of five hundred
pounds per annum for his own life and his wives, put up all his Engines, and
conclude with making every thing worse then it was before.

And no better a husbandry then those that will feed and give wages to half a
dozen Shepherds to keep a score of sheep,. 14.
and allow them the keeping of some of their own into the bargain, and make no
better a total at the years end, then the Gardner which gives entertainment to
a multitude of Catterpillers in his Garden, and thinks it is preserved by them,
the waters being ever likely to come short, or but faintly when instead of
fewer or greater Pipes, which brought it better, there, shall be so many to
divert or wast it in the way or passage to the Royal uses.

The necessity of Intelligence,, 15.
Leagues and Correspondency with neighbor and foreign Princes and States, and
the charges incident thereunto (which cannot be thought to be small, when as
that with the house of Burgundy within the space of sixty years, betwixt the
reign of King Henry the sixth, and the later end of the reign of Henry the
eighth amounted to no less then six millions) the more then formerly greater
charges of sending and entertainment of Ambassadors, Princely Gifts and
Presents to such as come hither, and the General Pardons at the end of
several Parliaments granted by our Kings and Princes, and to the great
advantage of the People of late petitioned for as a kind of custom and
renumeration for some Ayds or Subsidies, which came not up most commonly to a
moiety of what was in every Parliament quitted and released to them.

The granting away in all ages many of the Royal Rights and Prerogatives to
the people.. 16.


And in a long course and series of time,. 17.
like some aged parents in love to some of their children, or by the
importunites, or designs, of others, giving away too much of their own
Revenues and Estate, and bereaving themselves of that which is now thought too
little for those who have gained it from them.

Restorations (and many times by petitions of one or both Houses of Parliament)
of the Lands and Estates which came to the Crown by Attainders and Forfeitures
for Treason (their confiscations never amounting. 18.
to the damage done by such attempts and Rebellions, and the charge of
suppressing them, and defending themselves and their people) to reconcile the
Heirs, Posterity and Allies of such as had been attainted and induce them to a
better obedience and love of their Country.

The no small charges sustained heretofore,. 19.
by granting yearly Pensions or Annuities to several of the Nobility to serve
extraordinary, besides the ordinary duty of their Tenures, with certain numbers
of gens d' arms, and Bowmen in times of war, or upon necessity, the building
and endowing of many Colleges and Halls in the Universities, Eaton and
Winchester Schools, and endowing with great yearly Revenues the Famous
Hospitalls of Bridewell and Christ-Church in London, and St. Thomas in
Southwark, building and endowing a great part of the Cathedrals in England, the
Castle and Chapel of Windsor, and Palaces of Sheene, Woodstock, Richmond;
repair of the Tower of London, Castle of Dover, etc.

Charges for the honor of the King and Kingdom in making and installment of
Knights of the Garter,. 20.
and the costly ceremonies thereof, and not seldom sending Ambassadors with
it to foreign Princes, expenses in making of Knights of the Bath; and in the
reign of our more ancient Kings for Furs and rich Vestments, in making
Knights Bachelors.

Charge of the Courts of Justice and Circuits,. 21.
to preserve the peoples Rights, Properties and Liberties, protect them from
injuries, and punish the transgressors, now taking away yearly from the regal
Revenue fifteen or sixteen thousand pounds per ann. (which in honester and
cheaper times, was in the Reign of Henry the sixth as much as worshipfully
defrayed, as the Record says, the expenses of his then no small retinue and
household) with the greater charges now more then formerly in all other the
necessaries and affairs belonging to the Kingly Office.

A daily and almost hourly distribution and giving of Royal favors and
munificence,. 22.
and necessity of much of it, when as that which amongst private men is
accounted providence, thrift and good husbandry would be an unbecoming sparing
in Princes, and an avarice and temptation to oppress the people, and that which
in others would be prodigality, or a wast and consumptions of their Estates,
and reckoned as a folly is in Kings and Princes, most necessary in their
bounties and favors wherewith to satisfy and keep in quiet as well as they
can multitudes of people, whose numberless passions, iniquities, ill humors,
designs, necessities and interests are by the Sword of Justice in one hand: and
the Royal Scepter of grace and Benevolence in the other, to be kept in order by
love, honor, obedience and loyalty, the best increasers, maintainers and
preservers of public peace and tranquillity, which those who have suffered in
the want of it but some days, or months, or a year, or few years, or our last
twenty years folly and miseries, may know how to esteem and value.

A daily or very often craving and petitioning of some or many of his
Subjects,. 23.
and the largeness of a royal heart and hand like an over indulgent Parent,
taking a pleasure and content to divest himself to enrich and give them content.

The vast difference betwixt the charges of Navies and Armies now more then
formerly, when a Hobler or Dragoon Horseman which was wont to be heretofore
hired at three pence per diem, now has no less then two shillings six pence, a
Footman eight pence, the pay of a Troop of horse cannot be under four thousand
pounds per annum, and of one hundred and eighty men in a Garrison three
thousand six hundred pounds per annum.

The course of war i^ the later ages growing more and more tedious and
chargeable,. 25.
and so immense, as the Dutch notwithstanding their sout gelt, or Tax upon
salt, their vectigal frumenti for corn grinded at their Mills, the eighth part
of the price of Pears and Apples, a seventh of all Cattle sold to the Butchers,
an eighth for wood, a Tax upon Candles, and an Ezcise upon all things eaten,
drunk or worn; upon Law Suits, Servants Wages, Ships, Coaches and Carts; a
sixth penny upon all lease Lands, Assessments upon demeasne Lands, Gardens and
planted Grounds; an eighth upon Houses demised or let, hooft, gelt, being a
Dutch Floren for every poll or head scoors^engelt, a like payment for Chimney
money, with many other great Taxes; besides their many profitable and
succesfull depredations in the East and West Indies, etc. great aides from
France and England of men and money for many years during their wars; great
riches got by the greatest commerce of Christendom, and ransacking Sea and Land
for it, have been in sixty years wars with Spain left very much in debt at
the end of the wars.

And are yet notwithstanding since the wars ended some millions of money in
debt, and so much as they were for many years after, and are yet enforced to
continue their Excise, and most of their Assessments and Taxes upon the people,

When the King of Spain notwithstanding his vast Dominions, twenty millions of
Ducats, which is above six millions of our sterling money, yearly Revenues;
great exactions and impoverishing of his people by yearly Taxes and
Assessments; the golden Mines of Peru, Mexico and Potozi, and other inestimable
treasures of the West Indies, which P^^hero a Spanish Ambassador in a brag or
vie with the treasury of Venice, could say, had no bottom; and having the Sun
for its Lord Treasurer, daily to generate and increase its gold; has yearly
for many years yielded the Crown of Spain by and out of the Fifths, sometimes
ten, and sometimes fifteen millions of gold, and so much as in the year 1638.
two hundred and sixty millions of gold did by the Records of the Custom House
of Sivill appear to have been in seventy four years then last past brought from
the West Indies into Spain, and from Potozi in nine years inclusive from 1574.
to 1585. one hundred and eleven millions of silver, has notwithstanding with
his wars with the Dutch, and a war of late years with France, chargeable
bribes and intelligences, and a thirst after an universal Monarchy, consumed
that, and all that he could borrow besides from the Bankers of Genoa.

And France with all her Taxes and Gabells, beggering and very much enslaving
of her common people, has in a war of thirty years last past with the
Spaniards, fought it self almost off its legs, and into a consumption.

Which a long and late experience may forbid our wondering at, when as the late
long pretending but no performing Parliament could with the spoils of the Kings
and Churches Revenues, the Estates of the Nobility, Gentry, and good people in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and more Taxes and burdens imposed by them and
Oliver, their man of sin in twenty years, then our Kings of England in five
hundred years last past, all put together, had before laid upon them, could not
leave their Oliver when their sins, and his tricks, had made him to be their
Master, any more then three hundred thousand pounds sterling in Cash and ready
money: and that with that and such of the Royal Revenues as they left him, and
those vast Spoils, Rapines, Taxes, Assessments, and pillage of all that were
not as bad as himself and his Predecessor Commonwealth Contrivers in the three
Kingdoms of England, Ireland and Scotland, which amounted unto above forty
millions, he was not able in a few years wars with the Dutch and Spaniards to
bring about his expenses, and support the Protection, as he called it, of the
people with it, but died above three millions in debt, which the debts of our
famous King Edward the third, and Henry the fifth, who conquered France, and
the most of our indebted Kings never amounted unto.

When our English Kings and Princes having never received of the people by
their Aides and Subsidies the twentieth penny toward their expenses in the
preservation, of them and the honor, peace, and plenty of the Kingdom, could
never do as the Field Marshals, Stadt Holders or Generals in Commonwealths have
done, or as the late Princes of Orange, did for several successions in Holland
and the united Provinces receive great allowances and Sallaries, keep and
greatly improve and increase their own Revenues, and make the Public bear and
defray its vast charges, as well in wars, as the cares and defense of peace
in the absence of it, but did bear and sustein the brunt of all that was not
extraordinary, and the charge of many a war abroad, and suppressing of
insurrections and rebellions at home, out of their own Estates and Revenues,
and made many a hard shift even to the pawning of their Jewels, and mortgaging
of their Lands without an often calling to the People for Subsidies or other
Aids or Assistance to preserve them and their Estates and Posterities.

Nor took to themselves the liberty which many Subjects do to put into their
Accounts and Bills of charges to their Princes their Damnum emergens, damage
happening by any service done for him or their Country, and many times their
Lucrum cessans, gain or improvement lost, though every man's particular in the
defense of their King and Country, is involved in the general, and that the
service was not altogether or immediately done or tendered to him, or for the
preservation of him or his Estate only and Posterity, but as much if not more
for their own concernments, and think themselves to be ill dealt with if they
be not speedily and abundantly rewarded.

To help on which consumption of the Royal Revenues,. 26.
came also the great charges which King Charles the first (upon whom the decay
of the Royal Revenues occasioned by the necessities and indulgences of his
Predecessors, at once falling might have made him cry out with King Henry the
third, as the Monk of St. Albans relates it, seducor undique mutilatus sum Rex
et abbreviatus) was at in leagues and confederacies with foreign Princes,
maintaining Armies in the Palatinate and Germany, aiding the Kings of Bohemia,
Denmark and Sweden, engaging in a war against Spain, and sending a great
Fleet and Army to invade him; great expenses in sending a Navy and Army to the
Isle of The, and two others to aid the Rochellers, to furnish part of which
(for it amounted to a great deal more) he sold at once at too easy rates to
the City of London above twelve thousand pounds Land per annum rent of Assize,
the payment of fifty thousand pounds per annum Pensions and Annuities out of
the Exchequer, (as it was industriously computed by that factious party of
Common woe contrivers) to diverse of the Scottish Nation, many of whom did
afterward join with his enemies to ruin him; the great and necessary yearly
Pensions and Annuities paid to the King and Queen of Bohemia and their
children; charges of going with a great Army to the Borders of Scotland against
the Covenanting Scots, and maintaining another in England, with the payment of
120000l. principal money borrowed by his Father of diverse Citizens of London
with interest at 8. per cent.

Which with the many great cares,, 27.
troubles, wants and necessities which compassed him in on every side, whilst
his great virtues for want of necessary supplies of money and treasure were not
able to support or bear him up against the storms of an hideous Rebellion,
escape the snares and pursuit of a rebellious party, or scour and cleanse that
Augaean Stable which had ruined and weakened his Revenues, made him a glorious
Martyr for the Laws and Liberties of England, and those that were the causers
of it, the great Examples of a Divine Justice overtaking them.

And enforced him to leave his troubles to descend upon his Son our most
gracious Sovereign Charles the Second; with a small and despoyled Revenue,, 28.
which by its fluidness, and the gnawing and deflux of time was as to his Crown
Lands brought almost to an Exinanition, and his casual and other receipts,
bearing no more proportion to his expenses and disbursements then a Dwarf or
Pigmey does to a Giant or Poliphemus, could do no less then bring the
remainder, of that little which was left into a Tabes and almost incurable
consumption, when there is so great a difference betwixt the rates of
provisions and livelihood, and all manner of things bought or used in the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and what is now paid for them, when
he is at greater expenses then any of his Progenitors, and a less receiver,
receives at the old rate, and buys at the new, his demeasn Lands (besides his
Pastures at Cresl^w in Buckinghamshire, which were hertofore employed for the
keeping of some Oxen for his household provisions, and his parks, and some
adjacent Grounds to his Houses of residence) and all his Land and certain
Revenues are not above reprizes one hundred thousand pounds per annum, and two
parts of three of that consisting in Fee Farm Rents, which admit of no
improvement, when his Customs which should now amount to as much, or more then
what they were in his late Majesty's Reign, by the addition of an Excise
amounting to one hundred and forty thousand pounds per an. now yields not near
so much as it did formerly; the Excise of Ale and Beer, ill collected, o^ so
chargeable in the gathering of it, as it yields little more then the half of
what the Parliament estimated and intended it to be* great yearly Revenues and
Inheritances in Lands given to men of high deservings, both of him and the
Kingdom, all the Confiscations of the late Traitors of a great yearly value,
with the benefit of the Post Office, Wine Lycences, and many discoveries of
personal Estates due to the King given to his Brother the Duke of York to make
him a Princely Revenue.

When his ordinary expenses do so much exceed his ordinary receipts, and his
extraordinaries are six or seven to one of his ordinaries, is sixteen hundred
thousand pounds in debt, spends more then as much again in his household
expenses, as formerly now that his Pourveyance is taken away, loses two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds per annum by the loss of his Tenures and
Pourveyance, is at eighty thousand pounds per annum charge for the maintenance
of the Garrison of Dunkirk, above five hundred thousand pounds per annum for
the Navy and Land forces, has to procure a public quiet, paid many hundred
thousand pounds of the Arrears of the Navy and Army employed against himself,
and left in Arrears by his Enemies must be ten times a giver, if he should
grant every ones Petition, to one that he shall be a gainer or receiver,
discontents himself to content others, and forgetting that old rule and
practice of the world, sibi proximus is enforced to provide for others and not
for himself, and in the midst of his own necessities is to be the rewarder of
virtue, and still, as well as he can, the raging waves of the multitude, is the
Asylum or refuge of all that are distressed, and bears or lessens their burdens
out of his own Revenues.

And when Neighbor Princes are not usually without ambitions, and taking all
opportunities to enlarge their power and Dominions by the weakness of others,
or to weaken and oppress any of their Neighbors, and make advantages of their
troubles and necessities, do seldom want pretenses of titles or revenging
Injuries done to them or their people by Kings or their people, and can lay
aside their sworn Leagues and Confederacies, as soon as their Interest or
Designs shall invite them thereunto, when the French King has by computation
an ordinary yearly Revenue of above twenty millions of Crowns which makes above
five millions sterling per annum, besides his extraordinaries, which by Taxes
and Tallages in the late wars, being now by a habit and custom grown
something easy and familiar to them, may be raised to vast yearly sums of
money, and more then treble the ordinary, when the King of Spain abounds in
his Revenues in his Dominions in Christendom, besides his extraordinary Aids
and Assesments, and vast treasures and supplies from the West Indies, which is
a ready or rich pawn or credit for borrowing of moneys upon all extraordinary
emergencies, occasions, or necessities of State affairs. The City of Venice
with her Territories has above a million sterling per annum in her yearly
Income, besides extraordinaries, and a treasure of money enough to pay six
Kings ransomes, with Jewels and Plate unvaluable. And the Dutch have one
million and two hundred thousand pounds sterling per annum yearly, and ordinary
Revenue out of Amsterdam, besides what they have yearly out of all other
Cities, Towns and Places, by their huge Excises and Assessments upon all the
seven United Provinces.

And the King of England, who was wont to be Arbiter totius Europae, hold and
keep the Balance of Christendom even; and if he do not, it cannot be either
safe or well for his own Kingdoms and People, and their Trade and Commerce,
must pine and wither away, languish and groan under so great expenses and
necessities, whilst he is to preserve himself and people in peace, plenty and
safety, and has so little to do it withal, when at home all men do seem to
love and serve him, very many do ask and get what they can from him, and too
many deceive him. And as that prudent and great Statesman, Cecil Earl of
Salisbury Lord Treasurer of England, observed to the Parliament in the Reign of
King James, it is a certain rule, that all Princes are poor and unsafe who are
not rich and so potent as to defend themselves upon any sudden offense and
invasion, or help their Allies and Neighbors. Has a small Revenue to govern
an unruly People, one part of them ready to run mad with mistaken opinions in
Religion, and too many of the residue overgrown with vice and luxury; a burden
of burdens laid upon him, the burdens of his people, and the burdens of his
Ancestors by their bounties, expense and necessities, and are by so much
greater or heavier then theirs, as his Revenues are consideratis considerandis
a great deal lesser.

CHAP. I. The Remedies.
WHich a small or ordinary repair will not help, but requires new and more
sollid and lasting foundations, endeavored seriously, and attempted by King
James about the seventh year of his Reign by the advice of his Parliament and
Privy Council, but not then or any time since brought to perfection.

And may in a legal and well pleasing way to the people without the unwelcome
raising of the Tenths of the Abbie and religions Lands to the present yearly
value, which may be of dangerous consequence, and the Tenths and First Fruits
of the Bishops and Clergy of England, who have been over much pared already, or
a Resumption of the Crown Lands which unless it be of such wherein the King or
his Father have been grossly deceived: and the first money paid for the
purchase upon an account of the mesne profits, and interest satisfied, will
hugely disturb the Interest and House-gods of too many of the Nobility, Gentry
and rich men of the Kingdom, and without any new or foreign devices or
Talliages, to raise moneys, and Fricasser, or tear in pieces the already too
much impaired estates of a Tax-bearing tired people, which that Monarch of
virtues and blessed Martyr King Charles the first did so abhor, as he caused
Mr. Seldom and Mr. Oliver St. John to be imprisoned in the Tower of London, and
a bill to be exhibted in Star Chamber against them and the Earl of Clare, and
others, for having only in their custody, and divulging a Manuscript, or
writing of certain Italian projects proposed to him by Sir Robert Dudley a
Titulado Duke in Tuscanie, and with out the gawling, grating, and most commonly
unsuccesfull way of Projects, which if set up will be thrown down again by the
after Complaints and discontents of the people, or hunting and vexing them with
informations or calling their Lands and Estates in question to the ruin of
them and their Families upon defective Titles, or by Monopolies or a trebling
abuses by pretending to reform them; or Essays of new ways of profit framed
or found out by such as design more to themselves then for the good either of
King or People, and either know not, or cannot, or will not, foresee the many
evils and sad consequences which may as effects from causes, fatally and
unavoidably follow such or the like attempts, which the necessities of Kings,
or want of competent revenues, may either put them or their servants and
followers upon.

Be, as is humbly conceived, prevented by several Acts of Parliament to be
made upon the propositions, following which will not only increase the Kings
Revenues, but encourage and make the People very willing and well contented
therewith, when as what they shall for the present loose thereby, shall at the
same time by enacting of some good Laws for them be abundantly repenced.

By a general enclosure of all wast Lands and Commons belonging to the Kings,.
1.
Queens and Princes revenues in England and Wales, allotting equal and
reasonable proportions for satisfaction of Commoners, and by disafforrestation
of some Forests and Chases remote from London, or the Kings ordinary
Residences, the imbanking and taking in of all Lands, infra fluxum and refluxum
Maris high and low watermarks derelicted and forsaken by the Sea, or brought
thither by Alluvion, and added to the firm Land, and together with the Lands
and Revenues now belonging to the Crown of England never to be aliend,
rent-charged, or leased more then for 21 years or three lives, which besides
the addition of revenues and profit to the King, will very much add to the
livelihood and industry of many of the people who will be maintained thereby,
better the Lands, and increase subsidies when there shall be occasion.

And causing the like to be done by a general enclosure of all that now lies
wast, and in common, in particular, and private men's Revenues in England, and
Wales, amounting to some millions of Acres, will produce the like benefits to
the owners and Commoners, who in a grateful acknowledgement thereof may out of
their several allotments, as freewill-offerings to their King, pay yearly
three pence per Acre to him and his Heirs and Successors.

That Banks or Mount Piete's be erected in several places of England and
Wales,. 2.
as at London, York, Durham, Golchester, Norwich Ludlow, and Denbigh, where
money may be lent, and Pawns or Securities taken, not exceeding the Interest of
twelve per cent. for a year, or proportionably for greater or lesser times, and
that Commissioners in the manner of a Corporation or otherwise, may in every of
those places be from time to time appointed by his Majesty his Heirs and
Successors, to order and supervise the management thereof, for which his
Majesty his Heirs and Successors, may out of the increase and profit of the
said Interest, receive and take forty shillings per cent, no one particular
person being permitted to employ or put into the said Bank at interest above
the sum of five hundred pounds; and that no private or particular person,
putting their moneys into the said Bank, shall have and receive above the sum
of the current or usual Interest in the Kingdom, or any other gift or reward
whatsoever, whereby the intolerable oppression of public and private Brokers
those Baptizati Judaei and Pawn-takers, which like Wolves gnaw and devour the
poor as sheep, when as driven to them by their necessities, they are enforced
to come to them for succor, and give after the rate of fifty or sixty per
cent, which the hate of Jews to Christians never arrived to, and a Christian
and Protestant Kingdom ought not to countenance.

That by sumptuary Laws concerning Apparel to be worn by all degrees and
orders of people,. 3.
the excess thereof may be regulated and abated, with great penalties to the
infringers thereof, which Athens, Sparta and Rome being heathen Commonwealths,
and England heretofore by sundry good Laws and Statutes, unhappily repealed in
anno 21 Jac. Spain by Pragmatico's; and France by a late Reiglement have found
to be an universal good: and the Commonwealth of Venice held it to be
necessary, Ne civium patrimonia nimia intemperantia abliguriantur; to keep
their Citizens from wasting and spending their Estates, being Laws now more
then ever wanting in England, when as that which will quickly undo private or
particular Families, which by their universality do make a Kingdom, is so
frequent and every where almost to be found in a daily practice and pursuit of
pride, and that cheating one another to maintain it, is the most of the peoples
cares and consciences, every house almost as to the excess of their vanities,
and expenses beyond their Estates, has a Mark Anthony and Cleopatra in it; and
too many men and women, though not so good or well able to bear it as King
William Rufus, do think their clothes not costly enough; many of the Nobility
and Gentry have wasted and spent themselves almost quite out of themselves, and
left themselves little more then their Titles and Pedigrees. The Citizens do
all they can to our-doe them infolly; the Farmers, Yeomanry and Countrymen all
they can to overtake them, and the Servants to come as near as they can to
their Masters, Ladies or Mistresses: And they that first spend themselves to
nothing, or very near it, are like to quit the race to those that come after;
and they which come last to the brink of ruining their fortunes, which will be
probably the common and lower ranks of the people, are likely to learn by those
that ruined themselves before them, to stay where they left, and be Masters of
the others Estates.

And that such as shall wear any habits or kinds of Apparel forbidden; be
rated in all public Assessments according to the estate and quality of such
persons as are allowed to wear the like, that whosoever shall not be of the
degree and quality to keep a Coach, or live in the Country not far distant
from the Parish Church and keeps one, shall forfeit and pay 5. l. for every
year in which he shall so keep it; that the Justices of Peace in every Country
be the Collectors of all the penalties concerning Apparel, Habits and keeping
of Coaches, and to have a ^ourth part of the forfeitures upon the receipt,
conviction or recovery thereof: that the Masters and Mistresses of Servants
trangressing that Act, shall out of the wages due to such Servants pay and
answer every of the penalties forfeited by the Servants, not exceeding their
said wages, and stop and detain the same, and for their care therein have and
receive to their own use one third part in four to be divided of the said
penalties; and that the residue of all the said penalties ordained and
forfeited by the said Act, shall be collected and answered to the use of the
King and his Heirs and Successors.

Whereby that grand improvement of all Sins and Wickedness, which has now
overspread the Kingdom, that consumption of Estates, and destruction of good
Manners; And that high unparralleld and inordinate excess of Apparel and pride,
which being the canker of all honesty and virtue, ruined Rome the Conqueror and
Mistress of all the World, and, as Histories have told us, never failed to undo
many other Kingdoms permitting or allowing it, which our Ancestors and former
inhabitants of England would have abhorred and blushed at, may be restrained,
and those sinful necessities and plenty of all manner of knaveries,
dishonesties, Cheatings, and villainies, to maintain it, depressed and
extinguished, which the book of God, danger of Sin, Hell, and Damnation, and
all that can be said and done by the Bishopps, Ministers, Preachers, and men of
holy Church, without the assistance of such sumptuary Laws, can never, as
experience has sufficiently told us, be able to beat down, extirpate, or
lessen.

Which the pretended loss of the Kings Customs by Silks, and other vanities
imported, should not deter him and his great Council from attempting, when
the prevention of the great wast of gold and silver in making lace and
habiliments for such as ought not to wear them, the vent of our Cloth and other
English Manufactures in stead of them, suppressing of an universal pride and
Sin, which the land groaning under, is not able to bear, the causing of a
greater duty and obedience to superiors, which is now too much wanting, and the
pacifying of Gods wrath and Judgments which are ready to fall upon the Nation,
for it will abundantly recompense.

That seeing the Excise of Beer,. 4.
Ale, Perry and Sider greatly discontents and lies heavy upon the People and
the management and way of gathering it, adds to their affliction, and makes
them repine at the Nobility and Gentry upon a supposition, that to ease
themselves of that which was surmised to be a burden by Tenures in Capite and
by Knight service, with the wardships and incidents thereof, they have
contrived and raised the burden of more then one hundred thousand pounds per
annum Excise to be laid upon them, whereas the losses and damages of the
Nobility and Gentry of England, (besides what they may sometimes save in their
own wardships, and by reason of Lands holden of the King in Capite and by
Knight Service) in the profit and honor of Tenures holden of them by Knight
service, and of Wardships and other Incidents, and their just and legal
superiorities and commands over their Tenants, which will now be wanting: will
if rightly estimated, amount to as much yearly damage and inconveniences as
that one hundred thousand pounds per annum, or more, will come to by that
Excise, in which their expenses may tell them they bear a share likewise with
the common people, some of the Knights and Gentry loosing as much by the taking
away of Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, as two hundred pounds per
annum communibus annis, and some of the Nobility four or five hundred pounds
per annum, and the least of what every of the Nobility and Gentry do yearly
loose thereby, will be more then any particular Brewer or Aleseller can be
damnified, when as the Beer and Ale, and next buyer or expender, are sure
enough to pay for that and many times more.

That for the remedying of the great Deceipts, and Sophistications used by
Brewers Brewers.
of Ale and Beer, as their false gaugings and measures, not half or not enough
boiling it, to spare fuel and fire, putting in Broom, Coriander-seed,
Wormwood, and many other newly devised and noxious ingredients instead of Hops,
or to make it taste the stronger, which may much endanger the lives and health
of the people.

And the abuses of Merchants, Wine-Coopers and Vintners Merchants, Wine-Coopers
and Vintners.
in conjuring their Wines as they call it, mingling it with Stum, Molosse or
scum of Sugar, Perry, Sider, Lime, Milk, Whites of Eggs, Elder-berries, putting
in raw flesh, and using so many Adulterations and mixtures, as the Taverns and
places of retail do too commonly, vent intoxicating and unwholesome drink by
the name of wine, whereby the Wine-coopers, whose Trade was originally and
properly only to make and amend vessels for wines, are now by a knowledge and
taste of wines, pertaking of the Merchants evil secrets and doings, and
bringing some ease and conveniences to them by uttering and taking off their
hands great quantities of wines upon long days and many months of payment
given them, become as it were the Merchants Masters, and the only Merchants and
Sellers of wine to the Vintners and Retailers (which was formerly forbidden
them) after they have adulterated, unwholsomed, and almost poisoned them, to
the distemper and breeding of sickness in the bodies of men, who for a little
wine to warm and cheer their hearts or stomachs, or entertain one another with
mutual refreshments, are by such ungodly tricks and devices to purchase to the
Merchants, Wine-Coopers and Vintners filthy and wicked gain and lucre, many
times enticed into the confines of death and their own destruction.

And the many deceipts and abuses of Bakers, Bakers,
whose weights of bread and honest gains of their Trade is by the Statutes of
Assisa, Panis and Cervisiae, in Anno 51 of King Henry the third, to be yearly
regulated by the Kings Baker of his Household, and the bread of his Court,
according to the several yearly rates and prices of corn, and their
transgressions contrary thereunto by many other Laws to be severely punished,
and the offenders put upon the Pillory.

Which this last Century or Age by a Non-execution of Laws have not been so
happy to see. But the Bakers are now so disused to these ancient good Laws and
Regulations, and so used to a custom and cunning of blinding the Magistrates,
or such Officers as they entrust therewith or by evading, or diminishing their
punishments, as they can by a custom or necessity of sinning, which their
deluded consciences do persuade them to be lawful and warrantable enough, make
their bread 5 or 6 ounces too light, or short of the legal proportions nor
assize, when corn is very dear, and a great deal to light when it is cheaper:
And to add to their wickedness as if otherwise it would not be enough, are
suspected to mingle chalk and lime amongst their meal, which makes the white
bread, and do by combination with the Vintners, Innkeepers and Chandlers (who
are the Belly-Brokers to the poor) make their white bread so little as to
afford them 16. or 18. to the dozen: and if the Mayor and Sheriffs of London,
or the Magistrates of other Cities or great Towns do sometimes go about to
try and weigh their bread, and find any Basket or small parcel of bread to be
faulty (which by the Sergeants and under Officers too often giving notice over
night or before hand what day or way the scrutiny goes makes their care and
diligence to be most commonly ineffectuall, or to little purpose, or may be
easily prevented by some bread honestly made when all the rest do want weight
laid in their passage) and seized and sent to prisons, the next days or weeks
bread shall be sure to be made the lighter, to recompense the loss of the
former. And lesser Corporations being most commonly governed by retailing
Tradesmen, and such as have a fellow feeling of one another mysteries, or that
which they suppose to be their Callings, but are usually attended with fraud
and cheatings, do take no care at all to obstruct, discover, or punish one
another knaveries; by which the poor and their wives and children, whose daily
hard labors can scarcely bring them to other diet then brown bread, and
skummed cheese, and a cup of good beer when they can get it, are daily and very
much oppressed, and their poverties made to increase the riches of those who
are so far from relieving their miseries and hardships, as they are a great
part of the cause and increase of it; by which great and not to be endured
villainies and knaveries, not seldom, but daily and very often practiced in a
Kingdom, professing Christ and Christianity, by Vintners, Brewers, and Bakers,
in Wine, Beer and Bread, the main supports of life and nourishment, (which
might have been suppressed if the Stewards of Courts Leet, Sheriffs in their
Turns, and the grand Jury men of every County twice a year impannelled and
solemnly charged by the Judges to look better to these and other general
abuses, not by a strange custom neglected and slept over their had oaths and
duties) those grand principles and fundamental necessaries for food and
sustenance are corrupted, abused, and unwholsomed, diseases and evils, and
oftentimes death arising thereby secretly instilled and conveyed, and as it
were forced into the bodies of the people, which may well call and cry for a
Reformation.

As well as the great abuse of Leather, which under color of transporting
Calve skins, and obtaining license to send thither a certain number of hides or
skins of Leather, do ten times exceed the number; and by multitudes of Coaches
more then formerly, false Cocquets and connivance of Searchers and Officers in
the Ports, which should look better to it, there is (notwithstanding great
quantities of Russia and other Leather, and Hides imported from foreign parts)
so great a scarcity and dearth of Leather, as that which the Shoemakers, not
long ago, were wont to pay but fifteen shillings, for they must now pay double
as much, and that which they buy is (by the knavery of the Tanner, who to save
the charge of Bark, does not permit it to lie in the Tannepit half the time
appointed by the Law, and of the Currier and the carelessness and worse of the
Lord Mayor of London's Officer who keeps the knife, as they call it, at Leaden
Hall, and should seize all bad Leather) neither well tanned, good, or cheap; by
which villainies, deceipts, careless looking to the execution of good Laws,
evils of transportation, and some of the Nobilities and Gentries profuse rates
and prices given to their Shoemakers the shoes which they wear, are come to the
price of five shillings and six pence, and six shillings a pair; and sober and
more careful men in the laying out of their money must now do what they can,
pay four shillings six pence or five shillings for a pair of Neats Leather
shoes, for which within this twenty years was paid but two shillings eight
pence; and when they have come up to those strange prices, have their inner
soles many times made with chill and soaking Seal skins or Horse hides* and all
the upper Leather and under of their Shoes so ill tanned, as it being scarcely
separated or to be known from a raw hide, it lets in water like brown paper or
bays, and with a shower of rain, or a little wet shrivels and runs into
wrinckles and an unhansomeness, and scarcely keeps out a little rain or dirt
which breeds Rheums, Colds and Diseases in the people who being Islanders, and
living in a Country of so much rain and wet, which by some other Nations living
in drier Countries, called the Matella Planetarum, Piss-pot of the Planets,
cannot walk or live so healthfully as they do in warmer Countries, with wooden
Shoes or Sandalls, which may be remedied as to the peoples better usage in
their Bread, Beer, Wine and Shoes, the grand necessaries of life.

1. By a better execution of the Laws already enacted,

2. By not altogether trusting Tradesmen with the care thereof in Corporations,
who being either of the same Trades, or others furnished with as evil
Artifices, are but bad Overseers or Suppressors of deceits in Trade, by which
they all now more then ever enrich themselves.

3. If the Justices of Peace in every County by as Oath particularly to be
framed for that purpose, which in a time of heeding no Oaths, or an age of
equivocation or putting false constructions or interpretations upon them, may
be more then formerly needful, were enjoined better to look to Laws already
made, or to be enacted for that end, and allowed upon the discovery or
prosecution a fourth part of the forfeitures and penalties, which will help to
put them in mind of their duty; and to be like the Athenian Nomophylaces, more
vigilant in the finding out, prosecution and conviction of any such
transgressors.

4. That there be yearly appointed by the King, or the Lord Chancellor or the
Lord Treasurer in his behalf, Assayers or Surveyors of the Bread, Beer, Wine
and Leather made, or to be made or vented in every County and City, which as
concerning Ale and Beer will be but the same with the Ale-conners and Tasters,
which our ancient Laws and Customs thought necessary, and to have for his
pains, discovery, prosecution, and conviction of offenders contrary to the Laws
made or to be provided, one part in four of the penalties, and to attend
therein also, and observe the directions of the Justices of Peace therein.

5. That the Wines according to the Statutes be, as formerly, rated at a
reasonable price set as well for the Merchants as the Vintners or Retailers.

6. That no Wine-Cooper be upon a great penalty suffered to buy or sell wines,
which can never be for the good of the people, when the Devil or the Conjurer
having mingled and sophisticated what he bought pure from the Merchant, shall
have power to make it as bad as he will, and put it to sale when he has done.

7. That every Merchant and Vintner do as the Victuallers and Cooks are by
Statutes appointed for the keeping of Lent, yearly enter into Recognizances to
the King not to corrupt or alter their wines, nor willingly or wittingly permit
them to be adulterated or altered by the Wine-Coopers, but to sell them
according to the lawful measures, and observe and keep the rates and prices
yearly to be set.

8. That every Brewer and Baker do yearly enter into Recognizances to make
wholesome Bread and Beer and keep the Assize.

9. That every Tanner and Currier do the like as touching the well tanning and
dressing of their Leather: And that the Officer which shall keep the knife at
Leaden Hall in London do the like well and truly to execute the duty of his
place.

10. That the Vintners who by a late invention and ill use of glass bottles do
evade the rates of wines limited by a late Act of Parliament, and recompense
the abatement of price by the falseness of their measures, may be ordered to
use as formerly; Pint, Quart, Pottle and Gallon, Pots marked and allowed
according to Law.

11. That for the first offense every of the said Tradesmen shall forfeit one
hundred pounds, for the second two hundred pounds, and for the third be
disfranchised and never more permitted to use that Trade.

12. And that a conviction of any such offenses may be pleaded in bar unto
them in any Action to be brought, commenced and prosecuted.

To be delivered from which great and many deceipts and frauds, and every days
often committed oppression, by a tyranny of the rich over the poor and needy,
and to keep the Wolves from their morning and evening preys, and rejoicing in
the spoil of the widows and fatherless, the hungry and necessitous, which by a
cheating and blinding of their consciences, they will whether the Laws of God
and man will or no, suppose to be lawful, because it is their Trade, and the
mysteries of it, or because their Fathers or their Masters did it before them;
every one else does it, and every man must live and make use of their time,
labor, calling or opportunities.

The people of this Kingdom being so universally endamaged by the evils
happening by them, and concerned, and like to be benefitted by the remedies,
may (as those of Spain, Florence, and other foreign Countries, who in bearing
some burdens and Taxes laid upon them are many times rather gainers then losers
by the benefit of a Bands, or rule of rating Butchers, and many other
Commodities to be bought or sold, so as children cannot be cozened.

Be very willing that their representatives in Parliament shall consent.

That upon every Tun of wine, French, Spanish and Rhenish to be vented in
England there be by the first buyer forty shillings per Tun paid to his
Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and accounted for half yearly in the Court of
Exchequer.

That instead of an Excise upon Ale, Beer, Perry and Sider, every one that
shall in a public Alehouse sell Ale, Beer, Perry or Sider, shall yearly pay to
the King, his Heirs and Successors forty shillings per annum; and every public
Brewer twenty pounds per annum, and a further rate proportionable to the
quantities of their Brewings.

And that to restore this ancient Monarchy,. 5.
and heretofore famous and flourishing Kingdom to its former honor, safety
and defense, and an ease from the charge of mercenary Armies and Guards, and to
prevent the great and many dangers and inconveniences which may happen
thereby, as also to fatherless Children by Guardianships and breaches of trust,
his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors, may have and enjoy his and their
ancient rights of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, and all mesne Lords
and their Heirs their Tenures by Knight Service, with all incidents thereunto
belonging, allowing unto every one holding of the King by those Tenures the
liberty of being freed from the marriage of his Heir, to be compounded for by
yearly paying unto the King into the Exchequer, or into the Court of Wards,
next after his age of one and twenty years and livery sued forth, the sum of
twenty pounds per annum rent for every Knights Fee which he shall hold, or
proportionably according to the parts thereof.

1. That in the granting of Wardships to the Mother or next friends, according
to the Instructions of King James, with those reasonable cares and
considerations of debts and younger children used by the Court of Wards and
Liveries, the marriages of the Wards and Rents of their Lands during all the
time of their minorities computed together, be never above one years improved
value, which will be but the half of that which is now accounted to be a
reasonable Fine, and is frequently paid by many Copihold Tenants whose Fines
are certain.

2. That the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Durham, who by ancient
exemptions and privilege are to have the wardships of Tenants, holding of them
by Knight service in their minorities, though they hold other Lands in Capite
and by Knight service of the King may be ordained to do the like favors.

3. That all that hold in Capite and by Knight service be according to their
ancient liberties and rights granted by the Charter of King Henry the first,
freed (as in reason they ought) from all Assessments of their demeasn Lands
touching war.

4. That Primer Seisins be taken away of such kind of Tenures, and no more paid.

5. That the Lands holden in Socage, or of any other mesne Lords in case of
minority of any in ward to the King, by reason of Tenure in Capite, or pour
cause de guard, being taken into consideration only as to the Fine, for the
marriage may not be put under any Rent or Lease to be made by the Court of
Wards, but freed, as they were frequently and anciently by Writs sent to the
Escheators.

6. That the King in recompense thereof may have and receive of every Duke or
Earl dying seized of any Lands or Hereditaments in Capite and by Knight service
two hundred pounds, of every Marquess, Viscount and Baron two hundred marks,
and of every one that holds by a Knights Fee twenty pounds for a Relief, or
proportionably according to the quantity of the Fee which he holds.

7. That encroachments and wast grounds holden in Capite and by Knight Service,
may be no cause of wardship, or paying any other duties incident to that
Tenure, if it shall upon the first proof and notice be relinquished.

8. That only Escuage and Service of war (except in the aforesaid cases of
the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Durham) and all other incidents
(except Wardships) due by their Tenants which hold of them by Knight service,
be restored to mesne Lords, and that the Reliefs of five pounds for a whole
Knights Fee, or proportionably according to the quantity of Lands of that kind
of Fee holden, shall be after the death of every such Tenant twenty pounds.

9. That to lessen the charges of Escheators and Juries for every single Office
or Inquisition to be found or taken, after the death of every tenant in Capite
and by Knight Service, the time of petitioning within a month after the death
of the Ancestor, may be enlarged to three months, and the Shire, Town, City,
or principal place of every County be appointed with certain days or times
for the finding of Offices, to the end that one and the same Meeting, and one
and the same Jury, with one and the same charge, or by a contribution of all
parties concerned, may give a dispatch thereunto.

10. That in case of neglecting to petition within three months after the
death of the Tenant in Capite and by Knight Service, or otherwise concealing
any Wardships, or not suing out of Livery, if upon information brought, issue
joined, and witnesses examined, or any time before Hearing or Trial of the
Cause, the party offending or concerned shall pay the Prosecutor his double
costs, and satisfy the King the mesne rates, he shall be admitted to compound.

11. That the unnecessary Bonds formerly taken in the Court of Wards at two
shillings six pence, or three shillings charge upon suing out of every Diem
clausit extremum, or Writ to find an Office, obliging the Prosecutor thereunto,
may be no more taken, when as the time limited for petitioning to compound for
Wardships, and the danger of not doing of it will be engagement sufficient.

12. That Grants Leases and Decrees of the Court of Wards may not (to the great
charge of the Wards or others concerned therein) be unnecessarily, as they have
been, enrolled at length or otherwise, with the Auditors of that Court, when as
the same was recorded before by other Officers of that Court to which the
Auditors may have a free access, and at any time take extracts out of them.

13. That a severe Act of Parliament be made against such as shall misuse or
wast any Wards Estate, Lands, Woods and Timber committed or granted to them, or
any personal Estate which belongs unto them or shall not give the Wards fit
education, or shall disparage them in their Marriages, or marry them without
any competent Portion, or shall not within a month after the death of such
Ward, or coming to his or her age of one and twenty years make a true account
and payment unto the said Ward or his or her Heirs or Executors, of all that
shall be by them due and payable to him or them by reason of the said Wardship,
upon pain to pay to the use of the said Ward, his or her Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, besides the said moneys due and payable to the use of the said
Ward double costs and damages expended or sustained therein.

That all Lands hereafter escheated and forfeited to his Majesty (in cases
where there shall be no restoration to the next in descent or remainder) be
inseparable,. 6.
and as a Sacrum patrimonium annexed to the Crown, never to be aliened, leased,
or charged with any Rentcharge or Annuity further then for life or one and
twenty years.

That all Corporations of Trade,. 7.
may besides Fines and Amerciaments to be imposed and taken to their own use,
have also power to impose Fines and Amerciaments to the use of his Majesty and
his Heirs and Successors, and have no power to release or discharge any
Penalties, and Issues forfeited to the King: And that the Town Clerks of Cities
and Towns Corporate, and Clerks of every Corporation or Company of Trade shall
be bound by Oath and Recognizance to the King to certify and estreat into the
Exchequer all Fines, Issues and Amerciaments forfeited and lost, at two usual
Terms in every year, that is to say, Easter and Michaelmas.

That the By-lawes of every Corporation and Company of Trade,. 8.
and every City and Town Corporate which ought to be perused and approved by
the Lord Chancellor of England and Lord, Chief Justices of either Benches, or
Justices of Assize, or any three of them, and are not to be contrary to the
Laws, may be according to the Statute of 19 Hen. 7. cap. 7. perused and
allowed by them.

That upon every bloodshed or breach of the peace,. 9.
as by the Civil Law in foreign parts, and heretofore was anciently used in
England by the Common Law thereof, a reasonable mulct or penalty be imposed to
be gathered by the Magistrates, as the Drossaerts do in many places in Holland,
and be answered to the King, though the parties do agree or release and
discharge one another. That all Misericordia's which are now the only
Vestigia's, left of that ancient Custom and Prerogative in Cases of Nonsuits,
and Pleas of Non est factums not verified, may be put into certain reasonable
penal sums, duly collected and answered to the King, his Heirs and Successors,
which besides an annual and casual profit to his Majesty, will quiet and lessen
contentions, and bring a great ease to the people.

That in cases of Manslaughter there be before any pardon granted a reasonable
satisfaction made according as it was heretofore practiced in our Laws of
England,. 10.
both before and since the Conquest, made to the wives and children of the
Deceased, or if none to the next of kindred, unless the parties concerned shall
otherwise agree their recompense or satisfaction, and an Estimatio capitis, or
value of the party offending also paid to the King. That upon convictions of
Adulteries and Fornication, as was anciently used, there be paid to the King a
penalty proportionable to the offense; and that in all Trials for Manslaughter,
Murder or other crimes, that hard and unreasonable custom now and heretofore
used in England, that witnesses may not be brought, heard, or examined against
the King be abolished, and that all good and lawful testimonies which may tend
to the discovery of the fact, may be, as in other Cases and Trials, heard and
received.

That there be in every Circuit,, 11.
as anciently, a Clerk, besides the Clerk of the Assize, appointed to enter in
a Roll the Fines imposed by the Justices, and to make Estreats thereof duly
into the Exchequer.

That in all Actions of Trespass,. 12.
or any other Action, to be brought in the Court of the Kings Bench at
Westminster, or by Quo minus in the Office of Pleas in the Court of the Kings
Exchequer at Westminster, or in the Court of the Marshalsea, or Court of the
Virge of the Kings Palace at Westminster, whereupon any declaration shall be in
debt, there be upon the first Process or Writ such Fines paid to the King, and
in such manner as have been anciently and are now paid to the King upon actions
of debt retornable in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster: And that upon
every such first Writ the Plaintiffs Attorney do in order thereunto indorse
the just sum in debt, which he intends to declare upon.

That every Merchant or Trader that shippeth any goods to be exported,. 13.
or unlades any imported, shall under his hand attested, or if need be, upon
his oath deliver unto his Majesty's Farmers or Customers a true note or Cocquet
of all such goods exported and imported, and the true contents and value
thereof.

And that whosoever shall wittingly or knowingly deceive his Majesty, *. 14.
his Heirs or Successors therein, shall for the first offense forfeit five
times the value, and for the second ten times the value, and for the third to
be disfranchised, and never more permitted to trade: And that every conviction
of any such offense shall if pleaded be a bar to them in any Action to be
brought, commenced and prosecuted by them.

That once in every three years Commissions be issued to careful and worthy
men in every County and City uninterressed, *, 15.
to enquire of all charitable uses, and the employments and abuses thereof, and
if need be to put a better order therein for the future: and that the Arrears
be also collected and paid, the one moity to his Majesty, and the other to be
employed to the charitable uses.

That Commissions be likewise issued now (more then formerly necessary by the
dissolution of Monasteries and Religious Houses,. 16.
and the great disuse of Hospitalities and Alms deeds) to enquire and certify
the number of Poor requiring alms in every Parish in every County and City,
that all vagabond and wandering Beggars be returned to the several Parishes
where they were born, and where it cannot may be reduced to some Parishes in
every County or City less troubled then others with poor, and more able to
maintain them, that the Churchwardens or Governors of every Parish (as is
usually done in Holland, where by their excellent orders and care of their
Poor, very few are to be seen either wandering or miserable) may upon poverty
happening to any Family, or the death of a Father or Mother of children, go or
send to their houses as the Commissioners de aflictis at Amsterdam usually do,
lift up the broken hearted, and enquire what are their necessities, or what
there is to maintain them, and accordingly make provision for them, by
relieving the aged, sick, or impotent, providing work for such as are able, and
putting out of children at fitting ages to be Apprentices, or to service, or
some other employments, wherein we may well hope for those good effects which
the like courses in France* by the erecting of the Hospitals de dieu, or other
Hospitals in or about Paris have lately assured, that the increase and decrease
of the poor in every Parish, and the Collections and Assessments for them, and
Legacies and charitable uses given to the poor be yearly certified to the Clerk
of the Peace of every City and County at the Quarter Sessions to be holden
after Michaelmas, to be by him entered into fair Books with Calenders and Tables
fitted thereunto, and publicly read before the Justices at the next Quarter
Sessions after, to the end that the Justices there assembled may duly consider
thereof, and make such further orders and Provisions, as shall be fitting and
requisite: And that when the English Captives at Algier shall be released, and
no more likely to be in that condition, the one pound per cent. granted by Act
of Parliament for that purpose, or the like allowance and proportion for seven
years to be allowed out of the Custom House may be employed to relieve and
make a stock for the Poor of England: And in regard that such as sue at Law in
forma pauperis, notwithstanding all the cares which have been hitherto taken by
the Courts of Justice in assigning them Counsel and Attorneys, and ordering
that no Fees should be taken, they do for want of money and those cares and
diligences which are only purchased and procured by money, many times, but tire
themselves to no purpose, and after many years expense of time and labor in
trudging to and fro, with their foul and tatered Bundles and Papers, wither
away, and die in the hopes of that which for want of a due assistance and
vigorous prosecution they could never bring to pass.

That an Utter-Barrister or Councellor at Law, be once in every three years
appointed by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England
for the time being, and to continue for that time, and no longer, in the high
Courts of Chancery and the Courts of Kings Bench, Exchequer and Duchy of
Lancaster, and a Sergeant at Law in the Court of Common Pleas to be for the
like time nominated and appointed by the Lord chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas for the time being, to be of council and assistant for all rights
and duties of men and women suing in forma pauperis, and as Counsel to assist
and help the poor of the respective places in the prosecution and recovery of
all Legacies and charitable uses given to them or penalties given or ordained
by any Statute to be had or levied for their use, or any Parish collections and
assessements withheld from them, for which they shall take no Fees but in a
reasonable manner upon the recovery thereof, or end of the said Suits: And for
their better encouragement may in all the Courts of Justice of this kingdom,
according to their said several nominations and appointments, as well Superior
as Inferior, have a prae audience in those and other causes next to the Council
learned of the Kings and Queens of England, and the Prince or Heir apparent.

That in every County and City there be a public Workhouse to employ the Poor
in the manufacture of Woollen or Linen cloth, making fishing Nets, or other
Manufacture; and that for their better encouragement they may as they do in
Holland, after a competent number of hours in every day employed in the work of
the Public, be allowed two hours in a day to work for their own advantage,
notwithstanding that their lodgings, diet, and fitting apparel be defrayed out
of the Public; and that the Governors thereof may for their encouragement
have the benefit and liberty of Exportation and Importation of any the said
commodities without any Custom to be paid for the same, upon the Certificate
of the next Justice of Peace of such County or City, upon the oath of every
such Governor, that the said quantities to be exported were made or wrought at
the said public Workhouse, and upon the oath of such Governor, that the
commodities imported are to be employed, and used only in the said public
Workhouse.

And that the kindred of Poor living in any part of England and Wales not
taking alms, or overburdned with poverty, may be sought out and enforced to a
reasonable contribution according to their abilities toward the maintenance,
or providing for such Poor and decayed as within the eighth degree are of their
own blood and lynage; and where it may be, put them into such a way of living
as may exempt them from the fate of common servants, or people taking alms, or
from being placed in common Workhouses, that by such means and provisions to be
made for the Poor, which our Acts of Parliament, and the careless and many
times purloyning Collectors and Overseers of the Poor in several Parishes,
have not yet performed. And that all Nobility, Gentlemen and others, excepting
such whose constant and necessary attendance upon the persons of the King,
Queen or Prince shall not permit the same, having an Estate of Lands of
Inheritance of the yearly value of one hundred pounds per annum, or more, above
reprises and their houses of residence in any Parish of England or Wales not
keeping their Christmas in the said house or Parish, shall at every of the said
Feasts pay unto the Poor of the said parish the sum of forty shillings, or
proportionably according to that rate of his or their Lands lying or being in
the said Parish, besides their other payments to the Poor collected and
assessed in the said Parish.

That so the multitude of Beggars in England may no more be a Byword amongst
other Nations, that there may be no complaining in our streets, nor such
dismal and sad spectacles, as the leprous, blind, lame and aged people and
young children crying out for bread, and ready to starve for want of food or
clothing, nor so many counterfeits or tricks to make an ill use of charities to
uphold their lazy and ugly condition of life.

That the Clerks of the Peace and Assizes,. 17.
and every Justice of Peace shall take their oaths not to release or
discharge, or respite any Fines, Issues, Recognizances and Amerciaments
forfeited and due to the King, but carefully and duly estreat and certify them
every half year into the Exchequer in the Terms of Easter and St. Michael,
which the example of Hengham a Judge in the Reign of King Edward the first, who
for reducing an Amerciament or Fine of thirteen shillings four pence, to six
shillings eight pence, in favor and pity of a poor man, was grievously fined,
and ordered to provide at his own charge the great Clock at Westminster, may
persuade them not to violate.

That the Balance,. 18.
and In and Out of foreign Trade may be observed and reduced into Books, to be
yearly brought into the Exchequer, but not with Blanks, fair Seals, Covers and
Labels, as they have used to be to little purpose.

That the more to encourage Merchants to an honest account and payment of their
Customs to the King,. 19.
and to deal better with him, it may be enacted that where any Ships of any
Merchants, and their goods and lading shall be taken in times of hostility with
any other Prince, so as it be not by the carelessness and neglect of the
Merchants in carrying prohibited goods, or the Captain or owner of the Ships in
not making so good a defense, or not arming or providing themselves so well as
they ought, the losses of such Merchants and shipowners duly estimated and
proved before the Judges of the Admiralty shall be refunded out of the next
Prizes which shall be taken from that Nation, Prince or Enemy that took it, the
accustomed allowances to the Lord high Admiral and others first deducted.

That the wages of Servants now trebled more then what it was twenty years
agone,. 20.
and of Laborers and Workmen very much increased by reason of the intolerable
and unbecomming pride of clothes now in fashion amongst them by license, and
imitation of times of pride, disobedience, disorder and rebellion, and the
folly of some of their Masters and Mistresses enjoining them to wear clothes
too high for them, may be limited and ordered to be as they were before these
last twenty years, that every Master or Mistress that gives more shall forfeit
double the value to the King; and that no Servant who has formerly served in
any other place be received or taken into service without a certificate or
testimony of their good behavior from their Master or Mistress where they
last served, if they shall not appear to be unreasonable, or for malice, or any
sinister ends to deny the same.

That the Tenths of all the Fishing in the British or English Seas by Barks or
Busses,. 21.
now beginning to be instituted, and taken into consideration, which in part
was intended to be had by King Edward the sixth upon the coasts of Wales,
Ireland and Baltimore, by building a Fort or Castle upon the straight to
command (as Captain John Smith relates in his discourse of the benefits of
Fishing in our English Seas) a tribute for Fishing, and if industry fail not,
is like (if we but imitate the Hollanders, who have hitherto enjoyed that which
was none of their own, and enriched themselves by our carelesnes) to grow up to
a great, and not to be estimated National profit be paid and accounted for to
the King and his Heirs and Successors, who may well deserve it, when as besides
his Sovereignty of the Sea, and the guard and protection of them by his Navy
and Shipping, he has of late in the midst of his own wants and necessities for
the better encouragement of his people to seek their own good, and that which
our British Seas will plentifully afford them, given all his Customs inward and
outward for any the returns to be made by the sale of Fish in the Baltic Seas,
Denmark and France for seven years for the first entrance into the Trade of
Fishing.

That the rivers in England and Wales not yet navigable,. 22.
and fit to be made navigable, may by a public purchase of the Mills or Wears
standing upon them, and pulling down the Wears and Kiddels hindering it,
attempted in the Reigns of King Henry the third and Edward the third, by
several Statutes made for the taking of them away, be made navigable, and a
reasonable Toll or Custom upon every Vessel and Freight, paid to the King,
his Heirs and Successors.

That for the better support of our Nobility,. 23.
and the honors which they enjoy, and that as stars in our firmament, they
may be able to attend the Sun their Sovereign, and not suffer such Eclypses in
their Estates and Revenues, as too many have lately done, that the Lions which
should guard the Thrones of our Kings, may not pine away or languish, and the
stately columns and pillars thereof moulder into ruins and decay, and have
small, or unbecoming Estates, to maintain them in the splendour of their
Ancestors, and the Royal Revenue not to be troubled or lessened by suits or
requests to supply them, they may according to the intent and custom of the
Fewdall Laws, and the locality which ought to be in Earldoms and Baronies, not
be without some honorary possessions, which was so usual and frequent in
England, as through the three first Centuries after the Conquest the Lands
belonging to Earldomes and Baronies were accounted to be parcels and members
thereof, and the word Honor so comprehensive as it contained and comprised all
the Lands belonging thereunto, as well as the Earldomes, Baronies and Title
which did in sundry of of our former Kings reigns grants pass and comprehend
the Land as well as the Titles.

And that according to that laudable and ever to be imitated example of Thomas
late Earl of Arundel and Surrey, in obtaining an Act of Parliament in the third
year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr for the annexing of diverse
Baronies and Lands to the Castle and Earldome of Arundel, inseparable and
unalienable in contemplation of the poverty and small Estates of the then Lord
Stafford, and some other of the ancient English Nobility wetherbeaten and
wasted by the injuries of time or the luxuries, and carelessness of their
Ancestors.

The Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, and Baronets of England,
leaving some other Lands to their own disposing, for the preferring of younger
children, payment of debts, and supply of necessities, which accidents may cast
upon them, may be ordered to settle and annex by like Acts of Parliament the
Capita Baroniarum, and chief Castles, Manors and Lands belonging to their
Earldomes, Baronies or Estates competent and sufficient to keep up and sustain
the honor and dignity thereof from the gripes or defilements of poverty and
Adversities not to be aliened or separated from their Earldomes, Baronies or
Dignities as long as it shall please God to continue them.

That the ancient use of the Exchequer be restored,. 24.
and the Kings revenues carefully collected and answered, and that the Justices
in Air of the Kings Forests and Chases, on this side and beyond Trent,
Clerks of the Market, and Commissioners, and Clerks of the Commissioners of
Sewers do duly certify into the Exchequer all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments
imposed and forfeited.

That upon all manufactures made beyond the Seas,. 25.
and all things to be imported tending to excess and luxury, as Tobacco, Silks,
etc. there be an Imposition more then ordinary, which the wisdom of Neighbor
Nations have ever thought expedient, and was in the Reign of King James the
prudent advice in Parliament of the Lord Treasurer Salisbury.

That in the deplorable Cases of wreck at Sea,. 26.
the Masters or Owners of such Ships, not being Pirates or Robbers (whether
there be any living thing remaining or not in the Ship) all and every part of
the lading, Tackle, and Ship which shall be saved from the fury of the Sea, or
found on shore, notwithstanding any detestable custom to the contrary, may
according to the Ancient Equitable Laws of Oleron be saved and preserved for
the right Owners coming within a year and a day to claim the same, and tendering
such just charges and recompense, as by two of the next Justices of Peace not
interessed, shall be found to be reasonable, for those that were Instrumental
in the preservation thereof, that so the inhumane and unchristian customs of
too many who live upon the Sea Coasts, being in a Shipwreck as pittiless and
cruel as the Winds and Seas, taking away that which they left, and rejoicing in
the disasters and miseries of those that are afflicted, may be abolished.

That Champerty and maintenance being now crept through the care and severity
of all our former good Laws and Statutes made to prevent it,. 27.
into such a general practice and profit, as in the confidence of dark
contrivances, and the impossibility or difficulty of discovery of them. Some of
our Gentlemen of the Gyges ring or invisible Estates, in a way which they have
found out to live, as well without a Revenue, or other lawful means and
professions as with them, can like Nimrods, or mighty Hunters, by shares gained
in the driving of Causes, support an idle Gallantry by the spoil and oppression
of others; some women more wily then good can be Agitators or Retrivers of
causes, not concerning them, for a part of the hoped for Booty; and many
Citizens and Tradesmen do buy pretended Titles and Interests, and engage and
furnish money for no small parts to be had upon the success of Suites in Law;
and too many Attornyes, Sollicitors, and others, can make it the best of their
employments to deal in gross and by whole sale, and will not as the Law enjoins
them, make Bills or Tickets to their Clyents of their just and allowed Fees and
disbursments. Some good Laws and powerful restrictions may be made to prevent
or punish those grand abuses, and that if either the Plaintiff or Defendant in
any Action shall require it, an Oath or Oaths may be given at the Trial or
Hearing of such Suites or Causes, to any who may discover such Champerties or
Maintenance; and if any shall be found offending therein, either by disbursing
of money, to have any share or part of the thing inquestion, on, or by any
pre-contract, or other engagement, the Verdict may not be taken, nor Judgment
entered; or if it shall be discovered and proved after the Verdict taken and
Judgment entered, before the end of the Term, wherein such Judgment shall be
entered; the said Judgment be by the Judges of that Court arrested or made
void, and whether it be discovered and proved before Judgment entered, or after
the parties offending, as well those that committed the Champerty and
Maintenance, as all their Abettors may every one of them forfeit and pay to the
King and his Heirs and Successors, the sum of one hundred pounds, and be
imprisoned without Bail or Maineprise, until they shall have paid the same,
and also forfeit and pay to the party greived, his double Costs and Damage,
together with the moiety, or half of the matter in question.

That there be no pardon or reversal of any Outlary,. 28.
in Civil as well as Criminal Causes, or Actions, without five Marks first paid
to the King in discharge of his Contempt, and a Charter of Pardon, as was
anciently used, first sued out under the Great Seal of England.

That all Sheriffs,. 29.
under-Sheriffs, and their Deputies, do at the entrance or admission into their
Offices, take an Oath not to embrace any Juror or Juries, or for any Fee or
Reward, or otherwise to nominate any, at the request either of the Plaintiffs
or Defendants, or of any on their behalf; and that they shall not make out, or
deliver, or willingly or wittingly permit to be made in their names, any Blanck
Warrant or Precept to Arrest any person without a Writ under the Seal of the
Court, wherein such Action is laid or to be tried, first had and delivered unto
them; and that no Sheriff or Undersheriff, do crave allowance or respit for
any debts of the Kings, but upon just cause, That every Juror, if the Plaintiff
or Defendant, or their Attorneys shall before they besworn require it, do also
take an Oath that he has not received any Instructions or Evidence before hand
from the Plantiff or Defendant, or their Attornyes, or any on their behalf.

That all English Merchants trading into Foreign parts,, 30.
may be ordained to bring into England, at or in their return, a certain and
reasonable quantity of Bullion or coin of Gold or Silver, to be yearly
certified and Registered in the Exchequer, and that such as shall be brought in,
may not as it is now, be bought and Registered in the name and for the use of
the East Indian Company; and that the East Indian Company to prevent any
disguise, which may be made use of betwixt them and the Merchants, may also be
ordered yearly to Register and Certify into the Exchequer, all such Gold and
Silver Bullion or coin thereof as shall be imported by the said East Indian
Company.

That all Foreign Merchants,, 31.
Trading into England, or any the Dominions thereof, be ordained to export at
their returns English Manufactures and Commodities, to the value of what they
imported, and not to make their returns in money, or by Bills of Exchange, as
the Jews in great numbers trading hither, are known now to do. And that all
Merchants Alien, if they be not such as have houses and habitations here, or if
they have, do at their first beginning to Trade, enter into Recognizances of
great penalties in Chancery, not to Transport, or cause to be Transported out
of England, as was in part provided for by the Statute of 2 H. 6. chap. 6. Or
returned by Bills of Exchange any more then the sum of five pounds for their
necessary charges, upon pain of forseiting treble the value thereof.

That the many more then formerly used deceipts,. 32.
in the Shearing, Tentering, hot Pressing, and false Dying of our English
Clothes, which do much or more endamage our Trade of Clothing, then the
Transportation of Fullers Earth, Sheeps Pelts with the Wool upon them, or the
Clothes in the Whites, may be by some good Laws, restrained and suppressed; and
that the Aulnage as well of Cloth as Stuffs, may according to sundry Acts of
Parliament and other provisions be better looked unto and put in execution.

That the great and many Deceipts,. 33.
Abuses, and Adulterations now used in most or too many Trades and
Manufactures, surpassing all the Cheats and Tricks of Hocus Pocus, or which the
Pillories, and the Court of Star Chamber heretofore punished, ingrossings of
Commodities, or carrying them beyond the Seas, on purpose to make a scarcity,
and bring them in again at double or greater Rates, unlawful confederacies to
make the Manufactures so slight or evil wrought, as they may the sooner be worn
out; or by a small price paid to the Workmen, get the greater Rate in the
Retail, Bonds or Securities enforced from Workmen not to make or sell at that
rate to any other; Combinations to inhaunce Prices, and so many more ungodly
Artifices employed, as Tricks and Trades, are now grown to be Terms
convertible, and the Devils Registers have not precedents enough for them,
whereby not only numberless and great oppressions are daily exercised upon the
people, to the impoverishing of many of them, by those that like Pikes in the
Fish Ponds, do live only better then others, by devouring and undoing the
smaller Frye, and industriously employ themselves therein, and at the same time
cry out of injustice and oppression where it was not, and busied themselves
about Religion and Gospel Purity, when they never intended nor could not afford
to practice it, whereby all our English Trade and Manufactures are disparaged
and brought into a slight esteem, and made to be unsaleable, or at very low
rates in the parts beyond the Seas, and to give place to the Commodities and
Manufactures of other Nations more honestly made, and if not speedily remedied,
will render all his Majesty's cares of reviving and promoting the English Trade
and Merchandise of no avail, as long as that Canker, or a principal cause of
the decay and ruin of it shall be permitted, may by some good Laws be
restrained and suppressed.

That the many good propositions heretofore made by Mr. Henry Robinson and some
others,. 34.
concerning the Regulation or bettering of the ways of Trade and Merchandise,
may now after a Committee of Trade in the times of Usurpation and Confusion,
sleeping too much over it, and doing nothing, whilst Trade it self came to be
almost ruined, be taken into a more serious consideration, and some good Laws
enacted in pursuance of them.

That the Manufacture of Linen Cloth, the importation whereof from Flanders
and other Foreign parts,. 35.
expends the Nation, little less then 100000 l, per annum, by reason that too
many of our Wives in England have exchanged their good Housewisfery for
Gallantry, and Spinning for spending, may be more encouraged in England by
Injoyning six Acres in every hundred Acres of errable Land in England and
Wales, to be yearly sowed with Hemp and Flex, and that there be an Aulnage of
Linen Cloth, as well as of Stuffs and Woollen Cloth.

That our Laws be not (as too many of them use to be) Still Born,. 36.
or expiring by that time they can be read or recorded, or Starved at Nurse;
but that some good Laws may be made to prevent or cure their Swouning or
Convulsion fits, and bring them up to the good ends or purposes, for which they
were ordained, and put them in execution. That our Paths being restored, we may
rejoice in our Laws and Constitutions, and abhor those wandering after Dark
Lanthorns, or the ignis fatuus of newlights, which have lead us into many great
miseries and confusions.

That the Excise of Ale,. 37.
Beer, Perry, and Syder, and the charges affliction, and troubles, which it
brings upon the people, which before our times of misery, would have brought
death and ruin any private contriver; and was at the first created by Oliver
and his Impes to maintain a cursed Rebellion, and set up a destroying and
detestable Anarchy, may be abolished, and taken away, and the Nation restored
to the freedom and quiet which they formerly enjoyed under this our ancicent
and excellently composed Monarchy.

That his Majesty's Ancient and just Rights of Royal Pourveyances upon a due
Regulation of any evils or oppressions which may be proved to have been
committed in the manner of taking of them,. 38.
may be restored to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and that very great
Consumption of his Estate, occasioned by an enhaunce, and trebling of the Rates
and prices of Provision for his Household, which has laid heavy burdens upon
his too small and overmuch impoverished Revenues, multiplied his wants and
necessities, disturbed and disparaged the order and honor of his house, and
produced very many great Inconveniences worthy to be remedied by the
Parliament, and the care which they usnally take for the support of his
Imperial Crown and Dignity, may be cured.

And when a long and general observation and experience can tell every man,
who is not a stranger to his own affairs, or of other men, how hard a thing it
is for one that is behind hand to overcome his Poverty and get before hand;
how impossible it will be for a private man to live out of Debt, when his
yearly and necessary expenses and disbursements shall far surmount his Receipts
and Revenues; how necessary a Treasury, Bank, or overplus of money which is
Robur belli and fundamentum ac firmamentum pacis, is for a King in times of
War, and its many chargeable occasions, and the power and reputation of it in
times of Peace to preserve it; and that all Kingdoms and people never were or
could think themselves safe without it.

That in order to public good, and to consolidate the hoped for happiness of
King and People, which the pretended Parliaments of our late Times of
Usurpation, busying themselves in laying Burdens and Taxes upon the People, for
the maintenance of a War, and an Arbitrary power, and Tyranny, and the
continuance of their miseries, could never find the way or leisure to establish.

A Royal and Princely yearly Revenue may be settled upon his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors; and to the end to make the Plaster or the Tent proportionable
to the wound, and to the cure intended, and not make the repaires of his
Revenues to be insufficient or more chargeable and burdensome, by doing it by
parcels or at several times, whereby it may ruin, before it can be repaired,
or suddenly after; and for the better satisfaction of some of the Purchasers,
who were the cause of their own and his Majesty's troubles and miseries, and of
the Kings Loyal Party who suffered with him in it?

The highest monthly Assessement or Tax which in our late times of confusion,
was One hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem, may by Assessement or
Subsidies, or some other way proportionable unto it for the next two years, if
the Parliament shall think fit, be assented unto, and yearly collected and paid
into such hands as they shall appoint, and such part thereof not exceeding the
sum of two hundred thousand pounds, be distributed by his Majesty, to the
suffering and Loyal English who took Arms for him or his Royal Father, and
never deserted their Loyalty; or to their Wives and Children surviving them, as
his Majesty under his sign Manual shall direct, and some other part of the said
moneys, not exceeding the sum of one hundred thousand pounds arising out of the
said Assessements be employed for satisfaction, without allowance for Interest
(which should not be for wickedness or sinful contracts) of such Wives and
Children of Purchasers, or the Purchasers of Purchasers, which have yet
received no satisfaction according to his Majesty's Declarations, by the
Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, or Prebends, or out of his Majesty or his Royal
Mother the Queens Revenues, or which have not been Purchasers by false
Debenturs; and the other remaining undisposed moneys as aforesaid, of the said
two years Tax, to be and remain to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as a
sacred Patrimony unalienable to be annexed, inseparably to the Crown of
England, not to be Leased or Rent charged, further then for one or two Lives,
or one and twenty years.

That after the end of five years next ensuing, there be another monthly Tax or
Subsidy of 120000 l. more for two whole years then next ensuing, to be raised
as aforesaid, and disposed of by such as the Parliament shall appoint for his
Majesty's use, of which, if his Majesty shall please, there may also be issued
by Warrant under his Majesty's sign Manual, such moneys as his Majesty shall
think fitting, not exceeding the sum of two hundred thousand pounds, to be
employed for the further relief of such of the Loyal suffering party in England
for his Majesty, or his late Royal Father, as his Majesty shall appoint, and
that the residue of the monys to be collected and raised by the said monthly
Tax or Assessement for two whole years be, as soon as conveniently it may, laid
out and disposed for the purchasing of an honorable Revenue in Land for the
King and his Successors unalienable as aforesaid, and to no other use or
purpose, which they that could pay as much, and a great deal more to uphold a
Slavery, may be better contented to pay, to establish a redemption and freedom.

And that after the end of three years next after the said two years, there be
a like monthly Tax gathered and collected for two whole years next ensuing, to
be disposed of by such as the Parliament shall appoint, for the buying of an
honorable and Princely Revenue in Lands of inheritance for the King and his
Heirs and Successors, never to be aliend from the Crown of England, other then
as aforesaid. And although it may seem to be a great sum of money in the Total,
to be raised out of the people, yet it being the more probable and easy way,
and a great deal more necessary then what has been done for worser ends and
occasions, and being to be born by so many Cities, Towns, Counties, and people
as are to contribute thereunto in several years, and with several respirations,
will the eby not only free them from many of the like public Taxes and
Assessements hereafter, and save them in their purses and estates, as much or
more then that will amount unto, by some good Laws and provisions to be made
for the freeing of them from many of the gripings and oppressions of one
another, but entail our happiness and a greater then formerly freedom, quiet
and safety upon themselves and their posterity.

For there was, is, and ever will be, a necessity of power, strength, and
riches to be in a King that intends either to protect or make happy himself and
his people, as well as to have their love and affection; and though David when
he was in his private condition, could before he was King of Israel rescue a
Lamb of his flock, slay a Lion and a Bear, and with a sling and a peeble stone
kill the dreadful Goliath; and that Nathan the Prophet (no flatterer but a man
of God) had after he was a King, said unto him, The Lord is with thee, and
brought him a message from God, that His house, and Kingdom, and throne should
be established for ever, yet neither he, nor his subjects the men of Judah and
Israel, could believe him or themselves to be in any condition of safety
without his mighty men of war, Militia, Captains of thousands, and Captains
over hundreds; nor did son Solomon after God had given him a large and
understanding heart, and a portion of wisdom beyond that which ever was granted
to mankind, with a promise likewise of riches and honor, suppose it to be any
policy, to neglect his Tributes and Presents, the improvement and well ordering
of his Revenues, and putting an honorable order in his household, to build
Cities of Store, and Cities for his Chariots, and Cities for his Horsemen, and
a Navy of Ships in Ezion Geber, and send them to Ophir to fetch Gold.

Nor can it be certainly for the good and safety of the people to do by their
earthly King, who untied the chains and fetters of their folly, restored them
to their Laws and Liberties, and, as a balm of Gilead, cured and healed the
wounds of those that never could do it themselves.

Nor accord well with their gratitude, or the many protestations and promises
which they made of sacrificing their lives and fortunes, and all that they had
in order to his happiness.

Or with the repentance and satisfaction (which makes repentance efficacious)
of those that were the causes of his twelve years misery and affliction,
greater, longer, and sharper then any of his own hundred and eight Royal
Progenitors ever endured, enough to have turned his youth into the gray hairs
and infirmities of an old and decrepit age.

To do by him as they do by their heavenly King, take, get, and receive all
they can from him, but return as little as they may for it, or by the earth
their common feeder and nourisher in their lifetimes, and the receiver and
entertainer of them at their deaths, by making furrows on her back, and
enforcing it to serve all their designs and business; and for all her fruits
and kindness, do not so well by her as the Heathen, who could sacrifice to
Tellus and Ceres, but think they do enough, if in the months of April and May
they shall be pleased to admire her beauty, and beat Harvest well contented to
fill their Barns with her bounty.

And will be as likely to be for their good, as for children to have their
parents so poor and impotent, as not to be able to protect them, or for those
that are to go a Sea Voyage, to have the ships ill or not at all victualled, or
to adventure in a War or Garrison, when the Commander in chief, or the General,
upon whose wisdom, valor, strength, and conduct the safety of all depends,
shall be every day to seek for victuals to feed them or himself, Ammunition or
Weapons to defend, and money to pay them.

Unless they could be assured by no doubting Oracle, that it would be for the
good, honor, peace and plenty of the Kingdom to have the head, faim, languish,
and want its necessary support and Food, and that the members in the body
natural although never so warmely clad, or made much of, can thrive whilst the
Head is sick and infirm.

Or unless they would be as wise as the Citizens of Constantinople, who rather
then they would impart any of their Riches to their Emperor for the most
necessary defense of their City, Estates, and Religion, against the Turk when
their City was besieged by him, would reserve it for a prey to their enemies,
and a perpetual slavery for themselves and their posterities, or as our late
men of Reformation, and murmerers at their own happiness, did in their
complaints, and taking away Ship Money, and exchanging it for more miseries
then ever any of their Ancestors endured, when afterward they were enforced to
call their slavery a happiness, and to pay and pray, and give God thanks for it.

When as the great charge of Government in times of peace, and the quietest
imaginable, and the necessity of the peoples Aids and Taxes to support it may
the better be believed, when Augustus Caesar, notwithstanding the enjoyment and
full possession of the Empire, or greatest part of the world, with the riches
and spoils thereof laid up in the public Treasuries and their Capitol, enough
(besides what Julius Caesar had in the civil Wars consumed) to make it the
greatest that ever was together at one time above ground; and his great
frugality and care in managing his Revenue, by keeping a book or memorials, as
Tacitus says, wherein Opes publica continebantur quantum Civium sociorumque in
armis quot classes Regna Provinciae Tributa vectigalia and necessitates ac
largitiones, and had as Bodin says, received Immanem pecuniarum summam ex
Testamentis, great Estates of Inheritance from those very many that made him
their Heir, could not subsist without Tributes and Taxes, but though the bloody
and expenceful Bellona was laid to sleep, and there was nothing likely to
disturb that happy and grateful calm of peace with which the world was then
blessed found a necessity to Tax all the world, and even Joseph with Mary the
mother of the Redeemer of it, must go up to Bethlehem to be taxed and pay
Poll-mony, and for all that with all his care and providence in governing that
Empire, having spent two paternal Patrimonies ceterasque hereditates in
Rempublicam, and much of his own Estate upon the Commonwealth, left but a small
and inconsiderable Revenue to his heir.

And when as the King by his inestimable charges, great and daily expenses for
the protection and good of his people, and necessary maintenance of his Royal
Dignity, is in a worse condition then any of his Nobility or Gentry, who may
when their necessities enforce them strike sail if they please, and measure
their expenses by their Estates.

Because he cannot defend himself without defending his people, must do like a
Prince, and live like a Prince, and it cannot be for the good, safety, and
honor of them that he should either live or do otherwise.

But should rather believe as King James the fifth, in Anno 1540. his Majesty's
great Grandfather did, when in a preamble to an Act of Parliament in Scotland
for the annexation of Lands inseparable to the Crown, he did declare, that it
Was understood and weill advisedly considered be the Kingis grace, and the
Estates of his Realm beand assembled in Parliament, that the patrimony of his
Crown and Revenues thereof beand angmented is the great weill and profit both
to the Kingis Grace and his Leiges; and that King James the sixth, his
Majesty's Grandfather, and his Parliament of Scotland in Anno 1600. did not
err in the preamble of an Act, Of Annexation of forefaulted Lands and others
to the Crown, wherein they did declare, That it is clearly understand by the
Kings Majesty and Estates of the Realm, that the augmentation of the patrimony
and Revenues of the Crown, not only serves for the forth setting and
maintenance of his Highness Honor and Royal Estate, but alsorelieves greatly
his Subjects of diverse charges and heavy burdings. And when after his coming to
enjoy the Crown of England, he did in his Declaration in the year 1619.
Declaring what things he would be moved to grant to his servants and suitors by
way of bounty, and what he would not signify his desire not to cast himself
and his posterity into these wants or straits which might drive them to lay
burdens on the people.

Nor should the people of this nobler and better natured Nation, who have in
the times of Monarchy been blessed with a greater freedom then France, Spain,
Holland, Venice, or any Christian or Heathen people, or Kingdom were ever
owners of, be unwilling to employ as much of their care and well wishes in
settling the Kings Revenue, now so much weakened by age and kindness, and ruined
for want of repairs, and being repaired, will be but to help to protect and
defend themselves as they usually and commonly do in the repairing and building
a new their own houses, amending or making new their Clothes when they
perceive them to decay, or refreshing or bringing to heart again their Lands
which by doing them good have needed it.

When as those who contrived and assented unto Olivers Instrument of
Government, as it was called, who was one of the greatest of Villians and
Tyrants in the Christian world, and not only murdered his King, but did all he
could to destroy the Bodies, Estates, and Souls of his good people, did more
resemble Antichrist then either Pope or Turk, highly deserve a burying place
under the Gallows, and all that Ignomany could devise to lay upon him, and was
of neither Royal or Noble Birth or breeding, and could be well contented to
allow him Ten thousand Horse and Dragoons, and twenty thousand Foot, and the
Navy to be maintained by a constant yearly Revenue to be raised for that
purpose, with the remainder of the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenues, not
disposed of (except Forests and Chases, and the Manors thereunto belonging)
all the Lands of Delinquents in Ireland, in the Counties of Dublin, Kildare,
Clare and Katerlaugh, the forfeited Lands in Scotland (which were great and
considerable) the two parts of Recusants Lands in England, not compounded for,
and all Debts, Fines, Penalties, Issues, and Casual Profits belonging to the
Keepers of the Liberties of England, so miscalled, with two hundred thousand
pounds per annum yearly Revenue, for the Administration of Justice and charge
of Government, to be and remain to that Minotaure or Protector, so called, and
his successors, and the Framers of that which was called the Petition and
Advice, could afterward in the year 1656. by a fancied Authority of
Parliament, not only confirm unto him that Revenue in Land settled upon him,
with the Casual profits belonging to the Crown of England, but entreat him to
accept of ten hundred thousand pounds per annum, yearly Revenue, to be raised
upon the people without a Land Tax for the maintenance of the Army and Navy,
with such other supplies, as should be needful to be raised from time to time
by consent of Parliament, and three hundred thousand pounds per annum in like
manner to be raised for his support of the Government.

Need not repine or think that, or a greater Revenue to be too much for the
highest born Prince in Christendom, and the Heir of a Succession of Kings for
more then one thousand years last past; who could suffer their Regal Power and
Authority so to be bound with the Cords of love to their people and the rules
of right reason, as the Sun in all his Travails has never yet beheld a people
enjoying better or so good Laws, and Liberties, and less Taxed or burdened with
their Princes occasions.

And when as there is not any City or Town Corporate in England, but have
received and enjoyed their Charters and Liberties from the King or his
Progenitors, not any of the Nobility or Gentry, but have had their honors,
privileges and dignities, and all or some of their Lands and Estates from
them; nor any kindred or family in England, which either by him or some of his
famous Progenitors, or the many Joseph's and Mordecai's in every age advanced by
them, have not mediately or immediately been preferred and advanced, and had
all that they have or enjoy by their bounty and munificence, or had much
kindness or Royal favors showed unto them, and like the lesser Trees or Shrubs
in the Forest, have comfortably grown up and been protected and shadowed by
Druinas Royal Oak, for which in the care of their own good and safty which are
involved in his, they are as their forefathers were, more then ordinarily
obliged by those eternal Bonds of gratitude, which time or adversity should
never be able to break or obliterate, to contribute all they can to his
welfare, and this our once most famous Monarchy.

That so our Hercules may not want his Club to defend Himself and his people,
that the cry of Debts and people wanting their money, being the worst of
Anguishes to a virtuous and generous mind, may no longer afflict him; that the
looking upon a small Revenue may not dishearten him to take the accounts of it,
and that a greater may, now our Janus Temple is shut, put him in mind to do as
Augustus Caesar did when all the world was at quiet, keep an Exact account of
his Revenues and Expenses.

That he who has builded up our wastes, and raised up the former desolations,
may be at rest from his sorrows, and all the people in his Dominions break
forth into singing praises to the Most High, which has made him an Instrument
to do wonderful things, and like the Dove sent out of Noah's Ark, to bring us
the Olive Branch, which the Deep and the rage of many waters had covered.

FINIS.

