POEMS.

BY THOMAS PHILIPOTT, Master of Arts, (Sometimes) Of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by R. A. for Henry Shepherd, and William Ley, and are to be
sold at the Bible in Tower-street, and at PAUL'S Chain, near Doctors Commons.
M.DC.XLVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, As well by the merit of virtue, as desert of birth,
MILDMAY, Earl of Westmerland, Baron Despenser, and Bergherst.
MY LORD,
BE pleased to shed one beam on these tender sprigs of Laurel, which will
raise them up to that growth, that their shadow will be able to skreen me from
the heat of sensure, I have (through a throng of other business) pressed so
far as to present them to your view; my zeal to be known to your Lordship
(who is known to be the public Assertor of Letters) obliged me to offer them
up to your name, and if you think the sacrifice not worthy of the Altar, let it
be burnt, and the flame of it will be so happy as to give me light to see my
error that durst presume to consecrate things of so low an estimate, without
either sap or verdure, to the shelter of so high a Patron; so shall I (by my
humility) entitle my self to your pity, that could not (by my Poesy) endeare
my self to your praise; for I know (my Lord) that your mercy and justice are
so equally wound up together, that you can at once both judge and forgive, him
who shall aspire to no further happiness then to be acknowledged

The humblest of your Servants, Thomas Philipott.

To the Reader.
REader, thou may without affrightment look
Within the pages of this guiltless Book;
For here no Satyr, masquing in disguise,
Amongst these leaves in Ambuscado lies:
No Snake does lurk amongst these flowers, to cast
Her poison forth, and men's fair honors blast;
And though some stain the paper, when they write,
And so defile, and fully its chaste white
With lines of lust, that to wipe out that sin,
It even wants white to do its penance in;
Yet I no Goats blood in my ink will spill,
To make loose lines flow from my tainted Quill;
No soot or gall I Will mingle, to possess
My words with an invective bitterness,
Although (perchance) to make them seem more tart,
I may some salt to season them impart:
No, no, the wool of the Lamb I Will only take,
And that my principall'st Ingredient make:
So that what ere my teeming Pen shall vent,
Shall, though not witty, yet be innocent.
T. P.

To the Author.
ENCOMIASTICON.
It Is Poetry thou writ'st, Latins called Verse,
Because it turns off Active, smooth and Terse,
Greeks call'em Rithme, and Meter, when in sweet
Numbers, and measure they do fitly meet;
These rise, and bravely fly,
Height'ned by Fantasy,
And make true Poesy,
Which many miss, that try.
A Poet as thou art, Poeta nascitur, non fit.
(I may be sworn)
Was not so made, but rather so was borne.
And I may say, when I read many a line,
Graced with high influence, thou art divine;
The various style endeares it to us more,
Embroyd'red with Conceptions amplest store,
Wits curious Tapestrie,
Hymns, Past'ralls, Elegies,
Observatives, Divinity,
Philosophic Scrutinies;
It may be called a FLORILEGE for all,
That have not time for studies general.
Philomusus. T. C.

POEMS
On the beholding his face in a Glass.
SVre if this Mirror has limn'd out to me
My faces true and faithful imagerie,
My cheeks do yet lie fallow, and my brow
Is not yet furrowed with Times rugged plow;
No hair, as yet, has clothed my naked chin,
Nor wrinckle rumpell'd, or purl'd up my skin;
Nor has my head one hair, by Cares expense,
White with the powder of Experience:
But when more years shall fit on me, and age
Shall dress me with his liverie, and engage
This structure of my flesh to droop, and cares
Shall into reverend gray have did my hairs,
And I again (perhaps) expose my face
To the impartial censure of my glass,
My shadow will inform me, that it bears
(Like me) th'impressions too of many years,
When shivering agues do congeale the blood,
And fevers melt again that purple flood:
When I lie floating in a sea of rheum,
Being tossed with every melancholy fume:
This by its withered aspect will declare
It symptoms does of the same sickness wear:
Nay, when stern death with a rude hand does seek
To pluck the Roses out from either cheek,
To plant his Lillies there, and does dispense
To every languishing, and vanquished sense,
A chill benumning damp: could I then view
The sad resemblance of that ashie hue,
That blasts my cheeks, that shadow would put on
The same appearance of complexion.
How brittle and how transitory then
Are all those props that Nature leanes on, when
I from this faithful Mirror can descry,
My shadow is as permanent as I?
On the sight of a Clock.
HOw fruitless our designs would prove, if we
Should be possessed with so much vanity,
As with our frail endeavors, to assay
To stop the winged hours in their way?
Or fondly seek to chain up Time, and try
To make him with our wild desires comply,
Since leaden plummets hung upon his feet,
Not clog we see, but make his pace more fleet.
On a Gentlewoman dying in Childbed of an abortive Daughter.
WHat near alliance was between the grave
Of this dead infant, and the place that gave
First life to it? Here was a sad mystery
Worked up it self, both Life and Death, we see,
Were Inmates in one house, making the womb,
At once become a Birthplace and a Tomb?
The mother too, as if she meant t'improve,
In every fatal circumstance her love,
When this unpollisht infant di'd, her breath
Resigned, that she might wait on it in death:
And in one Monument might sleep by her,
To whom before she was a Sepulcher.
On a Gentlewoman much deformed with the small pox.
WHat has this pretty Fair misdone,
That angry Heaven so soon
Mistook the fatal place,
And buried all her beauty in her face?
Each hole may be a Sepulcher,
Now fitly to inter
Those, whom her coy disdain,
And nice contempt, has immaturely slain.
Yet lest so great a loss should lack,
Its ceremonious black,
She wears it in her eyes,
To mourn at her own Beauties Obsequies.
She needs no gloss to veil those scars,
And those Hebrew Characters,
Which (like letters) do display
The story of her Beauties sad decay.
That moisture shall embalme 'hem, I
Will power from either eye,
So that those scars she wears,
Shall need no other Ceruse, but my tears.
On Julia, throwing snow-balls at him.
WHilst Iulia did her snow-balls at me hit,
She did into my bosom too transmit
A sudden flame; it is strange that hea^ should flow
From such a frostie principle, as snow:
Sure those successive glances which did rise
From the bright Orbs of her refulgent eyes,
Made some impression on those balls, and so
Subverted the cold property of snow:
Yet as that flame which in my heart did reign
And darted fire from thence on every vein,
Was caused by snow, so when I did but rest
My hand upon the Alps of her white breast,
The snow that lay dispersed over that chaste seat,
Straight curbed the uproare of my former heat.
Strange miracle, my Iulia has the art
At once with snow to heat and cool my heart.
To Sir Henry New, upon his re-edifying the Church of Charleton in Kent.
SIR;
YOu need no Parian or Egyptian stone
To build a Tomb for you, your name alone
Shall stand, your monument which shall out vie
Those fading Trophies in stabilitie,
You have the basis of no structures fixed
On widows ruins, or the mortar mixed
With Orphans tears* you wish the melting skies
May wet your fields, and not your tenants eyes,
Moysten it with their deaw, you build no shrine
To lavish riot, where sin's made divine,
And Idolized, you sacrifice no wealth
At Bacchus Altar, nor give up your health
An offering to it, or to evacuate rheum
Do you exhale whole manors into fume;
No Sir, you have imploid your coin so well,
That God himself will be accountable
For what you have spent, you have laid your treasure in
So inaccessible a Magazin;
No sacrilegious robber shall purloine
Or rust embase the value of your coin:
You Have built a house where God himself will dwell,
And stand himself there his own Centinell;
Let others sit and brood upon that Ore
Which they have collected from the Indian shore,
And put themselves to the expense of care,
For a wild unthrift, you make God your heir.
On the sight of a Rivelet, that eight foot off from its Fountain dis-embogues
it self into the Medway.
NO sooner did' this pregnant spring distill
Out of her watery womb this purling rill,
But see how eagerly it rushes down
It self, in Medwayes neighboring stream to drown;
And even at its first birth falls upon
A ruinous precipi^ation;
Like some unwarie heir, who being of age
To act an unthrifts part, upon the stage
O'th world, and newly weaned from the embrace
Of his deceased Parent, does deface
His heritage with ^ot, and makes have
To let himself loose into lavish wast,
Pouring out his Revenues, to advance
Vice in each gay and pompous circumstance,
With such profuseness, that he straight is found
Plunged in the Vserers books, and there he is drowned:
And as the river when it has enlarged
Its channel with that rill the spring discharged
Into its liquid womb, gliding away
With thanklesse speed, its vassalage to pay
To the bl^w Sea-god, does no more reflect,
But steals the spring that fed, it with neglect;
Even so the userer when his bags swell high
And grow affected with a plurisie,
Which was with this loose unthrifts ruins fed,
And (like some flies) from his corruptions bred,
Calls in each wandering glance, and passing by
He never looks back, lest it be with an eye
Of scorn, not pity, nor will deigne to know
Him from whose spring his streams of wealth did flow.
On M. Jo. Joscelin, dying of a Fever.
What heat was this which scorched my Joscelins heart?
And licked that oil up which each vital part
Is daily moist'ned with? what heaps of flames
Checkered the azure front' spice of his veins
With crimson spots? how did their fervor purle
His sinews? and his skins fair margent curle
Into a shrivelled lump? as if that he
Was even grown Aetna's epitome,
And might be licensed to be canonized
Now for a Saint, since he was sacrificed
To death in fire, and had even undergone
By frying, with a Fever, martyrdom,
Which did each part with such continuance burn,
His bed it self was even become his urne?
Yet could my tears this privilege have gained,
To have appeased that ravenous flame which reigned
Within him, he had not been yet possessed
With the cold sleep, nor gone so soon to rest:
But this accrues yet to his future glory,
When time shall read the annals of his story,
'Twill find, it was no abject malady
That forced his active spirit hence, to fly
Into the Elysian shades, no trembling fit
Of a blood-shaking Ague made him quit,
And render up his tenement of clay,
No slow consumption melted him away,
Making him seem to his spectators so,
As if h'ad been a corpse a year ago:
But that he fell by coaping in a duel
With a more noble fever, and was fuel
Only for that disease, with which they say,
The world it self shall labor in the last day.
To a Gentlewoman singing.
SVre Philomel's transformed to humane shape,
For who but she could practice such a rape
On our ensnared sense, with the calm noise
That echoes forth from her seraphick voice?
Each Angel that is guardian to a Sphere,
Desists from whirling round his Orb, to hear
Her warble her tuned lays, the sullen North,
Who in distempered murmurs, bellows forth
A rude defiance to the swelling deep,
Is by her voices music rocked asleep.
When all the winds do sally fo^h t'ingage
The elements in mutiny, and wage
A conflict amongst themselves, they straight take truce
To listen to her voice, which does infuse,
Such charms into them, that they straight comply
In gentle whispers with her harmony:
Swans hearing her but sing, do straight concur
In a melodious simphonie with her:
Yet (oh sad fate) straining a note too high
To equal hers, do straight expire and die.
Copernicus's Pupills may go on
Now to protect his wild assertion,
And say the earth does circularlie move,
Whilst the dull Planets in their Sphere above
Stand still like idle gazers on, since she
Has by the miracle of her harmony,
Accomplished this, for at her charming call
Thrilled forth in an enchanting madrigall,
The earth appears to move, the knotite rock
And aged oak, as if they meant to mock
Natures decrees, assemble in loose rings
And shake their active feet when she but sings,
Whilst my joy'd spirits too, with nimble streine
Make have to dance Lavalto's in each vein.
On the death of M. Francis Thornhill, slain in a single Duel
What stratagems inexorable death
Does muster up to rob us of our breath?
Sometimes he sends a Fever to take in
Our forts of earth, sometimes the gout, to win
Our ruinous tenements, which being repelled
And their assaul^s by strength of nature quelled,
He straight imploys the sword, petar and gun,
With all the Engines of destruction;
To raze our Citadells of clay, which we
Accomplished in the fate of Thornhill see,
Who though his heart and vitals bore about
Vigor enough to keep diseases out:
Yet see how soon the sword had found the art
To cut the cordage that made fast his heart.
And soul, which thence flew heaven-wards, there to be
Indenison'd into eternity.
For though it swam in a red stream from hence
I Am confident 'twas white with innocence:
But shall his blood, exhale to air, the earth
Was moistened with, no 'twill produce a birth,
Of odorous flowers, to whom there shall accrue
(As if they wept for him) a constant dew;
Which on the ruins of his earth shall flow;
And when the wind from the cold North does blow,
Congeale into a pearly mass, so he
Invested with a shroud of pearl shall be.
On a Farmer, who having buried five of his children of the Plague, planted on
each of their graves an Apple Tree.
YOu whose bold thoughts do prompt you on to glory
In The number of your issue, view the story
Of this afflicted Villager, since he
Was by the increase of a fair Progeny
Made happy, till just God, for man's offense,
Employed the infection of a Pestilence
T'annoy the world, which five of's children gave
Up toth' possession of the lavish grave.
But see what glorious piety can dwell
In The narrow circuit of an humble Cell,
To preserve life in their remembrance, he
Establishes on each grave an apple tree,
By that quaint Hier^glyphick to declare
He was their tree, and they his apples were,
Which in his estimate did far out vie
In tenderness the apple of his eye;
And though stern death had been so much unkind,
To pluck the fruit and leave the tree behind,
Yet in that action, he did but show,
That they untimely to their graves did go:
To show in time, what we must likewise do,
Branches, Trunk, Root, and all must follow too.
An Epitaph on Mrs. E. VV.
REader, if thy indulgent eyes can spare
But so much brine as will make up a tear,
Let piety engage thee here to lave
That moisture out upon this beauties grave,
That so the turfe bedewed with it, may teeme
Roses and odorous Violets, to redeem
(By pow'ring forth a balmy dew) her dust
From putrid vapors, and her tomb from rust:
For modesty, truth, zeal, and meekness have
A sad interment too, within her grave,
Nay even all the virtues are become
Her Inmates, and do lodge within her tomb;
So that she forced us, when she lived, to say,
She was an Angel clothed in weeds of clay,
Which to approve when her fair soul was cloyed
With the worlds tumults (which yet still enjoyed
A calm of peace, amongst all the noise of men)
She threw off earth, and fled to heaven again.
On the approach of night.
WHy comes forth night arrayed in black, when day
Does (like an exhalation) melt away?
Why hang so many lights in the vault o'th sky?
As if night furnished out some obsequie?
Why are her tears in dewes so often shed?
The reason is, she mourns 'cause day is dead.
Considerations upon Eternity.
IMmense Eternity! of thee what part
Shall I define, since thou a circle art?
And when in thee (like the reviving sun)
I look for end, I find thee but begun.
When I thy first beginning would survey,
I find thou nere had none: when I assay
To sound thy depth, thy depth I find to be
A vast and bottomless Profunditie.
Could we pluck back those wasted years which are
Inrol'd in times moath-eaten Register,
And that collected mass of ages lay
Within a scale, we soon should find they would weigh,
Balanced with thee, no more when all is done,
Then if we pois^d an atome with the sun.
Who then would dote on life which only shrouds
The soul in slime and earth, which death unclouds,
But not annihilates; or fan that fire
Which will but breathed upon by wind expire,
Whose flame though it be by nature blown about
The heart and brain, the colic can put out:
Who would piece up his tenement of clay
With so much art, when rheums may washed away,
And dropsies drown it? or one sudden gust
Of a chil Ague shake it into dust,
When with a Fever it so long may burn
It may be both the ashes and the urne:
When its whole frame at once may be shook down
With th'earth-quake of a wild convulsion;
Why should I in a heap of painted dust
Or gilded rubbish then put any trust?
Whose chief ingredients are our shivering fears,
And thrilling sighs, whose cement is our tears,
Which kneaded it to shape, on which has been
Gods impresse stamped till 'twas razed out by sin.
Nor shall this sullyed medall be refined
Till it be in the general fire calcined;
On which, when it is new molded, God will daigne
To covne the image of his face again:
Whose impresse time shall then no more deface,
Nor sin its value any more embase:
When thus both soul and body are combined
In one strict union, and so close intwin'd
They never shall be divorced, they both shall be
Admitted into immortality:
Upon whose wings, winged too with their own love,
And innocence, they both shall soar above
The pitch of humane thoughts, and with an eye
Purged from blind vapors and dull mists, descry
Those various Essences, whose forms will be
Limn'd out in the Mirror of the Trinity;
And all the old Idaes range about
By which at first they both were copied out.
Next gaze on the Apostles, who do make
(In heaven) a new and second Zodiac,
For they were the 12 Signs, through which the Sun
Of Righteousness, his course on earth did run.
Then view the Martyrs, from the sacred Reake
Of whose pure flames, the light of truth did break;
Who though they waded through a crimson flood,
Which had no spring to feed it but their blood,
And all besmeared with purple, soared from hence,
Sit clothed in the white Rabes of innocence;
Whilst thus the eye is charmed, the ear shall be
Intranc'd with such melodious Harmony,
That if the soul were not so closely tied,
And to the body glorified, allied
In such a loving mixture, we might fear
That 'twould again be stolen out at the ear.
Thus some eternally shall gaze upon
That Orb of Light, the blessed Vision,
And so to ever-living joys aspire,
Whilst others melt in never-dying fire,
Which powers forth flames, but yet displayes no light,
Which will both burn, and freeze the damned wight:
Where outward tortures shall corrode each sense,
And inward fret into the conscience,
Where all Arithmeticke will be aghast
To calculate the years of torture past;
And bind them up in numbers, but to tell
The years to come, will be a second Hell;
For when ten thousand, thousands years are told,
And all those thousand thousands years are rold
About their Sphere, and Myriads more are done,
And yet alas, all is but now begun;
The wretched and captived soul will cry,
Oh that I once might live or once might die:
Lord tear the Mountains up, and throw them all
Upon my wretched head, that I may fall
Into a heap of Atoms, and may be
Seen not of any, lest it be of thee;
Unlock the Caverns of the earth, and find
Amongst those dusky Cells some angry wind,
Whose wild impetuous Gusts so long may blow
Upon my house of earth, until it throw
The rubbish in some wilderness, or thrust
The thin remains of my disbanded dust
Into some gloomy Vault, where none shall tell,
To gleane them up, so thou forgive me hell.
A divine Hymn.
O Thou who art all light, from whose pure beams
The infant daylight streams,
And to whose Luster all the throng of stars
Those mystic Characters,
Writ in the dusky volumne of the Night,
Do owe their stock of Light;
Who when the Sun, in the nonage of the year,
Like a Bridegroom does appear,
Sweet with the Balmy Perfumes of the East,
With Lights Embroidery dressed,
And spangled over with brightness, does array
That Planet with each Ray
He glitters with, a powerful spark inspire
Of thy Celestial fire
Into my frozen heart, that there may be
A flame blown up in me,
Whose light may shine like the meridian sun
In the dark horison
Of my benighted soul, and thence distill
Into a pious rill
Of contrite tears, those clouds which do control
The prospect of my soul,
That so the beams of faith may clearly shine
Amidst its Christalline,
That I may by th'infusion of their light
Learn to spell Christ's Cross aright.
And as one touch from Moses did unlock
The casquet of the rock,
And thawed its liquid treasures to repel
The thirst of Israel;
So let this flame dissolve that mass of sin
That lies wrapped up within
The chambers of my heart, that there may rise
Two fountains in my eyes,
Which may put out those scorching flames, which were
First fed and kindled there,
By that same hot Artillery which lust
Into my eye balls thrust;
And as when Fevers blaze within the blood,
And parch that purple flood,
The sparks and embers of them, are by heat
Stilled from the pores in sweat;
So when sin flames within me and does roll
Its heat about my soul,
And sparkles in each faculty, my eyes
Being lusts Incendiaries.
Oh let this inward sickness by that fire
Devotion does inspire,
Be stilled out, at those pores o'th soul, my eyes,
In a liquid sacrifice,
Which gathering into one heap, may swell
Into a holy well,
Wherein when the old Dragon wounds me, I
May bath incessantly,
And having washed my festred wounds, may be
Sure both at once of cure and victory.
On the death of a Prince, a Meditation.
IN what a silence Princes pass away,
When they are enfranchised from their shells of clay?
No thunderclap rung out this Heroes knell,
And in loud accents to the world did tell,
He was deceased; no trembling earthquake shook
The frame o'th world, as if 'twere Palsie-strook.
There was no bearded Comet did arise,
To light a torch up at his Obsequies;
And though so many men should have deceased
When his great soul was from the flesh released,
That Charons Vessel should have ceased to float,
And he have cried, give me another boat;
Not any yet resigned their vital breath,
Obsequiously to wait on him, in death;
Thus we may see, Fates unrelenting knife
Will even cut a Princes thread of life;
Nor can his spreading power enforce its strength,
Or his Dominions extend its length,
If from the urne his name first issue forth,
Not his tall titles or unfathomed worth,
Can this Prerogative, or Charter give,
That he his cheap dull vassal shall outlive;
And though the eyes o'th multitude before
Followed his presence, and did even adore
The earth that propp'd his feet, yet when the rust,
Of's monument shall mingle with his dust,
Contracted to a span, and the rude wind
Shall his abbreviated ashes find,
They cannot from his blast be so exempt,
But that he will disperse them to contempt;
So many graves his dust shall (he being dead)
Obtain, yet he be no where buried:
Who then in Titles, Crowns, or Wealth would trust,
Since he can scarce assure himself his dust?
Even in the grave shall so protected be,
It shall be freed from foreign injury.
To a Lady viewing her self in her Glass.
LADY;
WHen Sickness, Death's pale Herald does display
His Ensigns in your face, and does array
Your drooping Beauty with an ashie hue,
You straight take counsel of your Glass, to view
How much those roses, that their blushes shed
Over either cheek, are shrunk, or withered:
When any spot that luster does imbase,
Which does improve the beauty of your face,
You have recourse unto your Glass, to see
What part dares shelter that enormitie;
When you with any fashion would comply,
You to your Mirror straight employ your eye,
To be informed, what correspondence there
Your shadow does with your fair substance bear:
If in your painting there some error be,
Or in your dress an incongruitie,
You from your glass a certain pattern take,
By which your self you even a shadow make.
Since then in all things you your self apply
Still to this Crystal Index, to discry
Each blemish in your dress, and each defect
That clouds your beauty, and by that correct
All trespasses, you may instructed be,
By this, to know too your Mortality;
Since that frail Tenement you so perfume
With clouds of Mitrhe, and Cassia, and consume
So much to piece it up, it may repel
The assaults of Age, and be defensible
Against Times rude Onsets, will scon fade away,
And languish to a ruinous decay;
And by its transitorinesse declare,
That you your self, your shadows Emblem are.
On the death of Sir Simon Harcourt, slain at the taking in of Carigs-Main
Castle in Ireland.
MAy that pure flame which heated Harcourts breast,
Break from the gloomy confines of that Chest
Which circumscribes his hallowed dust, and sink
Like a spent Meteor down into my ink;
That that dull juice its heat may so refine,
Each drop of it may prove like that, divine,
With which each verse of mine embalmed shall be,
And like his fame last to Eternity;
At common Funerals each vulgar quill
Into some broken rapture can distill,
And with the watery tribute of the eye
Dissolve into some easy Elegy:
Should we not then pay to this honored Hearse
Our griefs dressed up in more refined Verse,
And mix with it such a large stream of brine,
It might these precious Relics even enshrine?
The grateful wind would from his ashes sweep
Such clouds of dust, that if we could not weep,
'Twould throw them thence into our barren eyes,
And (though unwilling) force some tears to rise:
I am no Laureat, nor does any Bay
Surround my Temples, if it did, Il'd lay
That wreath (brave Harcourt) on thy Tomb, that we
At once might crown thy victory, and thee.
But though I wear no Bays, in either eye
Is worn a tear, sorrows best Liverie;
In which I Will steep each verse, that so their brine
May distribute some salt to every line:
And when my barren and exhausted eyes
Grow bankrupt in their watery Obsequies,
And spend their stock too soon, those stars which shined
To light thee into the world, and did unwind
The Fate of thy great actions, sure will turn
To tears, and drop in gelly on thy Vrne:
Though thus two fountains flow from either eye,
T'embalme thy dust, my Fancy yet is dry:
But pardon me, that on thy hallowed tomb
I Have stuck no Epitaph, which might become
An Index to past ages, and display
To times to come, how (through that purple sea
Which from thy wounds in such a deluge ran)
Thy soul passed over to the Land of Canaan,
White with her innocence, alas no stone
Would serve to bear the sad Inscription;
For even that Marble that is put in trust,
To be the wardrobe for thy weeds of dust,
Will to deplore so great a loss (my fears
Tell me) be instinct too melt into tears.
On a Gentlewoman struct blind with the small Pox.
WHat have we poor unhappie Mortals done,
Such an Eclipse is cast over beauties sun?
What? was this cloud let loose to veil its light,
'Cause it too much astonished our dull sight?
Or did some goddess, fearing we might pay
A Superstitious homage to each ray,
This beauties eyes powered forth, become unkind,
And to prevent this tribute strike her blind?
Or are her eyes preserved? and cannot we,
Blinded by too much light their luster see?
Or has Jove fixed them in the starrie Sphere,
To shine by night, as they by day shone here?
If so; no more let lovers from afar
Court the loose aspect of the Cyprian star;
Nor let the erring Mariner no more
Worship the Laedan stars, nor yet implore
With volleyes of loud sighs, they would dispense
From their kind Orb propitious influence:
For her refulgent sparkling eyes, that were
On earth, the brightest stars in beauties Sphere,
And shone with such a clear and constant light,
That Our Horizon was by them made bright,
Shine forth in heaven, a Constellation, now,
And will, from their auspitious Orb, endow
Lovers with such mild influxe, at their birth,
That heaven they have found above, they will find on earth;
And to the Saylor that has lost his way
Amongst the wild Alps and Deserts of the Sea,
Dart such clear beams that they shall steer him right,
So that he will need no Pilot, but their light.
On the death of M. George Sandys.
WHen that Arabian bird, the Phoenix dies,
Who on her pile of spices bedrid lies,
And does t'herselfe a sacrifice become,
Making her grave an Altar, and a Womb,
T'inclose her pregnant dust, she can redeem
Those ruins she her self has made, and teem
With a new Phoenix: but now Sandys is gone,
And melted to a dissolution,
In The Furnace of a Fever, can his Vrne
An equal fine, or interest return
For those remains it keeps? Alas, we here
Are wholly beggared; for his Sepulcher
Is like some thrifty Steward, put in trust
To take account of every grain of dust
That moulders from the fabric of his clay,
But when the general fire which the last day
Shall sparkle with, shall a new flame inspire
Into his Vrne, and that Poetic fire
Which was so long an Inmate to his breast,
Shall be called forth from out that Marble Chest,
Where it now lies raked up amongst the dust,
And embers of his clay; and when that rust
That choakes it up, shall be dispersed, the light
Of this enfranchised flame shall shine so bright
Amidst our Horison, 'twill seem to be
The Constellation of all Poetry.
Tell me not then, that Piramids disband,
And drop to dust; that times ungentle hand
Has crushed into an indigested Mass,
And heap of Ruins, Obelisques of Brass,
That our perfidious tombs (as loath to say
We once had life and being too) decay;
And that those Flowers of Beauty which do grow
In Ladies cheeks, amidst a bed of snow,
Are withered on their stalk; or that one Gust
Of a bleake Ague can resolve to dust
Those hands which did a Globe and Scepter hold,
Or that that head which wore a Crown of Gold,
May be wrapped up within a shroud of Lead,
Neglected, and forgot, since Sandys is dead;
Within whose Breast Wits Empire seemed to be,
And in whose Brain a Mine of Poetry:
For who will not now confess, that Time's that Moth
Which frets into all Art, and Nature both,
Since he who seemed within his active Brain
So much of salt and verdure to contain,
He might have ever been preserved, is gone,
And shrunk away into corruption:
But these excursions their Conception owe
To passion, or from our wild Phansies flow;
All that we now can do is to return
Some Flowers of Poesy unto his Vrne,
Which being burnt in his own Funeral flame,
We Will offer up, as Incense, to his name,
Which yet by sent and color will be known
To Have sprung from him, and to have been first his own.
And if these Flowers cannot so persume
His name, but that 'twill (mauger these) consume,
Our tears strewn on it, will repeal that Fate,
And in his withered fame, new life create;
As when the treasures of the Spring are crop'd
And by untimely Martyrdom unlop'd,
From off their stalk, we can their death reprieve,
And a new life by water to them give:
So now when Sandys like the Springs flowery birth,
By deaths rude sith is mowed from off the earth,
And thrown into a grave, to wither there
Into a heap of ashes, though no tear
Can piece his dust together, we may weep
A Bath of tears, in which we yet may steep
His memory, which will (like Aeson) when
It Is thus manured, grow fresh and young again;
And being thus embalmed, a Relic lie
To be adored by all posterity.
On the sight of some rare Pieces and Monuments of Antiquity, in an
Antiquaries Study.
LEt Aesons Story wast away, and be
No more transcribed unto posterity:
It must now wither, and dispight of all
His powerful baths, and moistening juices, shall
Grow wrinkled over with age, decease, and have
(Being dead) t'entombe it in, no other grave,
But dark Forgetfulness; where it shall lie
For ever, buried in Obscurity.
For, now Antiquity it self, with years
Grown white and hoarie, with long age, appears
Here fresh and vigorous; things which Ages past
Crumbled away, and did decay so fast,
They were even thought in a Consumption then,
Do here rise up in a full Youth again:
Times Aesculapius has done this; for He
Against the disease of Time, a remedy
Prescribes, beyond all Druggs: He has the Art
T'embalme the fame of things; yet, not impart,
To keep them so that they shall never consume,
Whole clouds of Myrrh, Spice, Cassia, and Perfume:
And, as the Loadstone Iron can call out,
When it is beleaguered, and even walled about
With other wild confused heaps of dust;
So, when men's names grow fretted with the rust
Age strewes upon them, and they seem to be
Lost in the ruins of mortality;
He, from that rude and blended Mass, can bring
Their dead remembrance out, and can new wing
Those thus raised up to life, and make them fly
'Bove Times wide reach, up to Eternity:
He can piece up men's scattered dust, his hands
Manage a powerful Scepter, that commands
Even Fate it self, with which he can make blunt
The Teeth of Time, which, Estrich-like, were wont
To feed on iron, piles of brass devour,
And Natures beauty, like a Moath, defloure.
In fine, this study is the public Ark
In which the memories of men embark;
Which, being here reprieved from death, do shun
The being drowned in deep Oblivion.
An Epithalamium.
THe Bride is up: Go, bid the Negro creep
Into the watrie bowels of the Deep,
To gather up those orient Pearls, which dwell
In the contracted casquet of a shell:
Command him to examine every rock,
To pluck off Diamonds from that craggie stock,
And hang them all on her, that so the light
That breaks from her clear eyes, may make them bright.
Behold, the active Bridegroom does appear
Fresh as the Sun, in the nonage of the year,
Whilst every flower unclasps its leaves, as he
Walks by, as if they did delight to be
Enlivened with those odours, which his breath
Does (like rich perfumes) to the air bequeath.
And now he meets his Bride, whilst from their eyes
A numerous constellation seems to rise:
So that each one which viewes them from afar,
Thinks that each glance of theirs darts forth a star.
And now the Priest has (with his Nuptial Bands)
At once united both their hearts and hands.
And, though the Essence of their chaste delight
Must be prorogued, till Day be masked with Night:
Yet see, their souls prevent their bodies bliss,
Both making have to couple in a kiss;
Whilst on those twisted beams their eye balls shed,
They even seem each others hearts to thread:
So that, their eyes the bodies office do,
In mingling thus; and beget Babies too.
On a Nymph pourtrayed in stone, that powered forth two spouts of water from her
eyes into a Garden.
THink that this Statue which now courts your view,
Was once a virgin of that glorious hue,
Set out and furnished with such charming grace,
Each durst affirm she had an Angels face;
But as those Mineralls, which the teeming Earth,
Combining with the Sun, improves with birth,
Do through the womb of the Mine their veins diffuse,
That Metalls like themselves they may produce:
Even so that rockie hardness, which was bred
Within the caverns of her heart, did spread
A drowsy numnesse through every sense,
Whose chillness all those Organs did condense,
That gave attendance on the Brain, (the Throne
Where Life and Motion sit installed) to stone:
But 'cause before those sparkling rays, her eyes
Powered forth, did make each heart love sacrifice;
Thy spouts of tears, though turned to stone, distill,
As if they wept for those their scome did kill.
On one dead of a Dropsy.
WE need not here be lavish, and let fall
Our tears, as tribute, to this Funeral,
Since here we see the Body did resent,
And even, by private instinct, so lament
The Souls departure, that it did appear,
Transformed by grief, to one continued tear.
To a Gentlewoman viewing her self in her glass.
Cruel fair one, think this Glass,
Wherein you now behold your face,
Was composed of one who dyed
For love of you, since he applied
His liquid and dissolving eyes,
So long with tears to sacrifice
To your disdain, that to relieve
His Bankrupt and impoverished grief
With a fresh stock of moisture, he
Melted to a spring, which see
The cold, but charitable North,
(Lest a fountain of such worth
Should, by vulgar lips, be tasted,
Or profanely be exhausted)
Congealed into a Crystal Mass,
Of which was formed this Looking-glass:
And as your Figure fair did rest,
Within this Lovers living breast,
So still you see it does appear,
Though turned to Crystal, harbored here
An Elegy offered up to the memory of Anna Countess of Caernarvon
An Introduction to the Elegy.
THose Flowers of Beauty, Lilly, Violet,
And blushing Rose, which were by Nature set
In fair Caernarvons cheek, and seemed to grow,
(Strange wonder I) there amidst a bed of Snow,
By deaths rude hand now from their stalk are rent,
And thrown (alas) into a Monument,
Where they will wither into dust, and be
The types of humane mutabilitie.
If then these short-lived flowers could not give
But so much verdure, as would make her live,
Even in her worser part, her earth, what spice,
Or Balmie d^uggs, shall we then sacrifice,
T'embalme her name, since there can nothing be
That will do this, but flowers of Poesy,
Which I have strewn upon it; and, though they fail,
Such Aromatic odours to exhale,
As may this memory of hers perfume:
They Will so preserve it, it shall nere consume.
The Elegy.
FOr all those various streams which do entombe
Themselves within the Oceans liquid womb,
The Sea pays Impost, and an interest brings
Back to the Earth, when it refines to Springs
The brackish billows, and those waters strains
To Brooks, and weaves them into all her veins.
If the kind waves refund their tribute thus,
What fine, or use, will thou pay back to us,
Unhappy Earth, for these deplored Remains
Which now manure thy shrunk and withered veins?
Can thou unsluce thy thriftie pores, and power
From those Alembicks such a swelling shower
Of unctious deaw? it may her dust o're-run,
And rescue it from putrefaction:
So that no Colonie of worms shall dare
To plant themselves within her Sepulcher:
And, can thou then, from thy cold womb dispense
Such vapors, and chill damps, they may condense
That heap of deaw to sheets of ice, that She
Enshrined within a Crystal cloud may be:
So that the sacred ruins of her dust
May not disband to Atoms, by the gust
Of any saucy wind, or be exempt
From their cold Vrne, and scattered to contempt:
Can thou for that rich blood thy lavish Breast
Has swallowed up, repay thy Interest
In purple Flowers? which being thawed with heat;
May from their pores such fragrant Odors sweat,
They may perfume those Vapors, which her tomb
Throws out in mists from its corrupted womb;
And more refine the air, then if the spring
Did to her Vrne, its verdant treasures bring;
But if the needy barren earth repine
To pay back any Interest; or Fine,
Unto her Grave; my sighs shall be perfume,
To air her Dust, and such a flood of Rheum
Shall from mine eyes break loose, that in few years,
Her tomb it self shall be embalmed with tears;
Which being thus manured and softened, shall
Teem with the Rose, and Violet, and all
The fragrant Issue of the Spring, whose Flowers
Shall always be distilling pious Showers
Of Balmy dew, as if they meant to show,
That since their first Original they drew
From out her Vrne, they gratefully let fall
Those tears as Rights due to her Funeral;
But why do I appeal to stones and flowers,
And from their melting pores expect new showers,
To stock my tears, since Nature too should be
Her self (in grief) Competitrix with me?
For sure her casquets broak, and fallen to dust.
To which (as her Exchequer) she did trust:
The Balmy Perfumes of the Phoenix nest,
And all the treasurers of the rifled East;
Wherein she circumscribed the wealthy toiles,
The drudging silkeworme spins, and all the spoils
Of ransacked Elements, for in this Fair
Both Indies with their wealth contracted were:
This piece of winnow'd earth, which she did strew
With Roses, and pale Lillies, where they grew
In kind, and reconciled mixtures, is
Now crumbled to a heap of Atomis.
This Star which shone with such refulgent light,
Our Orb of State was by its Rays made bright,
Is stolen (alas) out of our Horizon,
And dropped to slime and putrefaction;
But stay bold Pen, bespatter not her dust,
Can her remains shrink into slime or rust,
When every weed that grows about her Vrne
Shall by my tears to Nard and Balsome turn?
But where does Zeal transport me? it is a fault,
(Sure) to disturb the silence of her vault,
And break that slumber, which like Opium
Resolved to vapor, hangs about her Tomb:
What though deaths impious hand move a disguise
Of putrid scales, and threw it over her eyes,
Lest being blinded by their Light, his Dart
Might have groap'd out its way, to have found her heart.
The last days flame shall burn these Scales away,
And in her eyes kindle a second day;
What though amidst our Orb, a star she shone,
In Heaven she shines a Constellation:
What though those liquid Saphires which each vein
Of hers, within her Azure Channells did contain,
And those two blushing Rubies Nature thrust
Into her lips, be sullied with the dust
Of her own Ruins, when the general Fire
Again refines them, they shall sparkle higher
Then all the Eastern Jemmes: for sure the Tomb
Is of a near Alliance, to the womb,
For as before the Infant can put on
Symptoms of figure or proportion,
It must first lie a shuffeld Embrio
Packed up within the Cell o'th womb; even so
When she has layne a Mass of Ruins, till
The Trump at Gods great Audit, with its shrill
And awful voice shall summon, and injoyne
Each Tomb its drousie Relics to resign,
Who sleep in dust, that so the Grave may be
Both Womb, and Midwife to Eternity:
Those Rubies, Saphirs, Diamonds, which are
Now lost in the Rubbish of her Sepulcher,
Shall be redeemed, and purged from every stain
That does benight their luster, and again
Be knit into one Frame, within which Cell
Eternity shall as an Inmate dwell.
Then leave we thee unto thy self, fair soul,
Exalted far above the rude control
Of Fate, or the assault of Time, and see
From thy bright Orb how every Entitie
The Womb of Nature teems with, comes forth lame,
And full of dis-proportion in the Frame,
And Structure of its parts, since thou art one,
Who were the Pattern for Prefection;
The world lies gasping too: for, it is no doubt,
But at that wound its lifeblood bubbled out,
Which death defaced thee with, and if there be
Things yet whose parts display some harmony,
It Is but thy dole of beauty they ingrosse,
Those that want that, are crippled in thy loss.
Her Epitaph.
REader, this Tomb preserves in trust
Beauty it self resolved to dust,
^or this Marble does enclose
^he Lilly, Violet and Rose,
Beauties Ingredients; which within
^his shell do lie to be agin
^atch'd into flowers, and adorn
that naked earth which clothes her urn,
When thou know this, unsluce thy eyes,
To mourn at Beauties Obsequies,
And weep so long, till there appears
About her tomb a Sea of Tears;
That she may, when the world expires,
Gasping in its Funeral Fires,
And to purge those sins away,
Which it contracted every day,
Does to it self a sacrifice become,
Rise, like a second Venus, from her Tomb.
An Elegy on Robert Earl of Caernarvon, slain at the battle of Newberie.
WHoever will unsluce his eyes, and lave
A stream of pious tears out on this Grave,
Sure, cannot think those Obsequies misspent,
He shall lay out upon this Monument:
For, from the stone thus softened by his Eyes,
So many springs of Laurel shall arise,
That Passengers shall think this tomb the Cell,
Where unplum'd victory did ever dwell.
For even she her self, when Dormer died,
Wounded through him, lay bleeding by his side;
But he is dead without a sigh or groan,
Vented by the worlds Genius, to bemoane
His sad decease? for sure, his loss should be
Sighed out to us, in no less Elegy.
Do not the grateful Elements conspire
To pay some tribute back for that brave fire
Which warmed his bosom? and does now enshrine
It self in theirs, which sure will so refine
Their dull and sluggish matter, that 'twill be
Improved again to its first purity;
It from that foame each wrinkled billow strowes
On the embroidered shore a Venus rose,
No less, sure, then a Mars or Hermes must
Rise from each grain of his unblemisht dust,
If every Roman Victor could allow
Each act of his a Statue, and endow
His name with Trophies, that it nere might rust,
Or be obscurely buried in his dust:
We must impoverish each Corinthian Mine,
And rob the Parian Quarries, to enshrine
His name in Marble, for his actions will
Each Page in times successive Annalls fill.
What Cataracts of shot, what storms of lead
Were often let loose on his unshaken head?
That those which viewed him from a far, began
Much to suspect they saw a Leaden man:
But when they saw him with such speed invade
And break the body of a Troop, it made
Them change that Faith, and think that he had been
Converted to some winged Cherubin;
Or else so brief and sudden was his Flight,
Transformed into a nimble beam of Light.
But shall that flame which did so clearly burn
Within his Breast, lie raked up in his Vrn,
Until the last days general Fire transmit
A second light to re-enkindle it?
No sure, his tomb cannot so check that Flame,
But 'twill break forth to shine about his name,
Or in some bright and shaggie Comet rise,
To light a toarch at his own Obsequies.
A Pastoral Court-ship.
Fair Iulia let the heat of Love
Which within thy Heart does move,
And there is lodged as in its Sphere,
Still from thine eyes each brinie tear,
In which dull sorrow thou do steep,
And never teach thy eyes to weep,
But when some transcendent joy
Does thy glutted senses cloy.
Thou art Natures Magazine,
Or her casket rather, in
Whose narrow precincts she has pent
The treasure that both Indies sent:
In The closets of thy lips she locks
The blushing Rubies of the Rocks:
In the storehouse of each eye
Her refulgent Diamonds lie:
In thy teeth her pearl she puts,
And in each vein a Sapphire shuts:
Thy hair contains the gold o'th West:
Thy breath the spices of the East:
And over thy skins fair Margent's drawn
A curtain of the finest Lawn:
So that those Lillies sweet, which dare
With thee in whiteness to compare,
To expiate so black a sin,
Want white to do their penance in,
And their vanquished heads do bow,
In veneration of thy brow.
See how the flowers and plants combine,
And their odorous leaves untwine,
That in those sweet Exchecquers they
May that stock of spices lay,
Which (like Eastern winds) thy breath
Does to the perfumed air bequeath.
Can thou these drooping flowers fair
With thy powerful beams repair,
And animate? and shall not I
Light a flame up at thine eye?
See how those Diamonds are dismayed,
With which thy bosom is arraid,
Because the splendour that does rise
From the Chrysolites of thy eyes,
Does transcend their feeble light,
And look as drowsy, as if night
Lay hid in them, and will, I fear,
Each melt into an envious tear:
Can thou thaw these, and shall not I
With those tears that either eye
From their brinie Springs impart,
Melt the hardness of thy heart?
If thou art barren in desire,
And can not burn in equal fire,
Those sighs which from my bosom flow,
A flame throughout my breast shall blow;
And those frequent tears I Will shed
From the cisternes of my head,
Shall so manure thy heart, thou wilt be
Fruitful straight in love like me.
On a spark of fire fixing on a Gentlewomans breast.
Fair Julia sitting by the fire,
An amorous spark, with hot desire,
Flew to her breast, but could not melt
The chaste snow there, which when it felt,
And that resistance it did bide,
For grief it blushed, and so it di'd.
Yet lest it should prove ought unkind,
It contrite ashes left behind.
On a spark fastening on a Gentlewomans cheek.
IF this small spark which bore so thin a blaze,
Could in each part so much resentment raise,
And to your cheek so much of anguish waft,
And on your skins unblemisht margent graft
Such signalls of its rigor; oh then deem
What torments of a far more high esteem,
My martyred heart must struggle with, which fries
In flames of Love, first kindled by your eyes.
Ad Joannem Harmarum, Libellum De Lue Venerea exarantem.
QVas tibi praetendam grates, quae dona rependam,
Harmare, aut merito ingenti quae serta refundam?
Qui gravidam morbis primo conamine Lernam,
Praegnantem malis foecundam discutis Hydram;
Vt faceres tantas prima Incrementaruinas,
Crudi and nascentis tituli, tu coeca recludis
Arcana herbarum, and Naturae scrinia pandis,
Tu clausae exerces latebrosa cubilia terrae;
Pug^acem abstrusis Mineram quibus eruis antris,
Ex^riae quae cruda luis cunabula damnet,
Et restag nantem morbi transfundet humorem,
Tuque poros reseras, cutisque suburbia solvis,
Vt tomes excussi laxata per ostia morbi
Effluat, and tenues sefe detrudat in auras;
Tu blando Aetnaeas subducis clystere flammas,
Et jecur immiti castigas putre Guaco,
Atque abster sivis terges polluta Diaetis
Viscera, tranquillo demulces pectora succo;
Qui rheuma effu sum torpenti compede sistat:
Herculeos tua jam manus est enixa labores,
Herculeos tua jam manus est partura triumphos:
Nam faust^e a pigro faecum detersit acervo
Augiae sta^ulum vappasque excussit inertes:
Suspecta Herculcae tandem est ac aemula clavae,
Quae foecunda tuae famulatur gloria pennae,
Nam Luis indomitae Lernam, and nova monstra subegit.
On the death of the much admired and much lamented, Mr. Francis Quarles.
AMongst that solemn Train of Friends, which sing
Thy Dirge (great Soul) and to thy Name do b^ing,
As to some shrine, the sacrifice of praise,
Daigne to accept these course and homespun Lays:
Alas, what can the world expect from me,
As tribute to thy Hearse, since if there be
Within me any flame, or heat divine,
That warms my breast, 'twas kindled first by thine;
And from that pure and active Fire did come,
Which is locked up in the Casquet of thy Tomb,
Whose heat (perchance) may thaw my barren eyes,
And make them shed some watrie Obsequies,
But cannot make my drowsy Fancy flame,
In sad and pious raptures to thy Name;
Or light some Poem up, whose glimmering rays,
About thy Name in time to come might blaze;
Or if it could, that sickly Flame would be,
But a dim Index to thy memory,
And only here remain like those few bright
Streaks in the air, when the expiring light
Is blind with darkness, and the day is done,
To tell the world that there has been a Sun.
As he that would disband the Diamond, must
Encounter it with its own proper dust:
So he that would enshrine thy Name in Verse,
Or strew some Epitaph upon thy Hearse,
Can never any pure, or noble fire,
Into his dull unactive thoughts inspire,
Unless that Fire his Fancy burns with, be
First lighted by a spark that flew from thee;
And as when he that frames a watch, would see
What loose distemper, or infirmity,
Is in the Fabric, how the wheels are set,
Or with what pace the sickly pulse does beat,
Straight to the Sun applies his eye, and can
Cure the disease by his Meridian:
So he that would write well, and write of thee,
And regularly wind up an Elegy,
And in such equal poise his fancy set,
The pulse might with well-paced numbers beat,
Must all his lines proportion, and make fit
To go by the Meridian of thy wit.
Thus from the duskie confines of thy urne,
Thou shall again to th'bankrupt world return:
And after death (Fame shall thee so prefer)
Be to thy self thy own Executer,
That all our sums of wit may seem to be
But only Legacies paid in by thee.
His Epitaph.
REader, this Tomb is put in trust,
To keep a heap of learned dust,
Which, we dare presume, will shun
The Fate of putrefaction.
For, that salt which did remain
Cloistered up within his brain,
Will so preserve his Relics, they
Shall never languish, or decay:
However, let our eyes return
Streams of tears unto his urne:
For, those his Relics sure will free
From all corruptibilitie:
Or else, contracting into one,
Will grow another Helicon.
Nor have we any cause to fear,
That we shall want the Muses there:
For, when he died, they did become
Themselves the Inmates to his tomb.
A thankful acknowledgement to those Benefactours that contributed to the
re-edifying of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.
SHould we entomb your benefits within
Unthankful silence, so deformed a sin
No tears would expiate, we might seem to be
Astonished by some drow sie Lethargy,
Or blasted with some Apoplectique Fit,
Which had at once congealed both brain and wit;
We therefore to your Names devoutly pay
The tribute of our thanks, and would defray
Our debt in nobler coin, could we but vie
In words, with our big thoughts, or amplify
Our hands, as wide as we can do our souls;
But this in us our thriftie Fate controules:
For you have snatched us from the Eearth, where we
Lay wrapped up in our own deformity,
And have reduced a House that was become,
Both to it self and Founders name, a tomb,
And like th'Idaea of the Chaos, lay
Deformed, and indigested by decay,
To shape and beauite, and do so prolong
Its fading luster, it again grows young,
Like withered Aeson, so that now we trust,
Twill Phoenix-like revive from out its dust,
And grow into one Fabric (though 'twas shrunk
Before into a scattered heap, and sunk
Almost beneath its ruins) to upbraid
The coldness of these times, which does invade
Each hand, and so benums it, that we see
It cannot open unto Charity;
But to improve, and widen out each Name
Of yours, to such a pacious length of Fame,
They may survive, till time and they become
Both Tenants, and both Inmates to one tomb:
So that when Mauselaeum's shrink to dust,
And Obelisques of Brass disband with rust,
When Pyramids themselves dissolve, and lie
(Mauger their height) low in obscurity;
And all those swelling piles preceding time
Established, only to blanch over their crimes;
Or fortify some name, against the rage
Of Fate, and the rude batteries of age
Shall be dispersed to ashes, and be spent,
Clare-Hill shall be your lasting Monument.
And, though in other tombs youl'd shrink away,
And melt into corruption, and decay,
Your Fame this Charter to it self can give,
Within this Monument you will ever live.
Upon the sight of a Tomb.
WElcome thou common Wardrobe, where we lay
(When we throw off the luggage of our clay)
Our weeds of earth, here the dull Peasant shall
(Biting the pomp only o'th Funeral)
Sleep even as warm under his turfe alone,
As Kings beneath their coverlets of stone.
Here slave, and tyrant, in this Marble Cell,
Shall calmly meet, and both together dwell,
Mingled into one heap of dust: here those
That to improve their interest, do pose,
And tire their wearied thoughts out, to display
Some Engine, by whose powerful succor, they
May clasp their wide and vast design, will find,
When they have stretched endeavor, to unwinde
Their wild attempts, this Earth is but a ball,
Which when they struggle for to grasp, will fall
To dust between their hands, and never suffice
Their spacious thoughts, till't stop both mouth and eyes.
Here those refulgent eyes, that from their bright,
And radient stock of glances, shed such light
Through every part of our dark Orb, they shone
A Constellation in our Horizon,
Like two inanimate blind cinders, must
Lie raked up in a shuffled heap of dust:
Nay and that fire, which did so often dart
Flame into Lovers breasts, till either heart
Glowed with a mutual fervor, must be here
Drowned in the deluge of a Funeral tear,
And in this cabinet of ruins lie,
A tribute paid unto mortality:
Only those nobler and eternal Fires
Devotion in our melting souls inspires,
Shall (when this frame sinks into dust, and all
The heat that warmes this mass of earth, shall fall
Into some gloomy vault) soar upwards, hence,
Borne on the wings of peace, and innocence.
On my self being sick of a Fever.
LOrd, I confess, I do not know
Whether my dust shall yet, or no,
In The furnace of this Fever, be
Calcined into Eternity:
Whether through this red Sea of blood,
Which in such a swelling flood
From the unsluced channel ran,
I shall pass over to Canaan:
Or that these sweats shall wash away
From off my soul that heap of clay,
In which, as in some narrow shell,
She, like some lazy snaile, did dwell:
If it be now thy fatal doom,
That I must melt into a Tomb,
There by the last days fire once more
To be made refined Ore,
And so receive thy stamp agin,
No more to be razed out by sin;
And that this Flame I glow with, shall
Into my hollow Marble fall,
Then warm my soul with heavenly fire,
That as these smokie heats expire,
I being winged with that may fly
Up to Immortality.
On the noise of Thunder.
BY Nature we are informed, that when a Cloud
Vapors endowed with heat and cold do shroud
The active hot, the sluggish cold assail
So long, till both dissolve their watrie Jaile,
And break their watrie chains, when through the air,
The glittring lightning spreads its fluent hair;
So from those factious strugglings, and those throws
This clouds ore-laden womb is torn with, grows;
That dismal clashing, and the noise we hear,
Which so amazes the astonished Ear:
But these are but conjectures, it may bring
Its rise and growth from a far higher spring;
For some malignant Exhalations,
Drawn from a Mine of Sulphur, by the Suns
Reflex may be inflamed, or else that Fire
The upper Region darts, may Flame inspire:
Nay more, some sullen Vapor, which like Hay,
Being long bound up in liquid fetters, may
Give fire unto it self, or there may be
Some other dark and gloomie cause, which we
Cannot, whilst dust hangs in our eyes descrie,
Which may become its first Incendiarie:
God has locked up the Meteors in a mist,
Which skreenes them from our sight, could we untwist
The second causes, and divide that Line
That Nature ties, yet could we not untwine
The threads they are woven out of, or unwind
The Mint, where their first Principles were coined.
Lord, when thou speak in thunder from thy Throne,
The Echo of thy Voice shall be a groan;
When thou unclasp'st the windows of the Skies,
Supreme Divinity, unsluce mine eyes,
That when the spangled Air its lightning wears,
Those Flames may be put out with contrite tears.
On one cured of the Stone.
Our first Original from stones we drew,
Ere since Deucalion and old Pyrrha threw
Stones into men, and since by a defect
In Nature, and the sins we daily act,
We hatch that in us, which declares to all,
We something of our first Original
Still treasure up, which is preserved within
The caverns of the Lungs, or Reins, and in
The circuit of the Bladder, which we try
To crush, by each approved remedy,
Which perad venture scatters it, yet still
We leave untoucht the root that fed this ill,
We may the stone in the Bladder cure, its true,
And that that grates upon the Reins subdue;
But yet no Oil, no Antidote, or Art,
But only Grace, can cure the stone in the Heart.
A Parley between an Epicure and a Christian.
Ep Why do thou thus deface thy self with tears,
Before thou art tenanted by years?
Call in those briny showers of dew, thine eyes
Contribute as sad Obsequies,
To the untinely Funeral of that grace,
Which did before adorn thy face.

Chapter Fond man, those tears are by mine eyes allowed,
To serve me for a Crystal shroud,
In whose thin folds, I my old man may hide,
By contrition mortifide;
And with these drops wipe off those spots of sin,
Which have so stained my soul within.

Ep. But why with throngs of g^ones do you enlarge
The Theme of sorrow, and discharge
Volleyes of sighs, that breath were better spent,
In tricking up a complement,
By which you might a Ladies heart surprise,
And yet her breast never prejudice.

Chapter Vain man, these sighs, I like my Proxy send
To Heaven, that there they may attend
My scaling that b^ight Mansion, and be
My Advocates to plead for me,
When all by Gods citation summoned are,
To be arraigned at his Bar.

Ep. But I adjure you to inform me, why
You to such ha^sh austeritie
Farm out each hour, and to such strictness wed
Your life? as if you had long been dead,
And your soul only moved a corpse, your frame
Such rigid fasts, to curb and tame
Your carnal tumults banishing delight,
The Confines of your Appetite:
Desist this rigor on your self to act;
Since you are not able to detect,
Whether or no, when you your breath resign;
Any part of you shall decline
Th'arrest of Death, since Fate says all must go,
But whither, who can living know?

Chapter Fool, therefore do I thus attempt to curb
Those passions, that would disturb
My purer thoughts, my flesh with fasts empaire,
And employ my tongue in prayer,
Checking the wild rebellions of my earth,
And strangling of them in their birth;
That being divested of that earthy weight,
Which did oppress, and clog my Faith,
I might on wings of Contemplation fly,
And soar beyond the vaulted sky;
And by the scrutinie of Faith, Optics see,
What place in Heaven's designed for me,

Ep. What is that Faith you vaunt of? I have read
Natures large Book, contemplated
Philosophies myst'ries, but never could know
The cause from whence Faith first did flow.

Chapter You may in quest of Natures secrets end
Myriads of years, and ages spend,
Till you all knowledge to your self ingrosse,
Yet never know Faith, till you can spell Christ's Cross.

A Collation between Death and Sleep.
DEath, and his drowsy kinsman, Sleep, agree
In all the symptoms of Conformity;
^leep's caused by eating, for the natural heat
Entices exhalations from the meat,
Transfused to Chylus, which the Brain possess
With an intoxicating drowsinesse;
Death too by fatal eating first came in,
When our first Parents wilfully did sin,
And offered violence to Gods Decree,
Tasting the fruit of the forbidden tree:
And as when sootie night her darkness sheds
Through the vast Concave of the air, and spreads
A Veil over bright Hyperion, we divest
Our bodies, to compose our selves to rest:
So our enfranchised souls shall like wise be
Disroab'd o'th weeds of their Mortality,
When death shall an eternal night disperse
Through all those Functions that with life commerce.
And as when the great eye o'th day displayes,
In the illuminated air, his Rays,
The Light dispersed in glimpses does inspire
Our hands again our bodies to attire;
So when the Trump at the last day shall all
By its shr^ll Summons to Gods Audit call,
And Christ's the Sun of Righteousness shall come,
To distribute to the world a public Doom,
Our moulder'd and disbanded bodies must
Quit the close confines of their beds of dust,
To cloth again our widdow'd Souls, and be
Enstated both with Immortality.
In seipsum Febre iterum correptum, and pene confectum
HEn me, Qualis edax liquefactis Ossibus Ignis,
Incubat? attritas quae lassat Flamma Medullas,
Quis Calor in Cineres redigit sinuosa Cerebri
Tegmina? quae tortos laxant Incendia nervos?
Quaeque fatiscentes obstipant Nubila sensus,
Et caecos volvunt adinertia Lumina Fumos?
Vt plane Aetnaei sum maesta Figura Camini;
Nam veluti Ignivemi serpunt e vertice Clivi,
Vndantes flammae fumis, and sulphur anhelat
Moestus Apex montis, coctoque bitumine fervet:
Dum glacie obstrictus torpet pes montis inerti
Qua Boreae afflatus torpentes evomit aeuras,
Quae macra effusis obstipant arva pruinis:
Frigora Plumatae sic dum nivis aemula, pigros
Invasere pedes, caelefacta per Ilia serpunt
Foecundi flammis ignes, qui naribus balant
Perque Apicem capitis, fumo sa incendia volvunt.
In me congestas fundat puer Hydrius undas
Huc glomerent Pleades nimbisque impactus Orion
Implicit as nubes, and densa volumina aquarum
Hic reserunt, calidas quae sic effusa Favillas
Ignitae febris deleant, qua totus aduror,
Et qua marcentes populantur sanguinis artus
Flamma potest febris tantos vibrare dolores?
O Deus aeterrae est qualis tunc flamma Gehennae?
On himself being stung by a Wasp.
When first this busy testie Wasp did fix
His sting in me, and did his venom mix
With my untainted blood, my skin begun
To swell to an Imposthumation.
How did each part by sympathy complain,
Stretched and distorted on the rack of pain?
What flames did this Incendiarie fling
From out the narrow quiver of his sting,
Into each part? which through my veins were thrown,
And through each Nerve and Artery were blown.
If then a Wasp can so afflict each sense,
How great must be the sting of conscience?
On the Nativitie of our Savior.
Who can forget that never forgotten night,
That sparkled with such unaccustomed Light?
Wherein when darkness had shut in the day,
A Sun at midnight did his beams display;
And God who man's frail house of earth composed
Himself in a frail house of earth enclosed,
Who did control the Fire, Air, Sea, and Earth,
Was clad with all these four, and had a birth
In time, who was begotten before time,
Received a birth, or the early Sun did climb
The ascent o'th East, whom the vast Air, and Main,
And Precincts of the earth could not confain,
Is circumscribed now in so brief a room,
He Is lodged in the circuit of a Virgins womb;
Who light to him, that was all Light, did give,
And made him, who was life it self, to live:
Who in her arms bore him, whose hand controules
The massy Globe, and bears up both the poles:
And what improved the Miracle begun,
He was at once her Father, Spouse and son:
Who then his Mother was by far more old
Yet equal age, did with his Father hold,
Who was a child, yet with his word did make
The world, and with his voice this world can shake:
Now Truths great Oracle it self was come,
The Faithless Oracles were stricken dumb.
No marvel if the Shepherds ran to see
Him, that should every Shepherds Shepherd be:
Who was the Door, through whom a certain way
To find out life, for all lost sheep there lay:
And though this Sun of Righteousness did lie
VVrapt up in (louds of dark Obscurity,
Yet he could such a stock of light allow,
As did the Heavens with a new Starendow,
Which with its beams did gratefully attend
Him, who at first those streams of light did lend,
And by the Conduct of its Rays did bring
The Eastern Kings to see their heavenly King.
And though all Stars, by Natures Laws, does run
A course contrariant to the course o'th Sun;
Yet lo, her Statutes violated were,
For here the Sun was followed by a Star.
On Christ's Passion, a Descant
Darkness had now closed up the worlds bright eye,
And drawn a Mask of vapors over the sky;
And all the beamy tapers of the night
In sable clouds had muffled up their light.
It Was Piety called in their beams, they had been
Found Accessarie else to such a sin,
They never could have assoill'd, though from their spears
They should themselves have dropped in the shape of tears:
They had lent light and influence to betray
Him, from whose light they borrowed every ray.
When with her pitchy Exhalation
Night had thus veiled the luster of the sun,
A Cataract of armed men did power
Themselves into that Garden, where each flower
By the Incense of those Prayers that Christ expired
A balmy stock of fresh Perfumes acquired:
And being now broake in, did forthwith run
With glimmering torches, to find out the Sun;
Yet could not this thick cloud of men benight
This glorious Lamp, the Fountain of all light,
Till the interposing of false Judas lips
Obscured his beams, and caused a black Eclipse:
Yet when he snatched his treacherous lips away,
He straight shot forth such a refulgent Ray,
The Soldiers by their darkened eyes did find,
The Excellency o'th Object struck them blind:
But as a dying Tapour, when it streams
Its fainting light forth in contracted beams,
Musters together all its sickly rays,
With those to stock and furnish out one blaze;
Our Savior, so to intimate, that He
Still held a League with his Divinity,
Cited together such a stock of Light,
That He astonished the dull gazers sight,
And by a sudden damp even struck them blind
That were made so before in the eye o'th mind,
Scattering them all to the Earth, when they were even
About to captivate the King of Heaven;
But when he summoned in his beams to be
Again wrapped up in his humanity,
And he appeared to them in's old array,
Clothed in a garment woven out of clay,
Not spangled over with those Majestic Rays,
Which did at once enlighten and amaze,
They straight invade him; and his guiltless hands
Twisted in one with wreaths of cords, (whosebands
Loosed them) then guard him to the Judgement-hall,
Who had for guard the Quire Angelical.
And now the high Priest is brought to be accused
Before the high Priest, who scoft at, and traduced
Him, unto whom he his own Priesthood owed,
And from which Spring all other Priesthood flowed:
And then transmitted him, (who once shall come
To doom all Mankind) to receive his doom
From Pilates mouth, who though there did arise
Thick Exhalation from those Calumnies
The black-mouth Jews belched forth, could clearly see,
Through those dark vapors Christ's Integrity;
And did his Innocence so much resent,
That he decreed to wave his punishment,
And leave Barrahas, to be offered on
Their Altar, for his expiation:
But they to their first purposes did cleave
With so much malice, they their King did leave,
And chose an abject Thief, unhappy they,
To let Barabbas steal their hearts away:
Which when he saw, and that they still went on
T'exact of him Christ's Crucifixion,
He left them to their rage, and from his blood
VVasht his pale hands, who with a crimson flood
VVasht off our sins, so that for this black deed
Water it self did expiation need.
When thus the Jews their Savior had surprised
(Who for their sins was to be sacrificed)
They to a feeble Pillar straight did chain
The Pillar that did Natures Frame sustain,
And with rude stripes to plough his back begin,
Whose stripes do heale' the wounds imposed by sin:
The soldiers next with supple knees do bring
A faigued Hail unto their teall King,
And with a Crown of thorns his head empound,
Who with a Crown of Glory could surround
Their wretched heads, then spit at, and despise
Him, that with spittle gave the blind man eyes:
(Strange Prodigy, the King of Kings has none
But spittle for his holy Unction)
And with those hands he gave them does embase
With scarres the sacred impresse of his face:
His body with a scarlet Robe they dress,
Who clothes the naked with his Righteousness;
And for an awful Scepter in his hand,
They place a Reed, whose Scepter does command
The spacious Bulk of Nature, and controules
That massiie Globe that hangs between the Poles.
When they had thus a cloud of hatred shed
In showers of scoffs upon his guiltless head,
They lead him to mount Calvarie, where he
Was to wind up his direful Tragedy;
And by the way enforced himself to bear
His Cross, which was reciprocally there
To bear up him, where being arrived, he is laid
Upon the Cross, his Altar to be made,
The public Sacrifice, and expiate
The guilt of Sin, and crush the power of Fate:
And now made ragged with his wounds, and rent
With inward torture, being embost, and spent
With this last agony, he did address
Himself t'impiore some julip, to suppress
The flames of thirst; the Jews did straight prefer
A punge, which was bedewed with vinegar,
To calm his scorching thirst, who did unlock
The stony Casquet of the barren Rock,
And thawed its liquid treasures, to redress
That thirst, which Israel scorcht in the wilderness:
Yet though he cleft that Rock, he could not part
The rock contracted in each Jewish heart.
When Christ had tasted this sour Opiate,
And saw the Prophesies had spun their Fate,
His breath exhaled to purge the air, and he
Resigned his tired and wearied Soul, to be
Transported, on the downy wings of Bliss,
Up to the spangled vault of Paradise;
And with it flew the good Theefes soul, who even
Stole life at death, and made a theft of Heaven:
But lest that Christ, with such neglect should fall,
He might want Rites to grace his Funeral,
The Sun called in his light, to specify,
That men dust do that which he durst not see;
Day put on Night, lest she should seem to lack,
For so great loss, her Ceremonious Black;
The palsied Earth so shook, as if her womb,
She meant to open, and become his Tomb;
The Dead deserted their cold Vrnes, to see
Him, that over Death could claim a victory:
So that it seems, even Nature here did turn
A Mourner too, to attend him to his Vrne:
And now, being dead, a Spear was through his side,
By a rude hand dismissed, which wound may hide
Our numerous sins, or if there be not room,
We may inter them all within his Tomb:
The Soldiers too, in lots their fortunes drew,
To see to whom Christ's garments would accrue,
As a just Prize, they dreaded to dissect
His seamelesse Coat, yet that we daily act,
Which by these barbarous Soldiers never was done,
We part his Coat by our division.
Whilst thus Christ's vestments were in Lotterie,
Exposed a prey to Fortune, Joseph, he
Pilate (with eyes thawed into tears) implored
Christ's body torn with wounds might be restored:
Thrice happy man, the Body he obtaines,
And his own soul too by that purchase gains;
And having now his lawful Boon fulfilled,
He gathered all those Balmes that were distilled
From weeping Trees, and took those unctious tears,
That Myrrha in a Tree imprisoned wears,
And made this confluence of Balsoms meet
All in Christ's wounds, that they might make it sweet;
Then in white Linen did his Corpse enshrine,
Whose innocence did cloth his sins as sine:
And next, this sacred Relic did inter
In the dark climate of a Sepulcher,
Hewn in a Rock: Oh! who'ld not breathe a groan?
The Rock it self is laid beneath a Stone.
A divine Aspiration.
O Thou who art the good Samaritan,
Whose hand, when sin both strips and wounds, can
Shed such a balm upon us, 'twill ensure
Those wounds from rankling, and improve their cure.
Be, as thou art, the Emblem of the Vine,
And in my wounds power in thy oil, and wine.
And, as thou heretofore the rock did part,
So with thy grace, Lord, cleave my stony heart.
Nail to thy Cross my sins, and let them have
A room to bury them within thy grave.
Thy stripes can heal my stripes, thy righteousness
My Scarlet sins with its white robe can dress.
The water lav'd out at thy wounded side,
Will wash my guilt off, and that supple tide
Which from that fluce in such full streams did bleed.
My soul, even hunger-starved with sin, shall feed.
Thy wounds shall be my wounds, thy tears shall be
My tears; for, thy whole passion was for me.
Let thy all-saving merits but ent wine
My tottering faith; thy heaven too shall be mine.
On the future burning of the World.
NO more shall the o're-laden clouds dissolve
In spouts of rain, and so the world involve
In a wild deluge, which shall swell so high,
Its to wring height shall tempt the vaulted sky;
And even invite the sullen stars, to wear
Upon each glittring beam a mourning tear;
Which they again shall mutually let fall,
As a Rite due to the worlds Funeral.
No more shall wary mankind, to beguile
The rage o'th Flood, lurk in a wooden I Will:
But when the tainted world is so defiled
With her pollutions, and so deeply soiled
With the dark spots of sin, that 'twere but vain
To think, that water should wipe off each stain
That sullies it; God will display his ire
In cataracts of all-consuming fire,
With which this Globe of Earth so long shall burn,
Till it into repentant ashes turn:
And, til, at last, it but one Torch become,
To light expiring Nature to her Tomb.
On a Gentleman buried in one grave with his daughter, before deceased.
REader, those sleep beneath this stone,
Whom life made two first out of one;
But having now resigned their breath,
They will grow one again by death.
For, should we on his grave intrude,
To view how much vicissitude
Attends on Nature, and how she
Masks her self in variety
Of numerous shapes, and after dare
To paddle in his sepulcher,
Amongst his dust, we might infer,
He was shuffled into her.
For, time determines, that both must
Resolve into one heap of dust:
But when the world it self expires,
Panting with heat, and God requires
Each gloomy vault, and hollow tomb,
To open its corrupted womb,
And give their ashes, which were pent,
And Cased up there, enfranchisement,
That being re-edified, they may
No more be obvious to decay,
Or Natures Tumults, this last birth
Will disunite their mingled Earth:
And, as their first life did divide them, so
This second life again will make them two.
On thought of our Resurrection.
Who can be of so cowed a Soul, hee'ld fear
To be regenerate in the sepulcher,
Since who exactly looks into the tomb,
Shall find it is but the emblem of the womb,
To which wee're not confined, but trusted, so,
As if we lay there in deposito:
For, when our dust is gathered into th'urne,
It lies but hostage till the souls return.
And, as the Phoenix, when she gasping lies
Upon her tragic pile of Spiceries,
And glowes with heat, her fleshie cinders must,
By the Suns rays, be martyred first to dust,
Before her pregnant ashes can redeem
Themselves from ruin, or again can teem
With a new Phoenix: so, before this earth
We bear about us, can improve its birth
To immortality, its whole compact
Must first be so disjoynted, and so slackt,
It fall to dust; and then 'twill molded be
To such a body, that Eternity
It self shall farm that Tenement, which shall
No more be obvious to a Funeral.
And, as before men can compile, or frame
Their glasses, they their ashes first in the flame
Transfuse to Crystal; so, before our dust
Can be assoil'd from excrements, or rust,
Ravel'd amongst it by our tombs, and be
Improved to such a clear transparencie,
It shall no more incumber, or control
The eye from taking a survey o'th soul,
It must be by the general fire refined,
And be to a translucent Mass calcined:
So shall each tomb become Gods Mint, where He
(Our earth being purged from all impuritie)
Will on it coin the Image of his Face,
Which Time no more, nor death shall never deface.
FINIS.
The Table.
ON the beholding his face in a Glass. page 1 On the sight of a Clock. p. 2 On
a Gentlewoman dying in Childbed of an abortive Daughter. ibid. On a
Gentlewoman much deformed with the small Pox. p. 3 On Julia, throwing
Snow-balls at him. ibid. To Sir Henry New, upon his re-edifying the Church
ofCharleton in Kent. p. 4 On the sight of a Rivelet, that eight foot off from
its fountain dis-embogues it self into the Medway. p. 5 On Mr. Jo. Joscelin,
dying of a Fever. p. 6 To a Gentlewoman singing. p. 7 Upon the death of Mr.
Francis Thornhill. p. 8 Upon a Farmer, who having buried five of his children
of the Plague, planted on each of their graves an Appletree. p. 9 An Epitaph on
Mris. E. W.Z ibid. Upon the approach of night. p. 10 Considerations upon
Eternity. ibid. A divine Hymn. page 13 On the death of a Prince. p. 15 To a
Lady viewing her self in her Glass. p. 16 On the death of Sir Simon Harcourt.
p. 17 On a Gentlewoman struck blind with the small Pox. p. 18 On the death of
Mr. George Sandys. p. 19 On the sight of some rare Pieces and Monuments of
Antiquity, in an Antiquaries Study. p. 21 An Epithalamium. p. 23 On a Nymph
pourtrayed in stone, that powered forth two spouts of water from her eyes into a
Garden. p. 24 On one dead of a Dropsy. ibid. To a Gentlewoman viewing her
self in her Glass. p. 25 An Elegy offered up to the memory of Anne
Countess of Caernarvon. ibid. Her Epitaph. p. 29 An Elegy on Robert Earl of
Caernarvon. p. 30 A Pastoral Court-ship. p. 31 On a spark of fire fixing on a
Gentlewomans breast. p. 33 On a spark fastening on a Gentlewomans cheek. ibid.
Ad Joannem Harmarum, Libellum de Lue Venerea exarantem. p. 34 On the death of
Mr. Francis Quarles. p. 35 His Epitaph. p. 36 A thankful acknowledgement to
those Benefactours that contributed to the re-edifying of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge. p. 37 Upon the sight of a Tomb. p. 38 On the Author being sick of a
Fever. p. 39 On the noise of Thunder. p. 41 On one cured of the Stone. p. 41 A
Parley between an Epicure and a Christian. p. 42 A Collation between Death and
Sleep. p. 43 In seipsum Febre iterum correptum, and pene confectum. p. 44 On
himself being stung by a Wasp. p. 45 On the Nativitie of our Savior. page 46
On Christ's Passion, a Descant. p. 47 A Divine Aspiration. p. 52 On the future
burning of the World. ibid. On a Gentleman buried in one grave with his
Daughter before deceased. p. 53 On thought of our Resurrection. p. 54
FINIS.

