THE COPY OF A LETTER OF FATHER PHILIPS, the Queens Confessor, which was
thought to be sent into France, to Mr. Mountagne; discovered and produced to be
read in the House of COMMONS, by Mr. Pymme, the 25. of June, 1641. to this
effect.

Lamentably complaining of the times and present state of things, and this was
written presently after PIERCY and JERMYN fled.

Printed in the year, 1641.

A COPY OF THE Letter of Father PHILIPS the Queens Confessor, which was
thought to be sent into France, to Mr. Mountague,
THe good King and Queen are left very naked, the Puritans, if they durst,
would pull the good Queen in pieces, can the good King of France suffer a
Daughter of France his Sister, and her children, to be thus affronted, can the
wise Cardinal endure England and Scotland to unite, and not be able to
discern, in the end it is like they will join together, and turn head
against France, a stirring active Ambassador might do good service here, I
have sent you a Copy of the Kings Speech on Saturday last, at which time he
discharged his conscience, and was advised to make that Speech by the Earl of
Bristoll, and the Lord Sey, but I believe there is a mistake in the writing,
and that it should have been the Lord Savile.

This Speech did much operato to the disadvantage of the Earl of Strafford,
for the Commons were much thereby incensed, and inflamed against him, and this
brought forth the next day being Monday, a Protestation which was taken in both
Houses of Parliament, of the same nature, but rather worse then the Scottish
Covenant. The Londoners who are very boisterous came upon Monday 5. or 6000 and
were so rude that they would not suffer the Lords to come and go quietly and
peaceably to their houses, but threntned them, that if they had not Justice,
and if they had not his life it should go hard for all those that stood for
him, following them up and down and calling for Justice, Justice, Justice.

There was in the house of Commons, 56, that denied to pass the Earl of
Straffords Bill, there names were taken and they were fixed upon Posts in
diverse parts in London, and there was written over the head, these are
Straffordians, the betrayers of their Country.

By this means it came to pass that the Lords and Judges were much
affrighted, and the most of his friends in the Lords house forsook him all,
the Popish Lords did absent themselves, the Lord of Holland, and Heartford,
were absent, so was Bristoll, and others, Savile and the Duke only stuck close
and faithfully to him, and some few other Lords, God knows the King is much
dejected, The Lords much affrighted, which makes the Citizens, and house of
Commons show their heads; some have braved little less then to overthrow his
Majesty, who if he had but an ordinary spirit, might easily quash and suppress
these people. Our good Queen is much afflicted, and in my Conscience the
Puritans, if they durst, would tear her in pieces, this cannot be for the
honor of France, to endure a daughter of that Nation, and her children should
be thus oppressed and affronted.

The Earl of Holland is made general of the Army whither he is gone down, the
Earl of Newport Master of the Ordinance, Belfoard the Lieutenant of the Tower,
has proved an arrand Traitor to the King, who commanded him upon his
Allegiance to receive a Captain and 100 men into the Tower, which he most
traitorously refused to do, one clause is omitted, which should have bin
placed in the middle of the Letter, which was to this effect that there was a
report in London, that the Parliament House was on fire, whereupon there was
more than 1000 people very suddenly gathered together, whereby you may easily
perceive the height and violence of the peoples affections, May, the 6th 1641.

This Letter was thought to be sent from a Priest, calling himself Father
Philips to Mr. Mountague. There was another Letter, and that was sent from one
Robert Philips, one of the Queens Priests, and it is supposed to be to M.
Mountague, to this effect, you may expect some company with you ere long,
Crofts, Suckling, Piercy, Iermin, are gone, all things here are in great
incertainties, Protestation is made and taken by both houses, much like, but
much worse, then the Scottish Covenant, I sent you some money by M. Iermin, but
now that he is gone, I make some doubt whether he might be mindful of you to
take it with him, I have spoke to the Queen about your occasions, and will do
what I can, though I am not able to undertake much.

Your loving friend, FR. PHILIPS.

Hereupon, it was ordered that Philips should be sent for by a Sergeant at
Arms, and there should be all possible means and endeavors used to discover
the Author of the former Letter, who was deemed almost by all men no better
then a Traitor, One other particular of weight is forgotten in the former
Letter, which is this, that there is mention made of some great sums of money
in the hands of some of the receivers, who are named, which are to be employed
for maintaining of Romish Cloisters beyond Seas, and particular mention is made
of a Cloister at Arras.

FINIS.

