THE NURSE OF Pious Thoughts:

Wherein is briefly showed, That the use which Roman Catholics do make of
sacred Pictures, Signs and Images, is not Idolatry, or any other misdemeanour,
(as some imagine) but the Nurse of Pious Thoughts, and Healthful Meditations.

Written By F. P. Philopater.

Proverbs 11.16. Evil thoughts are abominable to our Lord.

DOVAY, Printed in the Year 1652.

To the Right Honorable Lords, worshipful Knights, Esquires, Gentry, and all
the freeborn people of England, who desire the redress of notorious
scandalls, health and all happiness.
Right Honorable, etc.
AMongst the many notorious scandalls, which (contrary to the Laws of God,
just Laws of the Land, solemn oaths and Engagements of this Nation) are
committed in these distracted times, there are almost none more common in this
Island, then the defacing, disgracing, beating down, and demolishing of sacred
pictures, signs, memories, and images of our Savior, his Saint's, worthy men,
and all holy things, the Nurses of Pious Thoughts, the remembrances of virtuous
actions, and monuments of heroical deeds, without any notice thereof taken by
the State, to the unspeakable detriment of the Commonwealth; for if you do not
permit visible signs, pictures, images, and remembrances of piety, virtue, and
the Obligations which men have unto God, and Christ Jesus his only Son, to be
exposed to the senses, the windows of their souls, and yet allow of vain, idle
and profane, you shall shut up the door to virtue and gratitude, and let loose
the reins to sin and misery, experience telling us, that what the eye
seriously and constantly with affection beholds, the heart thinks, and
evil thoughts consented unto, corrupt good manners, and corrupt manners have
brought forth these present calamities and divisions, which to go about to
redress, will be in vain, unless you permit men to enjoy the means: Wherefore
not to be wanting in good wishes to my native soil, I have written this book of
sacred pictures, signs and images, the Nurses of Pious Thoughts, and out of my
affection have dedicated it unto your Honors, unto whom does belong the
correction of these scandalls, that protected by your Authority, and backed by
your power, the sacred objects of piety, virtue, and godliness, may every
where appear obvious unto the eyes, not only to the extirpation of vice,
reconciliation of dissentions, rooting out of malice, but also to the planting
of a true unity, perfect peace, and a sincere charity in the hearts of all the
Inhabitants of this Island, to the great glory of God, and prosperity of our
Country, which is all the interest, or desires of profit I seek for by these my
labors, more then to be esteemed, as by Gods grace I shall ever remain,

Your Honors most humble servant in Christ Jesu, F. P. Philopater.

The Preface to the Reader.
Dear Reader,
THe holy Apostle of our Lord, S. Peter, considering the danger, which even the
faithful and children of God live in, whilst they remain in this mortal life,
through the craft and policy of the enemy of mankind, says unto them, Brethren
be sober and watch, because our adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion, goes
about, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. not with his teeth or jaws, but
by a crafty and subtle kind of suggestion of impious thoughts unto the minds
of men, by which (consented unto) as the Scriptures affirm, Mat. 15.18. 1 Cor.
6.15. he not only defiles their hearts, expels God out of their bodies, and
enters himself to dwell there, Mat. 12.45. but also reigns and domineereth
over them so rigorously, that they must not constantly think but what he will.
Mat. 13.19.

And knowing by the excellency of his wit, and long experience, that if he
should suffer sacred pictures, signs, memories and images (the instruments of
pious thoughts) every where publicly to stand, and be respected as they ought;
there would be no quiet resting, or abode for him in their hearts, without
seeking for himself a new lodging in other parts; because there is no agreement
between Christ and Belial, therefore so by certain slights and cunning
suggestions, stirs up men of light belief, and unconstant minds, in whose
heart, (as our Savior says) he lives, to disgrace and beat them down as
idols, after this manner.

Whereas all words have diverse senses, and all things diverse formalities,
conceptions, and respects, he never permits them over whom he has power, or
in whose heart he dwells, to take the words of sacred signs, pictures and
images in the same sense, formality, conception, or respect, in which they were
delivered unto the Church of God, by our Savior and the Apostles, or in which
Roman Catholics take them at this day, that is to say, as relatives, which of
themselves are nothing, but a connotation of the things which they represent,
the devil maliciously will always have them, in whom he dwells, to take
them for things absolute, and so deceives them, to the banishing of pious
thoughts out of their souls.

As for example, we may consider the things which we commonly call an image,
either to be a carved or an engraven stock or stone, or a painted cloth or
paper; or else we may consider it, as it is an image of some common thing, or
else of some heavenly or divine, or of the mysteries of our faith, without any
further reflection upon it; or else we may understand it, not only as it is the
image of some heavenly and divine thing, or of the mysteries of our faith, but
also as it does represent unto us the said heavenly and divine things, or the
mysteries of our faith, and does, or may beget in our hearts pious thoughts; as
the image or resemblance of Christ upon the cross, as it does represent his
sufferings for us; or his image, as he is in heaven, as it does represent him
unto us in that glory; and so does or may beget in us pious thoughts of his
mercy and suffering for us, or else of the glory of the other life, in which
last sense the Church of God, and Roman Catholics always take sacred
pictures, signs and images, when they give unto them any religious respect,
honor, or reverence.

And Satan, to deceive those in whom he dwells, as in his house and home, to
continue his possession, always maliciously and wittingly suggesteth unto
them, that the church of God, and Roman Catholics take images in the first or
second sense, that is to say, either as they are carved or engraven stocks and
stones, of painted clothes, or papers, or an image in common, without any
further representation, and then stirs them up by his suggestions, not only
to beat them down as idols, but also to accuse Roman Catholics of idolatry, as
though they adored stocks, and stones, or painted papers, or clothes, not only
to the extirpation of pious thoughts out of the hearts of men, but also to the
great disturbance of the peace and unity which should be amongst Christians, by
the al^enation of the minds of silly people one from another, who ignorant of
this craft of Satan, believe Roman Catholics really to be idolaters, for the
respect they bear to sacred images, as they represent unto them pious thoughts,
and persecute them severely as idolaters, to the loss of their own souls, by
their calumniations and cruelty with out cause.

Satan well knowing that the soul of man is so enclosed in his body, that he
cannot naturally understand supernatural, divine and invisible things, but by
some visible, audible, or sensible means; and also that every virtuous action
has two vicious extremes, as has the use of signs, pictures, or images,
which extremes are superstition and profaneness, and that it were a hard task
for him to win men, who formerly had been faithful Christians; to fall into
superstition, and publicly to use these or the like images, signs or pictures,
as his similitudes, and adore them to his honor and glory, as if he were their
God, as he does the Heathen and Gentiles, suggesteth unto them in whom he has
power, either to profane them, or wholly to deface or beat them down, that
though he cannot directly and publicly apply them (or the like) to his honor,
as he does amongst the Pagans, yet by breaking, disgracing, or casting them
down, he may (at least) conduct men into ignorance, misprision or contempt of
divine, holy, and supernatural things, and the mysteries of our faith, so to
lead them into such a profane and barbarous kind of life, as that they shall
not bear any affection, either unto Religion, or Superstition, or unto any kind
of Sect, good or evil, more then may serve them for a cloak to color their
barbarism, or advance their temporal aff^irs, or not to be discovered that
they are Atheists, or profane.

Wherefore to prevent this mischief, and the utter ruin of our Nation by
Atheism and profaneness, I have written this book of The Nurse of Pious
Thoughts, thereby at large to show unto thee, dear Reader, that the relative
religious worship which Roman Catholics do give unto sacred pictures, signs,
and images, and the use they make of them, is neither idolatry, or any sin or
misdemeanour, as the^enemy of mankind^ suggesteth, but to nourish in themselves
and others pious thoughts, divine meditations, and elevation of their souls to
heavenly things, thereby to keep out the devil from dwelling in their hearts,
or doing them any mischief, and to conduct the Holy Ghost (to their infinite
comfort and consolation) to dwell with them for ever, which is that I wish unto
thee Reader, and so I rest

Thy servant in Christ Jesu, F. P. Philopater.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. WHat our thoughts be in general, and how they are visions, or words,
or speeches of our hearts. p. 1 Chap. 2. Of pious and impious thoughts, and
what pious thoughts are. 5 Chap. 3. How all evils proceed from evil thoughts.
8 Chap. 4. The excellency of pious thoughts, and how good works and heroical
actions proceed from them. 17 Chap. 5. How the thoughts commonly follow the
senses, and that the senses consented unto beget our thoughts. 25 Chap. 6. The
power which the senses have to move the mind to think good or evil, as they
present. 28 Chap. 7. How pious objects and sacred pictures furnish our souls
with pious thoughts. 34 Chap. 8. The necessity of sacred artificial pictures,
signs and images, to the nourishing of pious thoughts, and what we call sacred
pictures and signs. 40 Chap. 9. What we mean by a relative religious worship,
and of the distinction of honor and worship. 48 Chap. 10. That a relative
religious worship belongs unto sacred things, pictures, signs and images, as
they immediately or mediately conduct us to God. 55 Chap. 11. Almighty God
never prohibited either the making of sacred pictures; signs and images, nor
yet their relative religious worship. 67. Chap. 12. That it is lawful to make
holy artificial pictures, signs and images, which may immediately or mediately
bring us to think upon God, and heavenly things, and place them in Churches or
Temples. 75 Chap. 13. That in time of peace, when there is no persecution, the
pictures and images of Angels and Saints ought to be placed in Churches, and
there honored with a relative religious worship. 86 Chap. 14. How the Nurse of
Pious Thoughts does not only consist in the having and beholding sacred
pictures, signs and images, but also in giving unto them a relative religious
worship, not for the material things themselves, but for the sacred things
which they represent. 101 Chap. 15. How free Roman Catholics are from
idolatry, by worshipping of sacred pictures, signs and images, with relative
religious worship. 107 Chap. 16. By the second Commandment God commanded all
men to honor and worship his name, which is but a sacred sign, picture or image
of himself, with a relative religious worship, thereby to beget pious thoughts
in our souls. 118 Chap. 17. The third Commandment commands all men to honor
and reverence the Sabbath day, which is but a sacred sign 124 Chap. 18. Of the
sweet name or sign of Jesus, and how this name is to be worshipped with a
relative religious worship above all names; thereby to beget pious thoughts of
Jesus above all things. 132 Chap. 19. Greater honor to be given unto the name
Jesus, as it signifies Christ our Lord, then to any other name of God. 138
Chap. 20. How terrible the name of Jesus is unto the devils, when it is
honored with a relative religious worship. 149 Chap. 21. Many miracles wrought
in confirmation of the relative honor and worship given to the name of Jesus.
155 Chap. 22. Of the honor and glory of the Cross of Christ, as it
represents his person and passion, and how it shall distinguish the faithful
from the followers of Antichrist. 163 Chap. 23. That the faithful in the
Primitive Church used a relative religious worship toward the sacred sign of
the Cross. 173 Chap. 24. The Cross adored with a relative religious worship
in the Primitive Church, not for the matter, but for the holy passion of our
Savior which it represents. 191 Chap. 25. Of four sacred images which were
made of Christ our Lord, whilst be lived upon earth, and of the religious
relative honor done unto them, to the enriching of their minds with pious
thoughts. 205 Chap. 26. Of the enemies of the Cross and sacred images, and of
the miseries that befell them. 214 Chap. 27. The relative religious worship
which the faithful in the Primitive Church used toward the sacred pictures,
signs, and images of the written Word, and thereby learned the true sense, and
endued their souls with pious thoughts. 223 Chap. 28. Answer to objections.
24^ The Conclusion. 263
The Nurse of Pious Thoughts.
CHAP. I. What our thoughts be in general, and how they are visions, or words,
or speeches of our hearts.
BEfore we enter into a discourse, how to nourish pious thoughts, it is
necessary first to speak of thoughts in general, what they be, and how they
have place in our souls: Then secondly, of pious thoughts, and how to attain
unto them: and last of all, how to cherish and nourish them, that we may abound
with piety, which is a virtue of so great eminency, and excellency, that as S.
Paul says, It is profitable to all things. 1 Timothy 4.8. and withal, as there
he says, has the promise of this life that now is, and of that to come; and
what more can be desired of men in this vale of tears?

Now for the better understanding what our thoughts are, it is necessary first
to observe, that many things in the outward senses are two, which in the inward
soul are but one: as for example, to see, and to hear, in the outward senses
are two real distinct things, which in the inward soul are both one. The soul
having real distinct powers, but not parts, from whence it comes to pass, as
S. Augustine in the nineth and tenth chapters of his fifteenth book of the
Trinity excellently notes, that to hear and to see, as also to speak and to
see, in the inward soul are both one. Whereupon he describes a thought,
saying: A thought is a certain vision of the soul, whether these things be
present, which are seen with the corporalleys, or perceived by the other
senses; or they be absent, and their likeness only is seen by thought; or if
neither of these, but these things are thought upon, which are neither
corporal, nor yet have corporal shapes, as virtues and vices, or as the
thought it self, when it is thought upon. Thus S. Augustine of our thoughts.

Again in the same place he says also, That thoughts are speeches, or words of
the heart, which he proves by the Scriptures, which say, They said, thinking
within themselves, Wis. 2.1. Again, certain of the Scribes said within
themselves. Mat. 9.3. Again, The Scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying,
Luke 5.21. where the thoughts of men are called the words, or sayings of the
heart; so that a thought is rightly described, according to S. Augustina, to be
a vision, word, or speech of the heart, which if we could bring to be pious in
all men, and to be strengthened and nourished, we should easily make piety to
abound in the world; for as S. Aug. there says; When we say, that thoughts are
words of the heart, we do not therefore deny them to be visions, sprung from
the vision of things signified unto us, because in the inward soul they are
both one.

Now if it could be brought to pass, that men in their inward souls should
neither hear, nor see, nor speak, or that which is all one, not think of any
thing, but with detestation, which were not pious, they must needs abound with
piety, and be very happy; because, as S. Paul says, they should be profitable
to all things; and also be partakers of the promises which God has made unto
his servants in this life, and in that which is to come; here to be happy by
grace, and in the other by glory, which I heartily wish unto thee Reader.

CHAP. II. Of Pious and impious thoughts, and what Pious thoughts are.
NOt every thought of a good thing is therefore presently a pious thought. The
devil sometimes thinks upon God, though he cannot have a pious thought,
because he is confirmed in malice; and evil men think many times upon good
things, but with an evil intent: Wherefore as S. Augustine in his twelfth
Sermon upon the 118. Psalm says, We should not only think that it is good
which we do, but also, and that chiefly, if it he good, for which we do it:
Wherefore for a thought to be pious, it is not only sufficient that we think
of a good thing, but also that we think upon it to a good end; and God being
the last end of man, then our thoughts are truly pious; when we think on holy
and sacred things, or the works of mercy, or the obligations of our estate, etc
with an inclination of mind to adhere unto them, as unto things which may
either immediately, or mediately conduct us to God, the end of all our h^pes:
So that in few words, an absolute pious thought is an inward vision, speech, or
motion of the mind, by which we either immediately, or mediately adhere unto
God, the last end our happiness.

From hence it is that the Prophet David, a pious man, and a man according to
Gods own heart, says, I have inclined my heart to do thy justifications for
ever for reward, Psalm. 118.112. Again in the same Psalm, I have not declined
from thy Testimonies. Thus the Prophet; to instruct us, that the only thinking
upon a holy or sacred thing, is not sufficient to beget an absolute pious
thought; but the thinking upon it, with an inclination of mind to adhere unto
it, for the benefit we receive by it, and for Gods sake, the end of our
happiness.

On the contrary, an absolute wicked thought is a full or deliberate consent of
the mind, or thought, to do any thing against the Commandments of God, whereby
men become cursed and wicked, as witnesses the Prophet in the same Psalm,
saying, Thou have very much commanded thy Commandments to be kept, cursed are
they that decline from thy Commandments, though it be but with full consent of
thought, as he further witnesses in the said Psalm, saying, Thou have despised
all that revolt from thy judgments, because their thought is unjust, or wicked.

As to think upon an evil thing, or to have a suggestion of evil put into our
minds, either by the flesh, world, or devil, who are our enemies, without any
inclination of will, or consent of heart to do it, is not properly called an
evil thought, but a suggestion, carnal motion, or temptation. So likewise to
think only upon a good or holy thing, without any inclination of heart, or mind
unto it, is not properly a pious thought; but when we have an extension of
heart to adhere unto it, as unto a thing which may either immediately, or
mediately conduct us unto God, the last end of all our happiness.

CHAP. III. How all evils proceed from evil thoughts:
IF we would seriously consider from whence all the evils, miseries, and
mischiefs, which have happened in heaven or earth, are originally sprung, or
have had their beginning, or yet do daily arise; we shall easily find, that
they originally have proceeded, and even at this day do proceed from impious
and wicked thoughts.

In heaven all the Angels and intellectual Spirits lived in peace, and unity
with God, and amongst themselves, until Lucifer one of the chiefest amongst
the Intelligencers or Angels, begun to think wickedly, and to say in his
heart, I will ascend into heaven, above the stars of God I will exalt my
throne, Esaias. 14.13. And upon earth there was no evil, sickness, or
infirmities, or miseries amongst men, until man began to think impiously, that
he would be like God, Genesis 3.5. Whereupon truth it self says, Out of the heart
come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, theft, false
testimonies, blasphemies, these are the things which defile the soul, Mat.
15.19. which is also confirmed by experience, for in all our voluntary actions,
we first think before we do; whereby it is sufficiently manifest unto any
reasonable man, that all the miseries and calamities which heretofore have
been, or now are in the world, or hereafter shall be, originally proceed from
evil thoughts; wherefore if we could but plant the Nurse of pious thoughts
amongst men, we should in great part, at least, ease them of their miseries,
contentions, civil wars, Sects, and brawls.

Neither would the planting of pious thoughts amongst mankind be a thing of so
great a difficulty to bring to pass, if they would but firmly and constantly
believe the truth in this matter; which is, that evil thoughts do not only
separate, and divide one man from another, and bring in all those calamities
and miseries, which we daily see amongst men, but also divide man from God,
make divisions even in himself, and deprive him of his everlasting weal, as
witness the Scriptures, saying, Perverse thoughts separate from God, Wisd.
1.3. Again in the same chapter, The Holy Ghost will withdraw himself from the
thoughts that are without understanding: and yet more, Jn the thoughts of the
impious there shall be examination, and the hearing of his works shall come to
God, to the chastising of his iniquities. Again, evil thoughts are
abomination to our Lord, Prover. 11.16: Whereupon God further says by the
Prophet I say, take away the evil of your thoughts from mine eyes, Jsa. 1.16.
Again, Let the impious forsake his ways, and the unjust man his thoughts, and
return to our Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, Isa. 55.7. Again, Woe be
to you, who think that which is unprofitable, Micheas 2.1. And with these agree
the Prophet Zachary, saying, Think ye not every man in your heart evil against
his friend, and a lying ^^th love ye not, for all these things are such as J
hate, says the Lord, Zach. 8.17. Thus the Sctiptures, of the miseries, and
wretchedness, which accompany evil thoughts.

Now what man is there, who is endued with reason, and will be sensible of his
own good or evil, that (the aforesaid miseries considered) will not hate all
impious thoughts, and be glad of the means how to nourish in himself pious
thoughts, especially the Scripture saying, He who thinks to do evil, shall
be called a fool, Prove. 24.6. of whom our Savior says, Thou fool, this night
they (the devils) require thy soul of thee; and the things which thou have
provided, (by wicked thoughts) whose shall they be? Luke 12.20. for he (says
S. Hieruome upon this aforesaid Text) is truly to be called a fool, who
consents in his thoughts to the suggestion of sin, although to the eyes of men
he seem never so wise.

For the aforesaid reasons, our dear Lord and Savior being careful of the
good and salvation of mankind, reprehendeth man for his evil thoughts, saying;
Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts, Mat. 9.4. And S. Paul knowing the many
miseries and wretchedness which attend upon impious thoughts, exhorts all
men to practice, and nourish in themselves pious thoughts, saying; Brethren,
what things soever be true, whatsoever honest, whatsoever just, whatsoever
holy, whatsoever amiable, whatsoever of good fame; if there be any virtue, if
any praise of discipline, those things think upon, Phil. 4.8. and for a reward
of nourishing such pious thoughts, adds, and the God of peace shall be with
you; whereupon S. Chrysostom upon this Text says, You may see how S. Paul
would cast all wicked thoughts out of our minds, for from evil thoughts all
wicked deeds proceed. From hence it is that the Prophet calls those happy,
who presently correct, or kill their evil thoughts, which he calls Daughters
of Babylon, saying, daughter of Babylon, ( Blessed is he that shall hold, and
shall crush thy little ones against the rock, Psalm. 136.9. who are these little
ones of Babylon, says S. Augustine upon this Text, but our arising evil
desires, when it is a little one or as soon as it arises, crush it. We kill
our little ones; says S. Gregory (in the end of his expositions upon the
fourth Penitential Psalm) against the rock, when we mortify or kill the
first unlawful motions, or thoughts, by an intention to follow Christ, for
Christ was the rock, 1 Cor. 10.6.

Almighty God foreseeing so many evils to proceed from wicked thoughts, to
prevent those miseries, of the ten Commandments which he gave unto men, two of
them are against vicious thoughts, saying, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
house, neither shall thou desire his wife: Exodus 20.17; and writ them in the
hearts of all people, Romans 2.15. whereupon Juvenal an heathen Poet, in his
third Satyr says, He who shall think any secret wickedness within himself, is
guilty of the fact. And Valer^us Maximus, in the second chapter of his seventh
book, reports, that Thales the Philosopher being demanded whether God were
ignorant of the works of men, answered, No not of their thoughts, wherefore
(says he) we ought not only to have pure hands, but also pure minds, seeing
that we should believe the divine Godhead to be present at our secret thoughts.
From hence also if is that Alexander the Great (as affirms S. Basil in his
twenty fourth Homily) knew that it was an offense by beholding, to covet a
woman in thought, although he did not accomplish the fact. And Cieero a moral
man writing diverse books of Offices unto his Son Mark, for the well disposing
of his life, in his first book, not far from the beginning, amongst other
things, admonishes him, That in all his opinions and deeds, he should neither
do, nor think any thing (libidinese) lecherously, the light of Nature teaching
even the more moral sort of heathen men, that evil thoughts were corrupters
of good manners, and originally the cause of all miseries and disorders; and
therefore desired that they might be avoided, at least for the benefit of their
Commonwealth.

CHAP. IV. The excellency of Pious thoughts, and how good works, and heroical
actions proceed from them.
THe substance of all men's souls are of one celestial incorruptible matter,
the difference between soul and soul in excellency, beauty, and purity in this
life, is the inherent grace, infused virtues, pious thoughts, virtuous
operations, and in the other celestial splendor, and everlasting bl^sse,
which God bestows upon his servants; all which in such as are baptized, and
of years of discretion (of whom I intend only to treat) depend upon the pious
thoughts, and virtuous operation of the soul in this life, according to the
words of our Lord, saying, Out of the heart come forth evil cogitations; these
are the things which defile the soul, Mat. 15.19. of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, Mat. 12. Whereupon S. Paul says, that Christ is a
Discerner, or censurer of the cogitations, and of the intent of the heart, Heb.
4.12.

God will not only examine our outward works and words, but also our very
thoughts and intentions of our hearts; whereupon the Prophet Jeremy says, Wash
thy heart from malice O Jerusalem, that thou may be saved; how long shall
hurtful cogitations abide in thee? Jer. 4.14. to signify unto us, that no
outward act of alms or prayers, or of any other seeming good deed, is
acceptable, or of esteem before God, as long as wicked thoughts, or impios
intentions have place in the soul; but first it is necessary to wash our
hearts, and cleanse our souls from malicious thoughts, and evil intentions,
before we can do any good deed, or be saved.

Amongst the Sacrifices which were offered to God in the old Law, the Sacrifice
which was to be acceptable, and propitious to his expectation who offered it;
The extrails, and feet, (which signify the thoughts and affections) were
washed with water, before they were offered upon the Altar, Lev. 1. to signify
unto us, that no Sacrifice of any kind was acceptable, or propitious before God
for the remission of our sin, unless it were offered with pious thoughts, and
sincere affection or intention: whereupon, though throughout the book of
Leviticus God had commanded Sacrifice to be offered unto him, and also the
feasts of the new-Moone, and Sabbaths, and other festival days to be kept,
yet he says to the Jews, To what purpose do you offer to me your victime^?
the holocausts of rams, and the fat of fat things, and the blood of calves, and
lambs, and buck, goats I have not desired, who sought for these things at your
hands? The new Moon, and the Sabbath; and other festivities I will not abide,
Isay 1.11.

And showing the reason why he was so a versed from the things which formerly
he had expressly commanded, adds, because they were not performed with such
pious thoughts, and purity of heart, as he desired, saying, Your assemblies are
wicked, your hands are full of blood, wash you, be clean, take away the evil
of your cogitations from mine eye, etc. and come and accuse me, says our Lord,
if your sins shall be as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow; and if they
be red as vermilion, they shall be white as wool, Isa. 13. So that neither
corporal, nor spiritual Sacrifice, nor any other outward act, is grateful or
acceptable to God, unless they be accompanied with pious thoughts, and
intentions to do them for the love of God; whereby appears the excellency of
pious thoughts, for that they give grace, beauty, and luster unto all our
actions before God.

The Patriarch Abraham resolved with himself so far to obey God, as to
sacrifice unto him his only son Isaac; and though by the providence of God, he
was hindered from the fact; yet because he had a real intention, and pious
thoughts to perform it, this work was so acceptable unto God, as that
thereupon the made unto him the pro^^^ise, That in his seed (Christ) all
Nations should be blessed. King David resolved with himself to build a glorious
Temple for God, wherein, though he was prevented by Gods own appointment, yet
he received so great a reward for these his pious thoughts, and good
intentions, that God said unto him by the Prophet Nathan, I will give thee rest
from all thine enemies, and will make thee a house when thy days shall be
accomplished, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers; I will raise up thy seed
after thee, which shall come forth of thy womb, and J will establish his
Kingdom; He shall build a house to my name, and I will establish the throne of
his Kingdom for ever, 2 Kings 7.

Our Savior sitting over against the Treasury of the Temple, observed how the
multitude did cast money into the Treasury, and many rich men gave liberally;
but when there came a poor widow, she cast in two mites, which is a farthing;
he calling his Disciples together, said, Amen J say to you, that this poor
widow has cast in more then all the rest, for all these of their abundance
have cast into the gifts of God but she of her penury has cast in all her
living that she had, Mark 12. Luke 21. So though her gift in substance was the
least, yet the piety of her mind, and purity of her thoughts, made it amount to
be the highest in value before God.

As our ears (says S. Augustine upon the 148. Psalm) are to our voices, so the
ears of God are to our thoughts; as our ears listen unto our words, or unto
the tune of our voices, to give testimony what they are, even so says S.
Augustine, the ears of God watch upon our thoughts: I know (says God) their
works, and their cogitations, Isa. 66.18. and as there it follows, I will
judge every man accordingly, whereby it does appear, how careful and vigilant
every one ought to be of his thoughts.

It is not possible (says S. Augustine in the place before cited) that he can
have evil deeds or works, who has good thoughts, for the deeds or works
proceed from the thoughts: neither can any man do any thing, or move any of his
members to do any act, unless first the commandment of his thoughts precedes:
Even as whatsoever the Emperor in his inward Palace does command, passes
throughout the whole Empire, and into all the Provinces; what a motion or stir
is made at the command of the Emperor sitting within his Palace? He only
moves his lips when he speaks, and all the Provinces are moved to do that
which he says: So in every one of us the Emperor is within he sits within
in our hearts; if he commands good, good things are dene; if he command evil,
evil and sin is committed Thus S. Augastine. And this is sufficient to show
unto thee Reader, the excellency of pious thoughts, that they make all a man's
life pious and virtuous, and have promise of this life, and of that which is to
come.

CHAP. V. How the thoughts commonly follow the senses, and that the senses
consented unto beget our thoughts.
THe Philosophers seeking out how the understanding of men come to know, or
think good or evil thoughts, affirm with one consent, as a general maxim or
principle, that there is nothing in the understanding, which either by it
self, or else by some resemblance, shadow, or picture, was not first in some of
the senses, in such sort, as Aristotle in the 8. cha. of his 3. book of the
soul absolutely affirms, That sensible things in sensible forms, are also
forms in the understanding; whereupon it comes to pass, says he, That he who
wants senses, can neither learn, nor understand any thing, as also we find by
experience, for he who is born deaf, though the organs of his tongue be never
so perfect, yet he cannot learn to speak; and he who is borne blind, though he
have his other senses and understanding perfect, yet shall he never be able to
discern or dispute of colors.

The senses bring in the outward visible species, images, signs, figures, or
forms of things, and place them in the fantasy and memory; the memory and
fantasy propounds them to the will and understanding, and the understanding
and will embracing them, frame thoughts and actions accordingly: for as S.
Augustine in the eighth chapter of his t^n^h book of Confessions says, The
things themselves do not enter into the memory, only the images of the things
perceived by the senses, are ready there at hand, whenever the thoughts will
call for them. Thus S. Augustine; whereby it appears, that according to the
images or forms, which the senses bring in, the soul thinks; wherefore if
the senses bring in images and species of good and pious things, the thoughts
are noble, heroical, and pious; if of vicious and wicked, then the thoughts
will also be base and vile.

From hence it is that the Prophet Jeremy, speaking in the person of one, who
through the liberty which he gave unto his eyes, had infected his soul with
wicked thoughts, and himself with filthy sins, says, Mine eye has spoiled my
soul, Lament. 3.51. Again, death is come up through our windows, Jer. 9.21. The
eye (says S. Ambrose in the first chapter of his book entitled de fuga
seculi) has looked, and has perverted the sense of the mind; the ear has
heard, and has changed the intention, a smell ascended, and has hindered the
thought, the mouth tasted, and sin is committed, the touch approached, and the
fire burned; for as the Prophet says, death enters by the windows, and thy
windows are thine eyes. Thus S. Ambrose, to show unto us, that the thoughts
commonly follow the senses, and that the senses consented unto, beget our
thoughts.

CHAP. VI. The power which the senses have to move the mind, to think good or
evil, as they present.
WHat force our eyes have to move our mind to think good or evil, as they
present unto it, may well appear by our first parent Eve, her fall, who living
in the delights of Paradise, clothed with original grace, and possessed of
what her heart could honestly desire, looked only upon the forbidden fruit, and
saw that the tree was good to eat (as her senses told her) and fair to the
eyes, and delightful to behold, and she took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat; and so brought not only original sin into the world, but also evil
thoughts and deeds, and sickness, and infirmities, and all diseases, and
death, which were not before, nor should have been, if sin had never been
committed; whereby it does appear, how much it imports man, to have always
before his eyes sacred forms, pictures, signs, and images, that his senses
beholding them, his thoughts may be pious: for as S. Gregory the Great (in the
first chapter of his sixth book upon the first of Kings) says, seeing that we
cannot think two things at once, it is easily brought about, that thinking of
other things (which are good) we cannot be troubled with evil thoughts.

Holy Job considering the power which the object of the senses have, in filling
our hearts and minds with pious thoughts, says, I have made a covenant with
mine eyes, that I would not so much as think of a Virgin, Job 31.1. The object
of the eyes, being for the most part the matter of our thoughts, holy Job made
a covenant with his eyes, that they should not behold the beauty of a Virgin,
least it might administer vain and carnal matter to his thoughts: whereupon S.
Gregory the Great upon this text says, That Job might keep the thoughts of his
heart chaste; he made a covenant with his eyes, least that they might first with
liberty behold, that which afterward he should even, as it were, against his
will, love, for it is a great burden which the flesh draws downward, and the
Image or Picture of Beauty once tied to the heart, by means of the eyes, it is
hardly loosed with the pulling of both the hands: wherefore if we will not be
troubled with slippery or wanton thoughts, we must be provident before hand,
for it is no way safe for us to behold that which we may not covet; wherefore,
that the mind may be preserved in pious thoughts, the eyes (like thieves who are
posting to steal) are to be drawn back from lasciviousness in their
pleasures; for even Eve had not touched the forbidden tree, had she not first
with too great liberty looked upon it. Thus S. Gregory; to demonstrate unto us,
how much the beholding of sacred pictures, signs, and images, which represent
unto us, either God, or the things of heaven, or the mysteries of our faith,
may be beneficial unto us, seeing they are, or may be Nurses of Pious Thoughts.

Plutarch reports of Alexander the Great in his life, that after he had taken
the daughters of Darius King of Persia captives, he visited and saluted them
very seldom, and then always with his eyes cast upon the ground, being, says
he, afraid of himself, least that he might be entangled in their rare beauty;
neither would he ever come in the sight of Darius his wife, who was, (as they
told him) a most comely woman, but many times resorted unto her mother, whose
years took away the occasion of vain thoughts, or sensual allurements, and not
to be hindered in his designs, and conquests by the beauty of the Persian
Dames, as Curtius relates, he imagined them to be Statues of wood, or stone,
saying, The Persian Ladies are the grief of the eyes, but I pass by them, as
by Statues.

S. Hierome showing unto us, how much the object of our senses help, or hurt
our souls; in his second book against Jovinian says, by the five senses, as
it were by windows, vices find entrance into the soul: The chief City and
Castle of the soul cannot be surprised or taken, unless the A^my of the enemy
enter in by the gates; by the tumultuous motions of the senses the soul is
oppressed, it is led away captive by the sight, by the hearing, by the
smelling, by the taste and touch.

According as the senses present unto the soul, so she discourses, thinks,
and works; whereupon the Council Agathensis in the twenty eighth chapter
forbids Clergy men, and those who were bound to live chaste, to be present at
marriage feasts, or at other profane meetings, where Love-songs were sung, or
wanton speeches used; where unclean motions of the body, by dancing, or
lascivious kissing, might be stirred up, least (as it says) their ears and
eyes (which according to their obligation, are bound to attend the sacred
mysteries) should become polluted with the infection of vain speeches and
filthy words.

Neither art thou Christian Reader stronger then Sampson, nor more holy then
David, nor wiser then Solomon, who were all overcome, and made a prey to their
enemies, by the vain object of the senses; whereby appears the power which
the senses have to move the mind to think good or evil, as they present.

CHAP. VII. How pious objects, and sacred Pictures furnish our souls with pious
thoughts.
THe object of the senses having that power with our souls, as that it can for
the most part forcibly persuade us, to think good or evil, as it represents.
If thou will Christian Reader have pious thoughts, thou must always, or for
the most part, have before thine eyes and senses pious objects, such as are the
presence of God under some borrowed form, the passion of our Lord, things of
heaven, and the mysteries of our holy faith, which because they are all either
invisible, or absent, or both, it is requisite as long as thou art in this vale
of tears (whereas the Apostle says, we see by a glass in a dark sort) to have
of the aforesaid things sacred artificial pictures, signs, and images, or
borrowed forms, which may represent unto thy senses these holy things, as a
Nurse to feed thy soul with pious thoughts.

Neither is it sufficient to the maintenance of pious thoughts, only to have
sacred artificial pictures, signs, and images before you to behold, but also
it is necessary that you bear a relative religious honor and respect toward
them; for this does not only prepare, and open wide your heart to receive the
said Species into your understanding, and to love and understand the sacred
things which they do represent, but also does imprint a perseverance of pious
thoughts in your heart, for every one easily imbraceth and entertaineth that
which he honoreth and esteems, as we see by daily experience; for if a thing
be never so good, yet if you do not esteem it, to you it is not good, but
hurtful, who contemn a sacred thing.

For this cause S. John Baptist honored and worshipped the latchet of our
Saviors shoes with a relative religious worship, which ended in our Savior,
saying, whose latchet of his shoe I am not worthy to unloose, John 1.1.2.7. And
he who so much honored the latchet of his shoe, as that he thought himself not
worthy to touch it, in respect of the supereminent honor which belonged to our
Savior; imagine if you can the innumerable pious thoughts of God, and of the
mysteries of our faith which were in his soul, seeing that God exalts the
humble: whereupon S. Augustine upon this text says, He humbled himself very
much, in that he thought himself not worthy to do this; certainly (says S.
Augustine) he was full of the Holy Ghost: what a consequence is this? S. John
said, I am not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoe; and thereupon S.
Augustine infers, that he was full of the Holy Ghost, because that relative
religious honor which he gave unto the latchet of our Lords shoe for our
Saviors sake, opened wide his l^^ art, to receive into it all kind of pious
thoughts, or any impression of our Savior, or of the Holy Ghost, who dwells
with a contrite and humble spirit, Isay 57.15.

From hence also it is, that the faithful in the Primitive Church so much
honored with a relative religious honor the shadow of S. Peter, and the
handkerchiefs of S. Paul, as that they did bring forth the sick into the
streets, and laid them in beds, and couches, that when Peter came, his shadow
at the least might overshadow them, Act. 5.15. and brought from S. Paul's body
napkins, or handkerchiefs unto the sick, Act. 19.11. that by any thing which
had relation unto these holy servants of God, they might at least beget in the
sick pious thoughts, and sometimes also health of body, or cure of their
diseases.

From hence also it is, that the faithful at all times have not only had
respect and reverence to the memory of the Martyrs, the local places of
Churches, Chappells, and Altars, and to the holy name of God, and Jesus Christ
our Lord, but also unto the sacred text of the Scriptures, pious books, and
service of the Church, which are but holy signs, notes, pictures, similitudes,
and objects to our senses, which may Furnish our souls with pious thoughts, as
S. Augustine after his conversion in the sixth chapter of his nineth book of
Confessions affirms they did in him with great consolation, saying, By the
notes of the Church so sweetly sung, the words did fl^w into my ears, and the
truth which was contained therein, distilled m^lting into my heart, and the
affection of piery even boiled in my breast, my tears ran trickling down my
cheeks, and it was well with me. Thus S. Augustine, to demonstrate unto us,
that as obsceane and filthy objects, and the names and notes of profane loves
and vicious things respected, beget in our hearts impious and wicked thoughts,
so pious objects and sacred pictures, when they are respected for the holy
things which they represent, do presently furnish our minds with pious
thoughts, as I shall further show in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. VIII. The necessity of sacred artificial Pictures, Signs and Images,
to the nourishing of pious thoughts, and what we call sacred Pictures and
Signs.
THe thoughts for the most part following the senses, (as I have showed in the
precedent chapter) to have pious and golden thoughts, it is not only necessary
to avoid vain and idle species and forms, but also to have often, or for the
most part, before our eyes sacred artificial pictures, signs, and images,
thereby to imprint in our hearts sacred and pious thoughts: but we call these
sacred artificial pictures, signs and images, which represent unto us holy,
and divine, and invisible things, or the mysteries of our faith, etc. and as
they do represent them unto us, and imprint in our hearts the knowledge of the
aforesaid divine things or mysteries, and beget in our minds pious thoughts,
these we call sacred, not for the matter they are made of, but for the sacred
things they do or may represent, and as they do represent them unto us, this we
understand by sacred artificial pictures, signs and images, and nothing else:
Now how necessary these things are to the begetting in us pious thoughts,
appears first by what I have said in the former chapters; for if we can learn
nothing, or understand or think of any thing, but either by it self, or else by
some resemblance, picture, or sign, it must pass by the senses: and all the
things of heaven, and mysteries of our faith, etc. are invisible, and
insensible to the senses, unless we use sacred artificial pictures, signs
and images; we can never come to know any thing of the heaven of glory, or of
the mysteries of our faith, etc. as further appears by the Heathen and Pagan
people, who for want of the use of these things, and of a Preacher to preach or
teach them these things, by audible sacred artificial signs, or visible
sacred artificial pictures, signs and images, remain until this day in their
infidelity, or Paganism.

And we also, who at this day, and in ^ormer tim^s are Catholic Christian^,
have l^arned our Christi^^^^y by those sacred artificial signs, pictures and
images, neither otherwise could we ever have known it, as witnesses S. Paul
saying how shall they hear without a Preacher, Romans 10.14. If Preachers had not
come and taught all the Christian Catholic Nations that are, the things of
heaven, and mysteries of their faith, by audible artificial sacred signs, or
visible sacred signs, pictures and images, they should never have learned
them, or have come to know them; for as S. Paul in the aforesaid chapter says,
faith is by hearing, and hearing is by the word of God; and words are but
signs of things, as witnesses Aristotle in the first chapter of his first
book of Perihermanias, and Pierius in his book of the sacred Egyptian letters
throughout; neither as I have proved in the precedent chapters, do the things
themselves enter into the mind by the senses, but their signs, pictures,
forms or images, whereby it appears that the necessity of using sacred
artificial signs, pictures, and images is such, as that without them we
cannot learn divine things, or the mysteries of our faith.

Now seeing that the mind (as Cicero in his first book of Offices affirms) is
never quiet, but is always thinking or doing, as we may find by our dreams, and
discourses upon things in our memory and fantasies, when we are even asleep,
and no divine thing can naturally enter into our hearts and minds to be thought
upon, or agitated, or discoursed of, which passes not by some form, picture
sign, or image through the senses, it necessarily follows, that if we will
have pious thoughts, we must propose to the senses sacred artificial pictures,
signs, forms or shapes, that they may represent unto the heart, and mind
sacred things, as matter of pious thoughts; from whence it is, that Cathol^que
Christians in the Primitive Church, and at all times used sacred artificial
pictures, signs and images, as of the Nativity, Preaching, working of Miracles,
Passion of our Lord, upon his Ascension into heaven, his glory there, and of
his coming again at the day of Judgment, and also sacred signs, pictures or
images of all the things contained in both Testaments, as the pictures, signs
and images of Angels and Saints, and of all virtues, etc. the rebv to furnish
the mind by these objects of the senses with pious thoughts.

For as Abbot Mo^ses, a virtuous and learned old E^mite, who retired himself
into the deserts of Egypt for the salvation of his soul, in the eighteenth
chapter of the first book of Casians Collations says, The exercises of our
souls may very fitly be compared unto a Watermill, which is so continu ^lly
turned about with the violence of a stream running forth amain through certain
holes, that it can never cease from grinding, yet it is the Mill^rs or Masters
power, whether it shall grind Wheat or Barley, or if he will cast into it to
grind o^ work upon Oats; for that certainly will be broken in pieces and
grinded, which the Master or Miller will cast into it. In like manner, the mind
(says he) turned about by the incursions of this present life, and by the
torrents of temptations which rush in upon us, cannot be free from the heat of
thoughts, whereof, which to admit, or to repulse, every one ought to learn by
his diligence and pains, for if we continually apply our minds unto the
meditation of the holy Scriptures, raise up our memory to the memory of
spiritual things, elevate our desires to the desire of perfection, and to the
hope of the happiness to come; it must needs be, that the thoughts which arise
in our minds shall be spiritual, the mind being brought to stay her self upon
those things which she has meditated, but if overcome by sloth and negligence,
we spend our time in vices and idle talk, or else busy our selves with the
superfluous cares of the world: then our hearts will be filled with hurtful
thoughts, like a k^nd of a cockle sprung from thence; for as our Savior said,
where the treasure of our works or intentions is, there also our heart must
necessarily be fixed.

Thus Abbot Moses, a holy Hermit, who lived about twelve hundred years past
in the deserts of Sciti in Egypt, as affirms Ruffinus in the eighth chapter
of his eleventh book of histories, where their letters were all visible
pictures, signs and images, as witnesses Pierius in his book of the sacred
Egyptian letters: And the like comparison of the operation of our souls in
matter of thoughts has S. Anselme, sometime Archbishop of Canter bury; in the
forty one chapter of his book of Similitudes, and others, to demonstrate unto
us the necessity of often hearing with respect and reverence sacred sounds,
which are but signs of holy things, and of often seeing, beholding, and
looking upon sacred artificial pictures, signs and images, which represent
unto us divine things, or the mysteries of our faith, etc. with a relative
religious worship, that by hearing or beholding them after that manner, the
divine things or mysteries of our faith may easily pass and enter into our
minds, and fill our hearts with pious thoughts, as I shall yet further show in
the ensuing chapters.

CHAP. IX. What we mean by a relative Religious Worship and of the distinction
of honor and worship.
AS our Opposers would not understand what we mean by sacred pictures, figures
and images, no more will they understand what we intend by a Relative Religious
Worship, unless we explicate it unto them; wherefore here it is necessary to
repeat what I have said in the first and second chapters of our book, of the
honor and prayer to Saints, where I have showed, that as there are in general
two Kingdoms upon earch, the one temporal, the other spiritual, so also in
general (and for as much as will serve for our purpose) there are two kinds of
honors and worships, the one civil, belonging to the temporal Kingdom, the
other religious, belonging to the spiritual Kingdom, and both these kinds of
honors and worships have diverse degrees, divisions, or distributions, according
to the diverse and different dignities in the said Kingdoms, and yet keep one
or the same name of honor or worship, with little variety in words, more then
the terms of religious, civil or superstitious.

As for example, all the honor and worship which is in the temporal Kingdom,
as it is temporal, and not Christan, whether it be exhibited to God, or Gods,
or Kings, or his Officers, or other of his Subjects, is but civil or
superstitious, though it be divided into diverse acts, operations and degrees,
for these who have no true Religion (as Turks, Jews, and Infidells,) can have
no true religious worship amongst them; therefore all the honor and worship
which can or may be amongst them, is but civil or superstitious, according to
the humane virtues, dignities, or superstition, which is used amongst them,
though it be divided into diverse degrees; and that civil or superstitious
worship whith they bestow upon God, or Gods, or their Kings, may not be given
to every temporal man or Officer amongst them, but an inferior, according to
the civil or superstitious dignity, or office, or esteem of every one, or the
relation any thing amongst them has to a higher civil or superstitious power;
the same we say of Religious Worship in the spiritual Kingdom of Gods Church,
as it is spiritual, that whether it be exhibited to God, or to the Officers of
his Church, or to other Christians, or to sacred things dedicated to his honor,
yet we call it still a Religious Worship, though that Religious Worship which
we bestow upon God, as he is God (such as are Sacrifices, oaths and vows) may
not be exhibited to his creatures, but an inferior, according to the qualty,
dig^ity or esteem which the said creat^res have in Gods Church, or the relation
they haxe unto higher powers; and therefore for distinction sake, we call this
inferior worship which is bestowed upon creatures, a Relative Religious
Worship, and not an absolute, as having relation to God, the end of all
goodness, esteem and dignity, and this we intend and mean by a Relative
Religious Worship, and after this manner we affirm that sacred pictures, signs
and images may be honored and worshipped, with a Relative Religious visible and
invisible worship (and not with an absolute) as having relation either
immediately or mediately unto God, the end of all goodness.

This noble moral virtue of Religion, as also other moral virtues, has
diverse acts or operations, some whereof only respect God, as he is God and
Creator of all things, others his Angels and Saints, or spiritual persons, or
ecclesiastical and sacred things dedicated to his honor and service; as it
respects only and chiefly God, it is divine honor and worship, or an absolute
worship, independent upon any other thing, as it respects the creatures and
sacred things dedicated to his service, it is relative religious honor and
worship, because it is not absolute, or stays there, but has a further
relation to God, the end of all goodness, as of whom, and by whom, and from
whom the thing worshipped has that honor and worship, and not of it self, by
it self.

The like we find in other moral virtues; as for example, in Justice, though
the substance and nature of this virtue be one particular virtue, yet her
operations and effects are diverse and different, whereof some are occupied
about God, as he is God and Creator of all things, others about his creatures;
and that work or operation which according to Justice we bestow upon God, as he
is God and Creator of all things (as love of the whole heart) may not be
bestowed upon his creatures, but an other of an inferior and relative quality;
and the like we may say of other moral virtues, and also of Religion, which is
described by S. Thomas in his 2 a. 2 ae, quaest. 81. to be one special most
noble moral virtue, distinct only by reason from holiness, which according
to her proper acts and operation does only respect God, and by other virtues
which she commands his creatures; and therefore when she is described
according to her most principal office or operation, or principal Analogate,
she is said to belong unto God only, and when she is described according to her
largest extent or signification, then she is said to belong unto God and holy
things; that Religion, and a religious worship and honor does belong unto God,
that our Adversaries do confess, that she does also belong after the aforesaid
relative manner, unto sacred pictures, signs and images, and other holy
things, either mediately or immediately dedicated to the honor end service of
God, that I shall further show in the ensuing chapters.

CHAP. X. That a Relative Religious Worship belongs unto sacred things,
Pictures, Signs and Images, as they immediately or mediately conduct us to God.
S. Paul. speaking of the sacred things, Rites and Ceremonies which were used
by the faithful in the Old Law, in the service of God, says, These things
were done in a figure of us: Again, All these things happened to them in sign
(or example, as Protestants translate) 1 Cor. 10. Again, For the Law having a
shadow of things to come, not the very image of the things, Heb. 10.1. whereby
it appears that the Rites, Ceremonies, and Sacraments of the Old Law were but
sacred Signs, Pictures, Images, Shadows, or imperfect and obscure
representations of the sacred things of the New Testament; whereupon S. Paul
says, that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, seal of the Justice of
Faith, that is in prepuce, or Christians, Romans 4.11. yet they worshipped these
figures, signs and shadows in the Old Law with a relative religious worship and
honor, as witnesses the Scripture, saying, You shall observe these Ceremonies,
(in the Sacrifice of the Paschall Lamb) and when your children shall say unto
you what is this Religion? you shall say to them, it is the victime of your
Lords passage, when he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in
Egypt, Exodus 12.16. where the Scriptures call the reverence and respect which
was borne unto the Ceremonies and signs which represented our Lords passage
over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, a Religion, where they used
a relative religious worship, as of the same nature, and not a civil, which is
of another kind.

Again, Aaron and his children shall be Priests to me by a perpetual Religion,
Exodus 29.9. Again, This is the annoynting of Aaron and his sons in the
Ceremonies of our Lord, etc. by a perpetual Religion in their generations,
Exodus 7.35. where the Scriptures call the signs and ceremonies which were used
in the consecration of Aaron and his children to be Priests, a Religion, and
therefore to be performed with an outward and inward relative religious respect
and reverence. In like manner, a red cow being offered in burnt victimes for
sin, the Scriptures say, This is the Religion of the victime which our Lord
has appointed, Number. 19.2. where the Scriptures call the Rites and Ceremonies
used about the Sacrifice for sin a Religion, and therefore performed with a
relative religious honor, respect, and reverence.

The Scriptures also speaking of an addition of many people unto the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Jews, say, Many other Nations and Sects were joined to their
Religion and Ceremonies, Hester 8.17. whereupon S. Paul says, According to the
most pure Sect of our Religion, I was a Pharisee, Act. 26.6. where the
Scriptures and S. Paul call the whole practice which they had about sacred
things or things dedicated to the honor of God, and use of their divine
service, a Religion, and then the respect and reverence which they were to use
about the said things, must be religious, as of the same nature, for as our
Savior said, We do not gather grapes on thorns, or figs on thistles, Mat.
7.16.

S. James says, If any man think himself to be religious, not bridling his
tongue, this man's religion is vain, James 1.26. where he supposes that
Religion, and so likewise a religious worship may be used about the tempering
of the tongue. Again in the same place S. James says, A Religion clean and
unspotted with God the Father is this, to visit Orphans and Widows in their
tribulations, and to keep himself unspotted from the world: where likewise he
supposes, that Religion and religious worship may be exercised in visiting
Widows and Orphans, and the acts of virtue.

Aristotle in the third chapter of his book of Politiques, taught by the light
of reason, says, Honor is justly given, when it is distributed according to
dignity. And S. Paul says, Render to all men their due; Romans 13.7.

And some men are religious, as witnesses the Scriptures, saying, All
religious bless ye our Lord, Dan. 3.90. Again, There were at Jerusalem Jews,
religious men of all Nations, Act. 2.5. Again, Cornelius the Centurion is
called Religious, Act. 10.2. and you cannot give honor according to the dignity
of one who is religious, or render unto him his due, unless you give him some
kind of religious honor or worship, all other being inferior unto his dignity;
whereby it appears, that some kind of religious worship may be given unto
creatures.

Civil honor, worship and adoration may be given unto profane men, as
witnesses the fact of Jacob, who seeing Esau coming toward him, going
forward, he adored prostrate to the ground seven times, Genesis 33, 3. yet Esau
was a profane person, as witnesses S. Paul, Heb. 12.16. The Roman soldiers
of all Nations, as well faithful as Infidells, adored the Imperial Ensign
called Labarum, as witnesses Zozomenus in the fourth chapter of his first book
of histories; and all people and Nations, who are not exceeding barbarous, have
worshipped and honored the Chair of Estate, Scepter, Crown, and the very name
of their Kings and Emperors, when it has been pronounced in public Edicts:
whereby it appears, that a worship more then civil is due unto the friends
of God, and sacred things dedicated to his honor and service, otherwise you put
no difference between sacred things and profane, which God condemns,
saying, Her Priests have contemned my law, and have polluted my Sanctuaries,
between a holy thing and a profane they have put no difference, Ezech. 22.26.
whereupon our Savior, when he had made as it were a whip of little cords, he
cast them who sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and bankers out of the Temple,
Joh. 2.13. And S. Paul reprehended diverse Christians for eating in the Church,
saying, Have you not houses to eat and drink in, or contemn you the Church of
God, 1 Cor. 11.22.

The Officers of Christ in his Church are his Legates, according to the words of
S. Paul, saying, We are Legates for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. and Legates by relation
do participate in some part of the honor and worship which is due unto their
Lords and Masters; wherefore seeing that to God is due an absolute religious
worship, to the Officers of Gods Church, or his Legates, must be due an inward
and outward relative religious worship; whereupon S. Paul says, The fathers of
our flesh we had for instructors, and we did reverence them, not with civil
honor only, but with some kind of religious, as instructors of Religion, Heb.
12.9.

Our Savior says of his followers, You are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, Ioh. 15.19. Again, of the world they are not, as I
also am not of the world, Ioh. 17.17. and therefore there did belong unto them
an honor and worship, not worldly, which is religious.

Father and Son are relatives, and the Son by all right (though in an inferior
degree) is partaker of his Fathers honor and worship, our Adversaries confess
that religious honor belongs unto God, and the Scriptures confess that pious
and devout Christians are the adoptive sons of God, saying, We are the sons of
God, and if sons, heirs also, heirs truly of God, and coheirs of Christ, Romans
8.17. whereby it may justly be doubted, that those who deny an inward and
outward relative religious worship unto the Saints and eminent servants of God,
have neither part nor portion in the inheritance of Christ.

The things which are dedicated to the service of God, are called sacred by God
himself, Exodus 31.10. therefore there is due unto them an inward and outward
sacred relative worship, which is the relative religious worship we speak of;
whereupon all the Lexicons and Dictionaries, not only of Roman Catholics,
but also of our adversaries themselves, (as of Thomas Thomasius) do interpret
this word, Religio; a true worship of God or holy things, and all Nations
cannot be deceived.

Moreover, our Adversaries cannot deny, but that there are religious things, or
things which belong unto Religion, as the Scriptures, Preaching, Teaching,
Prayer, the Sacraments; unto which if our Adversaries will grant no kind of
religious worship, they destroy all Religion, and prove themselves to be
profane as Esau, Heb. 12.16.

Religion and holiness do not really differ, as S. Thomas (2.2 ae. quaest. 81.
Art. 8.) proves; therefore neither can their operations or effects really
differ, but holiness is exercised about creatures, as witnesses the
Scripture, saying, follow peace with all men, and holiness, Heb 12.14. Again,
holiness becomes thy house O Lord, Psalm. 92.5. not an absolute holiness, for
so God only is holy; but a relative, as conducting us by means unto God, who
is only holy of himself; so likewise the chiefest part of the Tabernacle was
called The Sanctuary of Sanctuaries, and Holy of Holies, Exodus 26. God also
commanded Moses to make holy vestments for Aaron and his sons, wherein they
might minister unto him, or serve him, Exodus 28. But to serve God belongs to
Religion, therefore these were religious vestments, and had both an inward and
outward relative religious reverence and respect born unto them, seeing that
none might wear them but Aaron and his sons, and then only when they attended
unto the service of God. The like we may say of all the things which belonged
unto the Temple, and vessels of the Altar, of holy ground, holy Mountain, holy
Scriptures, etc. which are holy by a holiness that refers us to God, and
also religious, and to be reverenced with a relative religious worship, for the
same cause holy and religious being really both one.

And to conclude, at all times, and in all ages the faithful honored and
worshipped sacred things, whether they were immediately or mediately dedicated
to the service of God, which are inward and outward relative religious worship,
as I shall further show in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. XI. Almighty God never prohibited either the making of sacred Pictures,
Signs and Images, nor yet their relative religious Worship.
ALmighty God commanded us that we should not make vain and idle graven things,
that might divert us from him for our own pleasures, or for our selves,
without any respect unto him, saying, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven thing, Exodus 20.4. but it is never read in the Scriptures, that he
prohibited either the making or worshipping of sacred pictures, signs or
images, with a relative religious worship, when they are made to his honor and
glory, and not our own only, or to our selves; hereupon it follows in the
same text, Thou shall not adore them (which thou have made to thy self, and not
to the honor of God) nor serve them, for this is Idolatry: but faithful Roman
Catholics never make any such pictures to themselves only, much less do they
worship them or serve them, or adore them.

God created all things in heaven and upon earth for man, and man for himself,
so that man may not use any of the creatures of God or himself for himself, or
to himself only, or do any thing to himself, or for himself only without
offense to God, much less may he make pictures, signs and images to himself
only, or to bow down to them or worship them, or serve them for himself only.

This is self-love, or Philantia, not only forbidden by the first
Commandment, and condemned by S. Paul, saying, In the last days shall
approach perilous times, and men shall be lovers of themselves, 1 Timothy 3.1.
but also by the moral Philosophers, as by Aristotle in the third chapter of his
second book of Politiques, and in the eighth chapter of his nineth book of
Moralls, ad Nichomachum, saying, They use to call those who love themselves
filthy people: whereupon Suidas reports of Narcissus as beautiful young man,
who was enamored of himself, that the Nymphs upbraided him, saying, Many hate
thee, because thou too much love thy self: wherefore seeing that Almighty
God binds all men by the obligation of their creation to love and serve him
with all their hearts, no marvel that he has tied man from making or doing
any thing for himself, as for himself, and from adoring or serving such things
after they be made, especially pictures and images, seeing there is nothing so
hurtful to the love and service of God, as self-love, and the working or
doing any thing for our selves, or the worshipping or serving it; whereupon the
Ancients compared self-love to the love of the Ape unto her Cub, which she
kills with embracing, as they do, who make to themselves and not to God
graven things or images, or pictures, and after fall down to them and worship
them, without any reference or order to God.

Our Savior, to keep all Christians from this self-love, or from making any
graven thing, or image for themselves, and not with reference, order, or
relation to God, taught them, saying, If any will come after me (to heaven) let
him deny himself, Mat. 16.24. that is, says S. Basil in his answer to the
sixth Interrogation of his large disputation upon Rules, forsake all his own
pleasures, and do, or make nothing for himself, much less to make a graven
thing, or image for himself, and after to bow down unto it, and serve it: This
to be the sense of these words the Scripture does witness, saying in the same
chapter, You shall not make gods of silver, nor gods of gold shall you make to
you, ver. 23. Again, mine Angel shall bring thee unto the Amorrheite, and
Hetheite, and Pherezeit, and Canaanite, and H^veit, and Iebuzite, whom I will
destroy, you shall not adore their gods, nor serve them, Exodus 23.23. Again, He
has cut down cedars, taken the elm tree, and the oak, etc. he took of them and
was warmed, and kindled them, and baked bread, but of the rest he wrought a
God, and adored, he made a graven thing, and bowed down before it, half he
burnt with fire, etc. but the rest thereof he made a god, and a graven thing to
himself; he howeth down before it, and beseeching, saying, Deliver me, because
thou art my god, Isa. 44.14. whereupon when the children of Israel in the
desert fell into Idolatry, whilst Moses was in the Mount with God about these
Commandments, God said to Moses, Thy people have made to themselves a molten
calfe, and have adored, and immolating hosts unto it, have said, these are thy
gods Israel, Exodus 32.8. whereby it is manifest, that this text only
forbids the making of Idols, and of vain and idle pictures, or images, which
have no reference or relation to God, but to men only, and the affection or
service done to them, which is by all Roman Catholics accounted sinful and
wicked; and therefore if any Roman Catholic make to himself any such image,
sign or picture, their Adversaries shall do well to punish him.

That these words, a graven thing, or as it is in the Hebrew text, Pesel,
signifies an idol or vain image made to a man's self, and not to the honor of
God, the seventy Interpreters of the Scriptures, who were assigned for that
purpose by the Jews, to translate the Old Testament into Greek do witness, for
they translate for the Hebrew word Pesel (which our Adversaries erroneously
call a graven image) Idolum an Idol. In like manner Origin in his eighth Homily
upon Exodus, and S. Augustine twice in his 71. question upon Exodus reads
this text, Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol. And Calvin himself in his
Commentaries upon the second of Exodus put forth in French, says upon this
text, Moses only speaks of Jdols. And a little after, That which some
foolishly have thought, here to be condemned all graving and images, needs no
confutation, seeing that Moses has no other intent, but to exempt the glory
of God from all fictions which tend to corrupt it; whereby it appears that
this text makes nothing either against the making of sacred pictures, signs or
images, or the adoring or worshipping them with a relative religious worship,
which conducteth us to God and heavenly things.

In like manner this first Commandment, (or the second, as our Adversaries
will have it) is again set down in the fifth of Deuteronomy, where it is also
said, Thou shall not make to thee a thing graven, nor the similitude of any
thing that is in heaven above, etc. thou shall not adore them, nor serve them;
where Almighty God prohibiteth the making of graven things, pictures, signs or
images to our selves, and not to his honor and glory, and likewise prohibiteth
the adoring or worshipping of such pictures, signs and images as are made to
our selves, and not to his honor; neither in all the Bible is there found any
prohibition, either to make any sacred artificial picture, sign or image, or
to adore or worship them, being made with a relative religious worship for the
holy things they do represent; where upon I may conclude that Almighty G^^
neither prohibited the making of sacred artificial pictures, signs and images,
nor yet their worship after the manner abovesaid, as I shall yet further show
in the ensuing chapters.

CHAP. XII. That it is lawful to make holy artificial Pictures, Signs and
Images, which may immediately or mediately bring us to think upon God and
heavenly things, and place them in Churches or Temples.
FIrst the arts of painting, carveing, printing and writing were never
prohibited, and if it be lawful to exercise these arts in natural and moral
things, it cannot be denied, but that they may be used to assist our minds or
memories in painting, printing, or carving such holy and sacred things, as may
put us in mind of God, or of the mysteries of our faith, or of heaven, and the
things which are therein.

It is manifest, that the Tabernacle of Testimony, with the Cherubins and two
Tables, wherein were written or engraven the ten Commandments, and all that
which belonged unto the Tabernacle were graven things, artificial pictures,
signs and images, for the Scriptures are herein most plain, God saying to
Moses, Behold I have called by name Beseleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur,
of the Tribe of Juda, and I have replenished him with the Spirit of God, with
wisdom, and understanding, and knowledge in all works, to devise whatsoever
may be artificially made of gold, and silver, and brass, of marble and
precious stones, and diversity of wood, and J have given him for his fellow
Ooliab, and in the heart of every skillful man have J put in wisdom, that they
may make all things J have commanded thee, Exodus 31. Thus God to Moses, to
demonstrate unto us, that holy artificial images, pictures, signs and graven
things, which represent unto us God and heavenly things, may be made or placed
in Churches or Temples, seeing that God himself, not only gave Commandment to
make such things, and to place them in the Tabernacle, but also endued men with
extraordinary wisdom and knowledge, to devise for the Tabernacle whatsoever
may be artificially made of gold, and silver, and brass, of marble and
precious stones, and diversity of wood, as here the Scripture says, and God
cannot be the Author of sin or evil.

Moreover that these things which Beseleel and Ooliab made by the Commandment
of God, were artificial pictures, signs, similitudes and images, the
Scripture further witnesses, saying, Look and make it according to the pattern
that was showed thee in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. whereupon S. Stephen said unto
the Jews, The Tabernacle of Testimony was among our fathers in the desert, as
God ordained, speaking to Moses, that he should make it according to the form
which he had seen, Acts 7.44. which S. Paul also confirms, Heb. 8.5.
wherefore it cannot be denied, but that it is lawful to make holy artificial
pictures, signs and images, and to place them in Churches, seeing that by the
Commandment of God such things have been made for the Tabernacle and Temple
of the people of Israel, which were signs and figures of the Christian Church,
as witnesses S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.

Again God said to Moses, The children of Israel shall make to me a Sanctuary,
and I will dwell in the midst of them, according to all the similitude of the
Tabernacle which I will show thee, etc. Two Cherubins also shall thou make of
beaten gold on both sides of the Oracle, Exodus 25. Solomon also in building the
Temple, made in the Oracle two Cherubs of Olive trees of ten cubits in height,
etc. and all the walls of the Temple round about he graved with diverse
engravings and carvings, and he made in them Cherubins, and palm trees, and
diverse pictures, as it were standing out of the wall, and coming forth, 3 Kings
6.

Moreover the two Tables of the Commandments which God gave to Moses in the
Mount Sinai, were sacred artificial graven things, signs or pictures, as
witness the Scriptures, saying, Moses returned from the Mount, carrying the
two Tables of Testimony in his hand, written on both sides, and made by the
work of God, the writing also of God was graven in the Tables, Exodus 32.15. And
words are but signs, figures, or images of things, as witnesses Aristotle in
the first chapter of his first book, Peri-Hermenias, and Pierius in his books
of the sacred Egyptian letters.

Moreover the nature of man considered, it cannot be, that the making of a
picture, sign or image only (as they are the similitudes of other things) or
the placing of them within Churches or Temples should be forbidden, for so God
should be contrary to himself, who has created man after such a manner, that
he cannot naturally learn, know, or understand any thing, without conceiving
the same, under some corporal image or likeness, his knowledge so depending
upon his senses, that he cannot know any thing, which either by it self, or in
some similitude, is not first represented by some sense; as for example, we see
visible creatures, and hear sounds or voices, whereby the common sense being
informed with such an image, as it is able to conceive, offers the same to
our fantasy or imagination; whereupon the mind begins to gather knowledge,
and to print (as it were) or to ingrave in it self that which is represented
unto it by the senses, and therefore makes judgment, and gathers knowledge
out of these images, species, or representations, in such sort, that as often
as the mind will either use knowledge, or seek to increase in it, she always
returns to these images, figures or species which she has received, and laid
up in the gulf of her memory, to the end, that she may have wherewithal to
occupy her self, and take delight, as occasion requires: And thus God of his
goodness has created man, whereby it appears that he neither has
prohibited men from making sacred pictures, signs or images, nor from the
placing them in Churches, seeing that both Almighty. God commands them to be
made, and to be placed in his Temple, and that man cannot learn divine things,
but by sacred artificial pictures, signs and images.

As there are profane and vain images, pictures, similitudes, and signs, so
there are sacred and holy, as witnesses God himself, who called the Tabernacle
and the artificial images, and graven things which did belong unto it, sacred
things, Exodus 31.10. and S. Paul calls the written words of the Bible, which
are but signs, pictures and images (as I have proved heretofore) holy
Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.25. and the places most fit for holy things, which either
directly or indirectly represent unto us God, and heavenly things, are
Churches, Chappells, and Temples, which also themselves are, or ought to be
signs, images and pictures of heaven; so that the places of sacred pictures in
holy Churches, Chapels or Temples, is but the observance of a decorum, in
placing like with like, not to cast pearls before swine, nor do injury to holy
things, by putting them in profane places.

Temples, Churches, and Chapels ought to represent unto us heaven, as
witnesses the Scriptures, saying of the place where Jacob worshipped God, This
is none other but the house of God, Genesis 28.17. in whose house be Angels and
Saints, whose Similitudes, Temples, Churches and Chapels are to represent;
whereupon the Temple in the Old Law, which was a figure of Christian Churches,
and Chapels, was adorned with pictures and images, as witnesses the
Scriptures, saying, Solomon made in the Oracle (which was in the most inward
part of the Temple) two Cherubins of olive trees of ten cubits in height, etc.
and all the walls of the Temple round about he graved with diverse ingravings
and carving, and he made in them Cherubins, and palm trees, and diverse
pictures, as it were standing out of the wall, and coming forth, 3 Kings 6.

S. Paul also calls Christian Churches the house of God, 1 Cor. 11.22. and
our Savior diverse times calls his Church upon earth, the Kingdom of heaven;
as Mat. 13.24. and again verse 47. and the Temple and Churches his Fathers
house, Ioh. 2.16. where not only God dwells, but also Angels and Saints,
according to the words of S. Paul, saying to the Christians, You are come to
Mount Sion, and the City of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and the
assembly of many thousand of Angels, and the Church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, Heb. 12.22. whereupon it comes to pass, that there was
never in the world any Church which did belong unto Catholic Christians,
which had not in it an Altar, as a picture, sign, or image of the Altar in
heaven, and some sacred pictures, signs or images, either to represent unto
those who should enter into it the society of heaven, or the mysteries of our
faith, or both, otherwise it could not represent the Temple of God, or house of
God in heaven, from whence it has his denomination; S. John saying, that he
saw a great multitude (in heaven) which no man could number, of all Nations,
Tribes, and peoples, clothed in white robes, and palms in their hands, etc.
these (says he) are they which are come out of great tribulation, and have
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, therefore
they are before the Throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his
Temple, Revel. 7. Again he says, I saw an Angel come forth from the Temple
which is in heaven, Revel. 14.17. whereby it appears, that as we have sacred
Temples, Altars and Churches, which represent the Temple, Altar, and house of
God in heaven, so also we ought to have sacred images, or pictures of Angels
and Saints, to represent unto us the Inhabitants in the Temple of heaven, or
the mysteries of our faith; and that our adversaries, who disgrace, deface, and
beat down these things, are enemies to pious thoughts, and to the elevation of
men's minds to heaven and heavenly things.

CHAP. XIII. That in time of peace, when there is no persecution, the pictures
and images of Angels and Saints ought to be placed in Christian Churches, and
there honored with a relative religious worship.
AS I have proved in the last chapter, Christian Churches, Temples and Chapels
ought to resemble unto them heaven, and the house of God in heaven, wherein do
dwell Angels and Saints, and therefore it is as manifest, that Christians ought
to have some sacred pictures of Angels and Saints in their churches, temples
and chapels, and there to honor them with a relative religious worship, to
represent unto them heaven, as is manifest, that they ought to have churches,
unless it be in time of persecution, when sacred pictures are more subject to
be profaned, then the churches themselves, by Pagans and Infidels, who do more
hate sacred images, then they do material churches, and therefore do sooner
deface and abuse them, then they do the churches themselves.

In the Old Testament, because the gates of heaven were not open before the
Ascension of our Lord, as the Scriptures witness, Colos. 1.18. therefore in
the Tabernacle and Temple of the Old Law, were only the pictures of Angels,
and not of Saints; but now in the New Law, that the Saints have passage into
heaven, and the Inhabitants of heaven do consist of Angels and Saints, as
witness the Scriptures, Heb. 13.22. Revel. 7.9. it is as requisite that the
pictures and images of Saints should be placed in Christian churches and
chapels, and there respected and honored with a relative religious worship, as
that it was necessary in the old Law the pictures of Angels should be in the
Tabernacle and Temple, and there respected and adored after the manner
aforesaid, the same reason serving equally for both.

The Inhabitants of the Temple and house of God in heaven, consisting of an
innumerable multitude of Angels and Saints, he should be but an unskilful
workman, who would undertake to make a description of it unto our corporal
eyes, and not paint or carve any image or picture of any Saint, seeing that
heaven is the house of Saints, as further witnesses S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1.
unless he should excuse himself by reason of persecution, that he omitted
these things, least they should be profaned by Pagans and Infidels, or
administer occasion unto them of greater wrath or indignation against
Christians: whereupon it came to pass, that though the Primitive Christians
always used pictures and images of Saints in their churches, chapels, and
places of meeting, and respected and reverenced them with a relative religious
worship, as they did their churches, thereby to nourish in themselves pious
thoughts; yet in the time of persecution they used them not carved or painted
upon the walls, or so fixed, as that they could not easily remove them, as does
witness the Council of Jliberis held in the time of of persecution, and
before the church had peace, in the thirty sixth Canon, saying, It has pleased
the Council that pictures should not be in the Churches, (that is to say,
fixed or fastened to the walls) least that which is worshipped and adored
should be painted upon walls, where the Pagan and Infidels coming might easily
abuse them.

But after that persecution ceased, and the church had peace; for the statues,
pictures and images of false gods, and profane men, which the Pagan and
Infidells used in their Temples, and the honor which they bestowed upon them,
the Christians brought in the pictures, images and memories of the Saints, with
a relative religious respect and honor unto them, as witnesses Theodoret in
the end of the eighth book of the cure of Greek affections, or of Martyrs,
saying, The Temples of those false gods, and profane men, together with their
groves, are now so destroyed, that there does not remain any of their
footsteps, neither can we know after what manner their Attars were built, for
the very matter of those things is purged out, by the erected Temples and
Altars of the Martyrs, for our Lord God has brought in his dead into the
Temples in place of your gods, he has made their glory void and vain, and has
given their honor to his Martyrs; and for the solemnities of all your gods and
goddesses, are brought in the common feasts of Peter, Paul, Thomas, Sergius,
Marcellus, Leontius, Antonius, Moritius, and other holy Martyrs. Thus
Theodoret, who flourished in the year 430. to show unto us, that as soon as the
church had peace, the faithful kept the feasts of the Saints, placed their
pictures in the churches, and gave unto them all the exterior visible honor
which the Pagans did unto their false gods, except Sacrifice, and their
relation to their Idols, as to the true and living God: Until the conversion
of Constantine the great the church of God for the most part remained in
persecution, as soon as he was converted, and begun to erect Christian
churches, in the first church which he built, which was the Constantiniana,
(afterward called the Church of our Savior) he placed in it the pictures and
images of our Savior, and the Apostles, as witnesses Damasus in the life of
S. Silvester, saying, Jn these times Constantine Augustus built the Church
Constantiniana, where he bestowed these gifts, a balcone of silver, with our
Savior sitting in the fore front thereof, in a chair of five foot high,
weighing one hundred and twenty pounds, and at his back the twelve Apostles,
every one of them of five foot in height, weighing every one of them ninety
pounds, with crowns of most pure gold; looking through the Cancells of our
Savior, sitting in a throne of five foot of most pure silver, etc.

Not long after Constantine lived, S. Gregory Nazianzen, who for his excellent
knowledge in divinity, was commonly called the Divine, a man of noble parents,
and brought up at Athens with S. Basil the Great, as his School-fellow, yet
this man making an Oration in the presence of S. Basil of the death of his
Father, which is the nineteenth amongst his works, highly extolleth his father
for building a stately and sumptuous Church, adorned with pictures so
artificially made, that they did not (as he says) yield to nature it self, yet
profane and vain pictures were never permitted to have places in Churches.

Moreover Helladius S. Basils successor in the Church of Cappadocia, writing
the life of S. Basil, affirms, That the pious man stood before the image of
our Lady, where also was painted the effigies of the famous Martyr Mercury; and
he stood praying that he might be freed of wicked Julian the Apostata, and he
learned of the said image the event that followed, which was of his death.

S. Gregory Nissen was brother to S. Basil the Great, and lived at the same
time with S. Gregory Nazianzen, yet he writing an Oration in the praises of
Theodorus the Martyr, and coming to describe the beauty and sumptuousness of a
Church built to his honor, in the City Euchita, afterward called Theodorpolis
of his name, amongst other things says, The Painter also by the flower of his
art has set forth in pictures the valiant acts or deeds of the Martyr, his
repugnances, his torments, the figures of barbarous and savage tyrants, the
violent force of the flames of fire consuming the Champion, a pattern of the
combats of our General Christ in humane shape; and to conclude, he has
expressed unto us, as in a book, which contains the interpretation of
tongues, all the combats and labors of the Martyr, by artificially painting
them in colors. Thus S. Gregory Nizzen, to demonstrate unto us, that in the
primitive Church, and even in the most flourishing time of the Church, the
faithful had the pictures and images of their Saints in their public
Churches, and respected and reverenced them with a relative religious worship,
as Roman Catholics do at this day, thereby to nourish in themselves pious
thoughts.

Anastasius Sinaita, Bishop of Antioch, flourished about the year 544. who as
it is set down in the third Oration of S. Damascenus, de Jmaginibus, relates,
that twenty Sarazens breaking into the Church of the aforesaid S. Theodor^s,
and making their retreat in it, one of them (as he says) shot an arrow at the
image of S. Theodorus, which wounded it upon the right shoulder, whereat blood
issued out, and ran down unto the lowest part of the image, yet they all
beholding what was done, and seeing the arrow sticking in the shoulder of the
image of the Saint, and the blood gushing out, were nothing moved with this
wonderful miracle, neither he who did it, being sorry for it, nor any of the
rest for their evil behavior; within a few days they all died, and none else,
except those Sarazens who had taken up their lodgings in the said Church. This
image (says he) thus stricken with an arrow is yet remaining, bearing the
wounds of an arrow, and the stains of blood, many of those who were then
living, and see this thing are yet alive, and I also see the image, and have
written what I have seen. Thus Anastasius Bishop of Antioch.

S. Chrysostom set forth a public Church-Service-book for the Church of
Constantinople, translated out of Greek into Latin by Erasmus, wherein is set
down the manner how the Priest is to proceed in the Service of the Church, and
amongst other things he says; That the Minister or Deacon going before with a
light, the Priest comes forth of the Vestry, with the Gospel in his hands, and
turning himself to the image of Christ, which stood between two doors, bowing
down his head, says with a loud voice, O Lord Governor of all things, etc.

The religious Nilus was a Disciple of S. John Chrysostom, yet he instructing
Olympiodorus, a Proconful, how he would have Churches adorned, says, I would
have the walls of the Church on both sides filled with the histories of both
the Old and New Testament, set forth by the work of a most skillful Painter, to
this end, that those who were not taught to read, and cannot read the
Scriptures, by beholding the pictures may be taught, who they were which by
worthy deeds sincerely served God, that they also may be moved to undertake the
like glorious works, by which these men have made an exchange of earth for
heaven, and honor these things by contemplation, which they never see with
their eyes.

Prudentius in his Hymn of the Martyr S. Cassianus, sets down at large,
how over his Tomb stood his image painted with a thousand wounds torn in all
the joints, his skin broken with little pricks, and a many boys sticking
bodkins into his wounded members, showing the cruelty of his death and
Martyrdom, yet Prudentius flourished in the year 390.

S. Augustine in the tenth chapter of his first book de consensu Evangelistarum
says, In many places Peter and Paul were seen painted with our Savior:
Evadius in the fourth chap. of his 2. book of the miracles of S. Stephen,
says, that before the memory or Altar of S. Stephen was a vail, wherein was
painted S. Stephen, bearing a glorious cross upon his shoulders: Nicephorus in
the second chapter of his fourteenth book affirms, that Pulcheria Augustae
placed in the Church which she had built in Constantinople in the year 43^. a
picture of our blessed Lady, received from Eudoxia at Jerusalem.

Theodoret Bishop of Syria writing the admirable life of Simeon Stilites says,
an innumerable people from diverse Nations came by troops unto him, into the
territories of Antioch, and many from Spain, Britany and France, who in Rome it
self was so famous, that in all their porches and entrance into their places
of offices, they put little pictures of him, thereby (as he says) to procure
help and defen^e unto themselves: Yet Theodoret flourished in the year 430.
whereby it appears that both in their public Churches, and private houses,
the faithful of the Primitive Church had the pictures of Saints, and respected
them with an outward and inward relative religious honor and worship, thereby
to nourishin themselves pious thoughts.

CHAP. XIV. How the Nurse of Pious Thoughts does not only consist in the having
and beholding sacred pictures, signs and images, but also in giving unto them
an outward and inward relative religious worship, not for the material things
themselves, but for the sacred things which they represent.
TO the preservation of pious thoughts in our hearts, as I have said
heretofore, it is not only sufficient often to hear sacred artificial sounds,
and see or behold sacred artificial pictures, signs and images, but also to
honor, worship and respect them, with an outward and inward relative religious
worship, not for themselves, or for the matter they are compounded of, but for
the divine things and mysteries of our faith which they represent unto us, and
as they do represent them unto us, and not otherwise; for not only vicious and
wicked men, whose hearts are of wicked thoughts, but also the devils
themselves hear, and see sacred pictures, signs and images, as appears by
the fourth of S. Matthew, where the devil both heard and alleged Scripture.
And Mr. Sanderson a Protestant Minister, in his second Sermon preached at
Grantham in the year 1634.. 6. and 8. tells us of many Sectaries here in
England, who are so addicted to the material visible artificial signs, and
sounds of the Bible, that to do any thing at all without directions from the
written material Word (as they say) is unlawful and sinful, even so far, as
for the taking up of a straw: whereby it appears, that not the often hearing
of sacred artificial material signs, or seeing of sacred artificial material
pictures, signs or images only, is sufficient to the begetting and nourishing
of pious thoughts in the hearts of men, but also it is necessary, that we
should reverence and respect them with an outward and inward relative religious
worship and honor, for the things which they represent, as often as we hear or
see them; so to worship them, not for the sounds themselves, or for the
pictures, signs and images themselves, or for the matter they are made of, but
as they represent divine things unto us, and the mysteries of our faith,
thereby to prepare and open our hearts for the worthy receiving of the
knowledge of these sacred things, and mysteries of our faith which they do
represent, and to distinguish between sacred pictures, signs and images, and
profane or civil.

First, honor and reverence toward any thing begets a great esteem and love
of the thing it self in the heart of man; for as Aristotle well observes (in
the eleventh chapter of his first book of Rhetoric) says, Honor and glory is
of most pleasing things; so that these things which we honor, we cannot but
love, and love opens the heart, and makes a passage to the thing beloved;
and when we honor, worship, or respect any thing which belongs to God, or
that may conduct us to God for Gods sake, or as it belongs or conducteth us
to God, the honor ends, or is terminated in God, and not in the thing
honored: whereupon (as I have said heretofore) S. John Baptist so much honored
the latchet of our Saviors shoes, for our Saviors sake, that he thought
himself not worthy to unloose it, Joh. 1.27. And the faithful Centurion so
greatly honored and reverenced our Saviors words for our Lords sake (as that
he said) I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof, but only say
the word, and my boy shall be healed, Mat. 8.8. In like manner, the woman which
was troubled with an issue of blood, so highly esteemed of our Saviors
garments, that she said, If I shall touch only his garment I shall be safe, Mat
9.1. And as also I have said heretofore, the Primitive Christians so highly
esteemed and honored the very shadow of S. Peter, for our Lords sake, That they
did bring forth the sick into the streets, and laid them in beds and couches,
that when Peter came, his shadow at least might overshadow any of them. Act.
5.15. There were also brought from Paul his body, napkins or handkerchiefs upon
the sick, and the diseases departed from them, Act. 19.12. of so great force
was the relative religious worship that the faithful gave unto the things
which belonged unto God, or unto his servants, to indue them with pious
thoughts, and a constant faith.

Almighty God will not only have these things which immediately belong unto
himself, to be honored with a relative religious honor and worship for his
sake, but also these things which appertain unto his servants, whom he also so
highly esteemed, that he keeps an account of every hair which grows upon
their heads, according to his word, saying, your very hairs of the head are all
numbered, Mat. 10.30. And if Almighty God will have the hairs of his servants
heads, which are but excrements, to be of so great esteem, who is there that
is not exceeding proud, an enemy of his own good, that will deny an outward and
inward relative religious worship to sacred pictures, signs and images, as
they are sacred pictures, signs and images, and administer unto our minds pious
thoughts of heaven and heavenly things, seeing this ingrafteth and setleth in
our hearts the knowledge of the pious things themselves, which are represented
by these pictures, signs and images, and may well be described to be the Nurse
of Pious Though

CHAP. XV. How free Roman Catholics are from idolatry, by worshipping of
sacred pictures, signs and images, with the aforesaid relative religious
worship.
TO let thee dear Reader most clearly and manifestly understand how free Roman
Catholics are from committing Idolatry in the worship which they give to
sacred artificial pictures, signs and images, I desire thee first to remember,
that they call sacred pictures, signs and images, these artificial things,
which represent unto them, either the things in heaven, or the mysteries of
their faith, or the holy actions of our Savior, or his Saints; etc. and as
they do represent them, these they call sacred pictures, signs, and images, for
the holy things they represent, and as they represent them; as God himself
called the artificial things which did belong unto the Temple sacred, Exodus
31. And secondly, that they worship them, not as they are absolute things or
substances, or as they are carved stocks, or stones, or painted clothes, or
creatures, this is but the false calumniations of their Adversaries, (who
whilst they can find nothing that is evil in their Religion, of which they can
justly charge them withal, do impute that unto them, which they do not) but
they worship them as they have relation to the aforesaid known holy things, and
either mediately or immediately conduct their hearts and minds to God, the
Author of all goodness, as a mark, sign or note which should show unto us a
thing of greater worth, eminency or dignity then it self, in such sort, as if
it did say, J am none of your God, or last end, seeing I do but represent only
a thing more excellent then my self, like the stamp upon the coin; whereupon
our Savior said unto the Jews, who showed unto him the tribute money, whose
is this image and superscription? they say to him Caesar's; then he says to
them, render therefore the things that are Caesar's, to Caesar, Mat. 22.20.

Wherefore seeing that sacred artificial pictures, signs or images, do but
tell us of things more excellent then themselves, certainly as such, and by
these who esteem them such, they can neither be esteemed or reputed as a God,
or Gods, nor be as God worshipped; for whoever esteemed, thought or imagined
that to be a God, or worshipped that for a God, which he affirmed to be but a
shadow, or a relation unto another thing of greater dignity, none who was
endued with reason, seeing that every one esteems God to be the chiefest of
all Gods, and the last end of all things, according to the words of our Lord,
saying, I am Alpha and Omega, and I am the first and the last, Revel. 1.17.

And de facto that any one does esteem a thing to be a sacred artificial
picture, sign or image, and does worship it as a sacred artificial picture,
sign or image of another thing, he does deny it to be a God, or to worship it
as a God, and therefore cannot commit idolatry unto it, by worshipping it as a
sacred artificial picture, sign or image.

Secondly, as I have said heretofore, an artificial picture, sign, or image,
about which the controversy is, as such is neither substance, person, nor
creature, nor so esteemed by any one who is endued with reason, because they
are but the work of a Painter, Printer, Writer or Carver, who cannot make a
substance, person or creature, because they are reserved to God alone; whereby
also it is manifest, that whilst Roman Catholics do worship sacred
artificial pictures, signs and images, as they are such, and no otherwise,
they cannot commit idolatry, because idolatry is, when the honor and worship
which is due unto God, as he is God and Creator of all things, is given unto
another person, or unto a creature or substance, which Roman Catholics
acknowledge, and confess sacred artificial signs, pictures and images, are
not: And what reasonable man ever, either worshipped or acknowledged, or
esteemed that for a God, which he publicly and constantly professed to be
neither person nor substance, nor yet so much as a creature; nor to have any
subsistence of it self: whereby you see that the clamours of some Sectaries
against the idolatry of Roman Catholics in the worshipping of sacred
artificial pictures, signs, and images, are but as the cry and noise of
frogs, which to hearken unto, do but dull men's ears, and hinder them of better
thoughts.

That Roman Catholics do not honor or worship sacred artificial pictures,
signs or images, with any other honor or worship then relative, unto divine
and heavenly things after the manner abovesaid, is first manifest by the decree
of the Council of Trent, which in the twenty fifth Session says, The image of
Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, are to be had and
retained, especially in Churches, and that due honor and worship is to be
imparted unto them, not for that any divinity is to be believed to be in them,
or virtue, for which they are to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be
begged of them, or that hope is to be put in them, as in times past the Pagans
did, who put their trust in Idols; but because the honor which is exhibited to
them is referred unto the first pattern which they resemble; so that by the
images which we kiss, and before which we uncover our heads, and kneel, we
adore Christ and his Saints, whose likeness they bear. Thus this Council, to
demonstrate unto us, that even by the decree of this Council, which all Roman
Catholics are bound to follow, they honor, worship and respect sacred
artificial pictures, signs and images, with a relative honor and worship
only, and no other.

Secondly, it is yet further manifest, that Roman Catholics do not honor or
worship sacred artificial pictures, signs or images, with any other honor or
worship but relative; for that though they worship pictures, yet they do not
worship all pictures, signs or images, which they should do, if they worshipped
pictures absolutely, neither yet do they worship the same signs, pictures or
images, when they do represent, or have relation unto other things, as
appears in the name of God, and Jesus, and the material Temples and Altars
of Jews and Gentiles, which they represent, or have relation unto any other
thing, then unto the living God, or Christ our Savior, or the Temple, or Altar
in heaven.

As for example, though the third Commandment say, Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain; and the Scriptures say, In the name of Jesus
every knee shall bow, Phil. 2 16. yet they do not worship the name of God,
where it is said to Moses, J will make thee God of Pharaoh, Ezod. 7.1. nor the
name of Jesus, when it signifies unto us, Jesus the son of Nun, or Joshua,
Act. 7.45. or Jesus the son of Sirach, writer of Ecclesiasticus, or the Temples
or Altars of Pagans or Heretics, because they want that relation to the living
God, and things in heaven; whereby it is demonstrated, that Roman Catholics
give no other worship or honor unto sacred artificial pictures, signs or
images, but relative, as they induce them to think, and put them in mind of
other things which are more excellent and eminent then they, and whoever
worshipped or honored God with a relation unto another thing more excellent or
eminent in dignity then he? or whoever esteemed that to be a God, which he
respected and worshipped with relation unto another thing, more excellent in
dignity then that which he worshipped? whereby it is manifest that Roman
Catholics neither do commit idolatry in their worshipping of sacred
artificial pictures, signs or images, as they do, neither can they, seeing
that in the fact it self they demonstrate, that the pictures, signs or images
which they worship, are no gods, nor yet so much as creatures, or substances,
after the manner which they worship them, nor yet have of themselves so much as
any subsistence.

Thirdly, this is generally and universally the Tenet of all Roman Catholics,
that a material thing which has neither life, sense, nor reason, such as is a
carved or engraven stock or stone, or painted cloth, of it self, or by it self,
without relation or reference unto another thing, is not capable of any honor,
worship, or reverence, much less of a religious honor or worship, whereby it
is manifest that Roman Catholics do not worship stocks or stones, or painted
clothes nor graven, nor carved, nor painted things, as they are such, or as
they are things absolute, but as they have relation to the things of heaven,
and the mysteries of our faith, and stir up in their minds pious thoughts.

And this is sufficient to show unto any indifferent Reader, how free Roman
Catholics are from committing either idolatry, or any superstition, in the
honor and worship which they give unto sacred artificial pictures, signs and
images, and how their adversaries do calumniate them herein unjustly, not only
to the breach of the peace, concord and charity which should be amongst the
natives of this Island of Great Britain, but also to the great hinderance of
the elevation of men's minds to heavenly things and pious thoughts, for the
which God forgive them.

CHAP. XVI. By the second Commandment, God commanded all men to honor and
worship his Name, which is but a sacred sign, picture or image of himself,
with a relative religious worship, thereby to beget pious thoughts of him in
our souls.
AS I have said heretofore, no Artificer, Carver, Printer, or Writer, can make
an essence, substance, or person, or creature, because these things are
reserved to God the Author and Creator of all things, but all that these men
can do, is to produce an accidental form, figure, sign, picture or image; and
all letters, words, characters, hierogliphicks, Tabernacles, Altars, etc. as
they are such, are but artificial signs, pictures and images of the things
which they represent, made by artificers; yet God not only commanded that a
relative religious respect, and honor, and reverence should be used toward the
Tabernacle, and propitiatory of the people of Israel, as is often specified in
the Scriptures, but also so straightly bound all men to give a relative religious
honor and worship unto his name, as that he made it the second Commandment of
the first Table, saying, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, for our Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain,
Exodus 20. and our Savior taught us to pray unto God saying, hallowed be thy
name, which name is but an artificial thing, sometimes pronounced, sometimes
painted, written or engraven; other sometimes expressed in pictures and images,
as witnesses Pierius in the thirteenth chapter of his seventeenth book, and
fifth of his thirty third book of the sacred Egyptian letters; where he
affirms, that for these graven, printed, or written letters, or word God,
which we use, they had the picture or image of an eye, as a God seeing all
things, according to the words of S. Paul, saying, There is no creature
invisible in his sight, Heb. 4.3. or a God father of lights, as the Scriptures
call him, James 1.17. other sometimes they express this word God, or the name
of God, by the picture of a Crocodile, or of a Stork, which have no tongues, as
of a thing unspeakable; whereby it appears, that men were always bound to
honor and worship sacred signs, pictures and images, with some kind of
religious worship, to the ingrafting in their hearts pious thoughts, seeing
that the Commandments of God bind all men in all ages and times, as our
Adversaries do confess, and we cannot give a relative religious honor unto any
sacred thing as it is such, but it will put in our minds pious thoughts.

According to this second Commandment, the children of Israel had this name of
God Iehova; which was esteemed most proper unto him, in such honor and
reverence, as for the respect they bore unto it, the common people abstained
from pronouncing it, and the Priests forbore to speak it, unless it were in
their sacrifices, and solemn blessings of the people, or in entering into the
holy of holies, as witnesses Philo in his book of the life of Moses; and when
in reading the Scriptures this name occurred, in place thereof they pronounced
another, as Adonai, or Elohim, in such sort, as that ^^t only the seventy
Interpreters, who translated the Old Testament into Greek, and our old
translation in Latin; and Origin in his Tetr^plis, or Hexaplis; but also our
Savior, and the Apostles, as often as the word Jehova does occur, they put in
place thereof Adonai.

And not only the name of God was worshipped by the people of Israel, with a
relative religious honor and worship, but also the plate wherein the name of
God was engraven, and hung in the miter of the High Priest before his forehead,
as witnesses the Scriptures, saying, They made also the plate of sacred
veneration, of most pure gold, and they wrote in it with the work of a
Lapadario, or Ieweller, the holy of our Lord (or the holy name of our Lord) and
they tied it to the Miter with a lace of Hyacinth, as our Lord had commanded
Moses, Exodus 39.29. whereupon Josephus in the eighth chapter of his eleventh
book of Antiquities relates, that Alexander the Great seeing Iaddus the High
Priest bearing this venerable plate on his forehead, with great reverence went
unto him, and adored the name of God written in the plate.

Moreover an oath being an act of Religion, to bind all men to use a relative
religious worship toward his name, which is but a sign, character or
Hierogliphick commanded them, that when just occasion was offered of swearing,
that they should swear by his name, saying, By my name thou shall swear, Exodus
6.13. Again, He that swears in the earth, shall swear by God, Isay 65.16. and
diverse Nations, as the Egyptians and Chinois, using pictures and images in
place of words, they must of necessity, according to this command, use a
relative religious honor and worship to pictures and images; neither may our
Adversaries say, that this reverence and honor to the name of God is only
civil, seeing that all Divines grant an oath to be an act of Religion, and
that the Commandments are religious things; whereby it is manifest, that by
the second Commandment we are bound to use a relative religious honor and
worship to some kind of signs, pictures and images, as unto those which
represent unto us the living God, and that this relative religious worship to
these sacred signs, do nourish in us pious thoughts, otherwise God would not
have commanded it.

CHAP. XVII. The third Commandment commands all men to honor and reverence
the Sabbath day, which is but a sacred sign.
THe third Commandment says, Remember that thou sanctify the Sabbath day, or
as Protestants translate, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, Exodus 20.3.
Again, observe the day of the Sabbath to sanctify it; or as Protestants
translate, keep the Sabbath to sanctify it, Dout. 5.12. now that days are but
signs, and not God, or Gods, the same Scriptures do witness, saying, Let
lights be made in the firmament of heaven, to divide the day and night, and let
them be for signs, and seasons, and days, and years Genesis 1.14. to manifest
unto us, that days, and years, and so likewise the Sabbath or Sunday, is but
an artificial sacred sign, gathered by the calculation of the Sun, as is yet
further manifest; for that some begin the Sabbath day from the first appearing
of the stars, after the setting of the Sun, as the Jews, others from midnight,
as Catholic Christians, others from Sun rising, as the Protestants, etc. In
some Countries the days are sometimes as long as one of our months, in others
as two, in others as three, and in some it is day for half a year together; so
that if they did not calculate a time for the observance of the Sabbath, they
should either keep none, or else sanctify it for half a year together.

Again, as I have said here before, men cannot change essences and substances,
because these things belong to God, but they have changed the Sabbath, from
Saturday unto Sunday, as our Adversaries do confess, whereby it is
demonstrated, that that the Sabbath day is but a sacred sign of rest from the
Creation of the world, as also of the eternal rest of heaven, and of the
Resurrection of our Lord, and of the people of God; etc. whereby they might be
distinguished from other Nations, and yet our adversaries themselves do honor
reverence this day after their kind or manner with a religious worship, though
it be but a sign, and no substance, or person, or God; neither may they say,
that this sanctification of the Sabbath, may be, or is performed by a civil
worship, seeing that first the Commandments of God, as I have said heretofore,
are divine and religious, and pertain to Religion. Secondly, civil worship
may be used by Pagans and Heathens, who cannot sanctify any thing to God,
because they want faith, without which it is impossible to please God.

Moreover, that the Sabbath day or Sunday is but a sign or ceremony to put us
in mind of another thing, God himself does yet further witness, saying, See
that you keep my Sabbath, because it is a sign between me and you in your
generations, that you may know that J am the Lord which sanctify you, keep you
my Sabbath, for it is holy unto you, he that polluteth it, dying, shall dye,
Exodus 31.13. to demonstrate unto us, that the Sabbath or Sunday is but a sign,
to distinguish the people of God and faithful from the Infidells and
reprobates, and yet all faithful people worship and honor it with solemn
rites, ceremonies and circumstances, as offering of Sacrifice, rest from
labor, attending to proper preaching, reading of the Scriptures, and other
pious works and exercises, so that it cannot be denied, but that sacred signs,
pictures, images, and such things as represent unto us, or have relation,
either immediately or mediately unto divine things, or to the things of heaven,
or mysteries of our faith, may be honored and worshipped with a relative
religious honor and worship, for the things of heaven, or holy things which
they represent, and that this relative religious worship begets in us pious
thoughts, seeing God commands it.

Again, God would have this sign of the observance of the Sabbath or Sunday so
much honored and respected by men, as that he promises great rewards to those
who shall religiously and carefully observe it, saying, If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will in my holy day, and call the Sabbath
delicate, and the holy of our Lord, glorious and glorify him (by keeping it)
whilst thou do not thine own ways, and thy will be not found to speak a
word, then shall thou be delighted upon the Lord, and I will lift thee up ab^ve
the neights of the earth, and I will feed thee with the inheritance of Jacob
thy Father, Isay 58.13. Thus the Scriptures, to demonstrate unto us, that there
is no cause why our Adversaries should so dislike of the religious relative
worship which Roman Catholics do give to sacred signs, pictures and images, as
they represent either heavenly things, or the mysteries of their faith, seeing
that God not only commands it, but also promises great rewards to those, who
shall zealously and carefully reverence and respect them.

The cause why Almighty God so presses man to sanctify the Sabbath day, which
is but a sign of the rest which he made from the creation of the world, and of
our Saviors Resurrection, and of the eternal rest in heaven, with a relative
religious worship, is because we cannot worship this sacred sign of the
Creation of the World, Resurrection of our Savior, and eternal rest in
heaven, without thinking upon these things, and begetting in our hearts pious
thoughts of the Creation of the World, Resurrection of our Savior, and
eternal joys of heaven; the Sabbath being a holy sign of those sacred
mysteries, as words are of things; when we worship this sign with a relative
religious worship for those things which it does represent, we cannot but think
upon the things themselves, because (as I have said heretofore) we cannot think
upon two things at once; from whence it is, that the relative religious worship
which is given to sacred pictures, signs and images, as they are such, cannot
but nourish in the doers pious thoughts; for which cause the devil stirs up
those, in whose heart he dwells, to have them cast down or profaned, least
by their remaining, and the relative respect born unto them for the sacred
things they represent, and as they do represent them, he should be forced to
change his lodging.

And to conclude, God speaking of the observation of the feast of Easter, or
Pasche, says, The first day of the Pasche shall be holy and solemn, and the
seventh day with the like festivity shall be venerable, Exodus 12.16. To show
unto us, that the children of Jsrael by the Commandment of God, gave honor and
worship to the first and seventh day of the Pasche, which are but instituted
signs of our Lords passage over their houses in Egypt, and of the Resurrection
from death, to life everlasting; whereby we see that of the ten Commandments,
two command us to worship, respect, and reverence with a relative religious
worship sacred artificial signs, pictures, and images, because this begets
in us pious thoughts.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the sweet name or sign of Jesus, and how this name
respectively is to be worshipped with a relative religious worship above all
names, thereby to beget pious thoughts of Jesus above all things.
ALthough the word, sign, or name Jehova was of great honor, and worship
amongst the faithful Jews, yet it should be inferior in honor and reverence
to the name or word Jesus, as it signifies our Savior amongst the Christians,
because Jehova does signify God, as he is our Lord and Creator, but Jesus does
signify. God, as he is our Savior and Redeemer; wherefore as the benefit of
our Redemption is greater then that of our Creation, so the name of Jesus, or a
Redeemer, or Savior, is greater then the name of God, or a Creator; whereupon
the Church in the blessing of the Paschall candle, says, It had availed us
nothing to be born, if we had not received the benefit of our redemption.
Moreover the name of God a Redeemer, does include in it the name of God as
Creator, but not the contrary; whereby it appears, that the word or name
Jesus respectively is more holy, and more to be honored and worshipped amongst
Christians, then was the Word or name Jehova in the Old Law, seeing that
respectively it is of greater dignity and eminency, as Abulensis in his seventh
question upon the twentieth chapter of Genesis proves more at large; where
upon I may conclude, that we are bound to honor with a relative religious
worship the sweet name of Jesus by the first and second Commandment.

Christ Jesus (says S. Paul) humbled himself made obedient unto death, even to
the death of the cross, for the which thing God has exalted him, and has
given him a name, which is above all names, that in the name of Jesus every
knee bow of celestialls, terrestialls and infernalls, Phil. 2.8. Thus the
Scriptures; to demonstrate unto us, that we may honor and worship graven
things, signs, pictures, and images, when they are not made to our selves, as
are Idols, or vain images; but to express and represent unto us, sacred and
holy things, and have relation unto God the end of all goodness, S. Paul here
saying, In the name of Jesus (whether it be engraven, and so a graven thing, or
painted, and so a picture, or printed, or written, or spoken, and so a sign)
every knee shall how.

The Angel Gabriel said to our B. Lady, Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and
shall bear a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great, and he
shall be called the son of the most high, Luke 1.31. so great, as that S. Peter
said, in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you did crucify, in this
same, this lame man stands before you whole, etc. neither is there any other
name under heaven given to men, wherein we may be saved, Act. 4.10. wherefore
if it were an offense, as it was amongst the people of Israel, not to honor and
worship the name Iehova, which signified God, as God and Creator of all things,
much more it must be an offense amongst the Christians not to honor and worship
the name Jesus, as it belongs to Christ our Lord, because it signifies the
whole work of the Incarnation, and our redemption; whe^^ to do concur the
wisdom, power goodness. Majesty, and all the attributes of God, more then in
any his other works made, o^ created, and put^eth us in mind of all these
things; whe^^ upon the Scriptures say, A most strong tower the name of our
Lord, the just unneth to it, and shall be exalteb, Prove 18.10. Again, whosoever
shall invocate the name of the Lord, shall be saved, Joel 2.22. Romans 10.13. for
as S. Paul says, None can say our Lord Jesus, but in the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
12.3. that is, says Sedulius upon this text, in heart, word and work.

In this name the Fathers and Prophets of the Old Law rejoiced, saying, as it
may be read in the Hebrew J will expect thy salvation (or thee Jesus) O Lord,
Genesis 49.18. Again, the Prophet David foretelling the preaching of the name of
Jesus amongst the Gentiles, says, our Lord has made known his salvation (or
his Jesus) in the sight of the Gentiles) Psalm. 97.2. Again in the same Psalm,
all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God (or the Jesus of
our God:) whereupon the Prophet J say, singing a song in Thanksgiving for the
benefits the world was to receive by Christ, says, God is my Savior (or
Jesus) J will do confidently, and will not fear, because our Lord, God of God
(that is to say, the son of god Jesus) is my strength, and my praise, he is
become my salvation (or my Jesus and Savior) you shall draw waters of joy out
of the Savior fountains (or out of the fountains of Jesu) And you shall say in
that day, confess to our Lord, and invocate his name, make his inventions
known among the people; Remember that his name is high, J say 1^.2. Thus these
Fathers of the Old Law, whereby it appears, that more relative religious
honor and worship is to be given unto the name of Jesus respectively, as it
represents unto us Christ our Savior, then unto any other name of God,
otherwise the Scriptures and ancient Fathers of the Old Law would not so highly
extol, commend, and rejoice at this name, more then in other names of God, as
I shall yet further show in the ensuing chapter.

CHAP. XIX. Greater honor to be given unto the name Jesus, as it signifies
Christ our Lord, then to any other name of God.
GOd the Father, as it were rejoicing at the salvation of mankind, and glorying
at the name of his only Son our Lord, said by the mouth of the Prophet Malachy,
Great is my name among the Gentiles: Again, my name is great among the
Gentiles, says the Lord of Hosts, Malachy the first; which words S. Irenaeus
in the thirty third chapter of his fourth book of heresies, expounding, says,
What other name is there, by which he is glorified amongst the Gentiles, but
that of our Lords, by which the Father is glorified, and man glorified, and
because it is the name of his proper son, who was made man by him, he calls
it his name; as if a King himself should paint the image of his son, in two
respects he might justly call that image his first, because it is his sons, and
secondly, because he made it; so the name of Jesus Christ, which throughout the
whole world is glorified in the Church, the Father does confess to be his,
both because it is his sons, and he writing it, has given it for the salvation
of men. Thus S. Jrenaeus, who lived with the Apostles Scholars, to signify
unto us, how glorious and honorable this name of Jesus (as it calls into our
memory Christ our Lord, and all the benefits received by him) was in the
Primitive church, seeing that it was glorified (as this Saint affirms) in his
time of the whole Church, dispersed over the world; and how could it be
glorified so universally and early by all Christians, if the Christians of
these times should have given no more honor or worship unto it, then they did
to Dick, or Tom, or John; yet Origin in his fourteenth Homily upon S. Luke
says, The glorious word Jesu is to be spoken, or called upon, with all honor
and worship.

In these Primitive times the religious respect and reverence which the ancient
Fathers bare unto this name of Jesus, as it had a relation to Christ our Lord,
was so great, that S. Ambrose chap. 9. of his book of Hexameron, or six days
work, says, This is the gift of the eternal Father to his Son, that in the
name of Jesu every knee shall bow, of these who are in heaven, upon earth, and
under the earth. Thus S. Ambrose. Now if this be a gift given by God the Father
unto his Son Jesus, that all his creatures which have understanding shall do
honor and worship to the name of Jesus, as it has relation unto his Son; he
must be in the nature of an Infidel or beast, who will not put off his hat, or
incline his head, or bend his knee at it, whether it be written, engraven or
spoken.

S. Chrysostom in his Sermon of the praises of God, set down in his fifth
Tome, so highly esteemed and reverenced this name of Jesus, as it has
reference to Christ our Lord, that he says, This name Jesus is a terror, not
only to those in hell, but also to diseases and vices, therefore let us
challenge to our selves from it ornament and forces. Thus S. Chrysostom;
whereupon Theophilact upon these words of S. Paul, Whatsoever you do in word or
in work, all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, says, for the name
of God drives away devils, and does make all things easy unto thee, and to
succeed well; which being so, he is worthy to perish, who will not bear a
relative religious respect and honor unto this sacred name of Jesus.

From hence it is that Abulensis upon the twentieth chapter of Exodus says,
That it is a greater-sin to take the name of Jesus in vain, then that of God.
And giving a reason, adds, The common and laudable custom of the Church,
does more honor that name of Jesus, then this of God: From whence it is that
the devout faithful people, as soon as they hear the name of Jesus, either bow
down their heads, or bend their knees, which they do not when they hear the
name of God; he therefore who does offend against this custom, dishonoring the
name of Jesus, does commit a greater sin, then he who dishonoreth the name of
God. Thus Abulensis, of the outward and inward relative religious honor and
worship which the Church of God has always given unto the name of Jesus,
because it is the proper name of the Word Incarnate, and of God, as he is our
Redeemer, a name so much honored by S. Paul, as that he not only has it 219.
times in his Epistles, but also the faithful persuading him, with many tears,
that he would not go to Jerusalem, because as the Prophet Agabus had foretold,
there he was to be taken prisoner, and to be cast into bands by the Jews; he
answered, I am ready, not only to be bound, but to die also in Jerusalem for
the name of our Lord Jesus, Acts 21.13.

After the people of Israel were conducted by God through the red Sea, and
delivered out of the hands of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, Wisdom says, that
they sung thy O Lord, Wisdom 10.20. If this the faithful in the Old Law did,
because they were preserved out of the hands of their temporal enemies, by the
passage through the red Sea, how much more ought Christians to sing and extol
the name of Jesus, who by the red Sea of his blood, has redeemed us from our
infernal enemies, and say with the Prophet; All Nations shall glorify thy
name because thou art great, and doing mavelous things, thou only art God;
conduct me O Lord in thy way, and I will walk in thy truth, let my heart
rejoice, that I may fear thy name, I will confess to thee O Lord my God with
all my heart, and I will glorify thy name for ever, because thy mercy is great
upon me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lower hell, Psalm. 85.9. O
Lord our Lord, how mavelous is thy name in the whole earth! Psalm. 8.10.
because thou have magnified above every thing thy holy name, Psalm. 137.2. the
name of Jesus which is magnified above all names or temporal things: whereupon
S. Hilarious upon this Psalm says, J have manifested thy name to men; and what
name this was, he showed before, saying, Father the hour comes, cause thy son
to be honored, therefore he adoreth this name. Now if the Prophet did adore the
name of God, not for the material letters or characters, but for that it
represented unto him an infinite goodness and greatness; why should we now
doubt, whether we ought to adore and worship holy names, pictures, and signs,
which conduct us unto the same God with a relative religious worship, seeing
that it does fill our souls with pious thoughts.

Again, the same Saint says upon the same Psalm, He confesses the Word made
flesh in truth, and the cause of his confession is taken from this, because
thou have magnified above every thing thy name; the name of God is not known to
one Nation only, but it is magnified above all things, and the greatness of
his sanctity is extended to all, not a barbarous, nor Soyth, nor servant, nor
freeman, neither woman, nor man, nor any age is exeluded from it, for the name
of God is magnified above all: Temples fall down, Idols grow mute, Oracles at
the coming of the Saints are silent, the credit of Augures is lost, the only
name of God is holy amongst all Nations. Thus S. Hilary.

Arnobius also expounding this Psalm, says, The Prophet does confess unto his
name, because in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of the things in
heaven, of the things upon earth, and of these things under the earth, and what
does he confess unto his holy name? he says, thy mercy, and thy truth: A soul
does confess nothing else to God in the sight of the Angels, but the mercy
wherewith he is redeemed, and the truth which he is taught; what truth? without
all doubt this, wherein his holy name is magnified above all things, for this
is a name which is above all names. Thus these Fathers of the relative
religious honor, respect, and reverence which the faithful in their times bare
unto this sacred name of Jesus, as it represents Christ our Lord, and all his
mercies, and puts into their minds pious thoughts.

And to conclude, the relative religious respect which the Primitive Christians
bare unto this sacred name of Jesus, was such, that Procopius an ancient
Father, who lived above eleven hundred years past, in his Commentaries upon the
forty fourth of Esaias affirms, they caused it to be imprinted with an hot iron
upon their bodies; and now the world is ascended to that height of pride, that
there are found men who will not call themselves Christians, and yet not
vouchsafe either to uncover their heads, or bend their knees, or incline their
stiff necks at this sacred name, to verify upon them the prophecy of S. Paul
saying, In the last times men shall be haughty, proud, stubborn, puffed up, and
lovers of voluptuousness more then of God, 2 Timothy 3. If at the reading or
publishing of a Proclamation, all who are well-affected toward the King or
State put off their hats, or bow or bend their heads at the name of the King or
State politic, how much more ought all Christians to do it, at the holy name
of Jesus, which is a name above all names? Phil. 2.9.

CHAP. XX: How terrible the name of Jesus is unto the devils, when it is
honored with an inward and outward relative religious worship.
AS this name of Jesus, as it represents our Savior, is honorable and
glorious both in heaven and earth, so also when it is pronounced with a
relative religious worship, it is a name of terror and fear unto the devils,
whose place is to live under the earth, in such sort, that not only in the time
of our Savior, the Disciples by virtue of his name, and power given unto it,
cast devils out of the bodies of men, when returning from preaching they said,
Lord also the devils are subject unto us in thy name, Luke 10.17. And our
Savior said, I saw Satan as lightning fall from heaven, but also at all times
the devils are to be cast out of the bodies of men, by virtue of this name,
pronounced or used with a relative religious worship, according to the words of
our Lord, saying, Them that believe, these signs shall follow, in my name shall
they cast out devils, Mark 16.17. whereupon S. Paul, when he would cast an
evil spirit or devil out of a woman, said no more, but I command thee in the
name of Jesus Christ to go out of her, and he went out at the same hour, Act.
16.18.

And it was so common a thing in the time of the Apostles for diverse of the
faithful, by virtue of the name of Jesus, as it represents Christ our Lord,
to cast devils out of the bodies of men, that in imitation thereof, certain
also of the Judais all Exorcists went about, and assayed to invocate upon them
that had evil spirits the name of our Lord Jesus, saying, I adjure you by
Jesus whom Paul preaches, Act. 19.13. And our Savior affirms, that many
shall appear before him after their death, who in pretense of right to their
salvation, will say, Have not we in thy name cast out devels? Mat. 7.22. To
demonstrate unto us, that not only the faithful shall at all times honor and
worship the name of Jesus, as it represents unto us Christ our Lord, but also
many wicked men and reprobates, and the devils themselves, though against
their wills.

S. Iustine Martyr lived with the Apostles Scholars, and was a famous Martyr;
yet he in his first Apology for the Christians unto the Roman Senate, before
the midst, says unto the Senators, Many of our men, who are called
Christians, both throughout the world, and even in this City, adjuring them by
the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified under the Praetor Pontius Pilate,
have cured many, who were possessed of devils, when by no other Exorcists, or
any Magitians they could find remedy, and even at this day they do cure,
casting and driving the devils out of their bodies. S. Antonius, as affirms
S. Athanasius in his life, not only with the name of Jesus often put the devil
to flight, but also taught Martinianus a prefect of soldiers to dispossess
his daughter by invocation of the name of Jesus, with a relative religious
worship unto it.

S. Hierome writing the life of S. Hilarion says, That on a night he heard as
it were the crying of infants; the bleating of sheep, the bellowing of beasts,
the mourning of women, the wring of Lions, the noise of an army, and the horror
of barbarous voices, that being first affrighted by the outcries, amazed, he
might be moved to fly at the sight; but understanding that these were policies
of the devil, casting himself upon his knees, he made the sign of the Cross
of Christ upon his forehead, armed with such a helmet, and compassed about with
the breast plate of faith, remaining in his posture, desiring after a manner to
see him whom he did abhor to hear; whilst he carefully cast his eyes on all
sides, upon a sudden the Moon shining, he see a Chariot drawn with fiery
horses to rush upon him; whereat when he had cried out Jesus, even before his
eyes, of a sudden all this pomp was swallowed up at a chink into the earth.

S. Ephraem the Deacon writes of S. Abraham an Ermite in Syria, that singing
Psalms at midnight, of a sudden a beautiful light shined in his Cell, and a
voice was heard, as it were of a multitude; saying, Blessed art thou Abraham,
thou art truly blessed and faithful, there is none found like thee amongst
men, who have done whatsoever I have desired; forthwith the holy man knowing
the craft of the malignant spirit, with a loud voice said, O full of deceit
and policy, thy darkness be to thee in perdition, for I am a poor sinner, yet
armed with the shield of hope through the grace of God I nothing fear thy
treacheries, neither do thy many fantasies affright me, for the name of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ whom I have loved, and do love, is to me a strong
fortress, in which name I check thee, filthy, and thrice miserable dog. At
which words presently, as smoke, the devil vanished out of his sight. Whereby
it appears, that the devils fear this very name of Jesus, as it has
relation to our Savior, and do fly away when it is spoken, with honor, faith
and confidence, that for his name sake he will protect us.

Almighty God being favorable unto all those who love and honor his name, it
has always been thought a good prayer to say, For thy name sake thou will be
propitious to my sin, for it is much, Psalm. 24.11. Arise Lord, help us and
redeem us for thy name, Psalm. 43.26. Help us O Lord our Savior, and for the
glory of thy name, O Lord deliver us, and be propitious to our sins for thy
names sake, Psalm. 78.9. whereby it appears, that he must be a savage
Christian, that will not bear a relative religious honor, reverence, or respect
unto the sacred name of Jesus.

CHAP. XXI. Many miracles wrought in confirmation of the inward and outward
relative honor and worship given to the name of Jesus.
THis name of Jesus has always amongst the Christians been a name of so
great a relative religious honor and worship, that by virtue of it, as it
represents Christ our Lord* and all his mercies, many miracles have in
several times been wrought in the church, S. Peter saying to the man who was
lame from his mothers womb, silver and gold I have none, that which J have, the
same J give to thee, in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, arise and walk,
and taking his right hand he lifted him up, and forthwith his feet and soles
were made strong, and springing, he stood and walked, and went with them into
the Temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God, Act. 3.6.

S. Paul not only did miracles by virtue of this name, as it has relation to
our Savior, whilst he lived, as I have showed heretofore, but also as it is
related by constant Tradition at his death when his head was cut off; it gave
three rebounds or leaps, and three times repeated this sacred name of Jesus,
whereat three fountains gushed out, which yet remain until this day, and was
so desirous, that all Christians should honor this name, that he says,
Whatsoever you do in word or work, do all things in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him, Col. 3.17.

Surius in the life of S. Ignatius, who lived long with the Apostles, writes,
that being urged by the Pagans to deny Jesus Christ (as their custom was in
them times) answered, that it was a thing impossible for him to do, because it
was engraven in his heart, which after death they cut in pieces, and found to
be true, his heart every where expressing in images the name of Jesus.

Nicephorus in the third chapter of his seventeenth book of histories writes,
that there being a great Earthquake at Antioch about the year of our Lord 524.
so fearful, that it destroyed almost the whole City, yet diverse having
confidence in the name of Jesus, writ over their doors, Jesus is with us, let
no man move from his place, and they, and their houses escaped, and stood firm.

S. Gregory the Great, a man of no little credit in the Church of God, in the
first chapter of his first book of Dialogues writes, that Honoratus, a holy
man built a Monastery near to the City of Pundi amongst the Alps, where he had
almost two hundred Monks under him, and a mighty great stone breaking from
under the hill, under which his Monastery was built, came rouling down, as if
it would destroy both his Monastery and Monks, which the holy man Honoratus
seeing, he often called upon the name of Christ (which was Jesus) and with his
right hand made the sign of the cross upon it, and so staid it presently, even
in the declining of the side of the Mountain.

Also the same S. Gregory in the third chapter of the same book, relates
another miracle which was done by virtue of the same sacred name of Jesus,
which was as follows, certain Monks had an Orchard of fruits and herbs for
their provision, with a Lay-brother, a holy man for the Gardner, into which a
thief used to break for to steal away the fruit and herbs, which the pious
Lay-brother perceiving the loss, looking about, found the place where he
passed over the pale, and seeking for a remedy, found a Serpent, whom he
commanded, saying, follow me, which the Serpent did, until he came to the
passage which the thief used, and then said to the Serpent, I command thee in
the name of Jesus that thou keep this passage, and do not permit the thief to
enter here any more; presently the Serpent extended her self along the passage,
and the Lay-brother returned to his Cell. About midday, whilst all the Monks
were at rest, the thief according to his custom came, and putting his f^ot
ov^^ the pale to enter into the O^c^^^^ (...) sudden he perceived that (...)
Serpent lay in his passage, whereat astonished, he fell backward, with his head
downward, and his foot fixed in the pale, where the Lay-brother coming at his
ordinary hour found him, and said to the Serpent, Thanks be to God thou have
done as thou wast commanded, go thy ways, which she did. And then loosing the
thiefs foot, without doing him any hurt, he said, how durst thou brother so
often steal the labors of the Monks, follow me. And so conducting him to the
gate of the Orchard with much courtesy, he gave him the fruit and herbs which
he would have stolen, saying, Go thy way, and hereafter do not steal, but if
thou shall be in want, come hither unto me, and that which now thou labourest
to take away by stealth, I will freely give unto thee.

Moreover it was so common a thing for the Christians of the Primitive Church
to reverence the name of Jesus with a relative religious worship, that pious
parents taught it their children, even from their infancy, as witnesses S.
Augustine in the fourth chapter of his third book of Confessions, saying, For
this name according to thy mercy O Lord, this name of my Savior thy son, had
my tender heart, even together with my mothers milk devoutly drunk in, and
carefully treasured up, so that what book soever was without the name, though
never so learned, or neatly and truly penned, did not fully delight me. Thus S.
Augustine.

And to conclude, this sacred name of Jesus and of God, is so much to be
honored, and worshipped upon earth, that even in heaven the elect shall have
them written in their foreheads, there to remain with honor and glory for ever
and ever, as witnesses S. John saying, And I looked, and behold a Lamb stood
upon Mount Sion, and with him one hundred forty four thousand, having his name,
and the name of his father written in their foreheads, Rev. 14.1. whereby it
will manifestly appear unto any indifferent reader, that to honor, respect,
and worship the name of God, and Jesus Christ our Lord with a relative
religious worship for the persons they represent, is a great sign of election,
and to make no more account of them, then they do of other vulgar names, is an
apparent sign of reprobation, from which God of his goodness deliver thee
Reader.

CHAP. XXII. Of the honor and glory of the Cross of Christ, as it represents
his person, and passion, and how it shall distinguish the faithful from the
followers of Antichrist.
SO great is the obligation which all mankind has unto the Son of God for his
death and passion upon the Cross, for their redemption from everlasting pains;
that as S. Augustine says, he who is not thankful to God for his creation, is
worthy to go to hell, but he who is not willing to have a pious mind, and
thankful remembrance for his redemption, is worthy to have another hell
created for his greater torments; whereupon all pious faithful Christians have
ever born a venerable relative religious worship unto the sacred sign or image
of the Cross, not as it is a piece of wood or stone, or painted cloth, or
action of the hand, but as it represents unto our memories the sacred passion
of our Lord, as words do things, and indueth our minds with pious thoughts;
whereupon S. Paul, as inamored of the holy Cross, says; God forbid that I
should glory, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6: 14. And
complaining of the little respect and reverence which the carnal men of his
time bore unto the sacred Cross of Christ, says, Observe them that walk, as
you have seen our form, for many walk, of whom I often told you, (and now
weeping also I tell you) enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is the belly, and their glory in their confusion, Phil.
3.17. where he gives us to understand, that to be a lover and honorer of the
sacred Cross of Christ, as it represents unto us his passion for us, is a
sign of election, and the neglect a token of perdition, which also in another
place he confirms, saying, The word of the cross to them indeed that perish
is foolishness but to them that are saved, that is to us, it is the power of
God, 1 Cor. 1.18.

Likewise at the later day, when Almighty God shall send his Angels to destroy
the earth and Sea, to make a distinction between the servants of God, and the
followers of Antichrist, he will give them a command, that all the Elect shall
be marked with the sign of the Cross, that thereby they may be known from the
Rebrobate, as witnesses S. John saying, I saw an Angel ascending from the
rising of the Sun, having the sign of the living God, and he cried with a loud
voice to the four Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,
saying, hurt not the earth, or the sea, nor the trees, until we sign the
servants of our God in their foreheads. Thus S. John, Rev. 7.2. whereupon
Andreas Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, an ancient learned Author, in his
Commentaries upon the Revelations, says upon this text, This place, as is
before said, does belong unto the time of Antichrist, when the sign of the
quickening cross (vivificae crucis) shall distinguish the faithful from the
infidells, who shall without any fear, and without any shame, carry the Cross
of Christ before the face of the impious.

Antichrist, to blot out the memory of the sacred cross, and to hinder men
from signing themselves with it, and from using any reverence or respect unto
it, shall cause all his followers to have his name, or the character of his
name imprinted in their right hand, or in their forehead; that if they would
sign themselves with the sacred sign of the cross, in testimony that they
believe the blessed Trinity, and march under the protection of Christ
crucified, they cannot, as witnesses S. John, saying, Antichrist shall make
all, little and great, and rich, and poor, and freemen, and bondmen, to have a
character in their right hand, or in their foreheads; and that no man may buy
or sell, but he that has the character or name of the beast, or number of his
name, Rev. 13.16. And this Antichrist shall do, as witnesses S. Hypolitus a
Martyr, who suffered death for the profession of the Catholic faith, about
fourteen hundred years past; least that any man with his right hand should
make the sign of the Cross in his forehead.

The like has S. Ephrem, who flourished not long after him, in his Tract of
Antichrist, saying; Antichrist will imprint his character in the right hand,
and forehead of all his followers, that it may not be possible for any with his
right hand to sign himself with the sign of Christ our Savior; or by any means
to imprint the terrible and holy name of God in his forehead; or the glorious
and fearful Cross of our Savior; for that wretch will know very well, that
by impression of the Cross of our Lord all his power is made void: And
therefore he will have his character imprinted in the right hand of men; because
we with our right hands do sign the rest of the members of our bodies with the
sign of the Cross. Thus S. Ephrem.

Moreover, our Savior will have the sign of the cross, as it represents
him crucified, to be had in such honor and reverence amongst the sons of men,
that when he shall come to judge quick and the dead, it shall appear before
him in the air, as his standard, as himself witnesses, saying, Immediately
after the tribulation of these days (of Antichrist) the Sun shall be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give her light, Stars shall fall from heaven, and the
powers of heaven shall be moved; and then shall appear the sign of the Son of
man in heaven, Mat. 24.36. Whereupon S. Methodius in his Oration of the
consummation of the world, says, The sign of the Cross exceeding in brightness
and glory the shining of the Sun, shall be seen from the East unto the West, to
tell the appearing and coming of the Judge. In like manner S Chrysostom upon
this text says; Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man, that is to
say, the Cross it self; for the Cross shall be seen more bright then the Sun;
for, the Sun shall be darkened, and the Cross shall appear, which cannot be
(says he) but the Cross with his brightness must obscure the beams of the
Sun. And then asking the question, why, or for what cause shall the sacred
Cross appear so glorious? answers, That it may abundantly confound the
impudency of the Jews. Thus S. Chrysostom, who never could imagine that there
would arise men, who should call themselves Christians, and yet abuse,
contemn, and beat down the Cross of Christ: Whither will these men run at the
terrible day of judgment, who now not only shun and avoid by all means the
Cross of Christ, but also call the reverend relative religious respect thereof
idolatry?

In like manner S. Ephrem, in his Sermon of these things, which are to be
revealed after the appearing of the Cross, at the coming of our Lord, says,
The sign of the Son of Man shall appear in heaven, with a multitude of
Angels, lightening the whole earth above the brightness of the Sun, even from
one end of the world unto the other, foretelling the coming of our Lord. And
with these further do agree Theophylact and Euthemius upon this text, saying,
Then the cross shall appear, shining more bright then the Sun. Again, the
Cross shall then be far more glorious then the Sun, which when the impious,
who in this life have had aversion from the sacred cross shall see, then as
our Savior there says, shall they weep and bewail their follies, when it is
too late.

Agreeable unto this which has been said, the holy Church in the office of the
cross does say, This sign of the cross shall be in heaven, when our Lord
shall come to judgment, and the Sibils in the end of their sixth book do sing;

O lignum foelix, in quo Deus ipse pependit!
Nec te terra capit, sed coeli tecta videbis.
Cum renovata Dei facies ignita micabit.
O happy Tree, upon whose arms did spread,
Our God himself did hang alive and dead.
Earth cannot hold thee, but a glorious sign
Thou shall appear in heaven, when Gods divine
Immortal face shall bright in judgment shine.
According to the words of our Lord of the day of judgment, Then shall appear
the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the
earth bewail. And after the Standard of the cross, as it follows in the
text, they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with much
power and Majesty, Mat. 24. which joy being propounded unto him (before his
passion, as S. Paul says) he sustained the cross, Heb. 12.2.

CHAP. XXIII. That the faithful in the Primitive Church used an inward and
outward relative religious worship toward the sacred sign of the Cross.
ALmighty God having bestowed that honor and dignity upon the cross, as not
only to be a sacred sign of the passion of his only Son for our redemption,
but also to be a badge of a Christian; and his standard, when he shall come
with his Army of Angels and Saints to judgment, as I have proved in the
precedent chapter. The ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, and all the
faithful, ever bare an inward and outward relative religious respect, honor,
and worship to that sacred sign, image, or picture, not as it is a stock or
stone, or painted cloth, or carved or painted thing, but as it represents the
person of our Lord, his sacred passion or mysteries of our faith unto our
memories, as words do things. For S. Dionisius Areopagita, who was converted to
the faith by S, Paul, Acts 17. (in the second. of his second chapter of his
book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy) relates unto us, that amongst the religious
rites, and holy mysteries of Baptism, the sacred sign of the cross was so much
honored, that it was often used, even sometimes thrice together, and in the
fifth chapter of the said book and second. speaking of the administration of
orders, or consecration of Clergy men, he says, The Bishop who consecrateth
them, does imprint upon every one of those whom he consecrateth the sign of the
cross.

S. Ignatius the Martyr, a man who lived for a long time with the Apostles,
speaking of the honor and dignity of the sacred cross of Christ, in his
Epistle to the Philleppenses, says; the Prince of this world, or devil does
rejoice when any one shall deny the cross, for he very well knows, that the
confession of the cross is his destruction, for that it is a trophe or
triumphal Ark against his power, which as soon as he shall see, he abhors, and
hearing of it, is affrighted.

S. Martiale, who is supposed by some to have lived in the Apostles times, in
the eighth chapter of his Epistle to those of Bordeaux in France, gives them
this counsel, saying, Remember the cross of our Lord, upon which you believe
the true God, and Son of God suffered, keep it in your mind, speak often of it,
and have it in the sign; for the cross of our Lord is your invincible armor
against Satan, a helmet defending your head, a breastplate protecting your
breast, a shield driving back again the darts of the malignant enemies, a sword
which by no means will suffer the iniquity, or treachery of the perverse powers
to come near unto you; by this only sign the heavenly victory is given unto
us, and by the cross the baptism of God is sanctified.

S. Hippolitus the Martyr, who lived near the Apostles times, in his tract of
the consummation of the world, says, that in the time of Antichrist, many
believing in him, shall receive the character of that impure fellow, and enemy
of God, in place of the quickening cross of our Savior.

Tertullian who flourished in the year 200. speaking of the relative religious
honor and reverence which the Christians of his time used toward the sacred
sign of the cross, in the third chapter of his Corona Militis, says, At
every pace, or moving, at our coming into the house, at our going out, in
putting on our apparel and shoes, when we wash our hands, when we take meat,
when we light candles, when we go to bed, when we sit down, and in every thing
which we do, we tear our foreheads with the sign of the cross, but if you
expect a text out of Scripture for these, and other such like observances, thou
shall find none, tradition will be pretended to be the defender, custom the
confirmer, and faith the observer. Again in the 22. chapter of his third book
against Marcion, he says, The Cross is the Greek letter Tau, or our Latin
letter T. the form of the cross which as it was foretold should be imprinted
in our foreheads in the true Catholic Jerusalem. Thus Tertullian, where he
alludeth to the Prophecy of Ezechiel, when God said to one clothed in linen
garments, Pass through the midst of the City in the midst of Jerusalem,
and sign Thau upon the forehead of the men that mourn and lament upon all the
abominations that are done in the midst thereof; and to them who had weapons
of destruction in their hands, he said in my hearing, Pass through the City,
following him, and strike, let not your eye spare, neither have ye mercy, the
old, the young man, and the Virgin, the little one, and the women kill to utter
destruction, but upon every one upon whom you shall see Than, kill not, and
begin ye at my Sanctuary. Thus Ezechiel in the nineth chapter of his Prophecies
of the signing those, whom God would spare and show mercy upon, with the letter
Thau, which is the last of the Hebrew letters, and according to the old Hebrew
characters, bears the form and similitude of the cross, to show unto us,
that the signing our selves with the sign of the cross, and the bearing a
relative religious worship unto it, for the mysteries of the passion of our
Lord, which it puts into our minds, is a great sign of election to eternal
salvation; and the hatred or aversion which many Sectaries of this age bear
against the sign of the cross, which is used in blessing, is an index of their
reprobation, according to the words of the Prophet, saying, He loved cursing,
and it shall come to him; and he would not blessing, and it shall be far from
him, Psalm. 108.18. even so far, as that for all eternity he shall never have,
nor yet hear of any.

Origin lived early in the Church, who also speaking upon this text of
Ezechiel, in his eighth Homily upon diverse places of the Gospel, says, He who
does not fear the golden Capitol, does fear the cross. In Ezechiel, when
the Angel slew all these unto whom he was sent, beginning his slaughter from
the holy place, they only are preserved whom he had signed with the letter
Thau; that is to say, with the image of the cross; let us therefore rejoice
brethren, and let us lift up our holy hands to heaven in likeness of the
cross, seeing that the devils are oppressed when they find us so armed;
whereupon in his sixth Homily upon Exodus he says; What do the devils fear?
what will make them tremble? without doubt the cross of Christ, by which they
are led captives in triumph, by which they are spoiled of their principalities,
and power; fear therefore and trembling will fall upon them, when they shall
see the sign of the cross faithfully imprinted upon us.

S. Cyprian flourished about the year 240. and he also in his Epistle to
Demetrianus, speaking of this aforesaid Prophecy of Ezechiel, says, God does
show in another place, that those only can escape, who are born again, and
have been signed with the sign of the cross, when sending his Angels to
consumed the world, and to destroy mankind, as he grievously threatens at the
last day; saying, go and kill etc. as is set down Ezechiel the nineth. Again
in the 22. chapter of his first book of Testimonies against the Jews, speaking
of the said prophecy of Ezechiel, he says, That in this sign of the cross is
salvation to all those who are signed in their forehead; God in Ezechiel does
declare, saying, pass through the midst of Jerusalem, and thou shall make a
sign in the foreheads of men etc. So what will become of these men who will
not have the sign of the cross made in their foreheads?

Lactantius flourished about the year 320. and he speaking of the practice of
the Church of God, concerning this point of the relative religious honor and
worship, which was given to the sacred sign of the cross, in the twenty
seventh chapter of his fourth book of Institutions, says; Now it is time to
declare the great power of the sign of the cross, of what terror this sign is
to the devils, those know who have seen it; forasmuch as that adjured by
Christ they fly out of the bodies which they did possess; for as Christ
himself whilst he lived amongst us, put to flight all the devils by his
word, and brought men again into their former senses, who had been troubled in
mind, and furiously mad by assaults of the devil, even so now his followers,
both by the name of their Master, and by the sign of his passion, do expel the
same wicked spirits out of men, whereof the proof is not hard; for if whilst
the Pagans offer sacrifice to their Gods, any one be standing by, who bears
the sign of the cross in his forehead, they cease from Sacrifice; neither can
the consulted Oracle give any answer: and this has often been the chief cause
that evil Kings have taken occasion to begin a persecution; for when some of
our Christian servants have stood by their Lords whilst they offered
Sacrifice, and have made the sign of the cross upon their foreheads, they put
to flight their gods; neither could they describe in the entrails of their
victimes the things to come. And in his verses of the benefits of Christ, he
said, bond thy knee, and adore the venerable wood of the cross, etc. whereby it
appears what a good fee these Christians deserve to have from the devil, who
have beaten down crosses, and call the signing of our selves and other
creatures, conjuring.

Eusebius lived about the same time, who writing the life of Constantine the
Great, in his 32. chapter of his first book, relates how the sign of the cross
appeared to him in heaven, with this inscription, in this sign thou shall
overcome; that is to say, his enemies; and in the second chapter of his third
book affirms, that he used now and then to sign his forehead with that
healthful sign of the passion, and many times very much rejoiced in that
victorious Trop^e, or sign.

S. Athanasius flourished in the year 340. who in his book of the Word
Incarnate, says, A man only using the sign of the cross, does drive away from
him the deceipts of the devils, etc. let him come who will m^ke an experience
of my words, and amongst the illusions of the devils, or impostures of their
foretellings or prophecies, or the miracles of their Magitians, and do but make
the sign of the cross, which they deride, and call upon the name of Christ, and
he shall see with his eyes, how for fear thereof the devil flies away, their
prophecies cease, and their enchantments and witcherafts are made void.

S. Basil the Great flourished about the year 370. who in his Oration of the
Martyr Gordian, says, He fortified himself with the sign of the cross, and so
with great constancy of mind, without any fear or changing of countenance, went
merrily to his death. Again, in the twenty seventh chapter of his book of the
Holy Ghost, he says, If we should go about to reject these customs, which are
not delivered in writing, as though they were things of no moment, we should
imprudently condemn many things, which in the Gospel are esteemed necessary to
our salvation, of which sort is (that I may repeat that first, which is the
first and most common thing used amongst us) (the sign of the cross) for who
has taught in writing, that we should sign those with the sign of the cross,
who have put their hope in Christ; is it not by a tacit and secret tradition?
is it not from the doctrine which our Fathers have kept in silence, which
curious and idle people call in question?

S. Cyrill of Jerusalem lived at that same time with S. Basil the Great, and
he in his fourth Catechesis, or instructions for Christian life, says, Let us
not be ashamed of the cross of Christ, but if any one shall hide it, do thou
publicly sign thy self in the forehead with the cross, that the devils seeing
the standard of the King, trembling may make have to be gone; see also that
thou make this sign, when thou beginnest to eat or drink, when thou sit
down, and when thou arisest, when thou beginnest to speak, or to walk and in
every one of thy affairs.

S. Ambrose also flourished at the same time with S. Gregory, and S. Cyril, who
in the seventy seventh Epistle of his nineth book says, Christian people do in
every moment write the contempt of death upon their own foreheads, for they
know, that without the cross of our Lord they cannot be saved. Again in his
fifty sixth Sermon, he says, In what place the cross of Christ is erected or
planted, there presently the iniquity of the devil is driven away, and
tempests of winds cease; and also the good husbandman when he prepares his
land by tillage, and seeks nourishment for life, he does not begin to go
about it, but by the sign of the cross. S. Hierome chapter 6. of his eighth
Epistle to Demetriades says, Thou often fortifiest thy forehead with the sign
of the cross, least the Master of Egypt should find any abode or habitation in
thee. Again upon the eighth chapter of Ezechiel, he says, In the Hebrew
Characters, which the Samaritans do use until this day, the last letter Thau
is made after the likeness of the cross, which is imprinted in the foreheads of
Christians, and often made with their hands. And upon the fifty eighth Psalm
he prays, saying; We beseech thee O Lord, that guarded by the sign of the
cross, and defended by the assistance thereof, we may deserve to be freed from
all the deceipts of the devil.

And to conclude, so honorable was the esteem which the Primitive Christians
had of the sign of the cross, as that they used it in all the rites and
ceremonies of their Religion, in such sort, as that they accounted no solemn
act of their Religion to be well and perfectly performed, unless the sacred
sign of the cross was added unto it, as witnesses S. Chrysostom, for the
Greek church, who in his fifty fifth Homily upon S. Matthew says, All things
which help to our salvation are perfected by the Cross; for when we are
regenerated, the Cross of our Lord is present, when we are nourished with the
most sacred meat, when we take orders; every where, and always that sign of
victory is at hand. Thus S. Chrysostom for the Greek church. And for the
Latin; S. Augustine in his one hundred and eighteenth Tract upon S. John,
says; Unless the sign of the cross be applied, as well to the forehead of the
believers, or to the water wherewith they are regenerate, or to the oil
wherewith they are anointed; none of these are rightly administered. Thus these
two Doctors, of the honor, reverence, respect, which both the Greek and Latin
Fathers of the Primitive church bare unto the sacred sign of the cross: And if
any one desire yet further proof, either for the frequent use of the sign of
the cross, or the relative religious worship which was bestowed upon it, or the
many miracles performed by it, refer him to the nineth article of the second
book of the first Tome of Coccius to Grotserus de Cruce, and to the sixteenth
chapter of the second book of the Progeny of Catholics and Protestants.

It being all one to speak by known signs, or by words; and when the faithful
do make the sign of the cross, their known intent is to profess, that they
believe in the B. Trinity, and desire to march under the standard of Christ
crucified, as is set down in our Catechisms: And when they do worship or
reverence the cross, they do it not, as I have said heretofore, as it is a
carved stock or stone, or a graven thing, or a painted cloth; but as it puts
us in mind of the mysteries of our Redemption, and the passion of our Lord for
the remission of our sins, and imprinteth in our hearts piety, which as S. Paul
says, is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that now is,
and of that to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

CHAP. XXIV. The Cross adored with an inward and outward relative religious
worship in the Primitive Church.
THough all exterior visible honor and glory is due unto God, according to S.
Paul, saying, To the King of the worlds, immortal, invisible only God, honor
and glory, 1. Tim. 1.17. yet all exterior visible honor is not due unto God
alike; but some is so immediately due unto him, and given unto him, that it may
not be given unto any other: of which kind are visible sacrifices, oaths and
vows: Other is immediately due unto him by means of his eminent creatures, as
adoration by bowing, or bending to the ground, kneeling, lifting up the hands
to men in dignity, etc. For Abraham (who is called the father of the faithful,
Romans 4.) adored the children of Heath, Genesis 23.7. Jacob, who is called the
elect of God, Psalm. 104.6. when he did see his brother Esau coming toward him,
Going forward he adored, prostrate to the ground seven times, Genesis 33.3. It
being told Moses, that Iethro his father in law did approach, going forth he
met him, adored and kissed him, Exodus 11.7. And it has always been the
custom of Christian children to ask their parents blessing kneeling, with
their hands elevated on high, and closed together; and also of inferior
servants after the same manner, to ask their Masters forgiveness of their
offenses; Jacob also adored the top of Joseph's rod, Heb. 11.11.

The Scriptures also call the Tabernacle, the house of God, Exodus 34.26. And
the Propitiatory his seat, who sits upon the Cherubins upon it, 2. Kings, or
Samuel 6.2. and the Ark, the foot stool of the seat of our God, Chronicles
1.28. and 2. and commanded it to be adored, saying, Adore his foot stool,
because he is holy, Psalm. 99.5. And even from the beginning of Christianity,
and from the first propagation of the Gospel, the Christian soldiers, both
Greeks and Latins, and of all Nations, adored the Imperial Standard of the
Romans, which was called Labarum, as witnesses Zozomenns in the 4. cha, of his
1. book of histories, and S. Gregory Nazianzen in his 1. Oration against Julian
the Apostata, about the midst, where he relates at large, that it being the
custom of the Roman soldiers to adore the picture or image of the Emperor
Julian the Apostata, by deceit and guilt to win them to adore the devil,
intermixed his image with the picture of devils; whereby first it is manifest,
that exterior visible adoration and prostration, is not so immediately due
unto God, as that it may not be given unto any creature, seeing that the
faithful, both in the Old and New Law, adored creatures, and that sometime by
the Commandment of God.

Secondly, that the cross, not as it is a carved piece of wood, or an engraven
stock or stone, or painted cloth, or a cross in general, but as it
represents unto us the mysteries of our Redemption; the seat or Altar
whereupon our Savior suffered for our sins, or the Standard of Christ Jesus,
and of all faithful Christians may be adored; seeing that in this sense it is
not inferior either to Joseph's Scepter or rod, or to the Ark of the children
of Israel, or unto the image or picture of the Roman Emperors in their
standards, or to the standards themselves; whereupon it came to pass, that
even in the most flourishing time of the church, and as soon as the church had
peace, and was freed from the persecution of the Heathen, the cross, as it
represents unto us Christ crucified, and the mysteries of our salvation etc.
was publicly and openly adored by all Christian Nations, as witnesses
Zozonienus in the place before cited; where he relates at large, how
Constantine the Great placed it in the Imperial Standard, to this intent and
purpose, that it might be adored of his soldiers, consisting of all Nations;
adding in the same chapter, saying;

It is also reported that the soldier, who on a certain time bare this
Ensign (with the cross in it) being amazed with a sudden assault of the
euemies, delivered the standard to another, and withdrew himself out of the
battle, where being out of the danger of any dart, of a sudden fell down
deadly wounded; and he who had taken of him the divine Ensign of the Cross,
remained free from any hurt, though many darts were cast at him. Moreover it is
said, that never any ^uldier whose office it was to bear this sign, either
suffered any great calamity in the wars, or was wounded, or taken prisoner,
which truly is very credible. Thus Zozomenus, to show unto us, that the sacred
cross representing unto us the sufferings of our Lord as soon as the church had
peace, and persecution ceased, was after the manner abovesaid publicly and
openly adored by the faithful Christians of all Nations.

In further witness hereof, S. Cyril Archbishop of Alexandria, an^ President
in the General Counce^^ of Ephesus, holden in the year 431 in his Homily
against Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, for who^^ condemnation the said
Counce^^ was called, set down in the end (...) the second act, and made in the
pr^sence of the whole Council, says All hail Mother of God etc. by who^^ the
holy Trinity is glorified and ad^^red, through whom the precious cro^^ is made
famous, and is adored throug^out the whole world. Thus S. Cyril, President of
the General Council, before all the Bishops which were assembled from all
parts to the Council, and before Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, then
deposed for heresy; and yet neither Nestorius the heretic, nor any of his
Adherents, who were many, nor any of the Bishops in the Council, amounting to
the number of 200. gainsaid him, or contradicted what he said. Neither could
the adoration of the cross become practiced allover the Christian world in few
years, if at any time it had not been adored by Christians, as we see by
experience in the contrary doctrine taught by the Sectaries, who have labored
against it, now about 80. years, and yet have prevailed but in some corners of
the North part of the world only; whereby it appears, that the cross
representing our Redemption upon it, has at all times been adored with a
relative religious honor throughout the whole world, even since Christianity
was planted amongst the Nations.

For suppose, but not granted, that there was a time when Christians did not
adore the cross, and that the adoration of the cross in the manner aforesaid
was idolatry, as our adversaries would have it, how should all the Christian
world, without a known Preacher or Teacher, or without any known Law, or
Edict either of Pope or Emperor, fall into this their supposed idolatry of
adoring the cross, and no known man to oppose them, or contradict this
doctrine? if there were Presbyterians in these Primitive times, (as our
adversaries would gladly make the world to believe) it seems that they were
not such fighters for Religion as now they are; seeing that known and reputed
Heretics and Infidells to both parties only excepted, there is not found any
one man in these ancient times, who did oppose it.

Moreover the Fathers in that General Council at Ephesus, so much insisted
upon the Doctrinall Succession, or preservation of the doctrine delivered by
the Apostles from the beginning, that Capreolus the Primate of Africa, being
hindered by the Wandall persecution to come to the Council, sent Besulam a
Deacon with letters, exhorting them, that by the authority of Antiquity, they
would expel all new opinions, and persevere in that one verity of the Church,
which from the beginning, even unto that present time, with a simple purity,
and an invincible authority, had come unto them: whereupon his letters being
read, and S. Cyril declaring the mind of Capreolus to the Council, says; The
will of Capreolus Bishop of Carthage is, that the ancient dogmaticall points of
faith be confirmed, and the new and absurdly devised, and wickedly divulged, be
exploded and condemned. All the Bishops together with a loud voice cried, This
is the voice of us all, this we all affirm, this is the vow of us all, as is
set down more at large in the first Act of the second part of the said
Council, before the sentence of the deposition of Nestorius, to demonstrate
unto us, that the adoration of the cross, as is aforesaid, was taught by the
Apostles, and has been used by the faithful, even from the first plantation
of the Christian faith over the world, thereby to imprint in the hearts of men
pious thoughts of the passion of our Lord; and therefore (the promises of God
unto his church considered) it is vain and idle now for any man to oppose or
contradict it.

The verses attributed to Lact antius of the passion of our Lord, set down in
the end of his works say, Flecte genu lignum quae crucis venerabile adora, bend
thy knee, and with reverence adore the wood of the cross. S. Ambrose in his
Sermon upon the death of Theodosius the Emperor, affirms, that not only the
cross of Christ was adored, but also the nail wherewith his feet was pierced,
saying toward the end of his Sermon, Hellen was wise, who placed the cross
upon the head of Kings, that the cross of Christ might be adored in Kings;
neither is this insolency, but piety, seeing that it is born to our holy
redemption: And some lines after, Kings are bended down to the iron of his
feet. Prudentius in his Apothesis against the Jews, before the midst, says,
Purpura supplex sternitur Aeniadae rectoris ad atria Christi, vexillumque
crucis summis dominator adorat, he that is clothed in purple, lies prostrate
in the porch of Christ, and the Emperor adoreth the Standard of the cross. S.
Hierome in his 27. Epistle written to Eustochius, a Virgin of the Epitaph of
Paula, in the 3. chap. commends Paula deceased, for that lying prostrated
before the cross, she adored, as if she had seen our Lord hanging upon it.
Prostratam ante crucem quasi pendentem dominu^ cerneret adorabat.

And it is so manifest, that the faithful in the Primitive church adored the
cross, with relation unto our Savior who suffered upon it for our redemption,
that S. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, a man well known to S. Ambrose, S. Hierome,
and S. Augustine, in his 11. Epistle says, that the Bishop of Hierusalim did
every year in the solemnities of Easter, expose the cross to be adored of the
people, he himself adoring it first. And to conclude, it is yet so manifest,
that the Fathers in the Primitive church adored the cross, that our learned
adversaries, who have read the ancient Fathers works confess it, as Danaeus in
his other part of his first part against Bellarmine, page 1415. saying, that
Cyril and sundry other Fathers, were plainly superstitious, and blinded with
this enchantment of the crosses adoration. Parker against symbolizing, part. 1.
page 14. and part 2. chap. 6. and page 61. alleges the sayings of Photius,
Sedulius, Chrysostom, Propertius, Paulinus, Hierome, and Evagrius, to that
effect. Fulk against Heskins page 657. affirms, that by report of Paulinus,
The cross was by the Bishop of Jerusalem brought forth at Easter to be
worshipped of the people; and Perkins in the 83. chapter of Problemes,
confesses, that Prudentius, Hierome, and Evagrius held the adoration of the
cross, and so forth, as is set down more at large in the 16. chapter of the 2.
book of the Progeny of Catholics and Protestants. And this is sufficient to
show, that in the Primitive church, and in the most flourishing time of the
church, the sacred cross of our Lord was adored with a relative religious
worship by the faithful; and this kind of worship being free from all manner
of suspicion, or idolatry, as I have proved heretofore; there is no reason or
cause why all Christian* Nations should not still use it, to the nourishing in
themselves pious thoughts, and holy meditations of our Saviors sacred passion,
and of our redemption upon the cross.

CHAP. XXV. Of four sacred images which were made of Christ our Lord, whilst
he lived upon earth, and of the relative religious honor done unto them, to the
enriching of their minds with pious thoughts.
EVsebius in the 14. chapter of his 7. book of histories, and after him
Casiadorus, Nicephorus, and other historiographers relate, that the woman which
our Savior cured of an issue of blood by the touch of the hem of his garment,
as is set down in the 9. of S. Matthew; in gratitude thereof, in the City of
Peneada where she was borne, erected two cast images or statues of brass, the
one of her self kneeling, and holding up of her hands, as is used in prayer,
the other of our Savior standing right over against it, with his garment to
his ancles, and his hand stretched out toward the woman, at the foot whereof,
even upon the thing it stood upon, grew a strange kind of herb, which when it
ascended to that height, as to touch the hem of his garment, had virtue to cure
all kind of diseases, which Statua Eusebius going to the said City of Penedda,
says, that he see with his eyes.

Zozomenus in the 20. chapter of his 5. book, continuing the same history,
says, that Julian the Apostata being certified that in Caesarea Philippi (for
so now Peneada was called) was the famous image or statua of Christ, which the
woman, who was cured of an issue of blood had set up, sent to have it cast
down, and his own to be set up in the place which being done, says Zozomen, a
violent fire descended from heaven, struck his statua above the breast, and so
cast the head together with the neck against the earth, that it stuck fast in
the ground with the face downward, and even until this day it remains black,
as burned with lightning. At which time also the Pag^ns or heathen people so
dragged the statua of Christ up and down with such sury, as that they broke it
into pieces, but the Christians afterward gathering together the broken pieces,
placed them in the church, where they are still preserved. Thus these ancient
Authors, to show unto us, that the Primitive Christians honored and worshipped
with a relative religious worship the image and statua's of Christ, not for the
matter or metal they were made of, but for the pious thoughts they represented
unto their memories, as Roman Catholics do at this day; and that those who do
deface sacred images, and beat down, as Julian the Apostata, and the Pagans,
are enemies of pious thoughts and Christianity.

Evagrius Scholasticus, who flourished about the year 596. in the 26. chapter
of his fourth book of histories, writes, that in the City Edessa, near unto
the river of Euphrates, where sometime Abgarus reigned as King, there was a
picture of our Savior kept which he himself had sent unto the said King; and
the City being so straightly besieged by Costroes King of Persia, that they were
almost in despair, his works of great heaps of wood and timber approaching so
near their walls, that they could not defend them; and they had made mines of
fire underneath, which could not burn for want of air, not knowing how further
to defend themselves, says Evagrius, They brought forth the most holy image,
divinely made, and not by the hands of men, but by God Christ, which he had
sent to Abgarus, when he desired to see him, and put it into the mine which
they had made, sprinkling it with water, whereof they had put a good quantity,
both into the fire and wood, which was in their mine, and so aid coming by
divine power to their faith doing this, that which before they could not
perform, was now easily done; for presently a flame took hold of the wood,
which was below, and burnt it into coals, and after ascended to that which was
above: And when the besieged see the smoke to begin to break out above, to
blind the eyes of their enemies, they take little tankers, and fill them with
sulfur, tow, and such like, as are apt to burn, and make a smoke, and and cast
them upon the top of their enemies works, which by the force of their throwing
kindled, and of themselves cast out smoke, whereby they so obscured the smoke
which came out of their mine, that all those who were ignorant of the fact,
imagined that the smoke which they see came from the tankers, and not from any
other place; but three days after flames of fire were seen to break out of the
earth, and then the Persians who fought upon thesr bulwarks, perceiving their
danger, Costroes striving against the divine virtue and power, turns the
conduct of water, which ran in the outside of the City upon the fire, thinking
thereby to extinguish it, but the fire receiving the water as if it had been
oil, or brimstone, or some such other thing, which easily takes fire, burnt
the more, until it had destroyed all the works of the enemy, and brought them
to ashes; whereupon Costroes failing of his hope, returned home with shame.
Thus Evagrius of the picture which our Savior had sent to King Abgarus.

Mention is also made of this image which our Savior made by his divine power,
without workmanship of hands, and sent to Abgarus by Procopius a Scholar of S.
Augustines, in his 2. book De bello Persico, and by the seventh General
Council in the 5. Act, where Leo a Lecturer of the Cathedral church of
Constantinople says, I your unworthy servant, when J went into Syria with the
Kings Commissioners, passed to Edessa, and there see the holy image not made
with hands, honored and also adored by the faithful. Of this image likewise
make mention Adrian the first, in the 18. chapter of his book to Charles the
Great, S. Damascenus in the 17. chapter of his 4. book Orthodoxa fidei, and in
his Oration de Imaginibus, and Constantius Porphyrogenitus in his Oration made
before the Emperors, the Clergy, and the people, which is set down in
Metaphrases upon the 16. of August.

Moreover this image was of such fame and respect, that it was translated from
Edessa unto Constantinople, as witness Zonoras in Romana Lecapeno, Nicephorus
Callistus in the 7. chapter of his 2. book, and S. Thomas upon the third of the
sentences did. 9. q. 1. Art. 2.

Marianus Scotus in his Chronicle at the year 39. and others relate, that our
Savior going to his passion, a woman called Veronica gave him a handkerchiefe
to wipe the sweat which run down his face, and he returned it unto her again
with his image upon it, which image was in the time of Tyberius conveyed by
the Christians to Rome, where even until this day it has been preserved, and
reverenced with a relative religious worship of all pious Christians, and is
commonly set forth to be seen in S. Peter's church, upon Maunday Thursday.

Moreover Athanasius in his book of the suffering of the image of our Lord,
printed amongst the works of S. Athanasius speaks of an image of Christ our
Lord, which Nicodemus, who took him down from the eross gave to Gamaliel,
which after many ages fell into the hands of the Jews at Berith, who out of
spite to our Savior spit upon it, struck it with a reed, crucified it, and
pierced the side thereof with a spear, whereat blood and water issued out,
which cured all diseases, as is more at large set down in the said history, to
manifest it is that sacred images have always been in use amongst Catholic
Christians and that a relative religious worship ought to be bestowed upon
them, seeing that even from our Saviors time the faithful have practiced it,
and God has been pleased to confirm their piety by miracles.

CHAP. XXVI: Of the enemies of the Cross, and sacred Images, and of the
miseries that befell Images, and of the miseries that befell them.
THe first enemy that the cross had was Satan, who lived long with the
Apostles, who as S. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Phillipenses says, Before
the cross was framed, the devil labored that it might be made, and to that
purpose he wrought with the children of disobedience, in Judas, in the
Pharisees, in the Sadduces, in old men, in young, in the Priests; but after
that the cross was finished, he was troubled, moved Judas to repent, showed him
a halter, and taught him how to hang himself with it; he terrified and
troubled the same woman in her sleep, (that is to say) Pilates wife, spoken of
in the 27. of S. Matthew, and he endeavored that they should cease from
crucifying, who before had labored by all means, that the same cross should be
had in a readiness, not that he repented him of so great an evil, for so he
should have been less wicked; but now he begun to apprehend his own
destruction, for the cross of Christ was to be the chiefest cause of his
condemnation, death, and perdition, therefore he works it in many that they
should deny the cross, and be ashamed of the passion, and affirm that Christ
tasted death only in opinion, etc. for the devil is diverse and sundry ways the
author of all evil, deceiving men's minds by false reasons. Thus S. Ignatius,
to demonstrate unto us, that the first enemy of the cross was the devil.

The second enemies of the cross were the Jews, who as S. Ignatius in the same
place before cited affirms, the devil stirred up to deny the cross, who also
unto this day remain reprobate.

The third were the Gentiles, whom as the said S. Jgnatius in the same place
affirms, calumniated the cross of witchcraft, or enchantment, as diverse do at
this day.

The fourth were certain Libertine Christians and Apostates, who in the
Apostles times fell from the faith, denied the cross, and put their whole
felicity in sensual life, and carnal pleasure, of whom S. Paul speaks,
saying, Many walk, whom often I have told you of (and now weeping, also I tell
you) enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is the
belly, and their glory in their confusion, who mind worldly things, Phil. 3.18.
Thus S. Paul against certain Heretics, who in his time were enemies of the
cross of Christ, and gave themselves to luxury, gluttony, and sensual delights,
casting off abstinence, temperance, continency, mortification, and austere
life, which the cross does teach us, which heresy then took root, not only
in Juda, but in Greece, in diverse of his Epistles does so extol the cross of
Christ, as to affirm, that he knew nothing but Jesus Christ crucified.

These Heretics were Simon M^gus and his followers, Cerinthus, B^silides,
etc. who taught that Christ was not indeed crucified, but withdrew himself from
the cross, and suffered only in his image, and the like; whereof see S.
Ironaeus in his 1. book and 25. chapter of heresies, and Epiphanius heresy 24.
and 28. and S. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Trallians.

After these followed the heretical Nicolaites, Theo^^orus and Cleobulus, who
as affirms S. Ignatius in his aforesaid Epistles, were so great lovers of
voluptuousness, carnal pleasures, and such Sycoph^nts, as that they became
enemies of the cross of Christ, denied the cross, and were ashamed of his
passion. And it is a thing worthy to be noted, that all those who denied the
virtue of the cross, or the signing themselves with the cross, were carnal
sensual people, whose God was their belly, and their glory in their confusion;
for within few years they ended their days in ignominy and shame; and these
also denied that the Christians ought to give any reverence or respect to the
images or pictures of the Apostles, or Saints, affirming themselves to be
immediately sent from God to reform the world, as witnesses S. Epiphanius,
Haeres. 21. and 22. and contemned the Martyrs of Christ, as witnesses S.
Irenaeus in the 20. chapter of his 3. book of heresies, saying, they ascended
to that madness, as to despise the Martyrs, and found fault with these who had
been slain for the confession of our Lord.

After these followed the Manicheans, who as the former Heretics had done,
taught that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ had not a true body, but a
phantasma, or an appearance of a body, whereof no pictures or images were to be
worshipped, as affirms Terasius in the 2. Council of Nice, Michael Syngelus
in the life of Dionisius Areopagita, and S. Augustine in the fifteenth chapter
of his 20. book against Faustus a Manichean. This Manicheus or Manes taking
upon him by his virtue and power to cure the son of the King of Persia, sick in
the hands of the Physicians, the Physicians being dismissed, and Manes taking
upon him the cure, he died presently; whereupon the King, as affirms Suidas,
caused Manicheus or Manes to be flayed quick, and so naked to be delivered to
dogs to be eaten.

After the Manicheans followed the Arians, so called of Arius, who as is
affirmed in the 7. Synod, denied that any worship ought to be given by
Christians to the image of Christ, or his Saints: This Arius after many
troubles and afflictions which he had brought upon the courch, at an appointed
time that he was to dispute with Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, f^ll into a
Flux, and as Carrion in his Chronicle relates, going aside to ease himself,
died suddenly upon the privy.

After these followed Julian the Apostata, who falling from Christianity to
Paganism, not only erected his own image in the place where the statua of our
Lord stood in Caesarea (of which I have spoken of heretofore) but also, as
affirms S. C ril B shop of Alexandria in his sixth book against him,
upbraided the Catholic Christians of his time with the adoration of the cross,
as our Adversaries do at this day, saying, O wretched men who adore the wood of
the cross, and imprint the sign thereof in your foreheads, and before your
doors. Thus the Emperor Julian in his heat against the Christians, who soon
after in the midst of his Army was slain from heaven, as affirms S. Gregory
Nazianzen in his second Oration against him, and Z z^menus in the 2. chapter of
his 6. book of histories.

After Julian the Apostata followed Xenaia, a servant by condition, and an
Eutichian Heretic by profession, a man who w s never baptized, yet feigned
himself a Christian Clergyman, and by the Eutychian Heretics was made also a
Bishop, this man, says Nicephorus, in in the 27. chapter of his 16. book of
Histories, was the f rst (who in these times) belched out this opinion, that
the images of Christ, and of those who pleased h m, were not to be worshipped;
and so to the Eutychian heresy added the contempt of sacred Images, and died
excommunicated by the Council of Calcedon.

After him followed the Mahometans and Turks, who do so abhor the Cross, as
(with the Sectaries of this age) they call the Christians Idolaters for adoring
it, as witnesses Cedrenus upon Heraclius: neither do they permit unto those of
their Sect the use of Images, as appears by the 15. and 16. chapters of their
Alcoran; which Turks being enemies of Christ and Christian Religion, are
without all hope of salvation. And this is sufficient to show unto thee, dear
Reader, the ancient enemies of the Cross and sacred images, and the miseries
they fell into. In thee it lies to be a follower of the Catholic Roman
Church, and to honor, reverence and respect sacred images, with a relation unto
the things they represent, thereby to nourish in thee good thoughts; or with
the Devil, Jews, Turks, Infidells and Heretics to condemn them, and fill
thy heart and mind with filthy shapes, vicious thoughts, and ugly
representations.

As for the more modern haters of the Cross and sacred images, and their evil
ends or miseries which befell them: If out of curiosity thou desire to see
them, I refer thee to the 12. chapter of Bellarmines book, of the images of
Saints, and to the 9. Article of the 2. book of Coccius, and to the 10. Article
of his 5. book in his first Tome, where they are set down at large.

CHAP. XXVII. The visible and invisible relative religious worship, which the
faithful in the Primitive Church used toward the sacred pictures, signs, and
images of the written Word of God, and thereby learned the true sense, and
endued their souls with wholesome meditations, and pious thoughts.
IF thou would (dear Reader) examine the cause from whence it proceeds,
that diverse in this age do so much apply their minds to the reading of the
Bible, that they have it almost continually in their hands, or lying by them,
and are so earnest upon it, as that many of them think they must have a text
out of the Scriptures for whatsoever they do, or else they sin, as witnesses
Mr. Sanderson, a Protestant Minister, in the sixth and eighth. of his second
Sermon preached at Grantham, in the year 1634. and yet for the most part reap
no other benefit out of it, but errors, heresies, and blasphemies against God,
thou shall find the original cause thereof to be,

First a pride of mind, and a contempt or scorn to bestow any relative worship,
respect, or honor upon the material character, or books, or letters, sent from
God himself unto his faithful followers, or chridren, penned by the Holy
Ghost, as S. Peter affirms, 2 Pet. 1.21. but handle, look upon them, and use
them, after the same manner, and with the same respect they do the books, or
letters of sensual carnal men; and sometimes also to show their contempt, or
little esteem, change the material word of God, as though that should be the
sacred word, what they would, and not what God had ordained.

And secondly a want of an invisible relative religious worship, respect and
honor unto the divine and supernatural sense which God has given unto his
sacred word; whereupon they also easily change the sense into their own, or
other profane, whereby they turn faith into infidelity, truth into error, and
the things revealed by God himself into blasphemy, and please themselves in it.

Whereas holy and sacred things are not to be handl^d or treated upon, but
holily, with a relative religious worship, respect and esteem, for the sacred
things which they do represent, and as they do represent them; and the text of
the Scriptures is not only called the holy or sacred Scriptures, Romans 1.2.2.
Tim. 3.15. but also our faith is called our most holy faith, Jude ver. 20.
those must needs fall into great errors, heresies, and blasphemies, who read,
speak of, or handle them, without a relative religious honor and respect unto
them, for God disperseth the proud in the conceit of their hearts, Luke 1.51.
Again, To whom shall I have respect, says God, but to him that trembles at my
words, Isa. 66.2. as at the words of his Creator?

S. Paul calls the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, The Gospel
of the glory of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. wherefore those who give no more
religious worship and honor unto it, then they give unto other books, but
rudely read, interpret, and handle them, as they do profane Authors, must of
necessity abound with errors, heresies, and blasphemies, according to the words
of our Lord, saying, Whosoever shall glorify me, I will glorify him, and they
that contemn me shall be base, 1 Kings, or Samuel 2.29. as of no Religion
established by the Son of God, or Scriptures, seeing that Religion (even by the
consent of our adversaries) is described to be a due worship of God, and holy
things, and fall into the error of those wicked Priests, of whom God
complained, saying, Between a holy thing and a profane they have put no
difference, Ezekiel. 22.26.

Whereupon the faithful servants of God to profess a Religion, and to nourish
in their hearts and souls the pious thoughts, and piety comprehended in the
Bible, always honored and respected the sacred text or Bible with relative
religious worship, both for his sake that writ it, and for the divine things it
represented unto their memories; in such sort, as in the Old Law the faithful
Jews kept it in the Tabernacle, and adored it with the Tabernacle, never
touched it, without first washing their hands, kissed it as often as they
either opened or shut it, would not sit upon that seat upon which it lay; and
if by accident it fell to the earth; they fasted for their negligence one whole
day, as affirms Corn^lius a Lapide in his preface to the phrases of the holy
Scriptures.

The reason why they did so was, for that wisdom will not enter into a
malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sin, Wisd. 1.4. whereupon the
Prophet prays, saying, establish thy word in thy servant in thy fear, Psalm.
118.38. Again, blessed is the man, whose will is in the way of our Lord, in his
law he will meditate day and night. Psalm. 1.1. where the Prophet affirms,
that those who walk in the way of our Lord, will not make so slight account of
the Scriptures, as to read them only transitorily, but he will meditate upon
them, which is performed always with great humility and submission of mind;
whereupon S. Hilary upon this text says, The meditation of the law is not
only in the words of the reader, but in the religion of works.

In the New T^stament our Savior says, Give not that which is holy to dogs,
neither cast ye you pearls before swine, least they trample them under their
feet, and turn again, and tear you in pieces, Mat. 7.6. Pearls (says S.
Hierome upon this text and the 13. of Matthew) are the Gospel, and the Law, and
the Prophets; the dogs, says he, are those, who after they have received the
faith, return to the vomit of their former sins; and swine, those who have not
yet believed the Gospel, but stick fast in the mine of infidelity and vices,
to demonstrate unto us, that our Lord would not have heretics, vicious men,
or infidells, to read the Scriptures, whereof in the 13. of S. Matthew he
yields a reason, because they do not esteem them above the things of this
world; and therefore if such men read the Scriptures in lieu of reaping benefit
by them, they corrupt them, and become, as our Savior there says, persecuters
of the church, which we find true by experience in this age.

Again, our Savior says to the Jews, Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. with
that honor, care and affection that they ought to be searched into: for, as S.
Chrysostom, in his Sermon of Abraham, well observes, he says, Search the
Scriptures, do not corrupt them: search them not only by reading them, but
carefully inquiring after the sense: God gave indeed the sacred letters or
characters, but he laid not open their contemplations or mysteries, but
reserved them to their senses, that so he might maintain equity or justice, and
behold thy care or industry. Thus S. Chrysostom, to show unto us, that he who
shall read the sacred letters or characters of the Bible without a relative
religious worship unto the text, for the divine things they represent, and
follow the sense which God gave unto the text, will reap no thing but error and
heresy: for, our Savior commanding a diligent search to be made into the
Scriptures, forbideth us to corrupt them, and wills us that we should not
omit any means of finding out the sense or height of their contemplation, which
(amongst other things) is an inward and outward relative religious worship to
the sacred text, signs, pictures, or images of the Bible, as did the Jews in
the old Law, lest for want thereof we corrupt the text by false senses, or
interpretations.

Our Savior, out of a desire that all men might be saved, and to fulfill what
was necessary on his behalf, commanded the Apostles, saying, Going into the
whole world, preach the Gospel to all creatures. And they going forth preached
every where, Mar. 16.20. Yet our Savior himself in Matthew. 13. says, that of
four sorts of hearers of the Gospel, three hear to their greater damnation. The
first are only hearers, who are like men who dwell by the highway, and look
aftere very thing that passes, and entertain all kind of thoughts, friendships
and affairs; like an Inn, which is open to good and bad, known and unknown,
friends and strangers, of whom S. James speaks, saying, If a man be a hearer
of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding the feature of his
face in a glass, who considered himself, and went his way, and presently
forgets what a manner of man he was, James 1.24. The second hear, and with
joy receive the Word, but are temporal, and have no root, and so for a time
they believe, and in time of t^mptation they revolt, because they did not
esteem of the Gospel above all earthly things, as did the Prophet David,
saying, The law of thy mouth is good to me above thousands of gold and silver,
Psalm. 118.71. and therefore for temporal pl^asures or commodities easily
forsook it.

The third hear the Word, and the care of the world, and the deceiptfulnesse of
riches, and concupiscences about other things entering in choke the word, and it
is made fruitless. For, as S Paul says, They who will be made rich, fall into
temptations, and the snare of the D^vill, and into many unprofitable and
hurtful desires, which drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. The
fourth are they, who with with a good and very good heart hearing the word of
God, do retain it, and yield fruit in patience. Thus our Savior, to
demonstrate unto us, that there is required on our parts an esteem of the Word
of God above all earthly things, that we may adhere and cleave unto the sense
given unto it by God, and it to us, and fill our hearts with pious thoughts,
otherwise the reading or hearing of it, or picking of our faith out of it, will
but increase our damnation.

Honor is due unto virtue, as affirms Aristotle chap. 5. of his book of
Ethics, and also the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5.17. And the Scriptures are the
virtue of God, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18. wherefore as to God is due an absolute
religious worship, so to the Scriptures, which are his Word, signs, figures
and images, is due a relative religious worship, because it is his Word;
whereupon S. Paul, describing the manner how the Christians in the Primitive
church received the word of the Gospel, says, We also give thanks to God
continually, because that when you had received of us the word of the hearing
of God, you received it not as the word of men, but (as it is indeed) the word
of God, 1 These. 2.12. and there also showing the effect which the Word of God
works in men, when together with the sense it is received and embraced after
this relative religious manner, presently adds their constant suffering for
the Gospel, as received into a good and very good heart, which yields fruit
in patience.

In regard of this visible and invisible relative religious worship, and honor
which is due unto the sacred Word of God, when Bishops make Deacons, and give
them authority to read the Gospel, they receive the holy books kneeling, as is
set down in the Pontifical: And anciently when the Gospel was read in the
church, all men who were present laid down their weapons, stood barehead, even
the Christian Kings and Emperors, and the Bishops, Priests and Deacons, who
celebrated the divi^e Service, and handled the book of the Go^pell in honor
th^reof, often kissed the sacred book with a holy kiss, as witness^th the
ancient Roman order, publ^shed in the 8. Tome Biblioth^cae Patrum; which
rel^tive relig^ous honor is so due unto the sacred Scriptures, as that Justinus
Martyr, who liv^d with the Apostles cholars, in his Oration to the Gentiles,
commends Prolomaeus King of Egypt for using it, says, after that the seventy
Interpreters had translated the Old Testament into Greek, P^olom^ us sent them
home with rich gifts, and as it was befitting, kissed the books, and
consecrated to God, put them in his Library.

Moreover in honor of the Gospel, when it was read in the church, candles were
lighted, not to drive away darkness, for the Sun then many times shined
bright, but to show signs of joy, and to express under the type of a
temporal light, that light which is spoken of in the Scriptures, saying, He
was the true light, as witnesses S. Isidorus in the 12. chapter of his 7. bo^k of
Etimologies, and S. Hierome in his book against Vigilantius; and to distinguish
the honor which they gave unto the holy Bible from other books, they made a
sacred place in the church only to keep it in, as witnesses S. Paulinus in his
12. Epistle to Severus. So the relative religious respect which the Primitive
Fathers bare unto the sacred books, and their divine Christian Catholic
senses, delivered unto them by doctrinall succession from the Apostles, brought
forth in them an abundance of pious thoughts, and healthful meditations of the
unity of the Christian Catholic faith, constancy in one and the same Religion,
sincerity in all their actions, and charity toward God and man, seeing the
relative religious honor and respect which they bare, both to the sacred
material letter, and divine sense imposed upon them, an obligation rather to
die a thousand deaths, then to suffer any alteration, or change in one jot of
the material text, or title of the divine sense.

On the contrary, our adversaries by denying all kind of visible religious
respect, honor, or worship to the sacred Word of God, have made those books
which they now call the Bible, as they use them, the most wretched, miserable,
visible creatures that are upon the earth, the Panders of all heresies,
schisms, and blasphemies, and the protector and defender of all rebellions,
wickedness, and sin, as we find by too lamentable experience; whereby appears
the necessity of this visible and invisible relative religious worship, and
honor unto the sacred Word of God, by all Christian men, to nourish in their
hearts pious thoughts of the things contained therein, and to possess them
with a firm and constant resolution to adhere unto that material text, and
divine sense, which were delivered unto the faithful in the beginning, to
persevere in the same until the end of the world, according to the words of S.
John, saying; That which you have heard from the beginning, let it abide in
you; if that abide in you which you have heard from the beginning, you also
shall abide in the Son, and in the Father, 1 John 2.24.

CHAP. XXVIII. Answer to Obj^ctions.
OBject. Some Roman Catholics pray to pictures, and adore them as God.

Answ. I do not think that any of our Adversaries ever heard any Roman
Catholic to say, Picture pray for me, or have mercy upon me, or to call a
picture a God, or to say that there were more Gods then one; if he should hear
any to say so, or know of any who should believe that any picture or image were
a God, this man or woman could not be a Roman Catholic, but an heretic or
Pagan idolater, seeing that the ^atholique Roman Church teaches all her
followers in the three Creeds, and in her Catechismes, to believe under penalty
of damnation, that there is but one God.

Ob. They pray before pictures, and kneel before images.

Ans. So our adversaries pray before their Bibles, and kneel before their
books, yet I do not think that they believe their Bible, or other Prayer-books
to be Gods.

Ob. They say that their pictures are holy, and call the cross holy cross.

Ans. So do our adversaries call their Communion the holy Communion, and their
Bible the holy Bible, and the Scriptures the sacred Word of God; for the same
reason that they call the Bible holy, and the Scriptures sacred, for the same
reason Roman Catholics call the picture of our Savior and his Saints holy,
that is, because they represent unto us holy things, as well as words, as I
have said heretofore: anciently in Egypt, and at this day in China, that which
we in Europe express by letters and characters, they expr^sse by pictures and
images; so that the Christians of these countries must either have no Bible, or
a Bible of pictures, and images; and if our adversaries will allow them to have
an holy Bible, and sacred Scriptures, then they must also allow of holy
pictures and sacred images, distinct from profane.

Ob. Images and idols are all one.

Ans. How absurd this is, appears by the Scriptures, which say, Christ is the
image of the invisible God, Col. 15. God created man to his own image, to the
image of God he created him, Genesis 1.17. Adam lived 130. years, and begat to his
own image and likeness, Genesis 5.3. man is the image and glory of God, 1 Cor.
11.7. And if images and idols be all one, then the Christians in Egypt and
China when they put forth Bibles, set forth idols, and when they respect or
reverence their Bibles or sacred Scriptures, they worship idols; which how
absurd it is, I leave to the piety of the Reader. Again, many idols are no
images, as trees, mountains, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, unto which the Heathen
offered Sacrifice, as unto their gods; whereby they made them idols, which yet
were no images.

Moreover images and idols differ in this: First; that idols, as they are
idols, had no truth at all in nature, but were feigned things, all our sacred
images have some estentiall truth extant, either in heaven or earth, which they
represent. Secondly, all idols are without truth, concerning faith and
religion; all our images contain such a truth as belongs to Christian faith
or religion. Thirdly, Sacrifice was offered to idols, but we never offer
sacrifice to any image or picture. Fourthly idols, as they are idols, were
either images of wicked men, or creatures not worthy of honor; ours of our
Savior and his Saints, who are worthy of worship and honor; whereby it
appears that sacred images and idols are not all one.

Ob. Roman Catholics adore, kneel before, and worship their images, as the
heathen did their idols.

Ans. The heathen, at least for the most part, adored, kneeled, and worshipped
the material carved piece of wood, or engraven stone, or molten image, or
painted cloth, as a God, as witness the Scriptures, saying, make us gods, that
may go before us, Exodus 32.1. Again, he cut down Cedars etc. and kindled them,
and baked bread, but of the rest he wrought a god, and adored, Isa. 44.15.
Again, Balthazar the King made a great feast to his Nobles, etc. and they
praised their gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, and of wood, and
of stone, Daniel 5.4. whereupon God himself said to the Israelites, that when
they should fall into idolatry, you shall serve gods that were framed with men's
hands, wood and stone that see not, Deuteronomy. 4.18. But as I have said heretofore,
no Roman Catholic either esteems or thinks any sacred image to be a God,
or adoreth or kneeleth to it, or worshippeth it as a God; if he should, he
should cease to be a Roman Catholic, and become an infidel. Again, the
heathen terminated their adoration, kneeling, and worshipping in their idols,
as in their last end, God and chiefest good, as is before showed; Roman
Catholics adore and kneel before their sacred pictures, and worship their
images only as remembrances of holy things, and neither as gods, or as things
which contain any Godhead, nor yet as before an absolute thing, creature or
person. Thirdly, they offered sacrifice unto their idols, as witness the
Scriptures, saying, They have made to themselves a molten calf, and have
adored, and immolated hosts unto it, Exodus 32.8. Again, They sacrificed to the
idols of Canaan, Psalm. 105.38. The Roman Catholics never offer sacrifice unto
any picture, or image whatsoever.

Ob. Some of you say, that the same honor is due unto the image, which is due
unto the example, but Christ, as you confess, is to be adored with divine
honor, or honor of latria.

Ans. Whatsoever any of ours for disputation sake shall say in this point, yet
they all submit their judgments to the church, which in the 7. Act of the
seventh General Council has decreed, that the image of Christ is not to be
honored with divine honor, and in the third Canon of the last Act, that the
image of Christ is no otherwise to be adored, then is the books of the Gospel:
and before these Councels, to worship the image of Christ with divine honor,
was condemned amongst us for heresy, as witnesses S. Jrenaeus in the 24. cha.
of his. 1. book of heresies, S. Epiphanius in his 27 heresy, and S. Augustine
in the 7. heresy of his book ad quod vult Deus.

So first no Christian Catholic ever affirmed that it was lawful to offer
exterior visible sacrifice to the image of Christ our Lord. Secondly, these
men do not say that the image of Christ, as it is the image of Christ, and as
it is separated from Christ, may by it self independent of Christ be
worshipped with divine honor, but as it is one thing with Christ, or is reduced
to Christ, as the garments of a King are annexed to the King, or as the
splendour, beauty or proportion of a body is coherent to a body; and so by a
subtle distinction they may peradventure defend, that the image of Christ may
by accident, or reductively, be honored with the same honor that Christ our
Lord is honored, though not of it self, or by it self, for all Roman
Catholics do hold, that a thing which has neither life, sense, nor reason,
(such as is an artificial image or picture of it self, and in regard of it
self) is neither worthy of any honor, nor capable; and therefore though these
Roman Catholics do differ in words, and subtle distinctions, yet they agree
in substance, effect, and meaning, and say, that the cross or picture of our
Savior, as it is a molten, or graven, or painted thing, and has no relation
to our Lord, is worthy of no honor or worship, but may be burned or broken
without offense; and as it has relation to our Savior, or as it is the
picture of Christ of it self, it speaks of an inferior thing to Christ our
Lord, as the picture of Caesar speaks of an inferior thing to Caesar, and
therefore cannot be worshipped with the same honor which is due to Christ, but
by accident or dependence, and this is the opinion of all. Roman Catholics.

Ob. Moses said to the Israelites, You saw not any similitude in the day that
our Lord spoke to you in Horeb from the midst of the fire, lest perhaps
deceived, you might make you a graven similitude, or image of male or female,
Deuteronomy. 4.15.

Ans. This text answers it self in the verses following, Beware lest at any
time thou forget the Covenant of the Lord thy God, etc. and make to thee a
graven similitude of these things which our Lord has prohibited to be made. So
this text only prohibiteth the making of vain images to our selves, and not to
the honor of God, as I have showed more at large hereupon, and so the alleged
text says, lest deceived, you might make you for your selves, and not for the
honor of God. Again in this same chapter it says, and being deceived, make to
you some similitude; whereby it appears, that this text only prohibiteth the
making of vain and idle pictures to our selves, and not the pious pictures of
our Savior and his Saints, nor yet of the civil pictures of well-deserving
men, which may redound to the honor and glory of God, by putting civil good
thoughts into our minds.

Ob. You picture God and the Holy Ghost contrary to the Scriptures, which say,
To whom have you made God like, or what image will you set to him? I say 40.18.

Ans. There be three sorts of images or pictures, some are made to express the
perfect similitude, form, essence, and nature of the thing it self, and so no
faithful man goes about to make an image or picture of God, because as so he
is incomprehensible and invisible, and this is that which is forbidden by this
text.

The second kind is by images to represent to our sight some visible
apparitions of God unto men, in such shapes and forms as his will has chosen,
and not his nature framed, as his walking in Paradise to seek Adam and Eve in
the shape of a man, Genesis 3. his standing upon the top of a ladder, Genesis 18. his
conversing with Moses, as one friend with another, Exodus 33. his sitting upon
a Throne, as he appeared to the Prophets Isay and Micheas, Isa. 6. and the 3.
of Kings and last chapter, his appearing in the form of a Dove, and cloven
tongues as it were of fire, Mat. 3. Act. 2. etc. to picture God after any of
these manners, to express the manner of his apparitions to mankind, has
always been lawful, otherwise these who in place of letters and characters
use pictures and images, as the Egyptians and Chinois could have no Bible,
neither do they give him any new form, but express the form, in which (out of
his infinite goodness) he appeared unto men.

A third kind of setting forth God unto our minds by pictures and images, is
not to express his immediate form, nature or essence by pictures or images,
which is impossible, but by some remote and mediate similitude, which according
to our weak capacity may put us in mind of him, or his attributes: As for
example, to express him as all-seeing by an eye, or as of in speakable power,
wisdom goodness, by a Stork, which has no tongue, for that no tongue is able
to express his essence, nature, goodness, etc. or else to show that God is
eternal, without beginning or ending, by a circle which has neither end nor
beginning, etc. as is more at large set down by Pierius in his book of the
sacred Egyptian letters, and this kind of painting or setting forth of God by
pictures and images, has also always been lawful, otherwise those who write,
or print pictures and images for letters or characters, could have no Bible, or
writ any thing of God, or of the mysteries of our faith, as the Egyptians and
Chinois; and this is called the expression of the nature of a thing by
Analogies, or metaphorical and mystical significations: as also for example,
to set forth the strength, agility, and glory of an Angel, by Analogy and
mystical signification, we use to paint, or print a beautiful young man with
wings, as were the pictures of Angels in the Temple; and this kind also of
setting forth God or Angels has always been lawful.

Ob. The Scriptures say, whereunto have you resembled me, and made me equal,
and compared me, and made me like? Isa. 46.5.

Ans. This text, as the former is spoken of idols, as appears by the text it
self, which says whereunto have you made me equal, which cannot be, but by
making of an idol, no Christian Catholic, either thinking, or esteeming, or
imagining any artificial picture, or image to be equal with God; and it
presently follows in the same text, You that contribute gold out of the bag,
and w^^gh silver with balance, hiring a goldsmith to make a god, to demonstrate
unto us, that this and such like places alleged out of the Scriptures, only
prohibit the making of idols, or the going about to paint or print an image or
picture which immediately shall set forth the nature, substance, or essence of
God, which is impossible, and forbidden.

Ob. The Council of Eliberis in the 36. Canon, forbids images in churches.

Ans. It prohibiteth the painting of them upon the church wall in time of
persecution, least they should be profaned or abused, but confesses, that
they ought to be worshipped or reverenced, as I have showed heretofore.

Ob. Tertullian in the 12. chapter of his Apology for the Christians against
the Gentiles, says, they did not adore statues or images.

Ans. Not as the Gentiles did their statues or images with divine honor* as
Gods, but with a relative religious worship, as in the 16. cha. of the same
book he affirms, saying, who does not think us to be religious toward the
cross, or of the cross?

Moreover the faithful Christian soldiers at all times adored the image of
the Roman Emperors in the Imperial standard, as witnesses S. Gregory Nissen
in his first Oration against Julian the Apostata, number 76. saying; They think
it not enough that they themselves are adored, unless it be given also unto
them in their pictures and images. The like has Zozonteus in the 4. cha. of
his 1. book of histories, saying; The soldiers used to adore the Ensign of war
called Labarum, which was inferior to sacred pictures, signs or images.

Ob. They adored the pictures and images of the Emperors with civil worship,
but not with a religious worship.

Ans. Then first you confess, that adoration may be given unto the pictures
and images of Christ and his Saints, but not a religious adoration; for if it
be lawful to adore the pictures or images of heathen men, you cannot deny it
unto the pictures of our Savior and his Saints, who are far more eminent; and
that relative religious worship may be given unto them, I have proved in the
former chapters; and by the same reason, that civil adoration may be given to
the eminent temporal things of the world, by the same reason a relative
religious adoration may be given to eminent, religious or spiritual things in
the Kingdom of Gods church, because the hierarchy in the one, is answerable to
the Monarchy in the other; wherefore seeing that you grant a civil adoration
to the pictures of eminent men in the one, you cannot with any reason deny a
relative religious adoration to the pictures or images of Christ and his Saints
in the other.

Ob. Some of the Fathers say, that neither Angels or Saints, or any other
creature, may be worshipped or adored with a religious worship.

Ans. As I have said heretofore, the virtue of Religion has diverse acts or
operations, whereof the chief is extended to God only, such as is the
profoundest humiliation and prostration of the will, as to the first truth,
first beginning, the chiefest good and last end of man, which for his
excellency, is or may be called absolute adoration, or a religious worship
without addition, or a divine worship, because it has no relation or
dependence upon any other, and this may not be given unto any creature: So when
the Fathers say that a religious worship may not be given to the Angels and
Saints etc. they understand this absolute religious worship, which is made with
a whole prostration or submission of the will, as to the chiefest good and last
end of man, which were injustice to bestow upon any creature; and when they say
that a religious worship may be given to creatures, as S. Augustine does in the
21. cha. of his 20. book against Faustus, and others; they intend this relative
or inferior kind of religious worship, which we call for distinction sake
relative, which may be bestowed either upon the eminent creatures of God,
according to the supernatural excellency or dignity which he has communicated
unto them, or upon sacred pictures, signs or images, for the relation they have
unto the mysteries of our faith, or things in heaven; so as when we say God
only is good, for that he is good of himself, infinite, and independent, it
does not hinder us to say that his creatures are good by communication from his
goodness, no more does it hinder us to say, that his eminent creatures, upon
whom he has bestowed grace and glory, or sacred pictures, signs or images,
which have a relation to the mysteries of our faith, or to the things of
heaven, may be worshipped with a relative religious worship, depending upon
God, and sending us unto him, as unto our last end.

According to this argument, you may prove that we ought not to use charity or
love toward our neighbor, or toward any man, because the Scripture says,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul,
and thy whole mind, Deuteronomy. 5.6. Mat. 22.37. therefore may you say as you do of
religious worship, you may not use charity or love unto any creature which is
absurd; but as the highest charity, and chiefest extension of our loves
belongs to God alone, as to our chiefest good, and an inferior kind of
charity with relation unto him, may be used, and ought to be used toward his
creatures; so likewise in the virtue of Religion, some acts are due unto God
alone, others to be communicated to his eminent creatures; and if you can
understand this of charity, you may easily understand the same of religious
worship, or of any other virtue, how it may be used toward God alone, and how
it may be communicated to his creatures depending upon him.

Ob. Some of the more simple sort of people amongst you adore your pictures of
God, or pray unto them, as unto a living thing.

Ans. I never could either see or hear of any such amongst them: If we cannot
find a dog that will not be able to distinguish between a true living Hare, and
a painted, how much more the simplest man? but if any such things should be
amongst them, he could not be a Roman Catholic, but an heretic or infidel*
and as such would have been punished.

Ob. Mr. L^mbert in his preambulations, and diverse of our Authors do write of
the abuses, which were committed in England about images.

Ans. These abuses, and the like were committed by Protestants, and after the
time that King Henry the VIII. had separated himself from the Cat holike Roman
Church, and had by virtue of his Supremacy, and the Supremacy of his Protestant
Clergy, placed Protestant Bishops, Abbats, and Abbatesses in the Monasteries,
who to disgrace them, and bring them to desolation and ruin into which they
after fell, invented these and the like abuses, that they might with the better
color seize upon their lands and goods, as appears, for that images were not
taken out of the Churches, Monasteries, until the the time of King Edward the
VI. in the year 1547. which was about thirteen years after that the Popes
Authority was by Parliament excluded out of England, as do witness your own
Chronicles.

Neither is it a sufficient cause to take away a good thing from amongst men,
for that diverse do abuse it, for so we should neither leave Bible nor
Sacraments in the church, seeing that both are abused by many, our Lord (says
the Prophet) will not leave the rod of sinners upon the lot of the just, Psalm.
124.3.

The Conclusion.
FOr conclusion, it is necessary to observe, that amongst the many oppressions,
which the enemy of mankind practices over those who by sin he has made his
slaves, this is one, that he permits not unto any one of them the use of a
pious thought, but if at any time a pious thought begin to appear in any of
their hearts or minds, he presently snatcheth it away, as witnesses our
Savior, Matthew. 13.19. thereby to force his subjects to begin their hell here
upon earth: Wherefore if you permit no text of Scripture publicly to pass
amongst the people, but such as is corrupted by dissenting translations, nor
any Sermons to be heard, but such as are made vain by differing opinions in
faith, nor sacred pictures, signs, and images to be seen, which shall not be
beaten down, as Idols, and their relative religious respect and reverence to be
preached against as superstitious, as they are in this Island; what will be the
issue? but that both pious thoughts and works banished, every man's heart will
be his hell, not only to the loss of their souls, but also in process of time
to the destruction of our Nation, by vicious life, and wicked deeds.

The Scriptures command us, saying, Labor the more, that by good works you may
make sure your vocation, 2 Pet. 1.10. But as S. Augustine in the 6. ch^p. of
his book of Grace and free will, w^ll observes, There could be no good works,
if good thoughts did not go before them; wherefore if you will take away the
abundance of iniquity, wicked deeds, witchcrafts, and other impious crimes,
which reign amongst men in this Island, it is necessary, that you not only
publicly admit of true Copies of the holy Scriptures, Sermons of the Catholic
Faith, which only is true; end of sacred pictures, signs, and images but also
that they be reverenced and respected with a relative religious resp^ct and
worship for the divine things which they represent, and as they do represent
them, thereby not only to put good thoughts into the hearts of men, but al^o
to nourish them, to the bringing forth of an abundance of good works* to the
honor of God, salvation of our souls, and prosperity of our Country, which
God grant. Amen.

To only God be honor and glory.

