Speculum Crape-Gownorum, THE SECOND PART. Or a Continuation of OBSERVATIONS
and REFLECTIONS Upon the Late SERMONS Of some that would be thought GOLIAH's
FOR THE Church of England.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin. 1682.

The Second Part of Speculum Crapegownorum, in a Dialogue between Priestlove
and Meryweather.
Priestlove, I Say, and I still say, that had it not been for the Observator
and Heraclitus, the Nation had been ruined ere this.


Merry. How Friend Priestlove?


Priestlove. Nay, how me no hows, for it is very true.


Merry. Not so hasty -- For will you prefer a Brace of Quacks to a whole
College of able Physicians?


Priestlove. I prefer no Quacks.


Merry. Yes, you do -- For the Observator and Heraclitus are a couple of mere
pretending Quacks; they find the Nation labors under a Scorbutic distemper,
and they come with their French Congies, and cry, Me cure de State. Me cure de
State, when they know no more of State-Physick, unless it be to Draw a Blister,
than Horse-Leeches.


Priest. I care not for that, I stand to my first Assertion still.


Merry. This it is, not to consider: for in so saying, you dishonor the whole
Society of the Crape-Gown Order of D. D's, and B. D's. and the more inferior
sort of Rectors and Vicars, who have now undertaken to be the State Physicians
themselves. And do you think that the Applications of Bow Church Sermons,
Guild Hall Sermons, Assize Sermons, and Anniversary Sermons are not much more
wholesome for the present distempers of the State, than the Euphorbucum and
Cantharides of the Observator and Heraclitus?


Priest. Both Applications may be good in their kinds.


Merry. Oh Sir, but the Levites pretend their Licenses from Heaven, which
the other can never lay claim to: So that the other are mere Intruders; and
whether the Levites do not practice beyond their Skill and Commission is much
to be questioned.


Priest. The Scripture commands obedience and submission to the Government;
they are commanded to Preach the Scripture, therefore they are commanded to
Preach Obedience to the Government.


Merry. That is to say, in Civil affairs, they are to Preach General Obedience
to the Laws and the Government; but thence it does not follow they are to be
Judges of the breaches of that Obedience: For were it otherwise, they were to
take their Texts out of Polton, and not out of the Bible. For example, were the
difference between the People and the Magistrate, whither the Statute of
Jeofails, or the Habeas Corpus Act were to be Repealed; what have they to do
with that? No more than the Pinner of Wakefield. Would it not be fine sport, to
hear the Pulpits ring with the Habeas Corpus Act, or the Statute of Jeofails?
You are commanded to obey the Statute of Jeofailes, you are commanded to obey
the Habeas Corpus Act, Job 36.21. In likemanner, what have they to do with
Associatians and Addresses, as they are the Disputes of State? For let them
talk till their Lungs ache, they can never prove by Scripture, that either
political Associations or Addresses are forbidden, in reference to the English
Government. But if the Prince shall once declare his particular dislike to such
proceedings, then are they to press a general Obedience to his Will and
Pleasure, so far as is consentaneous to Divine Writ.


Priest. Who shall be Judge of that?


Merry. The very definition of a Christian Loyalty it self: That is to say, That
virtuous and inviolable Fidelity which the Subject ows to his Lawful Prince, by
virtue of the same Obligations and Ties by which he is bound to God: And this
is that true Christian Obedience which every true Minister of the Church ought
to inculcate into the hearts of their Hearers by the force of pure Divinity,
not Arguments of State, which are fluctuating and inconstant; in regard that
Reason of State, and alteration of Government may alter the case of Obedience
upon various occasions; in so much, that in the quick Turns and Revolutions of
the latter end of H. 8. Ed. 6. Queen Mary and Elisabeth, some of the greatest
promoters and Practisers of Politic Obedience, were ashamed at last of their
frequent compliance, and retired out of the way; as you may Read in the History
of the Reformation it self.


Priest. You have given a nice Distinction of Loyalty, pray make it out.


Merry. The first is that Christian Obedience which is due to the supreme power
by the Law of God, so far as may stand with the Sacred Interest of Salvation.
The second is an Obedience upon the moral motives of Human Interest to the Law
of Man, which may sometimes impose commands which a sincere and upright
Conscience may in some measure scruple at, nay positively deny a submission to:
as in the case of the Three Children; or by a late fresh example in the case of
the late times, when even temporal obedience was refused by all that adheard to
the King whom dire necessity did not compel to it.


Priest. The late Times, what do you talk of those Usurpers.


Merry. However to talk like a Divine, it was a Supreme Power, though set over us
for our sins and our punishment: And most certain it is, that both we and the
Calvinists agree in this, That, Etiam Infideli Magistratui obediendum est, with
safety of Conscience. I only speak this to show, that men are not to urge upon
the Conscience so severely, that were so nice of it themselves.


Priest. Well, but then to the second.


Merry. The second, which is an Obedience to commands enjoined by the Politic
Constitution and Frame of Government, I think there is no Dissenter in England,
that would not be accounted a Rebel, but would confirm it to his Prince with
his Heart, his Hand and his Purse. And this is properly called Loyalty,
Loyaute, Legalidad, (all from the Latin word Lex) which acts according to the
Laws of Nature and Policy, as being due first to those Laws, and then to the
Minister of those Laws, as the derivation of the Word plainly implies. Which
being the chief satisfaction to the Civil Magistrate, it seems hard that
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction should make such a heavy clutter for her far less
inconsiderable mite of a coercive power. Just as if one and the same man owed
the secular claim a Hundred thousand pound, and the Ecclesiastical pretensions
Twenty pound; the Secular Magistrate should be bound to give no Release for the
whole Hundred thousand pound, because the same person requested the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to abate Five pound of her Twenty.


Priest. Is there nothing then due to the Church of England.


Merry. Yes -- the Noblest Tithes of the World -- the Tithes of Unity, Love and
Charity.


Priest. Why do they not pay them?


Merry. Pay 'em! They dare not come nere ye. Up ye get into your Pulpits, as
into so many Beacons; where ye raise such a Flame, that they are afraid of the
Countries coming in upon 'em. But doubtless had that method been used by those
who have taken another course, of teaching true Christian obedience, without
reflections, flames, and virulency, that Union had been long since accomplished,
which the Protestant Interest at present so much laments?


Priest. Tush -- they are a stiffneck'd Generation that will never conform.


Merry. No? There Is one, Mr. Read by name, has fairly lead the way. You will not
let him read the Liturgy of England in a Church, where would you have him read
it? upon the top of the Monument? Or what would you have him do with those
Souls that have committed themselves to his charge, and are so well satisfied of
his conduct to Heaven? Will you hear his own words? He tells ye, first, That he
has advised with his Brethren in the Ministry, who did acknowledge the
lawfulness of using the Liturgy in the Ordinary Lords-day-Service. That his
Principles are these, That Obedience to the Majestrate in things Lawful is a
duty. That a form of Prayer is lawful. And that Communion in such Churches is
lawful. Now why must Grand-Juries, and Petty-Juries be put to the trouble to
vex and torment such men as these, and deter them from their good intentions?


Priest. Because of the Law.


Merry. As to that Law (for I know you mean the last Law against seditious
Meetings.) I have this to say:

First, I do not find that the makers of that Law do assign the least breach of
Political Obedience against the Dissenters: only there is a Supposition, that
an Insurrection may be hatched at such a Meeting: So that as long as there is
no such thing done as the Law supposes, where there is no Transgression there
can be no Punishment. So then it remains, that this Law was obtained by some
part of the Clergy for their own advantage, and to render themselves the more
formidable to their Dissenting Brethren.

In the second place, it was never yet known in this World, that ever any Civil
Magistrate, or Supreme Power, made a Law, with an intent to punish any good
man. This Law against Dissenters punishes many a good man, therefore never
intended by the Supreme Power against the Dissenters. Now, that the Dissenters
are good men, I prove from David's own description of a good man in Psalm 15.
where putting the Question to himself, Vir bonus est Quis? He answers, first as
to the Civil Government, Qui ambulat integre, exercetque justitiam; That is, He
that behaves himself dutifully and obediently toward the Civil Magistrate, and
justly toward his Neighbor. Now that the Dissenters are, at least outwardly,
under the guard of these descriptions of good men, is plain, for that no
Informer complains against them for the least breach of Civil Obedience either
in Word or Deed as to any other Law, but only the single act of Nonconformity
to this Statute. So then the Statute not being intended against them, as being
good and virtuous men, and conformable to the Civil Government, they can be
guilty of no Nonconformity to the commands of the Civil Power: For the Civil
Power, by this Act, enjoins nothing but Peace to be kept; with the breach of
which, no Informer as yet has taxed them.

That the Dissenters are not guilty of any Nonconformity to this Act, in
referrence to the Ecclesiastical Power, I offer thus:

The Statute enjoins the Exercise of Religion, according to the Liturgy of the
Church of England, which contains no more than only Truth. If then the
Dissenters speak and pray according to Truth, they exercise according to the
Liturgy of the Church of England. The Psalmist therefore proceeding in the next
words, after he has declared who does well in Civils, tells us who does well in
Spirituals; That is to say, Qui loquitur veritatem ex animo suo, He that speaks
Truth from his heart: But the Dissenters do speak Truth, nay the Truth of
Truth, Divine Truth, and therefore exercise according to the Liturgy, and as
such they are good men, and so to be accounted, in foro Ecclesiastico. Now then
put it thus.

Never any Lawgivers ever made a Law, with an intent to punish any man that
speaks Divine Truth; But this Law against Dissenters punishes many a man that
speaks Divine Truth: Therefore never any Lawgivers intended this Law against
the Dissenters. And the same Argument holds for the Hearers, as well as the
Speakers, for that the hearing of Divine Truth is as Lawful as to speak it.

So then, if the Dissenters, as intended by the Act, were to be punished, they
are Transgressors; but the Dissenters not being intended by the Act are no
Transgressors: Therefore the Dissenters are not to be punished by the Act. Or
thus:

If the Dissenters, as not intended by the Act, are not to be punished, they
are Innocent; but the Dissenters, as not intended by the Act, are not to be
punished: Therefore the Dissenters are Innocent.

The reason why they are not intended by the Act; is because they are Loyal to
the Civil Government, and Obedient to the Spiritual, for that they Speak and
Preach Divine Truth. And then,

That the Dissenters Preach Divine Truth is easily thus proved; The Church of
England Teaches Divine Truth, the Dissenters teach the same Doctrine with the
Church of England: Therefore the Dissenters teach Divine Truth.

From whence we may infer, that to pursue such Vast Numbers of People under
the Notion of Dissenters with the Lash of a Law, that assigns no breach of
public disobedience or Public disturbance, no detriment to the Public
Revenue, or forbidden Acts of private injury, but only the supposition of an
Offense deduced and inferred from the bare separate Exercise of Divine
Worship, seems an extremity too much simpathizing with uncharitable, worldly
Interrest, that misses more the separated Purse than the separated Person. The
moderate Party themselves confess, that as to those who purely and out of
Conscience refuse to conform, their Circumstances are hard. And it is as hard,
that of all the Penal statutes, these that have the fairest plea to soften
them, should be so loudly awakened to their Offices, when those against the
crying sins of the Nation and more destructive to Government, lie dreaming out
a Lazy Being for want of Employment. And indeed Friend Priestlove the case
seems much the harder, in regard that the Turk in the present height of his
Tyranny and Popular reverence of his Mahumatisme, Smith, de Graecae Ecclesiae
bodierno statu.
yet lets the disconsolate Greeks have the free Exercise of their own Religion
which is all the happiness they have to boast of in this World.


Priestlove. I care not for your Greeks or your Jews neither; I tell you the
Presbyterians are a company of Traitors and Plotters. Does not the Observator
and Heraclitus tell ye so? and do not the streets ring of their Plots?


Merry. Truly you are well hope up with two special Fathers of the Church of
England. What if they should tell you that the Moon were made of Green-Cheese,
would you believe 'em?


Priest. Yes, that I would, so long as they wrote against the Presbyterians.


Merry. Well, but where are these Presbyterian Plotters? You see the
Popish-Plotters have been visible enough, at the Old Bailey, Westminster Hall,
Tower hill and the Gallows; where be these Presbyterian-Plotters? Do they walk
in the Clouds? or have they got every one a Gyges's Ring in their Pockets? Has
your Observator been all this while observing, and observed none of 'em yet?
Whoever they be, let 'em be brought to the Stake, and let the Observator and
Heraclitus have the pleasure of Roasting 'em to death, the next burning of the
Pope, for the reward of their great pains. However, I will not undertake to
justify every individual Dissenter; there may be Turbulent, Factious and
Ambitious persons of all Professions, and under all Masks of Religion.
Nevertheless, I hope you would think it a great piece of Imprudence, for a man
to throw away a whole Quarter of Wheat, for the mixture of a Peck of Tares. If
your Observator and your Heraclitus would bring their Winnows and their
Skreens, and separate tke Corn from the Chaff, they might then gain some
applause perhaps for that, which now runs about the World only for scandal and
impertinence.


Priest. I must tell ye, they have no decency, no decorum in their Worship.


Merry. As how?


Priest. Why you shall come into a Meeting House, and while the Minister is in
his Pulpit, there you shall see a company of People, Young and Old, Rich and
Poor, sitting upon their Bums, their Hats pulled over their Eyebrows, with
their Pens, and their Books, and their Blotting-Papers, all so busily employed,
as if they were so many men Copying of News-Letters, and this in such a strange
Ethiopic Character, that nobody can tell what they Write: They may be setting
down their last Weeks Gains and Expenses for ought I know. Nay, I saw one so
wedded to his Hat, that after the Minister was in his last Prayer, he would not
stir it from his Head, till he had concluded what he had to Write, wiped his
Pen, screwed his Inkhorn, fixed his Blotting-Paper, clasped his Book, and put
it in his Pocket: and by that time the Minister had almost done.


Merry. All this while, this is no disobedience to the Law. However, I wish
there were no greater obstacle of Protestant Unity than this, since it would
discover a very extravagant obstinacy indeed, if the promise and performance of
the Reformation of such an inconsiderable scandal as this should be refused.
For indeed, Friend Priestlove, I must here close with you, that it seems to me
a very indecent thing for the Ambassador of so Almighty a Prince, as the King
of Heaven, to be uncovered, and that the Hearers should receive the glad
tidings of Salvation in so unthankful a Posture. I speak not this so much out
of respect or veneration to the Walls, or the Pillars, or the place it self,
but to the Message delivered, the Deliverer, and the Time of Delivery. But now
to retaliate your Indecorum, I will tell ye of another Indecency, which I take
to surpass yours, from which, I can except no Parish Church within the Lines of
Communication; and which I look upon to be the mischief of Pews, not used in
other Reformed Churches; and that is the hideous noise and clatter in the time
of Divine-Service. For it behooves Mr. Sexton, or Mrs. Sextoness, to have a
vigilant eye that day, knowing that Christmas will come: And the greater the
reputation of the Minister that Preaches that day, the worse it fares with
mortal Ear and disturbed Devotion. At one end of the Church come in Two or
Three Women, and then perhaps in the midst of the Absolution, slap -- slap --
slap; by and by come in Three or four men together, and then it is, Our Father
which art in Heaven, slap -- slap -- slap; and if the Lock be a little
refractory, then three or four slaps more into the bargain. By and by comes a
whole shole of Slugabeds, and then it is, We beseech ye to hear us good Lord;
slap here, and slap there, slap there, and slap here; slap a that side, and
slap a this side; slap -- slap slap. Anon come in two or three gay Peticoats,
then upstarts Mrs. Ginglekey from her Hassock, opens this Pew, and that Pew,
and then it is, Lord incline our hearts, etc. Slap here, and slap there: And
thus there is no end of Slapping all the whole Prayer-time; as if the Pew doors
had been ordained to supply the place of Organ Responsories; a confusion that
would not be endured at a common Musick-meeting.


Priest. This is so customary, that nobody minds it; and besides, it may be
very advantageous to keep people from falling asleep.


Merry. Then keep your Doors open while Prayers are done, and slap 'em in
Sermon-time.


Priest. But how will you help it?


Merry. Nay, look you to that; I am sure it is a very great Indecorum. Go to the
Observator and Heraclitus, they are wise men, perhaps they will advise you to Oil
your Locks every Saturday night, and line your. Pew-dore with Cony-skin Furr.
But I Will tell you of a greater inconvenience than this, and that is the
Translation of Hopkins and Sternhold. I may call it a Common Nuisance to the
Service of the Church; a Translation (to use Mr. Abraham Cowley's expression)
that has reviled David worse than Shimei. Preface t^ his Pindarick Odes. Poem
upon Sir Philip Sidneys Translation.
You shall find the famous Dr. Don bewailing the scandal that attends the
Church by reason of their permission, and utterring his complaint in these
passionate Expressions: For I must not rejoice as I would do,
When I behold that these Psalms are become
So well attired abroad, so ill at home.


Dr. Patrick gives this Character of it, Friendly Debate.
That the words are mean and uncouth, and that the sense of the Prophet is
often mistaken. To say truth, the words are opprobrious to the present
Language, to all Rhyme, Reason and common Sense. To satisfy your Judgment, I
will give you a taste of some passages, but not so commonly taken notice of,
beside those already obvious. But Lord, Psalm. 22.9.
out of my Mothers Womb
I came by thy request.


Do you believe now, that ever David was so unmannerly, as to tell God
Almighty, that his Mother had never brought him into the World, unless he had
desired it? Now for downright Barbarism, Lord, when will thou amend this
gear? Ps. 35.18.

Why do thou stay and pause?


This seems to me to be a kind of expostulating with God for taking too much
consideration. This that follows is quite out of season: I shall depend thy
Grace upon; Ps. 55.26.

With all my heart and Lust.


What use young and illiterate persons may make of such a provocative as this,
I leave you to consider: For they are ignorant that Lust had two significations
before, and now but one. In another place he would make you believe that the
Universe was governed by some ordinary Mechanic. For, says he, Ps. 78.37.
-- Their hearts were nothing bent
To him nor to his Trade.


It put me rather in mind of the Shoemakers Saint, and the Knight of the
Burning-Pestle, that run away from their Master

Take this piece of modesty or immodesty, which you will, for it is as you
please to interpret it, and then I have done.

Ps. 55.12.
Her inward parts are wicked plain. These and a whole Regiment of horrid
Barbarismes of the same nature, together with the sordid Nonsense and villainous
Rhimes that attend 'em (if they may be so called, because so intended, such as
Pillar and Hopper, Psalm. 78.
and a thousand more) are accusations and proofs sufficient to prove 'em
guilty, and to condemn 'em ad Cloacam, as a dishonor to all Divine Worship.


Priest. All this is nothing, the people will sing; and should you bring in new
ones, they will say we are bringing in Popery.


Merry. This, indeed, is the common Crape-gown excuse: Much like what was
alleged in the Council of Trent, That no alteration in Divine-worship was to
be made, though for the better, for fear of intimating a fallibility before. But
I hope our young Crape-Gowners are better taught at Sam's Coffee-house than so;
or else they keep their Sanhedrims there to little purpose. But there is
another reason, these Gentlemen are so addicted to Haranguing, that they have
no time to spend in mending Psalms; as if the gingling of an Alamode Sermon
were the only Music that pierced Heaven. And thus you see I am as much for the
honor of the Liturgy of the Church of England, as you can be for your life.


Priest. Well, because you closed with me before, I will close with you now:
For I must confess I never looked upon Sternhold and Hopkins to be Poet
Laureats, of all the men in the World. But you know, Sir, nowadays, there is
more got by one Play, than by Twenty Volumes of Divine Poetry.


Merry. And then another thing is this too, your Crape-Gown men sit musing in the
Vestry over the Churchwardens Half-pint, till the beginning of the last Stave
of all; and so never hearing the Old, what should they concern themselves with
a New-Translation? Besides, they have most of them very ill voices, or such an
aversion to Harmony and Concord, that they care not a straw for singing;
believing farther, that God gave them their voices only to baul, and not to
sing.


Priest. Well, well, jeer on, you will get nothing by it, Heraclitus will pay ye
off; he is a parlous man: He and the Observator are to take upon 'em shortly the
Title of Subdefenders of the Church.


Merry. There is one Indecorum yet remaining which I have frequently met with,
and desire you to give me your judgment of it. It proceeds from the pride and
vanity of several Crape-Gown men, that Preach more out of Ostentation than
Instruction.


Priest. What Is that?


Merry. Why, it is your Church-Huzzaing, or Hum-humming in the Church. To this
end you shall have the Popular Chrysostom, would be cantonize his Oration into
so many parts, as he may think it proper, so expect Hums. Each of these parcels
of sublime Eloquence are tipped at the end with a most glorious Euphonema that
cries chink in the close, which charms your ears and dazles your understanding
both at a time, and then the Gentleman makes a Sembrief rest, and looks about
him.


Priest. And what then?


Merry. Why, the signal being thus given, the Church is straight in an uproar,
Hum, hum, hum; Hum, hum, hum; in so much that you would even admire the Bells
don't ring backwards of themselves. To these kind of Sermons, there are wanting
only a Prologue and an Epilogue to entitle 'em either to the Buskin or the
Socc, according to the quality of the Subject.


Priest. Oh, I find where you are, you would not have an Eloquent, Orthodox
Minister encouraged.


Merry. Yes, but not like a Player: For by the same rule, you may as well hiss
'em, when they displease, as hum 'em up, when they tickle your ears. And
besides, it shows very ill, at the same time, to reproach a Meeting House, and
make a Theater of the Church.


Priest. Well -- I shall tell the Observator and Heraclitus what you say,
they will give you an answer I Will warrant ye; I remember your three Accusations,
Pew-clapping, Sternhold and Hopkins, and Church-Huzzaing.


Merry. Do so, and commend my Service to 'em, and tell 'em, there is nobody ever
cared a straw for 'em yet, that had either Wit or Sense in their Heads.


Priest. But you were talking, I remember, a little while a-go of Size Sermons,
Anniversary Sermons: and Guild Hall Sermons, What have you to say against them?


Merry. I say still, I do not like your State-Sermons; it is such a piece of
Pageantry as was formerly used to Preach up the Titles of Princes: Sometimes
the Scripture was for the House of York, sometimes for the House of Lancaster;
It Is such a Spiritual Agency in Secular Affairs, that nothing can be more
Jesuitical. You may know what a Clock it is, by the Chiming of the Cathedral
Pulpit.


Priest. Oh Sir, upon extraordinary occasions, and in extraordinary places, men
come to show their Parts and their Learning, not their Divinity.


Merry. There you say something indeed; For nowadays, downright Divinity, is
accounted no more than downright Dunstable: Which you may gather from the
usual answers to the common Questions. What is such a one? A good, honest,
plain, downright man. What is such a one? Ay, marry Sir! there is a Quaint man
indeed! He Is a yerker ye says; He claws of your Fanatics. Good God! what a
strange itch of being accounted a Quaint Man has infected our Crape-gown
Gentility! And yet there is no understanding man, but will give more attention
to one of Gifford's plain Sermons, than to a Hundred Theological Orations, that
make the Pulpits roar like so many Matrasses of Aurum Fulminans, under the
Guard of an ignorant Chemist.


Priest. What of all this?


Merry. Why, I say, that Satyr and Divinity are ill-match'd; they look like a
White and black Horse in the same Coach. Satyr is one thing, Reproof another;
the latter for the Pulpit, the former for the Stage. And therefore the
Booksellers have a pretty good Prospect of the Business, while they lay out so
exactly Play and Sermon, Sermon and Play, that a Man might almost play at Chess
upon their Stalls; and in the course of the Game, here snap a Rook upon a Play,
there a Pawn upon a Sermon. Nay, it is come to that pass too, that Plays and
Sermons are both of a known value; Twelve Pence one, Six Pence to other, come
as many as will: Nothing so certain as Plays at Twelve Pence, Sermons at Six
Pence a piece, and Long Thread Laces, two a Penny.


Priestl. I see whereabouts you are; You are for a dull, heavy, flat, insipid
Sermon, without Salt. Salt savours all Things, says Solomon the wise; and if
All Things, Sermons. Eene eat your Shoulder of Veal by your self for me, if you
will give me neither Butter nor Oranges.


Merr. Why then, it seems, Railing against the Phanaticks, as you call 'em, is
Sauce for a Modern Sermon.


Priestl. It both embellishes, and takes to boot. And besides the Phanaticks
are now the only People, that have Abettors and Upholders; Alas, as for the
Pope or Antichrist, as ye call him, he (good Man) is in a sinking condition;
the King of France is tearing from his Head the Third Part of his Triple Crown;
And would it not be an ungentile Act, to trample upon the Unfortunate? But the
Fanatics are Rampant, and headstrong: They are for Petitions and Associations;
They are followed by Throngs, and Multitudes.


Merr. That Is no fault of theirs; if the People finding their Doctrine to be as
good as Yours, are more taken with their Plainness, than with your Flashes,
your Ecstasies, and Raptures.


Priestl What should the People follow them for, like a Company of Phanaticks,
as they are?


Merr. What They do you mean?


Priestl. Why I mean the Phanaticks.


Merr. Who are the Fanatics?


Priestl. Why -- the Fanatics are the Fanatics.


Merr. Very well -- I see you do go to Church sometimes, you repeat so well.
What a happy thing it is, to hear an A-la-mode Sermon? A Man may bring away the
greatest and chiefest Part of it in a smart Epitome, without the troublesome
help of that Mark of the Beast, called Shorthand. -- But what sort of things
are these Phanaticks? are they Men or Mice?


Priestl. They are such as the Observator and Heraclitus call Phanaticks.


Merr. They! Why, they don't know themselves who they are.


Priestl. I care not for that; I believe in Them; and whoever They be, that
they call so, are so.


Merr. You Are a Fool. -- They get their bread by calling Men Phanaticks --
They Will call you Fanatic if you vex 'em.


Priestl. Gad -- if they do. --


Merr. What then?


Priestl. I Will tell 'em, I love the King. --


Merr. So do Thousands and Thousands of those they call Phanaticks, more to the
purpose, and more Substantially, than ever they did, or ever will do, or are
able to do*


Priestl. What do you mean by Serving the King Substantially, and to the purpose?


Merr. I mean, They that obey all His Civil Commands exactly, and both can and
do pay their Taxes, and their Duties well; and are as ready to serve Him with
their Swords in their Hands; Not Beggars, that cry God Damn 'em, God Bless the
King, that live only upon the spoils o^ His Bounty.


Priestl. Well, but for all that I will not see my Parsons abused. --


Merr. Your Crape-Gown men, do you mean?


Priestl. Yes.


Merr. There Is no body abuses 'em, they abuse themselves. --


Priestl. As how?


Merr. Well -- now I come to them -- It Is to me the greatest wonder in the
World, that so many Six Penny Cuts should buz about your Ears like Dor-Flies
in Summer; (for their impatience is such, that they cannot stay till they
amount to a Volume) considering nevertheless, as if they lay under the
Engagement of the Self-denying Ordinance; with what a strange Reluctance, what
an inestable Unwillingness, what an unspeakable Constraint, they are forced,
pressed, and urged to expose the Six Penny Embryo, either an Obliging,
Caressing, endearing, bountiful, munificent Lady, that cannot, must not, will
not, be denied, obliges, under the high, and never to-be forgiven Penalties of
Ingratitude. -- Or else the most Beneficial Patron beseeches, obsecrates,
entreats, implores, nay will have it so; or else Authority Commands; Subscribed
Wag-staff -- And then out comes the Sermon, like Oil of sweet Almonds, squeezed
between two Tin Plates -- sometimes it slips forth like a wet Cherry-stone
between your Thumb, and fore Finger, without their knowledge. --


Priestl. You Will tax 'em with Hypocrisy, by and by.


Merr. By no means, Dear Sir -- I only show ye, what plunges they are put to,
to get rid of their Modesty -- Self conceit cries, Out with your Sermon, Sir, --
No pray, Sir, don't, cries Modesty; And then she lays before him a hundred
Arguments of Infirmities, Unworthiness, want of timely Notice, alias Surprise,
and the like -- Out with it cries Vainglory, it is as good as ever was tipp'd
over Tongue, Sir -- And this is the poor Man so tortured and tormented, that he
can take no rest; till at length Eager desire of Applause, plause, pitying his
Condition, fetches one great Person or other to solicit for her, and so
Friendless Modesty is forced to withdraw behind the Curtain.


Priestl. I tell ye, Sir, these Sermons are the Lights, by which we discover
the Gentlemen's Parts. How should we see the Gentlemen's Parts, if they hid their
Lights under a Bushel; that is to say, if they did not Print their Sermons?


Merr. Prithee let 'em Print their Sermons, till Fools Cap be Five Pound a Ream
if they please, but then let 'em Print 'em without Epistles and Dedications, or
such at least wherein it is plain their words, and their minds have as little
Coherence, as their Texts, and their Sermons.


Priestl. Hoyty-toyty, -- They shall come to You, to know what Epistles and
Dedications they shall make!


Merr. No-no, Sir, I never expect it -- They have a Guide of their own, that
knows how to apply himself to Ladys and Gentlemen of all sorts and Conditions.


Priest. Well then, pray set your Heart at rest -- I say they shall make what
Epistles and Dedications they please, so they Preach against Forty One.


Merr. Hush -- you don't consider how the Observator has of Late disturbed the
sweet sleep of Forty One; and therefore, prithee be thou more merciful.


Priestl. Merciful! what to Forty One? I Will wake him and wake him, and keep him
awake like a Lancashire Witch -- but I Will make him Confess. --


Merr. What?


Priestl. That the Presbiterians hold King-killing Doctrine, like the Jesuits.
--


Merr. -- Good now harp no more upon that string.


Priestl. Harp no more upon that string? Gad I Will go and do your Errand to the
Observator and Heraclitus immediately. --


Merr. Do so -- but in the mean time harp no more, I say upon that string --
For if the Presbyterians do hold King-killing Doctrine, They Learnt it from the
Church of England Men.


Priestl. Ye Lie. --


Merr. Patience -- or I Will call the Constable. --


Priestl. Call the Devil -- I say ye Lie. --


Merr. Govern your Passion, Sir, do you understand Heraldry?


Priestl. Yes.


Merr. Why then, Observe -- Edward the Sixth's Church of England- men begat
Queen Elizabeth's Church of England- men -- Queen Elizabeth's Church of
England- men begat King James's Church of England- men -- King James's Church
of England- men begat Charles the Firsts's Church of England men -- Charles the
First's Church of England men begat Charles the Second's Church of England men.
--


Priestl. Begat, and Begat? Why; I don't think the Church of England men dropped
out of the Sky. --


Merr. That Is not the point. --


Priestl. -- What then?


Merr. Why, then I say, you do not Read in any Story, since the Growth of
Christianity, that ever any Crowned Head was ever brought to a Formal Bar of
Justice, till MARY Queen of Scots was Arraigned, Tried, Convicted, Sentenced,
and formally Beheaded by Queen Elizabeth; and the Clergy were a part of the
Body, that pressed and urged the Queen to hasten her Execution.


Priest-l. The Interest of the Protestant Religion then required it.


Merr. Oh! but your Bathonian Doctor tells ye, you must not do ill, that good
may come of it. How strangely the Case is altered? Queen Elizabeth mig^^ ^ut a
Sovereign Prince to Death to secure the Protestant Religion, but now it is a
crime to exclude a Popish Succession that menaces the destruction of it.


Priest-l. What do you talk? now I think on it, she was a Plotter against the
Queen.


Merr. Could ye blame her for Plotting (though she absolutely denied it)
against a Person that kept her from the Enjoyment of her Kingdom? One that had
deceived her with Chains and Imprisonments, after she had made choice of her
Kingdom for Sanctuary and Assistance.


Priest-l. Well but now I think on it again, I have something to whisper in your
Ear, in the behalf of Queen Elizabeth. Did not Jehu and Jehoiadah cause Jezebel
and Athaliah to be put to death?


Merr. That will not serve your Turn. -- They were neither of 'em Sovereign
Princes. The Queen of Scots was an Absolute Princess; nay, She insisted upon
Her Sovereignty too, and Her not being Accountable to any, but God: But nothing
would do; She that came for Succor, met with a Heads-man for all that.


Priest^l. Well, I Will say this for Queen Elizabeth, tho She be dead and gone,
That I am confident She would never have done it, could She have told how to
have avoided it.


Merr. That may very well be; for we find, that the Nobility, and Chief of the
Clergy would never let Her be at quiet, till She had given Order for the
Execution. And therefore it is plain, that the Church of England-Men did hold
King-Killing, or Queen-Killing Doctrine, which is the same thing. So that, if
Knox, Buchanan, or Calvin first taught the speculative Part, the The Other first
put it in Practice, and set the Fatal President, that Others followed.


Priest-l. Grant it were so, -- the Case is altered now. -- Tempora mutantur
and Nos mutamur; What our Forefathers did, is nothing to Us.


Merr. The same thing may be said of the Presbyterians, who always disclaimed
the Fact, were the First that endeavored to prevent the Unfortunate Tragedy,
and the First that put their helping Hands to the Restoration of the Right
Heir. It cannot be imagined, but that the Queen of England, Restless as She
was, what to do at that Conjuncture, consulted the Choicest of Her Divines and
Her Chaplains, in point of Conscience; and it is as evident, that they in some
measure satisfied Her, by the Event. So that either they spoke against their
Consciences, or else they were of that Opinion, which you condemn in others,
but cannot discover in your selves. Therefore keep close to Your Texts, and let
Six Hundred Forty One sleep in the Bed of Oblivion, lest you wake Five Hundred
Eighty Seven about your Ears: Who, should he be once conjured up, will hardly
be laid again by all the Skill of Sam's Coffee-House.


Priest-l. Well, well. -- Leave it to Them. -- They Will find out a way to salve
all this Business, I warrant ye.


Merr. This I only speak (Neighbor) to put you in mind, that there were
formerly, certain People in the World, called Pharisees, Persons that always
extolled their Own Holiness and Virtues, and laid Crimes and Miscarriages to
the Charge of Other Men; perhaps, not so guilty as Themselves. More than this,
I find by one of the great Satyrists against the Late Times, Sermon Preached on
the Anniversary of that most Execrable Murder of K. Charles, the First Royal
Martyr. 1682. p. 6.
Nebuchadnezzar but very odly justified, for putting out Zedechiah's Eyes. We
do not wonder at the Ruin of Zedechiah, nor was the Ruining of him a Crime on
Nebuchadnezzar's Part.


Priest-l. He gives ye a Reason, I warrant ye.


Merr. A notable one. For (says he) Absolute Princes are Coordinate, and stand
upon the same Level; and if upon sufficient Provocations the one happens to
gain his Neighbor's Crown, the Fact is Just by Right of Conquest.


Priest-l. Well -- what think you of it now?


Merr. Truly I wonder I did not meet with this Argument in the King of France's
Declaration, to Justify his Invasion of Flanders. But how does this justify
the Ruining of Zedechia? For if the King of France should Conquer the King of
Spain, it does not presently follow, that the one must put out the others Eyes.


Priest-l. But if the one be Subordinate to the other, which was clearly the
Case of Zedechia, the recovery of the Crown is in the Supreme Prince an Act of
Justice, and the punishment of an inferior Prince who abjureth his Fealty, is
by all Nations allowed to be a Righteous Act of Vengeance.


Priest-l. Could an Angel have said more?


Merr. An Angel! Why I say this is all nonsense. For there was never any such
thing as Subordinate Sovereign in the World. A Sovereign Prince though meaner
in Power, is equal in Privilege and Dignity to the most puissant. When he
becomes Tributary, he is only Titular, and no Sovereign. If Zedechia were
Monarch of Judea, he was equal to the Assyrian Monarch, and it was a crime in
Nebuchadnezzar to ruin him, and put out his Eyes. And I would fain know, what
Nation in the World, ever thought it a Righteous Act of Vengeance, to punish a
Tributary Prince for endeavoring to recover his People and himself, from
Thraldom and Sworn homage, to which the Fortune of War had reduced him. If
Zedechia were only Nebuchadnezzars Slave, his Viceroy, or Substitute, then the
Case alters in^eed; but to talk of punishing Subordinate Sovereigns, is to
countenance the crime, against which the Gentleman was exclaiming all his
Sermon along.


Priest-l. But Nebuchadnezzar all this while did not cut off Zedechiah's Head.


Merr. Truly much at one -- For Chains and a Head without Eyes, could be no
extraordinary comforts to a meaner Man then Zedechia.


Priest-l. Well Sir, the Sermon was a good Sermon, and the Gentleman meant well.


Merr. And I wish him the Honor he deserves, that Nebuchadnezzar were now
alive to make him his Chaplain.


Priest-l. There Is no need of that; He is already Chaplain to a Great Person,
and serves a fine Gentleman.


Merr. That he does with a Vengeance -- For you may read him acknowledging
himself the most abject Slave in the World, to pin a piece of Flattery upon his
Patron.


Priest-l. Where have you picked up that?


Merr. In the Dedication of the Sermon before mentioned to the D. of S. in
these Words. So far am I from owning that Principle, That man is born free,
That I Confess my self and all that bear my Name, to have inherited such a
State of servitude to your Lordship, as if according to the Mosaical Custom,
Your Noble Ancestors had bored the Ears not of our Progenitors only, but of
their whole Issue.


Priest-l. Will ye blame him for his gratitude?


Merr. By no means; but this is such a piece of gratitude, as never was heard
of, to disown himself Born free, to involve his whole Generation without their
consent, and entail a perpetual slavery upon his Succession, for
Chaplain-Entertainment, and admission to the First Course. I cannot tell what
large possessions he may hold from his Patron in soccage (For he will not allow
'em in Frank Almonage) but certainly they cannot be so great as to entitle Him
and his Posterity to such a Servitude as he would fain aspire to. For if he
disown his Freedom in a Theological Sense, he denies the Scripture; if either
in the Ethical or Political Sense, let him have what Opinion of himself he
pleases; we are not bound to believe his Paradoxes, and deny our selves one of
the chiefest Blessings that Heaven and Nature has afforded us. -- Licet, ut
volo, vivere; non sim Liberior Bruto?


Priest-l. Don't tell me, I Would not give a rush now adays for a Complement
without a Hyperbole.


Merr. That Is as much as to say, Your Worship loves to be Flattered -- May that
happiness attend your Worship -- It Is Prince-like indeed -- But for my part, I
am for none of your Hyperbolical Complements, especially in Dedications to
Sermons. For it shows there may be much of Poetical License in the Sermon too,
that follows. But we will leave the Gentleman to have his Ears bored by his
Patron; and consequently marked for what he professes himself to be; and pass
on to the Quintessence of Courtship; such a piece that I do not find the like
in all the Academy of Complements. His first Oblations are to the Mother in
this Seraphick Phrase. Sermon called The present Miseries and Mischiefs of Sin.
For as for your Ladyship, I must beg Pardon of your Modesty to say, That your
great Prudence and Piety is a sufficient guard against all Temptations to those
sins, which in this following Discourse are found guilty of all the Miseries
and Mischiefs of mankind.


Prist-l. Bless me! What Is here but a Zealous Complement?


Merr. A Complement, Sir! Why it is the Elixir of the Miseries of Love and
Eloquence. It ought to have been written with the Quill of an Angels wing in
Letters of Gold, and sent upon the Wings of a Lark to St. Winifreid.


Priest-l. Do you know Sir, what the Lady is, or what her Virtues are?


Merr. No Sir, neither will I derogate from them. She may be a Lady after Gods
own Heart, for ought I know: But I am sure it was such a sufficiency, that
neither David nor Solomon with all their Prudence and Piety could ever boast
of. And therefore it argues a high piece of Sycophantism, to attribute those
praises and sufficiencies to Mortal Frailty, which are merely supernatural; and
for which the Person himself is forced to beg pardon of the Ladys Modesty
before he can proclaim 'em. It Is palpable he strained hard, and that his Brains
were upon the Tenterhooks for a piece of purse-opening Sublimity.


Priestl. Why, what if it did produce him Twenty broad Pieces, or so? what then?


Merr. Nay, he deserved it double for what he afterward gives to the Son. Of
whom (says he) I think, I may without Complement, say, That he seems to be so
made by Nature, as if God had on purpose framed him, to demonstrate the Beauty
and Lovelyness of Virtue, to those of his Quality, in this Degenerate Age.


Priestl. And all this may be real -- For (he says) he speaks it without a
Complement.


Merr. Nay, by your leave he does but think so neither. -- For my part, I wish
the Dedication may not have praised the young Gentleman out of the World -- For
it is the General Observation, that Persons of such rare perfections seldom live
long -- I remember a Gentlewoman that lost a hopeful Child once, and the Nurse
gave that reason for it. But you do not Observe, Sir; Here Is a young Gentleman
made by Nature, and Framed by God, and the Masterpiece of both it seems. So
that if there should be never another such a Pattern in all His Majesty's
Dominions, you must not think it strange.


Priestl. Truly, I must confess, this is something an Incomprehensible
Complement.


Merr. Nay, he goes higher yet.


Priest-l. It Is impossible!


Merr. Yes he does; and that most soaringly too. For (says he, speaking of the
aforesaid Gentleman) so naturally is he inclined to all good, and averse from
any thing that is evil, that one would almost think that he alone was exempted
from that General Corruption and Depravity of Nature, which all other men
derive from Adam.


Priestl. 'T was well that Almost came in, in Time -- My Hair began to stand an
end.


Merr. You see he has made the young Gentleman Almost a God upon Earth. Had it
not been for that Almost, and one single Imperfection more in the Gentleman,
that he suffered this Complement to be made him, not much more could have been
attributed to the Humanity of Christ himself: and you are also to mind the word
alone, upon which the stress of the Complement lies.


Priestl. It Is ill placed -- I don't deny it -- But yet I would fain find out
an Excuse for this Gentleman -- because I believe him to be a Tory. --


Merr. Do you believe this to be a Hyperbole, or no?


Priestl. Yes -- I tell ye. --


Merr. Why then you must believe it be a sublime Piece of Flattery: And yet
this was done by one that arraigned and convicted all the Sins of Mankind --
Your Humble Servant, Robert Wensley.


Priest-l. Well -- but you shall make an excuse for this Gentleman. --


Merr. Troth, I cannot do it -- you must even go to the Great Excuse-Forge in
Ludgate Street -- there you will find the Lay-Chairman of the Crape-Gown
Committee, whom you may first Fee, and then Employ -- But the jest is this,
that after the Gentleman has Seraphim'd and Cherubim'd the Lady and her Son, he
wishes them all the Happinessess of this World, and that which is to come; as
if the Latter could be denied to Persons so supernaturaliz'd, and fitted for
Heaven.


Priest-l. And thence you infer, that the Gentleman spoiled his own Complement.
--


Merr. I do so. --


Priest-l. -- I am glad on it withal my Heart -- For now will I make that pass
for a good excuse, as I Will manage the business. --


Merr. -- Well make your best on it -- for I am now proceeding to other matter
-- Can you Preach before the Artillery Company?


Priestl. Not I, in good Truth. --


Merr. Why then, I Will tell ye -- If you would Preach before the Artillery
Company --


Priest-l. Prithee why cannot the Artillery Company March to the hewing down
half a score Chines of Beef, but they must have a Sermon, like a Generals
Speech to encourage 'em to the Battle?


Merr. Nay -- I can give you no great Reason for that; but if you will Preach
before the Artillery Company, you must make a Military Sermon, I Am sure of
That. --


Priest-l. As how? --


Merr. Why -- you must be certain to take a Text first, wherein you find the
word Soldiers; that Common sense will teach ye. --


Priest-l. -- And what then. --


Merr. Why then Ephesians. 6. will help ye very much. But because that Chapter is
too well known you may pass it by cursorily, and come to the more Novel terms
of Art, as Drums, and Beats: For Example, if you would give 'em a hint of the
Late Times, as it is very expedient to do, you must say thus, -- When the
Pulpit was the Drum, and Curse ye Meroz the Beat. By way of Reproof you may tax
'em for Cashiering their Honor by Vice, and suffering themselves to be
beleaguerd by their Lusts. A Wing of Miscreants, the Muzzle of a Gun, or the
Swords Point are very proper Expressions. Forewarn 'em too, that they be not
Pioneers to blow up Religion.


Priest-l. That Is an Improper Expression. --


Merr. It Is no matter for that -- 'twill do well enough in a Pulpit -- And
besides you will find most of the Red Feather men asleep -- Then you may compare a
good Conscience to a Sentinel; and be sure to bid the Soldiers take great care
of Leaping over the Lines, and breaking their Ranks.


Priest-l. But where are the Blunderbusses, and the Bandeleers all this while
--


Merr. I believe they were forgot -- but I found that the Soldiers came to
John the Baptist like a Forlorn-Hope, and that they came in the Rear too.


Priest-l. O but I would have had Bandeleers and Blunderbusses in. --


Merr. Why Sir, I believe there might be some sort of Blunderbusses among 'em.
--


Priest-l. I do not mean such Blunderbusses -- I mean discharging, Firing
Blunderbusses, such as will kill a Man of Ten Thousand a year. --


Merr. What would you have had him done with 'em. --


Priest-l. Discharged 'em, (had their been a hundred) against the Phanaticks.


Merr. Why there were a sort of People, that the Parson was very angry with;
but he charged them so furiously himself, that there was no need of any other
assistance.


Priest-l. Well, but where are the Culverin, and the Demiculverin? were there
none of them neither?


Merr. They never March with them -- They are too troublesome in the street.


Priest-l. Well, -- but the Gentleman might have put two or three into his
Sermon, tho --


Merr. Why, Sir -- He did as well. -- He had several Thundering Expressions. --


Priest-l. Had he so? And he was truly angry, you say?


Merr. Truly angry, Sir! as a Man ought to be, that preaches before Soldiers.
--

Well, but would you now Preach acutely among the Lawyers? --


Priest-l. What then?


Merr. Why then, you must use another sort of Dialect, as thus: God resents the
Treason, grants a particular Commission of OYER and TERMINER, Humble Plea for
the Quiet Rest of God's Ark.
Finds the Bill, and presently gives Sentence. In an Assize-Sermon you ought to
be very Quaint, and Magisterial -- To tell the Judges their Duties, the Counsel
their's, the Jurymen their's, and the Plaintiff and Defendant their's. Then
you are to give the Judges particular Directions about the Giving of Oaths in
this manner, That they ought to take care, Assize Sermon, Preached at York,
called the Nature, etc. of Solemn Judicial Swearing, etc.
that Oaths be administered in all Courts of Judicature by those of greatest
Authority present; and not by the Cryers, who are generally young, heedless
Clerks, and only mind their Groats. -- Nay, you may tell 'em, if you please,
that No Man ought to take an Oath, after he has eaten his Breakfast. If you
speak of a thing doubtful, you may say, You will Return a Jury of Twelve
Primitive Bishops, or more, Mark of the Beast, p. 26.
(and then, I suppose, it must be a Grand Jury) all good Men and true, to prove
it. Or thus: If these things be so, I require him to prove it; if not,
Primitive Christian. p. 26.
St. Paul's Doctrine will be found Billa Vera in Heaven.


Priest-l. But what need of all this? -- What necessity for a Size-Sermon.


Merr. Only to give the Counsel time to take their Fees, and read over their
Breviates -- I could never find any other Reason -- And therefore I have known
some Judges pretend haste of business, and desire the Gentleman to keep his
Sermon Cold till another time. Others I have known, when the Gentleman has been
too tediously wrapped up in his own conceits, that have gone out of the Church
(and you know the Crowd follows the Scarlet) and left him to talk out the rest
to the Pillars. There was one Young Stripling was mighty severe upon the
Judges, and their Clerks; but when the Judge came to the Mayors House, whither
he was that day invited, he found (by a fatal mischance) the same Sermon in the
Mayors Window, Printed long before.


Priestl. However there may be some benefits reaped by these Sermons.


Merr. Which way? As for Example in the Case of Judicial Swearing, to talk of
the Pythagoreans, the Grecian Laws, the Ancient Germans, Jupiters Old Priests,
and Kata tou Meizo nos Homnyousi, to the Judges, they are too well qualified,
as to understand much more than their Teacher; and for the Undersheriff and
his Talis-men, as they understand not what was said, so they regard it as
little. I would fain know how far the League between Hannibal, and the King of
Macedon will affect them? or how far it will operate upon a gaping Country
Fellow, to bid him not Swear in vain? because Tertullian disallows it?

These things are to be pressed upon the People in plain home-spun-Kersey
Sermons; not in finical Flanders, laced Harangues to the Judges. Either they
preach to the People, or the Judges. -- But they don't Preach to the People,
for they cannot understand 'em. -- Therefore they Preach to the Judges; and
that is but Ill Manners.

Lastly, You are to terrify 'em with the Day of Judgment; which, to put in
proper Terms, you may call The Grand Assize, where all Writs of Error shall be
rectified.


Priest-l. Well, but if they will Preach, I think it is very proper, that they
should use Words and Expressions adapted to the Subject.


Merr. It Is very right, Sir. -- It tickles the Fancy, as you would tickle ones
Ear with a Straw: however to knock terms of Art out of joint among Artists,
seldom produces more then Laughter and Dinner-Discourse.


Priestl. I must confess, I would not have a man in an Assize Sermon tell the
Judges a Story of the good Samaritan?


Merr. That Is very proper, Sir, -- For a Judge may pour the Balsome of
Recovery upon a Gentleman's almost Lost Estate. That will hold, Sir.


Priestl. Nor would I have a Man talk to a Company of Seamen, like a Dancing
Master.


Merr. That Is very well too, Sir -- For a man may say, the Ship Dances in a
rough Sea, very properly -- nothing better. I tell ye Sir, a man of Art and
dexterity (to speak in Theology, like a Seaman) may bring any Text to bear upon
any point of a Subject he pleases. -- As for Example, to prove the Power of
King's, and particularly of the British Monarchy. A Gentleman takes this Text,
Sermon Preached at Wakefield Octo. 30th. 1681.
Psalm 51. verse. 4. Against thee only have I sinned.


Priestl. This is a great Argument -- For he that can only sin against God, is
accomptable to none but God.


Merr. Sir, I do not here go about to dispute the Power or Absolutenless of the
British Monarchy. For we have Secular Arguments of greater force to prove that
Thesis, were the Pulpit (as it ought to be) silent as to those matters; but
only to show, that it cannot be proved from this Text, notwithstanding the
dexterity of the Gentleman to traverse it, and to make it bear upon that
Subject.


Priestl. Well -- proceed. --


Merr. In the first place, I would fain know, why David should aim at that
time, more particularly in the 51 Psalm, to assert the Power of the British,
than of the Spanish Monarchy. For my part, I am apt to believe he was otherwise
emyloy'd, then to think of either.

In the next place, I conceive the Gentleman does not take the Interpretation
of the words right. For the words L'ke L'babka Chatathi; Against Thee, against
Thee only have I sinned, were without Question uttered in reference to the
privacy of the Fact committed, which lay concealed from all the World but God (
Joab being then an Accomplice) and David having recompensed the Injured Lady by
Marriage. Which the very next words, explanatory of the first, and to them
annexed, and made part of the sentence, by the Coputative Ve, seem to
demonstrate. V' Harang B'gneneka Gnasithi: And the evil I have done in thy
sight; not in the sight of any other. And therefore he makes this Confession;
to what end? not to show that he was unaccountable to none but God, but to
justify the Almighty in what punishment he should inflict upon him; as the last
words of the Text demonstratively imply; L'magnan tit sd^k b'dabreka, tizkeb
b'shaphreka, To the end thou may be justified in thy Word, and pure in thy
Judgment. And therefore these words seem to be grounded, more likely, upon
David's calling to mind the Words of the Prophet Nathan, Sam. 12. v. 12. Thou
did it secretly -- but I, etc. To which this Confession seems to have
referrence. For there was then no difference between the King and his People,
nor my reason for the King to Appeal to Heaven, about his Power. And this is
that which makes me believe, there is no more ground, to prove the Power of the
British Monarchy, from this sorrowful Ejaculation of David, so dreadfully
alarmed by the King of Kings himself; then there is to prove the Jurisdiction
of the British Parliaments from the 2. Sam. c. 5. v. 3. So all the Elders of
Israel came to the King to Hebron, and David made a League with them in Hebron
before the Lord. I would wish the Gentleman for Arguments sake next time to
take this Text in hand, and try what he can do with it: For if he can but find
out what that League was that King David made with the People, we should sooner
find by that, whither David were accountable to none but God or no, then by his
Text.


Priestl. I must confess, I don't understand your Hebrew, not I; but my thinks
it is a very pretty Text.


Merr. The Text is a very good Text, but you cannot think the fellows that are
hanged were accountable to none but God, because they sing the very words at
the Gallows. -- But I suppose you have heard of another Gentleman, and he is a
Sharper -- I mean He that undertakes to prove the Unlawfulness of the Bill of
Exelusion from Job. the 36. c. 21. v. upon this Ground, That it is not Lawful
for a Man to do evil, that good may come of it.


Priestl. Yes, I have heard of him, and I suppose you are of the same Opinion.


Merr. Truly, I belive there are many things which that Gentleman may call
Evil, which Reason of State will not allow to be so. And I believe, that State
Policy, is not bound to be confined, to his more narrow approhension of things,
nor to take his Direction in things, wherein he has nothing to do to give it.
It may be said, that it was not Lawful for Queen Elizabeth to assist the Prince
of Orange, to advance the Protestant Religion; but yet she did it, without
taking notice of his Maxim-* A Captain of a Man of War being too hotly engaged,
and like to be taken by the Enemy, is bound to sink his Ship, and blow up, it
may be, three or four hundred Men, rather than deliver his Charge to the Enemy.
One would think it were an evil in it self to destroy so many Innocent Souls,
and Subjects of the King, yet unless this evil be committed, that good may come
of it, that is to say, the Preservation of the Princes and the Nations Honor;
that Captain shall be shot to Death, by the Laws of War, if he do not do it. So
that in what is evil, or what is good, They who are managers of the Public
Government of Kingdoms and Principalities, are not to be guided by the Little
Rectors of Parishes.


Priestl. Well, I must grant, this was a little too far strained -- And truly
I think the Texts were ill chosen too; the one from the words of a Suppliant to
God, and the other from an Exhortation to a Person, Permissively under the
Clutches of the Devil; but now I shall never have done with ye. --


Merr. Upon my word, Sir, I Will give ye but one more of this Nature. --


Priestl. Well proceed.


Merr. A Parson not long since Preaching at Chertsey, Sir, having undertaken to
prove the Excellency of Monarchy, takes his Text Judge. 17. verse. 6. In those
days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his
own Eyes.


Priestl. How could this be? A Government without a King, and yet an Excellent
Monarchy!


Merr. Oh Sir -- you see they have the Art of doing these things.


Priestl. Well, but how did he do it? for I am in great Expectation.


Merr. Why, Sir, he proved it from several evil accidents, that happened at
that time, for want of a Monarch. --


Priestl. OF my word -- a very good way. --


Merr. First -- Micah made a Molten and a Graven Image, and an Ephod, and a
Teraphim; which was, because there was no King in Israel; for had there been a
King in Israel, there had been no Idolatry.


Priest-l. This is but an ill Beginning.


Merr. Secondly, The Levites taking a Concubine, and her playing the Whore
against him, was, because there was no King in Israel.

Thirdly, The Ravishing of the Levites Concubine was, because there was no King
in Israel, for had there been a King in Israel, the Levites Concubine had not
been Ravished.


Priest-l. Enough. --


Merr. Nay, Sir, I have no more at present. --


Priest-l. Gad, I smell a Rat; this is some Whig-Story of your own Invention.


Merr. Whigg me no Whiggs; -- I understand no such Names of Distinction. -- But
I know more than one, or two, or three, that heard him. --


Priest-l. Then he is --


Merr. Why, Sir, he keeps his Footman.


Priest-l. Does he? Then he is high enough; what need he Play the Fool, for
Church-Preferment? --


Merr. But what do you think of that Bathonian Squire, (for I can hardly call him
Minister) that rides Tantivy, Tantivy, against Jack Presbyter, as he calls him,
with his Lance couched in his Rest, like Don Bellianis of Greece, as if he
would overturn him at the first course?


Priest-l. Why truly, I find him in a very great Passion.


Merr. Yes, in such a Passion, that you may read his whole Book in his
Title Page, and discover the Rancor of his Mind in Thirteen Capital Letters.


Priest-l. But they affronted him, it seems --


Merr. Affronted him! Where was his Christian Charity? Because a single Person
Topham'd him in the Bath, therefore must he, like a pretended Attorney General
of a Minister, undertake to impeach a whole Order of Men, that contend with him
in Principles of Divinity and Morality, and most certainly outdo him in
Preaching.


Priest-l. But you know, There are some things (as the Proverb says) will vex a
Saint.


Merr. And truly, it was a most Saint-like Design, to revenge himself upon the
Presbyterians, by endeavoring to prove the Unlawfulness of the Bill of
Exclusion, from the Afflictions of Job.


Priest-l. As to the Revenge, I can say little; but as to the Ingenuity of the
Business, I find you do not apprehend it.


Merr. As how?


Priest-l. For had the Bill passed, it might have been an Affliction to the
Parties concerned.


Merr. I Will swear, Friend Priest-love, you have hit it; I did not apprehend it
before.


Priest-l. Well, -- but what say you to the Sermon it self? --


Merr. I think it not worth the Name of a Sermon. -- In short, it is such a
mere Tongue-Granado, such a Composition of Brim-stone and Fire, that I wonder
it does not kindle of it self, and fire the Booksellers Shop. And, in a word,
the Author may be called the Tory's Hick^ringhil.


Priest-l. Well -- have ye done now?


Merr. I have only one Request to ye, because I know you are a great Frequenter of
Sam's Coffee-House, to desire those Gentlemen, (especially the Historians)
either to let alone their Quotations; or else to cite 'em so, that we may find
'em to be Men of Reading --


Priest-l. Why, what Exceptions do you make against their Quotations?


Merr. Why, Sir, I find the Author of the Present Miseries of Sin, telling my
Lord Mayor the dreadful Example of Sylla, who in a violent Fit of Rage, vomited
up his Soul, page 13.
mixed with Blood and Threatenings. For which he cites Valerius Maximus, whom he
calls a Historian. In the first place, Valerius Maximus was no Historian; but
only a Collector of History. In the second place, Plutarch and Pliny would have
told him, That he did not die of a Violent Passion, but of a Phthiriasis, or
the Disease called Morbus Pediculosus.


Priest-l. But you see Valerius Maximus was best for his Turn.


Merr. That Is true indeed; -- and I would have allowed it at Paul's School.

In the next place, he tells ye of Alexander the Great's killing of Clitus. And
for this he cites Oliverius's Notes upon Valerius Maximus; whereas he might
have quoted Plutarch or Arrianus for the same thing; and that had been done
like a Scholar. page 19.
The Story of Ptolomy, King of Cyprus, is in Plutarch's Life of Cato; so that
he need not have been beholding to Oliverius's Notes upon Valerius Maximus for
it.


Priest-l. What Is that to you, if the Gentleman had a peculiar Kindness for
Valerius Maximus?


Merr. Dear Mr. Priest-love, I bear no Malice to Valerius Maximus in the least:
Only I say, It Is somewhat pedantick, to quote an Index, when a Man may cite the
Book it self. But I more wonder, that a Doctor should cite Cicero, Sermon
Preached At Bow- Church, Jan. 30. 1682.
for a piece of History; about the Romans enacting Laws against the Worship of
strange Gods, when he might have adorned his Margent much more to the purpose,
and more properly out of Livy himself.


Priest-l. Why should you be angry at this?


Merr. You mistake, Sir; I am so far from being angry, that since Quotation and
Margent-filling are only Acts of Vainglory and Ostentation, I would not have
Gentlemen unwarily lose their Applause by ill Management. -- I promise ye, I
expect that some of 'em should Thank me for this good Advice.


Priest-l. Have ye done now? --


Merr. Yes, Sir. --


Priest-l. Why now then let me ask thee, What is the Meaning of all this
Clutter and Hurly-burly? Certainly, it must be the Phanaticks, that make it. --


Merr. Faith, Sir, I can give no Account of it; but I find the Church of
England-men are very Angry. -- You cannot come to hear or read a Sermon made
upon any public Occasion, but let the Text be what it will, half the Sermon is
Matter of State. -- One cries out against the Popish Protestants; Bow-Church.
Bath-Church.
another cries, Pope Populus in Parliament; another, no less than a
Parson-Justice, Thetford-Sizes.
lifts up the Weavers-Beam of his Indignation, and lays upon the Parliament of
the whole Nation, as if he had engaged all his Divinity for the Certainty of
the Mortal Stroke.

The Weight of his Text was Two Hundred Shekels of Silver -- By me Kings reign.
--

The Weight of his Doctrine, a Hundred and Fifty: -- That Monarchy is Jure
Divino. --

The Weight of the rest, you may guess by what follows: -- They that Reign,
ought to be Kings; not Commonwealths, not Lords and Commons; not Parliaments,
(especially Parliaments, that by bare Votes would abrogate Laws) not
Parliaments, that by Arbitrary Proceedings would infringe the Liberty of the
Subject; not Parliaments, that would Exclude the Right Heir from the Crown; not
Parliaments, that are Guilty of High Treason. -- Was it not well now the
Parliament was not at Thetford? Else, for ought I know, they might have been
Committed. --


Priest-l. I confess, Zeal may sometimes a little exceed. -- However, they are
Men, and Rational Men; and sure they would not do this, but that they have some
Reason for it.


Merr. Why truly, Sir, I believe some think it pleases, and therefore they do
it in hopes of preferment. Others, out of an over-weaning pride, and conceit of
Themselves, and contempt of their Brethren. And then, in the next place, there
is such a Numerous Fry, that Hunger and Thirst after Maintenance, and so few
Bones in the Nation, that they snarte at all, who pretend to share with 'em.

If you will hear their own Acknowledgment, the Author of the Properties of
Heavenly Wisdom, confesses, that the Quarrels are sleeveless, de Lana Caprina,
as he calls it, page 28.
about Habits, Gestures, Days, and other Ceremonials.


Priest-l. Why then, one would think, such Differences as these, might easily
be laid asleep, by a Charitable Condescension on both Sides.


Merr. Ay -- but then again, says the same Author, the Confused Noise of Pro
and Con, Ob and Sol, I may add Whigg and Tory, drowns the Voice behind us,
which tells us, This is the Right Way, walk in it. We find also, that some Men
are obstinately attacked to their own Opinions; and these are a sort of People,
who believe that mutual Love and Charity are only owing to those of their own
Sect.


Priest-l. That Is contrary, I am sure, to the Scope of Christian Perfection,
and the Precepts of Christ, and His Apostles.


Merr. What care some Men for that? especially they, who are guided by that
Maxim of Hell, divide and impera. Interest, you know, Sir, has Governed the
World, how long do you think?


Priest-l. Why truly, I believe, ever since I can remember.


Merr. Why, there is the Grand Cause of all our Misfortunes. If you would but
remove that Obstacle --


Priestl. Why then I Will propose a way -- What think ye of a National Council?


Merr. I dare not undertake to propose it, Sir; But as to that I Will give ye the
words of the Author of the Old Way of ending new Controversies. P. 32.
A National Council ought more especially Oblige us, to determine the
Controversies among us; because their Decrees are our own Acts, as having
chosen the Persons who represent us in it.


Priestl. Very honestly spoken, what think you? --


Merr. That Is a thing to be left wholly to Authority -- I have nothing to do
with it -- But in my Opinion, M. Maurices Sermon, Preached before the King,
Jan. 30. 1681.
there is a Worthy Gentleman has put your Friends into an Extraordinary Method.
Whither they will follow it or no, I cannot tell; but I am apt to believe it is
much more wholesome advice, than is given them by their adored Guide, to whom
they bow at Sam's Coffee-House. And therefore because they shall not be
offended with me, I will give them the Gentleman's own words. It is not
material (says he,) from whence bad Men derive their Principles of Disloyalty,
since it is too certain, they owe all their Success and Advantages to our sins;
as these increase, so do they; they have both one Common Fate, they multiply
and decrease together. Our profaneness and Contempt of Religion, begets in
them a Contempt of Authority and the Laws; and the neglect of that Holy Service
we pretend to extol, adds greater Numbers to our Enemies than all their Art and
Industry can pervert. If we would weaken that Faction, let us take away the
support they have among our selves, the Open Scandal and Viciousness of our
Lives, and then they are left without pretense, and fall without our trouble.
Let us confute their Reproaches by a Reformation of our manners, and detect
their Hypocrisy, not by washing off the paint with Satyr, but by confronting
their pretense and form with solid and sincere Piety. Without this, all other
means will be to little purpose. Without this Loyalty is but affectation, a
thing no less unserviceable than it will be uncertain. And with this I will
conclude; firmly believing, if this advice were followed, all Thundering in
Pulpits, and Caballing in Coffee-Houses, would soon be at an End.


FINIS.

