SPORTIVE WIT: THE MUSES MERRIMENT. A NEW SPRING OF Lusty Drollery, Ioviall
Fancies, AND A la mode Lamponnes, On some Heroic persons of these late Times,
Never before exposed to the public view.

Collected for the Public good, by a Club of sparkling Wits, viz. C. I. B. I.
L. M. W. T. Cum multis aliis --.

Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
LONDON, Printed for Nath: Brook, to be sold at the Angel in Cornhill, and at
the New Exchange and other places. 1656.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, RALPH BANKS, Esquire.
Honored Sir,
WHen I resolved to address these Curiosities to your self, there was nothing
which more emboldned me than your own Ingenuity and worth, which I speak not
after the common strain of Epistles Dedicatory, but in confirmation of a Truth
well known to many. As for the Book it self, I may give it this character,
that is contains Fancies as happy as the Muses could infuse into the choicest
of our English Wits, and so ordered, as not to distaste the most serious, yet to
be as blithe and merry as youth it self could expect. And therefore if you are
pleased to look favorably on it, and to bid it welcome, I doubt not but it
will live securely under your name, not a little to the honor of him, who
desires to profess himself,

SIR, Your most obedient Servant. J. P.

To the Reader.
Jovial Readers,
BY your leave room for such Wit as your Friends and sparkling Canary presents
you with: you have it from persons who entertained no serious thoughts, or
notions at that time. It Is sufficient, that this small volume has been before
a lawful Judicature: and certainly it cannot but be the better thought of, in
regard it has been too severely dealt withal; for Gold, though it be the
richest production of the Sun, is very often exposed to the Touchstone. Such a
trial have every one of these Copies endured. And believe it Reader, it has
passed the Verdict of a Grand Jury: The truth is, there formerly came forth a
Book entitled Wit and Drollery, which contained so many refined Fancies, that
had not this appeared, it might (for things of that nature) have given a full
satisfaction to the curious. But since we have made so noble and so large a
discovery, I hope, Reader, thou will not be angry that we have not been
Concealers, and Hoarders of our wealth. For to deal plainly with thee, Reader,
the publishers had no designs beyond thy pleasure, their own reputation, and
the continuation of their sprightly Club. Only be pleased, courteou^ Reader,
to understand, that some friends of Sir John Mennis, and D. J. S. have already
taken notice, how these worthy persons are likely to suffer by Copies, to which
their names are shortly to be affixed: Papers only to be protested against;
and indeed those who knew those Gentlemen, can assure the Reader, that hitherto
they never allowed of the publishing of their Copies, nor will ever descend so
much from their own prerogative, as to own those which they never wrote.
Neither have we such a dearth of other Wits, there are other ingenuous persons
in our little World of Britain, more youthful, as familiar and joviall with
the Muses as ever they were, and such as when they please to be right Drollers,
can be as little in love as they, such as are resolved never to study Romances,
or to be guilty of the false praises of women. You may meet with several
Pamphlets, Reader, but consider whether they be not raked from the simple
collections of Short hand prentices. Of these surreptitious Editions there is
no end; and if such trifles are allowed, we shall see Ballads inserted shortly,
to as much dishonor of our English Wit, as if Don's Poems were turned into
Dutch. The only misfortune, as when mere Rimers, and such like pitiful
Gleaners of the scraps of Wit, shall, like Marsyas, pretend to play with
Apollo. Ingenuous Reader, this volume is exposed to thy clear censure; only
take notice, if you can find out a Christian, and Surname by the letters in
the Title, as they are placed, you will do little less than devine. These
particulars I had order to acquaint you with from the Club of Wits,

Remaining, Your unfeigned friend in NECTAR.

The Dunners Dance.
1.
WIll you hear the mode of France,
To stop the mouths of all that dun you?
Only lead them in a dance,
Though you be behind in money.
2.
If your Creditor do call
To pay for diet, wine, or raiment;
In your dance keep time withal,
But forget it in your payment.
3.
If your Tailor chance to strike you
With his Bill that stays no leisure;
Pay him with a dance, he will like you,
And in stead of coin, take measure.
4.
If your Shoo-maker come on,
Turn your measure, quickly lead it;
Let that everlasting Dun
See his own Boots nimbly tread it.
5.
If your Lawyer seek you out
For Fees for this advice or to other;
Make him dance, for all his Gout,
And pay one Motion with another.
6.
But if your Landlady do want,
You needs must satisfy her pleasure:
She despises your Corant;
She Will be paid in standing measure.
7.
Thus we do despise all care,
And thus we skip through all disasters;
That all the world cannot declare,
But we are nimble quick day-masters.
A CATCH.
1.
THe Black Jack, the merry Black Jack,
As it is tossed on high-a;
Grows,
Flows,
Till at last they fall to blows,
And makes their noddles cry-a.
2.
The Brown Bowl, the merry Brown Bowl,
As it goes round about-a,
Fill
Still,
Let the world say what it will;
And drink your drink all out-a.
3.
The Deep Can, the merry Deep Can,
As thou do freely quaff-a;
Sing,
Fling;
Be as merry as a King,
And sound a lusty Laugh-a.
The Bulls feather.
IT chanced not long ago, as I was walking,
An echo did bring me to where two were talking:
'Twas a man said to his wife, Die had I rather,
Then to be cornuted, and wear the Bulls feather.
Then presently she replied, Sweet, art thou jealous?
Thou can not play Vulcan before I play Venus:
Thy f^ncies are foolish, such follies to gather:
There Is many an honest man has worn the Bulls feather.
Though it be invisible, let no man it scorn,
Though it be a new feather made of an old horn:
He that disdains it in heart or mind either,
May be the more subject to wear the Bulls feather.
He that lives discontent, or in despair,
And fears false measure, because his wife 's fair:
His thoughts are inconstant, much like winter-weather
Though one or two want it* he shall have a feather.
Bulls feathers are common as Ergo in Schools,
And only contemned by those that are ^ools:
Why should a Bulls feather cause any unrest,
Since neighbors fare always is counted the best?
Those women wh'are fairest, are likely'st to give it;
And husbands that have them, are apt to believe it.
Some men though their wives should seem for to tedder,
They would play the kind neighbor, and give the Bulls feather.
Why should we repine that our wives are so kind,
Since we that are husbands, are of the same mind?
Shall we give them feathers, and think to go free?
Believe it, believe it, that hardly will be.
For he that disdains my Bulls feather to day,
May light of a Lass that will play him foul play.
There Is never a proud Gallant that treads on Cows leather,
But he may be cornuted, and wear the Bulls feather.
Though Beer of that brewing I never did drink,
Yet be not displeased if I speak what I think:
Scarce ten in a hundred, believe it, believe it,
But either they will have it, or else they will give it.
Then let me advise all those that do pine,
For fear that false Jealousy shorten their time;
That disease will torment them worse then any Fever:
Then let all be contented, and wear the Bulls feather.
Close-Stool and Chamber Pot choose out a Doctor. A Lampoun.
1.
LAdies all, glad ye; here comes Doctor Paddy,
So good at a woman's Glyster:
Whatere be her grief, he will give her relief,
If once he have but kissed her.
2.
And kiss her he might; for he was a Knight,
And a valiant man at Arms:
He never drew blood, but for the parties good;
And then he was paid for his harms.
3.
But Doctor Foster is but an impostor,
For all his exceeding great pains:
And Doctor Poe, the world does know,
Is best for the running of th'Reins.
4.
And Doctor Turner full many a mourner
By Chemistry has made:
He first kills the man, and then treads the hen:
Oh this is an excellent trade!
5.
Yet Doctor Davis the very'st knave is
Of all that ever did practice:
And the Bull of the town, in the Taffata-gown;
Whose name I take to be Atkis.
6.
And Doctor Langford, although I hang for 't,
I Will have a sling at your Jacket:
Though you ride in a Cart, for your Bridewel-desert,
Yet your hand is in each woman's placket.
7.
For Doctor Mumfort, to your great comfort,
For ought that ever I heard*
You are an honest man, as a Physician can,
For one that has a red beard.
A SONG.
1.
Come, Sweet, and draw the Curtain round,
That we may meet where pleasures do abound;
Come, throw thine arms about me,
And I will embrace thee,
O thou Myrrour of delight.
2.
Oh it bubbles in my veins,
Casts forth such a froth
Worth thy beauties and thy pains;
Where none shall see but me,
None shall feel but thee:
Leave off whining,
Let Us be sw --
Sweet, agree, agree.
3.
See how the inviting Balm bedews
Her belly white, that like to ivory shows,
Oh, I cannot hold;
I must and will be bold:
Kiss then, and put out the light,
4.
Oh it comes, it comes amain
Up this lane to my brain,
And distilleth down again:
Fix it there, and let it be
Almost a Tympany.
Leave thy whining;
Night 's declining:
Sweet, agree, agree.
A SONG.
LOve, I must tell thee, I Will no longer be
A Victim to thy beardless deity:
Nor shall this heart of mine* now it is returned,
Be offered at thy shrine* nor at thine altar burn.
Love, like Religion 's made an airy name,
To awe those souls whom want of wit m^kes tame:
There Is no such thing as Quiver, Shaft, or Bow;
Nor does Love wound, but we imagine so:
Or if it does perplex and grieve the mind,
It Is the poor masc'line sex; women no sorrow find:
It Is not our parts or persons that can move 'em
Nor is it men's worth, but wealth, makes women love 'em.
Reason, not Love, henceforth shall be my guide:
Our fellow creatures shall not be deifi'd.
I Will now a rebel be, and so pull down
The Distaff-Hierarchy, or females fancied Crown.
In these unbridled times, who would not strive
To free his neck from all prerogative?
Cartwright's Song of Dalliance; Never printed before.
Hark, my Flora; Love does call us
To that strife that must befall us:
He has robbed his mothers Myrtles,
And has pulled her downy Turtles.
See, our genial posts are crowned,
And our beds like billows rise;
Softer combat's nowhere found,
And who loses, wins the prize.
Let not dark nor shadows fright thee;
Thy limbs of lus^re they will light thee:
Fear not any can surprise us,
Love himself does now disguise us.
From thy waste thy girdle throw:
Night and darkness both dwell here:
Words or actions who can know,
Where there is neither eye nor ear?
Show thy bosom, and then hide it*
License touching, and then chid^ it:
Give a grant, and then forbear it:
Offer something, and forswear it:
Ask where all our shame is gone;
Call us wicked wanton men:
Do as Turtles, kiss and groan;
Say, We never shall meet again.
I can hear thee curse, yet chase thee;
Drink thy tears, yet still embrace thee*
Easy riches is no treasure:
She that is willing, spoils the pleasure.
Love bids learn the restless fight,
Pull and struggle whilst ye twine^
Let me use my force to night,
The next corquest shall be thine.
NARCISSUS. A Song.
1.
AS I was walking I cannot tell how,
Nor I cannot tell whither nor where;
I met with a crew of I cannot tell who,
Nor I cannot tell what they were:
But Virgins I think; for they cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
2.
They sung a fine Song, of I cannot tell what,
Nor whether in Verse or Prose:
Nor knew I the meaning, although they all sat
Even as it were under my nose.
But ever and anon they cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
3.
There came in a Lad from I cannot tell whence,
With I cannot tell what in his hand:
It was a live thing that had little sense;
But yet it could lustily stand.
Then louder the Ladies they cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
4.
Some shak'd it, some stroak'd it, some kissed it, it is said,
It looked so lovely indeed:
All hugged it as honey, and none were afraid,
Because of their bodily need.
And louder these Ladies they cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
5.
At length he did put in this pretty fine Toy
In I cannot tell where below;
Into one of the Ladies, but I cannot tell why
Nor wherefore it should be so.
But in the mean time they all cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
6.
But when these Ladies had sported all night,
And rifl'd Dame Nature's store;
And tired themselves in Venus delight,
That they could hardly do more:
Yet louder these Ladies they cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
7.
This Lad being tired, began to retreat,
And hung down his head like a flower^^
The Ladies the more did desire the seat,
But alas 'twas out of his power.
Then louder and louder they cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
8.
I then did return I cannot tell how,
Nor what was in my mind:
Nor what else I heard, I know not, I vow,
Nor saw I: for Cupid is blind:
But that these Ladies still cried,
Narcissus, come kiss us, and love us beside.
A SPEECH. You may suppose he has made his leg, and then he speaks.
TO you, grave Speakers, and the rest beside,
Grace from above, and peace be multiplide.
What do you lack? Petitions we have brought
One worth the notice, plentifully frought
With Characters of understanding hands,
Whose Consciences are all at your commands.
What though some could not write? yet I dare promise
They Have made a G. for John, an L. for Thomas.
As for my self, their Foreman, and their Speaker,
I would not now be taken for a Sneaker.
If I my place and dignity may rent, I
Am one of the honorable four and twenty.
'T is known, I stroke my beard, and wear my gown
So understandingly, that all the Town
Admire my gravity: and here is my brother
W -- for all the world just such another:
But he, I fear, did long since change his name,
Because there is a Bishop wears the same.
That Antichristian Calling 't is that grieves us,
From whom we beg your goodness to relieve us:
For since these are the great Abomination
Of Frogs and Locusts in the Revelation,
Sound each of these, you will find a Pope in's belly,
As plain as you may smell a T. from Jelly.
This -- Cause has made us raise an Army
Of Supplicants, whose troops I hope will charm ye
To yield your helps; and 't is a pious work,
To bring the English to the Scottish Kirk.
Or now, or never, lend your aids, to twist
Out of their throats these Imps of Antichrist.
It glads my heart, to think our sage advice
Has stickled first, to break this holy Ice.
Observe as well the Leaders, as Retinue;
And if you have or wit or judgment in you,
You can conceive no less, but that the Prelates
Must have a knock from us true Scottish Zealots.
For my particular, the chief combiner,
I am, if 't please your Worships, the Refiner;
And hope you will not condemn me for a Widgeon,
Who took upon me to refine Religion.
My brother Alderman he trades in Drugs,
And can assure you that there is Romish B^gs
Tricked up in Rockets: and such odd devices
Smell very strongly of Italian spices.
Ghess at our troops, when we that go before um
May for our understandings be of the Quorum.
The first that march in the Vanguard of Complainers
Are Shoo-makers, styled otherwise Cordwainers;
Who albeit but of indiff'rent fashion,
Yet sure they are men of upright conversation:
May they have liberty, they will tell you plain,
They hold the Bishops Papishes in grain.
There Is never a man in all this zealous bunch,
But fain would have their Lordships feel his punch^
However matters heretofore have past,
They hope Religion will tread right at last.
The next Subscribers to this learned Epistle,
Though low, yet, they are yeomen of the Bristle,
Cobblers inspired, a crew that daily mends,
And hope* ere long, to bring about their ends:
They Will have (nor will their zeal one ace be 'bated)
The Prelates underlaid, or else translated.
Next the report proclaim them all deceivers,
We have a band of honest-handed Weavers:
Nor can you deem them Shuttle-headed fellows,
Who for the Law are so exceeding zealous:
They from the bottom of their hearts defy
The massy Beams that blind the Churches eye.
And those whom you see standing three and three,
Go strait at heart, though bending at the knee;
They Are Jaylors all, who swear it is not their pleasure
The Church should be tormented with hard measures
Their knuckles show you what a mighty Itch
They have to gather up the Clergy stitch.
I need not tell you who these are that follow;
The nose informs you that they smell of tallow:
And Chandlers though they be, they are quick enough
To take such foul indignities in snuff:
They pray that ere the -- be ended,
The blinking Lights of the Church may be amended;
And they may Cotton so, that they in peace
Henceforth on Holy Days may melt their grease:
And that you 'll nimble be, they do not doubt it,
Nor cast away too many weeks about it.
Please you to v^ew these following partakers,
The sundry dozens of our two-eat'd Bake^s;
'Mo^gst whom are some that never sprung from Jolt-head,
Who swear it is sit the -- should be new bolted:
Though some sift catalogues and moldy Rouls
IN the Prelates cause, they 're but unleven'd souls,
Whose weal^h and state (the crust must never be spared)
But by Authority be clipped and pared.
These Rolls you see stick here like sutty sinners,
Next on the paper are sharp-pointed Pinners:
They Are pricked at heart, that some new bold and dreadless,
Are not, like their cast wa^e, bowed and made headless.
Those joined to t^ese, in this so pious labor,
You may behold a candid Troop of Haber-
Dashers, who just as wise as all the rest,
Do humbly crave the -- may be new dressed;
And trust to see the Prelates, those proud limbs
Of Antichrist, cut narrower in the brims.
In brief, the very Porters and the Dray-men
Affirm that all will never be well, till Laymen
Be joined to the --. Nay more, the Broom-men see some
Necessity of a Reforming Beesome,
To sweep -- house. The Comb-men they determine
The Teeth of Justice must scratch out this Vermin.
Here Is fifteen hundred hands, a goodly number;
Which we could double, but we are loath to cumber
Our selves with all these Tinkers, Tanne^s Cu^^iers,
Upholsters Sadlers, Cutlers B^^bers Furriers,
Fishmongers, Painters, Fullers* Dyets Soap men,
Perfumers Blacksmiths, Turners* Botchers Roap-men
And millions more of such good souls, all last week
Attended on old Burton, Prynne and Bastwick.
Our Suit's so reasonable and just, we kn^w
You Will quickly yield, and never say us no.
First, down with -- an ungodly Fry*
You may at leisure yield the reason why.
Then fall upon Cathedrals, and their Deans,
That honest Courtiers may increase their means.
The feat once done, you will see the minor Clergy
Soon forced with ease to sing ^ doleful D^rg^e.
Great Livings are not fit for men of the Letter;
To w^ild si^e pretty Pensions would be b^^ter.
The way of Truth's all one; nor can we learn
More ^^ofit in a -- than in a Barn:
And far more fruitfully do we receive it
From some well-tutor'd twenty Nobl'd Levit
Shall mounted on a stool demurely utter
Smoothe pleasing do^^rine, smoothe as oil or bu^^es,
Then if some rough-hewn fellow not behold^ng
To our benevolence, shall fall a scolding
IN the open streets, and saucily inveigh
Against crimes which are familiar in our way,
And such as we may wink at for our profit,
Nor is it fit that they should tell us of it:
There 's proper liberty indeed: much fitter I
Conceive Geneva's reverent Presbytery;
When some of us, whom they may think -- builders,
Shall rule the roast, and be appointed Elders:
And then if busy fellows be so idle
To talk their wills, we 'll help them to a bridle.
On Tobacco.
1.
WHen I do smoke my nose with a pipe of Tobacco after a feast,
Then down let I my hose, and with paper do wipe mine -- like a beast.
It so does please my mind,
It does so ^ase behind,
For to wipe,
For to wipe my ^ewel.
Tobacco's my delight,
So 't is mine to sh --
Oh fine smack,
Oh brave ^ack my jewel.
2.
Tobacco only can draw the vapors down from my troubled brain;
And from the bashful Pan vapors rise 'twixt my thighs to my nose again.
Five Pipes I have devoured,
Five Pans I have deflowered full of fume,
Full of fume down flurting;
And yet I would have more,
And yet I have great store.
3.
Tobacco is a dish for an Earl, for a Lord, for a Knight, for a Squire:
Than shiting who can wish greater, if you please, or occasion require?
Tobacco 's a fine thing,
But shiting 's for a King; for the brains,
For the pains of the belly.
Tobacco who despise?
Then shiting who denies?
None, I think;
Though I stink, I tell ye.
4.
When I puff it through my nose, I do make
Fly such flakes, I do mock the clouds:
When my arse to close-stool goes, mark how
I rap thunderclaps aloud.
My smoke does dark the sun,
My raps out-roar a gun:
Oh that fart, how it rattles!
This Pipe more I 'll pull,
This Pan I 'll shite more full:
So goodnight,
We will shite out the battle.
5.
My nose, mine arse, does blew, does throw
Fiery puffs, counter-buff, from my jaw:
My nose, mine arse or does blow, or does throw
Fiery puffs, counter-buffs from my maw.
My nose has made an end,
Mine arse and he are friends:
He 'll not j^st;
He 'll be kissed, but in spite not:
My ^ose will no more puff*
Mine arse has shit enough:
Give', some drink, we shall P^nk, if we wipe not.
A Lampoun.
HEre 's a Health to good Queen Mary,
we'll have it ere we part;
And to King Charles her husband;
I Will pledg't with all my heart.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Mary,
for whom I 'll spend my heart;
And to the Prince her brother,
and to the Duke of York.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Duchess,
that loves red hair so well;
And to my Lord her husband,
that made her belly swell.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Dorset,
that rules the Royal twig;
And to my Lord her husband,
and his great Periwig.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Caernarvan,
that 's a pearl in each man's eye;
And to my Lord her husband,
that can both swear and lie.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Rich,
that looks so like a Witch;
And to my Lord her husband,
that cannot endure the switch.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Kent,
that has a bounsing C -- *
And to my Lord her husband.
that tickled my Lady Hunt.
Here 's a Health to my Lady of Newport,
that can both sing and dance;
And to my Lord her husband,
that 's run away to France.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Denby,
as sweet as Sugar Candy;
And to my Lord her husband,
that little Jack-a-dandy,
Here 's a Health to my Lady Wimbleton,
but fifteen years of age;
And to my Lord her husband,
that 's jealous of his Page.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Holland,
of all women the best;
And to my Lord her husband,
that goes so neatly dressed.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Goring,
whose -- lies a cooling;
And to my Lord her husband,
that got his means by fooling.
Here 's a Health to my Lady Pembrook,
And so I 'll end my Song;
And to my Lord her husband,
that never did man wrong.
On a precise Woman.
ONe came to Court a wench; she was precise,
And by the spirit did the flesh despise:
One moved a secret Match betwixt them two;
But she in sooth and sadness would not do.
He did reply, So sweet and fair as she,
Made of the stuff all other women be,
Ought by the law of woman to be kind,
And show her self to bear a woman's mind.
Well, Sir, quoth she, you men do so prevail,
With cunning speeches, and a pleasant tale:
It Is but a folly to be over-nice:
You shall; but twenty shillings is my price:
If you a brace of Angels will bestow,
Come such a time, and I am for you. So
He took leave then, and with her husband met;
Told him, by Law he was to pay a debt,
Entreating him to do so good a deed
As lend him twenty shillings at his need.
Which very readily he did extend;
And the other willing on his wife to spend,
So taking leave of him, he went his ways,
Meeting his Creditor within few days,
And told him, Sir, I was at home to pay
The twenty shillings which you lent last day;
And with your wife, because you were not there,
I left it: pray you with my boldness bear.
'T is well, quoth he, I 'm glad I did you pleasure.
So coming home, questions his wife at leisure:
I pray, Sweetheart, was such a man with thee,
To pay two Angels which he had of me?
She blushed, and said he had been there indeed:
But you did ill to lend: husband, take heed;
It is not good to trust before you try.
Pray lend no more: for it may breed some strife,
To have such knaves come home to pay your wife.
The Drunkard's Song.
WHen I go to revel in the night.
The Brewers dogs my brains do bite;
My head is too heavy, and my heels are too light:
And I like my humor well, well;
And I like my humor well.
With ipse he I line my head;
My Hostess 's Cellar is my bed.
The world 's our own when the devil 's dead:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
Then I fall to talking of the Court,
Or about the taking of some Fort;
And I swear a lie for a true report:
And I like my humor well, well, etc,
Now from the Wars I came I swear
How I made a fellow die for fear;
How many I killed, that I never came near:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
If my Hostess bids me pay the Score,
I Will stand if I can, and call her Whore;
Or stumble and reel out of the door:
And I like my humor well, well* etc.
The cape of my Cloak hangs all a one side;
My hat band 's lost* and my hose are untide;
My heels on the ground begin for to slide:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
Then justle with every post I meet;
I kick the dunghills about the street;
I trample the kennels under my feet*
And I like my humor well, well etc.
The Constable then I curse and ban:
He bids me stand, if I be a man;
And I tell him he bids me do more then I can:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
If I fall to the ground, the Watchmen see;
They ask me if I foxed be:
I tell them it is my humility:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
If I chance to justle with a Tailors stall,
My nose to the ground does catch a fall:
We kiss and be friends, and so we part all:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
When I come home, my wife will scold;
It is my patience makes her bold;
She 'll rail the more, if I bid her hold:
And I like my humor well, well, etc.
When I go to bed, I lose my way,
Forgetting where my clothes I lay:
I call for drink, before it is day:
And I like my humor well, well;
And I like my humor well.
A Shepherd fallen in love. A Pastoral SONG: With the Answer.
CLoris, since thou art fled away,
Amyntas sheep are gone astray,
And all the joys he took to see
His pretty Lambkins follow thee,
They 're gone, they 're gone; and he always
Sings nothing now, but Well-a-day, well-a^day.
The embroidered Scrip he used to wear,
Neglected lies, so does his hair:
His Crook broke, his Dog howling lies,
While he laments with woeful cries,
Oh Cloris, Cloris, I decay,
And forced am to cry, Well-a-day, well-a-day.
His Oaten Pipe whereon he plays
So often to his sweet Roundelays,
Is flung away, and not a Swain
Dares sing or pipe within his plain:
It Is death for any one to say
One word to him, but Well-a-day, well-a-day.
The way wherein her dainty feet
In even measure used to meet,
Is broken down; and no content
Came near Amyntas since she went:
For all that ere I heard him say,
Was Cloris, Cloris, well-a-day, well-a-day.
On the ground whereon she used to tread,
He ever since has laid his head;
Still breathing forch such pining woes,
Tha^ not one blade of grass there grows.
Ah Cloris, Cloris, come away,
And hear Amyntas well-a-day, well-a-day.
The Answer.
Cloris, since thou art gone astray,
Amyntas Shepherd's fled away;
And all the joys he wont to spy
IN the pretty babies of thine eye,
Are gone; and she has naught to say,
But who can help what will away, will away?
The Green on which it was her chance
To have her hand first in a dance,
Among the merry Maiden-crue,
Now making her naught but sigh and ruo
The time she ere had cause to say
Ah, who can help what will away, will away?
The Lawn with which she wont to deck
And circle in her whiter neck;
Her Apron lies behind the door;
The strings will not reach now as before:
Which makes her often cry well-a-day:
But who can help what will away?
He often swore that he would leave me,
Ere of my heart he could bereave me:
But when the Sign was in the tail
He knew poor Maiden flesh was frail;
And laughs now I have naught to say,
But who can help what will away?
But let the blame upon me lie;
I had no heart him to deny:
Had I another Maidenhead,
I Would lose it ere I went to bed:
For what can all the world more say,
Than who can help what will away?
A Lampoun.
Heavens bless King James our joy,
And Charles his Baby;
Great George, our brave Viceroy,
And his fair Lady;
Old Bedlam Buckingham,
And her Lady-keeper:
She looks well to Huckingham,
He Is the -- sweeper.
These are they bear the sway
In Court and City;
And yet few do them love,
The greater's the pity.
The young Lady Marchioness,
And Lady Fielding:
Kate for her worth heavens bless,
Sue for her yielding.
Ned Villers has a wife,
And she is a good one:
Butler leads an ill life,
Yet she is of the blood one*
These are they bear the sway
In Court and City;
And yet grace in each place,
Else were it pity.
Cranfield, I Will make a vow,
He Will not be partial:
Nan was used you know how,
By the Earl Mar^ial.
The Horn of Honor, fool,
She has exalted.
Tell no tales out of School,
Lest thou be palted.
These are they bear the sway
And keep the money;
Which he may better do,
Than his wife's --
Old Abbot Anthony
Thinks he has well done,
In leaving Sodomy,
To marry Sheldon.
She has a buttock plump,
Keep but thy T -- whole:
She will hold up the rump
With her black A -- hole.
These are they bear the sway
In Court and City;
Yet next Spring he will sing
The Cuckolds ditty.
Young Viscount Fielding too
He Is a good fellow:
Yet mad Tom Compton's blue
Nose looks yellow.
Will: has a better way;
He can endure all:
What need Tom care a straw?
Lincoln can cure all.
These are they bear the sway,
And are most busy:
They will sup all the cup,
Till their brain's dizzie.
Young Compton might have had
Wives by the dozen;
Yet the fond fool was mad
For George's cozen.
Maxwel swore by his saul,
He Is not be hindered:
They get the Dee'l and all,
That swive the kindred.
These are they bear the sway
All this Isle over:
There is no greater fool
Then the fond lover.
Kit was almost forgot;
Damport had hid him:
They two were at the pot,
Whilst Ray o'er-rid him:
For all his elbow stood
Butchin with Sherry,
Crying thus: Bleed good blood:
Hang wives; be merry.
These are they spend the day
In drink and swiving:
Gentle Kit, learn more wit,
then go a wiving.
The Minstrel was an ass,
And lived by scraping:
His lusty kindred was
Not worth the japing:
And now in number sure
They cannot come near us,
We are so chaste and pure,
Hell need not fear us.
These are they bear the sway
Of Court and City;
And yet few love them, though
Greater's the pity.
Hark how the Wagons crack
With their rich lading:
Doll comes home with her pack;
She Is fit for trading.
Phil will no longer stay
With her bare baby:
What will the people say,
When she is a Lady?
These are they must away;
Who dares deny it?
Will you an Office get,
Thus you must come by it.
A SONG.
Cupid, Cupid, makes men stupid;
I Will no more of such boys play:
I delight to sport all night,
and then to change my love next day.
Read the story of Jove's glory,
how the wanton gods above
Caused more wonder than is thunder,
with their often change of love.
Custom covers constant Lovers
with a false pretended praise:
Dido di'd in height of pride:
then farewell Dido and her Bays.
Mortal eyes are not so wise;
the gods have made men's hearts more faint:
One denying causes dying:
is not Love a gallant Saint?
Maids be so wise, and so precise,
as not to stand still at a stay;
But let it go, the thing you know,
and do not stay what will away.
Ralph Sleigh.
The Song of the Caps.
THe Wit has long beholding been
Unto the Cap, to keep it in:
Let now the Wit fly out amain,
With praise to quit the Cap again.
The Cap that owns the highest part,
Obtained that place by due desert:
For any Cap, whatere it be,
Is still the Sign of some Degree.
The Cap does stand, each man can show,
Above a Crown, but Kings below:
The Cap is nearer heaven than we;
A greater sign of Majesty:
When off the Cap we chance to take,
Both head and feet obeisance make.
For any Cap, etc.
The Monmouth-cap, the Saylors Thrum,
And that wherein the Saylors come:
The Physi^k Law, the Cap divine,
The same that crowns the Muses nine:
The cap that Fools do countenance;
The goodly cap of Maintenance:
And any Cap, etc.
The Sickly cap, both plain and wrought;
The Fudling cap, however brought:
The quilted, furred; the Velvet Satin.
For which so many pates learn Latin;
The Crewel-cap, the Fustian pate,
The Periwig, a cap of late:
And any Cap, etc.
The Soldiers that the Monmouth wear,
On Castle-tops their Ensigns rear:
The Saylors with their thrum do stand
O^ higher place than all the land:
The Trades-man's cap aloft is born,
By 'vantage of (some say) a horn.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Physick's cap to dust may bring,
Without control, the greatest King:
The Lawyers cap has heavenly might,
To make a crooked cause aright;
Which being round and endless, knows
To make as endless any cause.
Thus any Cap, etc.
Both East and West, and North and South,
Where ere the Gospel finds a mouth,
The Cap divine does th^ther look,
The Square like Scholars and their book:
The rest are round, but this is square,
To show that they more stable are*
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Motley man a cap does wear,
That makes him fellow for a Peer:
And 't is no slender part of wit,
To act a Fool where great men sit:
But Oh the cap of London-town,
I wis it is like the Giants crown.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Sick-man's cap, not wrought with silk,
Is like repentant, white as milk.
When hats in Church drop off in haste,
This cap never leaves the head uncas't.
The Sick-mans cap, if wrought, can tell,
Though he be ill, his state is well.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Fudling cap, God Bacchus might,
Turns night to day, and day to night:
Yet Spe^ders it prefers to more,
By seeing double all their store.
The furred and quilted cap of age*
Can make a moldy Proverb sage.
Thus any Cap, etc.
Though Fustian caps be slender wear,
The head is of no better gear:
The Crewel cap is knit like hose,
For them whose zeal takes cold in the nose;
Whose purity does judge it meet
To clothe alike both head and feet.
This Cap would fain, but cannot be
The only Cap of no Degree.
The Satin and the Velvet hive,
Unto a Bishopric does drive:
Nay, when a File of caps you 're seen in,
A square cap this, and then a linen:
This treble cap may raise some hope
If fortune smile, to be a Pope.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Periwig, Oh that declares
The rise of flesh, though loss of hairs:
And none but Graduats can proceed
In sin so far, till this they need.
Before the Prince none covered are,
But those that to themselves go bare.
This Cap, of all the Caps that be
Is now the Sign of high degree.
A Fancy.
WHen mortal beauties sheath their radiant light,
Masking their glory in the clouds of night:
When Phoebus tumbles into Thetis lap,
After his traveling to take a nap;
Then dares each little star open an eye,
And peep into the world familiarly,
Which in the luster of the lightsome day,
Does stand eclipsed by a more splendid ray:
For where the freshest fashion is in place,
The rest look slovenly, and lose their grace:
So where a richer Fortune has a suit,
Virtue and Merit may and must stand mute.
A SONG.
It Is not my Ladies face that makes me love her,
Though beauty there does rest,
Enough to inflame the breast
Of those that never did discover
The glories of that face before:
But I that have seen many more,
See naught in her, but what in others are;
Only because I think she is fair, she is fair.
It Is not her virtues, nor those vast perfections
Which crowd together in her*
Engage my heart to win her:
For those are only brief collections
Of what 's in man in folio writ,
Which by their imitating wit,
Women like apes and children strive to do:
But we that have the substance, flight the show.
It Is not her birth* her friends, nor yet her treasure,
My freeborn soul can hold:
For chains are chains, though gold;
Nor do I court her for my pleasure,
Nor for that old mortality,
Do I love her 'cause she loves me:
For that is but only gratitude; and all
Loves that from Fortune rise, with Fortune fall.
If either birth or friends created love within me,
Then Princes I Would adore,
And only scorn the poor:
If virtues or good parts could win me*
I Would turn Platonic, and never vex
My soul with difference of sex.
And he that loves his Lady 'cause she is fair,
Delights his eye: so loves himself, not her.
Wit and Discretion are to Love High Treason:
Nor does he truly love,
Whose flames are not above,
And far beyond his wit and reason.
Then ask no reason for my fires;
They 're infinite, like my desires:
Something there is makes me to love; and I
Do know I love, but know not how or why.
A Medly.
I Prithee sweet Rose pull up thy clothes,
And let me see thy --
Fortune my foe, why did thou frown on --
Green sleeves and Pudding-pies,
And wot you not where --
The Cripple of Cornwall surnamed was:
He slept under an old hollow --
Barnaby where have thou been?
Drunk ore-night, and dry again, in the days of
Old Simon the King,
With a threadbare coat, and a Malmsey nose,
Sing, Heigh --
For a lusty lively lad,
Heigh for a lad lacks kissing;
Heigh for a lad that is seldom sad:
But when he is dead, and laid in his grave,
The passengers by will say, There was --
A jovial Turk dwelt in the town of Turvey;
And he could tune a kettle well, but his humor was scurvy:
Still did he cry, Tara tink, tara tink boys;
Room for Cuckolds here comes --
As pretty a Nymph as I have seen;
Her age was not above fifteen:
For grief of heart complained she,
I slept not since the Conquest.
A SONG.
When Phoebus first did Daphne love,
And could no way her fancy move;
He craved the cause. The cause, quoth she,
Is, I have vowed Virginity.
Then Phoebus raging, swore, and said,
'Bove fifteen none should die a maid.
If maidens then perchance are sped*
Ere they can scarcely dress their head;
Yet pardon them, for they are loath
To make Apollo break his oath:
And better it is a child were born,
Than that a god should be forsworn.
Yet silly they, when all is done,
Complain, our wits their hearts have won;
When it is for fear that they should be
With Daphne turned into a tree:
And who would so her self abuse,
To be a tree, if she could ch^se?
A Lampoun.
1.
THimble 's wife is fair,
Wherefore he vows to sting her;
And ever when they toy, she cries,
Oh Thimble, you wring my finger.
2.
Moor 's wife is chaste,
Which makes all men to wonder:
The reason is, that Moor himself
Does always keep her under.
3.
Bell 's wife is good metal,
Besides, she is very dapper:
And when the peal is rung, she cries,
O Bell, how fares your clapper?
4.
Lichfield's wife is lustful,
And given to excess,
Because she is a Printers wife,
And loves to be in Press.
5.
Cross 's wi^e is ugly;
Besides, she is very common:
Which makes him to lament,
No cross is like a woman.
6.
Hack's wife is unknown,
Because he lives unwed;
Yet has work enough to saw the horns
He gets on Herbert's head.
A Charm.
SLeep, old man; let silence charm thee:
Dreaming slumbers overtake thee:
Quiet thoughts and darkness arm thee:
Let no creaking door awake thee.
Phoebus has put out his light,
All his shadows closing:
Phoebe lends her horns to night,
To thy heads disposing.
Let no fatal Bell nor Clock
Pierce the hollow of thine ear:
Tongueless be the early Cock,
Or what else may make a sear.
Let no Rat nor silly Mouse
Along these benches rushing;
No^ a Cough disturb this house,
Till Aurora 's blushing.
Come, my sweet Corinna, come;
Laugh, and leave thy late deploring:
Sable midnight makes all dumb,
But thy jealous husbands snoring.
And with thy sweet perfumed kisses
Entertain a stranger:
Love, delight, and swee^^st bliss is
Got with greatest danger.
The Mercury.
COme buy my new Almanacks every one.
And take the choice before they are gone,
One thousand six hundred forty one:
Come buy my new Almanacks, new.
The Puritan has got his lock*
Babylon's Whore's stripped of her smock,
And you may see what 't is a clock:
Come buy, etc.
The Spring will windy be, and blow;
Autumn full of hail and snow:
Such storms as these you never did know.
Come buy, etc.
The Sun we find Eclipsed will be,
By S. by M. by P. and by G.
Such distempers as these you never did see:
Come buy, etc.
The Moon also will have another,
By Mars, or by some such -- brother:
Heavens bless the one, and blast the other*
Come buy, etc.
Be 't he or she, be 't hic or haec;
He that has had a -- check;
Let him beware^ the sign's in the neck.
Come buy, etc.
Time will give, that you shall see,
All will be ferk'd that learned be,
Or never trust my Astrology.
Come buy, etc.
The Planets do begin to jar
Amongst themselves, that fixed are:
Mercury proves the falling star.
Come buy, etc.
This Summer will be hot and dry;
Men will faint, fall down, and die:
You may know how, but never why.
Come buy. etc.
Pick out the best of all my store:
He that writ this, never writ before;
And if this fell not, he will never write more.
Come buy, etc.
The Tub-Preacher.
WIth face and fashion to be known;
With eyes all white, and many a groan;
With neck awry, and drawing tone;
With harp in 's nose, or he is none:
It Is a new teacher about the town,
Oh the town, the towns new teacher.
With coz'ning cough, and hollow cheek,
To get new gatherings every week;
With paltry text as man can speak;
With some small Hebrew, and no Greek:
To find out words, when stuff's to seek:
It Is a new, etc.
With hair cut shorter than the brow;
With little Ruff starched you know how;
With cloak, like Paul; no coat* I trow:
With Surplice none, till lately now:
With hands to thump, no knees to bow:
It Is a new, etc.
With Shopboard-breeding and intrusion;
With some outlandish institution;
With Systems Method for confusion,
With Vrsin's Catechism to curse on,
With strong-laid groans for mere illusion.
It Is a new, etc.
With threats of absolute damnation,
With certainty of some salvation
To his own Tribe, not every Nation;
And with some Use of Consolation.
It Is a new, etc.
With troops expecting him at the door,
To hear a Sermon, and no more;
And with new sighs of them great store,
And with great Bibles to turn ore,
Whilst he writes Notes upon the score:
It Is a new, etc.
With flesh-provision for the Lent,
With sheets of Sweetmeats oft-times spent,
Which young maids brought, old Ladies sent,
Yet of this Legacy sure event.
It Is a new* etc.
With new-wrought caps against the Canon,
For catching cold, though sure he have none,
And with new Pulpit-cloth to lean on,
And with new hour, when glass is run on,
New points, new notes, new naught to stand on.
It Is a new, etc.
The Impartial Doom.
Blind Fortune, if thou wantst a guide,
I Will tell thee how thou may divide,
And distribute to each their due:
Justice is blind, as well as you.
To the Usurer this doom impart:
Man 's Scrivener break, and then his heart:
May's debtors into Begg'ry fall,
Or what 's as bad, turn Courtiers all.
To Tradesmen that do sell too dear,
A long Vacation all the year:
Revenge us thus on their deceits,
And send 'em wives light as their weights.
But Fortune, how will thou recompense
The French-mens daily insolence?
For them I know no greater pain,
Then to be sent to France again.
L^st the Players should grow poor,
Send them Aglaura's more and more;
And to the Puritan more ears
Then Ceres in her Garland wears.
The Physicians if thou please,
Send them another new Disease:
To Scholars give, if thou can do 't,
A Benefice without a Suit.
To Court Lords grant Monopoly;
But to their wives, Community:
So Fortune thou shall please them all,
If Lords do rise, and Ladies fall.
To the Lawyers I beseech
As much for silence as for speech:
To Ladies Ushers, strength of back*
And to my self, a cup of Sack.
The Cuckold's Pedigree.
What Is a Cuckold, learn of me;
I can tell his Pedigree,
And his subtle nature conster:
He lives a man, yet dies a monster.
Yet old Antiquaries say,
He 's sprung from old Methusala.
Who after Noah's flood was found
To have his head with branches crowned.
God in Eden's happy shade,
Never such a creature made.
Then to be sure, and without all mistaking.
Cuckolds, Cuckolds, Cuckolds are of women's making.
The Curse.
THou who the native stink to expel
Of thy -- bely'st the smell;
Before the rank and luscious steam
Who pre^er'st -- the sweet extreme,
With Essences Civet, Musk be^mear'd;
May thou be wholesome, and yet seared*
Hot as the Dog Days may thou burn,
Yet none so mad to serve thy turn:
Not a Frenchman in the City,
Not a Stallion left to fit ye:
Not a D^ldo in the town,
Though thou would pawn thy self to the Gown
For the Prodigy that can
To thy lust supply a man.
Perpetual frosts in thy hands dwell,
In thy -- perpetual hell:
To frig thy self be all on fire,
Yet want the power to that desire.
That another may not do
What thy self's disabled to;
Be all thy acquaintance cold as North,
When Pisee^ frost dispenses forth.
Now to add unto thy Curse,
Hear and have what is far worse:
Free from the act, have a repute
Of a most noted prostitute;
Though thou art honest against thy will:
All pleasures want, but not one ill.
P -- on those false -- give me
Lesbia 's commodity;
Hers, your nose will half way meet,
Putting down Fish quite, or Thames Street:
Fulsom as a Tanners pit;
No Red-Herring smell^ like it.
Sents that come from the Exchange,
As unpleasant are, as strange.
Whose -- 's perfumed, it is none of hers,
But her dapper Milleners.
Encomium of Tobacco.
TObacco 's a Musician,
And in a Pipe delights:
It descends in a close,
Through the organ of the nose,
With a relish that inviteth.
This makes me sing, So-ho-ho, so-ho-ho boys,
Ho boys sound I loudly:
Earth never did breed such a Jovial weed,
Whereof to boast so proudly.
Tobacco is a Lawyer;
His Pipes do love long Cases:
When our brains it enters,
Our feet do make Indentures,
Which we seal with stamping paces.
This makes* etc.
Tobacco 's a Physician,
Good both for sound and sickly:
It Is a hot Perfume*
That expell^ cold Rheum,
And makes it flow down quickly.
This makes, etc.
Tobacco is a traveller,
Come from the Indies hither;
It passed sea and land
Ere it came to my hand,
And escaped the wind and weather.
This makes, etc.
Tobacco is a Critic,
That still old paper turns;
Whose labor and care
Is as smoke in the air,
That ascends from a rag when it burns.
This makes, etc.
Tobacco 's an Ignis fatuus,
A fat and fiery vapor,
That leads men about,
Till the fire be out,
Consuming like a taper,
This makes, etc.
Tobacco is a Whiffler,
And cries, Huff, snuff, with fury:
His Pipes, his Club and Link,
And Vizor too, when he does drink:
Thus armed, I fear not a Jury.
This makes, etc.
A SONG.
STay, shut the gate;
The Other quart since it is not so late
As your thinking:
The stars that you see
In the Hemisphere be,
Are the studs in your cheeks
By your drinking.
The Sun's gone to tipple all night in the Sea, boys;
To morrow he will blush that he is paler then we boys:
Give us wine, give him water; 't is Sack makes us the boys.
Fill up the Glass;
To the next merry lad let it pass*
Come away w' it:
Come set foot to foot,
And give your minds to 't;
The are heretical Sixes
That slay wit.
No Helicon like to the juice of the wine is:
For Phoebus had never had wit nor divineness,
Had his face not been budded as thine is and mine is.
Drink off your Bowls,
We'll enrich both our heads and our souls
With Canary.
A Carbuncle face
Saves a tedious race:
For the Indies about
Us we carry.
Then hang up good faces; let us drink till our noses
Give freedom to speak what our fancy disposes,
Beneath whose protection now under the Rose is.
This must go round:
D'off your caps, till the pavement be crowned
With your Beavers.
A Red-coated face
Frights a Sergeant and his Mace,
And a Constable trembles
To shivers.
In state march our faces like those of the Quorum,
When the whores do fall, and the vulgar adore um,
And their noses like Link-boys run shining before um
Call honest Will;
Hang a long and tedious Bill:
It disgraces
Those Rubies that appear:
You safely may swear
The reckoning 's right
By our faces.
Let the Bar-boys go sleep and the Drawer leav roaring;
Our looks can account without them, had we more in,
When each pimple that rises will save a quart scoring.
Against Demur in Marriage.
Prithee friend leave off thy fooling,
And at last resolve to do
What Loves pleasures never cooling,
Love and beauty prompt thee to.
Venus cares not for good will,
But would have thee doing still.
Do but view that maid of Mettle*
How the rose smiles on her cheek;
The flower 's derended by the n^ttle,
And the rose deserves a pri^k.
Crop it then before it wither:
Youth and Love decay together.
Call thy spirits up, and make her
Great as ever she can hold:
Leave her quite, or quickly take her;
Be thou either hot or cold.
Love and Religion both agree,
Luke-warm's as bad as he or she.
Delays in drinking spoil good Claret;
Demurs make sick the maidenhead:
Sipping either does but mar it;
Neither pleases, if once dead.
Take her then; no longer dally:
Worse then death is Shally, shally.
Courage, man, to 't; touch and take her:
Maids by hopes are often beguiled:
Dallying, big will hardly make her;
Kisses never got a child.
Take her then and leave thy wooing:
Meaning's not so good as doing.
A SONG.
THere was a Country-lass,
An Amazon by stature;
She sat upon the grass
To do the deeds of Nature
With her A --.
Her back and knee she bowed,
Making most hideous faces:
Her guts do croak aloud,
And for to ease their cases
She hard did crowd.
Now mark ye what fell out,
A strange deformed creature,
Twelve inches round about,
And of a nut-brown feature,
W'th a snout.
About this T -- there stuck
Many a broken plum,
All fritter'd with a fart
Which came out of her bum,
And made it smart.
It seemed unto mine eye
As if the composition
Had been Rost-Beef and Pie;
Which made the disposition
Hot and dry.
The water that she made,
It caused such a swidge;
That no man could invade
The t -- without a bridge,
Or else must wade.
An Answer to Full forty times over.
HE is a fond lover that doateth on scorn,
Who Fortune's neglects has patiently born:
He Is proud of abuses, if ere he return
To prove a fond Lover;
His wit he will discover,
By striving to win
A fort, where old forces neglected have bin.
For when a fort we defend from the foe,
We traitors imprison; they never come below*
And her fort is defended by answering, No.
If that will not do it,
Disdain added to it,
Your weapon will fall;
Although you approach, you will not enter at all.
They are Lady-birds sure, these lovers intend,
Which cannot with wit such a fortress defend,
Whilst Hectors their Squibs and their Crackers do spend;
And vainly come after,
To conquer with laughter:
For she has no wit,
That spends all her fire in the smoke to be hit.
Where a fort has no strength but such as is made
By pride and by state, such a foe may invade;
For these are defenses for those of the trade.
You men are so witty,
Works guard not our city,
But forces within,
With which we maintain 't, tho the outworks you win.
These warriors at last with our weapons will fight;
And if we are (...) they will come in the night:
But alas they are denied, our virtues are bright:
For she that loves honor,
No parley ere won her
To yield up her power,
For a few slatt'ring words, and the sport of an hour.
A Catch.
I Met with Joan of Kent;
I laid her on the bed,
And there I got her maidenhead,
And she was well content.
The Cloak's ANSWER to the Poet's FAREWELL.
MAster, if I may do you no wrong,
Since we have been companions so long,
Let Us not now part: can friends love too long?
I was your friend in Thirty, though;
But now, how proud you Poets grow:
Was 't so in Noah's days? Ah no!
For they in times far pas'd from hence,
With oaken leaves their backs did fence;
Which made them love that tree ere since.
As for the Muses, I will not flatter.
They to their breeches never had tatter;
Which made them always live in the water.
But you that have a cloak to hide
What want makes them show, why do you chide?
Troth it is a strange forgetful pride.
Sir, you do tax me of a high fault;
But if I Am thredbare, is that my fault?
No, Sir; for I will prove 'twas thy fault.
First, you me laid in bed full close, Sir;
But Coverlid was so short, you know, Sir,
You scratched my wool off with your toes, Sir.
When you, poor son of Polyhimnie,
Drank muddy ale in durty chimnie,
Your Landlady she spoke full grim nie:
Come, Sir, your Cloak, or I Will arrest ye:
Then quoth I, Woman, are you so testy?
Here, take me off: and so relas'd ye.
But now, for lightness you would fain
Divorce me, and a new one gain,
High heaven knows how: but it is in vain.
Poor men must wear poor cloaks, you know:
The Devil told the Collier so,
When he said, Like to like will go.
My thinness makes you fear the Box,
Where durty maid with Flint-stone knocks:
But Master, have not you the Pox?
For Deianira, that Gilflurt,
Gave Jove's son such a devilish hurt,
As burnt not only him, but 's shirt.
She got it from the Centaur Nessus*
It was a cruel burn, God bless us:
Alas poor Cloak, how that would dress us!
What if I Am thin, you need not jeer, Sir:
You know when Sergeant cries, D' ye hear, Sir?
A thin cloak you may quickly tear, Sir.
Then was not he a Iohn-an-oak
Who opened his mouth when that he spoke,
And made a Love-back of your cloak?
Some called me Fiction, though but few did:
I think the men were mad or stupid*
Or else they were as blind as Cupid.
Yet we read of one had such a thin shroud
In heaven (me^ were not then so proud)
That Poets said he was wrapped in a cloud.
This Hero he was hight Ixion;
Perhaps he had no money to buy one:
Yet ventured he Jove's bed to lie on.
For he in thredbare cloak loved Juno,
And Juno him for ought that you know;
Though I confess I care not to know.
Though I am on, you do protest
You walk in Cuerpo when y' are dressed:
Master, that is but a thredbare jest.
Then a brother in zeal came with his ditty:
But if he were hanged, 'twere no great pity:
For how a devil came he so witty?
For Scholar that talked of Arachne,
Alas his brains were lean as hackney:
The poor man spoke when there was no Sack nigh.
For him that took me for a Cobweb,
(This verse wants rhyme, though not the next)
I would the knave were in Mount Horeb.
Thus as poor cloaks they jeering sit,
The name of Tailors would them fit,
Because it is but a Pricklouse-wit.
The Clerks in Blackwel-Hall, in brief,
With sculls of Sar^cens eat Beef:
Master, does this provoke your grief?
Will you, to have a pendent haunch,
Or a greasy prominent paunch,
Basely forsake the Olive Branch?
Once more together let us agree:
Master, these are best times for me:
Thin cloaks are naught for knavery.
Now O that some good mortal would
Make me an Epitaph as well as he could;
Verily, verily, I thank him would.
On hedge now I hang* the more's the pity
That one did make my Master so witty:
His wits are gone into the city;
As he does say, more wool to borrow:
Perhaps he will have it to day or tomorrow;
Perhaps he will not, the more 's his sorrow.
Master, adieu, poorer then Condi;
Your bare breech, Sir, may want me one day:
Sic transit, transit, gloria mundi.
The Clowns Song.
THe Courtier scorns us Country-Clowns,
We Country-Clowns do scorn the Court:
We can be as merry upon the Downs,
As you at midnight with all your sport:
With a fadding, with a fadding.
You hawk, you hunt, you lie upon Pallets,
You eat, you drink* the Lord knows how:
We sit upon hillocks, and pick upon Sallets,
And sup up our Sillibubs under a cow:
With a fadding, with a fadding.
Your Suits are made of Silks and Sattins,
And ou^s are made of good Sheeps-gray:
You mix your discourses with pieces of Latin,
We speak our old English as well as we may:
With a fadding, with a fadding.
Your Masks are made of Knights and Lords,
And Ladies that be fresh and gay:
We dance with such music as Bag-pipe affords,
And trick up our Lasses as well as we may:
With a fadding, with a fadding.
Your Rooms are behung with cloth of Arras,
Our Meadows are decked as fresh as may be:
And from our Pastime you never shall bar us,
Since Joan in the dark's as good as my Lady:
With a fadding, with a fadding.
The Gelding of the Devil.
A Merry Jest I will you tell,
Of the gelding of the Devil of hell;
And of the Baker of Mansfield-town,
To Manchester-market as he was bound:
And under a Grove of Willows clear,
The Baker was singing with lusty cheer;
Beyond the willows there was a well,
And there he met with the Devil of hell.
Oh, quoth the Devil, how chances that
Thy Horse he is so fair and fat?
Good Sir, quoth the Baker, by my fay,
'Cause both his stones are cut away;
For he that is a Gelding free,
Both fair and lusty will he be.
Oh, quoth the Devil and say thou me so?
Thou shall geld me before thou do go.
The Baker had a knife of iron and steel,
Wherewith he gelded the devil of hell:
'T was sharp, and pointed for the nonce,
And for to carve all manner of stones.
The Baker he lighted from off his horse,
And cut the devil's stones clear from's arse:
Oh, quoth the devil, beshrew thy heart;
Thou do not feel how I do smart.
For gelding of me thou art not quit;
I mean to geld thee the same day sennit.
The Baker hearing the words he said,
In his heart was sore afraid:
He hy'd him unto the next Market Town,
To sell his bread both white and brown,
And when the Market was done that day,
The Baker rode home another way;
And told his wife how all befell,
How he had gelded the devil of hell.
Wondrous words, quoth he, I heard him say,
He would geld me the next Market Day:
Therefore, said the Baker, I stand in doubt.
Uds bobs, I Would rather the ^naves eyes were out:
I Would rather thou should break thy neck-bone,
Than for to lose any manner of stone.
For why? it is a loathsome thing;
And every woman will call thee Gelding.
Thus they remained both in fear,
Until the Market Day drew near.
Then quoth the Goodwife, Well I wot,
Go fetch me thy doublet for and thy coat,
Thy hose, and thy shoon, and thy cap also,
And I like a man to the Market will go.
Then forth she hy'd her all in haste,
With her bread upon her beast:
And when she came unto the hill's side,
There she saw two devils abide;
A little devil and another,
Were playing as if the had been sister and brother:
Oh, quoth the great devil, without fain,
Yonder Is the Baker; go call him again.
But be thou weal, Baker, or be thou woe,
I mean to geld thee before thou do go.
But these were the words the woman did say;
Good Sir, I was gelt but yesterday.
Oh, quoth the devil, and that I will see:
And he pulled her hose beneath her knee;
And looking upwards from the ground,
There he spied a most grievous wound.
Oh, quoth the devil, now I see
He was nothing cunning that gelded thee:
For when he had cut off thy stones clean,
He should have sowed up the holes again.
He called the little Devil to him anon,
And bid him look to that same man,
While he did go to some private place
To get some salve in a little space.
The Devil was no sooner gone his way,
But upon her belly there crep't a flea:
The little Devil soon espied that,
He up with his paw, and gave it a pat:
The woman for fear began to start,
And out she thrust a most horrible fart.
Hoop, hoop quoth the little devil; come again, I say,
Here Is another hole broke hard by, by my fay.
Baker, quoth the devil, thou can not be ^ound,
That smellest so sore above the ground:
Thy life and days it cannot be long*
Thy breath it savours so horrible strong:
The hole is broke so near the bone,
There will no salve well stick upon:
Therefore, Baker, hie thee away,
And in this place no longer stay.
Charing Cross.
UNdone, undone, you Lawyers are,
That wander about the Town,
And cannot find the way to Westminster,
Now Charing Cross is down:
At the end of the Strand they make a stand,
Swearing they 're at a loss;
And chasing say, That Is not the way;
They must go by Charing Cross.
The Committees they said, Verily
To Pop'ry it was bent.
For ought I know, it might be so:
To Church it never went.
What with -- and other Laws,
The Kingdom does begin
To think you 'll leave them never a Cross
Without doors nor within.
For neither man, woman nor child,
Can say, I 'm confident,
That ere they heard it speak a word
Against the Parliament.
'T had Letters about it found, some say,
Or else it had been freed:
Before George, I Will take my oath of it,
'T could neither write nor read.
The Maids Portion.
1.
NOw all my friends are dead and gone,
Alas, what shall betide me?
For I poor maid am left alone,
Without a house to hide me:
Yet still I Will be of merry cheer,
And have kind welcome every where,
Though I have but a Mark a year,
And that my mother gave me.
2.
I scorn to think of Poverty,
Or want of food or clothing,
I Will be maintained gallantly,
And all my life want nothing;
A frolique mind^ Il^ always bear,
My poverty shall not appear,
Though I have but, etc.
3.
Though I am but a silly wench
Of Country Education,
Yet I am wooed by Dutch and French,
And almost every nation.
Both Spaniards and Italians swear,
That with their hearts they love me dear^,
Yet I have but a Mark a year
And that my mother, etc.
4.
The Welsh, the Irish and the Scot,
Since I came to the City,
In love to me are wondrous hot,
They tell me I am Pretty:
Therefore to live I will not fear,
For I am sought both far and near,
Yet I have but, etc.
5.
This London is a gallant place
To raise a Lasses fortune,
For I that came of simple race,
Brave roarers do importune
I little thought in Dorchester,
To find such high preferment here,
For I have but a Mark a year
Which my good mother, etc.
6.
One gives to me perfumed Gloves
The best that he can buy me,
Live where I will I have the Jove's
Of all that do live ^^gh me
If any new toys I will wear,
I Will have them, cost they never so dear.
Though I have but, etc.
7.
My fashion with the Moon I change
As though I were a Lady,
All quaint conceits both new and strange,
I Will have as soon as may be:
Your Courtly Ladies I can jeare,
In cloth, but few to me come near,
Yet I have but, etc.
8.
French Gowns with sleeves like pudding baggs
I have at my requesting,
Now I forget my Country ragg^,
And scorn such plain investing
My old acquaintance I casheere,
And of my kin I hate to hear,
Though I have but, etc.
9.
My petticoats of Scarlet brave,
Of Velvet, Silk and Satin,
Some Students of my love do crave,
That speak both Greek and Latin;
The Soldiers for me domineere,
And put the rest into great fear.
All this is is for a mark a year,
And that my mother, etc.
10.
The Precisian sincerely vows,
And does protest he loves me,
He tires me out with yea's and no's,
And to impatience moves me:
Although an oath he will not swear,
To lie at no time he does far.
All this is for a mark a year,
And that my mother, etc.
11.
My Coach drawn with four Flanders Mares,
Each day attend my pleasure,
The Watermen will leave their fares
To wait upon my leisure.
Two Lacqueys labor every where,
And at my word run here and there.
Though I have but, etc.
12.
Now if my friends were living still,
I would them all abandon,
Though I confess they loved me well,
Yet I so like of London,
That farewell Dad and Mammy dear,
And all my friends in Dorcetshire.
I live well with a mark a year,
And that my mother, etc.
13.
I would my sister Sue at home
Knew how I live in fashion,
That she might up t^ London come,
And learn this Ocupation,
For I live like a Lady here,
I wear good clothes, and eat good cheer.
Yet I have but, etc.
14.
Now blessed be that happy day,
That I came to the City,
And for the Carrier will I pray,
Before I end my Ditty.
You maidens that this Ditty hear,
Though means be short, yet never fear:
For I live with a mark a year,
Which my old mother gave me.
VVat's A la mort.
1.
IF mourn I may in time so glad,
Or mingle joys with ditty sad.
Lend your ears, lend Wa^ your eyes,
And look you where she ^o^abed lies;
Two simple fee^, alas, contains
The last which late oer Downs and Plains,
Made Horse, and Hound, and Horn to blow,
Why Wat, where art? So ho, so ho.
2.
Where is this view and cunning sent,
Which so much blood and breath ha^t spent?
This subtle trains thy Courses strong,
Thy Capers high, thy Dances long,
Thy envious leannest, and thy Muse,
As perfect as a Maidens Scuce.
Thy tract in snow, like widows we.
Why Wat, etc*
3.
Oh! where is now thy flight so fleet,
Thy jealous brow, thy nimble feet,
Thy magic frisks, thy Circles round,
Thy Juggling feats, to mock the hound?
Who sees thee now in covert creep,
To sit and hark, or stand and weep,
Or cool thy foot to foil thy foe?
Why Wat, etc.
4.
Why did thou not then fly this fate,
And from this form thrust forth thy Mate,
As some good Wife when Death's at door
She Will thrust her good Man forth before?
Why did thou not this doom to escape?
Upon thee take some Wizards shape,
Or shroud thy self in Cottage low.
Why Wat, etc.
5.
But should we think Wat was more wise,
Then Iowlers nose, or Ioundells cries,
Or Ladies lips, since Wat alone,
Must needs by many be or' ethrown?
Yet as I mourn, thy life so short,
So will I sing thy royal sport,
And guiltless game of all I know.
Why Wat, etc.
6.
O sad, the fair young son of myrrh,
Forsook the boar and followed her,
Or had Action hunted Wat,
When he saw Dyna's, you know what;
Or had the young man loved this life,
Who slew for Deer, his dearest wife.
They all had known no other woe,
Save Wat where art? so ho so ho.
A Question.
WHy are women said their husbands to deceive.
Since the keys of their wickets with their husbands they leave?
The Answer is made to this Question so put,
That that door which will open by chance, will not shut.
The Game at Shittle-cock.
MY Mistress is a Shittle-cock,
composed of cork and feather,
Each battledore plays with her dock,
and beats upon her leather.
When one will not suffice her will,
She flies unto another still.
On the Beard.
THe beard thick or thin,
On the lip or the chin,
Does dwell so near the tongue,
That her silence
In the beard's defense,
Would do her neighbor wrong*
Now a beard is a thing
That commands in a King,
Be his Scepter nere so fair.
When it bears sway
The people obey,
And are ruled to a hair.
It Is a Princely sight
And a great delight,
That adorns both young and old.
A well thatched face
Is a comely grace,
And a shelter from the cold.
When the piercing North
Comes fiercely forth,
Let the barren face beware.
For a trick it will find
With a razor of wind,
To shave the cheek that is bare.
But there is many nice
And strange device,
That does the beard disgrace,
But he that brings in
Such a foolish thing,
Is a traitor to his face.
But of beards there be
Such a company,
Of fashions such a throug.
That it is very hard
To handle the beard,
Though it be nere so long.
The Roman T
In its bravery,
Does first its self disclose.
But so high it turns
Many times that it burns,
With the flames of a torrid nose.
The picked beard,
Is makes me afeard,
It is so sharp beneath;
For he that does place
A dagger in his face,
What does he in his sheath?
But methinks I do itch
To go thorough stitch,
And the needle beard to mend,
Which without any wrong,
I may call too long,
For a man can see no end.
The Soldier's beard
Does march in the heard,
In figure like a spade,
With which he does make
His enemies quake,
To think that their Graves are made.
The grim stubble eke
On the Justice's cheek,
Must not my verse despise,
Which were more fit
For a Nutmeg, but it
Does grate poor prisoners eyes.
A Beard does invest
The Bishops breast,
With much white spreading hair,
Which an Emblem may be
Of the integrity
That does inhabit there.
But O let us tarry
For the beard of King Harry,
That grows upon the chin,
In his bushie pride
With a grave on each side,
And a Champion ground between.
Next the clown does out rush
With his beard of bush,
Which may be well endured,
For though his face
Lies in a rude case,
Yet his land is well manured.
1: A song, on a Tenement.
IF any man does want a house,
Be he Prince, Baronet^, or 'Squire,
Or Peasant, (hardly worth a louse)
I can fit his desire:
I have a tenement, the which,
I know will fit them all,
It Is seated near a stinking ditch,
They call it Cunny-hall.
2.
It does lie beyond bonny ground
At the foot of Belly-hill,
This house is easy to be found
By whosoever will,
For term of life, or years, or days,
I Will let this pleasant bower,
Nay 'rather than a tenant want
I Will let it for an hour.
3.
About it grows a lofty Wood
To shade you from the Sun,
Well watered it is, for through it,
A pleasant stream does run:
If hot, you there may cool your self;
If cold, you will there find hear;
For greatest, it is not too little;
For least, it is not too great.
4.
My house, I must confess, it is dark
Be it by night or day,
But if you once be got therein
You cannot miss your way;
But when y^'re in, make boldly of
As fast as are you can,
But if you come to the end thereof
You come where nere did man.
5.
Thus if you like my Cunny-hall
Your house-rent shall be good,
For such a temper as you please,
Burn neither coal nor wood;
But if it rain, or freez, or snow,
To speak I dare be bold,
If you keep your nose within door
You nere shall be a cold.
I Am that lofty Swain
That never cared to love
None of Diana's train
Could ever my fancy move:
Kad Cupit from above
Could never conquer me,
Since Peggy it is thee I love,
And thy Captive I will be.
7.
Since Peggy it is sure
That I do love thee best,
Then put aside delays
And grant me my request.
Come good or evil hap,
Come wealth or poverty,
I Will set thee in my lap
And I Will smuggle thee hand somly.
8.
Ulysses did commend
Constant Penelope,
Pigmalion loved his friend,
Why may not I love thee?
Though great Achilles was
The God of Victory,
He loved a Trojan Less
And smuggl'd her handsomely.
9.
Though Vulcan (grim and black)
Fair Venus did embrace,
Of him she thought no lack
For all his dirty face:
Though he were crook'^ d^kin,
And Iglerd ore the eye,
Yet Venus loved him well
And he smuggl'd her handsomely.
Matheglin, ale, and beer,
Plump clarret wine, and sherry
Shall not be wanting here
If'^ may but make thee merry:
When ended is the feast
With mirth and merry glee,
I take thee to the bed
And Il^ smuggle thee handsomely.
Lydford Law. A Song.
1.
I Often have heard of Lydford-Law
How in the morn they hang end draw,
And sit in judgment after:
At first I wondered at it much,
But since I find the reason such
That it deserves no laughter.
2.
There stands a Castle on a hill,
I took it for an old Windmill.
The Van's blown off with weather;
To lie therein one night it is guessed
'Twere better to be hanged or pressed,
Or drowned, now chus^ you whether.
3.
The Prince an hundred pound has sent
To mend the leads and plankings rent
Within this living tomb;
Some forty five pounds more had paid
The debts of all that shall be laid
There, till the Day of Doom.
4.
One lies there for a peck of salt,
Another for three pecks of malt,
Two sureties for a noble:
If this be true or else fals^ news,
You may go ask of Master Cruse,
John Vaughan, or John Doble.
5.
Though debts and Debtors are but poor,
The Courts and Causes are the more,
(So many Tynners made)
That Lawyers and Attourneys all,
Which in these Courts do sco^de and brawle
Do find it a gainful trade.
6.
Nere to these men that lie in lurch,
There is a bridge, there is a Church
Five Ashes and one Oak;
Seven houses standing and ten down,
Some say the Parson has a gown,
But I saw nere a cloak.
7.
Whereby you may consider well,
That plain simplicity does dwell
At Lydford without bravery:
For in that town, both young and grave
The naked truth, and have
No Clokes to hide their kn^very.
8.
The people all within this Clim^
Are frozen all the winter time.
(be sure I do not fain)
And when the Somer is begun,
They lie like Slow-worms in the Sun,
And come to life again.
9.
I kissed the Mayor's hand of the town,
Who, though he wear no Scarlet gown,
Yet honors the Rose and Thistle.
A piece of Coral in the Mace,
Which there I saw, to serve the place,
'T would make a good child's whistle.
10.
At six of the clock I came away,
And vowed I would no longer stay*
within a place so -- arrant,
Both wide and open to winds that roar,
By Gods grace I Will come there no more,
Unless by some tynn warrant.
A SONG.
1.
O My Dearest I shall grieve thee,
When I swear, yet Sweet believe me;
By thine eyes the tempting book,
On which even crabbed ol^ men look;
I swear to thee, though none abhor them,
Yet do I not love thee for them.
2.
I do not love thee for that fair
Rich Fan of thy most curious hair,
Although the wires thereof be drawn
Far finer than the threads of Lawn,
And are softer than the leaves
On which the subtle Spinner weaves.
3.
I do not love thee for those Flowers
Growing on thy cheeks, Loves bowers;
Though such cunning them has spread,
That none can part their white and red:
Loves golden arrows thence are shot,
And yet for them I love thee not.
4.
I do not love thee for those soft
Red Corrall'd lips I k^st so often,
Nor teeth of Pearl, the double guard
To speech, where Music still is heard;
Though from those lips a kiss being taken,
Can tyrants melt, and death awaken*
4.
I do not love thee, oh my fairest,
For that richest, for that rarest
Silver pillar, that stands under
Thy round head, the Globe of wonder;
Though that neck be whiter far
Than towers of polished Ivory are.
6.
I do not love thee for those mountains,
Hid with snow, where milky fountains,
Sugared sweet as syrrop'd berries,
Must one day run through pipes of cherries*
O how much those breasts do move me,
Yet for them I do not love thee.
7.
I do not love thee for that belly,
Sleek as satin, soft as jelly;
Although within that Christ ^ll round
Whole heaps of treasure might be found,
So rich, that for the least of them,
A King might give his D^adem.
8.
I do not love thee for those thighs,
Whose A^^blaster rocks do rise
So high, and even that they stand
Like sea-ma^k^ to some happy Land.
Happy are those eyes have seen them,
More happy he shall sail between them.
9.
I do not love thee for that palm,
Although the dew thereof be balm,
Nor for that pretty leg and foot,
Although it be the precious root,
On which this goodly Caedar grows;
My Sweet, I love thee not for those.
10.
Nor for thy wit, though pure and quick,
Whose substance no Arithmetic
Can number down; nor for those charms
Thou make with thine embracing arms:
Although in them one night to lie,
My dearest I would gladly dye.
11.
I love thee not for eyes or hair,
Nor teeth, nor cheeks, nor lips so rare,
Nor for thy speech, nor neck, nor breast,
Nor for thy belly, nor the rest,
Nor for thy hand, nor foot so small,
But will thou know, dear sweet, for all?
A Song.
1.
COme, come, come, do you mask, do you mum
By my holy doom? what a coile is here?
Some must sway, and some obey,
Or else I pray, who will stand in fear?
Though my toe
That I limp on so,
Do work my woe, and well aday,
This sweet spring,
And another thing,
Will make us sing Fa, la, la, la, la,
2.
Fellow Gods, are you fallen at odds?
What fury mads your immortal brains?
For a little care of the worlds affair,
Will you fret and swear? will you take such pains?
No Gods, no,
Let fury go,
And mortals woe as well as they.
This sweet spring,
And another thing,
Will make us sing, Fa, la, la, la, la*
3.
Thou God of Moe^, with thy toting nose,
And thy mouth that grows to thy ^olling ear,
Stretch it forth from North to South,
And quench thy drought in Vinegar.
Though thy tongue
Be too large and long
To sing the song of Fa, la, la, la, la,
Join Momus grace
To Vulcans pace,
And a filthy face, cry, Bow, wow, wow, wow, wow.
A SONG.
ALL hail to the days
That merits more praise
Than all the rest of the year,
And welcome the nights
That double delights,
As well in the Poor as the Peer.
Good fortune attend
Each merry man's friend,
That does but the best that he may,
Forgetting old wrong,
With a cup and a song,
To drive the cold Winter away.
Let Misery pack
With a whip at his back,
To the deep Tantalian flood;
And Envy profound
In Lethe be drowned,
That repines at another man's good;
Let Sorrow's expenc^
Be a thousand years hence
With payments of grief and delay,
And spend the whole night
With honest delight,
To drive the cold Winter away.
The threading of the Needle.
1.
O That I durst but thread your Needle, Lady,
There would I work till I had made a Baby,
Or stop your Floodgates, on condition I
Did at the Joynter in the River lie.
2.
Oh that I durst but shoot a Gulf I know,
Or in the Lower Countries my seed sow;
Or plough the bottom of that Nether land,
Until my Plough did fall, and I not stand.
3.
Oh that I durst but play at in and in,
If I were out, I would again begin;
Or fast or loose, I care not whether much,
Yet should I lose at both, my play is such.
4.
Oh that I durst tread the grass that grows
About your River, where perfect Nectar flows,
Or that my smaller Current might distill
His moisture into yours, till yours it fill.
5.
Oh that I durst monopolize a thing,
I mean that curious black enameled Ring,
Whose virtue's such in durance, that it has
Worn out a world of Stones, that did surpass;
Yet I care not; for all that I will venture,
If you will give leave, within your Ring to enter.
The hunting of the Gods.
To the Tune of Room for Cuckolds.
1.
SOngs of Sonnets, and rusticall Round lay,
Forms of fancies are whistled on reeds,
Songs to solace young Nymphs upon Holidays,
Are too unworthy for wonderful deeds:
Phoebus ingenious,
With witty Silenius:
His haughty genius taught to declare,
In words better coined,
And verse better joined,
How stars divined the hunting the Hare.
2.
Stars enamored with pastimes olympicall;
Stars and Planets yet beautiful shone,
Would no longer that mortal men only
Should swim in pleasures, while they but look on.
Round about horned
Lucina they swarmed,
And her informed how minded they were;
Each God and Goddess
To take humane bodies,
As Lords and Ladies to follow the Hare.
3.
Chaste Diana applauded the motion,
And pale Proserpina sat in her place,
Which guides the Welkin and governs the Ocean,
Till she conducts her Nephews in chase,
Till by her example,
Their Father to trample
The old and ample earth, leave them the air,
Neptune the water
And wine, liber pater,
And Mars the slaughter, to follow the Hare.
4.
Young god Cupid mounted on Pegasus,
Beloved of Nymphs, with kisses and praise,
Strong Alcides upon cloudy Caucasus,
Mounts a Centaur, which proudly him bare,
Postillian of the sky,
Swift-footed Mercury
Makes his Courser fly fleet as the air.
Yellow Apollo
The Kennell does follow
With whip and hollow, after the Hare.
5.
Young Amyntas thought the Gods came to breathe
After their battle, themselves on the ground,
Thirsts did think the Gods came to dwell here beneathe,
And that hereafter the world would go round,
Coridon aged
With Phillis engaged,
Was much enraged with jealous despair.
But fury was vaded,
And he was persuaded,
When he they applauded the hunting the Hare.
6.
Deep Melampus, and cunning Iramboti,
Neap and Tiger, and Harpi the skies
Rents with roaring, whilst hunter-like Hercules
Winds his plentiful horn to their cries,
Till with varieties,
To solace their Deities,
Their weary pieties refreshed were,
We sheepherds were seated,
The whilst we repeated
How we conceited the hunting the Hare.
7.
Stars but shadows were, joys are but sorrows,
Were there no motion, nor had they delight,
Joys are joviall, delights are the marrowes
Of li^e and motion, the axell of might,
Pleasure depends
Upon no other friends,
But freely lends to each virtue a share,
Only is pleasure
The measure of treasure,
Of pleasure the treasure is hunting the Hare.
8.
Drowned Narcissus from his Metamorphosis,
Rowzed by Echo, new manhood did take.
Snoring Somnus up-started from Caemeris,
The which this thousand years was not awake,
To see club footed
Old Mulciber booted,
And Pan promoted on Coridon's mare.
Proud Pallas pouted,
And AEolus shouted,
And Momus flouted, yet followed the Hare:
9.
Hymen ushers the Lady Astraea,
The jest takes hold of Minerva the old;
Ceres the brown, with bright Caeth^ria,
With Thetis the wanton, Bellona the bold;
Shamefaced Aurora,
With witty Pandora,
And Maia with Flora did company bear,
But Juno was stated
Too high to be mated,
Although she hated not hunting the Hare.
10.
Three broad boles to the Olympicall Rector,
The Troy-born Eagle pres^nts on his knee,
Jove to Phoebus carouses in Nectar,
And Phoebus to Hermes, and Hermes to me:
Wherewith infused,
I piped and mused,
In tongues unused their sports to declare,
Till that the house of Jove,
Round as the Spheres do move
Health to all those that love hunting the Hare.
A SONG.
NAy, prithee don't fly me,
But sit thee down by me;
I cannot endure
The Lad that is demure,
A pox on your Worships and Sirs;
Your Congies and Trips,
With your Legs and your Lips,
Your Madams and Lords,
And such finicall words,
And the Complement you bring,
That does spell nothing,
You may keep for the Change and the Furs:
For at the beg^nning was neither Peasant nor Prince,
And who the devil made the distinction since?
Those Titles and Honors
Do remain in the Donours,
And not in the King,
To which they do cling,
If his soul be too narrow that wears um;
No delight can I see
In the thing called degree;
Honest Dick sounds as well
As a name with an L.
That with Titles does swell,
And thunder l^ke a Spell,
To affright mortal ears that do hear um.
He that wears a brave soul, and dares honestly do,
Is a Herald to himself and a Godfather too.
Why should we then dote on
One with a Foole's coat on,
Whose Coffers are crammed?
But yet he will be damned
Ere he will do a good act or a wise one:
What reason has he
To be ruler ore me,
Who is Lord ore his Chest?
But his Head and her Breast
Are both empty and bare,
And puff up with air,
And can neither assist nor advise one:
Honor but air, and proud flesh but dust is,
It Is we Commons make Lords, as the Clerks make the Justice.
But since we must be
Of a different degree,
'Cause most do aspire,
To be greater and higher
Than the rest of their fellows, and brothers.
He that has such a spirit,
Let him gain by his merit,
Spend his wealth, brains and blood
For his Country's good,
And make himself fit
By his valor and wit,
For things above the reach of all others.
Honor's a prize, and who wins it may wear it,
If not, it is a badge and a burden to bear it.
For my part let me be
But quiet and free,
I Will drink Sack and obey,
Let the great ones sway,
That spend their whole time in thinking;
I Will nere busy my pate
With secrets of State,
The News books I Will burn all,
And with the Diurnall
Light Tobacco, and admit
They are so far fit,
As they serve for good company and drinking.
All the name I desire is an honest good fellow,
And that man has no worth, that will not sometimes be mellow.
Bow Goose.
1.
THe best of Poets write of Hogs,
And of Ulysses barking Dogs,
Others of Sparrows, Flies and Frogs,
In former ages sang.
Some of the silver Swan of Bow,
Although mine was no Swan, what tho?
It was a Goose was brought from Bow
To Algate.
2.
A^ harmless and as innocent
She was, as those that with her went,
Nor do not think the watchmen meant
More sillier than she;
Who rested only on a stall,
And gave them not one word at all,
And yet these Caniballs did fall
About her.
3.
In silence then my Goose sat still,
Till she perceiving each man's bill,
Praying they would not use her ill,
That looked so like them all.
Yet they disdaining did begin
About us for to cast a gin,
And then the Constable came in
And took us.
4.
To whom they did relate our case,
And swore each man would quit his place,
If we were suffered to disgrace
The Kings Lieutenant so.
And then my G^nders eminence,
My Goose and I commanded thence,
And were made graduats to commence
In The Counter.
5.
We thither went, and then my Goose,
That pinioned was before, got loose,
For having us within their noose,
They had no cause to fear:
Then into every ward we went,
And here and there our money spent,
Until the Constable had sent
Next morning.
6.
Who summoned us for to appear;
Before an Alderman I Will swear,
That might have been that present year,
Made Lord Mayor for his wit:
Who took my Gooses cause in hand,
And things with such judgment scanned,
That having done I scarce could stand
For laughing.
7.
He did not only reprehend
Our follies, but did much commend
The Constable, his honest friend,
For this good service done.
How happy is thie City blessed,
With Officers among the rest,
That I may add unto their Crest
My Bow Goose?
8.
But to my grief, I Will tell you what,
My Goose, which was before so fat,
She might have been, accepted at
A Mayor or Sheriffs table,
Grew wan and lean, and that so ill,
That from her wing she dropped a quill,
Desiring me to write her Will;
Which I did.
9.
And thus my Goose's will began,
Unto the reverend Alderman
I do bequeath my brainsick pan,
With all therein contained.
And Mr. Constable, to you
My empty head, which is your due,
My bill unto the damned crew,
The Watchmen.
10.
And furthermore, it is my will
The City Clerks should have a quill,
To write such learned speeches still,
As his brave Lordship utters:
And unto Mr. Alderman
I give my tail to make a fan,
My legs unto the Gentleman
Her usher.
11.
I do bequeath my body's trunk
Unto good fellows, for the rump
Desiring that there may be drunk
Both Claret and Canary.
I pray you discharge your company,
All such as shall Recusants be,
To drink a health in memory
Of my Bow Goose.
12.
My body to the city Cook,
That lives not far from Pasty-nook,
That he into my corpse may look,
And coffin them in past.
My guts for the Marshall's red face save,
To wear about his neck so brave,
That honest Palfrey, the proud slave,
May swagger.
13.
As for my fellow prisoners all,
That live in debt, and ever shall,
I do bequeath perpetual,
My sad and heavy heart.
My claws and pinions I do give
Unto the Serjants and the Sheriff,
That they may punish those that live
Indebted.
14.
One thing more I do perceive
Almost forgot, I do bequeath
My tongue, which tatling cannot leave
Unto the City Counsel,
That they may meditate a truce
Between the City, and me their Goose,
For me to be their constant muse
For ever.
15.
That in their Liveries they may call
The boys from every Hospital,
To sing my solemn funeral,
With Dirge^ to my grave,
And when my Goose had uttered this,
Then did my Goose begin to piss,
And sighing with a harmless hiss,
Departed.
The Libertine.
1.
Persuade me not, I vow I Will love no more;
My heart has now taken quarter,
My fetters I Will no more adore*
Nor madly run as heretofore.
To break my freedome's Charter.
He that once fails, may try again,
But whosoever often fooled has been,
And still attempts, commits a triple sin,
He Is his own humor's Martyr.
I Will use my liberty to ^u^
Abroad, and still be choosing,
Who would consine himself to one
That has power of refusing?
2.
The unconfined B^e, we see his power
To kiss and feel each Flower,
Nor are his pleasures limited,
To the ruins of one Maidenhead,
Nor ty^d to one's embraces
But having's will of one, he will fly
T'another, and there load his thigh,
Why should he have more privilege than I,
Since both are amarous cases?
D^ffer in this alone, his thighs,
When he abroad does roame,
Laden with spoils, return, but mine
Come weak and empty home.
3.
The self-same beauty that I Have often sworn,
Dwelt only in my Dearest,
I see by other Ladies worn,
Whom the same graces do adorn,
I like that face that is nearest,
This I salute, and walk with that,
With this I sing, with the other chat,
I Have none to catechize me, where, or what,
Nor will be tied to a Quaerist.
Thus out of all, Pigmalion-like,
My fancy limns a woman,
To her I freely sacrifice,
And rival am by no man.
A Maidens Denial.
NAy pish! nay phew! nay faith and will you?
A Gentleman, and use thus! I Will cry.
Nay, Gods body, what means this? nay fie for fie! shame;
Nay faith away! nay fie! you are too blame;
Hark! some body comes, hands off, I pray;
I Will pinch, I Will scratch, I Will spurn, I Will run away.
Nay faith, you strive in vain, you shall not speed,
You man my Ruff, you hurt my Back, I bleed.
Look how the door stands open, somebody ^ees;
Your buttons scratch, in faith you hurt my knees;
What will men say? Lord, what a coil is here?
You make me sweat in faith, here is goodly geer.
Nay, faith, let me entreat you, if you lift,
You mar my clothes, you tear my smock, but had I wift
So much before, I would have shut you out.
Is it a proper thing you go about?
I did not think you would have used me this;
But now I see I took my aim amiss.
A little thing would make me not be friends:
You Have used me well, I hope you will make amends;
Hold still, I Will wip^ your face, you sweat amain,
You have got a goodly thing with all your pain*
Alas, how hot am I? what will you drink?
If you go sweating down, what will men think?
Remember, Sir, how you have used me now,
Doubtless ere long, I will be meet with you.
If any man, but you, had used me so*
Would I have put it up? in faith, Sir, no.
Nay go not yet, stay here and sup with me,
And then at cards we better shall agree.
The Companion.
1.
WHat need we take care for Platoni^k rules,
Or the Precepts of Aristotle?
They that think to find learning in Books are but fools,
True Philosophy lies in the Bottle;
And a mind
That Is confined
To the mode of the Schools,
Nere arrives at the height of a pottle:
Let the Sages
Of our ages
Keep a talking
O^ our walking
Demurely, while we that are wiser
Do abhor all
That Is mortal
In Plato
And Cato,
And Seneca talks like a S^zer.
Chorus.
Then let full Bowls on Bowls be hurled,
That our Iollity may be complete;
For Man, though he be but a very little world,
Must be drowned as well as a great.
2.
We'll drink till our cheek^s be as starr'd as the skies,
Let the pale colored Students flout us,
And our noses like Comets set fire on our eyes,
Till we bear the Horizon about us;
And if all
Make us fall,
Then our heels shall devise
What the Stars are a doing without us:
Let Lilly
Go tell y^
Of wonders
And thunders.
Let Astrologers all divine,
And let Booker
Be a looker
Of our natures
In our features,
He Will find nothing but Claret in Wine.
Chorus.
Then let full Bowls, etc.
On CANARY.
1.
OF all the rare juices
That Bacchus or Phoebus produces,
There Is none that I can, or dare I
Compare with the princely Canary.
For this is the thing
That a fancy infuses,
The first got a King,
The next the Nine Muses.
'Twas this made old Poets so sprightly to sing,
And fill all the world, with the glory and fame on it,
They Helicon called it, and the Thespian spring,
But this was the drink, though they knew not
the name on it.
2.
Our Cider and Perry
May make a man mad, but not merry;
It makes people windmill pated,
And with Crotchets suffisticated,
And your hops, yest and malt,
When they are mingled together,
Make our fancies to halt,
Or reele any whither:
It stuffs up our brains with froth and with yest,
That if one would write but a verse for a Belman,
He must study till Christmas for an eight shillings jest;
These liquors will not raise, but drown or o'rewhelm man.
3.
Our drowzy Matheglin*
Was only ordained to invegle in
The Novice that knows not to drink yet,
But is fudled before he can think it:
And your Claret and White
Have a Gunpowder fury,
They Are of the French sp'rite,
But they will not long endure you.
And your Holiday Muskadel* Allegant and Tent,
Have only this property and virtue that is fit in'^,
They Will make a man s^^ep till a preachment be spent,
But we neither can warm our blood not our wit in it.
4.
The Braggot and Rhinish
You must with ingredients replenish,
It Is Wine to please Ladies and toys with,
But not for a man to rejoice with;
But it is Sack makes the sport,
And who gains but the Flavor?
Though an Abbess he court,
In his high shoes h^'l have her.
It Is this that advances the Drinker and Drawer,
Though the Father come to town in his hobnailes and leather,
He turns it to Velvet, and brings up an Heir,
In the town in his Chain, in the field with his Feather.
A Song.
YOu that in love do mean to spo^^,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
Take a wench of the meaner sort,
Tobacco, Tobacco.
But let her have a comely face
Like one that comes of Venus race,
Then take occasion, time and place
To give her some Tobacco.
Your Can with moisture must abound,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
Your Bullets must be plump and round,
Tobacco, Tobacco.
But if that you do please her well,
Tobacco, Tobaecco,
All others then you will excel,
Tobacco, Tobacco.
She will be ready at your call,
And take Tobacco, Pipe, and all,
So ready will she be to fall
To taste your good Tobacco.
Your Stopper must be stiff and strong,
It must be large and long,
Or else she swears you do her wrong.
She scorns your weak Tobacco.
A Fancy.
WHen Py-crust first began to reign,
Cheese-parings went to war,
Red Herrings looked both blew and wan,
Green Leeks and Puddings jarre.
Blind Hugh went out to see
Two Cripples run a race,
The Ox fought with the Humble Be,
And clawed him by the face.
A Lady's Prayer to Cupid.
SInce I must needs into thy School return,
Be pitiful O Love I and do not burn
Me with desire of cold, and frozen age,
Nor let me follow a fond Boy, or Page;
But gentle Cupid give me, if thou can,
One to my Love, whom I may call a man,
Of Person comely, and of Face as sweet,
Let him be sober, secret, and discreet,
Well practiced in Love's school; let him within
Wear all his hair, and none upon his Chin:
An ODE.
1.
COme noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys for which you so provide,
If not, to mingle with us men;
What do you here? go home again:
Your Dressings do confess,
By what we see so curious arts
Of Palace and of Parts,
That you could mean no less:
2.
Why do you wear the Silk-wormes toils,
Or glory in the Shelfish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of Oar,
That you have gathered long before,
Whereof to make a Stoic,
To graft the green Emrald on,
Or any better watered stone,
Or Rubie of the Roick.
3.
Why do you smell of Ambergreece,
Whereof was formed Neptune's Niece,
The queen of Love? unless you can,
Like sea-born Venus, love a Man:
Try, put your self unto'r,
Your looks, and smiles, and thoughts that meet
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
Do promise you will do'^.
A Song.
MAy not an old age yet sing an April song?
Iug, Iug, True, True, sweet notes of Philomel,
Come Juno! for to thee it does belong,
Up in Love's Syngraph, sacred Rites to seal.
Iug, Iug, the plain song be of jugal love,
Descant then True, True, as the Dance is led.
Virtue will so in a sweet measure move,
Xanthus his golden arm^ shall open spread,
Embracing fruitful beauty to his bed.
And to this Song let us sing,
Ecchoing, Ecchoing.
The Bridal Night.
WHy art thou coy (my L^da) art not mine?
Has not the holy Hymineall Twine
Power to contract our Natures? must I be
Still interposed with needless modesty?
What though my former passions made me vow,
You were an Angel; be a Mortal now:
The Bride-maids all are vanished, and the crew
O Virgin Ladies, that did wait on you,
Have left us to our selves, as coy to be
Injurious to our Loves wished privacy.
Come then undresse; why blush you? prithee smile;
Faith I Will dis-robe you, nay I will not spoil
Your Necklace, or your Gorget, here is a pin
Pricks you; fair Leda 'twere a cruel sin
Not to remove it; oh how many gates
Are to Elysium! yet the sweetest Straits
That ere made Voyage happy, here is a lace
Me thinks should stifle you; it does embrace
Your body too severely, take a knife,
It Is tedious to undo it, by my life
It shall be cut; let your Carnation Gown
Be pulld off too, and next let me pull down
This Rosy petticoat; what is this cloud
That keeps the daylight from us, and's allowed
More privivilege then I? though it be white,
It Is not the white I aim at (by this light)
It shall go off (too) No: then let '^ alone.
Come let us to bed, why look you so? here is none
Sees you but I; be quick, or by this hand
I Will lay you down my self, you make me stand
Too long ^'th' cold: why do you lie so far?
I Will fellow you, this distance shall not bar
Your body from me; oh it is well! and now
I Will let thy Virgins innocence know how
Kings propagate young Princes, Marriage bed^
Never destroy, but erect Maiden-heads.
A Song.
AS Colin went forth his sheep to unfold,
In a morning of April as gray as it was cold,
In a thick^t he heard a voice it self spread,
Which was, Oh, oh, I am almost dead.
He peeped in the bushes, and spied where there lay
His Mistress, whose countenance made April May;
But yet in her looks some sadness was read,
Crying Oh, etc.
He rushed in unto her, and cried what is the matter?
Ah Colin, quoth she, why will you come at her,
Who by the false Swain has often been mislead?
To which, Oh, etc.
He turned her Milk-paile, and down there he sat,
H^s hand stroak'd his beard, on his knee hung his hat;
But yet still Mopsa cried, before ought was sed.
Colin, Oh, oh, etc.
Be God quoth stout Colin, I ever was true,
Thou gav'st me a handkerchief all hemmed with blew,
A pin-box I gave thee, and a girdle so red,
And yet she cried, Oh, etc.
Delaying, quoth she, has made me thus ill,
I ever feared Sarah that dwelt at the mill,
Since in the Evenings late her hogs thou have fed.
For which, Oh, oh, etc.
Colin then chuckt her under the chin,
Clear up, for to love thee I never will lin;
Quoth. she I Will believe it when the Parson has read.
Till then, Oh, oh, etc.
Uds bores, quoth Colin, I Will new clout my shoon,
And ere a week pass, by the mass 't shall be done.
You might have done before then, she said:
But now, Oh, oh, etc.
He gave her a twitch that quite turned her round,
And said, I am the truest that ere trod on ground,
Come settle thy milk-paile fast to thy head:
No more Oh, oh, etc.
Why then I perceive thou'^t not leave me in the lurch,
I Will don my best clothes, and straight go to Church.
Jog on merry Colin, jog on before,
For in faith, in faith I Will dye no more.
On an Old Woman.
YEsterday I heard an old woman s^y,
She had a great pain in her belly;
It was and a Cat, which caused that,
And I am and ashamed to tell ye.
The old woman she sat by the fire,
And no body there to espy her,
No body to see, but the cat and she,
And she pulled her coats up higher.
She threw her legs asunder,
And the cat she caught hold under.
She had a thing there was, so like and a mouse
That it made the cat to wonder.
This thing it was not naked;
For a mouse the cat did take it;
O still it was so like and a mouse,
That the cat would not forsake it.
The old woman she cried out murder,
And the cat she bit harder and harder,
Oh quoth she, I fear I shall die
Before I go any further.
At this cry the neighbors did enter,
And their skill and their strength they lent her;
At length they the cat, with much ado ga^
From the bottom of the old woman's venture.
The old woman she quaked and she quivered,
and all her body shivered;
Quoth she I have often been brought to bed,
But I never was thus delivered.
A College of Doctors.
I pray Doctor Argent, a note in ^your margent,
You are too far to have skill.
But a little, God knows, does serve for a Dose,
Or on Apothecary's bill.
You Dr. Tenant, that are a great Lieutenant
Of Doctors with the Scots,
I could tell you the cause, but I fear good wives paws,
Far more than your Gally-pots.
And Doctor Tailor, a great prevailer,
The favor of Ladies to win.
You tell-tales of pleasure, and to a hair take measure,
Then put all honesty in.
And Doctor Rawlins, for all your brawlings,
You are but a scurvy leach,
Poor, till 'twas your chance, your self to advance
By getting a widow by the bre^ch.
Were he not a liar, should say Doctor Friar
Did love flesh more than skin?
Well now the old fool has left the close-stool,
Unto his Pupil Gugueen.
Oh Dr. Elvin, though the hole you delv^ in
Be barren, and yield no fruit;
'Twas a happy receipt that made you to wait
On the Black guard without a suit.
Good Doctor Butler, like a Shefield Cutler,
Your knife is in every sheath,
Your brown bread chip fits a Ladies l^p,
You play not above, but beneath.
For you Doctor Poe, your Physick's so, so,
You placed your Clifter-pipe wrong,
Though you cured Mrs. Rich of the leacherous itch.
In the absence of spruice Mrs. Young.
Whoop, whoop, Dr. Saul. what news at Surgeons Hall?
The Simples that you use,
You had them by rote from you Fathers old note,
Or some Italian stews.
I know Doctor Li^ter, were it his own sister,
Must feel before he heal;
His reason is this, the pulse, more than piss,
Infirmities does reveal.
And a Doctor may feel, from head unto heel,
To grope out healths decay;
Tell him of no shame, AEsculapius did the same,
Health's honest any way.
What are you stirring, old Friend, Dr. H^rring?
It Is physic to see you squint;
You creep like a snail, so hard bound ^'th' tail,
That you sh^t as hard as a flint.
How chance Dr. Torris now grown so sour is,
Waxing weary of his life,
It Is because of the horn, why man think no scorn,
The gain and pain comes by your wife.
And Dr. Maben gives physi^k to women,
They nev^r are begul'd;
Pills work apace, and he likes the place,
That all of them prove with child.
Then Doctor Iordanus with porrige manus,
What news at Clerk^nwell:
Here Is physic ^nd^ed, swea^, pu^ge* and then bleed
Most fitly, Doctor farewell.
What have you got there, friend, Dr. Foster,
A pricket or a sore;
Good faith it is your wife, now God save your life
I thonght it had been your whore.
If there be a black Man Dr. Gifford's the man,
My Muse abhors detractors;
From such I stand blessed, for bad is the best,
So farewell ba^dy Doctors.
A SONG.
FIne young folly, though you were
That rare beauty, I did swear,
Yet you nere came near my heart;
For we Courtiers learn at school
Only with your sex to fool,
You are not worth a serious part.
When I sigh and kiss your hand,
Cross mine arms, and wondering stand,
Holding parley with your eye,
Next to dally with my desires,
Swear the Sun nere shot such ^ires;
All is but a handsome lie.
When I eye your curled lace,
Gentle soul, you think your face
Straight some murder does commit,
When your conscience does begin
To grow scrupulous of sin,
Then I court to show my wit.
Therefore, Madam, wear no cloud,
Nor to check my love, grow proud;
For, in troth, I much do doubt
It Is the Powder in your hair,
Not your breath, perfumes the air:
It Is your clothes that set you out.
Yet for all this truth confessed,
And I swear I loved in jest:
When I next begin to court,
And protest an amorous flame.
You Will swear I in earnest^am.
Beldame, this is pretty sport.
On a Pinte-pot.
1.
OLd Poets Hypocrene admire,
And pray to Water to inspire
Their Muses birth with heavenly fire?
Had they this seemly fountain seen,
Sack both their Well and Muse had been,
And this Pinte-pot their Hypocrene.
2.
Had truly they considered it,
They had, like me, thought it unfit,
To pray to Water for their wit,
And had adored Sack as divine,
And made a Poet god of Wine,
Then this Pinte-pot had been a shrine.
3.
Sack unto them had been instead
Of Nect^r, and the heavenly Br^^d,
And every boy a G^nnimed.
And had they made a God of it,
And styled it Patron of their wit,
This Pot had been a Temple fit.
4.
Well then (Companions) is it not fit,
Since to this Gem we owe our wit,
That we should praise the Cabinet?
And drink a health to this divine
mnd bounteour Palace of our Wine,
Die he of thirst that does repine?
On his deformed Mistress.
ANd is not the Queen of Drabs,
Whose head is periwigg'd with scabs,
Whose hair^ hangs down in curious flakes,
Curled and crisp'd, like gentle snakes,
The breath of whose perfumed locks
Would choke the Devil, with a pox,
Whose dainty twinings did entice
The whole monopoly of Lice,
To her, who daily there are fed,
The goodliest lice that ^re were bred*
Her forehead next is to be found,
Much like a piece of new-plough'd ground,
Furrowed with stairs, whose winding lead
Unto the ch^mney of her head.
The next thing that my muse descryes,
Are the two mill-pits of her eyes:
Mill-pits, whose depth no height can sound,
For there the God of Love was drowned,
On either side there was a souse,
An Ear^, I mean kept open house,
An care which always there did dwell,
And so the head kept sentinel,
Which there was set for to descry,
If any danger there was nigh:
But I think danger there was bred,
Which makes them so keep off her head.
Something I Am sure did cause their fears,
Which makes them so to hang their cares:
But hang her ears; Thalia seeks
To suck the bottles of her cheeks:
Her cheeks! who^e pride do make them rise,
Contending to out face her eyes:
Upon her cheeks I Would longer stay,
But that her nose calls me away.
Her nose, on which all beauty s^e,
Her Indian Ruby nose, that is flat.
Help Muses now I have begun,
That like her nose my verse may run.
Help, Fury's never given to flatter,
I know her nose affords matter:
For on her nose there hangs, I wot,
A curious pearl of Crystal snot,
As purely white, as whitest rose,
A dainty Gem for such a nose.
But now, methinks, Thalia skip^,
Intending to salute her lips:
Although she fears her lips are such,
It Is almost p^in of death to touch:
I Would wish the Devil so much bliss,
Those, daily to be damned, to kiss.
But where shall I find words enough
To rake the kennel of her mouth?
Whose wryness, with a certain g^^ce
Sets out the beauty of her face;
Whose dreaming gapings might afright
The lust of Incubus at night,
And Succubus might be afraid
Hereafter to come near a maid,
Where out in curiou^ postures hung
The spungy fly-flap of her tongue,
As if that Nature did contrive
To hang her, while she was alive.
Her teeth were fixed like Eagles claws,
Upon the ruins of her jaws,
Which there were placed like pikemen tall,
Something inclining to the fall,
Whose ripn'd age did yield them mellow,
The curious gold was not so yellow.
I think she took them by descent
From father Adam, whose intent
was, that his teeth should be entailed
Unto his heirs, that never failed.
Her chin a little lower stands
Much like the cape of Bon esperance.
Which Nature kind extended so,
To point her way when she does go.
Come Muses at Apollo's beck*
And wreath a halter for her neck.
Her neck was next, which might have bin
A fit supporter for her chin.
But Nature, to supply her lack,
Has drawn her neck unto her back.
The Hunters Song.
1.
LOng ere the morn
Expects the return
Of Apollo, from the ocean Queen,
Before the creak
Of the Crow, and the break
Of the Day, in the Welkin seen,
Mounted he would hollow,
And cheerfully follow
To the Cha^^ with his Bugle cle^r,
Echo he makes,
And the mountains shakes
With the thunder of his Careere.
2.
Now bonny Bay
In his Son waxes gray.
Dapple gray waxes bay in his blood:
White L^lly stops,
VV^th the scent in her chops,
And the black Lady makes it good.
Poor silly Wat
In this wretched state,
Forgets these delights for to hear,
Nimbly she bounds
From the cry of the Hounds,
And the music of their Careere.
3.
Hill^, with the heat
Of the Gallopers sweat,
Reviving their frozen ^ops,
Dales purple flowers
That springs with the showers,
That down from the rowels drops,
Swains their repast
And Strangers their have,
Neglect when the horns they do hear,
To see a fleet
Pack of Hounds in a sheet,
And the Hunter in his Careere.
4.
Thus he careeres,
Over moors, over meeres,
Over deeps, over downs, over clay,
Till he has won
The noon from the morn,
And the evening from the day.
Sports then he ends,
And joyfully wends
Home to his Cottage, where
Frankly he feasts
Himself and his guests,
And carouses in his Careere.
To his FRIEND; A Censure of the Poets.
MY dearly loved friend, how often have we
In winter evenings, meaning to be free*
To some well-chosen place used to retire,
And there, with moderate meat and wine, and fire,
Have passed the hours contentedly with chat,
Now talk of this, and then discourse of that?
Spoke our own Verses 'twixt our selves, if not,
Other men's lines, which we by chance had got;
Or some stage pieces, famous long before,
Of which your happy memory had store:
And I remember you much pleased were,
Of those that lived long ago to hear,
As well as of those of those of later times,
Who have enricht our Language with their Rimes;
And in succession how still up they grew,
Which is the subject that I now pursue:
For from my cradle, you must know, that I
Was still inclined to noble Poesy;
And when that once Pueriles I had read,
And newly had my Cato construed,
In my sma^l self I greatly mervail'd then,
Amongst all other, what strange kind of men
Those Po^ts were, and pleased with the name,
To my mild Tutor merrily I came:
For I was ^hen a proper goodly Page,
Much like a P^gmy, scarce ten years of age,
Clasping my slander arms about his thigh,
O my dear Master I cannot you, quoth I,
Make me a Poet? do it, if you can*
And you shall see I Will quickly be a man:
Who me thus answered smiling, Boy, quoth he,
If you will not play the wag, but I may see
You ply your learning, I will shortly read
Some Poets to you, Ph^bus be my speed.
To It hard w^nt I, when shortly he began,
And first read to m^ honest Mantuan,
Then Virgils Eclogues, being entered thus*
Methoughts I straight had mounted Pegasus,
And in his full careere could make him stop,
And bound upon Parnassus high clift top:
I scorn^d your Ballad then, though it were done,
And had for finis, William Elderton.
But soft in sporting with this childish jest,
I from my subject have too large digrest.
Then to the matter that we took in hand,
Jove and Apollo for the Muses stand,
That noble Chaucer in those former times,
That did enrich our English with his Rimes,
And was the first of ours that ever brak^
Into the Muses treasure, and first spoke
In weighty number, d^^ving in the Mine
Of perfect knowledge, which he could refine,
And coin for current, and as much as then
The English Language could express to men;
He made to do only his wondrous skill
Gave us much light from his abundant quill:
And honest Gower, who in respect of him,
Had only sipt at Aganippe's brim;
And though in years this last was him before,
Yet fell he far short of the others store;
When after those four ages, very near,
They with the Muses which conversed were.
That princely Surrey, early in the time
Of the eighth Henry, who was in the prim^
Of England's noble youth, with him there came
Wyat with reverence, whom we still do name
Amongst our Poets. Brian had a share
With the two former, which accounted are
The times best makers, and the authors were
Of those small Poets, which the title bear^
Of Songs and Sonnets, wherein often they hit
On many dainty passages of wit.
Gascoign and Churchyard after them again,
In the beginning of Eliza's reign,
Accounted were great meeters many a day,
But not inspired with brave fire, had they
Lived but a little longer, they had seen
Their works before them to have buried been.
Grave Spencer shortly after th^se came on,
Then whom I am persuaded there was none,
Since the blind Bard his Iliads up did make,
Fitter a task like that to undertake
To set down boldly, bravely to inden^
In all high knowledge finely excellent.
The noble Sidney with this last arose,
That H^ro for Numbers and for Prose,
That through^y paced our Language* (...) to show
That plenteous English hand in hand might go
With Greek and Latin, and did first reduce,
Our tongues from Lilly's writing, then in use,
Talking of Stones, Stars, Plants, of Fishes, Flies,
Playing with Words and idle Similice,
As the English Apes, and very Zanie^ be,
Of every thing that they do hear and see;
So imitating his ridiculous tricks,
They speak and write all like mere Lunaticks.
Then Warner, though his lines were not so trimmed,
Nor yet his Poem so exactly limn'd,
And neatly joynted; but the Critic may
Easily reprove him, yet thus let me say
For my old friend, some passages there be,
In which I do protest that I do see,
With almost wonder, so fine, clear and new,
As yet they have been equalled by few.
N^xt Marlow bathed in the Thespian springs,
Had in him those brave translunary things
That your first Poets had, his raptures were
All air and fi^e, which made his verses clear;
For that fine madness still he did retain,
Which rightly should possess a Poets brain.
And surely Nash though he a Proser were
A branch of Laurel, yet deserves to bear
Sharply Satyrick was he, and that way
He went, since that, his being to th^s day,
Few have attempted, and I surely think
Those words shall hardly be (...) down in ink.
Shall scorch and blast, so as his cold, when he
Would inflict vengeance, and be it said of thee,
Shakespeare, thou had a smooth and comid^ vain,
Fitting the ^ock, and in thy natural brain
As strange conception, and as clear a rage
As any one that traffiqu'd with the stage.
Amongst these Samuel Daniel, whom I
May speak of, but censure do d^ny*
Only have heard some wi^e men him rehearse,
To be too much Historian in Verse;
His Rimes were smooth, his Meetres well did close,
But yet his Mateers better fitted Pr^se.
Next these, learned Johnson in this List I bring,
Who had drunk deep of the Pierian spring,
Whose knowledge did him worthily prefer,
And long was Lord here of the Theater,
Who in opinion made our learn'dst to stick,
Whether in Poems rightly dramatique:
Strong Seneca or Pla^tus, he or they,
Should bear the Buskin, or the Sock away.
Others again, there lived in my days,
That have of us deserved no less praise
For their Translations, than the daintiest wit,
That on Parnassus thinks he high does sit,
And for a cha^re may amongst the Muses call,
As the most curious maker of them all:
But as reverent Chapman, who has brought to us
Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiodus,
Out of the Greek, and by his skill has reared
Them to that height, and to our tongue indear'd,
That were those Poets at this day alive,
To see their Books, that with us thus survive,
They would think, having neglected them so long
They had bin written in the English tongue;
And Silvester, who from the French more weak,
Made Bartas on his six days labor, speak
In natural English, who, had he there been stayed.
He had done well, and never had bewrayed
His own invention, to have been too poor,
Who still writ less, in striving to write more.
Then dainty Sands, that has to English done,
Smooth sliding Ovid, and has made him one,
With so much sweetness, and unusual grace,
As though the neatness of the English pace
Should tell your setting Latin, that it came
But slowly after, as though stiff or lame;
So Scotland sent us hither for our own,
That man whose name I even would have known
To stand by mine, that most ingenious Knight,
My Alexander, to whom in his right,
I want extremely, yet in speaking thus,
I do but show that love that was 'twixt us,
And not his numbers, which were brave and high,
So like his mind, was his clear Po^sie:
And my dear Drummond, to whom much I owe
For his much love, and proud I was to know
His Poesy, for which two worthy men,
I Minstry still shall love, and Hauthornden:
Then Beamont, Fletcher, and my Brown, arose,
My dear Companions, whom I freely chose,
My bosom-friends, and in their several ways
Rightly born Poets, and in these last days,
Men of much note, and no less nobler parts,
Such as to me, as freely could their hearts
As I turn mine to them, but if you shall
Say in your knowledge, that these are not all
Have writ in numbers, be informed that I
Only wy self to these few men do tie,
Whose works often printed, set on every post,
To public censure, subject have been most;
For such whose Poems, be they nere so rare,
In private chambers that incloyster'd are,
And by transcription daintily must go,
As though the world unworthy were to know
Their rich composures, let those men that keep
These wondrous relics in their judgments deep,
And cry them up, so let such pieces be
Spoke of by those that shall come after me:
I pass not for them, nor do mean to run
In quest of those, that their applause have won
Upon our Stages in these later days,
That are so many; let them have the bays
That have deserved it; let those wits that haunt
Those public circuits, may they freely chaunt
Their fine composures, and their praise pursue,
And so (my dear friend) for this time adieu.
Reasons to Hate.
Prithee die and set me free,
Or else be
Brisk and blithe, and gay like me.
I pretend not,
I pretend not to the wise ones,
To the grave, nor the precise ones.
Prithee why the room so dark?
Not a spark,
For to light me to the mark?
I Will have daylight, or a candle,
For to see,
For to see as well as handle.
Prithee why these bolts and locks,
Coats and smock^,
And these drawers, with a pox?
I would have, could Nature make it,
Nakedness,
Nakedness it self more naked.
There is neither art nor itch
In thy breech,
Nor provoking hand nor speech;
But when I expect a motion,
Fast asleep,
Fast asleep, or at devotion.
If then a Mistress I must have,
Wise and grave,
Let her so her self behave,
All the day long Susan Civil,
Pap by night,
Pap by night, or some such Devil.
Oh the most unhappy life,
Full of strife,
'Twixt Sir Fredrick and his wife,
For as true as I Am a sinner,
They have no
They have no meat for their dinner.
Duns his face looks old and ill,
And yet still
She struts and paints, and hopes to kill;
But if 'twere not for her table,
She were not,
She were not considerable.
Take a Lady in the grass,
Clap her --
-- her well and let her pass;
Upon the bed then let her tumble,
Put it in,
Put it in she will never grumble.
King Arthur.
WHen Arthur first in Court began,
And was approved King a,
He bought his wife a peck of m^^l^
To make a bag pudding a.
When Arthur first in Court began,
His men wore hanging sleev^^ a,
If all be true that I have heard,
They were three errant thieves a.
The first he was a Miller good,
The second he was a Weaver a,
The third he was a Tailor good,
And they were three thieves together a.
The Miller he stole Grist enough,
The Weaver he stole Yarn a,
The Tailor he stole good broad Cloth
To keep these three thieves warm a.
When Arthur first in Court began,
And was approved King a,
He kicked the Fiddlers out of doors
Because they could not sing a.
Constant Affection.
SEt forty thousand on a row,
My Love will make the greatest show;
But I for my part have chosen one,
And I Will have my Love, or I Will have none.
I bought my Love a pair of shoon
As black as jet, with shooties blew;
She put them on, and away she is flown,
Yet I Will have, etc.
Into some far Country I Will go,
And pine my self with care and woe,
And sigh to think what I have done,
Yet I Will have, etc.
For who can love so true as I,
Who am more than sick, yet cannot die?
My heart is broke, my delight is gone,
Yet I Will have, etc.
And when my love she thus has tried,
I Am sure her self she will nere abide,
But find me out, and bring me home,
Then I Will have, etc.
Theodora.
MY Theodora, Can those eyes,
From which those glories shine,
Give light to every soul that pryes,
And only be obscured to mine?
Who willingly my heart resign,
Enflamed by you to be your sacrifice.
Let but one ray enrich my soul,
And chase this gloomy shade
That does in clouds about me roll,
And in my breast a hell has made,
Where fire still burns still flames invade,
And yet light's power and comfort does control.
Then out of gratitude I Will send
Some of my flames to thee.
Thus lovingly our wits we will blend,
And both in Joys shall wealthy be,
Then Love, though blind, shall learn to see,
Since you can eyes to me and Cupid land.
A Song made when King Charles was at Plymouth.
1.
A Riddle a Riddle me neighbor John*
Whore ich chave late a been a?
Me chave a been to Plymouth mon,
The leck was nere a zeen a;
Zuch streets, zuch men, zuch hugiou^ zea^,
And Guns, with things that tumbling,
Thy zell wea me, would bless to zee
Zuch bomination jumbling.
2.
The streets ore-laid with shindle stone,
Do glysney leck the zea a,
Brays shops stand open ole day long,
Ich think a Vare, that be a.
And many a gallant man there goes
In goold, that zaw the King a;
The King, zom zware, himzell was thar,
A Mon, or zom zuch thing a.
3.
Amidst the zeas wear vleeing burd,
And wooden houzes zwim a,
As vull of goods, as ich have hard,
Wea men up to the brim a:
The venture to another world,
Desiring to conquer a,
Vor thar hugh Guns ar divilish ones,
Do dunder and spa^ veer a.
4.
Voole, thou that haft no water past,
But that below the Moore a,
To zee the zea woudst be aghast,
It do zo rage and roar a.
It is zo zolt, thy tongue would think
The veer war in the water;
It is zo wide no lond's espide,
Look nare zo long tharater.
5.
Thick water vro the Element,
None can discern che vor a,
It zeemeth low, yet ole do ze
It Is higher than the Moore a:
It Is strange how looking up the cleve,
M^n should look downward rather,
And if tha chad not zeet my zell,
Chud scarce believed my vather.
6.
Oh neighbor John, how var is that?
Our Mizen ^ar chill leave a,
Chill mop no longer there, that is vlat,
To wash a zheep, or zeer a,
Tho it zo var as London be,
Which is ten miles cha magin,
Chill thither his, and thick place I,
Chill hold in great in dudgine.
Against Fruition.
STay here (fond youth) and ask no more, be wise,
Knowing too much, long since lost Paradise:
The virtuous joys thou have, thou would should still
Last in their pride, and would not take it ill,
If rudely from sweet Dreams, and for some Toy
Th'wert waked? he makes himself that does enjoy.
Fruition adds no new wealth, but destroys,
And while it pleases much, the palate cloyes.
Who thinks he is the happier for that,
As reasonably might hope he should grow fat.
By eating unto surfeit this once past,
What relishes? Even kisses lose their taste:
Urge not as necessary; alas we know,
The homeliest thing which mankind does, is so.
The world is of a vast extent we see,
And must be peopled; Children then must be,
So must be bread to, but since there are enough
Born to the drudgery; what need we plow?
Women enjoyed, whatsoer's before to have been
Are like Romances read, or Plays once seen;
Fruition's dull, and spoils the Play much more,
Than if we read, or knew the plot before.
It Is Expectation makes a Blessing dear,
It were not heaven, if we knew what it were.
And as in Prospects we are then pleased most,
When something keeps the eye from being lost
And leaves us room to guess, to hear restrain^,
Hold up delight, that with excess would faint.
They who know all the wealth they have, are poor,
He Is truly rich, that cannot tell his store.
A SONG.
ALl you that desire to merry be,
Come listen unto me,
And a story I shall tell,
Which of a Wedding befell,
Between Arthur of Bradley
And Winifred of Madly.
As Arthur upon a day
Met Winifred on the way,
He took her by the hand,
Desiring her to stand,
Saying I must to thee recite
A matter of weight,
Of Love, that conquers Kings,
In grieved hearts so rings,
And if thou do love thy Mother,
Love him that can love no other.
Which is Oh brave Arthur, etc
For in the month of May,
Maidens they will say,
A May Pole we must have,
Your helping hand we crave.
And when it is set in the earth,
The maids bring Sully-bubs forth;
Not one will touch a sup,
Till I begin a cup.
For I am the end of all
Of them, both great and small.
Then tell me yea, or nay,
For I can no longer stay.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
Why truly Arthur quoth she,
If you so minded be,
My good will I grant to you,
Or any thing I can do.
One thing I will compel,
So ask my mothers good will*
Then from thee I never will fly,
Unto the day I do dye.
Then homeward they went with speed,
Where the mother they met indeed.
Well met fair Dame, quoth Arthur,
To move you I am come hither,
For I am come to crave,
Your daughter for to have,
For I mean to make her my wife,
And to live with her all my life.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
The old woman shreek'd and cried,
And took her daughter aside,
How now daughter, quoth she,
Are you so forward indeed,
As for to marry he,
Without consent of me?
Thou never saw thirteen year,
Nor art no^ able, I fear,
To take any oversight,
To rule a man's house aright.
Why truly mother, quoth she,
You are mistaken in me;
If time do not decrease,
I am fifteen years at least.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
Then Arthur to them did walk,
And broke them of their talk,
I tell you Dame, quoth he,
I can have as good as thee;
For when death my father did call,
He then did leave me all
His barrels and his brooms,
And a dozen of woden spoones,
Dishes six or seven,
Besides an old spade, even
A brass pot and whimble,
A pack-needle and thimble,
A pudding prick and reele,
And my mothers own sitting wheel;
And also there fell to my lot
A goodly mustard pot.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
The old woman made a rep^y,
With courteous modesty,
If needs it must so be,
To the match I will agree.
For death does m^ call,
I then will leave her all;
For I have an earthen flaggon,
Besides a three-quart noggin,
With spickets and fossets five,
Besides an old be hive;
A wooden ladle and maile,
And a goodly old clouting paile;
Of a chaff bed I am well sped,
And there the Bride shall be wed,
And every night shall wear
A bolster stufft with hair,
A blanket for the bride,
And a winding sheet beside,
And hemp, if he will it break,
New curtains for to make.
To make all too, I have
Stories gay and brave.
Of all the world so fine,
With oh brave eyes of mine.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
When Arthur his wench obtained,
And all his suits had gained,
A joyful man was he,
As any that you could see.
Then homeward he went with speed,
Till he met with her indeed.
Two neighbors then did take
To bid guests for his sake;
For dishes and all such ware,
You need not take any care.
With oh brave, etc.
To the Church they went apace,
And wished they might have grace,
After the Parson to say,
And not stumble by the way;
For that was all their doubt,
That either of them should be out.
And when that they were wed,
And each of them well sped,
The Bridegroom home he ran,
And after him his man,
And after him the Bride,
Full joyful at the tide,
As she was placed betwixt
Two yeomen of the Guests,
And he was neat and fine,
For he thought him at that time
Sufficient in every thing,
To wait upon a King.
But at the door he did not miss
To give her a smacking kiss.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
To dinner they quickly gat,
The Bride betwixt them sat,
The Cook to the Dresser did call,
The young men then run all,
And thought great dignity
To carry up Furmety.
Then came leaping Lewis,
And he called hard for Brewis,
Stay, quoth Davy Rudding,
Thou go too fast with the pudding.
Then came Sampson Seal,
And he carried Mutton and Veal;
The old woman scolds full fast,
To the Cook she makes great have,
And him she did control,
And swore that the Porridge was cold.
With oh brave, etc.
My Masters a while be brief,
Who takes up the Beef?
Then came William Dickins,
And carries the Snipes and Chickens.
Bartholmew brought up the Mustard,
Caster he carried the Custard.
In comes Roger Boore,
He carried up Rabbet^ before:
Quoth Roger I Will give thee a C^ke,
If thou will carry the Drake.
Speak not more nor less,
Nor of the greatest mess,
Nor how the Bride did carve,
Nor how the Groom did serve.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
But when that they had dined,
Then every man had Wine;
The maids they stood aloof,
While the young men made a proof,
Who had the nimblest heel,
Or who could dance so well,
Till Hob of the hill fell over,
And over him three or four,
Up he got at last,
And forward about he past;
At Rowland he kicks and grins,
And he William ore the shi^s;
He takes not any offense,
But fleeres upon his wench.
The Piper he played Fadding,
And they ran all a g^dding.
With oh brave Arthur, etc.
A SONG.
1.
THe fourteenth of September
I very well remember,
When people had eaten and fed full,
Many men, they say,
Would needs go see a Play,
But they saw a great rout at the red Bull.
2.
The Soldiers they came,
(The blind and the lam^)
To visit and undo the Players;
And women without Gowns,
They said they would have Crowns;
But they were no good Soothsayers.
3.
Then Io: Wright they met,
Yet nothing could get,
And Tom Iay ^'th' same condition:
The fire men they
Would have made 'em a prey,
But they scorned to make a petition.
4.
The Minstrills they
Had the h^p that day,
(Well fare a very good token)
To keep (from the chase)
The fiddle and the case,
For the instruments escaped unbroken.
5.
The poor and the rich,
The whore and the bitch,
Were every one at a loss,
But the Players were all
Turned (as weakest) to the wall,
And it is thought had the grea^^st loss.
You must supppose it to be Easter holidayes; for now Sisly and Doll, Kate and
Peg, Moll and Nan, are marching to Westminster with two Prentices before them,
who go swinging their Muckenders in one hand, and now and then give a wipe to
their greazy foreheads: at the door they meet a crowd of Wapping Seamen,
Kent-street Broom-men, together with the inhabitants of the Bank-side, with a
Butcher or two pricked in among them; There a while they stand gaping for the
Master of the Show; presently they hear the keys ring, which rejoices them
more than the sound of the Pancake-bell; and he peeping over the sp^kes, and
beholding such a learned Auditory, opens the gates of Paradise, and by that
time they are half got into the first Chapel (for you must consider they
cannot go all in at once, and the man he is in have) he lifts up his voice among
the Tombs, and begins his lurry in manner and form following.

HEre lies William de Valence,
A right good Earl of Pambroke,
And th^s is his Monument which you s^^,
I Will swear upon a Book.
He was High Marshall of England,
When Harry the third did reign
Full out four hundred years from hence,
But he will nere be so again.
Here the Lord Edward Talbot lies,
The Earl of Shrewsbury,
Together with his Countess fair,
Whom he did ocupy.
The next to him there lies one
Sir Richard Peckeshal hight,
Of whom we always first do say,
He was a Hampshire Knight.
And now to tell you more of him
There lies under this Stone
His two wives, and his daughters four,
Of whom I knew not one.
Sir Bernard Brockhurst there does lie,
Lord Chamberlain to Queen Anne,
She was Richard the second's queen,
And he was King of Englan.
Sir Francis Hollis; the Lady Francis,
The sam^ was Suffolk's Duchess,
Two children of Edward the third,
Here lie in Death's cold clutches.
This is King Edward the third's brother,
Of whom our Records tell
Nothing of note, nor say they whether
He be in heaven or hell.
This same is John of Eldeston,
And he was Earl of Cornwall,
This is the Lady Phillis Mohun,
No doubt but she made horns well.
At first she was Duchess of York,
And then the Wife also
Of Edward Duke of York: and this
Two hundred and thirty years ago.
The Lady Anne Rosse, but note ye well,
That she in Childbed died;
The Lady Marquess of Winchester
Lies buried by her side.
Now think your penny will spent good folks,
And that you are not beguiled,
Within this cup does lie the heart
Of a French Embassador's child.
Nor can I tell how it came to pass,
On purpose, or by chance,
The bowels they lie underneath,
The body is in France.
The Countess of Oxford and her mother,
The good old Lady Bourleigh,
And that is her daughter, another Countess,
Asunder these not far lie.
These once were bonny Dames; and though
There were no coaches then,
Yet they their breeches jogged themselves,
Or had them jogged by men.
But woe is me, those highborn sinners
That wont to work so stoutly,
Are now laid low, and 'cause they cannot,
Their Statues pray devoutly.
This is the Duchess of Somerset,
The Lady Anne by name,
Wife to the Duke of Somerset,
Duke Edward of great fame.
She lived in Edward the sixt's time,
So long ago 'twas since,
How long ago was that, Pray do not put him out Nan.
I pray?
Her Husband protected the Prince.
And underneath this stone does lie
Sir Robert Cecils L^dy low.
Mother to the Earl of Salisbury;
And then cried one, It may be so:
In this fair Monum^nt which you see
Adorned with so many pillars,
Does lie the Countess of Buckingham
And her Husband, Sir George Villers.
To the late Duke of Buckingham,
(We nere spoke of his Brother)
This old Sir George was Grandfather,
And the Countess his Grandmother,
Sir Robert Eatam a Scotch Knight,
And he was Secretary
To both of our late Queens so great,
Queen Anne, and then Queen Mary.
This was the Countess of Lenox,
Iclep'd the Lady Marget,
She was King James's Grandmother,
Which Death I doubt did forget.
This was Queen Mary, Queen of Scots,
By more then her husband bedded*
King James's Grandmother at the Castle
Of Fothringham beheaded.
The Mother of Henry the seventh
This is, that lies hard by;
She was the Countess, know ye well,
Of Richmond and Darby.
Henry the seventh here does lie, He had reason to say so.

With his fair Queen beside him,
He was the Founder of this Chapel,
Oh may no ill betide him!
Therefore his Monument's in bras^,
The cost was nere the less;
The Duke of Richmond and Lenox,
Lies there with his Duchess.
And here they stand upright in a press,
With bodies made of wax,
With a globe and a wand in either hand
And their robes upon their backs.
General Ireton and his Lady
Are here the spoils of Death;
And also two of his children;
This must be said in a breath.
Here lies the Duke of Buckingham,
And the Duchess his wife,
Whom Felton stabbed at Portsmouth town,
And so he lost his life.
Two children of King James these are,
Nor do our Records vary,
Sophia in the cradle lies,
And this is the Lady Mary.
And this is Queen Elizabeth,
How the Spaniards did infest her;
Her Body's here buried with Queen Mary,
And now she agrees with her Sister,
Old Devereux, Earl of Essex,
Stands there with his Buff coat,
The Parliaments first General,
And very stoutly he fought.
To another Chapel now come we;
Tho people follow and chat.
This is the Lady Cottington,
And the people cry, Who Is THAT?
This is the Lady Francis Sidney,
The Countess of Sussex is she,
And this the Lord Dudley Carleton is,
And then they look up and see.
Sir Thomas Bromley lies here,
And eight of his children,
Four daughters, and four sons also,
Both women grown and men.
The next is Sir John Fullerton,
And this is his Lady I trow,
And this is Sir John Puckering,
With his fine Bedfellow.
That in the middle is the Earl of Bridgewater,
Who makes no use of his bladder,
Although his Countess lie so nere him:
And so we go up a ladder.
King Edward the first a gallant blade, Into the place where the great Sword
and the Chair is.

Lies under-neath this Stone;
And this is the chair which ^e did bring,
A good while ago, from Scone,
In this same Chair, till now of late,
Our Kings and Queens were crowned;
Under this Chair another stone
Does lie upon the ground.
On that same stone did Jacob sleep, A sweet nap.

Instead of a Down pillow;
And after that 'twas hither brought
By some good honest fellow.
King Richard the second he lies here;
And his first Queen, Queen Anne.
Edward the third lies here hard by,
Oh he was a gallant man.
For this was his two-handed Sword,
A blade both true and trusty,
With which he conquered France; cries one,
Good Sir it is very rusty.
Feel but the weight on it in your hand;
Who now with this can fight?
And then the petticoats and wastcoats,
Do wonder at his might.
Here a lies again with his Queen, Queen Philip,
A Dutch woman by Record,
But that is all one, for now alas,
His P-'s not so long as his Sword.
King Edward the Confessor lies
Within this Monument fine;
This Monument was made before
William the Conqueror's time.
There lies Harry the fifth, and there
Does lie Queen Elenor;
She was Edward the first's wife,
Which is more than ye knew before.
Henry the third here lies ^n^omb'd
He was Herb John in Pottage,
Little he did, but still reigned on,
Although his sons were at ag^.
Fifty six years he reigned King,
Ere he the Crown would lay by,
Only we praise him, 'cause he was
Last builder of the Abbey.
There Is General Popham, and his Lady,
A very fine device a,
If more ye ask concerning him,
The D. a jot can I say.
Here Thomas Cecil lies, who is that?
Why it is the Earl of Exeter,
And this his Countess is; Good Lady,
To die how it perplexed her.
Here Henry Carry, Lord Hunsdon rests,
Though a makes a noise with his name;
This man was Chamberlain unto
Queen Elizabeth, of great fame.
And here one William Colchester
Lies, of a certainty,
An Abbot he was of Westminster, Plain dealing's a Jewel.

And he that says no, does lie.
This is the Bishop of Durham,
Much bigger then a Fairie,
Henry the seventh loved him well,
And made him his Secretary.
Sir Thomas Ruthal, what of him?
Poor Gentleman, not a word,
Only they buried him here; but now
Behold that man with a sword.
Humphrey de Bohun, who though he were
Norborn with me in the same town,
Yet I can tell he was Earl of Essex,
Of Hereford, and Northampton.
He was High Constable of England,
As History well expresses,
But now pretty maids be of good cheer,
We Are going up to the Presses.
And now the Presses open stand, Here they stand upright.

And ye see them all a row,
But more is never said of these,
Than what is said below.
Henry the seventh and his fair Queen,
Edward the first and his Queen,
Henry the fifth here stands upright,
And his good wife was this queen,
The noble Prince, He does not run a tilt.
Prince Henry,
King James's eldest Son,
King James, Queen Anne, Qu. Elsabeth,
And so this Chappel's done.
Now down the stairs come we again,
The man goes first with a staff,
Perchance one tumbles down two steps,
And then they all do laugh.
This is the great Sir Francis Vere,
That so the Spaniards curry'd;
Four Colonels support his Arms,
And here h^s body's buried.
That Statu against the wall with one ey, He had two if he could have kept them.

Is Major General Norrice;
He beat the Spaniards cruelly,
As is affirmed in Stories.
His six sons there hard by him stand,
Each one was a Commander,
And played such pranks as nere was known,
To rescue the Hollander.
And there does Sir George Hollis rest,
Brother to the Earl of Clare,
For which when first they tell me,
One louse I do not care.
But he has something else to fame him, About the time that mortals whet
their knives.

For he was Major General
To Sir John Norrice, that brave blade.
And so they go to dinner all.
For now the Show is at an end,
All things are done and said;
The Citizen pays for his wife,
And the Prentice for the maid.
When the are got out, they stare about,
And they spy against the wall
One with a pole-ax in his hand,
The greatest fool of all.
For he his Land did give away,
But no man knows wherefore,
And he made the Commonwealth his Heir,
Like Flora the great Whore.
A Pastoral Song.
1.
A Silly poor Sheepherd
was folding his sheep,
He walked so long,
he got cold in his feet,
He laid on his coals
by two and by three,
The more he laid on
The cuc-colder was he.
2.
But alas, good wife
what shall we do now?
To buy some more fuel
We'll sell the brown cow,
To buy some more coals,
to warm thee and me;
But the more he laid on
the cuc-colder was he.
3.
Some sheepherds, quoth she,
themselves can warm keep,
By fleecing their flock,
and by folding their sheep,
But when you come home
with your tar-box and crook,
It grieves me to see
how cuc-cold you do look.
4.
Alas (wife) I walk
through dew, dirt and mire,
While you perhaps warm
your self without fire,
With a friend in a corner,
in such a sort, as whereby,
The warmer you are,
the cuc-colder am I.
A Medly.
1.
I Sowed my Seed
In a pleasant Field,
And it grew apace;
A blessed Harvest
There was found,
To my disgrace;
And for to reap it I durst not stay.
My seed is sown,
I Am overthrown,
I must run away.
2.
To climb a tree
Where no boughs be,
But smooth withal.
I fain would enter,
But I dare not venture
For fear of fall.
But above her knees Sir you may not go,
For being a stranger,
You may not ranger,
There will come danger in climbing so.
3.
Her milk white breast,
So neatly dressed,
And all things neat,
Her leg and foot,
And all things to it,
Were made complete,
With her yellow hair, sir, when she wa^ young
That when I kissed her,
Her eyes did glister
As 'twere the Sun.
A Medly.
COme all you Maids that list to marry,
And you that Husbands want,
I wish you not long to tarry,
For Husbands are grown scant.
Some are grown provident,
And others all for riches,
That well is she that is content
With the linings of one's --.
Breed up your children to school,
For that is the best way to teach you^^
And let them not play the fool,
But let them consider the truth.
For Girls they will caper and kick,
Oh how they will range about,
And a wench that is fifteen years old
Good Lord how she longs for a --
Prick her out her work,
And let her Bone-lace weave.
For when that you most think of them,
They will you most deceive.
And you shall never gain a penny,
But still they will be plucking*
And think that they shall never have
Their bellies full of --.
Furmity is dainty cheer,
And Fish it must be spent Sir,
But H. does swear he would rather have
The belly of a pretty --.
Wenches ye do me great wrong.
Which makes me the ruffer to wrinkle,
And had I not been very strong.
She had caught fast hold of my --.
Pinching does not go by strength,
Therefore you must leave off Sir,
If you had seen her lie at length,
Then you had seen brave sport Sir.
Brave Jack of Winchester had a fine dog,
The finest that ever was seen,
He gave it to his Mistress
To bear her company.
This Dog was u^'d to run by her side,
When she was going to hunt,
And all the night long it lay in the bed
A lick^ng about her --.
Come hu^band, away with this filthy curre,
It makes my flesh to rise,
He left off all, and to her did fall,
And slipped between her --
Thine or mine, for a pint of wine,
And we will have it for supper:
Had you but seen her stretched at length,
How strongly he did -- her.
The Ioviall Tinker.
THere was a Lady in this Land,
She loved a Gentleman,
She could not tell what excuse to make
To have him now and then.
But writ a Letter to him,
And sealed it with her hand,
Bid him become a Tinker,
To clout both pot and pan.
And when he had the Letter,
Full well he could it read,
His Brass and his Budget
Then strait did he provide.
His Hammer and his Pinsors,
And well they did agree,
With a long Club on his back,
And orderly came he.
And when he came to the Ladies gates
He knocked most hastily^
Then who is there, the Porter says,
That knocks thus ruggedly?
I am a ^oviall Tinker,
And I work for gold and fee,
If you have any broken brass
Bring it here unto me.
I am the joviall'st tinker
Betwixt this town and London,
At mending of a pot or pan,
Or clouting of a Caldron.
My Brass is in my Budget,
And my Rivets under my Apron,
I pray you tell her Ladysh^p
I am come to clout her Caldron.
Madam yon is the strongest tinker
Betwixt this town and London,
He prays me tell your Ladyship
He is come to clout your Caldron.
O go thy ways good Porter,
And let the tinker in,
For I have work for him to do,
And money he may gain.
And when he came into the hall,
Upon him she did wink,
Says take him into the buttery,
And make the knave to drink.
Such meat as we do eat, she says,
And such drink as I use,
For it is not any Tinkers guise
Good liquor to refuse.
She took the Tinker by the hand,
Her work for him to show,
And down fast by the Caldron side
Laid he the Lady low.
And gave to her a hammer
All in her hand to knock --
That her own wedded Lord might think
The Tinker was at work.
She put her hand into her purse,
And plucked out five good Mark,
Said, take thee this good Tinker,
And for thy good days work;
She took the Tinker by the hand,
Her wedded Lord to show,
Says, here is the joviall'st tinker
That ever I did know.
This is the joviall'st tinker,
And the dearest of his work,
For he will not drive a nail to the head,
But he must have a Mark.
If you had been so wise Mad^m,
As I had thought you had bin,
Before you had set him on work
You would have agreed with him.
Pray hold your peace, good wedded Lord,
Think not of his work too dear,
For if you could do it but half so well,
'Twould save forty Mark a year.
And be not thou too long tinker,
And look not for any sending,
For if thou stay too long away
My Caldron will want mending.
The admirable Song of Tom and Will.
TOm and Will were Sheepherds swains,
Who loved and lived together.
When fair Pastora graced their Plain^,
Alas, why came she thither?
For though they fed two several Flocks,
They had had but one Desire;
Pastora's eyes and Amber locks
Set both their hearts on fire.
Tom came of a gentle race,
By father and by mother;
Will was noble, but (alas)
He was a younger brother.
Tom was toysom, Will was s^d,
No Huntsman nor no Fowler;
Tom was held the properer lad,
But Will the better bowler.
The scorching flames their hearts did bear,
They could no longer smother,
Although they knew they Rivalls were,
They still loved one and other.
The scorching flames their heat did bear,
They could no longer smother,
Although they knew they Rivalls were,
They still loved one another.
Tom would drink her health, and swear*
This Nation could not want her;
Will would take her by the hair,
And with his voice inchant her.
Tom kept always in her sight,
And nere forgot his duty,
Tom was witty, and could write
Sweet Sonnets on her beauty.
Thus did she handle Tom and Will,
Who both did dot^ upon her,
For graciously she used them still,
And still preserved her honor.
Yet she was so sweet a S^e,
And of so sweet behavior,
That Tom thought he, and Will thought he
Was chiefest in her favor.
Pastora was a lovely Lass,
And of a comely feature,
Divinely good and fair she was,
And kind to every creature.
Of favor she was provident,
And yet not over-sparing,
She gave no less encouragement,
Yet kept men from despairing.
Which of these two she loved best,
Or whether she loved either,
It Is thought they will find it to their cost,
That she indeed loved neither.
She dealt her favors equally,
They both were well contented;
She kept them both from jealousy,
Nor easily prevented.
Tale* telling fame has made report
Of fair Pastora's beauty,
Pastora's sent for to the Court,
There to perform her duty.
Unto the Court Pastora's gone,
It had been no Court without her,
Our Queen amongst all her train has none,
Nor half so fair about her.
Tom hung his dog, and threw away
His sheep-hook and his wallet;
Will burst his pipes, and cursed the day
That ere he made a Sonnet.
Their nine-pins and their bowls they brake,
Their joys were turned to tears,
It Is time for me an end to make,
Let them go shake their ears.
A Song.
1.
CLoris forbear a while, do not ore-joy me;
Urge not another smile, le^t thou destroy me.
That beauty pleases most, and is soonest taken,
Which is soon won, soon lost, kindly forsaken.
I love a coming Lady, faith I do,
And now and then would have her scornful too.
2.
O cloud those eyes of thine; bo-p^ep thy feature,
Warmed with an April slime, scorch not the creature.
Thus to display thy ware; thus to be fooling,
Argues how rude you are in Cupids schooling.
Disdain begets a shent, scorn, draws me nigh,
It Is 'cause I would, and cannot make me try.
3.
Cloris I would have thee wise, when Gallants woo thee,
And courtship thou despise, fly those pursue thee.
Fast moves an appetite, make hunger greater,
What Is stinted often delights, falls to the better*
Be kindly coy betimes, be smoothly rough,
And buckle now and then, and that is enough.
A Song.
1.
UNderneath the Castle wall
The Queen of Love sits mourning
A tiring of her golden hair,
Her red-rose cheek adorning;
With a lilly-white hand she smote her breast,
And said she was quite forsaken,
With that the Mountains fell a leaping,
And the Fiddlers fell a qu^king.
2.
Underneath a rotten hedge
The Pedlars wife sits shiting,
A tearing of a Cabadge leaf,
Her shitten arse a wiping.
With a coal black hand she wipt her ars,
And said her fingers were beshit^en;
With that the mountains stood still,
And the Fiddlers fell a spitting.
3.
The first beginning was, Sallingers Round,
Where the Cow leapt over the moon,
And the good wife sh^^ in the piss-pot,
And the cream ran into her shoon.
With hey stitch your nose in her breech,
And turn about knaves all three,
And we will have another as good as the the other,
If you will be rul^d by me.
4.
My sister went to market
To buy her a taffety hat,
Before she came there her arse lay bare,
Lay you your lips to that.
Hey stitch, your nose, etc.
5.
The Fiddler played his wife a dance,
And there sprang up a rose,
The Butcher bit his wife by the arse,
And she beshit his nose.
Hey stitch, your nose, etc.
6.
Cisly shit in the wood-yard,
And it flue East and West,
Cisly shit in the wood-yard,
And the plainest way was best.
It was well known to all her friends
She made good pudding-pies,
Up she start and let a fart,
The syrop ran down her thighs.
7.
Fortune my foe has stolen away my Bacon,
And powdered Beef and Mustard my mouth has quite forsaken;
Which makes me fall unto my Bread and Cheese;
O help strong Beer and Ale, or else my life I leese.
A Song in the praise of ALE.
NOr drunken nor sober, but neighbor to both
I lately walked down in a dale,
A friend by the way desired me to stay,
And speak in the praise of a pot of good Ale.
But yet to commend it I dare not begin,
Lest thereby my judgment may happen to fail,
Because many men do account it a sin
To speak in the praise of a pot of good Ale.
But yet by your leave, when troubles arise,
And sorrow and care the heart does assail,
The best help to be found is to toss the pot round,
And to wash away care with a pot of good Ale.
It m^kes a man merry, and full of conceits,
And as good as a Piper, where music does fail;
He that soundly drinks, no harm ever thinks;
But loves to commend a pot of good Ale.
The old wife whose teeth wag as fast as her tail,
Though old age by nature be feeble and frail,
She Will frisk and she will fling, and she will make the house ring,
If she be but inspired with a pot, etc.
The Ploughman, the Lab'rer, the Thresher likewise,
That works all day for a groat with his flail^,
Speaks of no less things, then of Queens and of Kings,
If he once be inspired with a pot, etc.
The man that has a black blous to his wife,
In her face as much favor as is in her tail
When he comes home at night, will swear she shines bright,
If he shine first with a pot, etc.
With that my friend said to me, come let us go,
Thy long staying here has made thee look pale;
We Will have six pots more though we die on the score.
And so they went back to the pot of good Ale.
How Daphne pays his Debts.
DAphne was Poet to the Queen,
And he caught her by the Money;
But afterward he met with a Lass,
And he caught her by the Cony.
She felt him please her then so well,
For he was in his prime,
She see a mark upon his face,
To know him another time.
He feeling England then so hot,
In England would not tarry,
But made him a Barque, to Maryland
All his estate to carry.
This Barque was taken by a Frigot;
Where was poor Daphne then?
For Daphne, you know, could never fight,
And I doubt none of his men.
Then Daphne to the Tower must go,
Where he did fall to writing
The life and death of a certain King,
That did delight in fighting.
But city Dun distur'b him then,
And cri^s, Discharge your debt sir,
But he replied with cap in hand,
I beg your patience you sir.
My patience yet, quoth he again,
Why how long shall y^ stay?
But unto this months and, quoth he.
But he meant until dooms day.
From Country then another came,
And payment him bese^ches,
But Daphne only makes a leg,
And gives him some fai^ speeches.
Quoth ^e, I now have made my book,
A famed Heroic Poem,
For which I Am promised so ^^ny pounds,
That I know not where to bestow em.
But when this book it did come forth
As some have given ^ ^i^^ing,
The gains of his pitiful Poetry
Scarce paid for paper and printing
At the months end they come again,
Molesting him like Devils.
Well now I Will pay ye all, quoth he,
I must be master of the Revels.
The State has promised this to me,
As the Clerk of the Parliament says,
And I hope that you will do as I do,
Believe the PVBLIQVE FAITH.
Already I have hired a house,
Wherein to sing and dance;
And now the Ladies shall have Masks
Made a la m^d^ de France.
This house was Pothecaries Hall,
I tell to him that asks;
Because of a meeting that was there,
Which he said was one of his Masks.
If there you find him not come to S. Ione^'s,
Where his next house is hiring,
And if you come quickly, you shall see
The Players themselves attiring.
For surely he does play, but must
Be watched like Bacons head,
Time is, Time was, but still you come
When the Time past is said.
I can tell y' of more of's houses, one
In fields of Lincolns Inn,
Another in Drury Lane: and thus
Daphne will never lin --.
Thus little you think that Daphne has
A Play with you begun,
Which is the cause you interrupt him,
Ere the fifth Act be done.
Now the fifth Act is never done,
Till the Exit all fulfill;
Let him but make his Exit first,
And then do what you will.
Yet Daphne, if they still molest thee,
Faith, in the mind I Am in,
I Would do as Players use to do,
Pay my great sums in tin.
Or as that you do play with them.
Think that they play with you,
Conceit you owe them naught, you know
How much Conceit will do.
Now in these houses he has men,
And clothes to make them trim;
For six good friends of his laid out
Six thousand pounds for him.
Then Daphne he will get at least
A hundred pounds a day:
Why I think the Devil's in you all,
Cannot you one minute stay?
If this will not do, but ye resolve
With Bailiffs for to founder him,
Yet let this blunt your cholers edge,
Ye shall have places under him;
His Landlord he shall have a copy
Of some new Masque, or so,
For which though he may largely crave,
Let him use some conscience though.
The tailor shall the wardrobe keep,
And now and then steal a suit,
Draper shall keep the half Crown boxes
For Gentlemen of repute.
His Landress, 'cause she washes well,
And kisses with a good smack o,
Shall have a Shedd wherein to sell
Strong Ale and foul Tobacco.
Nor ben't such Infid^lls to think
This time will nere be found;
For he that builds castles in the air
Can build a house of the ground.
Therefore pray set your hearts at rest,
And do not wrack the poor,
But if he pay not in two years time,
I Will nere speak for him more.
VVilly is gone to the Wood. A SONG.
WIlly's gone to the wood, to the wood, to the wood.
Willy's gone to the wood, thither go I;
And if thou will lay me down, lay me down, lay me down,
If thou will lay me down, loud will I cry,
Oh, oh, uf, oh, oh, uf, oh, oh, uf, oh, oh,
Oh my Love, oh my Love;
Who leads such a life like to Willy and I?
Willy rides all the night, all the night, all the night,
Willy rides all the night, he cannot lie,
But he must see his Love, kis his Love, woo his Love,
But he must feel his Love as he pass by.
With oh, oh, etc.
None leads a life like to Willy and I.
I met with my Love a going to a Fayer,
He kindly embraced me, asked what I did there;
Then presently I told him, I would not him deny,
For I will love Willy until I die.
With oh, oh, etc.
Who is so quaint as Willy and I?
I met with Willy in the midst of the green,
He told me he loved me, yet would not be seen,
Then sweetly he laid me down, I cried oh fie, fie, fie,
For I love Willy until I die.
With oh, oh, etc.
None leads a life like to Willy and I.
A Song.
YOu young men that want skill in wooing,
And have a desire to be wed,
Take council of me in your doing,
For fear lest you should be m^sled.
Do not my kind proffer refuse,
'Twill never you deceive,
'Twill teach you what woman to choose,
And what creature you would best for to leave.
In the first place I do you advise,
Take one nor too high nor too low,
But according unto your own size,
That you may her true qualities know.
Take one nor too young, nor too old,
Take one nor too fat nor too lean;
It Is a bad thing to meet with a scold,
It Is a worse thing to meet with a queen.
Nor take not one that is too proud,
Nor one that is a du^ty foul slut;
The one ^he will babble too loud,
And the other will poison the gut.
Chiefly I would wish you beware
A wench with a rolling eye;
For she that will cousen and swear,
Will also dissemble and lie.
She that has her hair a bright yellow,
And tresses like weavers of gold,
If she meet with some pretty fellow,
Her husband may chance be cuckold.
But she that is by nature composed
With round cherry cheeks and red hair,
If she be pink eyed and long nosed,
Believe it she is dangerous ware.
It is not all gold that does glister,
Nor it is not all lead that looks dull,
For Venus, the fairest of Sisters,
Made Vulcan her husband a gull.
So often times beautiful Lasses
Do jeer their poor husbands with scorn,
And cunningly break all their glasses,
And make them drink out of a horn.
But the bonny wench with the brown brow,
Oh she is a good one indeed,
She will be true to her vow,
I wish we had more of the breed.
A Song.
1.
DId I once say that thou were fair,
And that thy breath perfumed the air?
Did I commit Idolatry,
And court thee as a Deity?
Oh Caelia! then sure I was blind,
Or else it was 'cause thou were kind.
2.
Did I once beg a wanton kiss,
And thought there was no other bliss?
Did I all other objects fly^
To live i^th' sunshine of thine eye?
It Is true, I did; but Caelia then
Restored to me as much ag^n.
3.
Now Caelia's changed* and so am I,
And love feeds upon vanity,
My constant tho^ghts could never find
The pleasures of a fickle mind*
Till thy example did invite
My appetite with new delight
A SONG.
SUre 'twas a dream, how long fond man have I
Been fooled into captivity?
My Newgate was my want of wit,
I did my self commit the bonds I knit;
I my own g^oler was, the only foe
That did my freedom disallow:
I was a prisoner 'cause I would be so.
But now I will shake my chains, and prove
Opinion built the jail of love,
Made all his bonds, gave him his bow,
His broken arrows too, which murder so.
Nay all these darts idle Lovers dream,
Were all composed to make a Theme
For some carousing Poet's drunken flame.
'Twas a fine life I led, when I did dress
My self, to court your peevishness;
When I did at your footstool lie,
Expecting from your eye to live or dye.
Now smiles or frowns, I care not which I have,
Nay rather than I Will be your slave,
I Will woo the plague to send me to the grave.
Now I can stand the salleys of your eyes,
In vain are all your b^tteries.
Nor can that low dissembling smile,
Nor that bewitching style longer beguile,
Nor those heart-traps, which you each renu^
To all those witchcrafts, and to you
For evermore I Will bid adieu.
An Epitaph on John Tailor, whow as born in the City of Gloucester, died in
Phaenix Alley, in the 75. year of his age; you may find him, if the worms
have not devoured him, in Covent Garden Churchyard.
HEre lies John Tailor, without rhyme or reason,
For death struck his Muse in so cold a season,
That Jack lost the use of his Scullers to row,
The chill pale R^seal would not let his boat go.
Alas poor Jack Tailor, this it is to drink ale,
With nutmegs and ginger, with a toste, though stale:
It drenche thee in Rimes: had thou been of the pack,
With Draiton and Johnson to qu^ff off thy Sack,
They Would infu^'d thee a Genius should nere expire,
And have thawed thy Muse with Elemental fi^e.
Yet still for the honor of thy sprightly wit,
Since some of thy Fanc^es so handsomely hit;
The Nymphs of the Rivers for thy relation
Surnamed thee the Water-po^t of the nation*
Who can write more of thee, let him do'^ for me,
A pox take all Rim^ro, Jack Tailor, but thee.
Weep not Reader, if thou can choose,
Over the Stone of so merry a Muse.
Another from the University.
HEre lies neither Constable, Justice, nor Iaylor,
No Bailey, nor Catch-poll, but honest John Tailor;
Whose name is not graven on Marble Columes,
But lives in his own four hundred volumes,
Where women and men, and children may know it,
That he was this Islands chief Water-Poet,
Who being o're-whelm'd, by Death's power felt like one,
Not drowned in Lethe, but in Helicon*
And since he is not living, but surely is dead,
In Covent-gard^n Churchyard he lies buried.
A SONG.
1.
OH ho boys, soh ho boys,
Come away boys,
And bring me my longing desire;
A Less that is near,
And can do the feat,
When lusty young blood is on fire.
2.
Let her body be tall,
And her wast^ ^e but small,
And her age not above fifteen;
Let her fear for no bed,
But let us here spread
Our mantle upon the Green.
3.
Let her have a cherry lip,
Where I Nectar my sip,
Le^ her eyes ^e as black as a ^low;
Tangling locks I do love,
So those that hang above
Be the same of what is growing below.
4.
Let her face be fair,
And her br^sts be bare,
And ^ voice let her have that can wa^ble,
Let her belly be ^oft,
To mount me aloft,
Let her bounding buttocks be of marble,
Oh such a bonny less
May bring wonders to pass,
And make me grow younger and younger,
And when I dapart,
She Will be mad at the heart,
That I am able to stand to'^ no longer.
FINIS.

