A REFLECTION ON OUR Modern POESY. AN ESSAY.

-- Fuit haec Sapientia quondam,
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis:
Concubitu prohibere vago; dare jura maritis;
Oppida moliri; leges incidere ligno;
Sic honor and nomen divinis Vatibus atque
Carminibus venit. -- Hor. de Art Poet.
LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers in London; and F. Hicks in Cambridge. 1695.

To my Honored Friend and School-fellow Mr. A. OWEN.
SIR,
THE way of Dedicating now most in fashion, seems to me to stand in as great
need of a Reformation, as does our Poetry. For, as we take nothing to be True
and Genuine Poetry, but what is Light, Frothy, and has a wanton Air throughout
it; so the generality seem to stand persuaded, That an Epistle Dedicatory loses
its End quite, if not stuffed up with gross and open Flattery, sufficient to
call a Blush into any modest Reader's Cheek. But here it is a hard matter to
judge, Whether the Impudence of the Author, or the Vanity of the Patron (who
believes all true that is said of him) does contribute most to carry on this
notorious piece of Folly.

Now ( Sir) tho our Early Friendship, and Intimate Acquaintance was the Reason
that prevailed most upon me in presenting this small Essay to You; yet, to
speak truth, there was another Motive too, which made me the more desirous of
it, and that was merely upon the account of running counter to the generality
of Dedicating Poets, to try if a particular Example might have any small
Influence in correcting the Poetical License they take upon such like
occasions: For here I was satisfied that I might come off without the least
flattering Glance, with one who (tho young) has Experience enough to
understand, that Personal Respect is not to be estimated by the fine
Complements and Flourishes of a Fanciful Pen. And for my part, I think if our
Poets go on at their old Rate but a little longer, we shall be apt to interpret
Epistles of this sort as we do Dreams, by the Contrary.

The great Scandal that Poetry has of late been subject to, together with the
respect I always had for it, gave occasion for the following Reflection. For as
I was considering how much this Art was esteemed amongst our Forefathers, and
how Venerable, nay, almost Sacred, the Name of a Poet was then; Surely (thought
I) the Former Honor, and the Present Disgrace the Muses lie under, could never
depend on the different Capricio's of two diverse Ages, but there must be some
more reasonable Ground for this matter, which if once discovered, will give a
very fair opportunity of restoring Verse to its Primitive Dignity. Some there
are who suspect, That the want of Genius in our Age has given Poetry this
deadly Wound: But they will soon find their Mistake, if (laying aside the blind
Veneration we have for Antiquity) they compare the Ancients and Moderns in any
sort of Poetry, excepting the Epic. So that we must seek out for some other
Cause more probable than the former. And what others may spy, I know not; but I
think the great Difference lies here, That Poetry is now no longer the Fountain
of Wisdom, the School of Virtue; it is no longer a fit Trainer up of Youth, a
Bridler of the Passions and exorbitant Desires: But on the contrary, he is
reckoned the Ablest Poet, that is most dextrous at conjuring up these Evil
Spirits, to disturb the Calm and Quiet of the Soul. And this (if I mistake not)
is that which has deformed so great a Beauty, and cast an Odium on that most
Excellent Art, which was once the Pride of Conquerors, and Envy of Philosophers.

What I have transiently remarked in the following Verses, will (I doubt not)
be disliked by many of our Rhiming Sparks, for take but the Liberty of Writing
Immodestly from 'em, and you have quite dismounted them off their Pegasus; they
are quite Tongue-ty'd; it is with them, as Horace says it was in the Reign of
the old Comedy, Chorusque, Turpiter, obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.

What I have said against Love upon the Stage, I would not have apprehended so,
as if I would have that Passion quite exploded; for I think it one of the
fittest Passions for Poetry, and capable of very great Ornaments; but then I
would have it very nicely and delicately handled; and what might give the least
Offense to the severest Modesty always cast in Shades; for it is then only that
this Passion is not to be allowed, when it goes beyond its bounds; and that is,
when the Poet's Strokes are too bold, and his Colors too glaring.

I was told (which I my self afterward found to be true) that a great Part of
my Design was already performed in the Preface to Prince Arthur. However, that
did not trouble me in the least, for I was very glad to see so Eminent an
Author of the same Opinion with me; since I had laid a Rude Draught of my
Reflection the last Summer, which I then showed several of my Acquaintance.
However, the World may think this a Sham, and I am very willing to be thought
indebted to so creditable a Person for what I have said.

I shall make no Apology for the Tediousness of my Epistle, since you are too
often guilty of the Contrary Vice in writing to your

Real Friend, and very Humble Servant.

A REFLECTION ON OUR Modern Poesy.
IF Poets be (as they pretend) inspired
With Heat Divine, and Sacred Fury fired,
How comes it then, that each Poetic Piece
Gives nowadays Encouragement to Vice?
Each Line (or else we think it will not do)
With wanton Love, and Flames unchaste must glow.
That scribbling Fop that would a Poet be,
First bids adieu to all his Modesty:
Invokes not Phoebus, but the God of Wine;
Crowns his hot Temples with the inspiring Vine:
The Glass (Dull Sot!) must make his Thoughts sublime,
For in a Sober Mood what Bard can Rhyme?
But sure Great Homer got not thus a Name;
Nor Lofty Maro his Eternal Fame;
Their Muses chaste as Vestal Virgins were;
Stately, not Proud; Reserved, but not Severe.
The Flame that through their Works so bright does shine,
Was surely kindled by a Breath Divine,
No Cupid's Puff, nor Frenzy caused by Wine.
But that our Follies we at large may see,
Let Us closer view our Modern Poesy.
What place so much debauched as is our Stage,
Which next the Pulpit, should correct the Age?
What anciently Devotion did begin,
We have converted to the use of Sin;
And on our Theaters we daily see
Vice triumph over dejected Honesty.
But happy Athens! whose more splendid Stage
Was moraliz'd by Sophocles wise Rage:
Who e're he did pretend to Poetry,
Searched the grave Precepts of Philosophy;
Hence 'twas he taught but what he learnt before,
And practiced those sound Rules his Writings bore:
He doubly charmed his Modest Audience,
By good Example, and wise Eloquence.
Philosophers far short in teaching came;
Their Naked Virtues maimed were and lame.
The Pearl they represented to the View
Unpolished, as It naturally grew.
But Poets put a Gloss on it, made it shine,
Then 'twas embraced as somewhat more Divine.
And what the People thought too Hard before,
Sits Easy now, and is with Pleasure bore.
And now what weak Excuse, what vain Pretense,
Can Christian Poets bring in their Defense?
Shall Heathens teach by Nature's Glowworm Light,
What they neglect when Faith directs their Sight?
Or are our Palates vitiated, and we
Can relish naught but Vice in Poetry?
Must They indulge the Ill, and sooth our Fate,
Or else prevent it e're it be too late?
If We are led away by strong Desire,
Must They add Fuel to the raging Fire?
Not so did Orpheus; but with tuneful Voice,
Taught Salvage Men that followed Nature's Choice,
That wildly strayed in shrubby Brakes all day,
And herded with the common Beasts of Prey;
Even These he taught their Passions to subdue,
Through Error's Maze to follow Reason's Clue,
Their Mossy Caves and Grotto's to forsake,
And fitter Dwellings for themselves to make;
And that in Learning Greece did so aspire,
Was wholly owing to his Sacred Lyre.
Then let some Champion for the Muses rise,
Who dares be obstinately Good, and Wise;
Let him but turn the Stream of Helicon,
And make It in its proper Channel run.
He needs not fear his Bays shall withered lie;
Or that We shall despise his Poetry;
For Virtue, when well dressed in Comely Grace,
Has surely Charms so lovely in her Face,
We all should Vice forsake, and only Her embrace.
But He must then take a peculiar care,
No Wanton Scenes have in his Poem share:
A Plot and Moral let him choose, that is free
From all Allays of fulsome Ribaldry,
Which in our Modern Plays too often we see.
Let not Immodest Love come in his Rhimes;
Which to excuse, our Poets oftentimes
Reply, They bring such Objects into view,
To make us loathe those Passions we pursue.
But this is False; They always move Desire,
Fan by degrees in us Unlawful Fire:
For here the Poet's Warm Expressions move
The Unthinking Herd such Passions to approve.
Then let 'em be with Care removed from sight;
If we'll be free, we must forget 'em quite.
The Wiser Ancients did this Fault decline,
And made their Tragedies more Masculine.
Each nervous Scene some Manlike Virtue taught,
Untainted with the least Immodest Thought.
Their Heroes were more Stern, and fit for Wars,
Scorned whining Love, and Jealousy's fond Jars:
But Ours, more fit for Cupid's Childish Arms,
Are Women's Fools, and Captives to their Charms.
The Stage, which Terror should with Pity move,
With us is wholly taken up in Love.
In this (as well as other Follies) we
Too much affect the Gallick Levity:
Thence our Romantic Heroes first we drew,
Unlike our Arthur, and our William too.
In vain it is, that Heaven's Wise Providence
Has by a Sea divided us from France,
If still their Fopperies we Imitate,
And their vain Customs to our Isle Translate.
We want not Genius for the Buskin Muse,
Would Britain but all Foreign Aids refuse;
Nor of our Language need we to complain;
It Is Pompous, Bold, and fits the Tragic Strain.
Our Poets too that have wrote Comedy,
Have Wit enough, but fail in Modesty;
They still forget the End for which they write,
And mind not Profit, so they can Delight.
But he that wears the Sock, should carefully
Purge all his Writings from Obscenity:
And though the Age's Humor he expose,
Yet no Unseemly things should he disclose.
His Plays should be a Glass, where All might see
How to correct their own Deformity.
Terence in this might justly claim the Bays,
Whose Lively Draughts succeeding Ages praise:
By Him was taught upon the Roman Stage,
The Duties proper to each State and Age.
But here with us, in a whole Comedy
One Virtuous Character you cannot see:
Rather than want for Vice, we choose to draw
Strange Monsters, contrary to Nature's Law.
True Innocence the Poet ridicules,
And Honesty reserves for none but Fools.
His Gentleman he makes a Wondrous Sage,
That Is deeply read in Vices of the Age:
His Mistress and his Clothes employ his Care;
Of all his Thoughts his Country claims no share.
The Damsel too, ever Fifteen Years expire,
Is all over Love, and Wanton with Desire;
Then strait all Filial Duty's laid aside,
And naught will please her, but the Name of Bride:
Which once obtained, does soon uneasy prove,
And still she trafficks in Forbidden Love;
Her Husband's Kisses lose their wonted Taste,
And stolen Pleasures always Relish best.
These Characters with Wit and Language joined,
Must needs Instruct a Youthful Reader's Mind!
These Ills, though great, yet are but light to Crimes,
Whose Horror shall amaze succeeding Times!
See now the Poet's Bold in Mischief grown,
And turns to Ridicule the Sacred Gown!
The Grave Divine a Laughing Stock he makes;
And the firm Basis of Religion shakes:
High Heaven's Ambassador within the Scene
Lays by his awful and becoming Mien,
And takes upon him there (O Monstrous sight!)
To play the Pimp, or Canting Hypocrite.
Happy the Heathens! whose Impiety
Never mounted yet to such a high degree.
Due Reverence to their Priests was always shown,
And Distance kept from the Mysterious Gown.
Calchas was Feared and Honored as a God,
The Grecian Army still Obeyed his Nod.
But hear, O hear! how mighty was the Hand
Of Moses, and how powerful the Wand,
That wrought such Wonders in Proud Pharaoh's Land!
Revolve the amazing History, and learn
The Dignity of Priesthood to discern.
Satyr, which was a wholesome Remedy,
Prescribed to cure a People's Malady,
When prudently applied does Good produce;
But as all Goods are subject to abuse,
So this of Late no Public Cure intends,
But only serves to black Malicious ends.
We dip our Pens in Gall when ever we Write,
And all our Inspiration is but Spite.
But Horace, free from Prejudice and Rage,
With Honey did the smarting Sting assuage:
His Satyr grinn'd not as it bit, but Smiled,
Both Cured the Reader, and his Care beguiled.
Had Dryden never Writ, then Britain still
Had with Despair admired the Roman Skill:
But now, by his Example taught, we know,
That Finest Satyr in our Soil will grow.
Our Songs and Little Poems, for most part,
Have much degraded the Poetic Art.
On Trifling Subjects all our Wit we drain;
Which little Credit to the Writer gain.
Turn over every Late Miscellany,
You hardly can a Modest Copy see.
Broad Words, and fulsome Thoughts we now admit,
And praise the Nauseous Author for a Wit.
But sure by Men of Sense and Quality,
The Wretch is Pitied for his Ribaldry;
And here the Petty Scribler's Blasted Bays
Is propt but by the silly Vulgar's Praise.
Were I designed by Kinder Destiny
To Court a Muse, and follow Poetry,
My early care should be to raise a Fence
To guard All-Pure my Native Innocence;
My Infant Genius should strict Virtue learn,
And Modesty should be its great Concern:
Nor Popular Applause, nor hopes of Gain,
The unspotted Brightness of the Pearl should stain.
For Reputation, if it once be lost,
Can never be regained by any Cost;
It Is Bright like Crystal, -- but it is Brittle too,
Easy to Crack, but hard for to Renew.
Then closely would I watch m' untainted Muse,
That She no Meretricious Arts should use;
No Unbecoming Words, nor Wanton sound,
The Niceness of her Virgin Ear should wound.
So should my Writings with the Eneid strive,
And my Chaste Verse to endless Ages live:
Whilst all my Readers say, Lo! This is He,
That from long Bondage set the Muses Free.
FINIS.

