MARONIDES OR Virgil Travestie: Being a new PARAPHRASE Upon the Fifth Book of
Virgils AEneids in Burlesque Verse.

By John Phillips Gent. the Author of the Satyr against Hypocrites.

LONDON Printed for Nathanael Brooks at the Angel in Cornhil 1672.

TO My Honored Friend GEORGE WHARTON Esquire Treasurer and Play Master of his
Majesty's Office of the Ord'nance in the TOWER.
Sir,
THere is no man that puts Pen to Paper but has so much kindness for the
offspring of his own fancy, as to think it may deserve some Charity, though it
be but a Blew-coat entertainment. If men cavil at the subject, as perhaps some
Paedagogues may for affronting their Classic Author) it is no more then if they
should see Virgil himself now playing at the serious game of Irish, and by and
by, turning the Tables, and trifling away a little time at the idle sport of
Draughts. I know it is a rudeness to interrupt the serious studies of any
person, but for the same person to take his own pastime is no ill manners to
himself; though as to what relates to my defense, perhaps I may aver that he
who reads the following pages may find so much of the (...) intermixed, as
wilperadventure turn' emmore into a serious Satyr* then a jocular story. Let
others think what they please; if these extravagant hours of mine shall have
the happiness to gain your approhation, tis' what I expect. The chief reason
why I make this address to your self, being, because I am fully persuaded, that
he who has been so true a judge of Loyalty, can be no less a judge of Ingenuity.

So I Remain Your Humble Servant I. Phillips.

Maronides OR Virgil Travesty. LIB. V.
WHile Dido in a Bed of Fire,
A newfound way to cool desire,
Lay wrapped in smoke, half Cole, half Dido,
Too late repenting Crime Libido,
Monsieur AEneas went his ways;
For which I con him little praise,
To leave a Lady, not in the mire,
But which was worser, in the fire.
He Neuter-like, had no great aim,
To kindle or put out the flame.
Both City dames and Croyden-Gillians,
For ten mile round, were also fine
At place prepared, ere clock struck nine.
Young men and maids, Old men and babes,
Lady's in Coaches, durty drabs,
In wooden-heel shoos, and shoostrings blew,
With headlong have came all to view
For people loved gaping after shows then as well as now.
The fare renowned Trojan blades;
And eke their solemn Masquerades,
AEneas brought the prizes forth,
Which were to be rewards of worth:
A very noble Porridg-Pot,
Two doublets very finely wrought
The one half, silk, the other Canvas,
Two Flagellets, a Treble, and base:
An Engine, which, if I don't err,
Great Artists call a Nut-Cracker:
Trenchers two dozen, I don't dally,
The which AEneas in a Sally,
Plundered from Tent of Agamemnon,
There was no reason to contemn'um
Though they were brown, yet they were good
And purchaz'd with the price of blood.
One of old Priams greasy Hats.
An instrument to murder Cats.
The work of famous Aristander,
Mathematician and Commander;
Who fifty ways could Rats destroy
And wrote thereof a Book in Troy.
A Peuter Bowl enameled rare; He that distinguishes well teaches well.

Two Slippers, two, and not a pair;
For one was mighty Hectors own,
The other Jason wore alone;
The one was blew, the other green,
Embroidered both with Gold I ween.
A Gittern whereon Helen played,
When very young, I mean, a maid.
With many other Rarities
To please the most ambitious eyes;
The which AEneas liberal
Exposed to view upon a Stall.
AEneas first beat up his Drum;
Then taking Trumpet with his Here the Thumb is taken for whole hand.
Thumb*
He sounds a Levet Tan, tan, ta, ra:
He blew with such a Si sa ra ra,
Until he got the Piles behind:
Behold the mighty force of Wind!
And then for silence making sign,
With Eloquence the most divine;
Quo he, let us begin by Sea,
And with our Ships commence the Play.
The Vanquisher that shall command
Shall be rewarded out of hand,
With such a prize, as he shall say,
And for a truth affirm it may,
When he came out of Mothers placket,
That he was wrapped in Mothers smicket.
Menestheus, and there hangs a tale,
Chose the good Ship, yclepd the Whale,
Who when he came to Italy,
First founded Memmion Progeny.
To whose geeat deeds, if y' are not privy,
In English read, or Latin, Livy.
Gias a young man well descended;
The next place strove to be commended.
For he was strong and very Chuffish,
And a great diver was for Craw-fish.
Sergestus was the third brave blade,
Who, when he came to Rome, first made
The house of Sergius far renowned:
Thence Galba came, an Emperor crowned*
Now this Sergestus shaved his head:
For why? because his hair was red.
But for the Ship he ruled over*
'Twas called, they say, the good Centore.
He played all Games at dice all weathers:
And Fowl devoured in their feathers,
For knowledge was not then prepared
To turn-pike up their skins with Lard.
Cloantus was the next brave Lad,
In Drawers made of Canvas cladd.
His good Ship was the Scylla named
Himself for little else was famed.
Only from him and from his Dame,
They say, Seignor Cluentus came.
These only were the Gallant Boys
That strove to win AEneas toys.
Not far in the Sea there stood a Rock,
Your brains out sooner you might knock,
Then move it, yet because it stood
So near the Shore, they held it good
To make this Rock Contenders mark,
He that first touched it was a spark.
AEneas full of wit and wile,
Thought good to throw up cross or pile,
To Avoid contention and more strife
Then he intended; to be brief,
The Galleys having took their place,
The brave Commanders, each with face
Like Lions bold stood on the Poop,
In one hand Brandy, the other Rope.
Quo they unto their Gally Slaves,
As every one himself behaves,
Here Is this or this, take which you please,
But this I think's most for your ease;
I can assure you it is for mine.
Then leaving Rope, take Brandy wine.
That is, like Devils row, not men;
So I and you shall honor gain.
With that a generous heat invaded
Their braunie Arms with Oil bedaubed,
And if their hearts went pit a pat,
It Was only fearing they knew what.
With speeches thus and courage spurred,
They wanted nothing but the word.
The signal given, to it they go,
With Head above and Tail below:
All at one time they make a start,
T'ha seen it would have joy'd your heart.
In The name of ill luck see the slaves,
How they do cut and slash the waves;
How they do sweat! the more fools they;
They need no Ushers to make way.
In vain the Ocean yells and roars;
You Would think'm rather Wings than Oars.
And for the Ships -- not many words,
You Would swear they were no Ships, but birds.
Have you er'e seen on Wilton Plain,
Of gallant Coursers three or twain;
How nimbly forward each one pricks,
While their thin sides the Rider licks?
So through the Sea the straining Galleys
Are forced for their Commanders follies.
See how the oil of heated brows,
Drops from their Foreheads on their Toes,
Straight one the order breaks, and then,
What says the man commands the men?
You may be sure he says no prayers;
But to be sure, devoutly swears;
Row, row ye Rogues, row for your lives
You Will please the Gods, and please your Wives.
Row Devils, d'ont ye proverbs know?
What Devil drives, that needs must go.
The pleased spectators they behold,
And each one wishes, as he would
Have the cause to go. Here prays one
For friend, there mother for her son.
With various clamours, various cries
They all be-din the amazed skies.
Fair Echo hearing such a clamor,
Resolved to make one, as became her,
Replying to the word Courage,
Courage sometimes, and sometimes rage.
Gyas so well his business plied,
That he was got a spet and stride
Before the rest: for understand ye,
He Had been no niggard of his Brandy.
Their heads were lighter by a Tun,
Which made the Ship the faster run.
Cloantus followed close a Stern,
While the other nails does bite, and girn.
His heel alas was heavier much
A damned fly-bottom made by Dutch.
The Whale and Centaure jig by joul,
Swam very friendly to the Goal.
But now these friendly Enemies,
Men otherwise discreet and wise;
Seeing themselves approach the place
That gave them honor or disgrace;
Now every one looks on his brother
As if they could have eat each other.
Have you ere seen upon the tiles,
When Moon on tops of Houses smiles,
Two great boar-cats, with sparkling eyes,
Look each on other, while the prize,
Gray Maulkin, couches in their sight,
So Trojans now brim full of spite
Wish that the ships and men also
Might rather to the Devil go.
Or to the bottom of the Sea,
Than that his ship should lose the day.
Gyas who thought his Pilot steered,
Too Roomie, and some by-blow feared,
Roard like a Lion; ye damned dog,
Why so far off, keep close ye Rogue,
Why Menetus? son of a whore,
I say keep closer to the shore.
But Menetus was deaf as block.
For his experience feared a Rock.
Which if the ship it once should justle,
In Faith Sir Guyas might go whustle.
Then Guyas in a fury falls,
And yauls and bauls, and calls and yauls.
Hei -- Dotard, Pilot mine A --
Hired by my foes* and that is worse
My youth of honor to deprive.
Close; or the Devil fetch thee alive.
Soul of a dog keep close a shore.
But Menetus would nere the more.
Meanwhile Cloantus near at hand,
Slides betwixt Guyas and the Land.
Where Menetus had left the Shore,
O Heavens! how Gyas then did roar.
His choler boiled up like a Kettel,
And in the heat of all his mettle,
To Menetus he dings amain:
He did not stand with serious brain
T'advise if rashness were a fault;
But in a moment, quick as thought,
Griping his neck, as Poult'rers gripe,
The necks of Turkies, Hens, or Snipe,
He plunged him headlong in the Sea,
Sans complement or other plea.
Go there, quo he, confounded fop,
Fit but to make the Devil a sop*
And now to fetch Cloantus up,
He takes the Helm in his own clutches,
Quo he, Hell take the slave that grutches
To melt his grease or break his back,
Rather than let my Honor crack.
By this poor Menetus that swum
Not like a stone, but like a Drum,
Had made a shift, a good one too,
To scramble though without a Shoo,
Up to the top of a small Cliff.
No other Chamber, to his grief,
He then could have to dry his hair;
Each one of which might well compare
To the best River in the Isle.
His hary Arms he squeezed er'e while,
And filled at every stroke three pails.
He frowned and scowld, and bit his nails.
The people that beheld his fall
Yet sorry did not seem at all,
Could not but laugh when they looked up,
And saw him on the peeked top
Perched like an Ape upon his breech.
They could not hear his raving speech;
But judged him angry by his face,
And twisting beard at his disgrace.
By this advantage those behind
That neither with their Oars nor wind
Could hope before, now haul and tear,
Thinking to put in for a snare.
Sergestus therefore straining hard,
Menestheus leaves in the rear guard,
Which he disdaining cries outwrite
Ye cursed slaves, you row, you shite.
You work as if your Arms were broke,
Such scoundrel dogs the Devil choke.
What Hospital have I dispeopl'd,
For such a crew so damn'dly crippl'd.
What Goal broke loose to vex my brains,
With setter'd Arms and Feet in Chains?
There go again damned rotten fellows,
Good for just nothing but the Gallows.
Well Neptune had thou been so kind,
T'assist me with one puff of wind,
Thou should have known, deny't who can,
Thou had obliged a Gentleman.
But since your worship plainly shows,
The little love to me it owes;
And that I must be yet beholding
To these weak slaves, I Will leave off scolding.
Row on my hearts, men of renown,
Redeem your honor and my own.
This picquant speech so pricked their souls,
That they renew their strength in shoals.
The truants dry before, grew wet;
All on a sudden bathed in sweat.
Sergestus fearing they would rout him,
With double fury lays about him.
But woe for him in time of need,
The more the have, the worse the speed.
For ill advised of a rock,
The ship with such a wannion struck;
Rash went the Keel, crack went the prow*
Some twenty Oars brake at one blow.
Quo one, thrown off as he was rowing,
l'th Devils name where am I going?
Two hundred men were flung about,
As, Man had been but a dish-clout,
Like chairs and stools in Tavern fray,
Here one and there another lay.
Sergestus, more in the suds than Sea,
Misfortune would not yet obey.
But made'm go to work again;
And fish the pieces out of the Main.
Cheer up my boys, there is life in Mustle
With that they kept a heavy bustle;
And presently they got her off.
They row and heave, and blow and puff.
Sergestus daunc'd a Sarraband
To see his men obey command.
Now you must know that in the nick
Of this mischance, Menestheus quick-
Ly had the Centaur overrun.
And seeing now his business done
Oh! are ye there, quo he, stick fast,
Till I come back; I Am now in have;
Which made Sergestus backward pray
For the misfortune of the day.
While poor Sergestus thus imbroil'd,
Against the worst of evils toiled,
Menestheus heads young Gyas prow
Quo he, hei -- Gyas -- what chere ho!
Where Is Menetus? gone to Peg Trantum?
Such pocky Pilots who can want'm?
Gyas made no reply for grief;
But there he stood just like Lots Wife.
His Ship like Horse without a bridle
Made a great bustle, yet was idle.
Cloantus straight he overtook:
Cloantus that could hardly brook;
Against his men he disimbogues
A hundred Villains, Thousand Rogues.
But 'twas in vain to keep a pudder,
When men could hardly hold the Rudder.
Thus from hard fortune Heaven protect us!
Cloantus victor now est victus.
Menestheus now with wind and tide
And acclamations on his side,
Went on without competitor.
It Is good you see sometimes therefore,
To have the favor of a Whore.
Cloantus seeing this abuse,
Although what Seamen seldom use
Yet in a case so necessary,
From Custom yet resolves to vary.
And though as mad as are March Hares,
Composed his mind to say his Prayers.
They say he made this brief Oration,
Or rather sweet ejaculation.
Ye Gods, that lodged in the Seas,
Often succor Vessels in distress,
When overcharged with Hogsheads,
And taking Rocks for feather-beds,
They often to him become a prey,
That owes the Manor of the Sea.
And likewise, that which never fails,
You set your Arses against the tayls.
Of Galleys, when they want a wind,
And blow'em forward with -- behind;
If by your aid my vessel slow
Shall win the prize, I make this vow;
An Ox shall be the Recompense,
Of your Divine omnipotence;
And then to please your appetite,
That in Ragou's take much delight,
The body shall be stuffed with parsley;
The Entrails spiced, and peppered fiercely.
And for to treat you as my Minions,
I do assure you of Champignons:
With this a present of Greek-wine,
To tope your noses most divine.
And as for Fish, ye then shall surfeit
On Salmon, Cods-head, Carp and Turbet.
This vow attested with Cud -- nowns,
Made water in their mouths eft-soons.
Immediately the Sea-Gods all,
And Goddesses both great and small,
To help Cloantus are agreed,
In hopes so well to drink and feed.
So by main strength they gave a shove,
Or whether they the ship did move
Some other way, that makes no matter
But sure I am he got the better;
Leaving Menestheus and the rest
To follow him as they could best.
Cloantus now in Port so safe,
For Joy it made AEneas laugh.
And after that he made a speech
Which did the Company bewitch.
And by a Herald did proclaim
The worshipful Cloanthus fame.
And then with Laurel crowned his head
In token he so well had sped.
Then from his pocket forth he drew
A Leathern pouch, both full and new;
And gave the Mariners, I think,
Some four Deneers a piece, to drink.
And farther for their present Cheer,
He set a broach three tunns of beer.
A Brigandine most gay and rich
Cloanth to take he did beseech,
Who though he then for joy did cry,
To take the same did not deny.
It was a very neat design,
For it was full of Pictures fine.
By graver wrought there might you read,
The History of Ganimed.
Fair Ganimed great Jove's Bordachio,
Whose Chin he pricked with his Mustachio.
There the young squire you might behold
With hunting Javelin on his should --
Er, and you would think he did pursue
A Heart that fled, but neither true.
Just in the nick an Eagle came,
'Twas wild on Earth but in Heaven tame;
Who being sent for his dear sake
Takes perfect hold with Claws and beak
And straight according to the plot,
Away he carries little Trott.
In vain his play-fellowes pursue
The mighty bird, that swiftly flew.
There you may see his Greyhound Placket,
Seeming to keep a fearful Racket,
Striving to leap into the Air:
What noises he made ye cannot hear.
And well it was 'twas but a picture,
His howling else, as I conjecture,
Cloantus might have made repent,
Th'acceptance of his Ornament.
The Painter yet did well t'express
The Greyhounds love and tenderness.
And Virgil too did well to show,
That he what painting meant did know.
A Cuiras shaped in Clouds of Gold,
Menestheus had to have and hold
To him and to his heirs for ever,
They say a fairer was seen never.
It was the Cairas of a Cap --
Tain, that long since had the mishap
(Mishap indeed) for to be killed,
By great AEneas in the field.
As fine as 'twas, it seems, the same
Saved neither Masters life, nor fame.
This Captain was Demoleon hight,
Now being slain bid him good night.
The Cuiras it was all of Gold,
For it was so heavy that to hold
It in their Arms, nor Sagaris
Nor Phegeus could endure I wiss.
You Would have me tell you, who they be,
No by my truth, I Am not so free.
Two brazen Kettles he gave more,
Two gondola's without an Oar;
Of Latten made, and worth each one,
I guess, about a duccatoon.
As for who 'twas these gifts deserved,
Virgil is very much reserved.
And sparingly divides the store,
To Cloanth, only, and one more.
Our knick-knacks were more freely given,
But how they will get'm, that knows Heaven:
Now they that were contented well,
Were well content by the sequel.
Which made them on the sands to walk,
For Liberty to chat and talk.
As they were making their preambles
Of their atchievments and their gambols,
Repeating one thing ten times over;
Behold! what is it they discover.
Even Sergestus all forlorn;
With broken Oars, and vessel torn,
Making god-wot, a weak endeavor
The Shore in safety to recover.
He looked like one quite broke at speirings
After some twenty thousand jeerings.
For you must know he took't in snuff
That any Rock should him out-huff.
But in his passion came too nigh him,
For Rock would not be hectored by him,
Which brought him unto weeping Cross,
More for the shame than for the loss.
Have you a Serpent ever seen,
With skin so pompous, blew and green.
Taking his pastime on the Road,
When on a sudden the swift load
Of hanckney-Coach his chine does crack,
Tearing his kidneys from his back.
There moves the Snake brisk at the head,
But by the tail ill followed,
So now the ship, in some part whole,
In some parts full as washing bowl,
And pinioned quite for want of wings,
Of Oars I mean, or such like things,
Instead of swimming, briskly rowed,
Moves like a Tortoise, only towd,
At length with help of little wind,
(Thanks to the little gale so kind)
And Canvas sail, (live ever they,
That Canvas first did bring in play)
With much a do she made the Port:
Sergestus, looked ala-mort.
How'ere AEneas, good man he,
Of poor Sergestus took Pi-tee.
It Is thought there were some shavers there;
Wisht'rather his, than their own share.
Pox on it, quo one, would I had lost,
I had saved my bones and yet got most.
For for to comfort up his heart,
And wash his tail all mire and dirt,
AEneas gave him dainty maid;
I mean a Nurse, whatere I said,
With too small Children at her breast;
So she could be no maid, it is guest.
This woman was Nurse Pholoe hight
She could both read, and pothooks wright,
Her nostrel was so wide and plain,
That you might almost see her brain,
Though Cretan born, yet was she free,
From lying or from thievery.
Her face was something black and fat,
And eke her Armholes smelt somewhat.
She played upon the Virginals;
With Castanets could dance at balls;
She could preserve, and also starch;
And so to other things we march.
AEneas quitting the seashore
Betakes him to a field; wherefore?
Not so fast Tom; for you must know,
The field was large and wild also.
And Virgil says not to spoil meeter,
'Twas like a Cirque or Amphitheter.
There sitting on a piece of Timber,
As far as I can well remember,
AEneas that renouned widgeon
These words did speak in language Phrygian*
My loving friends and dear assistants
Twixt you and I there is no distance
I come not here with tales of tubs,
And therefore from your Nolberjobs
Lend me your leathern Lugs I pray,
And listen well to what I say.
If any of you here will run,
You may, if not, let it alone.
Better occasion, friends, believe it ye,
No man can have to show activity.
Better employment to your mind,
Where can your mighty Lordships find,
Then to bestir your Lordly legs
In running after Mumblede pegs?
Sa, Sa, then come, make have and strip;
You know that time does nimbly skip.
As for your doublets, I shall watch'em:
Hands nimbler than your heels must catch'em:
And he that has a nimble thigh,
Let him here show it by and by.
For he that with his active pumps,
Can put his enemies to his trumps,
Or fairly winn the first assault,
The Cat has still left in the malt
Something which I as my great trust is
Shall give to all with equal justice.
This faithful promise being made,
Their hairy bosoms soon displaid.
The Trojans eke and mixed Sicilians
That came to see were many millions,
Or thousands, for what should I ly for?
I fear I have erred above a Cipher.
But they that Poets read you know
Will never stand for a round O:
But if they should, it is hard in my sense,
To be debarred Poetic License.
Which Poets claim as more emphatick,
Than Conscience free to a Phanatick
Euryalus, a youth most proper
Shows all to Ladies but his Crupper;
For he had nothing on but's drawers
The first of Trojan clapper-clawers.
My Master Nisus next appears,
He had less shame, but far more years.
For he had nothing but his shirt,
Under his twist with knot begirt.
His love was great to Euryalus,
A pious love, and not for buss.
Diores next sprung from the Race
Of Royal Priam, shows his face,
With Helymus and Panopes
Hoy day, -- and who I pray are these?
Why these were two rich Farmers sons,
Acestes great Companions.
In fair, they hunted, in soul weather,
They drank and played and whor'd together.
Patron were next and Salias
The one a bold Arcadian was,
The other an Acarnan brisk,
To run, or cuff, or tumble whisk:
But which was one, or which was the other,
Maro himself does not discover.
Why then do you think I Will tell ye more.
Than I my self was told before?
Yet this I Will say that Maro could not,
Or if he could, I Am sure he would not
From one was lineally descended
The Croyden Butcher so commended.
The other to make out th'intreague,
Forefather was of nimble Teage.
Of all the rest we say but little,
Since Maro spares to speak a tittle.
All being thus resolved to run,
Quo they, to great Anchises son,
With guts discharged and bladders empty,
Lo here our selves we do present thee.
Streight-way AEneas sitting boldly
On timber-log of which I told ye.
By kind assistance of his tongue,
Made'em, they say, this short Harangue
He that of you shall run the best,
By my dead Father three times blessed,
In no wise shall repent his bargain,
For hear what I propose ye for gain.
Two darts, both made of Gnossian craft,
Of Ebonie shall be the shaft;
Feathered with Gold, which seems a Bull,
But that I speak to men not dull.
A Partisan of steel, but such
An one, as you may make as rich,
As any City leading staff,
If you will be at expense enough.
To the three swiftest in the course
I do design to give a horse.
Though I confess, they have most need,
That slowest are, of nimble steed:
But that is all one, I Am bound to praise ye,
And not give horses to the lazy.
This horse shall have Caparisons
Rich as the Queen oth'Amazons.
There boy's, there goes the hare away,
And I think worth the catching, ha!
His quiver eke, and eke his belt,
Cut from the brims of a broad felt,
Embroidered all with work of Gold.
Instead of shoulder knot, behold
A glittering Pearl, three times as big
As a large hen's or a duck egg.
He that cries hey -- for our town,
With olive branch him will I crown.
The third shall have a morrion made
At Argos, where it is their trade.
I will not say how finely don,
He Is free to take, or let't alone.
The signal given by the sound
Of twisled trumpet, see the ground
All in a cloud, and such a high one
As wrapped AEneas like Ixion.
Some said that sweat of heel and toe
Would dust allay, but it was not so.
For why to stop each 'others paces
They kicked it in each others faces.
Nisus had got by much the start,
And as he ran, he often did fart;
Which much endammadg'd them behind,
Having two foes, the dust and wind.
For by this means he got before,
Some two and twenty yards or more.
Nisus behind, but far behind
Ran Salius, like a nimble Hind,
After him ran Euryalus;
And close at his heels Helymus:
Him Diores that was the last,
Seeing'em all in so much have,
With malice now and rage ore'come,
Gave such a kick upon his bum;
That through the pain of his Posteriors,
He now gives way to his inferiors.
Nisus was just upon the mark,
But see how fate can prove a Turk!
For just ith'nick, he sprain'd his toe,
There lay poor Nisus crying, oh --
He bowed so rudely to his toes,
As made the blood spin from his nose.
So there he lay as I have told ye,
Swearing like a belfounder, boldly;
When furnace cracks, and metals runn,
As if the Devil were on Dun.
He saw the prize was not for him;
Which vexed him more than did his limn.
Yet though he lost his hope and glory,
He had not lost the quick memory
Of his Euryalus, so dear;
For Salias now coming near,
He seized so fiercely on his shoo,
That Salias comes headlong too.
Salias got up, as mad as Weesel,
Dings a good dust at Nisus muzzle;
Nisus holds fast, and which is worse,
^ets his cursd fangs in Salias Arse.
Nisus gripes hard, and rudely tears:
^alias curses, damms, and swears:
Nisus is deaf, and nothing hears,
But keeps him there, spite of his ears.
Euryalus, thanks to his face,
Thus got the Goal, and won the race.
The rabble shout, and tear the Air,
Favoring Euryalus the fair.
They that beheld the real truth,
Nisus and Salius, Arss and Mouth;
Cried out hey now for our Town!
Hold Nisus, hold, the Towns our own.
The second man was Helymus;
And Diores the third, so close
He trod upon his heels that day,
Men feared a quarrel by the way.
But as it seems, they were more wary:
They Would other fish to fry, then tarry.
Then Salius came with great complaints,
Swearing by all his Gods and Saints,
That they had robbed him of his fat Ox
While plaguey Nisus seized his buttocks.
Diores intercedes for him,
As one he thought had lost a limb;
That since his luck was like his hurt,
He might have satisfaction for it.
AEneas scarce refraining laughter,
Yet as a courteous moderator,
Come, come, quo he, cease difference,
Ye shall have all due recompense:
Therefore, quo he, as friends embrace,
And kiss now in another place.
And so the injury was repayd,
With Morrion made like Lions head;
The ears and eyes were all of gold
And eke the teeth, fine to behold.
So rich that Salias not denied,
But he was fully satisfied.
Then Nisus for to get comfort
Presents himself all mire and dirt,
From head to foot a Branford quag,
About him never a clean rag:
Now you may well observe, quo he,
How my misfortunes vanquished me;
And made me look so like a beast,
For being nimbler than the rest.
AEneas could not choose but smile;
Grieve not, quo he, at Fortune vile;
For here is thy reward; with that
He gave him a most precious Hat,
Of damask silk, it was notorious.
For Feather and for work so curious.
By Didimaon wrought so neat;
Quoth Nisus then, by Mahomet
I Will wear thy hat both morn and noonday,
On every Holiday and Sunday.
He lies in's throat, that shall miscall
Our Captain, that is so liberal.
The Race thus finished without squabling,
All anger laid aside and brabling,
The Racers well content and merry;
My masters Time for none will tarry;
So said AEneas, the Minheer,
Besides, quo he, bring Cestus here.
Now you must know what Cestus was;
A plaguey Poultice for weak jaws:
A little touch with a weak hand,
And presently a man was brained:
A certain cursed Castanet
For men to dance the broken pate.
Two Iron Brickbats, each a Ring;
Which he that best can weild and swing,
To pound his Adversaries Pole,
Was vanquisher of body and soul.
To this same sport, that so men mauls,
AEneas his Companions calls.
Quo he, the man that has the heart
For a prize that is not worth a fart,
To venture brains, or loss of lymb,
Let him come purchase my esteem.
The Victors prize shall be a Cow
With forehead plated you know how:
With plates of silver and of gold,
And linen veil about her should-
Ers, white, and delicately starched,
Like woman going to be Church'd.
Besides an instrument of death,
Eclep'd a sword, in Ivory sheath.
And eke a Morrion, none oth'worst.
Some said, he would have given that first;
But then considering again,
If he gave one he must give twain,
They saw it was the wisest plot.
For purse was his, the limbs were not.
When any one is bruised enough,
Quo he, and wishes to leave off;
Let him while he his hands can use,
Hold up his hand, or cry Kings scruce;
If hands be mauled confoundedly,
Bid some good friend that stands by.
Thus said the Cestus was brought out
At sight whereof like one devout
They looked with settled countenance,
The view on it put'em in a trance.
So that for all his cunning coaxing
None seemed to love this kind of boxing.
At length not fearing Lymb nor torture
Dares appears, a vast Wine-Porter,
Who only could hold Paris tack,
At this same play makes others cack.
Who for to honor the memory
Of valiant Hector had the glory.
With this abominable weapon
To knock down Butes like a Capon.
The best that ever was at cuffing,
Without a Ly or any huffing.
Amyclus vast in strength and burden,
And always bred at the Beargarden,
Begot this Butes on a whore,
That was half woman, half a mare.
When Dares did himself present,
It bred a great astonishment,
His shoulders to behold, all bones,
As big and stronger than Milstones;
His Arms were rather Bull-eonfounders;
In Paper-Mills you see such pounders.
Now the Goliah's strength was all,
As for his brains they were but small;
You would have laughed to'have seen the noddy
To show his mighty strength of body,
How he did vainly cuff the Air.
Boreas himself did not come near;
And swung about his brawnie wrists,
To show what he could do with his fists.
And when he had done, to see the Looby
How h'a faign'd to girn, like a great booby.
Sa, Sa, quo he, what is there none
Will let me break nor shin, nor bone.
What nere a Knight that has a mind,
To loose his eyes, and to be blind?
This furious challenge was so dismal,
That not a man would venture his mall.
Trojans, Sicilians, all were dumb,
As if they had felt the weight of's thumb.
Their Hector's now not worth a fart,
As if they had neither souls nor heart.
Quo Dares, then the Cow is mine,
To day how bravely will I dine.
For who to Cow has right more full
Than I that am so like a bull? As the Devil said to the Collier.

With that he took the precious Beast
By both the horns upon her Crest.
Bawling so loud, tell he was hoarse,
Who of ye all now by main force,
In hopes to eat a gallant supper
With fist can Cow set on her Crupper?
Chickens by Jove, you handle Cestus?
You kiss mine Arse. He^-Captain Festus
(For so he called AEneas jeering,)
Must I stay here all day Pickeering?
As if I'had nothing else to choose,
But here stand making Childrens shoos.
Till some fond Caponet shall come,
To be made Gelly by my thumb?
Find me a match that will contest,
Or let me carry away the Beast.
At which one mad, what ails that fellow?
What ails, quo he, that Bull to bellow?
Why so much raving, so much tearing?
We Will match his cock, for all his swearing.
Acestes through the Rabble flung,
As if a wasp his tail had stung;
Cud boars, quo he, shall such a thief
With pain so little get our beef?
Fuming he goes to seek Entellus,
Whom, of such language nothing jealous,
He found stretched out upon a banck,
Smoking Iamayca, cursed rank;
For interest will not ly.
Ye Logger head, quo he, is this
A time to sleep and smoke, I wiss?
When all our honors ly at stake?
Pox o'your drowsy hide -- come -- wake, --
And show how thou in times of yore,
Have cudgel'd many a lusty boar.
Have thou forgot the prancks and the tricks
Which thou were wont to play with Eryx?
Eryx thy Master at this game?
To whom thou second art in fame.
Cuts-foot! shall daring Dares quell us?
While we have living brave Entellus.
How many spoils of Butchers bones
Of Weavers Arms, and Dyers stones
Hang in thy Chimney up like bacon?
Of thy renown the certain token?
For shame then let not this wind-sucker,
At our disgrace thus sneer and snicker.
Quoth he, thy words are positive.
It Is not for fear as now I live,
That Dares thus I let alone;
But I am old and feeble grown.
Were I as young as I ha bin,
This Raskal that makes such a din
I Would pounce him so, that you should see,
I Would make him soon cry me mer-cie,
To Cow or Calf without regard,
The slender motive of reward;
Only for glories sake, ere this,
I'had made him stink for fear, or piss.
That this is truth ye know full well
Yet that you may not take it ill,
To show I speak not words, but deeds;
I Will try one bout at Loggerheads.
If I am beaten, say it is Age,
And no defect of my courage.
Straight he flung down of dismal battery
Two fatal Engines, not to flatter ye,
Nor yet to chafe your wanton Nerves,
But for to stamp ye like conserves.
Little they said, meant plaguely;
Their very aspect made men flee.
More afraid than hurt.
Dares himself, to tell you true,
Likt'em so ill, he looked askew.
For they had on them fearful stains,
Of Eryx blood, and part of's brains.
Eryx who meeting at an Alehouse,
With Hercules of's honor jealous,
Straight fell to blows, from blows to knooks,
The least of which would kill an Ox.
What Eryx got by it, truly I
Think he might well put in his eye.
His eye! alas had there been less put,
They then had living had the Toss-pot.
Dares beholding such damned trophies,
Think ye that Dares such an Oaf is,
Quo he, to venture life in field,
With weapons that he cannot weild.
AEneas thinking it was a scandal,
The mortal Engines needs would handle,
But when he felt their weight, quo he,
The Devil handle'em for me*
Seav'n folded Ox-hides stuffed with lead,
Some half a Tun in each, they said,
With iron hoops and devilish nails,
Such as you see about Cart-wheeles.
Crossing himself, then said AEneas,
viz his Goddesses.
Per omnes meretrices meas,
What hideous Tartar with a vengeance
Invented first these fatal Engines?
Puh! quoth Entellus; these are feathers;
Those with which Hercules strapt the Gathers
Of my friend Eryx, (peace be with him,)
And sent unto the Elysian frith him,
Were twice as big, and yet the Lubbers
Would weild those mighty Noddle-rubbers
As nimbly at each others coxcombs,
As they had been but little box-combs.
For my part cries Entellus surder,
I likes this well, I Am clear for murder.
But yet to show I Am gamester fair too,
If he will have other, there they are too,
I Will fight with any, ere spoil play.
And ye shall cap me, as they say,
If at a blow or two at least,
You guess, not who shall have the Beast.
Then cried AEneas drunck with joy,
Troth godamercy brave old Boy.
Bring me a pair of Maul cheeks hither;
But not so heavy as the other:
Others were brought, and after trial,
Approved without the least denial,
Both for their bigness and their huffing,
By Doctors in the Art of cuffing. Belonging to Beargarden College.

One takes Entellus; the other Dares,
Saying a hundred Ave-Maries:
For it had almost turned his stomak;
Entellus shape did such a show make.
Such shoulders, Buttocks, bones so hideous,
A Chine so nervous, breast prodigious.
For to say truth he nothing hid;
Both shirt and coat were laid aside.
If shirt he had, for else you know,
What he had not, he could not show;
And in matter of such weight
Men must be cautious to speak right:
Zabarel l. 200 p. 20000.
For if he had no shirt, and I,
Do say he had, I tell a ly.
But now behold'em in their traces,
Making wry mouths and Monkey-faces,
They dance Step stately to take aim,
Who first should give the first damned main.
At first they slightly seemed to skirmish,
But straightway fury growing warmish,
One gives the other plaguey palt,
Which was returned the next assault:
Young Dares was more nimbly stout,
Entellus was the stronger Lout.
With weapons poised, and fists erect,
With burning eyes and fierce aspect,
They now lay on sans fear or wit,
As if they cared not where they hit.
Their Lungs are tired and breath in vain,
Their naked Members pant amain.
Such force have bumping blows applied,
To Diaphragma, or the side,
Secundum artem, as they knew,
To make men vomit black and blew.
Sometimes a loving blow did miss,
Then the other was not grieved I wiss.
Straight you might hear his guts cry twang,
And to others skul ring with the bang.
While all his reason takes her flight,
T'had been no reason else, You might have believed him without swearing.
by this light.
Sometimes with strokes struck unawares,
They only rub each others ears.
Dares with many a nimble leap,
At old Entellus head does skip-
Unweildy he stands stiff and tough,
Without recoyling from the cuff.
While Dares with a dreadful eye,
Stood watching his huge Enemy.
Woe worth that rib which he shall find,
But once ungarded to his mind)
As men that Walls and Castles batter,
Seek weakest place to make'em torter,
And having found what they intended,
With all their fury thither bended.
Mauling and battering their insistunt,
Though they had as good perhaps a pist on it.
Thus Dares watching still for harm,
Harm watch harm catch
Caught from the bold Entellus Arm,
Such a damned lick athwart the back,
As made his very bum-strings crack.
Dares, but how the Devil't it was done,
Is past my apprehension,
Returns him such a thumping quitt,
As for his quo, 'twas out of debt.
These blows each equalled in stress,
Some twenty pounds or little less.
And Virgil says in his relation,
That the through force and indignation
With which Entellus struck and mist,
His aged Trunck the Grass-plot kissed.
That he fell down all hands agree,
Let them that doubt the truth go see.
And more than that too a shrewd sign,
They say he fell like mighty Pine.
There lay the huge Entellus sprawling:
For joy the Trojans fell a bawling;
While he enraged at the flounce,
Does all his Gods at once renounce. Proud spirits had rather be damned than
suffer disgrace.

Acestes and AEneas brave,
Both willing the old man to save,
Where er'e they had it, got a Crane,
And so they cran'd him up again;
Being got upon his heels once more,
Six lusty Common oaths he swore,
Though for his manners such a sot,
That all his thanks he quite forgot.
Having recovered now his place,
With rage in heart, and shame in face
Finding what ere he yet had done,
But fleabites in comparison.
Quo he, now let him look to his hittings,
By Jove I Will handle him without mittins.
Poor Dares was in great dejection,
Your strong men are not always the wisest.
Seeing Entellus Resurrection.
He that before thought worst was past,
Seeing his foe so rudely cast,
And therefore sang his nunc dimittis,
Now at the end of all his wit is.
There was no way but guard to keep,
Better h'd been in's bed asleep.
The Other lay's on cuff after cuff,
Not minding whither's skin be buff.
His bended clutches damned Memento,
Make flying Dares dance Coranto's
Entellus bounty fell like hail,
Not sparing either head or tail.
Dares afraid his reasons house
(Though he had scarce so much as goose)
About his battered ears should tumble,
Was half ith'mind in manner humble.
To crave in time a Letter of License.
He liked not banging sans defeizance.
While the other labors all he can
To make a window to his brain.
Dares was in condition sad,
His face was swelled big as his head,
His head was swelled as big as his hat,
And he himself just falling flat
Upon his bloody bruised nose;
When all in have AEneas throws
Himself between the blows so thick:
Good faith 'twas well he came ith'nick.
For had he had but one more thwack
Upon his head or his Sto -- mack
Dares had given the Crows a pudding;
And Death had come before his Wedding.
For now Entellus Claws were up,
And falling just was fatal swop.
But just in time AEneas spruce,
And brave Acestes cried, Kings scruce.
With coaxing words AEneas mellows
The bloody heart of vexed Entellus.
Good words apease wrath.
Good Sir quo, he your wrath forbear,
Man stout at Cuffs, as ere stole Dear,
Next time shall Dares learn more manners
Then let his wits be his Trappanners,
Thus to provoke a man whose wrists
Can powder Rocks of Amethists;
With nails like fleas crack Adamants;
And puff down Armed Elephants.
These gentle words made Gaffer Thwacksides
Most patiently lay by his Ox-hides.
Such credit had AEneas there,
Quo he, your will be done Menheire.
Then Sir AEneas, turning face
To him that was in doubtful case;
So bruised and battered, and so swelled,
(He scarce could stand unless upheld)
Made him to the best of my memory,
This pithy speech consolatory.
Holding him gently in his arms,
Quo he thou needs not others harms,
For well thy own, without a book,
Now teach thee with both eyes to look
Before thou leapst, and not to venture,
Before thou knew'st thy bold Attempter.
Had not thy Foe been very handsome,
He had destroyed thee without Ransom.
For now confess and speak as true man,
Do you believe his hand was human?
As sure as thou were banged to day,
He keeps the Devil himself in pay.
Therefore, All this should have been said before.
if legs will bear thee, go,
Weak boxer of the driving snow,
Go get a Surgeon, Noble Festus,
And dream no more of pounding Cestus.
The poor young knave all soar with banging
His neck upon his shoulders hanging,
Eyes sunck in a black quag of butter,
Or flesh well churm'd, few words could utter.
But softly cried to show's respects,
Farewell Sir, till I see you next.
He could no more in Prose nor Rhyme,
Not had he courage at that time
To bring his fingers to his chin
To see what teeth remained within.
His beard was all bedaub'd to see a
With a damned soul Haimoragia.
The place where Nose stood, you might know it
But nere take hold on it for to blow it.
The Trojans they came all to much him,
He wish'd'em damned that did but touch him.
For so his battered Corpse did smart,
That every touch went to his heart.
Then Dares two Companions chose,
To comfort up his broken Nose.
But both the Crown and eke the beast.
Entellus got by dint of fist.
Who now like toad on washing-block,
With conquest swelled, thus began to mock.
Weak Trojan fops both young and old
That enviously this day behold
The Victory that I have won;
Come see what more I could have done,
See against what a firking foe,
Your Dares stripped from top to toe!
Had ye not dragged his Homo-Plater
From our inevitable slaughter.
You should have seen how I had rubbed him,
And mong the Devils belly bub'd him.
This said his furious fist he clutch'd,
And twixt the horns so rudely touched.
The Bulls head that from head of Bull
Came brains and blood a Kettle full. Though the Rhyme made it a Bull 'twas
otherwise a Cow.

So died the Cow without adieu,
Or making will in minutes few.
Then with a heart full of repentance,
And mind prepared forpious sentence,
He cried beholding the blew sky,
With doleful face and blubbring eye.
Eryx, to thee, my Counter-part,
I give this Bull with all my heart,
For Dares sake, who has my prayers
The best of living Cudgel -- players.
Here will I Chapel build, or Pesthouse
Where horns shall hang and eke my Cestus.
If Dares die here shall he be
Entombed likewise, close by me.
No question we shall then agree.
They that Entellus saw turned Priest,
Yet knew he was a damned Atheist,
Raised such a shout at his conversion,
As shook the Earth like Ague tertian.
So long this hubbub did continue,
'Twas feared that some would break a sinew.
Which made AEneas in compassion,
And for another dirty fashion,
Which was to have no shouting known,
At any speeches but his own.
Enough quo he, enough I say;
How long must I hear Asses bray?
I Would rather a had a pack of knaves,
Than such a crew of simple slaves.
Enough this cursed Cow killing sport,
There Is none but one the better for it;
Come bring me out your Bows and Arrows
And if ye needs will kill, kill sparrows.
Thus having got some good Companions,
All in a row like ropes of Onions,
Quo he bring hither Galley Mast,
And set it me upright and fast;
First having tied at top of it,
A Pigeon, or a Clout beshit,
It matters not so mark be hit.
The lots were thrown into a hat,
Or Helmet, it is the same thing that:
At which they fumed like a hot tossed,
To see that Fortune ruled the roast:
For each one feared to be put out
From being one should hit the clout.
For he was Dominus fac totum
AEneas said he would have but four;
And who durst say then, he would ha more,
But four then drawing, stone-blind Chance
Ilippocoons Honor did advance.
A fatal murderer of wild-Ducks,
A foe professed to Dawes and Rooks;
The second fool whom fortune favors
Was Mister Mnesteus, a Sea-Mavors,
Whose head with Olive had been crowned,
For swimming well, and not being drowned.
Of whom I shall say little more,
Since I have said so much before.
Master Eurytian was the third;
He Would hit a Curran in a turd.
Which made him cried up for an Archer.
His brother yet was much the archer;
His brother Pandarus, wot ye well,
Who taking bow of pliant steel,
Without so much as one bear leave,
The Cuckold Menelaus gave
Such a damned prick through buttocks each,
That Helen nere so clawed his breech.
Acestes was the last forsooth,
Who although old, with so much Youth
Would needs contest for skill and strength;
What he got by it you will know at length.
Hippocoon his goggle eyes
Casting a thousand times to the skies,
First hit the top oth'mast, I trow:
A lower shot, had been below:
The bird with that affrighted, tried
To Have flown away, but she was tied.
And so she only flapt the Air;
He did no more as I can hear;
While bird thus fluttered on the wing,
Menestheus shoots and cuts the string:
Whether the bird, do you now think,
That but ere while for fear did stinck,
Now finding Leve to be light,
Did not make have to mend her flight.
But shame on all Ill luck say I,
That faster then a bird will fly,
How orderly this bird was killd? first frighted, then the string cut, Theu
rump stic'd.
For as the Bird was on the wing,
Eurytion snapt his fatal string:
Though ere he drew, he made a prayer,
To Brother Pandarus in his ear,
The which his brother soon did hear.
And so as bird was tripping off,
(Not dreaming but she had been safe)
The Arrow pierced her pretty rump,
And made her turn up belly trump.
'Twas then no time to take advice
How to avoid the fatal slice;
Straight with a vengeance down she come,
Like one that feared not bruising bum.
He that the day came after fair
Was now Alcestes, by compare.
There Is nothing left for that old fop,
Less he would set his own head up.
But what said the Facetious Drole,
Quo he I Will not be made a fool, One of Feltous resolv's

Suppose that yonder sat an Owl,
Where bird was tied; why may not I
My brother hit? by Jove I Will try.
He drew, but wonderful to see
His dart became a prodigy.
A prodigy that friz'd the hair
Of every mortal that was there.
'Twas here a dart, but mounting higher
In The air becomes a flame of fire.
Like whizzing Rocket up it goes
Had Owl been there, 'thad singed his nose.
Or else as Pub. says better far,
Like volant or crinited starr.
In English certain flying jigs,
Or stars with flaming Perriwigs.
The flame continued while it could,
That is to say while there was wood,
But fuel wanting due recruite,
The fire went out without dispute.
Upon the whimsical adventure
Was many a thousand peradventure;
A hundred strange Enthusiasms;
Lights new as that, and fond phantasms
The most renowned Augurs plied
Their painful studies, and discry'd
A thousand stories and keck shoes,
To lead the doubtful by the noses.
The Phrygian Conjurers could not rest
Sicilian Bards were all possessed.
Nay all the Rabble had a maggot,
Bigger in head the stick of faggot.
AEneas in a pious frolic
Pulls from his neck a certain relick*
It was a chain of gold, at which,
There hung a medal very rich.
'Twas all of broyld St. Lawrence left,
And gravd upon an Agat haft;
To that annexed in Crystal hung
The very Cole that burnt Saint's tongue.
Thus gifted came he to Acestes; For to say truth many that nere saw it doubt
it to this hour.

Great Sir, to you my deep protest is,
That for an Archer there was none
Was ever fit to wipe your shoon.
Who would the Devil himself not blame,
Not having seen, to credit fame?
For who can think that did not see,
That thou could little bit of tree
In th'Ayr at distance come to fire,
By Jove it makes me admire.
Fore George, as I am come of woman,
Jove owes thee kindness more than common.
As for my part, the heavens protect thee,
Like my dead father I respect thee,
And than my Mother ten times better,
If now I ly, then hell me fetter.
What though the prises all be gone,
Thou shall have presents of our own,
To satisfy for thy ill luck,
That mark so surely from thee took.
With that he made him three low legs
And gave him the forementioned jigs.
And more then all that, something more,
(Which I it seems forgot before.)
A goblet of a massy weight,
A work embossed most accurate,
This cup so trimmed with fine devices
Was for a fairing, sent Anchises
By Cissus a good friend of his,
Who living, Club did never miss;
But being dead, yet every night,
In dear remembrance of old Knight,
Anchises made the Goblet weep,
Till both forgot, he fell asleep
To make the Ceremony stanch,
He Crowned him with an Olive branch;
A most exceeding favor that,
Because he seldom wore his hat.
Eurytion nothing envious
To see him first rewarded thus,
AEneas wisdom did approve;
AEneas thank't him for his love,
And gave him eke a good reward;
For civil men by civil regard
To generous spirits, seldom loose.
Menestheus had his old shoes.
Hippocoon two nutmegs guilt:
For where the text imploys a guilt,
By mentioning no gifts at all;
We judge the gifts were very small.
From Archerie to Horsmanship
They next proceed with spur and whip.
Epirides the first appeared
With chin concealed in monstrous beard;
He was Ascanius Padagouge.
A most austere ars-firking dog
But yet esteemed as learned a Sir John,
As ere was bred up at the Sorbon.
He could compose a Catch or Cannon,
And verses make with George Buchannan.
Native of Rion in Auvernia,
But plagued with a diseafe called Hernia.
Soon as he came before his betters
He showed himself a man of Letters,
Making a hundred ugly scrapes,
Like Scholar that the Courtier apes.
AEneas soon as one could wake him,
Spies formal fool, and thus bespake him;
Epirides where is my Cock-Robin?
Will he a while leave placket-bobbing,
And for a Steed leave riding wenches?
Then give him Horse fit for his inches.
Where Is all the other younger fry,
Have they their Coursers fit to fly,
To let the world know by their fooling;
Their parents gave'em no mean schooling?
Go quickly then and fetch'em all:
Epirides with legs so small
And Thighs as dry as Kixes, though
As swift as arrow out of bow,
Made so much have, that some protest,
He leapt full thirty foot at least,
At every leap; for such men fly
Always, when they are in Masters eye.
Returning like the flowing surges,
With a whole troop of young St. Georges.
They were as plump, and loo'd as fairly
As hogs, that ly all day in the Barley.
Their Horses like a several bride,
Both necks and tails with Ribands tied.
Inn's a Court gentlemen all they were,
And every one a sling did wear.
Not to sling love-songs cross the way,
But slugs and stones in deadly fray.
Arrows and Bows did others wear,
Which Parents gave at Bartholmew Fair.
For then were no such things to smoke ye,
As fierce Dragooners under Okey.
But others like your French gens d'armes,
Had Spears and Lances for their Arms.
Their right paws were in Gantlets cased,
And roaring feathers hats embraced.
About their necks they Cuirass had,
Of double gilded Lattin made.
Some for right mettle did them hold;
But all that glisters is not gold.
Three Captains lead three neat squadrons,
With Scarfs of Lindsey Woolsey Aprons,
For in three squadrons were the Chuffs,
For the use of Colors was not then in fashion.
Distinguished one by Spanish Ruffs.
The next were hats with Steeple-Crowns,
The third the Switzers Bonnet ownes.
One of these Chiefs that was no dastard,
Of poor Politus was the Bastard.
The younger son of Priamus,
Who knocked down Neoptolemus;
In Pages Trouzes up he mounts,
A Carriers horse, by all accounts,
But such a one, that dress him well
Would clear outrun the Devil of Hell.
And sooner would he leap a River,
Than some a Cart-rut should get over.
The next to him was Asys hight,
Iulus love, and sole delight.
Though to be plain, if all tales are true,
More for his tail, than for his virtue.
What Horse he had, Gelding or Mare,
Virgil is pleased to speak to spare,
But questionless the trade he drove,
Got him well mounted for his Love.
Some men admire why such a one,
Is favored by a mighty Don;
But search the grass well with your eyes,
And you shall see where the Snake lies.
Ascane as young, lastin degree,
Was yet the first in quality.
His gaudy coat and feathered hat
Made all the people cry, who is that?
But far beyond his glittring garb,
His Courser was a Chestnut Barb.
Not such a shaped or nimble steed,
Did all the fields of Siden breed.
'Twas Didos gift, though when she made it,
Had she known all, he never had had it.
This Horse was only fit to show
On Whitsun-holidays or so;
He was a perfect Ram for Capring;
And many a Knight for all his vap'ring,
Unless he held fast by his Crest,
Would put him in danger of his Chest.
But let him all his jades tricks try,
Run Valley low, or Mountain high.
Or play the Devil on all four,
Iulus sat him like a Tower,
So well he governed hand and foot,
As he had been George Castriot,
Or one of Don of Austria's Riders;
Which he is a Coxcomb that considers.
For all the other meaner squires
Acestes common Hackneys hires.
Geldings for some, for others Mares,
With Fillies pricking up their ears.
The Trojans clapped their hands by dozens,
Seeing the Children of their Cousens.
Here some of whom they knew the Mothers,
There some their own, though got by others,
And every one as fine as fippence,
And and all prepared to run for thrippence.
See youth, cries one, on yonder Mare,
Mothers n'own boy, both lip and hair
'Twas pretty thus to hear'um read,
How living face was like the dead.
Such pretty cheeks with pretty dimples,
You shall not see in both the Temples.
Though then they looked a little whitish,
For fear least Courser should prove skittish.
At length when every pretty Elf
Had in his Saddle fixed himself.
Epirides with nimble flack,
Makes whipcord briskly cry smack-smack.
At which they all alarm take;
Far better, than their Steeds, divining
By sound of whip-cord, Pedants meaning.
Straight the three squadrons they divide
In bodies two, or Maro ly'd.
Some fly away, while some pursue,
And at their backs with switches flew.
But feeling smart, make head again,
Ribrosting to others for their pain.
Weary of being thus lambasted,
Eft-soons to milder sport they hasted.
Here three to three, there two to two,
There more, (hey toss what is here to do!)
They prance and frisk it to and fro;
Foe runs in full career at foe;
When to accord the sturdy knee,
And skill full trip, with Hait or Gee,
(Which horses learn without much trouble)
In full career they make a double;
So Huntsmen say; but Horsemen, turn;
Turn let it be then, for I scorn
Much contradiction; that is to say,
They did as girls that dance the Hay.
These pretty Turn-again-Whittingtons,
Made by these Gentlemen's eldest sons
Their cross careirs, Turns whole and half,
Which Father made and Mother laugh,
Were like the Labyrinth so pretty,
Once framed by Daedalus the witty,
To Minos Sarjeant-Carpenter.
Within whose walls as men did err,
Or go astray, or vainly wander,
Not knowing tricks of gay Meander;
So these young sprouts of Troy renowned,
Sometimes their Horses turning round,
Now running in a straight careir.
And sometimes doubling here and there,
Like nimble Dolphins seemed to play,
Like Dolphins in the Lybic Sea.
When Boreas bold, thank Boreas for it,
Is pleased not to disturb their sport.
Then out comes Fleabit and Tregonnel
And hey for Strawberrie, that last won all.
Some run for Crowns, and some for Guinies,
The cunning Jockies cheat and punies.
But last of all, that which was most,
They raised a most confounded dust.
And thus you see these youths so cranck
Showed Parents many a pretty pranck
Being a notable politician.
Which afterward Iulus, He
That founded Albas fair City.
Becoming King most powerful,
Did recommend by special Bull,
Unto his Race of Romans bold,
For to observe and eke to hold,
As sacred to their fathers names,
By Title of the Trojan Games.
And thus you see what slight occasions
Men take sometimes to Cajole Nations
While wise AEneas thus imployes,
His time in gaping upon boys,
Fortune, who being of Greek extraction,
(And therefore of the Grecian faction) What will not great people do for their
own ends.

Hated a Trojan at her heart;
Resolves to show him to his smart,
Another of her plaguey dog-tricks,
Juno, old Priam's dear Exec'trix,
More full of mischief than a Page,
Plump as a Tike with female rage,
To trusty Gossip, Iris hies,
A practiced bitch in telling lies,
Juno her mind did soon impart,
Which Iris had as soon by heart,
Quo she, for words there needs no pumping,
I know your meaning by your mumping:
So bribed with promises and dollars
She flung an old scarf ore her Colors;
Away she cuts her airy passage,
To prosecute her damned Embassage.
And as she went, her legs she shows,
Full neatly clad in crimson hose
Well garter'd too, above the knee,
As they affirm, that both did see.
Slow was her pace, for being plump
She feared to fret her tender rump.
From Arcady, without a wherry,
She quickly crossed the Ocean ferry.
And cause the Road was straight and free,
She was not long from Sicily,
Where she beheld, in Armor glittering
The lazy Trojans scaperloytring
The Fleet was left like Theif in Mill,
Or to be gone, or stay, at will.
Nor Dog to bark, nor boy to baul,
What ever danger should befall;
Both boys and dogs were all ago
To see my Lord AEneas show.
The women by themselves afar,
Were private from these acts of war
As 'twere in public hugger mugger,
Clawing away the sack and Sugar,
Till crying ripe, the wine intices
Some to bewail defunct Anchises.
While others at misfortnune wept;
Well well-quo one, time was I kept
As good a house for East-cheap beef,
As she that was Churchwardens wife;
And for good Pewter and for Brass
And dining Room rubbed with a gloss,
I had as good as most in the Parish
Though some perhaps might make more flourish
How long shall Ladies nice of stomach
Be forced to ly in swabbers Hamock?
How long shall women bred so squeamish?
Ly nose in ars midst Hogo's flemmish?
Others that were more finely Maudlin
Called poor AEneas Goose and Codlin,
Come, come, I love to speak, cries one,
There Is Captain turd, let him alone,
Let him but drink while he can see,
He cares not what betides poor we,
He crams his guts as at a wedding,
While we are glad of hasty pudding.
Where is the City that he promised?
I doubt I shall be ana -- tomiz'd.
Ere that day come: he might ha'had
Cities enough, would he have staid;
But he would needs have to'ther toss.
Your rolling stones never gather moss.
While cups and tongues thus fast do move,
As both for nimbleness had strove,
Iris that saw their drunken posture.
Quits shape divine betokning moisture;
With staff in hand, on eyes spectacles,
Like wife of Doricles, her self she tackles,
And old Witch that had lived so long,
She had forgot that she was young,
For the reversion of whose jointure,
The fifteenth race had cried, God Saint her.
Though she were old, yet she was subtle,
And to the purpose well could prattle.
My Grannam Berce she was hight,
Though dark with age, the Ages light.
Mischievous Iris in this form
Appears in midst of all the Chirm,
To whom as soon as she could make,
'Em hold their clacks these words she spoke, Which she was half a day a doing

Poor women, Poor unhappy women!
Companions only now for Seamen,
How long with grief must ye contend,
Oh where shall be your sorrows end?
Had ye not better that the Dolopps
Had long since cut ye into Collops?
Then from vexation of your souls
You Had lain secure among the Moles.
Rather than thus to live at Sea
Half dead with hunger every day:
Your hands that fanns did only dandle,
Now forced the rugged Oar to handle,
Distressed inhabitants of Pinnaces.
To whom the Sea destruction menaces.
That live in boats, where ticks and fleas,
Without respect of persons seize:
Rather then lead a life so fell,
Women had better live in Hell.
It Is now seven years, or little less
That you in cold and heats distress,
Poor wrinkled weather beaten Madams
Lead by the noses like Jack Adams,
In vain do hunt the flying shore,
Which Fate has promised ten times ore;
A tale that I shall nere believe,
Nor pin my faith upon her sleeve.
Let her go on and vainly coax
Our credulous leader, John, Anoaks.
A quartan Ague stop his Lungs.
For him we have endured these wrongs;
But here is anow, lets have a care:
Why cannot we tarry where we are?
What ailes this Country? it is both good
And Governed by our flesh and blood.
Let Us build a Town among our kindred,
Our friend Acestes nere will hinder't*
There we may play our wanton tricks,
Not subject to the Oceans freaks.
Our Country Gods I pity too,
Han't they a fine time? what think you?
Snatched from the rage of Grecian Robbers.
To be made Cabin-boys and Swobbers
Fools! can we hope for so much joy,
Ere to revisit your old Troy?
Or Symois, famed for Morehens plenty?
Or Xanthus nere of Gudgeons empty?
Then let us go burn those pocky Vessels;
That are not fit to harbor Weasels.
This night my candle burning blew,
Cassandras Ghost my Currains drew,
Quo she, why wander ye like Tartars?
In Sicily take up your quarters.
What will ye always live like Barnacles?
That may have Towns like Athens, or Naples.
Always be swimming on the Seas,
Like VVidgeons or like Soland Geese?
Burn then those fly-boats, why do you tarry?
If husbands chafe, ye have your Lurry.
Behold four Altars newly raised
Where sacrifices lately blazed.
To Neptune for some courtesies,
Where fire enough in Embers lies:
Find you but hearts, the Gods find flames,
Courage then, thrice Immortal Dames.
Take leave of damned seafaring trade,
And of the ships make a Grilliade
Be you but bold, I don't say cruel,
The Gods find fire, and yonder is fuel.
This having said the plaguey strumpet,
Takes up a brand, and stead of trumpet,
Blows the hot coal, to wake the flame,
Go then, she cried in the Devils name.
With that so swift she flung the brand,
As sent it soon to journeys end.
And where as soon, it was apparent
He dally'd not to tell his arrant.
Dames, that before nere saw such jigs,
Began to stare like roasted Pigs;
They star'd so long you would have thought
Their very eyes would have dropped out.
They knew not what to think or say,
For all the stuff they had, there lay.
Here soft compassion to her Kettle,
There pitied pinner stops her metal.
Another gins her cheeks to wet,
In mercy to her Cabinet.
At length steps up an ancient Matron,
That Priamus by strings of Apron,
Had often lead, as being one,
Had nursed him many a Girl and Son;
Whom she their Primars also taught,
And firkt their royal tayls for naught.
This venerable piece of Age
Hight Pyrgo, more than Midwife sage;
With voice like Kitten, when it mews,
Thrusting her neck out like a Goose,
Quo she, let us not be over hasty,
To credit Beroe, she is too too testy.
Come, come my friends, I know what is what,
And I must tell ye -- I smell a Rat.
She Beroe, she is a lying slut;
She Is no more Beroe, than my Scut.
Alas poor Beroe's sick a bed,
Scarce an hour since I dressed her head.
You might ha'believ'd her without swearing.
And then she swore the Devil take her,
That there was nothing worse did make her;
Then that she could not come to sip,
And chat with us and smoke her pipe;
It Is not for want of Love or Grace,
She came not hither to say mass
For old Anchise in purgatory.
But her old age, which makes me sorry.
To see her made a stalking horse
And that for mischief, which is worse,
No, no, this wench in the Devils name,
Is come from Heaven from Jove's good dame.
Her Armpits smell of Rosemary,
Which strongly prove divinity.
Her lively air, and feet's proceeding,
And eke her voice speak heavenly breeding
To little purpose thus spoke Pyrgo:
For not one soul believed her -- Ergo.
Yet in respect to female Wizard,
They stood a while twixt hauk and buzzard.
They liked well Sicilian plains,
But Fate had so be whim'd their brains
With windmils they should have in Latium,
Which for the present much did dash'em.
Iris that had no mind to dally
Seeing'em thus stand shally shally,
Streightway her self disberoiz'd,
And in true shape re-Deitiz'd,
She through a cloud her bow displays,
And on her wings, with heavenly grace,
A whole and even course she steers;
Then in a moment disappears.
There was no need of doing more,
The Trojan women now give ore,
And now like boys in fields of Moor,
That go to pillage Baud and Whore;
In Troops most fiercely diabolic,
They take in hand their cursed Frolic.
Like people mad, or stark possessed,
Acting what only rage thought best.
They sack and pillage Neptunes Altars,
As if they nere had read their Psalters;
Fate kiss their tayls, and for AEneas,
They count him but a silly flea as.
By these fierce Queans thus armed with fire
In hand and tail and upper tire.
The Galleys kindled look like Torches.,
The flames are not for Spanish Marches,
But rather a la mode de France,
From Rope to rope they nimbly prance.
The Turk himself upon the Ropes,
Nere showed such strange Curvets and hops.
The Ropes they eat for Sausages
And on the Sails for Tripes they seize.
They drest'em not in Cook-room though,
But eat the Cookroom up also;
Yet could not master all, be it known,
They left the Furnace as a bone.
Down to the water they eat all,
But would not drink because 'twa^ small:
Flames nere so thirsty, understand ye,
No liquors love, but Wine and Brandy.
Eumelus all in have comes posting,
To see what Women were a roasting;
The flames did so their business handle,
That he might see without a candle,
The matter was too too transparent,
And so he quickly had his errant:
Back he returns with horrid din,
But nimble sparks too fleet for him
Had told before how stood affairs;
Alarmed by those Messagers,
The people all make to the shore:
Ascane a horseback gets before;
Damned jades quo he the Devil confound ye;
But fires your friend, the Devil drowned ye.
Passion makes any man mistakes.
What witchcraft thus possessed ye all,
To burn our ships both great and small?
A madness Grecian rage outstrips,
They burnt our houses, left our ships.
The pox possess and burn' you next,
A crew of whores, that Hell perplexed,
And sent from thence a plague to us.
Was ever Treason black as this?
Consuming now our boats and ropes,
You Have burnt the last of our hopes.
Accursed Bitches, with black souls,
Blacker then are your own made Coals.
Whore's only fit to be strappado'd,
And back and belly bastonadod.
You Have brought me here with such a flutter,
That I have almost broke my crupper,
Besides the loss of all my sport,
Hell take your plaguey bon-fire sor't.
This having said, with fury tossed,
Like a blind man that staff had lost,
He threw his cap so hard toth'ground, A neat invention to give him his hat
without alighting.

As made it back to's hand rebound.
AEneas like a Lacquie puffing,
Comes in at length swearing and huffing;
He looked like one besides his wits,
Tore his Montero all to bits;
But when the whole he understands,
He falls a gnawing both his hands;
Then in a passion out he roars,
Where are these jades, these plaguey whores!
Incarnate Devils, I Will quit their scores.
But cunning bitches once the feat
Being done had, sounded a retreat;
Whip they were gone forsooth to piss,
So general the engagement is;
That you might sooner cut your throat,
Than see a Smock or Peticoat;
They had all found Daughter and Mother
In Rocks or Sands some hole or other.
Some in the next Woods refuge take,
For all their Arses buttons make,
Seeing the Jades prancks they had played,
For Iris then they backward prayed.
And spending on Juno in Follies free,
Of Billings-gate Artillery.
More mad at her that drell'd'em in,
And jeeres'em now out of their skin,
But still the Vessels they burn on,
Till massy Timber's almost gone.
Wise work in faith for bearded Chins,
To leave their Ketches at thirteen's.
The colking made so thick a smoke,
As would a Chimney-Sweeper choke.
Hero's like fools stood gaping on;
But all their strength was useless grown.
AEneas being sore distressed,
To see the Devil make such a Feast,
Bedaub'd and plastered with despair
Claws his white skin and tears his hair,
To see his ships where hopes relied
By durty drabs so fricassy'd.
He tore his garments all he had
Which made his smirking Tailor glad.
And then his hairy breast he showed
All scabby to the multitude;
At length with voice of dying man,
He crossed his Arms, and thus spoke on.
O Jove of whom I never fail,
To speak kind words, though in my Ale.
Ay me behold this fatal blaze,
Such nere befell in all your days;
For give me leave to let you know so,
Troys fire to this, was but a so, so;
If you have any kindness for's,
And that gray Mare ben't better Horse;
If there be any smooth Bordachio
That does affect your smooth Mustachio,
I mean, mong us, let me be him,
I Will strive to please ye with my limb.
You shall have with me, bate extortion,
An ample younger brothers portion:
If this be pleasing to your Grace
Laugh not but weep, lend weeping face,
And all the tears that you can shed
On ships with flames environed;
Damned Sempstresses would they were whipped,
Have all our grand affairs unript;
And therefore pour L'amour de dieu
Give us some Rain or else some snow;
They Will be more welcome now, good sooth,
Then showers in Harvest after drouth:
Rain pailfuls therefore for a spurt
Plain dealing's a jewel.
Else I Will not give thee sixpence for it;
You have a Sun, that with his bucket
Knows up again well how to pluck it.
Sometimes ye rain down hei! ding dong,
Giving your water for a song.
That Holland felt, nor drap de berry,
Are able to withstand the ferry.
And when we pray but for Ale quart,
Thou giv'st us Winchester, measure for it:
Then if thou love me, dear Jove, rain,
Rain for thy life and fill the main,
Till like a piss pot it run ore;
Never came rain to purpose more.
Give our your ships that are so hot all,
But one kind dram of thy full bottle.
AEneas had no sooner ended,
But a vast deluge straight descended:
Showers did not fall, but rather Rivers,
The Trojans looked like Cornish diverse: For Juno was gone a Gossiping and knew
nothing of his Petition

AEneas washed, began to scowl,
Though but just now, his very soul
He would have pawned for but one brimmer;
The Gods could hardly please his humor.
To tell ye how fine feathers looked
Like Capons tails, how scarfs bemuck't
Had changed their Curious glossie hues,
Or the sad fate of Calves-skin shoos,
It Is needless quite, for you may guess;
But's ships were in a better case;
For fire and water falling out,
The water hap't to be most stout,
And quickly maugre their welsh heat,
Over the flames the victory get.
So that what ever did remain,
Was surely saved by the rain.
But though your flames were quenched and ceased
AEneas could nor well digest
These blows of Fate, which made him muddy
And put him in a deep brown study,
What course to steer, or how t'apply
To present evils, remedy.
Long was he in a great quandary,
Whither to go his ways or tarry.
Pox o'these Oracles quo he,
They tell no truth that I can see.
Then up steps, an old Cinque and Quatre
Grave Nautes hight, whom Jove wise daughter
Chose from his Cradle for her Crony,
And with him often top'd Stypone.
A desperate Casuist, for he well
Aquinas knew, and Zabarell.
And for predictions a mere Lilly.
Only for Rimes Drammatic silly.
This Doctor taking straight, forsooth,
AEneas words out of his mouth
AEneas thou art a fool quo he,
Leave fretting and be ruled by me.
Fortunes a Whore, a mere Gilflurt,
And scorns the more, the more ye court,
Let her be Pox't and hanged for a Jade,
Throw thy Cap at her, and her aid.
Go boldly, without fear or wit,
And hit that nail that will be hit.
Yet cause two heads are better than one
Acestes of your privy Coun --
Cel swear, he will hear thee with a whistle;
And he is as shrewd a man as Cecil.
For the old and lame, knock'em oth'head;
It Is just like having babes to bed.
For lazy Truants, man or woman,
Turn'em a grazing on some Common:
Where if the rain or wind do trouble,
They may build huts with lome and stubble.
Which then, they for a Town may take,
And called Acestes for his sake.
But all the lusty swaggering blades,
Thar can both fight and ravish maids,
Burn Villages and plunder Towns,
Swear oaths of all dimensions,
Keep these as the apple of your eye,
And be their chief, I Will tell ye why,
To murder all the innocent flock
That live by Tibers little brook.
But which shall shortly toss her nose,
Bove all the floods Io: Moxon knows;
And spite of all their teeths compel
'Em to pay Custom and Ga -- bell
Thus ends the Prophet Gaffer two-shoos:
For standing cold without Galoshoes,
The rhume his nose did tickle sore;
And sneezing forced him to give ore.
AEneas wits gone wool to gather,
Heed neither speech nor Nautes neither.
His busy pate was full of parables,
His soul was pricked as twere with sparables;
Thus paind like maid that wears willow,
Quo he, I Will go consult my pillow.
Now was the night as dark as pitch is
And near the hour that favors witches;
When he tossing and tumbling lies,
Like one in Love above the eyes.
Or vexed soul, when houer is fled,
That Maudlin swore she would come to bed.
Thus lying as he lay, tormenting
His brainsick noddle with inventing,
Up comes the Reverent Anchises
In the same Doublet, Hose and Breeches
As he was always wont to wear;
For knowing how his son did fear,
Besides those Devils, Rats and Ferrets,
Those other Devils called Spirits,
And that an Apparition might
Make mad work with the sheets by night
Thought fit to come in shape lest dreadful
To him that had his breast and head full.
The Curtains drawn, he sets him down,
And then quo he, God save ye Son.
Up start's AEneas in a huddle,
And all affrighted, pissed a puddle.
For fear, though they were strong as Ludgates
Will set open any Mortal's Floodgates.
When Father cried in deep affection,
Hold water Son, ye have protection.
Go ring your shirt, and leave surmises
I am your Father old Anchises.
Jove that has quenched the raging fire,
According to your own desire,
Has sent me here your brains to settle,
And not with fear your mind to nettle.
As for the old and the decrepit,
To that which Nautes says, give credit:
It Is good advice, and as sententious,
As Huncks ere gave to son licentious.
But those that can both say and do,
Let them go all along with you,
To Tiber's stream, to which are bred nigh
A warlike race, of a strange kidney.
That sling a Devil and half at once,
If e're they meet with any affronts.
But ere ye go to this same war,
You must go under ground d'y'heare,
And visit sable Pluto's manor.
Where I shall be to do thee honor;
And make thee welcome as a Prince,
As has the old saying been long since.
For I am no tormented soul
But walk about upon parole.
In fields Elysian without fetters;
Where all your souls marked with red letters,
Their several sports and pastimes take,
With Cards, or Bowls, or Ale and Cake.
There you shall meet a courteous Sibill
Which there men credit next the Bible;
She Will go before you with a Lanthorn
To show you every corner, and turn:
There you shall hear me make Tautologies.
Concerning all your Genealogies.
Which every day I con by heart,
As Children say their mornings part.
So Son adieu, the day appears;
I dare not tarry for my ears.
For when the Sun awakes the Daw's,
Hobgoblins eyes always draw straws.
AEneas in a plaguey fear,
Sneaks out his head and cries who is there?
Bow having now the Nightmare slain;
And rung his wits all in again,
He springs upon his tail anon;
Quo he, what Father gone so soon?
Not stay and take a dram oath bottle,
After the pains of so much twattle?
How is your heart so cruel grown?
So short a visit, and be gone?
Return again my dear Dadda,
And hear how well I yet can say,
Pray Father pray to God bless me:
That silly fear should so oppress me?
And make me thus forget all grace:
Dog in a Doublet as I was.
Then out he goes for tinder box,
But by the way so hard he knocks
His Princely shins against a Chair,
That passion urged could not forbear;
Quo he, pox take this dog my father,
To lead me thus I know not whither;
I warrant it an Inch-Incision,
The Devil take him with his vision.
But by and by when pain was over,
And senses did their seat recover,
His anger cooles, and he repents
Of his ungracious complements.
To make his peace he smoked the Room
With Frankincense or some perfume.
A consecrated Cheescake next,
If I am not besides the Text,
(Though Lipsius and the German gang
Of Pedants only fit to hang,
Say 'twas a Fool) which merits faith
As given to one that had no teeth.)
He gave old Vesta, old indeed,
Sh'had lived five thousand years a Maid;
Now called the Gods mumble-Crust.
This offering finished, and in post
His mattins said, and Ave Mary's,
He Is fixed again for new figaries.
He goes to find the Rabble out,
He tells his tale; they laugh and flout;
Until he swore by his Virginity;
And then they could not in civility
But credit every word he said.
Acestes readily obeyed,
And without making long discourse
Promis'd'em all his utmost force,
AEneas not to spoil his plot,
Resolves to strike while the Iron's hot.
He straight calls out the old and feeble
And women most unprofitable,
And all the dainty, Lazy blouses,
That ships forsake to live in houses.
He only kept with him the stout,
Such as would hold all weathers out
Of which one man would cudgel four,
And four would ribrost half a score.
In number few, but great in heart,
Not valuing danger of a fart.
The ships were presently repaired,
New Oars are framed, new masts are reared.
New taffata Jacks and silken streamers
For this new moddel had no Dreamers.
A toil that words have quickly ended,
For what is soon said, is soon amended.
AEneas now Surveyor turns,
Gets him a Plough, and beasts with horns,
And most gentilely like a Clown,
Scores out the Moddel of a Town;
The Streets, the Lanes, and Market places,
Exact like Troy with all her graces.
Their Concubines apartiment,
And privies most magnificent
Acestes laughed until he puk'd,
To find his Honor thus be-duk'd,
Makes law's a hundred more then twenty;
And Officers close stool to empty.
Then where they never were before,
To Venus, that Celestial whore
Upon the mountain, Erycine,
He makes a Temple, and a Shrine,
To lay Anchises bones therein,
And of the order Iacobin,
He Consecrates a lazy Priest,
Whose office 'twas in dirty vest,
Before a Taper always burning,
To howl out ditties full of mourning.
Thus having got a little quiet
They fell to junketting and riot;
Nine days in gluttony they toil,
And drink like Shoomakers the while;
Till now the Ocean calm and gay
Tell's em it is time to take away.
The Southwind blows, but makes no bustle,
More then to call'em with his whistle.
The longest day must have an end,
And friend at length must part with friend.
So it is with them, now season calls,
Of force they must pack up their Awls.
The Galley-rosters then began
To howl and blubber, and take on;
The women loath to ly alone
Are all now frantic to be gone.
AEneas, who had words at will,
Begs'em with patience to be still;
Sometimes he laughs, sometimes he cries,
As Cunning swayed his drolleries.
Twenty deluding tricks he used,
And so their female brains amused,
That they were well content to yield,
And to the Conquest quit the Field.
O heavens now what a noise is here!
Of humble servant, thine my Dear,
Farewell my Joy, farewell my Love,
Farewell my Honey, Duck and Dove,
They kiss, they cry, they laugh, shake hands,
Embrace and hugg, and on the Sands
They Had taken their last leave, some think,
Had Captain giv'n'em the least wink.
Three Sheep are to the Tempests slain,
To keep'em in a merry vain.
And then for Eryx that town Bull
Four Heifers from the Herds they cull.
The Anchors weighed, all ready now,
AEneas stands upon the prow,
With Olive branch upon his brow;
As thus he sat in Princely pomp,
On a Portmantle easing Rump,
A young tarpaulin Iacka lent
Brought him a cup of musty Tent;
What Is this quo he, the juice of Toades
It Is well enough, 'twill serve the Gods:
With that he powered it down the Main,
That drank it, as't'had been Champain.
The guts and Garbadge of each beast,
He gave the Tritons for a feast.
For with the Brisket, Chines and Ribs,
Trojans themselves had filled their cribs.
The Seas thus pleased with Sail, and Oar,
They part from the beloved shore.
You would have sworn, had you been near
That all the Kent-Street Broom-men there
Had emptied all their leathern gear,
Nothing was extant to your views
For a whole mile but Women's shoos.
Thus in old shoos their wishes flew,
While they look on and wish for new:
And so return from viewing fleet
With tongues more clamorous than their feet
Venus the while a slut most crafty,
And mindful of her white boy's safety,
Bids Coachman harness Flanders Mares,
And straight to Neptune she careirs.
Neptune, it being long Vacation,
For want of better recreation,
With Oyster shells, and rocky flakes
Was busy making Ducks and Drakes;
But when he saw the Lackerd Coach,
He left his sport and makes approach,
Bless me, quo she, what mean you so
Your noble pastime to forego?
In truth I blame my rudeness for it;
That thus has made you leave your sport,
With voice more lulling than a lute
She had so charmed the Seagreen Brute,
Madam quo he, kissing her hand,
I were not worthy my command,
Should I not all things set aside
When such a Dame, so near allied
Whom I love more, than you can guess it,
Shall honor me with such a visit;
Good now what wind has blown you hither?
Some plot of Juno upon the weather:
You Are in the right on it, on my Honor
She plagues my heart out, pox upon her,
It Is scarce a month but in despite,
She burnt up all my sons whole fleet.
And would have gridled him himself,
But that the pretty harmless Elfe
Has a good faculty to ball it,
When any mischief does befall it.
In all our heavenly Court there is none
But hates her like a Scorpion.
And Jupiter's a Hobbyhorse,
He does not kick her out of doors
As one would kick a dog or bitch.
She has the Devil in her breech.
Time that brings all things to an end,
Cannot bound the malice of this fiend.
The Laws of Fate she chops and changes,
As all things moved upon her hinges.
What need I tell you, you well know,
She Is nothing else but fire and Tow.
But the other day, in Lybic Seas*
What a Combustion did she raise!
Attempting those her wild fegaries
Within your Highness territories;
But that your Grace, I humbly thank ye,
Seeing how meanly she did rank ye,
Were pleased to take good cognizance
Of puffing slaves Irreverence,
And so cornub'd'em, that I think
Their windy holes began to stink;
And then the sneaking sons of whores
Pulled in their horns, like Cuckolds Currs,
That find by letters intercepted,
How well their stately heads are grafted.
But tempests missing her desire,
She seeks to work her ends by fire;
But then her husband by a shower
Stopped the damned progress of her power.
That which remains, I beg your Grace
To let your Seas keep smiling face.
Let only gentle Zephyr be
Your Highness courteous Deputy.
And for those testy Aquilo's
Chase'em like Hornets from my nose.
Let Son at Tyber safe arrive;
And for so doing, as I live.
My Maids shall work ye against Easter,
A pointed Band worth twice a tester.
I tell you this, as I am modest
Upon the word of a true Goddess,
Dear Madam, why such words as these?
You are sole Mistress of the Seas.
From thence you came: The Seas were mad,
If they for you no kindness had.
And therefore vex your self no more,
I Will make the winds your breath adore.
I Will have a care of your young man,
The same that Do has of her fawn:
Fair Simois and Xanthus both
I call to witness upon Oath;
The large effects of former care;
Achilles when, great man of War,
Assaulting Troy, a bold adventure,
Your dapper Son would needs encounter
And like to have his brains knocked out,
In cloud I rapt him, as in clout,
While his fierce foe in vain pursued,
And The Air as vainly hack't and hewed
I have the same protection still,
The same intention and good will;
And for the sake of your bright eyes
He never shall want what in me lies.
Moreo're to show I love him well,
I Will give him passage into Hell.
Egress and regress to his wishes,
As he were one of my own Fishes.
The Lady hearing so much mercy,
Dropped him a very delicate Curtsey.
The King of floods then gave command,
And Coach is tackled out of hand;
Coach by two Hippotams drawn,
Not Dolphins as the Learned fain
And on the billows then he drives
The pace of Princes and their wives
At his approach the Sea becalms,
The waves as quiet are, as Lambs;
Winds clap their tayls betwixt their legs,
Like Chaplain took at Baudy Pegs:
The Scene was changed quite through the main,
All covered now with Neptunes train.
He to show Lady Coz. his Port
Had summoned all to attend his Court.
First the Promoters of the Sea,
His Sarjeants and his Catch poles, they
Were certain Monsters, th'ugliest Rogues
That ere were seen, upon Sea-Hogs.
Whales of all sizes, sorts and shapes,
With noses made like squirts for Claps,
Whence they could spout ye with a vengeance
Whole Rivers, like my Lord Majors Engines.
These Glaucus lead, a man of note,
In scallop shel instead of Boat.
And all the way he played most fine
Upon a Trumpet called Marine.
Ino's Executor Palaemon
Rid mounted on a good fat Sammon;
Old Triton second in the Empire,
Rode in a Chariot frindg'd with Sampi^
A Scallop lined with mother of Pearl
Which six large Oysters nimbly whirle
Phorcus the next most eminent
Brought a whole a ragged Regiment
Riding with dirty shirts on Sharkes,
All dammy Boys, and Hect'ring Sparks,
Next Thetis with her Sallow jowl
Rides mounted on an ambling Sole;
And next to her was Melite,
Behind her man upon a Ray.
Fair Panope a Virgin still,
Bestrides an o'regrown Mackaril.
Cymodoce brings up the Rear,
Upon a nimble Didapper.
Such was the worshipful procession
Made by the Chiefs of Sea-born Nation:
AEneas at the weather smiles,
A smile in length above three miles.
Men might have seen his heart untroubled
Caper Coranto's through his doublet,
Among the ships there is not a lazy one,
All by the fore-lock take Occasion;
Their sails are full, and Seamen brisk,
Some go to sleep, and some to Whisk,
The gale works for 'em, while the Ships
All keeps their course, their Amm'ral keeps
That steered by Palinure, a head
The body of the whole Fleet lead
Starboard, or Latboard, or No near,
How e're he steered all others steer,
The Rowers all the Season blessed,
That gave them so much time to rest,
And all lay down upon the plancks
To recreate their weary Flanks.
While Pilots with their eyes, like Owls,
Look out for Sea-marks, and for sholes,
The rest, without the aid of Poppey,
Or juice of Lettices, so nappy,
So soundly slept, that some men swore
Their very souls where heard to snore,
When, lo, a little Urchin whipster,
A god called, but more like a Tapster,
That by his good will would never waken,
But sleep all day in rusty Bacon,
This demi-god is Deaths one brother,
It Is well sh'has him, sh'has nere another.
This drovvsie Soul drops from the stars,
Dispels the Mist, that hid his Arse,
And thus like a dissembling Knave,
For Palinure provides a grave.
Like Phorbas clad, quo he, dear Friend
What harm do thou thy self intend
By watching thus? aside thy care:
And sleep a while, while weather's fair,
And I Will be careful till you wake
Of Galleys, that no harm they take.
Follow your Fools advice that please,
I Will sleep no sleeps by Gods good grace:
Who sent you here with this blind story?
Thus Palinure frumpt young John Dory.
This bold young Sophister however
Continued still to buzz in's Ear'.
He beggd him ore and ore again
To clear his eyelids, but in vain,
For Palinure he could not coax:
Friend, quoth he, you are in the wrong box.
Is this a time for me to snort,
Knowing the burden I support.
How should I answer to be found,
I fast a sleep, Ships fast a ground?
My Master, great AEneas, sure
Would give much thanks to Palinure.
A scalded dog the Kitchen bauks,
So we have had enough of rocks,
The little God, but hugeous Devil,
Finding persuasions nere so civil,
Would not prevail, draws out a jelly,
The color I can hardly tell ye,
With this same oil, not oil of Violet,
He rubbed the Temples of the Pilot,
Who, without dreaming o the Fleet,
Falls flat on's belly fast a sleep.
When on a sudden part of the steerage,
Not well repaired or out of mere age.
Whips off, and Pilot, heaven knows how,
Only that Virgil says 'twas so,
Went with a murrain altogether,
A strange mischance in such good weather,
And therefore wise men guess it rather,
(Though bad excuse by Virgil made,
Is better than to have nothing said)
That the old man too much had drank,
And going to sh -- fell off a plank.
However 'twas, waked with the fall,
He vainly to his Mates did call,
For he was drowned, and mischief done,
Away the unlucky God does run.
How e're the Ships steer a right course,
For Neptunes promise guides their oars,
Though some conjecture they did well,
Rather by hap, than by good skill.
Tell by and by the Rocks approaching,
Where Sirens live, all day debauching,
AEneas by good chance looked out,
And seeing Ships so near a rout,
Thought Pilot either drunk or dead,
And that without his present aid,
The Ships would be at six and sev'ns,
He goes to see: but then O Heavens!
Th'astonish'd Mortal quickly found,
That Palinure, Good man, was drowned,
The Galleys swom at seven and six,
Like blind men groping without sticks,
And now they began approach the stones
That looked all white like dead men's bones,
And yet the waves near shallow shore,
Lay howling day and night for more.
AEneas, whiter than his Cravat,
Saw 'twas nothing for man to laugh at;
'Twas time i'saith for him to work,
The which he did like any Turk;
And straight though night, and hard put to it,
Got sea room, and good way to boot,
He wrought, but could not sing a noat,
Like merry Cobblers under stals;
For grief had spoild his Madrigals;
But for his Pilot, now a sleep,
A hundred sighs he fetched full deep;
He puffed, and heaved, and roard, and snob'd,
To see himself of Pilot robbed;
Ah my Dear Friend, his noddle shaking,
That now must sleep for want of waking,
Whom sleep it self, has taken napping,
And strangled in the water dropping,
Naked upon some foreign shore
Thou shall be cast and seen no more;
Though if no Porpoise eat thee up,
Nor Sturgron on thy carcass sup,
Time may perhaps bring thee to light,
Till then, Dear Palinure, good Night,
FINIS.

