SATYR AGAINST HYPOCRITES.

Si natura negat facit indignatio versum.
Juvenal. Satyr. 1. LONDON, Printed for N. B. 1655.

A SATYR AGAINST HIPOCRITES.
TEdious have been our Fasts, and long our Prayers;
To keep the Sabbath such have been our cares,
That Cisly durst not milk the gentle Mulls,
To the great damage of my Lord Mayors Fools,
Which made the greazie Catchpoles swear and curse
The Holy Day for want o'th'second course;
And men have lost their body's new adorning
Because their clothes could not come home that morning
The sins of Parliament have long been bawled at,
The vices of the City have been yawl'd at,
Yet no amendment; Certainly, thought I,
This is a Paradox beyond all cry.
Why if you ask the people, very proudly
They answer straight, That they are very godly.
Nor could we lawfully suspect the Priest,
Alas, for he cried out, I bring you Christ:
And trul' he spoke with so much confidence,
That at that time it seemed a good pretense:
Then where is the fault? thought I: Well, I must know,
So putting on clean cuffs, to Church I go.
Now 'gan the Bells to jangle in the Steeple,
And in a row to Church went all the People.
First came poor Matrons stuck with Lice like Cloves,
Devoutly come to worship their white loaves;
And may be smelt above a German mile,
Well, let them go to fume the Middle-Ile.
But here is the sight that does men good to see it,
Grave Burghers, with their Posies, sweet, sweet, sweet,
With their fat Wives. Then comes old Robin too,
Who although write or read he neither do,
Yet has his Testament chained to his wast,
And his blind zeal feels out the proofs as fast,
And makes as greasy Dogs-ears as the best.
A new shaved Cobbler follows him, as it hapt,
With his young Cake-bread in his cloak close wrapped;
Then panting comes his Wife from the other end
Of The Town, to hear Our Father and see a friend;
Then came the shops young foreman, it is presumed,
With hair rose-water'd, and his gloves perfumed,
With his blew shoo-strings too, and besides that,
A riband with a sentence in his hat:
The Virgins too, the fair one, and the Gypsy,
Spectatum veniunt, venient spectentur ut ipsae
And now the silk'n Dames throng in, good store,
And casting up their noses to the pew door,
Look with disdain to see the pew so full,
Yet must and will have room, I, that they wull;
Straight that she sits not uppermost distaste
One takes; It Is fine that I must be displac't
By you, she cries then, Good Mistress Gill Flurt;
Gill Flurt, enraged cries the other, Why ye dirt-
tie piece of Impudence, ye ill-bred Thief,
I scorn your terms, good Mistress Thimble-mans wife.
Marry come up, cries the other, pray forbear,
Surely your Husband's but a Scavenger;
Cries the other then, and what are you I pray?
No Aldermans wife for all you are so gay.
Is it not you that to all Christenings frisk it?
And to save bread, most shamefully steal the biscuit,
At which the other mad beyond all law,
Unsheaths her talons, and prepares to claw.
And sure some gorgets had been torn that day,
But that the Readers voice did part the fray.
Now what a wardrobe could I put to view,
The cloak-bag-breeches, and the sleek-stone shoe,
The Embroidered Girdles, and your Usurers Cloaks,
Of far more various forms than there be Oaks
In Sherword, or Religions in this Town,
Strong then of Cypres chest appears the Gown:
The grogram-gown of such antiquity,
That Speed could never find its pedigree;
Fit to be doted on by Antiquary's,
Who hence may descant in their old Glossary's,
What kind of fardingale fair Helen wore,
How wings in fashion came, because wings bore
The Swan-transformed Leda to Jove's lap,
Our Matrons hoping thence the same good hap;
The pent-house bever, and calves-chaudron ruft,
But of these frantic fashions now enough,
For now there shall no more of them be said,
Lest this my warehouse spoil the French-men's trade,
And now as if I were that woollen-spinster,
That does so gravely show you Sarum Minster,
I Will lead you round the Church from pew to pew,
And show you what does most deserve your view,
There stood the Font, Ingredients that compound a Congregation.
in times of Christianity,
But now it is taken down, men call it Vanity;
There the Church-VVardens sit, hard by the door,
But know ye why they sit among the Poor?
Because they love um well for love of the box,
Their money buys good beef, good wine, good smocks.
There sits the Clerk, and there the reverend Reader,
And there is the Pulpit for the good flock-Feeder,
Who in three lamentable doleful ditty's
Unto their marriage-fees sing Nunc dimittis
Here sits a learned Justice, truly so
Some people say, and some again say no,
And yet methinks in this he seems wise
To make Stypone yield him an excise,
And though on Sundays Alehouses must down,
Yet wisely all the week lets them alone,
For well his Worship knows that Alehouse sins
Maintain himself in gloves, his wife in pins.
There sits the Mayor as fat as any Bacon
With eating Custard, Beef, and rumps of Capon;
And there his corpulent Brethren sit by,
With faces representing gravity,
Who having money, though they have no wit,
They wear gold chains, and here in green pews sit.
There sit True-blew the honest Parish-masters.
With Satin Caps, and Ruffs, and Demi-casters,
And faith that is all; for they have no rich fancies,
No Poets are, nor Authors of Romances.
There sits a Lady, painted fine by Art,
And there sits curious Mistress Fiddle-cum-fart:
There sits a Chambermaid upon a Hassock,
Whom th'Chaplain often instructs without his Cassock:
One more accustomed unto Curtain-sins,
Than woman is to wet her thumb, that spins.
O what a gloss her forehead smooth adorns!
Excelling Phoebe with her silver horns.
It tempts a man at first, yet strange to utter,
When one comes near, fogh gudds, it stinks of butter.
Another tripping comes to her Mistris's Pew,
Where being arrived, she tryes if she can view
Her young man's face, and straight heaves up her coats,
That her sweetheart may see her true-love knots.
But having sat up late the night before
To let the young man in at the back-dore.
She feels drawziness upon her creeping,
Turns down one proof, and then she falls a sleeping.
Then fell her head one way, her book another,
And she sleeps, and snores, a little a tone with the other.
That Is called the Gallery; which (as you may see)
Was trimmed and guilt in the year Fifty three.
It Was a zealous work, and done by two Churchwardens,
Who for mis-reckoning hope to have their pardons,
There Will writes shorthand with a pen of brass,
Oh how he is wondered at by many an ass
That see him shake so fast his warry fist, Hang it.

As if he would write the Sermon before the Priest
Has spoke it; Then, O that I could (says one)
Do as but this man does, I Would give a crown.
Up goes another hand, up go his eyes,
And he, Gifts, Industry, and talents cries.
Thus are they placed at length: a tedious work,
And now a bellowing noise went round the Kirk,
From the low Font, up to the Golden Creed.
(O happy they who now no ears do need:)
While these cought up their morning phlegm, and those.
Do trumpet forth the snivel of their nose;
Straight then the Clerk began with potsheard voice
To grope a tune, singing with woeful noise,
Like a cracked Sans-bell jarring in the Steeple,
Tom Sternholds wretched Prick song to the people:
Who soon as he has placed the first line through,
Up steps Chuck-farthing then, and he reads too:
This is the woman's boy that sits i'th'Porch
Till the Sexton comes, and brings her stool to Church.
Then out the people yaule an hundred parts,
Some roar, some whine, some creek like wheels of Carts,
Such Notes that Gamut never yet did know,
Nor numerous keys of Harpsicalls in a row
Their Heights and Depths could ever comprehend,
Now below double Are some descend,
'Bove Ela squealing now ten notes some fly;
Straight then as if they knew they were too high,
With headlong haste down stairs again they tumble;
Discords and Concords O how thick they jumble!
Like untamed horses tearing with their throats
One wretched stave into an hundred notes.
Some lazie-throated fellows thus did baule
Robert Wisdom's delight.
^
They a i hin a moy a meat uh ga have
^
a ha me uh a ha gall a.
And some outrun their words and thus they say,
^
Too cruel for to think a hum a haw,
Now what a whetstone was it to devotion
To see the pace, the looks, and every motion
O'th Sunday Levite when up stairs he marched
And first behold his little band stiff starcht,
Two caps he had, and turns up that within,
You Would think he wore a black pot tipped with tin,
His cuffs ashamed peep't only out at's wrist;
For they saw whiter gloves upon his fist,
Out comes his kerchief then, which he unfolds
As gravely as his Text. and fast he holds
In's wrath-denouncing hand; then mark when he prayed
How he reared his reverend whites, and softly said
A long most Merciful, or O Almighty,
Then out he whines the rest like some sad ditty,
In a most doleful recitative style,
His buttocks keeping Crotchet-time the while;
And as he slubbers ore his tedious story
Makes it his chiefest aim, his chiefest glory,
TO excel the City Dames in speaking fine,
O for the drippings of a fat Sir-loyn,
Instead of Aron's ointment for his face,
When he cries out for grease instead of grace.
Up stepped another then, how sour his face is!
How grim he looked! for he was one oth' Classis,
And here he cries, Blood, blood, blood, destroy, O Lord!
The Covenant-breaker, with a two edged sword.
Now comes another, of another strain,
And he of Law and Bondage does complain:
Then showing his broad teeth, and grinning wide,
Aloud, Free grace, free grace, free grace, he cried.
Up went a Chaplain then, fixing his eye
Devoutly on his Patron's gallery,
Who as duty binds him, cause he eats their pyes,
God bless my good Lord and my Lady, cries,
And's hopeful Issue. Then with countenance sad,
Up steps a man stark revelation mad,
And he, Cause us thy Saints, for thy dear sake,
That we a bustle in the world may make,
Thy enemies now rage, and by and by
He tears his throat for the fifth Monarchy.
Another mounts his chin, East, West, North, South,
Gaping to catch a blessing in his mouth,
And saying, Lord! we dare not open our eyes
Before thee, winks for fear of telling lies.
Mean while the vulgar fry sit still, Practice of Piety.
admiring
Their pious sentences, as all inspiring;
At every period they sigh and groan,
Though he speak sometimes sense, and sometimes none:
Their zeal does never let them mind that matter,
It is enough to hear the Magpy chatter;
They crowd, they thrust, are crowded, and are thrusted,
Their pews seem pasties, wherein they incrusted,
Together bake and fry; O patience great!
Yet they endure, though almost drowned in sweat.
It seemed as if those steaming vapors were
To stew hard doctrines in, and to prepare
Their rugged doubts, that might breed some disease
Being taken raw in queasie consciences.
But further mark their great humility,
Their tender love, and mutual charity,
The short man's shoulder bore the tall man's elbow,
Nor he so much as called him Scurvy fellow,
Wrarh was forgot, all anger was forborne,
Although his neighbor trod upon his corn;
And in a word, all men were meek and humble,
Nor dared the Sexton, though unfeed, to grumble;
He honest man went with his neck a skew,
Gingling his bunch of keys from pew to pew;
Good man to's Market Day he bore no spleen,
But wished the seven days had Sabbaths been;
How he worships satin, with what a Gospel-fear
He admires the man that does a bever wear,
Room, room, bear leave, he cries, then not unwilling
With a Pater noster face receives the shilling.
But what was more religious than to see
The women in their streins of piety,
Who like the Seraphins in various hews
Adorned the Chancell and the highest pews.
Stand up good middle-Ile-folks and give room,
See where the Mothers and the Daughters come!
Hey-day!
Behind the Servants looking all like Martyrs,
With Bibles in plush jerkins and blew garters,
The silver Inkhorn, and the writing book,
In which I wish no friend of mine to look.
Nor must we now forget the Children too,
Who with their fore-tops gay stand up ith pew.
Brought there to play at Church, and to be chid,
And for discourse at meals what children did.
Well, be good children, for the time shall come,
When on the Pulpit-stairs ye shall have room,
There to be asked many a Question deep,
By the Parson, with his dinner, half a sleep.
But now aloft the Preacher 'gan to thunder,
When the poor women they sit trembling under,
Jack-a-dandy.
And if he name Gehenna or the Dragon,
Their faith, alas! was little then to brag on;
Or if he did relate, how little wit
The foolish Virgins had, then do they sit
Weeping with watry-eyes, and making vows
One to have Preachers always in her house,
To dine them well, and breakfast 'um with gellies,
And caudles hot to warm their wambling bellies;
And if the cash, where she could not unlock it,
Were close secured, to pick her Husbands pocket.
Another something a more thrifty sinner,
To invite the Parson twice a week to dinner;
The other vows a purple Pulpit-cloth,
With an embroidered Cushion, being loath
When the fierce Priest his Doctrine hard unbuckles,
That in the passion he should hurt his knuckles.
Nay, in the Churchyard too was no small throng,
And on the Window-bars in swarms they hung:
And I could see that many Shorthand wrote,
Where listening well, I could not hear a jote;
Friend, this is strange, quoth I, but he replied,
Alas! your ears are yet unsanctifi'd.
Cuds so, I had even almost now forgot
To tell you the chiefest thing of all; what is that?
How the good women in a row do come,
To bring the Newborn babe to Christendom.
The Midwife, Captain of the gang, walks first,
Laden with Child, and Naples-bisket crust;
Most reverently she steps, dressed all in print,
If she be not a Saint the Devils in it:
For so demure she looks, that you would guess
She were some holy penitent Votaress,
With eyes and mouth set in her Looking-glass,
On purpose for to carry Babe of Grace:
Nor is it a thing inspired, but got by Art,
And Practice, as the Beggar learnt to Fart.
Then follow the Guests, each one in her degree,
Most punctual in their Parish-Heraldry.
Being come to Church, they keep their close order,
And go on, and go on, and go farther and farther,
Till they arrive where for the Priests ease, God wot,
Stands a pretty, little, stone Syllabub-pot;
Water 't had in it, though but a little, God knows,
Scarcely to wet the tip of the Child's nose:
Men say there was a secret wisdom then,
That ruled the strange opinions of these men;
For by much washing Child got cold in head,
Which was the cause so many Saints snuffled:
Oh cried another sect, let us wash the cock,
And eke that other thing that lurks in smock;
Th^^e were the members whence did first arise
The sinful cause of all our miseries.
But their wise Wives replied, fuming and fretting,
'Twas dangerous, least the part^ should shrink in wetting;
And for that cause they only did be-sprinkle
The pretty Birdsney-Pigsney-Periwinkle.
Now when the Priest had spoke, and made an end,
And that the Child was made the Churches friend,
The women straightway they went home again,
To talk of things which they conceal from men:
Then Midwife carries Child to ask Mother blessing,
Who gives it a kiss in her Flanders-lace dressing,
She sat with Curtains drawn, most princum prancum,
And called the women every one to thank 'um:
Full threescore pound it cost in Plumbs and Dishes,
Which women eat as Pikes eat little Fishes;
But when the Claret and Hypocriss came in,
Then the tittle tattle began to begin;
The Midwife takes a Tankard and drinks up all,
Of all the Saints, quoth she, God bless St. Paul,
He bid the men give the women their due;
If they do'nt, may the women never prove true:
Well fare my Son here, he is a yonng man,
But let any other do better if he can;
Five in six years! -- hey ho, -- here daughter,
Here Is to the next bout, and what shall come after.
But what ails my Neighbor here to look so grum?
A year and a half, and nothing yet come. --
Alas, I lost time, quoth she, I married a Fool, --
'Twas six months ere he knew he was to use his tool:
But I have taught him a new lesson I faith; quo I, fie upon it,
Such a fool at these years, -- but learn more wit, -- if ye do'nt --
Alas, cries one, you are happy to me,
Weeping and drinking most heartily,
My Husband whores and drinks all the week,
Judge you then Neighbors how I am to seek:
(Then they all shook their heads, and looked most sad)
These are they, quoth the Midwife, spoil our trade;
But be of good cheer daughter, come, come,
If he wont, another must in his room.
Alas, quoth she, with a jolly red Nose,
There Is many an able Christian, God knows,
Would leap at that which thy Husband despises:
Then 'gin they to talk of the several sizes,
Of the long, and the short, the little and great,
'Twould put a modest Gam ster into a sweat.
I thank my God, quoth the Midwife then,
I have buried three Husbands, all proper men;
I thank my God for it, though I say it that should not,
Yet I cannot say, like one that understood not,
There was no difference between the three,
But if any man a good workman be,
He may well do enough, if he be intent,
To give a reasonable She content.
I speak merrily Neighbors, -- hah -- hah -- here is to you all,
God send us more of these good jobs to fall:
By and by they single out a poor woman,
That has had the luck to have as good as no man;
But her they use m^st unmercifully,
Calling her Husband Do-little, and Cully,
Fumbler and Gelding, and then they all exhort her,
Rather then be shamed, to hire some strong Porter.
Now after this discourse, and the Wines drank up,
They all depart to their own homes to sup;
After that to bed, and it is a pound to a doight,
If their Husbands sleep for their Quail-pipes that night.
Others not so concerned, walk in the fields,
To give their longing Wives what Cake-house yields; To be heard of men.

And as they go, God, Grace, and Ordinances,
Is all their chat, they seem in heavenly trances;
Thus they trim up their souls with holy words,
Shaving off sin as men shave off their Beards,
To grow the faster; sins, they cry, are fancies,
The Godly live above all Ordinances.
Now they are at home, and have their suppers eat,
When Thomas, cries the Master, come, repeat;
And if the windows gaze upon the street,
To sing a Psalm they hold it very meet.
But would you know what a preposterous zeal
They sing their Hymns withal? then listen well;
The Boy begins,
To the Tune of S. Margarets Chimes.
Go too therefore ye wicked men,
'Depart from me [Thomas] anon,
For the [Yes Sir] commandments will I keep
Of God [Pray remember to receive the 100 l. in Gracious-street to morrow] my
Lord alone.
As thou has promised to perform, [Mary, anon forsooth]
That death me not assail, [Pray remember to rise betimes to morrow morning,
you know you have a great many clothes to soap]
Nor let my hope abuse me so,
That through distrust I quail.
Behold the zeal of the people.
But Sunday now good night, and now good morrow,
To thee oh Covenant Wednesday full of sorrow:
Alas! my Lady Anne wont now be merry,
She Is up betimes, and gone to Alderman-bury;
Truly 'twas a sad day, for every sinner
Did feast a supper then, and not a dinner;
Nor men nor women wash their face to day,
Put on their clothes, and piss, and so away;
They throng to Church just as they sell their ware,
In greasy hats, and old gowns worn thread bare,
Where, though the whole body suffered tedious pain,
No member yet had more cause to complain
Than the poor nose, when little to its ease,
A Chandlers cloak perfumed with candle-grease,
Commixing sents with a Sope-boylers breeches,
Did raise a stink beyond the skill of Witches.
Now steams of Garlic whifting through the nose,
Smelt worse than Assa-fetida, or Luthers hose;
With these mundungus, and a breath that smells
Like standing pools in subterraneal cells.
Composed Pomanders to out-stink the Devil,
Yet strange to tell, they suffered all this evil,
Nor to make water all the while would rise,
The women sure had spunges 'twixt their thighs:
To stir at this good time they thought was sin,
So strictly their devotion kept them in.
Now the Priests elbows do the cushion knead,
While to the people he his Text does read,
Beloved, I shall here crave leave to speak
A word, he cries and winks, unto the weak,
The words are these, Make haste and do not tarry,
But unto Babylon thy dinner carry,
There does young Daniel want in the Den,
Thrown among Lions by hard-hearted men.
Here my Beloved, and then he reaches down
His hand, as if he would catch the Clerk by th'crown.
Not to explain this precious Text amiss,
Daniel's the subject, Hunger the object is,
Which proves that Daniel was subject to hunger,
But that I may not detain you any longer,
My Brethren dear prick up your ears, and put on
Your senses all while I the words unbutton.
Make haste, The Exposition.
I say, make haste and do not tarry,]
Why? my Beloved, these words great force do carry.
Au! it is a waundrous emphatical speech,
Some men Beloved; as if they had lead i'their breech,
Do walk, some creep like Snails, they are so sloe pac't,
Truly, my Brethren, these men do not make haste.
But be ye quick dear Sisters, 1 Use.
be ye quick,
And lest ye fall, Not like an Anchor.
take hope, hope's like a stick.
To babylon] Ah Babylon! that word's a weighty one,
Truly 'twas a great City, and a mighty one.
Which as the learned Rider well records, Babel battered.

Semiramis did build with brick and bords.
Wicked Semiramis, accursed Bitch!
My spirit is mightily provoked against that wretch.
Lustful Semiramis, for will I wist
Thou were the mother of proud Antichrist.
Nay, like to Levi and Simeon from antiquity,
The Pope and thee were Sisters in iniquity.
Strumpet Semiramis, like her was non,
For she built Babylon, Ah! she built Babylon.
2 Use.
But, Brethren, be ye good as she was evil,
Must ye needs go because she is gone to the Devil?
Thy dinner carry.] Here may we look upon
A child of God in great affliction:
Why what does he aile? Alas! he wants meat,
Now what (Beloved) was sent him for to eat?
Truly a small matter; only a dish of pottage,
But pray what pottage? Such as a small cottage
Afforded only to the Country swains,
From whence, though not a man the place explains,
It Is guessed that neither Christmas pottage 'twas,
Nor white-broth, nor capon-broth, good for sick maws,
Or milk-porrage, or thick pease-porrage either,
Nor was it mutton-broth, nor veal broth neither,
Nor any broth of noble taste or scent,
Made by receipt of the Countess of Kent;
But sure some homely stuff crum'd with brown-bread,
And thus was Daniel, good Daniel fed.
Truly, this was but homely fare you will say,
Would he have been so content.
Yet Daniel, good Daniel was content that day.
And though there could be thought-on nothing cheaper,
Yet fed as well on it as he had been a reaper.
3 Use.
Better eat any thing than not at all,
Fasting, Beloved, why? it is prejudicial
To the weak Saints; Beloved, it is a sin,
Several Reasons.
And thus to prove the same I here begin:
Hunger, Beloved, why? this hunger mauls,
Au! it is a great mauler, it breaks stone-walls;
Now my Beloved, to break stone-walls you know,
Why it is flat felony, and there is great woe
Follows that sin, besides it is a great schism,
It Is ceremonious, it is Pagan Judism;
Judism? why Beloved, have you ere been
Where the black Dog of Newgate you have seen?
Hair'd like a Turk, Description of Antichrist.
with eyes like Antichrist,
He does and has ye Brethren long entic't.
Claws like a Star Chamber Bishop, black as hell,
and doubtless he was one of those that fell.
Judism I say is uglier than this curr,
Though he appeared wrapped up in Bear-skin furr.
Thrown among Lions by hard-hearted men,]
Here Daniel is the Church, the World's the Den.
By Lions are meant Monarchs, Kings of Nations,
Those worse than heathenish abominations:
Truly dear friends, these Kings and Governors,
These Bishops too, nay all superior powers,
Why they are Lions, Locusts, Whales, I Whales, beloved,
Off goes our ears if once their wrath be moved;
But woe unto you Kings! woe to your Princes!
It Is fifty and four, now Antichrist, so says
My Book, must reign three days, and three half days,
Why that is three years and a half beloved.
Or else as many precious men have proved,
One thousand two hundred and threescore days;
Why now the time's almost expired, time stays
For no man; friends then Antichrist shall fall,
Then down with Rome, with Babel, down with all,
Down with the Devil, And hey then up go we.
the Pope, the Emperor,
With Cardinals, and the King of Spain's great power;
They Will muster up, but I can tell you where,
At Armageddon, there, Beloved, there,
Fall on, fall on, kill, kill, haloo, haloo,
Kill Amalek, and Turk, kill Gog and Magog too.
But who dear friends fed Daniel thus forsaken,
Truly (but there is one sleeps,
a would do well to waken)
As it is in the English his name ends in uck,
And so his name is called Habacuck.
The Doctrine of Generation.
But in the original it ends in Ock,
For that dear Sisters calls him Have-a-Cock.
And truly I suppose I need not fear
But that there are many Have-a-Cocks here:
The Laud increase the number of Have-a-Cocks,
Truly false Prophets will arise in flocks;
But as a ^arding-candle shut up quite
For Ministers may be Cuckolds.
In a dark Lanthorn never gives light;
Even such are they. Ay but my breathren dear,
I Am no such Lanthorn, for my horns are clear*
But I shall now conclude this glorious truth
Use of Exhortation.
With an Exhortation to old men and youth:
Be sure to feed young Daniel, that is to say,
Feed all your Ministers that preach and pray.
Motives
First of all, 'cause it is good, I speak that know so,
1.
And by experience find it is good to do so:
4.
Fourthly, 'cause it is not evil; Nextly and Thirdly,
3.
For that it is very good, unless the Word lie.
6.
Sixthly, for that you are moved thereto; and Twelfthly,
12.
'Cause there is naught better, unless I my self lie.
Hunger a great enemy to Gospel-duty.
But now he smells the Pyes begin to reak,
His teeth water, and he can no longer speak:
Only it will not be amiss to tell ye
How he was troubled with a woman's belly;
A Cropsick sister.
For she was full of caudle and devotion,
Which in her stomach raised a commotion,
For the hot vapors much did damnifie
Her that was wont to walk in Finsbury.
So though a while she was sustained with ginger,
Yet at the length a cruel pain did twinge her;
And like as marble sweats before a shower,
So did she sweat, and sweating forth did pour
Her mornings draught of Sugar-sops and Saffron,
Into her sighing neighbors Cambrick apron.
At which a Lard she cried, full sad to see
The foul mishap, yet suffered patiently:
How do you, then she cried? I Am glad it is up:
Ah sick, sick, sick; cries one, Oh for a cup
Of my mint water that is at home:
As patt as might be, then the Parson cried,
It Is good; one holds her head, let't come, let't come,
Still crying; just in the nick the Priest replied,
Yea like a stream ye ought to let it flow,
And then she reached, and once more let it go.
Straight an old woman with a brace of chins,
A bunch of keys, and cushion for her pins,
Seeing in earnest the good woman lack it, A very great Creature-comfort.

Draws a Strong-water bottle from her placket;
Well heated with her flesh, she takes a sup,
Then gives the sick, and bids her drink it up.
But all in vain, A great cry, and a little wool.
her eyes begin to roll,
She sighs, and all cry out, alas poor soul!
One then does pinch her cheek, one pulls her nose,
Some blessed the opportunity that were her foes,
And they revenged themselves upon her face,
S. Dunstans Devil was never in such a case.
Now Priest say what thou will, for here is a chat
Begun of this great Empyrick, and that
Renowned Doctor, what cures they have done:
I like not Mayern, he speaks French says one.
Oh says another, though the man be big,
For my part I know none like Dr. Trig.
Nay, hold you there says the other, on my life
There Is none like Chamberlain the Man-midwife.
Then in a heap, their own receipts they muster,
To make this gelly, how to make that plaster,
Which when she hears that but now fainting lay,
Up starteth she, and talks as fast as they.
But they that did not mind this doleful passion,
Followed their business on another fashion;
For all did write, the Elder and the Novice,
Methought the Church looked like the Six-Clerks-Office*
But Sermon's done, and all the folks as fast
As they can trudge, to Supper now make have:
Down comes the Priest, when a grave Brother meets him,
And putting off his broad-brim'd hat, thus greets him:
A great sign of grace.
Dear Sir, my Wife and I do you invite
Of The Creature with us to partake this night:
And now suppose what I prepare to tell ye,
The City-dame, whose faith is in the belly
Of her crammed Priest, had all her cates in order,
That Gracious-street, or Cheap Side can afford her.
Bill of fare.
Lo first a Pudding! truly 't had more Reasons
Than forty Sermons show at forty seasons.
Then a Sur-loyn came in, as hot as fire,
Yet not so hot as was the Priests desire.
Next came a shoulder of Mutton roasted raw,
To be as utterly abolisht as the Law.
The next in order was a Capon plump,
With an Use of Consolation in his rump.
Then came a Turkey cold, which in its life
Had a fine tail, just like the Citizens wife.
But now by'r leave and worship too, for hark ye,
Here comes the Venson put in Paste by Starkey:
Which once set down there, at the little hole
Immediately in whips the Parsons soul.
He saw his Stomachs anchor, and believed
That now his belly should not be deceived.
How he leans ore the cheer toward his first mover!
While his hot zeal does make his mouth run over.
This Pastie had Brethren too, like to the Mayor,
Three Christmas, or Minc'd-pyes, all very fair:
Methought they had this Motto, Though they flirt us,
And preach us down, Sub pondere crescit virtus.
Apple-tarts, Fools, and strong Cheese to keep down
The steaming vapors from the Parsons crown.
Canary too, and Claret eke also,
Which made the tips of their ears and noses glow.
Up now they rise, and walk to their several chairs,
When lo, the Priest uncovers both his ears*
Grace before meat.
Most gracious Shepherd of the Brethren all,
Thou said that we should eat, before the Fall;
Then was the world but simple, for they knew
Not either how to bake, or how to brew.
But happily we fell, and then the Vine
Did Noah plant, and all the Priests drank wine:
Truly we cannot but rejoice to see
Thy gifts dispensed with such equality.
To us thou have given wide throats, and teeth to eat;
To the women, knowledge how to dress our meat.
Make us devoutly constant in thy cup,
And grant us strength when we shall cease to sup,
To bear away thy creatures on our feet,
And not be seen to tumble in the street.
We are thy sheep, O let us feed, feed on,
Till we become as fat as any Brawn.
Then let us fall to, and eat up all the cheer;
Straight So be it he cries, and calls for beer.
Now then, Much good may do you Sir.
like Scanderbeg, he falls to work,
And hews the Pudding as he hewed the Turk:
How he plough'd up the Beef like Forrest-land,
And fumed because the bones his wrath withstand*
Upon the Mutton he fell like Woolf or Mastie,
Still hewing out his way unto the Pastie:
At first a Sister helped him, but this Elfe sir,
Wearying her out, she cries, Pray help your self sir.
Upon the Pastie though he fell anon,
As if it had been the walls of Babylon.
Like a Cathedral down he throws that stuff,
Why, Sisters, says he, I am pepper proof.
Then down he pours the Claret, and down again,
And would the French King were a Puritan,
He cries: swills up the Sack, and I Will be sworn,
Quoth he, Christian forgivenes^
Spains King is not the Popes tenth horn.
By this his tearing hunger does abate,
And on the second course they 'gan to prate.
Then quoth Priscilla, No Grace after meat,
Oh my brother dear,
Truly you are welcome to this homely cheer,
And therefore eat, good brother, eat your fill*
Alas for Daniel my heart aketh still.
Then quoth the Priest, Sister be of good heart;
But she replied, good Brother eat some Tart.
Rebecca then a member of the 'lection,
Began to talk of Brotherly affection;
For this, said she, as I have heard the wise
Discourse, consists much in exercise;
Yet I was foolish once, and did resist,
And but that a dear Brother would not desist,
Carried forth by a strong believing power
That I would yield at length, even to this hour
I had lived in darkness still, and had not known
What joys the Laud reveals to his own.
Then said the Priest, there is a time for all things,
There is a time for great things, and for small things:
There Is a time to eat, and drink, and reformation,
A time to empty, and for procreation;
Therefore dear Sister, we may take our time,
There Is reason for it, I never cared for Rhyme.
Do not the wicked Heathen speak and say,
Gather your Flowers and Rose-buds while you may?
Ay truly, answered she, it is such a motion
As always I embraced with warm devotion:
I mean since it did please the Laud in mercy,
To show me things by feeling, not by hearsay;
Nothing beyond ingratitude.
And truly Brother, there is no man can prove
That I was ere ungrateful for his love;
But sometimes Angels did attend his Purse,
At other times I did him duly nurse
With many a secret dish of lusty meat,
Which did enable us to do the feat.
Truly quoth Dorcas then, I saw a Vision,
That we should have our foes in great derision.
Quoth Martha straight, (and then she shook the crumbs
From off her apron white, and picked her gums)
So did I too; methought I went a Maying,
And the Word of the Laud came to me, saying,
Martha put off thy clothes, for time is come,
That men may bauble show, and women bum,
For that the seed of them that do profess,
Shall only need be clothed with Righteousness.
It Is true dear Sister, there are some that now
Are come to this perfection, and I trow
We may in time grow up to be as they,
Grant us, ah Laud, that we may see that day;
Let Us in the mean time at home and eke abroad,
Uncloath and unbrace our selves before the Laud,
On all occasions that time shall yield,
That our dear Sisters dream may be fulfilled.
Why did not Jacob dream, and so it was;
And Pharaoh dreamt, and so it came to pass.
Then Dorcas cried, reach me the Cheese up hither;
Sister, quoth she, give this unto our Brother,
It Is very good, if well washed down with Sack,
His wasted spirits much refreshing lack.
Recruited thus, All this good cheer, quoth he,
Is but an Emblem of Mortality.
The Ox is strong, and glories in his strength,
Yet him the Butcher knocks down, and at length
We eat him up. A Turkey's very gay,
Like worldly people clad in fine array;
Yet on the Spit it looks most piteous,
And we devour it, as the Worms eat us.
Then full of sauce and zeal up steps Elnathan,
[This was his name now, once he had another,
Until the Ducking-pond made him a Brother]
A Deacon and a Buffeter of Satan:
Truly, A man may love his Brother,
quoth he, I know a Brother dear,
Would gladly pick the bones of what is left here;
Nay he would gladly pick your pockets too
Of a small two pence, or a groat, or so,
The sorry remnants of a broken shilling;
Therefore I pray you friends be not unwilling.
As for my self, it is more than I do need,
To be charitable both in word and deed;
For as to us, the holy Scriptures say,
The Deacons must receive, but
the Laymen pay.
Why Heathen folks that do in Taverns stray,
Will never let their friends the reckning pay;
And therefore pour your charity into the basin,
Brethren and Sisters eke, your coats have lace on.
Why Brethren in the Lord, what need you care
For sixpence? we'll next morn enhance our ware:
Your sixpence comes again, nay there comes more;
Thus Charity's the encreaser of your store.
Truly well spoke, then cried the Master-feaster,
Since you say so, I freely give my tester:
But for the women, they gave more liberally,
For they were sure to whom they gave, and why.
Not better than himself.
Then did Elnathan blink, for he knew well
What he might give, and what he might conceal.
But now the Parson could no longer stay,
It Is time to kiss, he cries, and so away:
At which the Sisters, once the alarm taken,
Made such a din as would have served to waken
A snoring Brother, when he sleeps at Church;
With bagg and baggage then they 'gan to march;
And tickled with the thoughts of their delight,
One Sister to the other bids Good night.
Good night, quoth Dorcas to Priscilla; she,
Good night dear Sister Dorcas unto thee.
In these goodly good nights much time was spent,
And was it not a holy complement?
Christian Liberty.
At length in steps the Parson, on his breast
Laying his hand, A happy night of rest
Refresh thy labors, Sister; yet ere we part,
Feel in my lips the passion of my heart.
To another straight he turned his face, and kissed her,
And then he cries, All peace be with thee Sister.
Next her that made the Feast he kisses harder,
Never a profane kiss among all these.
And in a Godly tone, cries, God reward her:
And having done, he whispers in her ear,
The time when it should be, and the place where.
Thus they all part, and for that night the Priest
Enjoys his own Wife, as good as ever pist.
This seemed a golden time, the fall of sin,
You Would think the thousand years did now begin,
When Satan chained below should cease to roar,
Nor durst the wicked as they wont before
Come to the Church for pastime, nor durst laugh
To hear the non-plust Doctor faign a cough.
The Devil himself, alas! now durst not stand
Within the switching of the Sextons wand,
For so a while the Priests did him pursue,
That he was fain to keep the Sabbath too,
Lest being taken in the Elders lure,
He should have paid his crown unto the poor;
And lest he should like a deceiver come
'Twixt the two Sundays inter stitium,
They stuffed up Lecturers with texts and straw,
On working-days to keep the Devil in awe.
But strange to think, for all this solemn meekness,
At length the Devil appeared in his likeness,
While these deceits did but supply the wants
Of broken unthrifts, and of threadbare Saints*
Oh what will men not dare, if thus they dare
Be impudent to Heaven, and play with Prayer!
Play with that fear, with that religious awe
Which keeps men free, and yet is man's great law:
What can they but the worst of Atheists be,
Who while they word it against impiety,
Affront the throne of God with their false deeds,
Alas, this wonder in the Atheist breeds.
Are these the men that would the Age reform,
That Down with Superstition cry, and swarm
This painted Glass, that Sculpture to deface,
But worship pride, and avarice in their place.
Religion they bawl out; yet know not what
Religion is, unless it be to prate.
Meekness they preach, but study to control;
Money they would have, when they cry out your soul.
And angry, will not have Our Father said,
'Cause it prays not enough for daily bread.
They meet in private, and cry Persecution,
When Faction is their end, and State-confusion:
These are the men that plague and overrun
Like Goths and Vandalls all Religion.
Every Mechanic either wanting stock,
Or wit to keep his trade must have a flock,
The Spirit, cries he, moves me unto it,
And what the Spirit bids, must I not do it?
But having profited more than his flock by teaching,
And stepped into authority by preaching
For a lay Office, leaves the Spirits motion
And straight retreateth from his first devotion.
But this he does in want, give him preferment,
Off goes his gown, God's call is no determent.
Vain foolish people, how are ye deceived?
How many several sorts have ye received
Of things called truths, upon your backs laid on
Like Saddles for themselves to ride upon?
They rid amain, and hell and Satan drove,
While every Priest for his own profit strove.
Can they the age thus torture with their lies,
Lowed bellowing to the world Impieties,
Black as their coats, and such a silent fear
Lock up the lips of men, and charm the ear?
Had that same holy Israelite been dumb,
That fatal day of old had never come
To Baals Tribe; oh thrice unhappy age!
While zeal and piety lie masked in rage
And vulgar ignorance! How we do wonder
Once hearing, that the heavens were forced to thunder
Against assailing Giants, surely men,
Men thought could not presume such violence then:
But 'twas no Fable, or if then it were,
Behold a sort of bolder mortals here,
Those undermining shifts of knavish folly,
Using alike to God and men; most holy
Infidels, who now seem to have found out
A subtler way to bring their ends about
Against the Deity, than op'nly to fight;
By smooth insinuation and by slight:
They close with God, seem to obey his Laws,
They cry aloud for him and for his cause.
But while they do their strict injunctions preach.
Deny in actions what their words do teach.
O what will men not dare, if thus they dare
Be impudent to Heaven, and play with Prayer!
Yet if they can no better teach than thus,
Would they would only teach themselves, not us:
So while they still on empty outsides dwell,
They may perhaps be choakt with husk and shell;
While those who can their follies well refute,
By a true knowledge do obtain the fruit.
FINIS.

