Dublin, February 15. 1641. CONFIDENT NEWS FROM IRELAND BEING A LETTER SENT
FROM Mr. William Philips, Merchant, dwelling in Dublin, to Mr. William Baber, a
worthy friend of his, and one of the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple. CERTIFYING
How one of the Rebels flying from his Confederates into Dublin, related to Sir
Charles Coot their damnable Designs, who making it known to Sir Simon Harcott,
and the rest of the Justices, they suddenly issued forth, and beating them out
of their Works, slew 800 of them, with small loss. A Relation that is real,
and not Coined according to invention merely for Press profit; but to satisfy
many whom it may concern, who cannot be resolved by one man's private Letter.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Wood. 1641.

CONFIDENT NEWS FROM IRELAND.
NOBLE FRIEND:
I Having such a convenient Opportunity by the Bearer hereof, my loving and
special Friend: I could not but let you understand something of the present
condition we now stand in; which at this time is very miserable and pitiful,
and as far as I conceive is like to be worse, if the Parliament of England send
not over speedy Aid. For the number of the Rebels increase daily, and are
entrenched within our view in a great multitude; besides the Papists in the
City do much afflict Us; for they daily plot and contrive which way to bring us
and this City to confusion. Whose wicked and malicious designs, by Gods
special favor and providence over us, have been continually defeated, and
brought to naught.

Upon Saturday, the Twelfth of February, about 11. of the clock at night, came
an Irishman, one of the Rebels: but by craft fled away from his Companions;
who knocked at the Gate, desiring of the Watch that he might speak with Sir
Charles Coot, Governor of our City: Saying, he had somewhat to tell him, which
did concern the welfare of the City and Kingdom: which Sir Charles hearing of,
commanded that they should strictly search whether he had any company with him,
or any at hand: if not, to bring him unto him, which was performed accordingly,
and the man brought unto his Bedchamber, chained with Fetters of Iron: who
related how with much difficulty he fled from the Rebels, his Conscience not
suffering him to conceal such a Bloody Design which they had intended on the
morrow against the City: and to that purpose had gathered 30000. men, that when
that they were all at Church, they might surprise the City. Whereupon Sir
Charles arose from his bed, sending to Sir Simon Harcott this sudden News; who
with all speed came unto him, and they went to the Lords Justices together, to
relate the News.

Whereupon Command was given for every man to stand to his Arms, and the whole
City to be raised for their Defense.

About two and three of the clock in the morning, they marched from the City,
being in number about six thousand, with four Troops of horse, and two
Fieldpieces. About six of the clock in the morning, they approached near the
Rebels Camp, and found them unprovided for such a strong design: only their
number much increased, and their Camp strongly fortified, which did not a whit
discourage our Men; For they were extreme willing to give the Onset, and to
fall upon them: seeing they were altogether so unprepared; which they did, and
by the Discharge of our Fieldpieces, the Rebels began to forsake their
quarters: which our men seeing, with all earnestness pursued them. Some stayed
behind to take their Arms, and such Carriage as they had.

The number of Arms was five thousand: and about nine and ten of the clock,
being Sunday in the morning, our Men retreated, with a Report of the slaughter
of Eight hundred Men, on the Rebels part, on ours Fourscore.

Our Intelligencer we kept fast, but we rewarded him well for his pains: which
will perhaps be an encouragement for others hereafter, to do us the like
faithful service.

We are much obliged to the Parliament of England; and also to the Pious and
Religious City of London: Of whose Bounty and Liberality, we have, and do
still partake of in a large measure: The Lord of Heaven reward them threefold
into their Bosoms.

Our Gallowsies are well adorned with Priests, Jesuits, and Friars, the
Complotters and Broachers of all our present Calamities: At which News, the
Rebels swell with indignation, and vows Revenge.

We have nine Barks laded with Corn, and other Provision for Drohedagh; which
poor City holds out valiantly, and thirsts for Relief. Which I hope by this
time, have obtained their desires, and are relieved: but I cannot certainly
assure you thereof.

Thus am I prevented by the urgencie of the Bearer, to bid you farewell;
desiring to be remembered to all my Friends: and especially your self.

Your assured Friend, William Philips.
From Dublin, this 15. of February 1641.
FINIS.

