IN MEMORY Of Our Late Most Gracious Lady, MARY Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland. A POEM,

By Mr. JOHN PHILLIPS.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow in the Poultry. MDCXCV.

IN MEMORY Of Our Late Most Gracious Lady, MARY Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland.
I Would begin, but know not how;
The Subject's Great, though veiled with Sorrow now;
Since Death, that only could,
Has laid the Illustrious Theme so low.
We grant however Distinction still in Dust;
For future Ages, as a Sacred Trust,
In Veneration to the Grave allowed,
With Sumptuous Mausoleum's hid, it lies;
Yet still the poor unhappy Mortal dies.
Unfortunate Race of proud Mankind!
By an eternal Doom, over all Impartial,
To a few Years of crazy Life confined,
And only in their primitive Dust Immortal*
As if no other way could have been found
For Nature's Wheel to have turned round.
When this same Nature, that in Time's Abyss
Long had drowsy lain before,
Roused into Action by a greater Power,
First warmly brooded over the Pregnant Mass,
And all the World was perfeted in Man,
She Step-dame turned, and would not Life bequeath,
But on strict Terms to have it back again.
That was but lent, She cried, and straight ordained
Her grand Plenipotentiary Death,
Her Debt with utmost Rigor to demand.
Nor Prince nor Peasant spare, said she,
No Age or Sex, no Title or Degree.
And least the Task should be too great for One,
Gave him a Train of numerous Diseases,
From which in vain the silly Fugitives run
To lonely Rocks, and distant Wildernesses.
Death searches every Nook and every Hole
From the Antarctic to the Artic Pole,
And the magnificent Structure, Body and Mind,
First raised by Gods in Council joined,
In dreary Darkness lays, though we are safely bold,
And hope, we shall once more a brighter Light behold.
To these harsh Laws subjected fell Great-Britain's QUEEN;
Too good to Dye, had She not mortal been.
The Phoenix of Her Age: Thrice happy I Will,
If such another from her Funeral Pile
Might have renewed the Glory of her Throne.
Let Ancient Story lasting Altars raise
To Chaste Zenobia, or Drusilla's Praise;
Drusilla, She who by Augustus side
Jove's Themis and his Metis both supplied;
Let Modern Records tell who loud Encomiums won
For single Virtues found distinct in every One;
Here Heavens Perfections all in full Resort
Kept both a Sacred and a Splendid Court.
All centered in our QUEEN, Earth's Admiration,
As many Stars make up one Constellation.
She was the Goddess in her towering Sphere,
The rest but Demi-Goddesses to Her.
The Best of Queens, the Best of Wives, the Best of Friends;
For Friend and Wife, if not reciprocal,
The Tie dissolves, and the Relation ends.
Thus piously instructed, She,
When the Chief Master of the Family,
(A Family no less then Three wide Realms,
And yet but one continued Household all)
Waging Just Wars abroad, exchanged soft Ease
And Conjugal Delights for Martial Toil,
To stem th'Invasion that all Europe overwhelms,
She, the Indulgent Mistress, all the while,
At home kept all in Order, all in Peace;
And the vast Household lived released from Fear,
O'reshadow'd by her Providential Care.
While She, from Dover-Cliffs to distant Thule,
By One Obeying, Millions learnt to Rule.
Like Cynthia thus, the farther from her Sun,
She still more brightly and more dazzling shon.
Had Salem's King, for Wisdom so Renowned,
Been now alive, with all his Glory Crowned,
Excited by her Fame alone,
He would have left Iudea's pompous Throne,
And to this Wonder of her Sex have paid
The Visit which to Him Sabaean Princess made.
Do thou not, Nature, now repent
Thy Primitive Rigor, and Austere Decree
That blinded Fate, and laid that strict Restraint
On Death inexorable made by Thee?
Permit Us to accuse thy Conduct, Thou
That to Hearts and Ravens odly do allow
Long Useless Life; but to a narrow Span
Have warped the Days of the World's Sovereign, Man.
In this more cruel, and the unequal Friend
Of thy loved Darling dire Mortality,
That still the Virtuous soonest meet their End.
The gaudy Morsels they, culled out by Death,
His Taste to pamper and perfume his Breath
When over-glutted with the vulgar Fry.
Yet Heaven is surely their designed Abode:
Could there no other way to Heaven be found,
But through the Grave, and Darkness under Ground?
It Is somewhat hard, if Mortals might complain,
And Man be the inferior World's proud Sovereign,
That Nature should his Kingship thus control,
For him to want the poor Prerogative,
That Virtue should not always Vice outlive.
Soonest! -- and that renews our just Complaints,
That Heaven should be so eager that abounds in Saints.
Had she prolonged her Days, and walked with God,
Or in a fiery Chariot shunned the common Road,
We never had repined
To see the Anointed Union broke:
But to be swept away among the Vulgar Crowd,
That makes us 'wail the fatal Stroke,
And want of Heavens Exemption, twice so kind,
Yet all the while to only Two confined.
But whether rambles my Enthusiast Muse?
Oh -- Grief's a Frenzy, frequently trranscends
Those Bounds which only Rapture can excuse,
And often in vain with Fate and Heaven contends.
Thus argued the Chaldean deep and loud,
Though otherwise for Patience so renowned,
When by the Burden of his Anguish bowed.
Then Grief retire, thou have thy Tribute duly paid;
The rest in Annual Rites must be displayed;
For when a Saint like ours to Heaven ascends,
Grief stays below, --
And only Joy the Seraphim attends.
Our Tears on Earth to certain Measures are restrained;
For should our long excessive Moans,
Like Niobe congeal us into Stones,
No Mortal yet ever saw restored
What the relentless Grave has once devoured.
Thus Thirty Days --
In Moab's Plains by their loud Grief detained
The Sacred Host of Israel wept
When their Divine Commander slept,
And God concealed Their Captain, and his Friend.
-- It Is but Self Interest still
With grudging Tears to wail Her endless Gain,
While only we deplore the Loss our Selves sustain.
For now, --
Our Saint e're this, in Bright Seraphick State,
Has made her public Entry through the Iaspar Gate,
Where she through Walls of vast Transparent Gems,
And Starry Luster into Tresses curled,
Looks down with Pity on the Wicked World.
Vouchsafe a Royal Saint an Apotheosis
So just to be allowed as this.
For why should gaudy Superstition claim
The Keys of Paradise,
And real Sanctity not have the same,
Or Greater Privilege to Canonize?
She wore a Crown on Earth; Who can surmise
That she should lose her Crown by going to Heaven?
Nor would the Question be too closely driven,
Where the Effects of Prayer to Saints would fall,
Should Rome on Hers, we on Our MARY call.
Now Towering Muse descend again,
And to the cheared World explain
The Enigma of our Joy and Sorrow Subaltern,
So blended, that at once we both Rejoice and Mourn.
We thought the Omnipotent at first provoked,
And our Disaster with Impatience brook'd,
Britannia languishing with Arms across
To see her Welfare weltring in her Loss.
But then, Fresh Joys Arrived,
Finding Victorious WILLIAM still survived,
And to his Peoples Hearts more closely joined,
By New Espousals of Addressed Affection.
Britannia then, --
Acknowledged Heaven less Angry and more Kind,
The more she stood in need of Heavens Protection.
Long may He be, still Armed in our Defense,
The Care of wakefull Providence.
And long may be his Martial Flame
The Terror of proud Bourbon's Hated Name.
For Mighty Works, and Wonderful Events,
Heaven still prepares Heroic Instruments.
Him all Men grant the Instrument prepared,
And by the Gallick Titan only feared.
Should His Support, by Prudence Fortunate,
Once fail the Common Cause, I dread the Fate
Of Europe all into Confusion hurled,
Like the Unbolted Frame of the Dissolving World.
But This our Hope, and This our Joy sustains,
Though MARY's gone, yet WILLIAM still remains.
FINIS.

