The First Book of Architecture by ANDREA PALLADIO translated out of Italian
with: diverse other designs necessary to the art of well building by Godfrey
Richards



And are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Peacock in Cornhil near
the old Exchange London

THE FIRST BOOK OF Architecture, BY ANDREA PALLADIO. Translated out of ITALIAN:
With an Appendix Touching DOORS and WINDOWS, By Pr LEMUET Architect to the
French King: Translated out of French,

By G. R.

Also Rules and Demonstrations, with several Designs for the Framing of any
manner of Roofs either above pitch or under pitch, whether Square or Bevel,
never Published before. With designs of Floors of Variety of small pieces of
Wood, lately made in the Palace of the Queen Mother, at Sommerset-House; A
curiosity never practiced in England before.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and sold by G. Richards, at the Golden Ball over
against the Exchange, London: And by Sam. Thomson, at the Bishops Head in
Duck-Lane. 1668.

IMPRIMATUR,

G. Brabourne, S. S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, and D. D. Archiep.
Cant. Sacellan. domestic.
Jan. 27. 1662.
To my Worthy and much Honored Friend, DANIEL COLWAL, Esquire
Sir,
BEing very sensible of the many Favors which you have a long time been
pleased to afford me, I dare no longer delay to acknowledge my Obligation:
Although with the Addition of your farther trouble, in desiring your Perusal
and Allowance of this Translation, wherein if you shall think that I have done
the Author no less right then he has done the Subject, I shall not doubt of
the approbation of all other Ingenious persons; and that our Artists having
such Examples will make it as much esteemed here as abroad; and it is only for
their service that I have undertaken this work. I confess I ought to present
you something suitable to those higher Studies wherein you have with so much
success exercised your self, and not by any thing inferior, divert you from
the Philosophical and Sublime Entertainments, which you find in that Royal
Society at Gresham-Colledge, whereof you are a Worthy Member. But this being
intended for an assistance to our Ingenious Workmen, and Improvement of English
Architecture; I shall therefore hope for your Patronage, and that you will own
me in this, as in all other occasions, to be,

Sir, Your most Humble and Obliged Servant; Godfrey Richards.

THE PREFACE.
THe Subject of this Translation, being Architecture, does, in the opinion of
Sr Hen. Wotton, need no Commendation, where there are Noble Men or Noble Minds:
Therefore I shall only give you an account of the Authors, and my own
concernment herein: He was Andrea Palladio, a famous Architect of Italy, where
taking notice of the Irregularities and Deformities in Building, introduced by
invasions of the Goths, and other Barbarians; to prevent those inconveniences
for the future, he thought fit to instruct the world in the Rules and Practices
of the Learned Ancients; having opportunity to observe the footsteps of their
labors even at Rome it self, where being the greatest Concourse of Noble Men
and Noble Minds, they spared neither Care nor Cost in Building: And in
Imitation of them, our Author is exact in his directions touching every
material, as in the choice of Stone, Timber, Metals, Sand, Lime, Brick, etc.
what good, and what not, how to be prepared and put in use. It Is observed how
careful they were in the making their Brick and Lime, not forbearing the
hardest Stone; for as Sr Henry Wotton observes, that the Italians to this day,
and much more the Ancients, did burn their firmest Stone, and even Marble it
self, where it was plentiful, which in time became Marble again, or at least of
Indissoluble Durity, as appears in the standing Theaters. And other Learned
Men have required that all the Timber be cut out of the same Forest, all the
Stone out of the same Quarry, and the Lime be made out of the same Stone of
which the Building is intended, imagining that they will Sympathize and join
better by a kind of Original Kindred. But instead of this Curiosity, we too
often make Lime without any great choice, and of Refuse Stuff, which is an
English Error, of no small moment in our Buildings. After these Particulars,
our Author proceeds to treat of the Five Orders of Columns, whose Members and
Proportions, as he has laid them down, are by the Judicious esteemed the most
excellent in their kind; and for some of their terms which I have changed, it
was not without the advice of Skilful Artists, thereby to conform to those
terms most familiar to our Workmen. To these are added Designs of Doors and
Windows, by Pr Le Muet, Architect to the French King; which I thought good to
present, ( Palladio only discoursing of them) they being well approved by all
Artists, both for their manner and Proportions, and the same which are in the
Louvre at Paris; and out of him I have given the Proportion of Halls and
Chambers, though a little differing from Palladio, because most agreeing to the
present practice both in England and France: And for the same Reason, I do,
instead of Monsieur Muets Designs of Frames of Houses, put in such as are used
in England, by the direction of some of our ablest Architects, which (I hope)
will be grateful, and very useful, not only to our Artists, but Gentlemen and
others which may have occasion to Build; giving an account of all the Names
proper to each Member and principal of the House; and also show the manner of
framing, with their several Scantlings and Buttments.

Although we want not such Ingenious Artists whose names deserve to be
Celebrated for many standing Examples of their skill, which do better deserve
description then many published with much pomp beyond the Seas: Yet we have but
few Books which I can recommend to you, besides the Excellent discourses of
Sir H. Wotton and John Evelyn Esquire the former on the Elements of Architecture,
and the latter in his account of Architecture and Architects (added to his
Elegant Translation of the Parallel) where they having comprised fully and
clearly the most weighty observations of the Art in general, the studious will
need only to serve himself of the particular parts thereof, according to his
own occasions.

And such Pieces as I here present, the Reader cannot think unseasonable, now
that a new and great City is to be built, wherein the King having shown his
particular care of keeping the Trade in its former channel, by fixing the
Exchange, Custom-house etc. on their old foundations, and the Laws having
provided for such a way of building, as may join together (what our Author
requires to be observed by every undertaker) Accommodation, Handsomness, and
Lastingness, and prevent that deformity and danger which we have formerly been
liable to, by Irregular and slight buildings, narrow Streets, intolerable
encroachments, jettings of windows, and what not, that might make it
combustible. I hope now both old and young will rejoice at the re-building of
London, a second happy restoration, inferior only to that of his Majesty's
Person and Government.

G. R.

THE FIRST BOOK OF ARCHITECTURE, By ANDREA PALLADIO.
CHAP. I. What ought to be considered and prepared, before you begin to Build.
BEfore you begin to Build, you ought carefully to consider every part of the
Foundation and Groundwork of the Building which is to be raised. Three things
in a Building (as says Vitruvius) ought to be considered, without which it
will not deserve commendation: Those are usefulness or accommodation,
lastingness and handsomness: For that work cannot be accounted perfect, which
is useful but only for a short time, or not convenient for a longer; or having
these two, has not also decency: It will be commodious, when every part has
its due place and fit situation, not below its dignity, nor above what its use
requires; And they will be fitly disposed, when the Galleries, Halls, Chambers,
Cellars, and Granaries are in their proper places. As for the lastingness, you
regard that when all the Walls are right by the line, thicker below then above,
and have good and sufficient foundations; and besides, the pillars above must
be directly over the pillars below. And all the Apertures (as Doors and
Windows) must be one above the other, so that the solid be upon the solid, and
the vacant be upon the vacant. The handsomness will arise from the fair form,
and the correspondence between the whole and its parts, of the parts among
themselves, and of them to the whole: Because that a building ought to appear
an entire and perfect body, wherein each member agrees with the others, and all
the members be necessary to what you design.

These things considered, in the design and model, you ought then diligently to
calculate all the charge that may arise, and make timely provision of money,
and prepare what materials shall seem requisite: So that in building nothing
may be deficient, and hinder the Complement of the work, it being no little
praise to the builder, nor small advantage to the work, that it be finished
with due expedition: And that all the Walls be at once laid out, and equally
dispatched, from whence there will be none of those clefts which usually are
seen in Fabrics finished unequally, and at diverse times.

And therefore having chosen the most skilful Artists that you can get, that so
the work may be the better carried on, by their advice; You are to provide
Timber, Stones, Sand, Lime, and Metal; concerning which provision, you shall
have some Advertisements, as to frame the Joists of the Hall and Chambers,
provide your self with so many Joists, as when framed, there may remain between
them the space of a Joist and half.

In like manner, concerning Stone, you are to take notice, that to make the
Jaumes of Doors and Windows, you are not to have stone bigger then a fifth, nor
less then a sixth part of the light; And if you intend to adorn the building
with Pillars or Pillasters, make the Bases, Capitels, and Architraves of stone,
and the other parts of brick.

Besides, as for the Walls, you are to consider, that they ought to diminish
according as they rise; which instruction will state the account right, and
lessen great part of the charge: And because all these parts may be discoursed
of in their particular places, it shall suffice to have here given this general
advice, which is as a rough draught of the whole building.

But besides the quantity, you are also to consider the quality and goodness
of the materials, to choose the best; Experience gained from the buildings of
others will be a great help, because thereby we may easily know how to
determine what is fit and expedient to our own purpose. And although Vitruvius,
Leon Battista, Alberti, and other excellent Writers, have taught what is
requisite in the choice of materials, yet that nothing may be wanting in these
Books of mine, I shall speak of some, confining my self to the most necessary.

CHAP. II. Of Timber.
TImber (as Vitruvius has it, cap. 9. book 2.) ought to be felled in Autumn,
and through all the Winter: because then the Trees recover from the root that
strength and soundness which in the Spring and Summer was dispersed into
leaves and fruit; And you are to cut them in the wane of the Moon, because the
moisture which is most apt to rot wood, is then consumed: from whence there
will not come the worm to hurt it. It should be cut but to the middle of the
pith, and so left until it be dry, because by drops there will pass away that
moisture which would cause putrefaction; Being cut, let it be laid in a place
free from the extremities of Sun, Wind and Rain; and those ought chiefly to be
kept dry, which are of spontaneous growth; and to the end that they may not
cleave but dry equally, you are to daub them over with Cow Dung; it should not
be drawn through the dew, but in the afternoon, nor to be wrought being very
wet or too dry: because the one makes it apt to rot, the other hard to work;
nor will it in less then three years be dry enough, to use in Plankes, Doors
and Windows. It is convenient for those who are about to build, to inform
themselves from men skilful in the nature of Timber, what Wood is fit for such
use, and what not. Vitruvius, in the Chapter above mentioned, gives good
instructions; and so other learned men who have written thereof at large.

CHAP. III. Of Stone.
SOme are Natural, some Artificial: The Natural are hewn out of the Quarry, and
are either to make lime or to build walls; of those which are used for Lime,
shall be spoken hereafter; those of which walls are built, are either Marble
and hard Stone, or else soft and pliant. Marble, and hard Stone is to be
wrought as soon as dug; for it will be at that time more easy to work, then
when it has remained a while in the Air: Seeing the longer they are out of
the Quarry, they become the harder, and must suddenly be put in hand; But the
softer Stone (especially where its nature and sufficiency is not understood, as
when it is dug in a place from whence formerly none has been taken) ought to
be dug in Summer, and exposed to the Air, and not to be used within two
years; it must be dug in Summer, to the end that not being used to wind,
rain, and frost, it may by degrees grow hard, and enabled to resist those
injuries of the weather; and it should be left so long, that those which have
been prejudiced may be put in foundations; and the others not spoiled (upon
trial) are to be used above ground in Buildings, because they endure longest.

Artificial Stones, are from their form commonly called Quadrells; These are
made of a chalkie, whitish, and pliable earth; you must by all means avoid that
which is gravelly and sandy; the earth must be dug in Autumn, and tempered
in Winter, and so they may be well made in the Spring; But if necessity forces
you to make them in the Winter or Summer, cover them in Winter with dry sand,
and in Summer with straw, when made, they require a longer time to dry; and
it is best that they dry in the shade, so that not only the outside, but the
middle and all parts may be equally hardened, which cannot be done in less then
two years. They are made bigger or less according to the quality of the
building, and the use to which they are intended; Therefore the Ancients made
their bricks for public and great buildings, larger then for small and
private: The bigger sort ought to be hollowed in many places, that so they may
dry and bake the better.

CHAP. IV. Of Sand.
THere are three sorts of Sand, that is to say, Pit-Sand, River-Sand, and
Sea-Sand. Pit-Sand is of all the best, and is black, white, red, or cindry,
which is a sort of earth burnt by fire enclosed in the Mountains, and dug up
in Tuscany. There is also dug in Terra di Lavoro, in the Territories of Baia
and Cuma, a Sand called by Vitruvius, Pozzolana, which suddenly knits together
in water, and makes building very strong; it has been found by long
experience, that of all Pit-Sand, the white is the worse: And of River-Sand,
that from the stream which is found in the falls of water is the best, because
it is more purged. The Sea-Sand is worst of all, and blackens and shines like
glass, but that is better which is nearest the shore, and bigger. The Pit-Sand,
because it is sat and tough (but apt to cleave) is therefore used in Walls and
long Vaults. The River-Sand is very good for the covering, or rough-casting of
Walls. Sea-Sand, because it is soon wet and soon dry, and moulders away by
reason of the Salt, therefore is unfit to bear weight. All Sand is best in its
kind, if being squeezed and handled, it crackles; and if being put upon a white
cloth, it neither stains nor leaves it foul: that is bad, which mingled with
water, makes it dirty and muddy, and which has for a long time been in the
Air, Sun, Moon, and Frost, because it will retain much earth and rotten
humor, apt to bring forth shrubs and wild fig trees, which are greatly hurtful
to buildings.

CHAP. V. Of Lime, and how to work it.
STones, whereof Lime is made, are either dug out of the Hills, or taken out
of the Rivers: All Stones of the Hills are good, which are dry without any
moisture, and brittle, having no material in it; which when it passes the fire
shall leave the Stone less; Therefore that Lime will be best which is made of
the hardest, sound, and white Stone, and being burnt remains a third part
lighter then its Stone. There are also certain sorts of Stone, the Lime whereof
is very good for the setting of walls. In the Hills of Padua they dig a rugged
Stone, whose Lime is very good in works which lie open, and in the water,
because it presently hardens, and endures very long. All dug Stones are
better to make Lime, then the gathered; and from a shady and moist pit, rather
then a dry: the white is better to work then the brown; Stones which are
gathered in Rivers and Brooks, that is to say, Pebbles, make excellent Lime,
and very white, and neat work; Therefore it is generally used for finishing of
Walls. All Stones, as well of the Hills as Rivers, are sooner or later burnt,
according to the fire which is given them; but ordinarily they are burnt in
sixty hours: Being burnt, wet them, but not pour on the water all at once, but
at diverse times, and frequently (that they may not burn) till they be well
tempered: Afterward put them in a moist and shady place without any mixture,
only cover them lightly with Sand; and by how much the more thoroughly they are
steeped, so much the more tough and better they will be: Except those which are
made of rough Stones, as the Paduan, because they, as soon as they are wet,
must be wrought, otherwise they waste and burn away; whence they will not hold,
but become useless: for to make the Mortar, you must so mix the Sand, that
taking of Pit-Sand, you must put three parts thereof with one of Lime; if River
or Sea-Sand, two parts thereof with one of Lime.

CHAP. VI. Of Metals.
THe Metals used in buildings are Iron, Lead, and Copper: Iron serves to make
Nails, Hinges, and Chains, to fasten the Doors, to make Doors themselves,
Grates, and the like works. It is no where found, and dug pure, but when
dug is purged by the fire, to the end it may be so melted, that it may run,
and that before it be cool, the foulness may be taken away; but after it is
purged and cooled, it heats well, and becomes soft, and easy to be wrought and
beat out with a hammer. But it will not easily melt, if it be not put again
into a furnace made for that purpose; if being red hot, it do not work nor
yield to the hammer, it wastes and is spoiled. It Is a sign of the goodness of
Iron, if in the mass you see the veins continued straight without interruption,
and if the ends of the piece be clean and without soil: Because the said veins
show if the Iron be without knots and puffs, and you may understand the middle
by the ends. Being wrought into plates square, or any other figure, if the
sides be even, you may conclude, it is all alike good, having equally endured
the hammer.

With Lead they cover stately Palaces, Churches, Towers, and other public
buildings, and Gutters and Pipes to convey water, and therewith they fasten the
Hinges and Iron-work in the Jaumes of Doors and Windows. There are three sorts
thereof, white, black, and of a color between both, and by some called
Ash Color; the black is so called, not because it is really black, but because
being white, with some blackness in it: Therefore in respect of the white, the
Ancients with reason gave it that name. The white is more perfect and precious
then the black, the Ash Color is between both: Lead is dug either in great
lumps found by themselves, or in small pieces, which shine with a certain
blackness, or else in very thin flakes, amongst the Rocks, Marble and Stones.
All sorts of Lead will easily run, because with the heat of the fire it melts
before it is red hot: but put it into a very hot furnace, it loses its nature
and strength; for one part is changed into Litharge, and the other into dross.
Of these sorts of Lead the black is soft, and therefore easily wrought with the
hammer, and dilates much, and is very heavy. The white is harder and lighter,
the Ash Color is much harder then the white, and of middle weight between both.

With Copper sometimes they cover public buildings; and the Ancients made
Nails or Bolts, which fastened in the stones above and below, kept the stones
from falling out of order, and the Claspes or Hooks placed to hold two stones
together; and they used these Nails and Claspes, because that buildings which
cannot possibly be made without many pieces of stones may (by being thus joined
and bound together) as it were become one stone, and so more strong and
durable. They also made Nails and Claspes of Iron, but more often of Copper,
because they will last longer, not being so subject to rust. Also they made
Letters for Inscriptions, which they placed on the borders of buildings: And we
read that of this Metal were the hundred famous gates of Babylon; and in the
Isles of Cades, the two Pillars of Hercules eight cubits high. That is esteemed
the best, which burnt and extracted from Mineral by fire, is red, inclining to
yellow, of a good grain, and full of holes; for that is a sign it is well
purged, and free from dross: Copper may be heated like Iron, and made liquid,
so that it may be cast; but in extreme hot furnaces, it will not endure the
force of the flame, but totally consume. Although it be hard, nevertheless it
submits to the hammer, and dilates it self into thin Leaves; it is best
preserved by Tar: and although it does not rust like Iron, yet it has a kind
of rust which is called Verdegreece, especially if it touch sharp and liquid
things; of this metal mixed with Tin, or Lead, or Latten (which is also Copper)
and colored with Lapis Calaminaris, is made a metal commonly called Brass;
which oftentimes Architects do use, as in Bases, Pillars, Capitels, Statues,
and such like. In Rome are four Columns of Brass (at St. Giovanni Lateranno)
of which one only has its Capitel, and were made, by Augustus, of metal which
was taken from the stems of ships, which he took in Egypt from M. Antonio:
There remains also in Rome, to this day, four ancient gates, which are those of
the Rotunda, which formerly was the Pantheon; That of St. Adriano, which was
the Temple of Saturnus; That of St. Cosmo and Damiano, which was the Temple of
Castor and Pollux, or rather of Romulus and Remus; And that which is in St.
Agnes, without the gate Viminalis; But the most beautiful of all these, is that
of St. Maria Rotunda, wherein those Ancients did endeavor to imitate by art
that kind of Corinthian metal, in which the natural yellow of Gold prevailed:
for we read that when Corinth was destroyed and burnt, (which now is called
Coranto) thus they melted and mixed in one mass, Gold, Silver, and Copper, and
fortune tempered, and made the mixture of three sorts, which afterward was
called Corinthian: In one of them the Silver prevailed, whence it remained
white, and very near it in luster: In another the Gold prevailed, and remained
yellow, and of a Gold color: And the third was, where all these three metals
were of an equal temperament; and these species have been since diverse ways
imitated. Hitherto I have discoursed of those things seeming most necessary to
be considered and prepared before building; It now remains that something be
said of foundations, the materials whereof being prepared, the work may be
proceeded on.

CHAP. VII. Of the Qualities of Ground, wherein Foundations are to be laid.
THe Base of the building is that which we call the Foundation, which is to
say, the part which is under ground, upholding the rest of the building that is
above ground; Therefore of all the errors which do happen in building, those
are the most pernicious which are committed in the foundation, because they
bring with them the ruin of the whole Fabric, nor can without great
difficulty be amended; Whence the Architects ought to use their utmost
diligence: Because in some places they have a natural foundation, and in other
places it is necessary to use Art.

A Natural Foundation is when we build on Stone, a soft sandy or moldring
Stone, or Gravel; for these, without digging, or other helps of Art, are of
themselves excellent foundations, and most fit to uphold the greatest building
both on Land and in Water: But if nature affords not a foundation, it must be
attempted by Art, and then the place you have to build on, is either a solid
earth, or a gravelly, sandy, mossie, soft, and moorish place. If the earth be
fast and firm, you may dig so far as to a discreet Architect may seem requisite
for the quality of the building, and soundness of the earth: and (when you
intend not to make Cellars, or other underground Offices) your depth is to be
a sixth part of the height of the building; To know this firmness, observation
from the digging of Wells, Cisterns, and such like, will help well; and it is
also known by Herbs growing there, if they usually spring up only in firm and
fast grounds; and besides, it is a sign of firm ground, if a great weight thrown
thereon, it neither sounds nor shakes; And from the Report of Drums being set
on the ground, and lightly touched, it does not resound again, and if water put
in a vessel does not shake: The neighboring places will also give you to
understand the fastness and firmness of the earth: But if the place be sandy or
gravelly, observe whether it be on land or in water: for if it be on land, you
must take notice what has been before directed, concerning fast ground; And if
you build in a River, the Sand and Gravel is altogether useless, because the
water with its continual stream and flood often changes its bed: Therefore dig
till you come to a bottom sound and firm; or if that be difficult, dig somewhat
in the Sand and Gravel, and then place piles whose ends may reach to the sound
and good earth, and upon those you are to build: But if you are to build upon a
mossie, and loose ground, then you must dig till you find sound earth, and
therein also so much as the bigness of the walls and the greatness of the
building require.

This sound ground (and fit to uphold building) is of diverse sorts; for (as
Alberti well says) somewhere so hard, as it is scarce to be cut with Iron;
somewhere very stiff, somewhere blackish, somewhere whitish (which is accounted
the weakest) somewhere like chalk, somewhere sandy; of all these the best is
that which is cut with most labor, and when wet, does not dissolve into dirt.

You should not build upon a ruin or old foundation, if first of all you know
not its depth, and whether it be sufficient to bear the building; But if the
earth be soft and sinks much, as in moorish grounds, then you must place piles,
whose length must be an eighth part of the height of the Wall, and in thickness
a twelfth part of their length: The piles must be placed as close as one can
stand by the other, and are to be rammed in with blows, rather quick then
heavy, so that the earth may the better consolidate and fasten. You must place
the piles not only under the out-walls, upon the Trench or Gutturs, but also
under the inner-walls, which divide the building: for if you make the
foundation for the inner-walls different from those without, then laying Beams
along one by the other, and others athwart them above; oftentimes it happens,
that the inner-walls fall down, when those without being placed on piles, stir
not: Whence all walls come to cleave, the which render the building ruinous,
and is very uncomely to look on; Wherefore you must avoid this danger, making
the piling work of less charge; for according to proportion of walls, the piles
in the middle may be placed thinner then them without.

CHAP. VIII. Of Foundations.
FOundations ought to be twice so thick as the walls to be raised thereon, and
therein the quality of the earth, and the greatness of the building is to be
regarded, making them more large in soft and looser ground, and where there is
a great weight to be sustained. The plain of the Trench must be Level, so that
the weight may press equally, and not inclining to one part more then another,
may prevent the cleaving of the walls. For this reason the Ancients used to
pave the plain with Tivertine, Tivertine, a certain stone brought from Tivoli.
and we lay Planks and Beams, and build thereon.

Foundations are made sloping, that is to say, to diminish as they rise; yet
so, as that there may be so much left on one side, as on the other: so that the
middle of that above may fall perpendicularly upon the middle of the lower
work, which must be also observed in the diminution of Walls above ground;
because by this means the building becomes much stronger, then by making the
diminutions any other way.

There is sometimes made (especially in moorish grounds where there is need of
piles) to avoid charge, Foundations discontinued but with certain Vaults, upon
which they afterward build. In great buildings it is very commendable to make
vents through the body of the Walls, from the Foundation to the Roof, because
they let forth the wind (which is very prejudicial to buildings) lessen the
charge, and are of no small convenience, if in them you make winding stairs
from the bottom to the top.

diagram of a wall

CHAP. IX. Of the Fashion of Walls.
THe Foundations being laid, it remains that we treat of the Superstructure.
The Ancients had six sorts of Walls; One called Reticolata, or Network:
another of Quadrells, or Brick: a third of Cement, which is of rough stones
from the Hills or Rivers: a fourth of various stones: a fifth of squared
stones: the sixth Riempiuta, which is also called Coffer-work. Of the Network
there is no use at all in these days; but because Vitruvius relates it was
common in his time, I do here put also that design. They made the Coignes and
Corners of their building of Quadrells, and every two foot and half took up
three Courses of Quadrells, which bound the whole thickness of the Wall.

A. Coignes, or Corners of Quadrells. B. Courses of Quadrells, which bind the
whole Wall. C. The Network. D. The Courses of Quadrells, through the thickness
of the Wall. E. The inner part of the Wall made of Cement.
Walls of Brick, or Quadrells, both those about Cities, and other great
Edifices, must be so made, that the inside and outside may be of Quadrells, and
in the middle filled up with Cement, and with brick, earth, and stone, rammed
together; and to every three foot in height, there must be three Courses of
Quadrells of the biggest sort, which may take the whole breadth of the Wall.
And the first Course must be laid with the length inward, that the lesser part
of the brick be exposed: The second, the length laid side-ways, and the third
as the first. Of this sort are the Walls of the Rotunda in Rome, and the Bathes
of Dioclesian, and all other ancient buildings which are there.

E. The Courses of Quadrells, which bind the whole Wall. F. The middle part of
the Wall made of Cement, between one Course and the other, and the outward
Quadrells.
The Walls of Cement must be made so, that to every two foot at least, there be
three Courses of Quadrells or Brick; And that the Quadrells or Brick, be
prepared according to the manner aforesaid. Such are the Walls of Turin in
Piedmont, which are made of River-pebbles split in the middle, which being
placed with the split side outward, make very even and smooth work. The Walls
of the Arena of Verona are likewise of Cement; and there are three Courses of
Quadrells to every three foot: And in like manner are made other ancient
Edifices, as appears in my Books of Antiquities.

G. Cement or River Pebbles. H. Courses of Quadrells which bind the whole Wall.
The Walls of irregular stones were so called, because they were made of Stones
of unequal sides and Angles; And to make these Walls, they used a plumb Rule,
which applied to the place where the Stone was to be put, served to place them
straight and even: Thereby to try, time after time, if the Stone stood right in
the designed place. Of this sort may be seen Walls at Preneste, and Ancient
streets were paved in this manner.

I. Irregular Stones.
diagram of a wall

diagram of a wall

At Rome may be seen Walls of squared Stones, where was the Piazza, and the
Temple of Augustus, in which they locked in the lesser Stones with Courses of
greater.

K. Courses of lesser Stones. L. Courses of bigger Stones.
The manner Riempiuta, or filled Walls, which is also called Coffer-work, which
the Ancients did use; Taking Planks, and placing them edge-wise, allowing so
much space as they would have the thickness of the Wall, filling it with
mortar, and stones of all sorts mingled together; and so they went on from
Course to Course. There is seen such like Walls at Sermion, upon the Lake De
Grada.

M. Plankes put edge-wise. N. The inner part of the Wall. O. The face of the
Wall, the Plankes taken away.
Of this kind may be called the ancient walls of Naples, which had two walls of
squared Stones four foot thick, and six foot distant the one from the other;
those walls were bound together, with other cross Walls, and the Cases which
were between the Traverse Walls and the Out-Walls were four foot square, and
were filled up with Stones and Earth.

P. The Outward Stone Wall. Q. The Traverse Walls. R. Cases filled with stones
and Earth.
These were the forms of which the Ancients did serve themselves, and the
footsteps thereof are yet to be seen; whence it may be concluded, that Walls
of what sort soever ought to have some Tires or Courses, which are like sinewe;
that hold fast all other parts together, which chiefly may be observed when
Walls are made of Brick: For the structure through age falling asunder in the
middle, the Walls may not become ruinous, as has happened, and is seen in many
Walls, especially on that side which respects the North.

CHAP. X. Of the Method which the Ancients did practice in making their Stone
Buildings.
BEcause it happens, that sometimes buildings are made (the whole, or good
part) of Marble, or some other great stones; I think it convenient, in this
place, to acquaint you what the Ancients did in such cases; For we may observe,
in their work, that they were so diligent in joining their stones together,
that in many places their connection can scarcely be perceived. And besides, the
Beauty, Firmness, and Duration of the Fabric, is very much to be regarded.

And for as much as I can understand, they first squared and wrought the sides
of the stones which were to be placed one upon the other, leaving the other
sides rough, and so used them; whereupon the edges of the stones were beyond
the square, and might manage them better, and more variously attempt to place
them right without danger of breaking, then if they had been squared on all
sides before; For when the edges are made square, or less then square, they are
very weak and subject to accidents: In this manner they made all buildings
rough, or, as one may say, rustic; And that being done, they go on working and
polishing the face of the stone which is to be seen. It is true that the Roses
which are between the Modilions, and other such like ornaments of the Cornich,
could not commodiously be done when the stones were fixed, therefore they made
them while they were on the ground. This is well attested by many ancient
buildings, where may be seen many stones rough and unpolished. The Arch by the
old Castle in Verona, and all other the Arches and buildings there, were done
in the same manner; which is easily made out by one curious in observing the
marks of their Tools, that is to say, the manner how the stones were wrought.
The pillars of Trajan, and Antonine in Rome, were so made, nor could they
otherwise have so exactly joined the stones, that might so closely meet where
they go cross the heads, and other parts of the figures. And the same may be
said of the other Arches which are there.

And if the works were very great, as the Arena of Verona, the Amphitheatre of
Pola, and the like, to save charge and time, which they would have required,
they wrought only the Imposts of the Arches, Capitells, and the Corniches; and
the rest they left Rustic, having only regard to the fair front of the
building. But in Temples, and other buildings, which required curiosity, they
spared no pains in the working them, and glazing and smoothing even the very
fluces of the Columns, and polishing them diligently. Therefore, in my
judgment, you should not make Walls of Brick in the Rustic manner, much less
Mantles of Chimnies, which require curious work; For besides the unhandsomness,
'twill happen that they will split and divide asunder, which naturally ought to
be entire; But according to the greatness and quality of the building, you may
make them Rustic or Polite: And in a work that requires altogether neatness,
we need not do as the Ancients used, with Reason, and necessitated by the
greatness of their works.

CHAP. XI. Of the Diminution of Walls, and of their parts.
IT is to be observed, that by how much the higher the Walls are, so much the
narrower they must be; Therefore that part which is above ground is to be one
half thinner then the foundation, and the second story a half brick thinner
then the first; and so continue till you come to the top of the building, but
with discretion, that it be not too weak. The middle of the upper Wall ought to
fall direct to the middle of the Lower, that so all the Walls be in a Pyramidal
form. But if you would make a superficies, or face of a Wall, above, directly
over that below, it must be on the inner part; because the raftrings of the
Floors, the Vaults, and other supporters of the building, may not suffer the
Wall to fall or give way. The discharged part, which is on the outside, must be
supplied with a Border or Corniche, incompassing the whole building, which will
be an ornament and fastening to the whole Fabric.

The Angles, because they partake of both sides, and are to keep them upright
and fast together, must be very strong, and held with long hard stones, as it
were with arms; Therefore the Windows and Apertures must be as far from them
as may be; or at least, so much space must be left between the Aperture and the
Angle, as is the breadth of the Aperture.

Having spoken of mere Walls, it is convenient to pass to the ornaments, the
greatest whereof are the Columns when they are meetly placed, and have fair
proportion to the whole Fabric.

CHAP. XII. Of the Five Orders used by the Ancients.
FIve were the Orders among the Ancients, that is to say, the Tuscan, Dorick,
Ionick, Corinthian, and Composita, which ought to be so disposed in the
building, that the strongest be set lowest; for then 'twill be more capable to
bear the weight, and the building will have a more sure foundation: Wherefore
they always place the Dorick under the Ionick, the Ionick under the
Corinthian, and the Corinthian under the Composita; the Tuscan, as being rude,
seldom is used above ground, unless in a building of one order only, as in
Town-houses, or in vast buildings, as Amphitheaters and such like, where being
many orders, this instead of the Dorick is placed under the Ionick; and if you
leave out one of them, and place, for example, the Corinthian immediately over
the Dorick, which may be done according to the Rule aforesaid, provided
always, that the more solid be the lowest. I shall set down, particularly, the
measures of each of these Orders; not so much according to the Doctrine of
Vitruvius, as according to my own observations in Ancient buildings; But first
I shall say those things which belong to all in general.

CHAP. XIII. Of the swelling of Columns, and their diminutions; of
Inter-columns and Pillasters.
COlumns of every Order must be so formed, that the upper part must be lesser
then the lower, and the middle somewhat thick; In diminishing it must be
observed, that by how much longer the Columns are, so much the less must they
be diminished, in regard that the height of it self works the effect of
diminishing by the distance; Therefore if the Column be 15 foot high, the
Diametre of the Column below must be divided into 6 parts, and the Diametre
thereof above shall be 5 of those parts. If from 15. to 20. the Diametre below
must be divided into 7 parts, and 6 must be the thickness of the upper part; So
likewise those which are from 20. to 30. the Diametre below must be divided
into 8 parts, and 7. must be the Diametre of the upper part, and so the Columns
which are higher are to be diminished proportionably by their several parts, as
Vitruvius shows in his Second Chapter of his Third Book. But how the swelling
is to be made in the middle, we have no more to show from him then a bare
promise; and therefore many have written variously thereof. I am wont to make
the profile of the said swelling in this manner; I divide the body of the
Column into three equal parts, and leave the lower third part perpendicular, at
the end of which I lay a long thin rule as long as the Column, or a little
more, and move that part which reaches from the third part upwards, and bend
it till the end touch at the point of the diminution, at the top of the Column
under the Collarino or Astragal; according to that bending I proceed, and so
the Column becomes somewhat swelled in the middle, and appears very handsome;
And although I could not have contrived (besides this) a form either shorter or
more expedient, or that might be more acceptable; I am yet more confirmed in
this my opinion, since it has so much pleased Pr. Cattan^o, that (I having
told him of it) he has put it into one of his Works of Architecture, with
which he has not a little Illustrated this profession.

A. B. The third part of the Column which is perpendicular. B. C. The two
thirds diminished. C. The point of the Diminution under the Collarino or
Astragal.
diagram of a column

The Inter-Columns, that is to say, the spaces between the Columns, may be made
of a Diametre, and of the Column, and the Diametre is to be taken at the lower
part of the Column, of two Diametres, of two and. of three, and sometimes of
more. But the Ancients were not wont to allow more then three Diametres of the
Column, except in the Tuscan Order, in which the Architrave is wont to be of
wood; They made the Inter-columns very large, not less then a Diametre and
half, and this space they allowed sometimes, especially when they made the
columns very bigg; But those Inter-columns were most preferred that were of two
Diametres, and of the Column; and they accounted this the most noble and
beautiful manner of the Inter-columns.

And you ought to take notice, that between the Inter-columns and the Columns,
there ought to be proportion and correspondence, for leaving too much vacancy
between small Columns, you will take away great part of their beauty; because
the great quantity of air that will be between them will diminish very much
their thickness; And on the contrary, leaving too little space to the great
Columns, by the straightness and narrowness of the spaces they will appear
gouty, and very ungraceful: Therefore if the spaces exceed three Diametres, you
must make the Columns in thickness a seventh part of their height, as I
observe hereafter in the Tuscan Order; But if the spaces shall be three
Diametres, the length of the Column must be 7. or eight, as in the Dorick
Order; And if 2 the length of the Column must be 9 Diametres, as in the Ionick;
If 2. the length of the Column must be 9 as in the Corinthian. Lastly, if 1.
the length of the Column must be 10. as in the Composita. Concerning these
Orders, I have took this care, that they may be examples for all other
Inter-columns, which Vitruvius intimates in the Chapter aforesaid.

In the front of Buildings, the Columns ought to be an even number, so that the
middle Inter-column may be made bigger then the rest, that the Doors and
Entries may be the better seen; which usually are placed in the middle: And
thus much for Pillar-work only.

But if Galleries be made with Pillasters, they must be so disposed, that the
Pillasters be not less then a third of the vacancy between Pillaster and
Pillaster, and those at the corners must be two thirds bigger then the other,
that so the Angles of the Fabric may be firm and strong; And when they are to
support an extraordinary great weight, as in very great buildings, then they
must be the half of the vacancy: as those of the Theater of Vicenza, and the
Amphitheatre at Capua: or else two thirds, as those of the Theater of Marcellus
in Rome, and of the Theater of Ogubas, which now belongs to Sig. Lodovico de
Gabrielli, a Gentleman of that City. The Ancients also made them sometimes as
large as the whole vacant, as in the Theater of Verona, in that part which is
not upon the Hill. But in private buildings, they are not to be made less then
a third of the vacant, nor larger then two thirds, and they ought to be square;
But to save charge, and to make room to walk more freely, they may be made less
in the flank then in the front.

And to adorn the Frontis-piece, you may put in the middle of the front half
Columns, or other Pillasters which may bear up the Corniche, which shall be
upon the Arches of the Gallery; and they must be as large as their height shall
require, according to their several orders, as in the ensuing Chapters and
designs may appear; For the understanding whereof (that I may not repeat the
same thing often) you may understand, that I in the dividing and measuring the
said Orders, would not take a certain and determinate measure, which is
peculiar to any City, as Cubit, Foot or Span; well knowing, that Measures are
as various as the Cities and Countries. But in imitation of Vitruvius, who
divides the Dorick Order with a Measure taken from the thickness of the Column,
which is common to all, and by him called a Module: I will also serve my self
with such a Measure in all the Orders, and the Module shall be the Diametre of
the Column, taken at the Base, divided into 60 parts; except in the Dorick, in
which the Module is to be the half Diametre of the Column, and is divided into
30 parts: for so it falls more commodious in the Compartiments of the said
Order. Wherefore every one may serve himself (making the Module greater or
lesser, according to the quality of the Fabric) with the proportions and
profiles designed convenient to every Order.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Tuscan Order.
THE Tuscan Order, according to that which Vitruvius writes of it, and is so
indeed, is the most simple and entire of all the Orders of Architecture:
because it retains the most of Antique, and wants all those Ornaments which
renders the others so pleasant and agreeable. This had its Original in Tuseana,
a place very remarkable in Italy, whence the Name is derived.

The Column with it is Base and Capitel, ought to be in length seven Models, and
at the top are diminished a fourth part of their Diametre, having occasion of a
row of Columns of this Order only, you may make the Inter-columnes very large;
Because the Architraves may be of wood, and will be very convenient for Country
use, for the passage in and out of Carts, and other Country conveniences; and
besides the charge will be less; But if you make Gates or Galleries with
Arches, you must observe the Measures that I have marked in the design, in
which you may observe the Stones so disposed or joined together, as when the
whole work is of Stone; The which I have also directed in the designs of the
other four Orders.

And this way of disposing and fastening the Stones, I have derived from many
Ancient Arches, as appears in my Books of Arches; and herein I have used great
diligence.

A. Architrave of wood. B. The ends of the Summers which bear up the projecture
of the Cornice.
diagram of columns

diagram of archway and columns

The Pedestals which are made under the Columns of this Order must be the
height of one Model, and made plain. The height of the Base is to be the half
Diametre of the Column. This height must be divided into two equal parts; one
is given to the Orlo or Plinth, which must be made round; the other is divided
into four parts; One for the Listella, or Cincture, which may be made a little
less, and is also called Cimbia; and in this Order only is part of the Column,
the other three are for the Totus. The Projecture of this Base is a sixth part
of the Diametre of the Column below. The Capitel is the height of half the
Diametre of the Column below, and is divided into three equal parts. One is
given to the Abacus, which from its form is commonly called Dado, or Dye. The
other to the Ouolo, or Echinus, and the third is divided into seven parts, of
one is made the Listella under the Ouolo, and the other six remain to the
Collorino, or neck of the Column. The Astragal is double, the height of the
Listella under the Ouolo, and the Center thereof, is made upon the line, which
falls plum upon the said Listella, and upon the same line does fall the
projecture of the Cimbia, which is as thick as the Listella. The Projecture of
the Capitel answers to the body of the Column below; Its Architrave is made of
Wood as high as broad; and the breadth ought not to exceed the body of the
Column at the top. The Summers which carry out the Eaves, projecteth a fourth
part of the length of the Column. These are the Measures of the Tuscan Order,
as Vitruvius teaches.

A. Abacus. B. Echinus. C. Hypotrachelium, or frize of the Capitel. D.
Astragal. E. Body of the Column above. F. Body of the Column below. G. Annulet
Geincture, or Listella. H. Torcus. I. Orlo, or Plintb. K. Pedestal, or
Stylobatum.
The Profiles which are placed by the plain of the B^se and Capitel, are the
Imposts of the Arches.

diagram of a column

But if they make the Architraves of stone, it must be observed, which was
spoken before of the Inter-columns; There is to be seen some Ancient Buildings,
which may be said to be built according to this Order, because they retain in
part the same Measures, as is the Arena of Verona, and Theater of Pola, and
many others; of which I have undertaken the profiles, not only of the Base of
the Capitel of the Architrave of the Freze and of the Cornice, put down in the
last page of this Chapter. But also those of the Imports of Arches; and of all
these buildings, I shall put the designs in my Books of Antiquities.

A. Scima Recta. B. Corona. C. The projecture of the Corona, and the Scima
Recta. D. Cavetto. E. Freze. F. Archetrave. G. Cimatium. H. Abacus. of the
Capitel. I. Scima Recta, of the Capitel. K. Hypotrachelium, or frize of the
Capitel. L. Astragolus. M. Body of the Column under the Capitel. N. Body of the
Column below. O. Annulet, or Cincture. P. Torus, or Scima Reversa. Q. Orlo, or
Plinth of the Base.
Over against the Archetrave marked F. is the profile or design of an
Archetrave very curiously wrought.

diagram of columns

CHAP. XV. Of the Dorick Order.
THE Dorick Order had its Original and name from the Dorians, a Grecian people
which dwelt in Asia; The Columns when made alone without Pilasters, ought to
be seven and a half, or eight Diametres long; The Inter-columns are little less
than three Diametres of the Columns. And this manner of placing Columns, by
Vitruvius, is called Dyastylos; but if they join to Pilasters, they must be
together with the Base and Capitel seventeen Models, and one third in length;
And you must observe, that (as I have said before in the 13. Chapter) the Model
in this Order only is the half of the Diametre of the Column, divided into
thirty parts; And in all the other Orders, it is the whole Diametre, divided
into sixty parts.

diagram of columns

diagram of columns The height of the Arch is 20 Modells 1/2

From the middle of one-columne unto the middle of the other there is 15 Modells.



Amongst Ancient Buildings, we see no Pedestals to this Order, yet they are
seen amongst the Modern. And if you join a Pedestal to them, you must make the
Dado of the Pedestal a perfect square; and from it you must take the measures
of its Ornament: Therefore it must be divided into four equal parts, the Base
with its Zocco or Plinth must be two of them, and the Cymacium one, to which
must be joined the Orlo, or Plinth of the Base of the Column. This kind of
Pedestal may also be seen in the Corinthian Order, as at Verona, in the Arch
which is called De Lioni. I have set down diverse Measures of designs, which may
be joined to the Pedestal of this Order, which are all very agreeable, and
taken from Antiquity, and are very carefully measured. This Order has no
proper Base, wherefore in many Buildings, you may see Columns without Bases; as
in Rome, in the Theater of Marcellus, in the Temple De la Pieta, near to the
said Theater; in the Theater of Vicenza, and in diverse other places. But
sometimes the Attick Base is joined to them, which adds very much to their
Beauty, and here is the Measure of it.

The height is the half Diametre of the Column, and is divided into three equal
parts, one is given to the Zocco or Plinth; The other two are divided into two
parts, of one is ma^e the Torus superior, and the other which remains is
divided into two, and one is given to the Torus inferior, and the other to the
Scocia, or Cavetto with its Annulets. Therefore if you divide it into six
parts, of one must be made the Annulet above, and of the other that below, and
four must remain to the Scocia. The projecture must be the fixth part of the
Diametre of the Column; The Ceincture must be the half of the upper Torus: if
it be divided from the Base, its projecture must be the third part of the whole
projecture of the Base. But if the Base and part of the Column shall be of one
piece, you must make the Ceincture small; as you may see in the third design of
this Order, where are also two manners of Imposts of Arches.

A: Body of the Column. B. Annulet, or Ceincture. C. The upper Torus. D. Scocia
with its Annulets. E. The lower Torus. F. Plinth, or Zocco. G. Cimacium. of the
Pedestal. H. Dado, or Square. of the Pedestal. I. Base. of the Pedestal. K.
Imposts of Arches.
diagram of a column

diagram of columns

The height of the Capitel ought to be the half Diametre of the Column below,
and is divided into three parts; That above shall be divided into five parts,
three shall be for the Abacus, and the other two parts for the Cimatium, the
which must be subdivided into three parts; of one is made the Listella, or
Annulet, and of the other two, the Scima Recta. The second part is divided into
three equal parts, one is given to the Annulet which are three, and are equal,
the other two which remains to the Ouolo, or Echynus, whose projecture is two
thirds of its height. The third principal part of the said Capitel, is for the
Hypotrachelium, or Frize of the Capitel, given to the Collarino; The whole
projecture is the fifth part of the Diametre of the Column. The Astragal is as
high as all the three Annulets, and is in projecture equal to the body of the
Column below. The Annulet or Ceincture, is half the height of the Astragal, the
projecture thereof is plum with the Center of the said Astragal.

Upon the Capitel is made the Architrave, which is to be in height half the
thickness of the Column, that is to say, one Model; It is divided into seven
parts, of one is made the Tenia, whose projecture must be equal to its height.
The whole is divided into six parts, one whereof is given to the Guttae, the
which ought to be six in number, and to the Listella which is under the Tenea,
which is a third of the said Guttae. The rest is divided into seven parts, from
the Tenia downwards, three whereof is given to the first Fascia, and four to
the second. The Frize is in height a Model and half, the breadth of the
Trigliph, is one Model, and its Capitel is the sixth part of a Model. The
Trigliph is divided into six parts, two whereof is given to the two channels in
the middle, and one to the two half channels at the extremities, and the other
three make the spaces that are below the said channels. The Metopa, that is to
say, the space between two Trigliphs ought to be so broad as high.

The Cornice ought to be in height one Model, and a sixth part, and is divided
into five parts and a half; two whereof is given to the Cavetto and Ouolo; The
Cavetto is less than the Ouolo, as much as is the Listella; The other three and
half is given to the Corona, and for the Scima Reversa, and Scima Recta.

The Corona ought to have in projecture four six parts of the Model, and on its
plain which looks downwards, and projecteth forth, must have in length six
Guttae, and three in breadth over the Trigliphs with their lists, and over the
Metopa certain Roses.

The Guttae, or bells, answer to those which are under the Tenea, which are
made in form like a Bell.

The Cimatium must be an eight part thicker than the Corona, and is divided
into eight parts: two whereof is given to the Orlo or Listella, and six remains
to the Cimatia, whose projecture is seven parts and a half. Whereupon the
Architrave, the Frize, and the Cornice, fall out to be in height the fourth
part of the length of the Column; and these are the measures; of the Cornice,
according to Vitruvius, from whom I have a little swerved, altering the
members, and making them a little bigger*

A. Scima Recta. B. Scima Reversa. C. Coronna. D. Ouolo. E. Cavetto. F. The
Capitels of the Trigliph. G. Trigliph. H. Metopa. I. Tenia. K. Guttae. L. Prima
Fascia. M. Seeunda Fascia.
Parts of the Capitel.
N. Cimatium. O. Abacus. P. Ouolo, or Echinus. Q. Annulets. R. Hypotrachelium,
or Frize. S. Astragal. T. Listella, or Ceincture. V. Body of the Column. X. The
Plain of the Capitel, and the model divided into thirty parts. Y. The under
part of the Coronna.
diagram of columns

diagram of columns

CHAP. XVI. Of the Ionick Order.
THe Ionick Order had its Original in Ionia, a Province in Asia; and we read,
that the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was built of this Order: The Columns, with
Capitel and Base, are nine models long, and by a model is understood the
Diametre of the Column below. The Archetrave Frize, and Cornice, are the fifth
part of the height of the Column; In the following design, which is of Columns
alone, the Inter-columns are of two Diametres, and a fourth part. And this is
the fairest and most commodious manner of Inter-columns, and by Vitruvius is
called Eustillos. In the other design, which is of Arches. The Pilasters are in
breadth a third part of the height of the Arch; and the Arches are in height
two squares.

diagram of columns

diagram of columns The height of the Arch is 11 Modells.

From the middle of one column to the middle of the other there is 7 Modells
and 17 parts



If you put a Pedestal to the Columns of the Ionick Order, as in the design of
the Arches, it must be made as high as half the bredeth of the light of the
Arch, and must be divided into seven parts and half, of two of them shall be
made the Base of one; the Cimatium, and four and half, which remains, shall be
for the Dado, or square of the Pedestal.

The Base of this Order is in thickness half a model, and is divided into
three parts; one is for the Plinth, it is projecture is the fourth part of the
said thickness, and consequently the eight part of a model. The other two
parts of the Base are divided into seven, of three is made the upper Torus; The
other four are divided again into two parts, one is given to the Scotia above,
and the other to that below, which ought to have more projecture then the other.

The Astragals ought to have the eight part of the Scotia; The Ceincture of the
Column is the third part of the Torus of the Base; But if it be so that you
make the Base join with part of the Column, you must make the Ceincture small,
as I have also said in the Dorick Order, the Ceincture has in projecture half
the projecture aforesaid; These be the measures of the Ionick Base, according
to Vitruvius.

But because in many antique buildings are seen to this Order Attick Bases, and
to me seems more agreeable, upon the Pedestal; I have designed the Attick Base
with a small Torus or Astragal, under the Ceincture; not omiting therefore to
make the design thereof as Vitruvius teaches us.

The designs L. are two different profiles for to make the Imposts of Arches;
and of each there is set down the Measures by Numbers, which show the parts of
a model, as is done in all the other designs; These Imposts are in height half
as much again as the thickness of the Pillaster which supports the Arch.

A. Body of the Column. B. The Astragal with the Ceincture, which are members
of the Column. C. Upper Torus. D. The bollow called Scotia. E. The lower Torus.
F. The Plinth fastened to the Cymatium of the Pedestal. G. Cymatium in two
forms of the Pedestal. H. Dodo, or plain square. of the Pedestal. I. Base in
two forms. of the Pedestal. K. Orlo, or Plinth. L. Imposts for the Arches.
diagram of a column

diagram of a column

To make the Capitel, the foot of the Column must be divided into eighteen
parts, and nineteen of such parts is the breadth and length of the Abacus, and
the half is the height of the Capitel with the Voluta; whereupon it becomes to
be nine parts and a half high: one and half is for the Abacus with its
Cimatium, the other eight remains to the Voluta, which is made in this manner.
From the extremity of the Cimatium, within, is placed one of the nineteen
parts, and from the point which is there made, is let fall a line plumb, which
divides the Voluta in the middle, and is called Catheta; And where the point
falls in this line which seperates the four parts and half above, and the three
and half below, there is made the Center of the eye of the Voluta; whose
Diametre is one of the eight parts; and from the said point is drawn a line
which intercects at right Angles. The Catheta divides the Voluta into four
parts, in the eye of which is formed a square, the bigness whereof is the half
Diametre of the said eye. The Diagonal lines being drawn in it, in them are
made the points where the fixed foot of the Compass is to stand to make the
Voluta, and they are (computing the Center of the eye) thirteen Centres; as to
the Order which must be observe in them, it appears by the number placed in the
Design. The Astragal of the Column is right against the eye of the Voluta; The
Volutes are as thick in the middle as is the projecture of the Ouolo or
Echinus, which reaches beyond the Abacus, so much as is the eye of the Voluta;
the hollow of the Voluta is even with the body of the Column. The Astragal of
the Column turns about under the Voluta, and is always seen: as appears in the
platform of the Column; And it is natural, that so slender a thing as is the
Voluta should give way to one so hard as is the Astragal; and the Voluta is
always equally distant from it.

They were wont to make in the Angles of Rows, of Columns, or porches of the
Ionick Order, Capitels which had the Voluta not only in the front, but also in
that part that making the Capitel, as they were wont to do, would be the flank;
Whereupon they come to have the front on two sides, and are called Angular
Capitels; and how they made them, I shall demonstrate in my Book of Temples.

diagram of columns A. Abacus. B. Hollowes of the Voluta. C. Ouolo, or Echinus.
D. Astragal under the Echinus. E. Ceincture, or Annulet. F. Body of the Column.
G. Line called Catheta.


On the Platform of the Capitel of the Column, the said Members are marked
with the same Letters.

S. The eye of the Voluta in a large form. Members of the Base, according to
Vitruvius. K. Body of the Columns. L. Ceincture, or Annulet. M. Torus, N.
Scotia prima. O. Tondino, or Astragal. P. Scotia secunda. Q. Orlo, or Plinth.
R. Projecture of the Base.





The Architrave, Frize, and Cornice, make (as I have said) the fifth part of
the height of the Column, and the whole is divided into twelve parts; The
Architrave four, the Frize three, and the Cornice five: the Architrave is
divided into five parts, of one is made the Cimatium, and the rest are divided
into twelve, three are given to the first Fascia, and its Astragal, four to the
second and its Astragal, and five to the third.

The Cornice is divided into seven parts,. two are given to the Scotia and
Ouolo, two the Modilions, and the. to the Coronna, and Scima Recta, and
projecteth forwards as much as its thickness.

I have designed the Front, the Flank, and the Platform of the Capitel, the
Architrave, Frize, and Cornice, with their convenient Sculptures.

A. Scima Recta. B. Scima Reversa. C. Coronna. D. Cimatium of the Modilions. E.
Modilions. F. Ouolo. G. Cavetto. H. Frize. I. Cimatium of the Architrave. K. L.
M. Are the first, second, and third Fascia.


Members of the Capitel.
N. Abacus. O. Hollow of the Voluta. P. Ouolo, or Echinus. Q. Astragal of the
Column. R. Body of the Column.






CHAP. XVII. Of the Corinthian Order.
AT Corinth a noble City of Peloponese, or Moree, first of all was found the
Order which is called Corinthian, which is more adorned and beautified then any
I have yet treated on.

The Columns are like the Ionick, and with the Base and Capitel joined to
them, they are nine models and a half long. If you make them fluted, they must
have 24 flutes or channels, which must be made half so deep as broad: the
plains or spaces between one flute and the other must be a third part of the
breadth of the said flutes. The Archetrave Frize and Cornice, are a fifth part
of the height of the column; In the design of Columns alone, the Inter-columns
are two Diametres, as is the Portal of St. Maria Rotunda in Rome; and this form
of Rows of Pillars, is by Vitruvius called Systylos. And in that of Arches,
the Pillasters are of two parts of five of the light of the Arch; and the light
of the Arch is in height two squares and half the thickness of the Arch being
comprehended.

diagram of arch

diagram of arch The height of the Arch is in Modells parts 10

From the middle of one Column to the middle of the other there is 6 Modells
1/2.



The Pedestal under the Corinthian Column must be in height a fourth part of
the length of the Column, and being divided into eight parts, one is given to
the Cimatium, two to its Base, and five remains to the Dado, or plane of the
Pedestal; The Base must be divided into three parts, two for the Zocco or
Plinth, and one to the Cornice.

The Base of the Column is the Attick, but in this Order it differs from that
which is put to the Dorick Order: in this the Projecture is the fifth part of
the Diametre of the Column, whereas in the Dorick it is the sixth part; It may
also vary in some other parts, as may be seen in the design, where also is set
down the Imposts of the Arches, the which is in height one half more then the
thickness of the Membretto, that is to say, the Pillaster which bears up the
Arch.

diagram of column A. Body of the Column. B. Ceincture and Astragals of the
Column. C. The upper Torus. D. Scotia with the Astragals. E. The lower Torus.
F. Orlo, or Plinth of the Base fastened to the Cimatium of the Pedestal. G.
Cimatium. of the Pedestal. H. Dado or plain. of the Pedestal. I. Coronna of the
Base. of the Pedestal. K. Orlo, or Plinth of the Base.


The Impost of the Arch is at the side of the Calumn.



diagram of column

The Corinthian Capitel ought to be as high as the thickness of the Column
below, and a sixth part more which is allowed to the Abacus; The rest is
divided into three epual parts, the first is given to the first leaf, the
second to the second; and the third is divided again into two, and of that part
next the Abacus is made the Caulicoli with the leaves, which seem to support
them whence they grow; And therefore the stalk from whence they grow must be
made thick, and in their foldings must diminish by little and little: The
example hereof is taken from plants, which are bigger at the root then at the
extremity of the branches. The Bell which is the body of the Capitel under the
leaves, ought to be direct to the bottoms of the flutes of the Column.

To make the Abacus, that it may have a convenient Projecture, make the square
A B C D. each side whereof must be a Model and half, and the Diagonal Lines
must be drawn in it from one Angle to the other, and where they intercect each
other in the point E. which is the middle and center of the said square; The
fixed foot of the Compass must be placed, and toward each Angle of the square
must be marked a Model; and where the points F G H I. are, the ^ines must be
drawn, which intercects at right Angles with the said Diagonals, and that they
may touch the sides of the square in L M N O. These shall be the bounds of the
Projecture, and how much the length is, so much shall be the breadth of the
horns of the Abacus.

The Curvature, or hollowing of the Abacus, is made by laying a long a thread
from one horn to the other which is from the point L. to the point N. then from
the said points, draw two Arches of Circles, then set in one foot of the Compass
in the intersection at the point P. with the other describe the Arch, which
will make the hollowing or curvature of the Astragal of the Column, and is so
made that the tongues of the leaves touches it, or rather advances a little
beyond, and this is their Projecture. The Rose ought to be as large as the
fourth part of the Diametre of the Column at the foot: The Archetrave, Frize
and Cornice, (as I have said) are to be a fifth part of the height of the
Column, and the whole is to be divided into twelve parts, as in the Ionick; But
here is the difference; in this the Cornice is divided into eight parts and
half, of one is made the Intabliment, of the other the Denticuli, of the third
the Ouolo, of the fourth and fifth the Modilions, and of the other three and
half the Coronna, and the Scima. The Cornice has as much Projecture as it is
high, the Coffers or places of the Roses that go between the Modilions must be
square, and the Modilions as big as half the plain of the said Roses. The
members of this Order have not been marked with Letters as the foregoing,
because by them these may easily be understood.

diagram of frieze

diagram of column

diagram of column

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Composita Order.
THe Composita Order, which is also called Roman, because it was an Invention
of the Ancient Romans, and is so called because it partakes of two of the
aforesaid Orders; And the most Regular and Beautiful is that which is
compounded of the Ionick and Corinthian; It is more slender then the
Corinthian, and may be made like it in all parts, except in the Capitel.

These Columns ought to be in length ten Models; In the design of Columns
alone, the Inter-columns are one Diametre and a half, and this manner is called
by Vitruvius Picnostilos. In those of Arches the Pillasters are half the light
of the Arch, and the Arches are in height under the Vault two squares and half,
that is to say, two Diametres and half of the light of the Arch.

diagram of column

diagram of column The height Models 12 parts 20

From the Middle of one column to the middle of the other there is 7 Models
part 15



And because (as I have said) this Order ought to be made more neat and slender
then the Corinthian, Its Pedestal is to be the third part of the height of the
Column, and is divided into eight parts and half; of one part is made the
Cimatium of the Base, and five and half remains to the Dodo or Plinth of the
Pedestal; The Base of the Pedestal is divided into three parts, two is given to
the Zocco or Plinth, and one to its Terus with its Cimatium.

The Base of the Column may be made Attick as in the Corinthian, and it may
also be compounded of the Attick and the Ionick, as appears in the design. The
Profile of the Impost of the Arches, is by the side of the plain of the
Pedestal, and its height is as much as the thickness of the Membretto.

diagram of column

diagram of column

The Capitel of the Composita Order has the same measures as the Corinthian,
but it differs from it in the Voluta, Ouolo, Fusarolo, or Fuse, which are
members attributed to the Ionick; and the way of making it, is thus: from the
Abacus downwards, the Capitel is divided into three parts, as in the
Corinthian: The first is given to the first leaves, the second to the second,
and the third to the Voluta, which is made in the same manner, and with the
same points with the which the Ionick is said to be made, and takes up so much
of the Abacus, that it seems to grow out of the Ouolo near the flowers which
are put in the middle of the Curvatures of the said Abacus, and is as thick in
the front, as the breadth of the horns thereof and a little more: The Ouolo is
as big as three parts of five of the Abacus, and its lower part begins right
against the lower part of the eye of the Voluta; It has in Projecture. parts
of its height, and is with its Projecture perpendicular to the hollow of the
Abacus, or a little more:

The Fuse is a third part of the height of the Ouolo, and has in Projecture
something more then the half of its thickness, and turns about the Capitel
under the Voluta, and is always seen. The Gradetten, or Moulding, which goes
under the Fuse, and makes the Orlo of the bell of the Capitel, is the half the
Fuse: The body of the bell answers direct with the bottom of the flutes of the
Column; of this sort I have seen one at Rome, from which sort I have drawn the
said Measures, because it appeared to me very beautiful, and well ordered.

There are Capitels made after another manner, which may be called Composita,
of which shall be discoursed, and the figures thereof shall be put in my Books
of Antiquities.

The Archetrave, Frise and Cornice, are the fifth part of the height of the
Column, and their Compartiments may be well known by that which has been said
before in the other Orders, and by the numbers placed in the design.

diagram of frieze

diagram of column

diagram of column

CHAP. XIX. Of Pedestalls.
HItherto I have discoursed (what to me seemed convenient) of Walls and their
Ornaments; and in particular, touching the Pedestals which may be applied to
every Order; But because it appears that the Ancients had not a regard to make
the Pedestal bigger for the one Order then for another, although this part much
adds to the Beauty and Ornament, when it is made with discretion and proportion
to the other parts; To the end that the Architects may take notice and serve
themselves upon occasion, and know that they made them sometimes square, that
is to say, as long as broad, as in the Arch Di Lioni, at Verona. And these I
have assigned to the Dorick Order, because it requires Solidity; Sometimes they
are made taking the measure from the light of the Arch, as in the Arch of Titus
at Sancta Maria Nova in Rome, and in that of Trajan on the gate of Ancona,
where the Pedestal is half the height of the light of the Arch; and of that
kind of Pedestal I have put to the Ionick Order; and sometimes they took the
measure from the height of the Column, as is seen at Susa, a City situate at
the foot of the Mountain which divides Italy from France, In an Arch made to
the honor of Augustus Caesar, and in the Arch of Pola, a City of Dalmatia, and
in the Amphitheatre of Rome; In the Ionick and Corinthian Order, in which
buildings the Pedestal is the fourth part of the height of the Column, as I
have made in the Corinthian Order. In Verona, in the Arch Di Castle Vecchio,
which is very beautiful, the Pedestal is a third of the height of the Column,
as I have put in the Composita Order; And these are the handsomest forms of
Pedestals, and have the best proportion with their other parts: And when
Vitruvius discoursing of Theaters makes mention of the Poggio, you may know
that the Poggio is the same with the Pedestal, which is the third of the length
of the Column put for Ornament of the Scene; But of Pedestals which exceed a
third of the Column, such are seen at Rome in the Arch of Constantine, where
the Pedestals are two parts and half of the height of the Column; And almost in
all the Ancient Pedestals, the Bases are observed to have been made twice as
big as the Cimacium, as is seen in my Book of Arches.

CHAP. XX. Of Errors.
HAving set down the Ornaments of the Architecture, that is to say, the Five
Orders, and showed how they are made and laid down, the Profiles of each of
their parts, which I found that the Ancients did observe; It seems to me not
unfit here to acquaint the Reader of many abuses, which being brought in by the
Barbarous, are yet observed; to the end that the studious in this art may avoid
them in their own Works, and understand them in others.

I say then, that Architecture (as all other arts are) being Imitatrix of
Nature, accounts nothing tolerable which is estranged, and differs from that
which is natural: Wherefore we see that those Ancient Architects who built with
Timber, when they began to build with stone, directed that the Columns might be
less at the top then at the foot, taking example from Trees, which are all
less at the top then in the trunk and near the root. Likewise because it is
very convenient that those things upon which any great weight is put should be
pressed, under the Column they put a Base, which with their Torus and Seetia,
seem by the burden over them to be swelled; so also in the Cornices, they
bring in the Triglifes, Modiglions, and the Dentills, which should represent
the heads of the Joices, which in the sealing are placed to bear up the Roof.
The same may be observed in all other parts, if you are curious: And being so,
you cannot but blame that form of building which deviates from that which
Nature instructs, and from that simplicity which is directed in things by her
produced, framing (as it were) another nature, and departs from the true, good
and handsome manner of building; For which reason you ought not (instead of
Columns or Pillasters, which are to bear up some great weight) to place
Cartouches, which are certain Scroles, which to the intelligent seem deformed,
and to the ignorant rather confusion then pleasure, nor do they produce other
effects, then incrcese the charge of the Builders. Likewise you must not make
any of those Cartonches come out of the Cornice, for it is requisite that all
the parts of the Cornice be made to some end, and to make appear what it would
be if the work were framed of Timber. And besides, being it is convenient that
to uphold a great weight something solid and fit to support that weight be
required, questionless those Cartouches are altogether superfluous, because it
is impossible that any Timber whatever could really perform what these seem;
for feigning it self to be soft and gentle, I know not by what rule they put
them under any thing heavy and hard. But that which (in my opinion) imports
much, is the abuse in making Frontispieces of Doors, Windows and Galleries,
divided in the middle, because they were made to defend the inhabitants from
rain; I know nothing more contrary to natural reason, then to divide and open
that part which the Ancients instructed by necessity it self did make whole,
and raised in the middle, to show that it ought to serve to defend the
inhabitants of the house, and those that enter therein, from Rain, Snow and
Hail. And although Variety and Novelty should please all, yet we are not to go
against the precepts of Art, and that which Reason demonstrates; Whence we see
that although the Ancients did vary, yet never departed from the general and
necessary Rules of Art, as may be seen in my Book of Antiquities: Also
concerning the projecture of the Cornice and other Ornaments, it is no small
abuse in making them come too forward, because when they exceed that which
according to Reason is fit for them, especially if they be in a close place
they seem narrow, and uncomely, and put fear in those which stand underneath,
threatening always to fall, you ought as much to avoid making the Cornice
disproportionable to the Column, putting great Cornices upon little Columns, or
upon great Columns little Cornices, who doubts but that such a building will
seem very ill favored. Besides, to make the Columns seem to be of several
parts, making rings and wreathings about them, as it were to hold them
together, ought as much as may be to be avoided; because how much the more
entire and strong the Columns appear, so much the more they perform the design
for which they are placed, which is to render the work above secure and firm.
Many other like abuses might be reckoned up, as of some members which in the
Cornices are made disproportionable to the other, which by what I have showed
before, and by that which is now said, may be easily known; it remains now to
come to the disposing of the particular and principal parts of the building.

CHAP. XXI. Of Galleries, Entries, Halls, Anti-Chambers and Chambers, and of
their proportions.
GAlleries, for the most part, are wont to be made on the wings and sides, or
on the front; They serve for many accommodations; as Walking, Eating, and other
Divertisements, and they are made bigger or lesser, according to the greatness
and convenience of the building; But ordinarily, they ought not to have less
then 16.18. and 20. foot in breadth, and in great buildings unto 24. and their
length at least five times their breadth, six, seven, or eight times at most.

Example.
Let AA represent a Gallerie, the breadth whereof is A B; you must give it in
length five times its breadth unto the number marked 5; or six times unto the
number 6; or seven times unto the number 7; or lastly, eight times unto the
number 8, which is the greatest length allowed to Galleries.

diagram

And besides, every House well composed ought to have in the middle and
chiefest part some place, to the which all the other parts of the house may
relate and appertain; which place vulgarly is called Entry, Lobby, or Passage
if it be below, and the Hall, if it be above; and is in the House as a common
place, for it serves to entertain those who attend the Masters going forth to
salute him and negotiate with him; and such places are the first part of the
House that present themselves to those that would enter therein. The Halls
serve for Feasts, Nuptials and Banquets, to Act Comedies, and to take other
such like pleasures and enjoyments; Therefore it is, that these places ought to
be greater then other, and of a Capacious form, to the end that many persons
may commodiously be there entertained, and behold what is done.

Of the proportion which the Halls ought to have.
As for my part, I have not been accustomed to allow to the length of Halls
less then twice their breadth, or twice and. or a third part of the breadth at
most. And to great buildings you may allow the length to be three times the
breadth, whereupon they will be so much the more beautiful and convenient.

Example.
Let A A represent a Hall, the breadth whereof is A B. having 24 foot, within
the work you may allow the length, twice the breadth unto the number marked 2,
to wit, 48 foot in length, for 24 foot in breadth, or twice the breadth, and.
more unto the number marked 2. to wit, 54 foot long for 24 foot broad, or twice
the breadth, and. more unto the number marked 2. to wit, 56 foot long for 24
foot broad; or lastly, to great building the Hall may have in length three
times the breadth, unto the number marked 3. to wit, 72 foot long for 24 foot
broad.

diagram

The Anti-Chambers and Chambers ought to be so divided, that they may fall on
each fide of the Entry and of the Hall; and you must take heed that those on
the right hand may answer and be equal to those on the left; to the end, that
the building may be on one fide as on the other, and the walls bear equally the
burden of the roof.

Of the proportions of Anti-Chambers.
A well proportioned Antichamber ought to have in length the Diagonal line of
the square of the breadth, or the breadth and, at most.

Example of the first bigness for Anti-chambers.
Let A B C D be a square, whereof each side is 24 foot, and the Diagonal line
thereof being drawn A C, the same length that the Diagonal is of, you must give
to the said Antichamber from A unto E, and from D unto F, in this manner.

diagram

The Antichamber will have 34 foot in length, to 24 foot in breadth.

Example of the second-bigness of Anti-Chambers.
Let A B C D be a square, of which each side is 24 foot as before, add to the
said A B. D C the half their length, to wit, 12 foot from B to F, and from C to
G, you shall make the Antichamber, 36 foot in length to 24 foot in breadth.



Of the Proportion of Chambers.
As for the Chambers, you may make thereof five sorts and proportions; for they
are either square, or they may be in length their breadth with an eighth part,
a seventh, a sixth, or a fifth part above their breadth.

Example of the First bigness of Chambers.
Let A B C D be a perfect square, of which the 4 sides and the 4 Angles may be
equal, this shall be the bigness of the Chamber.

diagram

Example of the Second.
Let A B C D be a square, whereof each side is 24 foot, you may divide one of
the said sides into 8 equal parts, whereof each may be 3 foot, add one of the
said parts to the side A B and continue it to E, and as much to the side D C,
continue it to F and you will make the Chamber 27 foot long to the 24 foot
broad.

diagram

Example of the Third.
Let A B C D be a square, as before, of 24 foot; to each side, divide the side
of A B into seven equal parts, add to it one, continuing the same to E, and the
side D C unto F, the said Chamber will have 27 foot 5 inches and part in length
to 24 foot in breadth.

diagram

Example of the Fourth.
Let A B C D, as before, be a square, having to each side 24 foot; divide one
of the sides, as A B into six equal parts, add thereunto one of the said parts,
drawing the said side unto E, and D C unto F, you will make the Chamber 28 foot
long to 24 foot broad.

diagram

Example of the Fifth and lost bigness of Chambers.
Let the square A B C D be, as before, each side thereof to be 24 foot, divide
one of the sides into five equal parts, add one of the said parts drawing the
side A B unto E, and D C unto F, you will make the Chamber 28 foot 9 inches,
and 7/12 in length to 24 foot in breadth.

diagram

CHAP. XXII. Of Floores and Superficies, of Departements, Planchers, and Flat
Seelings.
AFter having seen the forms of Galleries, Halls, Anti-Chambers and Chambers,
it is needful to discourse of Floores or Superficies, of Departements,
Planchers, and Flat Seelings.

Floores or Superficies, may be of square tyles or hard stone, or of Marble, or
small squares of Carpenters work, and may be made of diverse sorts, and diverse
colors, according to the variety of the materials, which renders them very
agreeable to the eye: In lodging Chambers they are seldom made of Marble or
other hard stone, because in the Winter they will be too cold; But in
Galleries, or other public places, they will agree very well.

This sort of Flooers of small squares of Carpenters work, may be seen at
Somerset House, of which, being a novelty in England, I thought good to present
the Design thereof, although not in my Author.

diagram of floor

diagram of floor

You must take heed that the Hall, Anti-Chambers, and Chambers, which are of
the same story, may have all the Floores or Pavements equal in such manner,
that the thresholds may not be higher then the rest.

The Planchers are also made of diverse ways, for some there are that take
pleasure to make them very handsome of well wrought Joists; where you may take
notice that the Joists must be distant the one from the other, the thickness
of a Joist and half, and so the seeling will be very handsome: And there will
be so much wall between the ends of the Joists, as will be sufficient to bear
up the wall about it; Whereas if they stand wider one from the other, it will
be very ill favored; and if closer 'twill be as a dividing of the upper wall
from the lower; and if the Joists rot or be consumed with fire, the wall of
necessity must be ruined.

Others will have Compartements of Plaster, or wood, enriching them with
pictures and gilded work, and beautify them according to their various
humors; Wherefore in this there can be given no certain and determinate rules.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the height of Halls, Anti-Chambers, and Chambers
HAlls, Anti-chambers, and Chambers, are made either arched or flat: if you
make them flat, divide the breadth into three parts, and two of those parts
shall be the height of the Story, from the floor to the Joist.

Example of the first height of Halls, Anti-Chambers, and Chambers.
Let the figure M represent the Chamber whose height you would find, which
suppose to have in breadth 24. foot within the work, which shall be divided
upon the line AB, into three equal parts with points, where is marked the
numbers 123. each part being eight foot, two of each parts shall be the height
of the Chamber, to wit, 16. foot from the Floor to the Joist.

diagram M


And if you would have it higher, the breadth must be divided into seven parts;
take thereof five, which will give the height.

Example of the second height.
Let the figure N be of the same breadth as the foregoing, to wit 24 foot
within the work, which shall be divided upon the line AB into seven equal
parts, take thereof five to make the height of the Story AC, and BD, the said
height will be 17 foot 2 inches, from the Floor unto the Joists.

diagram N


Or divide the said height into 4 parts, and three of those parts will likewise
give a greater height.

Example of the third height, yet higher.
Let the figure O be of the same breadth as the former, to wit of 24 foot
within the work, which shall be divided upon the line AB, into four equal
parts, three thereof you must take for the height of the Story, so it will be
of 18 foot from the Floor to the Joist.

diagram O


CHAP. XXIV. Of the Proportion of the height of Chambers of the second Story.
THe height of Chambers of the second Story shall be a twelfth part less then
the Chambers below

Example of the height of the Second Story in the Figure marked M.
Be it, as it is said in the Figure marked M, its first Story of 16 foot, from
the Floor to the Joist, divide the said 16 foot into twelve equal parts, take
eleven which will make 14 foot 8 inches for the height of the second Story,
from the Floor to the Joist.

Example of the Second Story of the Figure marked N.
Be it, as it is said in the Figure marked N, its first Story of 17 foot 2
inches high, from the Floor to the Joist; divide the said 17 foot 2 inches
into twelve equal parts, take thereof 11, which will make 15 foot 7 inches, for
the height of the second Story from the Floor to the Joist.

Example of the height of the second Story of the Figure O
Be it, as it is said in the Figure O, its first Story of 18 foot from the
Floor to the Joist, divide the said 18 foot into twelve equal parts, take
thereof 11, which will make 16 foot and for the height of the second Story from
the Floor to the Joist.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Proportion of Halls, Anti-Chambers, and Chambers, of the
first Story which are Arched.
IN great Buildings the Hall, Anti-Chambers, and other Rooms of the first Story
may be arched, whereupon they will be much more handsome, and less subject to
fire: Their height is made by dividing the breadth into six parts, and thereof
take five, which will give the height that it ought to have from the Floor or
Superficies unto the bottom of the key of the Arch.

Example of the first height of Halls Anti-Chambers, and Chambers which are
Arched.
Let the Figure marked A be of 24 foot in breadth more or less, and be divided
into six equal parts; take thereof five, which will make it 20 foot high, from
the Floor unto the bottom of the key of the Arch.

diagram

And if you would have one higher, you must divide the said breadth into eight
parts, and seven thereof shall be the height.

Example of the second height.
Let the Figure B having the same breadth as the former of 24 foot within the
work, be divided into eight equal parts, and take thereof seven which will make
21 foot for the height from the Floor unto the bottom of the key of the Arch.

diagram

And if you divide the said breadth into 12 parts, you must take thereof 11
which will make it higher.

Example of the third yet higher.
Let the Figure C be of 24 foot broad within the work, as the former, divide
the 24 foot into 12 equal parts, take thereof 11 which make 22 foot in height,
from the Floor into the bottom of the key of the Arch.

diagram

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Proportion of the height of Chambers of the second Story.
THe Chambers of the second Story must be raised a sixth part less then the
Chambers below.

Example of the height of the second Story of the Figure marked A.
Be it, as it is said in the Figure marked A, its first Story of 20 foot in
height, From the Floor unto the bottom of the key of the Arch, divide the said
20 foot into six equal parts, take thereof five which will make the second
Story 16 foot eight inches from the Floor to the Joist.

Example of the height of the second Story of the Figure marked B
Be it, as it is said in the Figure B, its first Story of twenty and one foot
in height, from the Floor unto the bottom of the key of the Arch, divide the
said 21 foot into six equal parts, take thereof five, which will make the
second Story 17 foot 6 inches in height, from the Floor unto the Joist.

Example of the height of the second Story of the Figure marked C.
Be it, as it is said in the Figure marked C, its first Story is of 22 foot in
height, from the Floor unto the bottom of the key of the Arch, divide the said
22 foot into 6 equal parts, take thereof five which will make the second Story
18 foot 4 inchess in height, from the Floor unto the bottom of the key of the
Arch.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Proportion of the third Story.
IF you would make above the second Story, an Attique or third Story: The
second must always be divided into twelve equal parts, nine whereof will give
the height of the third Story, from the Floor unto the bottom of the Joist.

In the building of Chambers you ought to have regard as well to the place of
the bed, which is usually six or seven foot square, and the passage, as well as
to the situation of the Chimney, which for this consideration ought not to be
placed just in the middle, but distant from it about two, or two foot and, to
the end it may make room for the bed, and by this means the inequality is
little discerned if it be not in buildings, the breadth at least of 24 foot
within the work; And in this Case it may be placed just in the middle.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the height of Galleries.
THe lower Galleries must be as high as the Halls, Anti-Chambers and Chambers
of the first Story, to the end that one may enter therein on even ground, which
is to be understood then, when the said lower Galleries has the same framing,
which the said Halls, Anti-Chambers, and Chambers, whose Floores ought
ordinarily to be raised higher then the groundwork of the Court about two foot
at least, or of three or four foot; And is ascended by steps, which ought not
to have more then six inches in height, nor less then four, and in breadth one
foot, or at the most 15 or 16 inches.

But if the Galleries be made all open, so as they enter into it from the
Court; In this case you may lay the Floor lower then the neighboring Rooms,
and (...) ^^ffice that the said Floor be one foot higher then the ground work
of the Court; Thus doing 'twill appear very graceful; for by this means they
come near to the fair proportion which they ought to have in their height from
the Floor or Superficies unto the bottom of the key of the Arch; And their
Entrance is by steps which are between the opening of the Arches.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the just Proportion which the upper Galleries ought to have.
THe upper Galleries are made either flat or Arched, if flat, they must be as
high as broad: Galleries which are arched must be as high as broad, with a
fifth, fourth, or third part over, and above their said breadth.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Measures of Doors and Windows.
THe certain and determinate Measures cannot be given of the height and breadth
of principal Gates of Buildings: nor of Doors and Windows of Chambers,
because, for to make the principal Gates, the Architect must accommodate them
to the greatness of the Building, and the quality of the Master, and the use
that is to be made of them; Nevertheless we will not omit to give the Measures
following.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Proportion of Principal Gates.
PRincipal Gates of Entrance where Coaches and Wagons ought to pass, and other
such necessaries, must not have less then seven and, eight, or nine foot: and
to great Buildings, unto ten or twelve foot in breadth.

Their height must be their breadth and half at least; And to have it well
proportioned, you must give it in height twice their breadth.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Proportion of Inner-Doores.
Doors within the House in the least Building, ought not to have less then
two foot and in breadth, and five foot and in height: those from three to four
foot broad must have in height twice their breadth; and to great Buildings you
may allow even to five or six foot in breadth, and the height double, and
sometimes a fifth or fourth part less then their breadth.

The Ancients were wont to make their Doors narrower above then below, as may
be seen in a Church which is at Tivoli, which Vitruvius teaches us; and it is
likely they did so, to give them more force.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Proportion of Windows.
THe Appertures of Windows must have four foot and or five foot, and to great
Buildings unto six; between the two Jaumes their height must be at least double
their breadth; and to make them comely and well proportioned, a fourth part, a
third, or a half part more then the breadth: And according to the bigness of
these, you may make all the rest in the other rooms of the same Story; But
those of the second Story ought to be lower by one twelfth part then those in
the first; And if you make Windows above them, you ought to make them a fourth
part lower then those in the second.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Proportion of the Soiles of Windows.
THe Soiles of Windows must have from two foot eight inches, unto three foot
at most in height. The Transoms, or cross pieces of Windows, must be four or
five inches thick; Their Rebates must be from one inch and unto two inches at
most, to the end they may have greater strength, and that the frames of wood
which carry the shutters may have convenient strength. The Jaumes of Windows
must be much rebated and let in from two inches, and to three inches at least,
to the end that the wooden frames may be strong, and join to the wall; when the
wall is thin, the shutters of the Windows ought to shut over the rebates the
half or one third only; Also it is needful to divide the said shutters, that
they may not be a hindrance to the Chamber, nor obscure the light.

CHAP. XXXV. Rules to be observed in making Doors and Windows.
IN making Windows you are to take heed that you do not give them more or
less light then is necessary, nor make them wider or narrower then is needful;
Wherefore you ought to have regard to the greatness of the places, which ought
to receive the light, it being evident that a great Room has need of more
light then a little one; So that if the Windows be made less then they ought
to be, the place will be obscure and dark. And because in Houses some Chambers
are made large, some indifferent, some little, you must take great care that
all the Windows may be equal one with the other in their rank and Order, so
that those on the right hand may answer those on the left, and those above may
be right over those below. Likewise the Doors must be right over one another,
to the end that the void may be upon the void, and the full upon the full: and
moreover, let the Doors be placed in such manner, that one may see from one
end of the House to the other, which is very graceful: and besides, it is cool
in Summer, and has many other conveniences.

It is very secure to turn Arches over Doors and Windows, which Arches do
discharge and hinder that the Doors and Windows be not pressed with too much
weight, which is of great importance for the lasting of Buildings.

The Windows must be conveniently distant from the Corners and Angles of the
Building, because that part ought not to be open and infeebled, whose office is
to support and fasten all the rest of the Building.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the just Proportion which the Pillasters of Doors and
Windows ought to have in thickness and Projecture.
PIllasters of Doors and Windows ought not to be thicker then the fifth part
of their Apperture, nor less then a sixth.

The Projecture of Pillasters in general is found by dividing their thickness
into six parrs, and one of those parts must be the Projecture they ought to
have.

It remains to see their Ornaments.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Ornaments of Doors and Windows.
HOw to adorn the Windows and principal Doors in Buildings, may easily be
known from that which Vitruvius teaches in the sixth Chapter of his fourth
Book, adding thereunto all that the most Reverend Daniel Barbaro has said
thereof, and shown in design: And also of that which I have said before of all
the five Orders; Therefore leaving that, I shall only put some designs of the
Ornaments of Doors and Windows of Chambers, so as they may be made diverse
ways; And I shall mark particulary every member which is graceful, and how
much Projecture is needful.

The Omaments which are given to Doors and Windows, are the Archetrave,
Frize, and Cornice.

The Archetrave turns about the Door, and ought to be as thick as the
Pillaster, which (as I have said) ought not to be less then the sixth part of
the Apperture, nor more then a fifth; and from the Archetrave, the Frize, and
Cornice, take their thickness according to the two inventions which follow.

Example.
Let the breadth of the Apperture of the Door A A. be divided into six equal
parts, one of these parts shall be the Archetrave B, which winds about the
Door, and must be divided into four parts, of three thereof is made the height
of the Frize O, and of five, that of the Cornice D.

diagram of a door

The Measures of each member of the Ornaments may be found in this manner.

The Archetrave B must be divided into ten parts, three must be for the Prima
Fascia G, for four the second V; and the three which remains must be divided
into 5: three for the Scima Reversa P, and the other two for the Orlo, or
Regula R, whose Projecture is the fourth part of its thickness; The Scima
Reversa P, has in Projecture its height, and is marked in this manner: they
draw a straight line which terminates at the end thereof, under the Orlo or
Regula R, and on the second Fasciae V, and is divided in half, so as each of
these halfes is the Base of a Triangle of two equal sides; And on the Angle
opposed to the Base must be placed the sixth foot of the Compass, and the Curve
lines must be drawn, which make the said Scima Reversa P.

The Frize is three parts of four of the Archetrave, divided into four, and is
designed of a portion of a circle less then the semicircle, the swelling
whereof comes directly over the Cimatium of the Archetrave.

The five parts which are given to the Cornice, distribute themselves in this
manner to its members: one to the Scotia with its Listella, which is a fifth
part of the said Scotia.

The Scotia has in Projecture two thirds of its height; to design it they form
a triangle of two equal sides, and to the angle G they place the Center, and so
the Scotia becomes the Base of the Triangle; another of the said five parts is
for the Ouolo, and has in Projecture the two thirds of its height, and is
designed making a triangle of two equal sides, and the Center is made at the
point H; The other three parts are divided again into seventeen, eight for the
Coronna with its Lists, of which that above makes one of the eight parts; and
that which is below and makes the hollow of the Coronna, makes one of the six
parts of the Ouolo: The other nine are for the Scima Recta, and its Orlo or
Regula, which is a third of the said Scima. To frame it so as may be well and
graceful, they draw the right line A B, and it is divided into two equal parts:
at the point C, one of those parts is divided into seven, whereof six are taken
at the point D; then they form two Triangles, A E C, and C B F, and on the
points E and F, they put the fixed foot of the Compass, and draw the portions of
the Circles A C and C B, which make the said Scima.

The Archetrave likewise, in the second invention, is divided into four parts;
of three is made the height of the Frize, of five that of the Cornice, then the
Archetrave is divided into three parts, two of them are divided again into
seven, of which seven, three are for the first Fascia, and four for the second;
And the third part of the Architrave is divided again into nine parts of two is
made the Astragal, the other seven are divided into five parts; Three are the
Scima Reversa, and two the Orlo or Regula.

The height of the Cornice is divided into five parts and one of which is
divided again into six parts, of five is made the Scima Reversa above the
Frize, and of the 6 the Listella; The Scima Reversa has as much Projecture as
it is high, and the same also has the Listella; The second part of the height
of the Cornice is for the Ouolo, which has in Projecture of its height The
Moulding above the Ouolo, is the sixth part of the Ouolo, and has the same
Projecture; The other three parts of the height of the said Cornice are divided
into 17 parts, eight of which are for the Coronna, which has in Projecture
three parts of four of its height, the other nine are divided into four parts,
three are for the Cimatium, and one for the Orlo or Listella; The which remain
are divided into five parts and; of one is made the Moulding, and of four and
the Scima Reversa above the Coronna; The said Cornice has as much Projecture
as it has thickness.

Members of the Cornice of the first Invention.
I. Scotia. K. Ouolo. L. Coronna. N. Cimatium. O. Orlo, or Regula.
Members of the Archetrave.
G. Prima Fascia. V. Secunda Fascia. P. Scima Reversa. R. Orlo, or Regula. S.
Swelling of the Frize. T. Part of the Frize which enter into the Wall.
By the means of these two, you may know the members of the second Invention.

diagram

Of these two other Inventions, the Archetrave of the first which is marked F,
is likewise divided into four parts, of three and is made the height of the
Frize, and of five that of the Cornice; The Archetrave is divided into eight
parts, five are for the plain of the Archetrave, and three for the Cimatium,
which is divided again into eight parts; Three for the Scima Reversa, three for
the Scotia, and two for the Ouolo or Regula; The height of the Cornice is
divided into six parts, of two is made the Scima Recta, with its Orlo or
Regula, and of another the Scima Reversa; the said Scima Recta is divided again
into nine parts, of eight thereof are made the Coronna and the moulding; The
Astragal, or Rondeau above the Frize, is a third of one of the said six parts,
and that which remains between the Coronna and the Astragal, is left for the
Scotia.

In the other Invention the Archetrave marked H; is divided into four parts,
and of three and is made the height of the Frize, and five the height of the
Cornice: The Archetrave is divided into eight parts, five of them are for the
plain of the Archetrave, and three for the Cimatium, which is divided into
seven parts, of one is made the Astragal, and the rest are divided into eight
parts; three of which are for the Scima Reversa, three for the Scotia, and two
for the Orlo or Regula; The height of the Cornice is divided into six parts
and, of three are made the Scima Reversa. The Dentells and the Ouolo, the Scima
Reversa, has as much Projecture as it is thick: the Dentells are two of three
parts of their height, and the Ouolo three of four parts. Of the is made the
Scima Reversa, between the Scima Recta and the Coronna; And the three other
parts are divided into seventeen, nine make the Scima Recta, and the Orlo or
Regula, and eight the Coronna.

This Cornice has much Projecture as it has thickness, as all the other
aforesaid.

Here follows designs of Doors and Windows according to the five Orders of
Andrea Palladio, and are the same which are in the Louvre in Paris.

architectural diagram

diagram of a door A Door and windwe acccording to the Tuscan Order


diagram of a door A Door and window according to the Dorick Order


diagram of a doorway

diagram of a door A Dovre and window according to the Dorick Order


diagram of a door

diagram of a door A Door according to the Lonick Order


diagram of a door

diagram of a door A Door according to the Corinthian Order


diagram of a door

diagram of a column capital The Corinthian Capitel


diagram of a door

diagram of a door

architectural diagram

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Chimnies in Halls, Chambers, Studies, and Wardrobes, and of
their Proportions.
HAll-Chimnies ought to be within work fix or seven foot, and in great
Buildings unto eight, between the two Jaumes; and 'twill be convenient to make
their Funnels in the thickness of the wall, if possibly it can be; if not, they
must be set in a place where they may correspond to those of the Chambers, the
which spreads it self but little in the middle, as it has been said; and if it
be possible, it must be so disposed, that the Chimney be seen in the front by
them that shall enter into the Hall.

Their height must be four foot and to five at most, from the bottom of the
Plate-band to the Mantle-tree; they must project two foot and half, or three
foot at most, from the wall unto the mantle-tree. The Jaumes must be from eight
to twelve inches in breadth: and in great Buildings even to 24, or more,
according to that Order of Architecture, with which they are to be adorned.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Chamber-Chimnies, and of their Proportions.
CHamber-Chimnies must have in breadth five and or six foot, and in great
Buildings unto seven, and must be placed as I have said before, because of the
place of the bed. Their height must be four foot, or four and from the
Mantle-tree or Plate-band, their Projecture must be two foot, or two and from
the back to the Fore-sides of the Jaumes.

CHAP. XL. Of the Chimnies in Studies and Wardrobes.
CHimnies in these Rooms must be four foot, four and or five foot at most in
breadth: Their height from the Mantletree must be like to that above of four
foot, and. and also their Projecture two foot, or two and, from the back.

CHAP. XLI. Of Funnels of Chimnies.
FVnnels of Chimnies must be carried through the Roof, and above the ridge,
three foot, four or five foot at most, that they may carry the smoke into the
Air. You must take care that they be not made neither too wide nor too narrow;
for if they be too wide, the wind will drive back the smoke into the Room, and
will not permit it freely to ascend and pass forth; And in Funnels too narrow,
the smoke not having free passage is repulsed, and returns backwards:
Therefore it is that Chamber-Chimnies are not made narrower then ten or eleven
inches, nor broader then fifteen, which is the ordinary depth of Funnels of
great Kitchen Chimnies, by reason of the great fire that is made therein; And
for their breadth, they must be four or five foot at most within the work, from
the place where the breast ends unto the top of the Funnel; Now the said breast
reaches from the Mantle-tree unto the Sieling or pitch of the Arch, always
diminishing within the work, until you come to the measures of depth and
breadth before mentioned; And from thence arising unto the end of the Funnel,
it must be carried up as even as you can possibly; for failing in this, it
often happens the smoke is offensive.

CHAP. XLII. What is to be observed in making Chimnies, and the fashion which
was practiced among the Ancients.
THe Jaumes and Mantle-trees of Chimnies must be curiously wrought; for rustic
work does not appear well, unless it be in very great Buildings, for the
Reasons aforesaid.

The Ancients, to heat their Chambers, did serve themselves in this manner:
They made their Chimnies in the middle, with Columns or Corbeaux which bore up
the Archetrave, upon which were the Funnels of the Chimnies which conveyed away
the smoke; of which kind one may be seen at Bay near the Piscine of Nero, and
one which is not far from Civita Vecchia; and when they would not have
Chimnies, they made in the thickness of the wall pipes or funnels, through
which ascended the heat of the fire which was under the Chamber, and was
conveyed forth through certain vents and conducts which was on the top of the
funnels. Much like this, the Trenti Gentlemen of Venice in the Summer refreshed
their Chambers at Costoza, their Country dwelling: For in that place there are
great Mountains in which are certain great Caves, which in times past were
Quarries, which (I suppose) Vitruvius means in his second Book, where he
treates of Stone. In these Caves are engendered extreme cool winds, which these
Gentlemen caused to be brought into their house, through certain Subterranean
vaults; and by the means of certain truncks, like to those whereof I have
spoken before, make them to run through all the Chambers, opening and shutting
them at pleasure to take more or less of Air, according to the time and
season; And this place would be wonderful were it only for this great
Commodity, nevertheless that which renders it yet more admirable and worthy to
be seen in the prison of the wind, which is a certain Chamber under ground,
made by the most Noble Seignieur Trenti, and by him called Aeola; where many of
those trunks and conducts of wind are discharged; And to render it beautiful,
and worthy of this name he has given it, he has spared neither care nor
charge.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Staire-Cases, and their diverse manners, and the numbers and
greatness of their Steps.
THere ought to be great care taken in the well placing the Staircase; for
there is not a little difficulty to find a place convenient, so as the Stairs
may be distributed without prejudice or hindrance to the rest of the Building;
It Is therefore that ordinarily they are placed in the corner of the Building,
or on the wings, or in the middle of the front, which is but seldom, unless it
be in great Buildings; because much of the Stone-work will be hindered by reason
of the Stairs being in the middle, unless the house be double.

There are three openings necessary to the least Staire-Case, the first is the
doore-way that leads to them, which is the better when it is spacious, and
pleases me most if it be in such a place where, before one approaches, one
may see the best part of the house: for although the house be little, by this
means it appears much larger; nevertheless it behooves that the said Doroway
be obvious and easy to be found.

The second opening is that of the Windows, which are needful to give light to
the Stairs, and when there is but one, let it be in the middle as near as you
can, to the end that all the Staire-Case may be enlightened.

The third opening is the landing place, by which we are to enter into the
Rooms above, and ought to lead to places large, fair, and well adorned.

Stairs will be well made, if they be spacious, light, and easy, so as they
may invite people to go up.

They will be lightsome when they have a perfect light, that disperseth it self
to all parts equally.

They are spacious when they appear not little, nor narrow in respect of the
bigness and quality of the Fabric; but they must never be narrower then four
foot; to the end, that if two persons meet, they may commodiously pass one by
the other; They may be made of five or six foot, or seven and half, and to
great Buildings unto ten or twelve foot broad to every flight, and they must be
made as commodious as possibly you can.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Height and Breadth of Steps.
THe Steps ought not to be more then six inches high; and if they be lower,
they must chiefly be to long and continued Stairs; They will be so much the
easier, because one needs not lift the foot so high; but they must never be
lower then four inches.

Their breadth ought not to be leffe then a foot, nor more then fifteen or
sixteen inches.

The Ancients observed not to make the number of Steps even, to the end that
beginning to ascend with the right foot, they might end with the same foot,
which they took to be a good Omen, and with greater devotion so to enter into
the Temples.

CHAP. XLV. Of Diverse manners of Stairs.
STairs are made Straight or Winding: the Straight are made spread abroad into
two branches or passages; or square, which turns into four branches or
passages; and to make them in this last manner, all the space must be divided
into 4 parts, whereof 2 must be for the Stairs, and 2 for the vacancy; The
middle whereof if it be open, the Stairs receive light. They may be made with a
wall within, and then within the two parts which are taken for the Stairs, the
thickness of the wall ought to be comprehended and enclosed, which makes the
Case or Newel; they may also be made without a wall within: these two sorts of
Stairs were made by the Invention of Seignieur Lovis Cornaro, a Gentleman of
an Excellent Judgment.

Winding-Staires, some are made round, some oval, some with a Newel in the
middle, and some open; And such Winding-Staires are made chiefly where there is
little room, because they take up less room then the straight Stairs, yet not
so easy to ascend. Those which are open in the middle are very handsome,
because they may have light from above, and those who are above may see those
who are coming up, and are also seen by them.

Those which have a Newel in the middle, having but little room are made in
this manner: you must divide the Diametre into twelve parts, ten whereof are
for the Stairs, and the two which remain are for the Newel in the middle; Or
divide the said Diametre into eight parts, six whereof are for the Steps, and
two for the Newel; And if there be much room, you must divide the Diametre into
three parts, whereof two are for the Stairs, and one for the Newel, as in the
design A; Or otherwise, you may divide the Diametre in seven parts, of which
take three for the Newel in the middle, and four for the Stairs. Just in this
manner is the Staire-Case of the Column of Trajan at Rome; and if you make
Stairs winding as in the design B, they will be handsomer and more agreeable,
and longer then if they had been straight; But to Stair-Cases open in the
middle, the Diametre must be divided into four parts, two whereof must be for
the middle, and two for the Stairs.

Besides the fashion of Stairs which are in practice, there has been a
Winding-Staire invented by Mark Anthony Barbaro, a Gentleman of Venice of an
Excellent Judgment, who made excellent experiments in very narrow places, where
there is no Newel in the middle; and the Stairs in their turning are much
longer, and are divided after the manner aforesaid.

Those which are oval divided in the same manner as the Round; they are very
handsome and pleasant, because all the Windows and Doors are in the middle
and head of the oval, and are very commodious; I have made one open in the
middle in the Monastery of Charity at Venice, which has succeeded very well.

There is another very handsome manner of Stairs which King Francis the First
caused to be made in the Castle of Chambor near Bloyse, and is in this manner;
There are four Stair-Cases which have four Entrances, to wit, one Entry to
each, and go up the one over the other in such manner, that being made in the
middle of the Building, the four may serve for four Appartements; so that the
Inhabitants of one need not go up and down the Stairs of the other; And
because it is open in the middle, they all see each other go up and down,
without any hindrance the one to the other. This Invention being new and
handsome, I have placed it here, and marked with Letters from the foot to the
head, to the end every one may see where each Staire begins, and where it ends.

There was also to the Porticos of Pompey at Rome, leading to the place of the
Jews, Winding-Staires of an admirable form; for being placed in the middle, in
such manner that they could not receive light but from on high, they were set
upon Columns, to the end that the light might distribute it self to all parts
alike; According to which example, Bramante an Excellent Architect in his time,
made one of them at Beluedere, and without Steps, having the four Orders of
Architecture, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and Composita. To make these
Staire-Cases, you must divide the whole space into four parts, two whereof are
for the void place in the middle, and one on each side of the Steps and Columns.

There are many other fashions of Stair-Cases in Ancient Edifices, as
Triangulars; and of this sort are those of the Cupolo of St. Maria Rotunda,
which are open in the middle, and receive light from above: Those also which
are at Sancto Apostolo in the same City, by which we go up to Mount Cavello,
which are very magnifick, and they are double. Many persons have taken the
model thereof, and carried it to a Temple on the top of the Mountain, as
appears in my Books of Temples; and of this sort is this last design.

You must note, that in Stair-Cases which are square or oblong, when you are
constrained to place Steps in the Angles, in turning you cannot make more then
six in a Semicircle, which are three in of a Circle, and is then, when the
Staircase shall have but six or seven foot in breadth within work, which is
the least that can be made.

To Stair-Cases of eight foot broad, you must put eight Steps from the Angle,
turning to a Semicircle, which will be four to of a Circle.

And to Staire-Cases from nine to ten foot broad, you must put ten Steps to a
Semicircle.

If they have eighteen foot more or less, you may make twelve Steps to a
Semicircle.

You must take heed that the landing place of the Stairs, which is the space
between the wall and the Steps which one ascends, and which does distribute
to the Apartements, be broader a fourth part at least then the length of the
said Steps.

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

diagram of a stairwell

OF ROOFS. RULES AND INSTRUCTIONS, FOR Framing all manner of Roofs, whether
Square or Bevel, either above pitch or under pitch, according to the best
manner practiced in England.

Also to find the length of the Hips and Sleepers, with the back or Hip-mould,
never yet Published by any Architect, Modern or Antique; a Curiosity worth the
Regard even of the most Curious Workmen: Exactly demonstrated in the following
Rules and designs; By that Ingenious Architect Mr. William Pope, of London.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Roofs.
Having raised the Walls to their designed height, and made the Vaults, laid
the Joists, brought up the Stairs, and performed all those things spoken of
before; we are now to raise the Roof, which embracing every part of the
building, and with its weight equally pressing upon the walls, is as a band to
all the work; and besides defends the Inhabitants from Rain, from Snow, from
the Burning Sun, and from the moisture of the night; adds no small help to the
building, casting off from the walls the Rainwater, which although for a while
seems to do but little hurt, yet in process of time is cause of much Damage.
The first Men (as says Vitruvius) built their houses with flat Roofes, but
finding that thereby they were not defended from the weather, they (constrained
by necessity) began to make them ridg'd (that is to say) raised in the middle:
These Roofs are to be raised to a higher or lower pitch according to the
Country in which they are; wherefore in Germany by reason of the great quantity
of Snow that falls there, they raise their Roofs to a very great pitch, and
cover them with Shingles, which are small pieces of wood, or of thin Slate or
Tyles; for if they should raise them otherwise, they would be ruined by reason
of the weight of the Snow. But we who dwell in a more temperate Country ought
to choose such a pitch which may secure the building and be of a handsome form;
therefore we divide the breadth of the Roof into four equal parts, and take
three, which makes the most agreeable pitch for our Country, and is the
foundation for the raising of any manner of Roof, whether Square or Bevel; as
appears in the following designs and descriptions.

The Manner of Framing a Floor, with the Names of each Member, 1. THe
thickness of the Wall, and Lintel or Wall-plate; and if it be in Timber work,
then a Bressummer. 2. The Summer. 3. Girders framed into the Summer. 4. Spaces
between the Joists. 5. Joists. 6. Trimmers for the Chimney way. 7. Trimmers for
the Staire-Case, or well-hole for the Stairs.


diagram of a floor

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Design A.
THe Breadth of the House, A. A. A. B.
Cantilivers, Cornices, and Eaves; The Length of the Rafters and Furrings,
which ought to be of the breadth of the house A A.

The principal Rafters to be cut with a Knee (as in the Design) that they may
the better support themselves and the burden over them upon the upright of the
wall, and also secure that part from the dripping in of the Rain; which
otherwise would happen if the Rafters were made straight and furred.

The Beam to the Roof, or Girder to the Garret floor, ought to project without
the work, as far as the Furring or Shreading, which is the Projecture of the
Cornice.

This manner of framing the Roof will be useful from 20 to 30 foot, or
thereabouts.
1. Ground-Plate. 2. Girder, or binding Interduce, or Bressummer. 3. Beam to
the Roof or Girder to the Garret floor. 4. Principal post and upright brick
wall. 5. Braces. 6. Quarters. 7. Interduces. 8. Prick-post, or Window-post. 9.
Jaumes or Doore-post. 10. King piece, or Joggle piece. 11. Strutts. 12.
Coller-beam, Strutt-beam, winde-beam, or top-beam. 13. Doore-head. 14.
Principal Rafters. 15. Furrings or Shreadings. 16. Ends of the Lintels, and
pieces. 17. Bedding-moulding of the Cornice over the Windows, and space
between. 18. Knees of the principal Rafters, which are to be of one piece. 19.
Purline Mortices.
diagram of a structure's scaffold

CHAP. XLVIII. Design of the Gable End or Roof B.
LEt the whole Breadth of the Gable End or Roof A A be 20 foot, divide the same
into 4 equal parts, take thereof three for the length of the principal Rafter A
B, and placing that perpendicular from the point C to the point D, begets the
length of the Sleeper A D, which will be 18 foot. And the length of the Dormers
principal Rafter from A to E, when laid to its pitch upon the back of the
principals, will reach to the level line F B, or top of the principal Rafter;
And this is a general rule for all Breadths.

1. Summer or Beam. 2. King piece, Crown post, or Joggle piece. 3. Braces, or
Strutts. 4. Principal Rafters. 5. The Sleeper. 6. Purline of the Dormer. 7.
Principal Rafter of the Dormer. 8. Single Rafter of the Dermer, standing on the
Sleeper and Purline. 9. Point of the Sleeper. 10. 11. The thickness of the
Wall and Lintels, or wall-plates.
diagram of a roof scaffold

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Italian or Hip Roof C.
THe Breadth of the Roof, A. A.
being 20 foot.

The length of the Sleepers or Hips, A. B.
being 18 foot, which is proportionable to the breadth of the House.

The height of the Roof perpendicular. E. D.


The length of the Hip, C. D.
and the Angle which it makes upon the Diagonal line, which is showed by the
prick line G, from F to C.

1. 2. The Wall and Lintells. 3. Dragon Beam for the Hip to stand on. 4. Beam
or Summer, wherein the Dragon-Beames are framed. 5. King piece or Crown post.
6. Strutts or Braces from the Crown post to the Hip Rafter. 7. Hips as they
make the Angle equal to the breadth of the House. 8. Hips as they make the
Angle in the Diagonal lines from Corner to Corner. 9. The Additional length
which the Hips make upon the Diagonal line, more then the breadth of the House.
diagram of a roof scaffold

CHAP. L.
Of Flat Roofs D.
WIthin a Camber-Beam and Rafters joggled in, whose weight lies not chiefly in
the middle, and may be so made that without hanging up the Beam, the principals
may discharge the weight; And how Drips may be made to walk on.

1. Camber-Beam. 2. Principals joggled into the Camber-Beam. 3. The place where
the principals are joggled in. 4. Punchons or Braces. 5. Drips to walk on, and
may be made with the less current that the Roof may be made the more pitch for
the strengthening thereof: And may be made higher or lower according to the
Building and Discretion of the Architect. 6. Battlements.


A Flat Roof, with a Crown post, or King piece.
diagram of a roof

CHAP. LI. Of the Hip Roof E.
INstructions to find the length and back of the Hip, so as it may answer the
side and the end; of the perpendicular line, of the gable end, the two Skirts,
the side of the Roof in plano, or lying in ledgment with the hip and gable end;
the Diagonal and perpendicular lines being laid down proportioned to any breadth
or length, by which the most Ingenious may serve himself, and an ordinary
Capacity (already acquainted with the use of the Ruler and Compass) may plainly
demonstrate all the parts of a Roof whether Square or Bevel above Pitch or
under Pitch by lines of proportion, as may appear in the Designs following.

Suppose the Roof 20 foot Broad, and in length 30.40. or 50 foot more or less.
LEt A. B. C. D. be the sides and ends of the said Roof one end to be Hipt, the
other a gable end. Draw the lines A. B. C. D. the breadth and length of the
Roof. Then Araw the gable end A. B. E whose sides or principal Rafters being of
the brodth of the House; then draw the perpendicular line E F. the height of
the gable end, which line is of general use to level the ridge of all Roofs;
and if the other end be Hipt as in the design D. C. G. then it serves to find
the length of the hip, and the back of the Hip, so that it may answer both
sides and ends of the Roof, always observing that the middle of the breadth of
the house is as I. H. then draw the line K L N through the center I. which will
make right angles to the line E F. H. G. both in bevel and square houses. Then
extend the line A. B. on both sides to O. being the length of A. E. or E. B.
the length of the principal Basters or of the breadth of the house. So will O.
N. and O. K. make the length of the ridge I. F. and K. D. and C N. the two
skirts.

To find the length of the Hip.
DRaw the Diagonal lines D. I. and I. C. over which the Hip is to hang when in
its due place; then take the perpendicular line E. F. and place it from the
point I. to P. P perpendicular to the Diagonal or Base lines D. I. and I. C. at
I So is I. P. and I. P. the pitch of the hip equal to the gable end E. F. and
when erected will hang perpendicular to the point I. Then take P. D. the
hypotenuse of the triangle D. I. P. and C. P the hyporenuse of the triangle C.
I. P. placing them from D. to G. and C. to G. gives the length of the hip D. G.
C. and when laid to their pitch, will all meet perpendicular to the point I.

To find the back of the Hip. so that it may answer both sides and ends of the
Roof, whether Square or Bevel.
LAy the Ruler from the point L. to the point H. and from the point H to M and
mark where it cuts the Diagonal lines D. I and I. C. at Q. Q. then set one foot
of the Compasses on the point Q. and extend the other foot to the hip lines D.
P. and C. P. at the nearest distance with that mark the point R upon the same
Diagonal lines, then draw the pricked lines L. R. H. and H R M. which makes the
back of the hip for the two corners of that Roof.

This Rule serves for all Roofs whether over or under pitch.

CHAP. LII. F Of Roof Bevel at one end, and Square at the other; the Gable end
Square, the Bevel end Hipt.
SUppose the breadth of the Roof 20 foot, the length more on one side then on
the other, as in the design A. B C. D. then draw the gable end A. E. B. whose
sides from A. to E. and from E to B is of the breadth of the house, or is the
length of the principal Rafters; then draw the perpendicular E. F. the height
of the Roof from the floor; and if kneed, then from the top of the knee, as in
the design of a kneed Rafter before-going.

The sides of the Roof which makes the Ridge G. H. I. K. to be drawn as is
described in the foregoing design.

Divide the breadth of the Roof in two equal parts, as F. L. Q then take the
distance L. N. which is the breadth of the house, and make it parallel to C. Q.
D. as M. L. M. and L. will be the point whose perpendiculars O. T. will meet
the principal Rafters and hips.

To find the length of each Hips distinct one from the other. Of the longest
Hip.
DRaw the Diagonal line L. C. and take the height of the gable end E. F. and
place it perpendicular to L. C. at O. So have you the height of the Roof
perpendicular from O. L. equal to E. F. the gable end; and the line O. C. will
be the length of the hip Rafter, which will be equal to C. H. the skirt for
that side of the hip, and C. P. the side of that hip end.

To find the back of the longest Hip C. O.
LAy the Ruler from the point M. to Q. and mark where it cuts the Diagonal line
at R. then set one foot of the Compasses at the point R. and extend the other
foot till it touch the line C. O. at the nearest distance, then make it touch
the Diagonal line at S. then draw the lines M. S. Q. which is the back of the
hip for that corner of the Roof.

To find the shortest Hip.
DRaw the Diagonal line of L. D. and take E. F. the perpendicular of the gable
end as before, and place it from L. to T. perpendicular to L. D. then draw the
line T. D. which is the length of the hip for that corner, and is equal to the
skirt D. I and the side of that hip D. P. which when erected, will meet with
the other principals perpendicular to the point L.

To find the Back of this Hip.
LAy the Ruler from the point Q to the point M. and mark where it cuts the
Diagonal line L. D. at V. Extend the Compasses from the point V. to touch the
line T. D. at the nearest distance, and carry that distance on the Diagonal
line to the point W. Then draw the pricked lines M. W. Q. which will make the
back of that hip fit for that Bevel corner.

And this Rule serves for all Bevel Roofs whether over or under pitch.

CHAP. LIII G. Of a Roof Bevel at both ends, and broader at one end then the
other.
architectural diagram

THE length and breadth of the house. A. B. C. D. E. F. G.


The length of the Rafters or pitch between the widest and narrowest end about
the middle of the house, to stand over the pricked line T. T. as the foot F. to
stand on the one T. the foot G. to stand on the other T.

The point of the two Hip ends when brought to their due place, H. H.
will be perpendicular to P. P. and will meet the sides I. K. L. M. over the
points P. P.

The points of the perpendiculars and lengths of the Hips from A. B. C. D. O.
O. O. O.


The backs of the Hips or Hip mould due to each corner. Q. Q. Q. Q.


The points to find out Q. the point for each backs. R. R. R. R.


The lines representing the breadth of the house parallel to each end. S. S. S.
S.


Representing the middle of the house. T. T.


Notwithstanding the Bevel ends you may place your Beams for your principal
Rafters to stand on, Square, or so near a Square as may be, or between both, as
from the ends of the pricked lines I. K. L. M. bringing the outside of them
straight under P. P. which will be more handsome for the house in the inside
although it Bevels outward.

FINIS.

