

THE LIFE OF JOHN WILLIAMS, Ld KEEPER of the GREAT SEAL, Bp. of LINCOLN, and
ABp. of YORK.

In the Reigns of King JAMES, and King CHARLES the First.

WHEREIN Are related several Remarkable Occurences of those Times both in
Church and State.

With an APPENDIX, Giving a just ACCOUNT of his Benefactions to St. John's
College in Cambridge.

By AMBR. PHILIPS, Fellow of the same College.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed at the University Press, for A. Bosvile, at the Sign of the
Dial over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
TO save my READER the needless trouble of Criticism, I here advertise him once
for all, that he shall be mistaken if he takes me for an Author in this Book: I
am at best but a Collector, and a Transcriber; and therefore I will not be
answerable for any Matter of Fact related in the following Papers, since I have
referred him all along to the Authors themselves, which I have quoted sometimes
for my Dates of Time, sometimes for a farther Illustration of some Passages,
which for Brevity's sake I have but just touched at, sometimes for parallel
Places, to confirm what Bishop Hacket has affirmed, and sometimes for what
contradicts his Account of Things, that so the Reader may hear both sides, and
then determine as he pleases. And I would not have it thought that I have
soiled the Margin of my Book (Slovenliness being accounted by some as the Badge
of Learning) to show my Reading; for I did it merely because we live in an Age
that will take nothing upon Trust, and wherein nothing less than Seeing is
Believing. And since it is the common Cheat of Writers to declare themselves
unprejudiced, on purpose to betray their Readers into security, I had no other
way left me to show my Integrity. For I doubt not, if any will be at the same
trouble that I have been at, of comparing the several Historians, Letters and
Pamphlets of those Times together, but that their Judgment of Bishop Williams
will in the main agree with the Account I have given of him. And they will find
Reason enough to believe, that neither he nor Bishop Laud are the Monsters,
that Partiality and Prejudice, and sometimes Ignorance have made them: and that
whatever Blemishes are interwoven with their Glorious Actions (as spots in the
Sun) they have sufficient Beauties to compensate for them, and to give them
both the lasting Repute of Great and Good Men. Both whose Worth I take to be so
Self-sufficient, that there is no need of pulling down one to set up the other.
And I am apt to believe (adding this Hint to what I have said upon this Point
in the Book it self) that if the truth were known, Buckingham might be
accountable in a great measure for the Differences betwixt Laud and Williams;
who in all probability when he was disgusted with the Lord Keeper, might engage
Laud against him for the speedier and more effectual Accomplishment of his own
Revenge in the Ruin of Williams.

Bishop Hacket is the great Storehouse whence I have taken my Materials for
the following LIFE; and because there may be a great many who may not have
Leisure upon their Hands to read him, I have inserted all the Secret History
that is remarkable in him into my Work, or at least I have given short Hints of
it every where, and directed those that have a mind for any further Information
to the respective places in him, where they may find it. His Lordship's
commendable Gratitude to his Great Patron Williams, has made him so very
studious of Embellishments for his Life, that I can liken the Lord Keeper, as
represented by him, to nothing so properly as to the Statue of some Ancient
Hero, so beset with Trophies and Ornaments, that the Comeliness and just
Proportion of the Image underneath is scarce discernable at first sight. And
Bishop Hacket in his Book has set out the Lord Keeper, just for all the World,
as he was when Living, that is, surrounded with a multitude of Learning, and
all the costly variety of Science.

My First Part, and a great deal of my Second, has nothing in it that is
(properly speaking) Historical, but falls rather wholly under the Notion of
Biography. For which reason, having but little Matter to work upon, I was
forced to make the best shift I could to keep my Reader a-doing with occasional
Reflections of such sort as the Actions themselves did seem to suggest. And I
desire my Reader would pardon me, if I have presented him with a Miscellany of
Style, and now and then to humor my self, have been guilty of some little
Sallies and Excursions, to divert the Fatigue of Collection.

NOTE,
THE Figures in the Margin of the Book included in Parentheses thus (5,) refer
to the Pages in the First Part of Bishop Hacket's Book; and those in Crotchets
thus [5,] to the Pages in the Second Part.

ERRATA.
PAge 69 Line 21. read arbitratu. Page 74 Line 11, read bear. Page, 182 Line 19,
read resign.

From his Birth, till such Time as he was settled in Chancellor Egerton's
Family.
PART I.
IN this LIFE, which I have undertaken, The Method observed in this Life.
I shall use the same Method with a good Projector, when he would give a full
View of an Exquisite Piece of Architecture, and lay before you a Prospect of it
on all sides. One entire Draught, tho never so well contrived, would be but
imperfect; because in representing one Part complete, he must of necessity
conceal another: The Front and the Back-Parts will never show themselves at
once. And should I take this Great Man in but one Posture, though never so
graceful, yet I should rob him of a considerable part of his due Glory, and my
Reader of no less a share of Profit; since He was One, that might be a Pattern
to any in Four several Respects; as a Private-Man, a Churchman, a Statesman,
and a Declining-Favourite; the most difficult Character of all to sustain, so
as to quit the Stage without a general Hiss. Therefore I shall divide my Work
according to these Four Circumstances of his Life, beginning from his Birth,
with that short Course he ran in Privacy. And it is our Misfortune, that active
Bodies very rarely continue long in one Posture, scarce long enough inindeed
for our Imitation; so that we must take them at a Blush, or not at all: So
transient, in Truth, is any of those few real Advantages, We have offered us;
as if Providence designed we should be always upon our Guard, and ready to
catch at Opportunities.

But, to begin: Edmond Williams Esquire His Parentage and Birth.
of Aber-Conway in Caernarvonshire, was the Son of Wm Williams Esquire of (5.)
Coghwillanne, near adjoining, and of Dorothy Daughter to Sir Wm Griffith Knight,
of Penrhyn. Now this Edmond took to Wife Mary the Daughter of Owen Wyn Esquire and
by her had Five Sons and Two Daughters. Of the Male Children, John (whose Life
we are writing) was the Youngest, born about or upon the 25th of March 1582, at
Aber-Conway, a Sea-Town in Caernarvanshire.

Williams of Coghwillanne (his The Arms of his Family.
Grandfather) branched out his Pedigree from the Princes of North Wales, (6.)
in King Stephen's Days, and so continued his Coat of Three Saxons Heads ( Tree
Pen Saix in Welsh) constantly without any the least alteration from Ednevet
Vychan, Lord Steward of Wales, in the 25th Year of Hen. III.

His Descent, his Parentage, and all the Trappings of Birth I am the more
particular in, not as though he stood in need of such foreign Embellishments to
recommend him; but because Sir A. W. and some others, pitifully, as well Co.
and Chapter p. 141.
as falsely, strove to insinuate his mean Extraction, when they could invent no
other likely Scandal to make him odious at Court: A Practice very general (as
may be easily observed) when any of the Clergy rise to Places of Dignity and
Honor; as though a Cassock were no more honorable than a Livery. But, to
proceed:

His Grandmother, the Lady Griffith, Is sent to School.
as well as his Parents, took due and timely Care of his Education. And that it
might be such as should fit him to promote God's Glory, and to be by that means
a Credit to them, they determined to make him a Scholar. For which End he was
sent to the Public School at Reuthen, for his First Rudiments, in Latin and
Greek. Here it was that he first gave some (7.)
small Essays of the future Activity of his Mind: always very busy, and in
earnest pursuit of two contrary Courses. For one while nothing would go down
with him but Play, and bodily Exercise; another while never without a Book in
his Hand. The Master a little surpised, at first knew not well what to make of
so strange a Composition. But, like a prudent Man, upon second Thoughts, seeing
the eagerness of his Temper, he thought it might not be safe to curb him: so he
left him to the swing of his Humor, and the Lad came on a-pace, and soon
out-stript all his Fellows. When he had been here for some time close at his
Book, and began now to show himself a little more at large (like a blowing
Flower in a forward Spring) It happened that Dr. Vaughan (afterward Bishop of
London) coming into Wales, took Reuthen in his way: where he found his little
Kinsman John Williams, the Captain of all the School. The Dr. glad to find him
come on so Is removed to Cambridge.
well, and willing to further his growth, bethought himself of removing him
speedily to Cambridge. And he admitted him there, entering the 16th Year of his
Age, in Saint John's College, under the Tuition of One Mr. Owen Gwin, a Welsh
Gentleman, and Fellow of that House, 1598. And by the College Register, I find
that in the same Year he was admitted into the Number of the Scholars of the
House on the 5th of November.

At Cambridge his Countrymen received Is carressed by his Countrymen, and
admired for his Beauty.
him with a hearty Welcome; and that must always be said for their Honor,
That they are sincere and cordial in their Affections to one another, beyond
most People. As they carress'd Young Williams, so likewise did they never cease
praising him, and speaking much in his Commendation up and down the University;
insomuch that he was soon distinguished, and had a great many Eyes upon him
from the very first; and the more, because his Beauty, and the comeliness of
his Form were very remarkable. And however some Philosophers may speak
slightingly of the Endowments of the Body; yet certainly there is in
Physiognomy somewhat more than a great many dream of; and an outward harmony in
the Countenance inclines us to a good liking of the Person at first Sight.

There are few of our Welsh Youth Laughed at for his Welsh Tone.
but at their first coming abroad, would move almost any Man to Laughter with
the Native Tone of their Voice, and by pronouncing all their English, as if
they spoke it in a Passion. And thus it was with our Youngster, which would
often put him to the Blush. Those that knew him at his first Admission, would
often tell him, That he came up better stocked with Latin and Greek, than with
good English. And well for him that he did; for this made him the more retired
Student, because he was resolved to shut himself up from all Company as close
as possible, till he had smoothed his Tongue, and could manage it like others
his Companions. So soon was he inspired with the generous Spirit of Emulation,
and was ashamed to be outdone, even in what he was never bred to. And this he
practiced the more earnestly, by reason of the strong Ambition he had to be an
Orator: so that in a short time he overcame this National Defect of his so far,
that when ever he had occasion to speak publicly, his Gesture and
Pronunciation were as elegant as his Invention., and his Manner gave a Luster
and Brillant to his Matter.

His Natural Parts were sar above (8.)
the common Level; but that which His Parts, and Application to his Studies.
overtopt them all, was his Memory, which was quick and retentive to a Miracle.
But yet (in this only like a Miser) he was not satisfied (as too many are) with
the plentiful Patrimony with which Nature had furnished him; but he was for
enlarging his Store, and grasping all he could. So that, although his Abilities
were such, you would think they did not need Improvement, yet he applied himself to
his Study, with that Diligence, as if he had nothing else to depend upon; and
was (if I may say so) incontinent in his Appetite after Learning. While (7.)
he was yet but Under-Graduate, he had read over many Authors in several
Sciences, together with the most considerable Historians and Poets, Greek and
Latin. A great deal (you will say) to be done in so short a Time! But it seems
Nature was partial to him, Sleeps but 3 hours in 24.
and laid but a small Tax upon his Time; for he was of so happy a Constitution,
that from his Youth upward he never required more than three Hours Sleep in
Twenty-four, to keep him in perfect Health.

This was the large Fund he had to (8.)
traffic with, and to become a considerable His Religion and Virtues.
Man in Time. Now let us see what hopes there were of him as a Christian; since
a Defect in this Point is therefore the more inexcusable, because it lies level
with all Capacities, and our ignorance is wholly wilful. As for his Religion,
he did not make a bustle, a noise and a show with it, as some Folk do, whom our
Savior assures to their Cost, That they have their Reward. But yet he was very
well furnished with excellent Morals, and such Virtues as are requisite and
commendable in greener Years; for there is a Decorum even in these Matters, and
all Virtues suit not so well with all Ages. As in Practice, so likewise in
Opinion, he was careful from the Beginning to avoid all Error; knowing no
doubt, that our Thoughts are the Springs of all our Actions, and that in the
sight of God they themselves are Actions. He was constant to the Public
Prayers of the College, and conscientious and regular in his own private
Devotions. Modesty is a Virgin-Grace, and therefore more becoming Youth: of
this we may conclude he had a large share, in that he was all Submission and
Obedience to his Superiors, a never-failing sign of an ingenuous Temper. He
was Just to his Word, True to his Friend, and Reconcilable to his Enemy; three
Qualifications, that distinguish a great Soul from a poor Spirit, and such as a
Monarch may be proud of. From his close Studying you may gather he was no
loiterer, no idle Companion; and from the very little Sleep he required, that
he was no haunter of Taverns, nor in the least intemperate either in Meat or
Drink. His short College-Commons satisfied him: hence it is that he was
Continent and Chaste. Though about seven Years old he had a Mischance (if I may
call it so) that seemed to conspire with his Virtue, and to oblige him to
actual Chastity. Being then in his Coats, and His Mischance when 7 Years old.
taking a Leap from the Walls of Conway Town to the Seashore, he thought that
the Wind (which was then very strong) by swelling out his Coats like a Sail,
would bear him up, as it did some of his Play-fellows; but contrary to his
Expectation, he fell with some force with his Belly upon a big ragged Stone,
which caused an Infirmity (to use Bishop Hacket's Phrase) better understood
than farther described. And here I must beg leave to correct an Error about
this matter in Wilson's P. 197.
History of Great Britain; for he says, That he was assured, that the Bishop
was born an Eunuch; so that Dr. Hacket's Story beforementioned deserves more
credit, who as being Domestic Chaplain to Bishop Williams, might have a truer
Information: Besides I find an Account of it, agreeable to this, in a Pamphlet
called The Observator Observed, wrote by H. Lestrange, in vindication of his
History of Charles the First. But take it either way, and it is sufficient to
clear him and the Countess of Buckingham from the aspersions of some
Historians, and to manifest the malice of Sir A. W. the P. 140.
Pamphleteer, who would fain persuade Posterity of the Bishop's great
Incontinency.

But his Sobriety, Temperance and His Profuseness.
Chastity, are the more commendable; because he was not, as some of narrow
Fortunes are, placed quite below the reach of Temptation; had he been so
minded, he had wherewithal to humor any Vice: For all his Friends, (9.)
as well as his Father, allowed him very plentifully. But in truth, though their
Liberality was great, yet his own was greater; the Stream was larger than the
Fountain that supplied it; so that his Pockets were generally empty, for out it
went faster than it came in. It was his humor from his Cradle, and followed
him to his Grave, to be profuse. He spent all he could get, besides some for
which he ran atick. Not that I propose him for a Pattern to those of his Age,
but therefore I register this small Failing of his; because it may bespeak the
Reader's Candor, when he shall hereafter be accused of Bribery.

One Instance I have to produce, An Instance of his Generosity.
which discovers in him a charitable, frank and generous Temper; and that so
much the more, because what we do when we are Young, and have not learned to
masque our Inclinations, shows us as we are in our selves. Mr. Edward Lively (
Hebrew Professor, and a Worthy Man) was by hard hap reduced to Circumstances so
very narrow, that to support himself and his Family, he was put to the sad
shift of selling a part of his Library. When Young Williams heard of this, he
scraped hard to get him three pounds together, and when he had compassed it, he
went to Mr. Lively, and made him a courteous Offer of it. His necessities
pleaded so hard, that he accepted of it; and as the only return of Gratitude he
could make, he was not ashamed to tell it abroad, to bring his pretty
Benefactor into Repute: and much was it talked of to his credit, that so little
a Hand should open it self, when large ones were shut; when yet if rightly
considered, it is but natural: for the longer we live, the stiffer are our
Joints, our Muscles stronger, our Sinews harder, and we every way fitter for
Griping. But to reflect upon our Story; it would be a nice point to determine,
whether of the two parties was the most obliged; so free and unexpected was the
Bounty of the One, so condescending and so grateful were the acknowledgments of
the other. But if we compute our Obligations from the Pleasure and Satisfaction
we receive from others, I doubt not but Williams was the party indebted.

That so candid a Temper should Gains Enemies.
have Enemies will be no News to any One, that has experienced how easily
People are disgusted, and how hardly pleased; as though we made it our Business,
who should hoard up in his Lifetime the largest share of Discontent. He was
hasty and passionate indeed, and his Heat had chafed a great many; a National
Failure it was (and what Nation without some) and very predominant in the
Welsh. The ill will of others he got by beginning so soon to stickle for the
Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church of England: and others took a distaste
to him, because he was wont to frequent the Reverend Mr. Perkins's
Congregation: What Reason they had for it, I know not, the Character of Mr.
Perkins being Fuller's Holy St.
delivered down to us for a Learned, pious, and laborious Preacher, who died
Minister of St. Andrews Parish in Cambridge.

At the close of Queen Elizabeth's Chosen Fellow of St. John's.
Reign, our Student commenced Batchelour of Arts, and within a few Days after
on the 14th of April 1603. he was elected into a Foundation Fellowship, for the
Diocese of Bangor, as appears from the College Register. Yet for all his
Merits, he obtained not (10.)
this without the Opposition of some of the Seniors, in whose Votes, together
with the Master's, the Power of Election by Statute lies. But it seems a Letter
from K. James did his Business for him; for Bishop Hacket refers to One, wrote
by him 22 Years after to his Majesty, acknowledging That his Gracious Letters
conferred the first Preferment upon him. So that this King, as it happened,
laid the very Foundation of his future Greatness, and after built him up to the
very Height of it. So true is it, that one Benefit, as well as one Injury,
draws on another. Sits close to his Studies.
And now our Young Graduate being set in a convenient posture for Studying, his
next care was how he should make the most of the Three Years that lay betwixt
him and his Degree of Master: Diligence he concluded was the best Husbandry of
Time: and so earnest was he at his Business, that he had constantly some Work
a-going forward. Greek and Hebrew he plied closely, as the best Introduction to
Divinity; and in these he had the Assistance of the most Eminent Men at that
Time in Cambridge. To master French, he found it a Task of no great difficulty:
He dipped into the Elements of Geometry; and found amidst his Business some
leisure hours to soften his severer Studies with Music; in which, both Vocal
and Instrumental, he had attained to a competent Skill. To all this add, That
he performed his public Exercises to that Admiration, that all without the
Spirit of Prophecy, concluded he was too active for a Fellowship to hold him
long: like a generous and High-metled Steed, that disdains to be bounded by a
narrow Enclosure, though his Pasture be never so rich and flowery. So obvious is
it to bespeak the future Success of that Youth, that has a Constitution proof
against Laziness, the very Consumption of a Great Genius, by which it dwindles
away into nothing in a short time. For it is with the Soul of Man as with his
Body; give it Nourishment, or it will prey upon it self.

In the Year 1605. He went out (11.)
Master of Arts, and feasted his Friends Takes the Degree of A. M.
at the Commencement, after his extravagant rate, (for so I will make bold to
call it) being better flushed with Money, by large Presents from many bountiful
Hands, than is usual with our young Graduates. But so it was, his Merits got
him Friends, and those Friends furnished him with Money. So that his Revenues
(and those considerable) lay not in dirty Land, but flowed in to him like the
Tribute of a Monarch, from the Good Will of others. And he got not Friends by
his Riches (as most do) but got Riches by his Friends; which very few can.

Our Student continues still hot in (12.)
pursuit of his Business; like a Body His Method in Studying.
set in Motion upon a Descent, which is so far from having the least
Inclination to rest, that it gathers fresh Vigor at every Turn. And now he
began to enter into the deep and spacious Study of Divinity; a Field of extent
enough for any Genius, though never so unconfined. He began (as he has sometime
in his riper Years told Dr. Hacket) to read all the Scriptures with the best
Commentators. And in his Common-Places and Problems, he manifested his great
Industry, so as to wrest Praise from his Seniors, and to merit Thanks from the
Juniors, whose benefit it is that such Exercises be carefully performed. Now he
summons all his Vigor, and puts his whole Faculties upon the stretch: For he
sets upon Reading the Schoolmen, Church History, and the Fathers all together.
But how is it possible to methodize such a variety of Studies? Why, every Man
has, or ought to have such a Method, as best suits his Capacity; and it seems
he had his. My Manner was (says he) to allot one Month to each of these
Employments; and Variety was almost as much refreshing as cessation from
Labor. This Method I was constant to for 13 Years, until I was called off by
my Secular Employments; and when I was discharged from them, I sell again to
run round in my former Circle. Over and above, he was an Exact Philosopher,
especially in Metaphysics, the Advantage and Use of which he defended
publicly in the Schools when he was Proctor for the University. His
Application (13.)
to History presupposes his Knowledge in Chronology and Geography: And I will
(says Bishop Hacket, a competent Judge) deliver it confidently, that I took him
to be the best proficient in Ecclesiastical History of his Age.

Ignorance is not so distasteful as His communicative Temper.
a selfish Knowledge, joined with the fear of making others as wise as our
selves: and an honest Beggar's Character (we know) stands fairer in the Eye of
the World, than that of a tenacious Miser. To possess and yet not to
communicate is not the part of a Man, but of the Brute Beast, that has not
reason to see the great Advantages of a mutual Benevolence. Our (15.)
Student, that was in a manner a perfect Storehouse of Learning, was open to
all: His Temper communicative, and Discourse free. Which (16.)
was so much the more acceptable, because he was remarkable for his Candor and
Moderation, and far from showing any dislike of a Scholar, that differed from
him in a Theological Debate. Yet this Moderation of his (17.)
was called by some Sluggishness, Craftiness, Neutrality, or any thing that
might give it a bad Color. As if the Spirit of Christianity were not
consistent with a Disputant, and Rudeness were better at Syllogizing, than
sound Sense, which is an enemy to Passion: or as though (to speak with Bishop
Hacket) in Points unfundamental and unresolved, every Man must be a Guelph or a
Gibelline.

I have given you a short Scheme of Is employed in Business for his College.
his Studies, by the Prosecution of which he fitted himself for the high
Employments in which we shall find him hereafter. And by his close Application
this way too, he began to grow into considerable Repute and Esteem in the
College. For, by that time he was 25 Years old, or thereabout, he had the
Honor to be employed by his Society in some concerns of theirs; by which means
upon such occasions, he had admittance A Bp. Bancroft takes Notice of him:
sometimes to speak before Archbishop Bancroft. And upon this Reverend
Prelate, what with his engaging Wit, and what with his decent Behavior, he
gained so far, that two Years before he was Batchelour of Divinity, he sent for
him, and of his own free Will, gave him the Advouzon of an Arch-Deaconry in
Wales; Cardigan, to the best of Bishop Hacket's Remembrance.

Another time the Master and Fellows, Is sent to Court by the Fellows.
deputed him for their Agent to Court, to petition the King for a Mort-Main,
thereby to bring an Increase to their Maintenance. In which Suit he sped; as
indeed he did in most Undertakings, being of a ready Wit, (18.)
and almost unwearied Diligence. Here The King takes Notice of him.
it is worth Observation, the Notice the King took of him then, for there was I
know not what in him, which his Majesty liked so well, that he told him of it
long after, when he came to be his Principal Officer. These Employments were so
many lucky Hits, as we may call them, and gave (no doubt) the first occasion to
his future Advancement. For we may reason backward thus, and see the disposing
Hand in all past Occurrences of Life; but when we come to look forward, the
very first Object terminates our sight, and we know not What will follow What;
so many different Conclusions can Providence draw from any one Principle, and
yet all just and equal.

Thus far have we brought our His Friend Dr. Playfere dies, and he makes his
Funeral Speech.
Charge safe through this troublesome World, and fenced off all Misfortunes.
But to secure him wholly had been impossible, even for his Guardian-Angel. And
the Reader will find he had his share of Troubles. One single One, like a
random-shot in Battle, befell him at this Time, which wounded him to the very
Soul: It was the Death of his Reverend Friend Dr. Playfere, in the Year 1608.
This was a heavy Blow indeed for the first, and troubled Mr. Williams so much,
that when he was requested to grace his Friend's Obsequies with a Speech, he
urged his excessive Sorrow in Excuse. But by much importunity, he was at last
prevailed upon, to give that Sorrow a Vent; which he did in such an Eloquent
and Moving Manner (as perhaps no Passion has the persuasive Force of Sorrow)
that when he ended, and the Assembly brake up, every body said, that Playfere's
Eloquence survived in his Friend. And he, though naturally covetous of a Good
Name, yet, I dare say, thought his Reputation now too dearly bought.

Happy and wise too is the Man, that He takes Orders:
knows how to make the right use of Misfortunes. We must call in the Assistance
of Religion as well as Philosophy, ere we can convert them into Blessings. Thus
Mr. Williams, after this, grew strangely indifferent to the World in all
respects, except it were to be doing good in it. And the better to enable him
to this (after humbly imploring the Divine Assistance) he gave himself over
entirely to the Service of God, entering into Orders first as Deacon, then as
Priest, in the 27 (19.)
Year of his Life. After this, that he And the Charge of a small Living.
might not lie fallow, and be like the barren Ground, he took the Charge of a
small Living, which lay beyond St. Edmund's-Bury, in the confines of Norfolk;
Fakenham perhaps, or very near to it. A poor Business though it was, that would
hardly defray the cost of his Journeys, yet it took not off his Edge, for it
answered the great Ends for which he entered upon it; to teach the Simple, to
attain to a readiness in Preaching, and to be acquainted with Compassion (as he
used to say) toward the hard Condition which his poor Brethren did undergo,
that had scarce enough to feed and keep them warm, for all their Labor. It
seems he had a Liking for the People; for in his highest Honor, I heard him
(says Bishop Hacket) treating with Sir Lionel Talmach, to employ an hundred
pound for him, to buy Land for the Relief of the Poor of that Village for ever.

In a poor Country Vicaridge he Preaches at St. Mary's in Cambr.
was to condescend to the Capacity of his People, least he might be to them as
a sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. But at St. Mary's in Cambridge, where
he had a Learned Auditory, our Preacher showed his great Skill Anno 1610, in a
Discourse upon Luc. 16, 22. And And before the King at Royston.
about eight Months after, being listed into the Combination of the choicest
Preachers, he was called upon Duty, before King James and Prince Henry at
Royston; where he acquitted himself so well, that his Majesty was pleased to
speak much in his Commendation; and the Prince not content to let him go off
with hungry Praise, looking upon him as an Honor to Wales, assured him, that
he would not be unmindful of his great Merits. But he dying untimely (if there
be such a thing as an untimely Death) the Father bestowed that Preferment on
him, which the Son intended.

The Fame of our accomplished Lord Egerton takes him into his Service.
Preacher came at last to the Ears of the Lord Chancellor Eg^^^^. And he wanted
not Friends in in that Family to recommend him; to whose Requests the
Chancellor only replied, Send for him, and let me have him. This was at
Midsummer, in the Year 1611. But when he came to London to wait upon his
Lordship, after great and humble Acknowledgments of the Honor done him, he
entreated, that he might have his Lordship's Consent, to continue one whole
Year, or the greatest part of it, at Cambridge; because he was at Michaelmas
following to be Proctor for the University, a Place of great Trust and Credit,
and some Profit. At this the Chancellor asks him, if his place might not be
supplied by a Deputy? My Lord (replys the Chaplain) (20.)
I must take an Oath upon my Admission into that Office, to oversee the
Government instrusted to me, not in general Terms only of Faith and Diligence,
but for the due Provision of many particular Branches of the Statutes; and I
dare not trust my Oath with another Man's Conscience. And he must be a hardy
fellow, that dares, since every Man at long Run, is like to answer for himself.
Who could refuse so fair a Plea? So he returns to Cambridge, where I must show
him in his Honor of Proctorship, before I proceed any farther with him.

His Reply to the Chancellor shows Is Proctor in Cambr.
what strict Notions he had of the Greatness of his Charge; and he was too
Honest to act short of his Conscience. To instance only in the Principal Duties
of his Office; What care did he take to have the Public Exercises duly
performed? Insomuch that at the Afternoon Disputations of the Under-Graduates,
he would moderate himself; by which means he had an opportunity to encourage
the Hopeful and Deserving, inflaming some with his Praises, and inciting others
with Rewards: for he was always free of his Money, but especially upon such
like Occasions. The Night-Walks indeed he committed sometimes to others; but he
perceived there never went more Authority with the Staff, than when he bore it
himself. Though he reclaimed several from their loose Courses, yet was he
remarkable in this, that he never stigmatized any one with a hard Censure. He
knew very well that Affableness, Sweetness and soft Persuasions were more
irresistible than Threats; as dealing with Scholars, and not Peasants. And it
is but want of Discretion, to think when we are in Office, we may talk big by
Authority, and lord it over Gentlemen of a Liberal Education, who have no
Notion of Slavery, except it be to contemn it.

Next to a conscientious discharge The Duke of Wittenberg comes to Cambr.
of one's Office, nothing so much credits an Officer, as when some remarkable
occurrences happen during his Office. And two very signal ones gave our Proctor
a very fair opportutunity of showing himself. Soon after Christmas, his Majesty
sent his Commands to the Heads of the University, to give Entertainment, such
as might be made ready out of hand, to the Duke of Wittenberg, and his Train.
The Duke himself was a Learned Prince: And it was therefore thought most
suitable to entertain him with Philosophic Disputations; and so it was
determined. Mr. Proctor, he sat as Moderator, and managed the Business with
all the Skill and good Address imaginable. For, to compliment the (21.)
Prince, he backed all his Reasons with Quotations from Julius Pacius,
Goclenius, Is very much taken with Mr. Williams.
Keckerman and others, that had been Professors within the German
Principalities. Which was so highly acceptable to the Duke of Wittenberg and
his Retinue, that they would not part with Mr. Williams from their Company, so
long as they continued in Cambridge; and when they went away for New Market,
they took him along with them. So much is the manner of acting in all we do,
and the right suiting of Things and Circumstances: which to perform free and
unconstrained, is the Talent only of a ready Wit, and a sound Judgment; two
important Qualifications, and rarely to be found in one and the same Person.

The next Passage is of another stamp, The King displeased at the University.
having more of the Statesman, than the Scholar in it. The Earl of Salisbury,
Lord Treasurer, and Chancellor of Cambridge dying, May 24 An. 1612. In the
Regent House, the Masters of Arts it seems could not agree in the Choice of one
to succeed him. The Majority gave their Voices for Henry Earl of Northampton,
Lord Privy Seal: The Other Party, that did not like him, they put up against him
the King's Second Son, Charles Duke of York, though then but 12 Years old. At
this the King was highly displeased, that they durst nominate his Son to any
Place, before they had humbly craved his Royal Assent. And the Lord Privy Seal,
the Chancellor Elect (perceiving himself slighted) shrunk up his shoulders, and
made Answer, That he was not worthy the Honor they designed him; as who should
say in plain English, I scorn your Proffer. Upon this, the Heads Mr. Williams
sent to appease the King.
(considering that the Wrath of a Prince is not like that of a Private Man, to
be quenched by Delay) dispatch away Proctor Williams (who though he was but the
Junior Proctor, yet was employed) to present himself with their Letters before
the King, now in the Height of his Displeasure. So he came to the Court at
Greenwich, and falling upon his Knees before his Majesty, the King, with no
pleased Countenance, demanded what his Business was. Sir (says he) My self and
They who sent me, crave Justice of your Majesty, in behalf of your University
of Cambridge, which suffers under your Displeasure, in that sort as I believe
never any of your Subjects did before; that Nineteen Parts of a Great
Incorporation should be condemned for the Frowardness (and that unpreventable
by all the Power we had) of the Twentieth part, and they the meanest of us all.
We beseech you, Gracious Sovereign, to name a Chancellor to preside over us, or
suffer us to come to your Majesty upon all Occasions, as unto our Chancellor;
not made so by the Suffrage of poor Scholars (you are far above that) but in
the Sublime Title of your Kingly Office, by which you are obliged to protect
all your People that are unprotected. The Speech Obtains his Suit.
ended, the King gave the Petitioner his Hand to kiss; saying, He would pardon
all that was past. So merciful was the King, and so persuasive was the humble
Address of the Proctor. Moreover, he added, That they themselves (22.)
should have Power to choose their own Chancellor; for he would not rob them of
their Right of Free-Election: that his farther Pleasure should be signified in
his Letters, which came to Cambridge the same Day the Proctor did; and being
opened, the Orders were, That they should forthwith call a Congregation, and
resume an Election for a new Chancellor, and that his Majesty would constrain
him to hold it, whoever it were, that the Congregation agreed upon. Still the
Heads continued in a Doubt what to do, because the King was not more
particular: And here it fared with Mr. Williams as it usually does with all
that are employed upon any Business; for they blamed him for not sounding the
matter to the Bottom. But he, whose Explains the King's Letters to the Heads of
the University.
Wit was always true to him at a pinch, warded off their unreasonable
Displeasure; by gathering much from a small Hint, which is the very Perfection
of Policy. Certainly (says he) there is one Clause in the Royal Letters, that
plainly determines our Votes; for no One has declared a flat Refusal of this
Place, but the Earl of Northampton: Therefore no One else can be meant in this
Passage, That whomsoever we choose, the King will constrain him to hold it.
This Intricacy so happily unfolded, the Lord Privy Seal was chosen. And the
King confessed they had nicked his secret Meaning: yet not They, but Mr.
Proctor; which deservedly gained him a deal of Credit.

There is one thing more which happened Dr. Gwin made Master of St. John's
College by the Interest of Mr. Williams.
during his Office; but whether to his Praise or Dispraise, I cannot readily
tell. A mixed Action it was, and discovers a great Beauty, shaded with a
Blemish, like the Sun in an Eclipse. Dr. Clayton the Master of St. John's
College dying, Dr. Morton (then Dean of Windsor, and afterward Bishop of
Durham) and Mr. Gwin (one of the Senior Fellows) put in for the Mastership. Now
Dr. Morton was a Man incomparable every way, and not only beyond Mr. Gwin, but
almost all of his Time, for Piety and Learning. But for all this, his Interest
amongst the Fellows (who all when they are Masters of Arts by Statute have a
Vote in the Election of a Master) was but small in comparison to Mr. Gwin's;
and so much the less considerably, because Mr. Williams appeared against him.
And as he was courting his Friends for Mr. Gwin, amongst others, he made suit
to one Mr. Senhouse (afterward Bishop of Carlisle) who gave him this civil
Denial: Sir, if you desire my Voice to confer the Mastership upon your self, I
will not deny you. I know you, though a young Man, right worthy of it; but your
Tutor shall never have my Suffrage, while I can say No. But yet Mr. Williams
(23.)
prevailed so far with his Interest, that Mr. Gwin, who had formerly been his
Tutor, was made Master. To excuse this is more than I can do; and there is but
one way by which I can account for his Error, how a Man of his clear Judgment
should fall into it. He was High-spirited almost to a Fault; and such Tempers
(we know) are at best but very uneasy, when any One is beforehand with them
in Obligations. And, no doubt, as a Pupil he thought in all Reason he ought not
to be unmindful of his Tutor at such a Time. I need say no more, lest I prevent
my Reader's Reflection: But this let me add, When Gratitude and Justice take
contrary sides, doubtless in a generous Breast, the Conflict must needs be very
sharp. After he had given He repents it after.
a Helping-hand to set Mr. Gwin over this Great Society, his Fortunes carried
him from College; but he heard so much, that he was soon out of conceit with
his own Work. For, there was at that time a meddling Fellow (Mr. Gwin loving his
Ease) who monopoliz'd the whole Rule of the College, and imbroil'd matters at
such a strange rate, that all Mr. Williams could do when he knew of this, was
to repent heartily for what he had done. And he that will set himself out of
the Power of his own Actions, and prevent all After-reckonings, had need be
very cautious how he makes a Compliment of his Conscience.

Now the Commencement drew on. A Splendid Commencement at Cambr.
And the Senior Proctor either never having any polite Learning, or having
outgrown what he had; the Junior was pitched upon to be the Father of the Act,
as we call it. This Commencement (says Bishop Hacket) was as gay and full of
Pomp, by the great Concourse of Nobles and Gentlemen, as ever I saw; most part
of which the Acquaintance and Fame of the Proctor drew thither. All these he
had the Honor (as is usual for the Proctor) The Proctor's Liberality.
to treat; which he did, not liberally, but profusely. For it was his Temper to
be always at perfect enmity with Parsimony. It would have made you smile, to
hear the Prevaricator in his jocular way, give him his Title and Character to
his Face; Titus Largius primus Dictator Romanorum. I do not commend him for
this Quality of his. It was excess of Generosity in him, to think Frugality was
but a clownish Virtue at the best: though if ever Prodigality appears with a good
Grace, it is certainly upon such public Occasions.

So now the Year, and the Business (24.)
of it is over; and he returns to Chancellor Egerton. Yet before I settle him
there for good and all, I must fetch him back once again. The King's only
Daughter, the Princess Elizabeth The Palsgrave comes to Cambr.
being married to Frederick Prince Palatine, and Chief Elector of the Empire,
upon Valentine's Day, being the Fourteenth of February 1612. after Stow Chron.
the Celebration of the Nuptials was over at Court, the King had a mind, that
his Son-in-law the Elector should be received with an Academical Entertainment
at Cambridge. Notice being given to Dr. Carew the Vice Chancellor, he with the
Sages of the Consistory concluded, there should be a kind of Commencement
Extraordinary. At this Time Mr. Williams had not been above 7 Months absent, so
that being still fresh in the memory, and high in the good Opinion of the
Doctors, he was pitched upon for one to oppose upon the Theological Questions.
Mr. Williams sent for to assist in his Entertainment. Commences T. B.
Down they send for him out of hand: and that he might be duly qualified for an
Opponent, they make him in all haste commence Bachelor in Divinity. The
Questions, which he gave in to defend for his Degree were, 1. Peccata semel
remissa nunquam redeunt: 2. Qui sacros Ordines susceperunt, famulari possunt
Magnatibus ut fructus Ecclesiasticos percipiant. In responding to which (in a
manner extempore) he showed at once the Soundness of his Judgment, and the vast
Compass of his Learning. But in the Opponent's Place, upon the Day appointed,
on Mar. 13. 1612. he acquitted himself manfully, to the great Satisfaction of
the Noble Assembly, and the very great Honor of the University. This done, he
retired to his Home; for so Returns to Lord Egerton.
I must now call the Lord Chancellor's Family. And thus I have brought him safe
to the end of the first Stage of his Life: which was in a manner publicly
lead, though in a private Capacity: For to conceal himself absolutely was more
than he could do.

The End of the First Part.
From the Time he settled in Chancellor Egerton's Family, till the End of King
James's Reign.
PART II.
THE former Part has showed you The Design of this Part.
Mr. Williams from his Childhood to his Manhood: how hopeful he was in his
Youth; and how afterward those Hopes exceeded what they seemed to promise: how
able he became in Learning; and how creditable and useful a Member he was of
his College in particular, and of the whole University in general. I come in
the next place to consider him as a rising Man in the World; how he made his
Fortunes (as we ungratefully express our selves, when all the while it is the
Lord's Doing) and how he behaved himself in them after. And that we may not
confound Characters, I shall first give you an Account of him as a Statesman,
and as concerned in Civil Affairs during his Prosperity, omitting for the
present all that might belong to him as a Clergy Man.

Now or never was his time to look The means by which he gained Lord Egerton's
Favor.
about him. For he had a very fair Opportunity given him, by entering into the
Service of so considerable a Man as the Chancellor was, with the Assistance of
Providence to raise himself; at leastwise to make some Efforts toward it.
Therefore as a prudent (27)
Man, the first thing he cast in his Mind, was how he might ingratiate himself
in the Family; but especially in his Lord's Favor, who he knew was able to
reward him. There were at that time in the Family a great many Ladies, and
those of Quality, to whom his Address and Behavior, as well as his Garb, was
more courtly than is usual with Scholars. He received all Strangers with great
Courtesy and Civility. And if any Disorders happened amongst the Servants, he
interposed with the Gravity of a Divine. Thus he had gained the Outworks; and
thus far an indifferent Artist might have gone. But to make One's self
acceptable to a Man of the Chancellor's Gravity and Judgment, shows something
of the like Worth in One's self: So apt are we to be taken with our own
Resemblance. The Chaplain therefore approved himself to his Lord, not only by
his good Preaching, but likewise by the sharp and solid Answers he made to such
Questions as were cast in by the By at Table, to fathom his Learning and
Judgment. For to take a Man unprepared and off his Guard, even in little
matters, tries his Strength more, than a formal Dispute does, where Warning is
given: As, we know, Bills upon sight are never drawn (at least to any purpose)
but upon the ablest Men. But what recommended him more than all this was, that
he understood the References and Petitions, that were sent to his Lord from
Oxford, better then all his Servants, being newly come from Cambridge: And his
Opinion was so constantly taken in all those Complaints, that Dr. King (the
Bishop of London) would sometimes pleasantly call him the Chancellor of Oxford.
To this, he wars stored with Friends in the Courts of the King and Prince, from
whom he gathered Intelligence worth his Master's hearing; no blind Rumors, but
Clouds, that at first rising were scarce so big as an Hand, yet portending
mighty Tempests as they fell. Lastly, to make him every way acceptable to his
Lord, he had picked up some Gleanings (in his own modest words) in the
Knowledge of the Common-Laws of the Realm. In this the Chancellor (28.)
gave him Encouragement to proceed; and was so taken with him, that at his
leisure hours, both to divert himself and instruct his Chaplain he would impart
to him the Narration of some important Causes, that had been debated in
Chancery or Star Chamber. So fortunate was Mr. Williams to fall under such a
Tutor as instructed him in that Business, to which it pleased God after to call
him. But neither did he for all this neglect his Studies as a Divine: and
Resolution and Diligence carried him through (29.)
all. He encourages Merit, and defends the injured Clergy.


And now he was so far in his Lord's Favor, that he was able by his Interest
to procure several Livings that fell into the Chancellor's Presentation, for
such as he knew to be able and deserving Scholars; so early did he patronize
Merit. And he gave farther Evidences yet of his public Spirit, when swarms of
Scholars came about him, such as were harassed with tedious and chargeable
Lawsuits. If their Cause were good, or if it had a Flaw in it, he would point
it out; would show them where lay the Strength, and where the Weakness; would
commend them to faithful Attorneys and able Counsel, work the Officers to an
Abatement of Fees, and supply them with Money that wanted it. Especially if the
Cause concerned the Title of their Living, or the payment of their Tithes, he
would sweat and bestir himself for his poor Brethren to the utmost of his
Vigor. So that under his Lord and Master, he was a zealous and successful
Abettor of the Rights of the Clergy in general.

To study the Interest of others so earnestly as wholly to neglect our own, may
rather be called Simplicity than Makes his own Iterest, so that the Lord
Egerton prefers him.
Honesty; and might sound prettily in a Romance, where Honor is Meat, Drink
and Clothing. But certainly, as the World goes, to trust to the Generosity of
others when we may befriend our selves, is more than is required at our Hands,
and much more than Prudence will account for. Therefore Mr. Williams, though very
mindful of others, was not at the same time unmindful of himself; but grounded
himself so deep in his Lordship's Affections, that in about five Years Time
(which he lived with him) he raised himself a plentiful Fortune by the
Assistance of that Bounty, which was so far from denying him any thing, that it
commonly prevented his Requests; the Politic way of enhancing a Benefit
without cost: for a modest and generous Person thinks he pays dear for what he
is forced to ask for. But, to be particular, his Patron gave him the Parsonage
of Walgrave in Northamptonshire, and by his Interest got him the Rectory of
Grafton Under-wood, in the same County. He was a Prebendary of the Church of
Lincoln, and Residentiary, with the Chantorship of the same; he had a (30.)
Prebend too in the Minster of Peterborough, and in the Churches of Hereford
and St. David's: and to these, the Chancellor gave him a Sine-Cure in Wales,
equal in profits to any of his other Preferments. By this time I expect my
Reader should cry out, Bless me! what a Glut of Preferment is here for one Man!
So jealous are we of our own Interest. But when Plenty falls into the
possession of a free Heart, it is a great Mistake to think we are injured, and
that too much flows to One. Do we grudge the Sea all those almost infinite
Waters, that are perpetually emptying themselves into it? And the reason is,
because we know they lie safe there, as in a common Storehouse, ready to
supply all places that may want. And what Riches fall into a public Hand, are
not his alone, but Every-body's; and all that is proper to him is the great
Satisfaction only of Distribution.

In the Year 1616. in October, the Lord Egerton falls sick.
Lord Chancellor, worn out, what with the multitude of Business, and what with
Age, began to decline. And in January his Weakness prevailed more, insomuch
that from that time he admitted scarce any Company, but his Chaplain's. What
Business he had with his Majesty, was committed to his Trust and Management: a
very considerable Opportunity, which doubtless Mr. Williams improved to his own
Advantage. The King could not but take Notice of him as often as he brought any
Messages to him from his Master: and to be entrusted by so discreet a Man with
Secrets of State, was no small Credit to him. And his Majesty thought, that
living so long with so great a Statesman, he could not choose but gain
considerable Experience himself in such Affairs. These things put together, and
added to some advantageous Hints, tending this way before, show like so many
Incidents well prepared, to render his following Advancement more probable:
from which the Reader will be able to see, by what Degrees his good Fortune
ushered him into the Court, and at last raised him to the greatest Dignities.

On the Fifteenth of March, his Dies.
Great and Good Patron died in a Wilson. Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 97.
Good Old Age, and full of Virtuous Fame. His Chaplain mourned for him long
after, and attended his Body to Cheshire, where he buried him in a Chapel with
his Ancestors.

A little before the Day of his Death, the Chancellor called Mr. Williams, and
told him, That if he wanted Money, he would leave him such a Legacy in his
Will, as should furnish him to begin the World like a Gentleman. Sir (says the
Chaplain) I kiss your Hands; you have filled my Cup full; I am far from want,
unless it be of your Lordship's Directions how to live in the World, if I
survive you. Well (says the Chancellor) I know you are an expert Workman; take
these Tools to work with, they are the best I have. So he gave him some Books
and Papers written all with his own Hand. Dr. Hacket says, he saw the Notes;
and (31.)
that they were that old Sage's Collections He gave him four Books (says Da.
Lloyd, in his Life of the ABp) which he presented after to the King.
for the well Ordering the High Court of Parliament, the Court of Chancery, the
Star Chamber, and the Council Board. So that he had a good Stock to set up
with; insomuch that Dr. Hacket does not doubt but that the Marrow of Mr.
Williams his Politics, was drawn from the Lord Egerton's Papers.

The Lord Chancellor Egerton, when Cabal. page 236. Wilson Hist. Gr. Brit. p.
97.
he grew weak, had desired Leave of his Majesty, to retire, and to have time to
see how Accounts stood between Sir Fr. Bacon made L. Keeper.
God and himself. Which being granted him, the Great Seal of England was next
delivered to Sir Francis Bacon, on the Seventh of March (according to Stow) An.
1616. He hearing that Mr. Williams, after the Death of his Master, was
preparing to go to his Cure at Walgrave, he made him a very civil Offer to
continue with him in that Place, wherein he had served the Lord Egerton before.
He declined it though, but in such Mr. Williams refuses to be his Chaplain.
an artful and obliging manner, that Bacon did not at all resent it; for they
parted very good Friends; and Sir Francis willing to set a Mark of his Favor
upon him, made him Justice of the Peace and of the Quorum in Northamptonshire.
What should be the reason, why Mr. Williams, a Man that loved to be in the Eye
of the Public, should refuse this Offer, I cannot imagine. Whether he were
tired of the City, or whether he saw so far into Bacon, as that he was not like
to continue long undisgrac'd; or lastly, whether his better Genius prompted
him: For, it is very likely, had he been his Chaplain, he would hardly have
succeeded him in his Office, though he might; at least so creditably he could
not: Because the World, that ever searches deep into the worst side of things,
would have been apt to cry out, that the Servant had undermined his Lord.

At this time by the Interest of his Is made Chaplain in Ordinary to the King.
very good Friend Dr. James Montagu (after Bishop of Winton) he was made
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, attending Yearly at Court in February. And
he had his Majesty's Orders to wait upon him in his Great Northern Progress,
which was to begin in April following: And the King told him pleasantly, That
he might expect the Laborers Penny as soon as they that had served him longer.
But the Bishop of Winchester obtained of his Majesty, that Mr. Williams might
stay behind, to take his Doctor's Degree, and to give fit entertainment to
Marcus Antonius de Dominis Archbishop of Spalato, who was newly come over into
England, and did design to be at Cambridge Commencement, in the next July. Here
again we may see how Fortune seemed to Compliment Mr. Williams with an
Opportunity of showing himself: And he never was to appear any way publicly at
Cambridge, but still he brought something about luckily to add to the Splendor
of his Performance. So at this Commencement in (32.)
the Year 1617. he was created Doctor. Takes his Doctors Degree.
The Questions which he maintained for his Degree were, 1. Supremus Magistratus
non est excommunicabilis. 2. Subductio Calicis est mutilatio Sacramenti and
Sacerdotii. You will, I make no doubt, prevent me here, and guess that his
Treat (as is the Custom of the University upon such occasions) was very costly
and sumptuous: but one (32.)
piece of Address I must not forget; how that the Doctor was at no little cost
and pains in sending to the Italian Ordinaries at London, and ransacking the
Merchants Stores, for such Delicacies as he thought would relish best with the
Archbishop of Spalato: which Dainties it was observed that he never took any
Notice of, but preferred our English Dishes to them.

And now Dr. Williams having acquitted Retires to Walgrave.
himself honorably both as to his Act, and to the Entertainment he gave to the
Archbishop; he retired cheerfully to his Rectory of Walgrave. How he lived, and
what he did there, I shall forbear to mention, till I come to speak of him as a
Clergyman. So that at present I will not break the Thread of my Narration, but
go on with him directly in his growing Fortunes, till the End of King James's
Reign.

In the Year 1619. he preached before (35.)
the King at Theobalds; his Text taken Preaches before the King at Theobalds
out of Matthew. 11. 8. His Majesty approving of the Sermon, commanded it to be
printed. So that by several Offices and frequent Opportunities, he had now
gained his Majesty's good Liking. During the time he was at (36.)
Walgrave, the Deanery of Salisbury fell by the Death of Dr. Gordon, while the
King was in his Summer's Progress in the West. A great many stirred for it; and
for one of the Competitors, and a deserving Scholar too, the Marquess of
Buckingham used his Interest; but the King putting them all by, sent Is made
Dean of Salisbury.
for Dr. Williams, who could not be heard of in a fortnight, keeping then his
Residence at Lincoln, remote from Court. This was the first piece of Preferment
for which he was not beholding to any, saving the King's own Pleasure; for he
had not at that time so much as a Friend to intercede for him; Death having
robbed him of Dr. Montagu, the only Man about his Majesty that he depended upon.

Thus we have passed over the Beginning or Dawning (as we may call it) of his
good Fortune; and he is (you see) in a very likely way of Doing well, as we say
when a Man thrives in the World; as though Prosperity and Probity were one and
the same. Though (38.)
Dr. Williams was now in great Favor Buckingham the King's Favorite.
with his Majesty, and he loved him better than even the Lord Egerton had done;
yet if he had any Designs of advancing himself, it must be effected by that
Grand Favorite the Marquess of Buckingham, or not at all. No Man can be so
ignorant of the History of those Times, as not to know that he overruled all
the King's Affections, and disposed of all things for him, even to his very
Smiles and his Frowns.

It fell out one time, that the Dr. (41.)
was at Royston, attending upon his Majesty, in the Absence of the Marquess.
The King abruptly (without any relation to the Discourse then in hand) asked
him, when he was with Buckingham? Sir (says the Dr.) I have had no Business to
resort to his Lordship: But (replies the King) wheresoever he is, you must
presently go to him on my Message. Which he did accordingly; and the Marquess
receiving him courteously, invited him with all Affability to come freely to
him upon his own Addresses. He gathering from the Hint Williams applies himself
to him.
his Majesty gave him, that he intended he should seek the Marquess, and do all
he could to gain him by all Observance, from thenceforth resolved it.

But why must the Dr. be prompted by the King to seek his own Interest? Were
not his Eyes open at that time His Reasons why he did it not before.
of Day, and could he not see plainly, without having it pointed out to him,
that Buckingham was the King's Darling? Or did he know all this, but yet wanted
Ambition to climb? No; Dr. Williams was a Man, though bold and aspiring, yet
cautious withal: and you shall hear what dissuaded him from courting the
Marquess. One time (says (39.)
Bishop Hacket) making a Repetition of his former Life to me, when he was under
a great Sickness at Bugden, he gave me two Reasons, why he moved so slow to the
Protection of that great Lord. First, he mightily suspected his continuance;
the Title of a Favorite being so inauspicious in almost all Examples. And to
whom a Man is obliged for his Rising, it is expected he should follow his
Fortunes, be they good or bad: at least every grateful and generous Spirit will
think himself obliged to do so. Secondly; he saw (40.)
his Lordship was very apt to cast a Cloud suddenly upon his Creatures; and
raised them, as it were, on purpose to have the Pleasure of casting them down
after. And from these two weighty Considerations he concluded to give way to
others, to seek the Marquess, that might be rash enough to venture. And happy
sure had it been for him, had the King's Encouragement never diverted him from
his own prudent Resolutions; for it led him through much Prosperity to a great
deal of Adversity, and Misery in the End. So true is it, That in any thing we
undertake, we cannot so much as guess what will be the final Issue of it: and
the safest way the most prudent Man can take, to establish his Happiness (like
the wise Man's House upon the Rock) is, after his own honest Endeavors, to be
very well content to leave the Determining cast to the Allwise Disposal of
Providence: so much of the Stoic ought every Christian to have.

But to proceed: It happened well (41.)
Buckingham courts Kat. Manners.
for him at this time to show his Services, that the Marquess courted the Lady
Katherine Manners, Daughter and only Child surviving to Francis Earl of
Rutland. Wilson gives us this History of Gr. Brit. p. 149.
Account of the Matter: Buckingham (who was a general Lover) tempts the Earl's
only Daughter, carries her to his Lodgings in Whitehall, keeps her there for
some time, and then returns her again to her Father: At this the stout old Earl
resolves upon Revenge, except he would marry his Daughter, to save her injured
Honor. Buckingham (that perhaps made it his Design to get the Father's Consent
this way, she being the greatest Match in the Kingdom) marries her; after which
she was converted to our Church by Dr. White: Thus he. Which in the former part
of the Story seems to have something of Truth; if compared with Bishop Hacket's
Relation. Which is, That the motion being set on foot in the beginning of the
Year 1620. was retarded, by reason of an Affront the Earl took, in thinking
that the lusty Woer made his Advances too fast. But however it was, the Earl
(it seems) Dr. Williams forwards the Match.
was angry, and the Duke, he had a mind to the Lady. Therefore Dr. Williams
took the Opportunity to go between the great Men, to set matters straight on
both sides. Now the Earl had a good Opinion of the Dr. for some former
Services, and was therefore willing to admit him to discourse the Point fairly.
To cut it short, the Dr. brought the Earl about so dexterously with his Art and
pleasant Wit, that his Lordship put it into his Hands to draw up all Contract
and Conditions for Portion and Jointure. And now (42.)
the Earl being open-hearted with the Joy and Transport of a good Understanding
between him and the Marquess; the Dr. nicks the Opportunity, and prevails upon
him to settle more upon the Marriage, than the Marquess and his Mother had
demanded. Now the Parties were agreed, his Majesty put in his Objection, which
must be answered, before he would give his Consent. The Lady Katherine had been
bred a Papist; and he thought he could not be too cautious, as times went, how
his great Favorite wedded with one of that Persuasion, lest it should raise
Jealousies amongst his People. Therefore the King lays his Converts the Lady:
and writes a little Treatise to confirm her.
Commands upon Dr. Williams to convert her, or no Wedding should be by his
Consent. The Dr. undertakes and performs the Task: so that on the 16th of May
1620. the Nuptials were celebrated. And the Negotiation of this Match (says
Bishop Hacket) the Negotiator told me, was the last Key-Stone, that made the
Arch in his Preferment. But lest this new Convert (43.)
should slide back into her former Errors, the King orders Dr. Williams to draw
up the Elements of Orthodox Religion in a little Manual for her use; which
accordingly he did, and just Twenty Copies were printed with no Name, only By
an old Prebend of Windsor. The following Letter (since one of the Copies is not
easy to be had) sent to the Marquess with the Book, will be sufficient to
inform the Curious of his Method and Design in that little Piece.

My most Noble Lord,
MY most humble Duty and all His Letter to the Marquess sent with the Treatise.
due Respects remembered; I have at last, according to his Majesty's Intimation
and your Lordship's, made up for my Lady's private use a little Stock, as it
were, in Divinity, and divided the same into Three small Treatises. The First,
to furnish her how to speak unto GOD by Invocation: the Second, how to speak
unto her self by Meditation: and the Third, how to speak unto those Romanists,
that shall oppose her, by way of Answer, and Satisfaction. Prayers are the most
necessary for the obtaining, Principles for the augmenting, and Resolutions (in
these Days) for the defending of her Faith and Profession. I held these Three
in some sort (and more I held not) to have been necessary. The Prayers I have
translated from Ancient Writers, that her Ladyship may see, we have not coined
a new Worship or Service of GOD. Of the rest, I received my best Grounds from
his Majesty, and such as, I protest faithfully, I never could read the like in
any Author for my own Satisfaction. If I be out in my Descant upon them, I hope
your Lordship will the rather pardon it, because the Book is but private,
whereof 20 Copies only are printed, and as many of them to be suppressed as
your Honor shall not command and use. I make bold to send these Books to your
Lordship, because I hope they will be more welcome and acceptable to both the
great Ladies, coming immediately from your Honor. I humbly thank your Honor
for affording me this Occasion, to do your Lordship any little Service, who am
in all affectionate Prayers and best Devotion

Your Honor's true Creature and Beadsman, JOHN WILLIAMS.
From your College at Westminster the 28. of November. 1620.

By the Date of this Letter, you may Is made Dean of Westminster.
understand (which I had forgot to tell you before) he was by this time made
Dean of Westminster. It was on the (44.)
12th of July 1620. that he was Installed; the Marquess bestowing it upon him,
who at that time was Patron of it, whom the Doctor solicited for it, by the
following Letter, dated Mar. 12. 1619.

My most Noble Lord,
I Am an humble Suitor; first, to be His Letter to petition for the Deanery.
acknowledged your Servant; and then, that I may be nearer and better able to
perform my Desires, to be by your happy Hand transplanted from Salisbury to
Westminster, if that Deanery shall prove vacant. I trouble not your Honor for
Profit, but only for Convenience; for being unmarried, and inclining so to
continue, I do find that Westminster is fitter by much for that Disposition:
and mine own, nothing inferior in Value, will be at his Majesty's Collation. If
your Honor be not bent upon an ancienter Servant, I beseech you think upon me.
I am true, and so reputed by my former, and by the Grace of GOD will prove no
otherwise, to my Second Master. GOD in Heaven bless you as he has begun: he
prays it, who is

Your Honor's poor Beadsman already ever bound, J. W.


His Removal into this Deanery was This Preferment lucky to him.
the truest Step he had taken as yet: For within a Year after, the Lodgings of
the Dean became the House of the (47.)
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Palace of the Bishop of Lincoln. Now
the Scene fills, and the Plot thickens apace, (to speak with our Play-wrights,
since I am representing a Life) Incidents begin to turn thick upon one another,
and we shall soon launch him into such an Ocean of Business, that it will be
difficult for us to carry on our Story, without being lost in Confusion. But
yet, why may not we relate as methodically and clearly as he acted,
notwithstanding the multiplicity of Affairs with which he was surrounded, but
not encumbered? The Occasion of his sudden Rising afforded ample Matter for
Wonder, because known but to few. And for an Introduction, to clear the way to
my Reader, I must touch at some Passages in those Times, which are sufficiently
known to every one.

The Parliament held in the Year (48.)
1613. and the King could by no means hit it. They clamoured against his
Majesty, and buzzed it about in the Ears of the People, That his Majesty winked
at the Increase of Popery: upon this, the K. in a disgust dissolves them, and
desired no more of their Company for 7 Years after. At last, what with the want
K. calls a Parliament An. 1620.
of Money and other Reasons of State pressing, he resolves to try them once
more; and so on the 30th of Jan. 1620. he with the Lords and Commons met in the
High Court of Parliament. Their Demeanor to his Majesty was (49.)
(as beseem'd Subjects) dutiful and full of Respect. But they were resolved
They redress Grievances.
to fall foul upon some Persons, who, they thought, had more regard in their
Practices to their own private Interest, than to the common Good of the People.
It seems the Lord Marquess and the Chancellor were both at this time in Fault;
the one by interceding for, and the other by granting Commissions for
Monopolies, and other Grievances. The Appeals of the Subject for Justice were
very loud in Parliament, but especially against Sir Gyles Mompesson, Sir
Francis Michel, and Sir Edward Villers (Half-Brother to the Marquess) who, though
innocent in himself, was yet unwittingly tricked by some crafty Merchants, into
a piece of Knavery. They that were accused, Some that were in danger, try to
get it dissolved.
with a great many others that exspected every hour to be in the same pickle,
could invent no other way to escape, but by poisoning the King with an ill
Opinion of the Parliament, and so to get them dissolved. To this Intent, they
terrify the Marquess, who (as was said) had a Hand in these Things, that were
so much resented: they insinuate, That it was high time for him to look about
him; considering that the King had (as was noted) at the Opening of the Session
given Encouragement to the Parliament to redress Grievances, and had said
openly before all the Members, Spare none, where you Frankl. Annals, p. 52.
find just Cause to punish. And if the Two Houses should sit a whole Year, the
greatest Advantage that could be hoped for from them, would be but Two or Three
Subsidies at the most; and that it were better for the King to gather such a
Sum or greater by his Prerogative, though it be a little out of the way, than to
wait for the Exhibition of a little Money, which will cost dishonor in the
End, and the ruin of his most Loyal and Faithful Subjects.

These Jealousies disturb the King, The Marquess at a loss what to do, till the
Dean advised him.
and haunt my Lord Buckingham with all the Terrors and dismal Apprehensions
imaginable, till the Dean of Westminster with his seasonable Advice dispelled
the Glooms, and brought Things to a clear Light; Who addressed himself thus to
the Marquess, (as Bishop Hacket found it in a Breviate of his own Handwriting)
That there was no reason to quarrel with the Parliament for tracing
Delinquents; that they deserved Praise for their Justice, as well as for their
Civil Behavior toward the King. But your Lordship (continues he) is jealous,
that if the Parliament holds long in Favor, you may be brought into Question.
Follow this Parliament in their Undertakings, and you may prevent all: Swim
with the Tide, and there is no (50.)
danger of drowning. They will be glad of your Favor to assist them. And trust
me, and your other Servants, that have some credit with the most active
Members, to keep you clear from the Strife of Tongues. But if you assist to
break up this Parliament, now in pursuit of Justice, only to save Villains; you
will pluck up a Sluice, which will overwhelm your self. The King will find it a
great Disservice before one Year expire. This is Negative Counsel: I will now
spread Affirmative Proposals before your Honor, which I have studied and
considered. Delay not one Day, before you give your Brother Sir Edward a
Commission for an Embassage to some of the Princes of Germany, or the
North-Lands, and dispatch him over the Seas, before he be missed. Those empty
Fellows, Frankl. Annals, p. 52.
Sir G. Mompesson and Sir Fr. Michel, let them be made Victims to the public
Wrath. Nay, my Sentence is, destroy all Monopolies, and Patents of griping
Projections. I have searched the Signet-Office, and have collected almost
Forty, which I have hung in one Bracelet, and are fit for Revocation. Damn all
these in one Proclamation, and your Lordship will partake of the Applause
together with his Majesty. This will convince the People that you do not
approve of what you acted under a Misrepresentation of things, when you were
but new-blossom'd in Court, and could not discover the Deformiy that lay hid.
And God forbid, the King should be incited to Collections of Aid, without the
Concurrence of his Parliament. An Englishman's Tribute comes not from the
King's Exaction, but by the People's free Oblation out of the Mouth of their
Representatives.

These were the Dean's Instructions; The Marq. thanks him for his Advice; and
the King approving of it, makes him Privy-Counsellor.
for which the Marquess returning him Thanks, said, That hereafter, he would
use no other Counselor to ease him at a pinch: and well had it been for the
Dean had he continued as good as his Word. Upon this they go both together,
(51.)
and present these Proposals to the King; who approving highly of them, Things
were transacted accordingly. And doubtless this piece of State-Wisdom, by which
the Dean gave so masterly a stroke of his Skill, recommended him to the Honor
soon after conferred upon him. For the King finding him to be a Man of sound
Wisdom, and of a stanch Judgment, he made him one of his Privy Counselors;
into which Office he was sworn Stow's Chron.
on the 18th of June 1621.

This Parliament, wearied with long The Parliament is prorogued.
sitting, was prorogued from the 27th of March, to the 18th of April. The
Marquess had a Design in it; thinking that this Interval would give them time
to cool, and that it might mitigate the Displeasure of Both Houses, which at
that time was very strong against the Lord Chancellor Bacon. But he was out in
his Politics, it seems; for Accusations, like Malice, grow more inveterate by
delay, and Time discovers new Circumstances, instead of wearing out the old. So
Bacon is deposed.
the Leisure of three Weeks multiplied a pile of fresh Suggestions against him,
and nothing was presaged more certain than his Ruin: and accordingly being
accused of Bribery, the Great Seal was taken from him on the third of May. Thus
fell this Great Man: a Thing (considering the rest of his Character) almost
incredible, were it not vouched by the universal Consent of the Histories of
those Times.

The Courtiers, you may be sure, a The Keeper's Place much sought for.
great many of them were scrambling for the Place. And the most likely to get
it was one Sir Lionel Cranfield, then Master of the Court of Wards. But the
King, before he would dispose of it, had set Buckingham to enquire what the
profits of it might amount to in Justice, and whether certain perquisites were
natural to it, which some had a great mind to cut off. Sir Lionel entreats the
Lord Marquess to be quick, and to advise concerning the Matter with the Dean of
Westminster, a sound and a ready Man, who was not wont to clap the Shackles of
Delay upon a Business. So, he being spoke to, to draw up in Writing what he
thought of the Matter, he returned a (52.)
speedy Answer on the 10th of May, in these Words.

My most Noble Lord
Although the more I examine my self, The Dean's Account of the Revenues of that
Office.
the more unable I am made, to my own Judgment, to wade through any part of
that great Employment, which your Honor vouchsafed to confer with me about;
yet because I was bred under the Place, and that I am credibly imform'd, my
true and Noble Friend the Master of the Wards, is willing to accept it (and if
it be so, I hope your Lordship will incline that way) I do crave Leave to
acquaint your Honor, by way of prevention, with secret Underminings, which
will utterly overthrow all that Office, and make it beggarly and contemptible.
The lawful Revenue of that Office stands thus, or not much above, at any time.
In Fines certain 1300 l. per An. or thereabout. In Fines Casual 1250 l. or
thereabout. In greater Writs 140. l. For Impost of Wine 100 l. In all 2790. And
these are all the true Means of that Great Office.


Away runs the Lord Marquess with The Marquess shows it to the King, who
pitches on the Dean for that Office..
this Paper, and some other Informations of the Dean's, and presents them to
his Majesty, when the Ink was scarce dry: upon which the King, having perused
the Paper, bolted out these unexpected Words, You name diverse to me to be my
Chancellor. The Marquess pleased and surpised at once, replies ex tempore,
Sir, I am a Suitor for none, but for him that is so capable in your great
Judgment. Be you satisfied then (says the King) I think I shall seek no
farther. At this Buckingham impotent to contain his Joy, sends a blind Message
to the Dean imediately, That the King had a Preferment in the Deck for him. He,
ignorant of what had passed, mistook the Message, guessing it might relate to
the Bishopric of London, now void by the Death Cabal. p. 409.
of Dr. King, in prospect of which he had been a Suitor before. Thus in
speaking for another, he sped for himself. This is the very Manner faithfully
related, how this Preheminency dropped upon him, that never dreamt of it. And
this Account, which I have taken from Bishop Hacket, of Dr. Williams his
Advancement, first to the Deanery of Westminster, secondly to be
Privy-Counsellor, and lastly to be Lord Keeper; as it discovers nothing in it
of dishonorable Proceedings, so is it in it self very probable, and has,
besides that, the Authority and Word of a worthy Prelate to strengthen and
confirm it, and consequently to discredit the uncharitable Surmises made P.
138, 139.
by Sir A. W. concerning the causes of his Rising; which I shall not trouble my
self to transcribe here, but rather choose to refer my Reader to the Pamphlet
it self, if he thinks it worth his while.

But I go on. On the 10th of July 1621. he was sworn Keeper of the The Dean is
sworn L. Keeper.
Great Seal of England. And when the Seal was on that Day actually delivered
(61.)
Rushw. Hist. Coll. part 1. p. 36.
to him at Whitehall, he made a Speech to the King, in the Audience of all the
Lords of the Council; which because it is but short, I will transcribe.

Most Dread and Mighty Sovereign,
IF I should think my self any way Makes a Speech.
worthy or sufficient for this Great Place, wherein your Majesty is pleased to
make Probation of me, I were the most unworthy and insufficient wretch in all
the World. But in good Faith I do not: But as conscious of my own Unworthiness,
I am quite astonished at your Favor and Goodness. I do not therefore trouble
my Head to find out the Reasons of this Advancement, because I take it for no
Ordinary Effect, but an Extraordinary Miracle. Deus, and qui Deo proximus
tacito munera dispertit arbitrario, and beneficiorum suorum indignatus per
homines stare judicium, mavult de subditis dedisse Miraculum. I must only lift
up mine Eyes unto Heaven, and beseech that GOD, who some Ten Years since
brought me like Elisha to be Servant only unto that Elias, who under GOD and
your Majesty was the Chariot and Horsemen of our Israel, that now he would be
pleased to double the Spirit of Elias upon his Servant Elisha, whom your
Majesty has invested with his Robe and Mantle. And for my especial Direction,
I will take up that Counsel which Pliny gave his Friend Maximus, newly elected
Praetor for Achaia, Meminisse oportet Officii Titulum; I will never forget my
Office and Title: I am designed to be a Probationer in this Place, and as a
Probationer by GOD's Grace I will demean my self; I will take up together with
this Seal that Industry, Integrity and Modesty, Non ut me Consulem, sed ut
Consulatus candidatum putem. That is, I will not esteem my self a Keeper, but a
Suitor only for the Great Seal. And if I feel the burden too heavy, (which I
mightily fear and suspect) I will choose rather Desinere quam Deficere, to slip
it off willingly to some stronger Shoulder, than to be crushed in pieces with
the poise of the same. And I humbly beseech your Majesty also to remember, I am
no more than a mere Probationer. If I prove raw at first, I must have time to
learn. The best of them all have craved no less, and I will desire no more. For
if after the full weighing of my Strength, I shall find my self unable for this
Service, I will say unto your Majesty, as Jacob said unto Pharaoh, Pastor ovium
est servus tuus; whatsoever you are pleased, Sir, to make me, I am but a Keeper
of Sheep; in that Calling your Majesty found me, and to that Calling I shall be
ready to appropriate my self again. In the mean time, I beseech your Majesty to
protect this Court of Justice, wherein you have placed me, that the Strength
and Power of that Body be nothing impaired through the Weakness of the Head.
Nemo Adolescentiam contemnat. Let not my Fellows of another Profession cry out
with him in the Psalm, There, there, so would we have it; neither let them say,
We have devoured him. And so I end with my Prayer unto GOD, That your Majesty
may live long, and my self no longer, than I may be serviceable to your Majesty.


His Majesty heard him very graciously, (62.)
and said, That he was well The K. approves of him.
pleased in his Choice, and that he was confident he would not deceive his
Jugment. (59.)
When it had taken Air, that People surpised at his Advancement.
this great Preferment was like to be conferred upon the Doctor, People began to
talk, every one as his Interest or Affections prompted him. Some would not
believe it, and cried it was impossible, so strange a thing should be; others
said it was no Novelty, but an old Custom renewed, and, God give him Joy of his
Office: And the Lawyers, they fretted to have such a Flower pulled out of their
Garland. But why Court and Chapter p. 140. The Seal formerly in the Hands of the
Clergy. Sanderson Hist. of K. James, l. 2. p. 504.
out of Theirs? Did they not know that the Father of the late Chancellor
received the Seal from a Bishop, as well as it came from the Son to a Bishop
again? Were they ignorant how former Ages held it more consonant to Reason, to
trust the Conscience of the Clergy with the Case of Laymen, they being best
able to judge of a Case of Conscience; and anciently the Civil Laws were
adjudged by the Ministers of the Church; and the Chancery and other Courts of
Equity, then in the Charge of a Divine Minister. And had K. James P. 505.
lived to have effected his Desires, the Clergy had fixed firm footing in
Courts of Judicature, out of the road of the Common Law: and this was the
Reason of Dr. Williams his first Initiation to this Office.

But to wrangle no longer with the The Dean's Caution to avoid Envy.
Lawyers: Since the Dean was to be the Man, and since Promotion to any Dignity
will draw Envy more or less upon any Man, but especially upon one, whose sudden
Advancement surprises People; let us see what Methods the Dean took to soften
the harshness of Censure, and to qualify Envy as much as possible; which
certainly is the Duty of every Wise Man in all his Actions. Therefore, after he
had got the Grant (60.)
of the Place, he obtained of the King, that the Seal should not be taken from
the Commissioners, and put into his Custody, before Ten Weeks were over. Thus
he thought Popular Discourse would have leisure to spend it self, and he
himself have time to study and weigh the Trust of his Office; and the better to
enable himself to discharge it, he kept Sir Harry Finch, a most profound
Lawyer, in his Lodgings, from May to October following, to advise with him upon
all occasions. By this means too, he had time to seek out for honest and able
Servants to fill the Chief Places of Trust under him. Add to this, that in the
Interim several Things were discoursed of, to his Honor: for when the first
Heat of a Rumor is over, then People are apt upon second Thoughts, to reason
the Matter heartily and fairly; whereas in the beginning the impetuous bent and
current of the Stream is apt to appear even the weightest Judgments along with
it. Now it began to break out, that this Preferment was not of his own seeking,
neither could it then or thereafter be made out, that he had bought his
Greatness. Next to this, he sheltered himself under his Modesty; which, because
it is soft and yielding, breaks the force of Envy, the most of any thing; and
therefore his (61.)
humble Request to his Majesty was, That he would take off from the Grandeur of
his Place, by such Terms and Conditions in his Person, as might comprize it in
a less size, than it was ever before received in by any. To this intent, he
desired no Chancellor for the future might continue above three Years; that he
should be in the nature of a Probationer for one Year and half; that in the
Court of Chancery he might have a Master of the Rolls, of exact Knowledge, to
sit with him; and lastly, the constant Assistance of two Judges. What could
show greater Modesty and Caution, the two main Supporters of Men in high
Places? But all these Proposals were rejected, and made ineffectual, it is
likely underhand by some curious Persons, who might have a mind to try, if the
new Lord Keeper could walk alone without falling, in so slip'ry a Place. It Is
(55.)
to no purpose to answer the Objections Objections against a Clergyman's being
Lord Keeper, answered.
which some Persons then made (and may make now) against his Entering upon that
Office, being a Clergyman, and set apart, as it were, for GOD's Service: As
if taking Orders did incapacitate a Man of Abilities from serving his King and
Country; or as if a Priest were no Subject, and his King had no Right in him.
It Is true indeed at first, when the Harvest was great, and the Laborers but
few, the Laborers could not well be spared out of the Field, any more than a
Soldier can in the Day of Battle. But now that the whole Nation is gained over
to the Gospel, and thanks be to GOD, we have able Pastors and Teachers; the
Church of Christ may be served and patronized by other means, beside Preaching.
And the Clergy have but too great need of some of their own Order in Places of
Power and Dignity, to preserve their Maintenance from Sacrilege, and their
Persons and Function from Contempt. But what had been a real Objection (56.)
could it have been made but true, was, that some should cry out, He was
illiterate in the Laws: this scandal vanished soon though, when the Court had
Trial of his Abilities. And to the Doctor's great Credit be it spoken, that
though bred a Divine, yet no Man either before or after, acquitted himself beyond
him, and perhaps, not equal to him, in Chancery.

I have been so taken up with the (62.)
He is made Bishop of Lincoln, and holds his other Preferments too.
Encumbrances of settling his Lordship in his new Office, that I have not had
time before to tell my Reader, That, in the same Month he was made Lord Keeper,
he was likewise made Bishop of Lincoln. And because the Revenues of that
Bishopric were but small, he urging, that the Port and Grandeur of the
Keeper's Place must be maintained in some convenient manner, and if it might
possibly be, without being a charge to his Majesty; his Lordship got a Grant to
hold the Deanery of Westminster, which was sought after by several that stood
upon the catch at that time, expecting that it would be voided by the Lord
Keeper. It was well for him though, that he had secured himself in the Deanery as
fast as Law could make him, when about five Years after his Enemies strove to
out him. By the Indulgence of his Commendam too, he held his Rectory of
Walgrave; saying; That the Instability of Humane Affairs, should make every Man
look for a Dissolution of his Fortunes, as that of his Body. Upon Cypr. Ang. p.
86.
his holding all his Preferments, Dr. Heylyn, I remember, makes this pleasant
Remark; That he was a perfect Diocese within himself, as being Bishop, Dean,
Prebend, Residentiary and Parson all at once: To which let me add, That never
was there, I believe, a Diocese more complete, or better filled, in all the
several Degrees of Dignity and Office.

The Keeper now being high in his (63.)
Majesty's Favor, as the King had raised him for his, so now he through the
King raised others for their Merits. He got the Royal Grant for the Advancement
of four at one time; Dr. Davenant to the Bishopric of Salisbury, Dr. Carew to
that of Exeter, Laudmade Bishop of St. David's by Williams's Interest.
and Dr. Done to succeed Carew in the Deanery of St. Paul's; at this time too
St. David's Bishopric was void, and the principal among those that put for it
was Dr. Laud, a Man of great Learning. But, it seems, both the King and the
Archbishop of Canterbury were much bent against him, judging him to be a Man of
too bold and hot a Spirit for those Times. So that there had been but small
hopes for him, had not Buckingham set the Keeper on to move in his behalf; who
by his great Importunity with (64.)
the King, at last prevailed for him, with much ado: For, says the King to him
in a passion, as he went away, Then take him to you, but on my Soul you will
repent it: And 'twas ominous, it seems. After this, the Lord Keeper retained
Laud in his Prebend of Westminster, and about a Year after gave him a Living of
about 120 l. per An. in the Diocese of St. David's, to help his Revenue; which
being brought to him at Durham-House, beyond his Expectation, by Mr. William
Winn, his Expression was, Mr. Winn, my Life will be too short to requite your
Lord's Goodness. But how two Men so Great and so good should break out after
into open Enmity is a Mystery to me at present. If I can hit upon any probable
account, by that time I come to speak of their Differences, the Reader shall
have it: Else I shall not, I think, put my Invention upon the stretch, out of
Prejudice to either Party: I being wholly unconcerned as to either of them, any
farther than that I am willing, as far as shall lie in my Power, to rescue the
Memories of great and worthy Men from such Calumnies, as it is but too often
their hard Fortune to be sullied withal: so ungrateful and sacrilegious are we
to the Dead, to curry Favor with the Living; who, when their Turn comes (as
who knows how nigh his own may be) to quit the World, are like to fare no
better; if there be any thing to be gained by throwing Infamy, Reproaches, and
such heavy Lumber upon their Graves, instead of raising Monuments for them. I
would beg my Reader's Pardon for this Digression, but that would but enlarge it.

I proceed now to show the Lord The Keeper's Diligence in his Office.
Keeper in his New Employment; for I have already kept him longer idle than he
would be content to be, were he now living. He was a Man (as we have seen
before) of incomparable Natural Parts; but alas! under a load of Business they
sink soon; and nothing but Application and incessant Industry can rub through
all Encumbrances, and make clean Work. It is almost incredible what a perfect
Drudge the Keeper was, especially when he first entered upon his Office: for
long use and familiarity makes all Business easy. It (53.)
was in the end of Michaelmas Term that he first appeared in Chancery, and in
November the Parliament sat again, in which he was Speaker in the Lord's
House: and he had in the Court of Chancery, besides the ordinary Business,
several Causes, which were referred in the preceding Session of Parliament to
the succeeding Lord Keeper, to view the Orders of his Predecessor displaced.
And his Business at this time was so great, that he was forced to sit by
Candlelight in the Court two hours before Day, and to remain there till
between Eight and Nine; then to repair to his Office in the (54.)
House of Lords till Twelve or One every Day. After a short Repast at Home, he
returned to hear the Causes in Chancery, which he could not dispatch in the
Morning: Or if he attended at Council in Whitehall, he came back toward
Evening, and followed his Employment in Chancery till Eight at Night, and
later. After this, when he came Home, he perused what Papers his Secretaries
brougt to him, and when that was done, though late in the Night, he prepared
himself for the Lord's House next Morning. And (7.)
all that lived in his Family, knew that it was ordinary with him, to begin his
Studies at Six at Night, and to continue them till Three in the Morning, and be
ready again by Seven to attend his Employment. When I read or hear of such
great Examples as This, it makes me think with Regret, what a great many
precious Hours we squander away; how we forget the great Errand we are sent
upon, and let the Business of the World, and the Welfare of Mankind run all to
havoc, while we are either lazily stretching our selves in our Beds, or
impertinently cutting out our Time into formal Visits, or idle Assignations.

Upon the First Day of the Term, (71.)
His Entrance upon his Office.
when he was to take his Place in Court, he declined all the Pomp of an
Inauguration; and setting out betimes in the Morning, attended by the Judges,
and some few more, he passed through the Cloisters into the Abbey, and went with
them into Henry the Seventh's Chapel, where he prayed devoutly on his Knees
almost a quarter of an Hour: Then rising up cheerfully, he was conducted by his
small Train to a mighty confluence, that expected him in the Hall. These he
addressed himself to from the Bench of the Court of Chancery: I omit the Speech
it self; but the Substance of what he spoke was, To desire, that those Reasons
(72.)
His Speech.
of State, which had thought it convenient, to change the Governor of this
Court from a Professor of our Municipal Laws, to some one of the Nobility,
Gentry or Clergy of this Kingdom, might not create him any Envy. And though I
dare not take upon me (says he) to account for these Reasons; yet peradventure
this Court of Equity may be as soon perverted by too much, as too little Law:
And the principal Qualifications for the well managing of it, seem to be, great
Natural Abilities, and a large compass of Learning, with a sincere Integrity of
Mind, rather than an exact Knowledge in the Quirks of the Law. Then he proceeds
modestly to confess his own Insufficiency for so great a Place; but since it
had pleased GOD (73.)
and his Majesty to put him upon an Office, which was not of his own seeking,
though at present he was unfit, yet he would endeavor all he could, to make
himself fit; and the better to enable him, he would put his whole Trust and
Confidence in GOD. To this he added some few Resolutions, by which he designed
to guide his Actions: as First, never to make any Decree that should cross the
Grounds of the Common or Statute Laws. Secondly, never to encourage any Motion
made at the Bar, which did not tend apparently to further and hasten the
Hearing of the Cause. Thirdly, that without special Motives, he would not
overthrow the Decrees of his Predecessors. Fourthly, to be as (74.)
cautious as possible in referring Causes, because it deferred the hearing of
them. Fifthly, he resolved that this Court should be no Sanctuary for
undiscreet and desperate Sureties. Lastly, that he would follow the Rules of
this Court as near as possibly he could.

To make good Resolutions is doubtless the Mark of an ingenuous Temper, His
well ordering of the Court of Chancery.
but to keep them and practice according to them, shows a Man stanch and of
steady Principles. And whatever the Keeper resolved, he had Courage and
Industry enough to go through with it. When he had been some time in his Place
to stock himself with Experience, never was the Court of Chancery better
ordered, than in his Time. For (76.)
he made it his Business to prevent all immethodical Pleadings, to cheek
Excursions, and hold the Council close to the Point. Immediately upon the
opening of a Bill, he would direct the Pleaders, and suffer them to speak only
the very weight of the Cause. And so skilful did he grow in his Business, that
when he had been in Office for two Terms, the Council at the Bar (who were Men
of Worth and Judgment) approved of him very much. After he had spent three
Years in Chancery, (200.)
he was not a whit inferior to the best Judge for Sufficiency, to manage his
Place. So that it is a Slander, that His Decrees never canceled.
his Successor the Lord Coventry, reversed many of his Decrees, and corrected
his Errors. Let me (says Bishop (201.)
Hacket) quote a couple of Witnesses, what they asserted of him; and they are
(continues he) rightly produced, as GOD shall judge. The Duke of Buckingham, in
the beginning of Michaelmas Term 1624. desired the Lord Chief Justice Hobart,
to certify the King, that Williams, by reason of his Inabilities and Ignorance,
was not fit for the Keeper's Place; and upon that, he would engage to throw him
out, and that he should succeed him. My Lord (replies Hobart) somewhat might
have been said at the first, but he should do the Lord Keeper great wrong that
should say so now. The next is Mr. G. Evelin, one of the six Clerks, and in his
Time the best Headpiece of the Office, who took pleasure in saying (as many yet
know) that the Lord Keeper Williams had the most towering, sublime Wit, that he
ever heard speak; and that his Decrees in all Causes were just: that the Lord
Coventry did seldom alter any thing he had settled before him, but upon new
Presumptions, and that he spoke of him always in Court very honorably. By that
time too that he had Masters his Passion.
spent three Years in the Court of Chancery he had obtained a very great
command over his Passion, (which was at first objected to him) and he carried
all things with a mild and gentle Hand, would chide little, and bear much. How
excellent he was for dispatching His great Dispatch in Business.
Business, take this Account, which he gives of his first Year, in a Letter
(74.)
to the Lord Marquess: July 10. 1622. In this Place I have now served his
Majesty one whole Year, diligently and honestly; but to my Heart's grief, by
reason of my Rawness and Inexperience, very unprofitably. Yet if his Majesty
will examine the Registers, there will be found more Causes finally ended this
Year; than in all the seven Years preceding: How well ended, I confess
ingenuously, I know not. His Majesty and your Lordship (who, no doubt, have
received some Complaints, though in your Love you conceal them from me) are in
that the most competent Judges. His (75.)
Dispatch (it seems) which was his great Excellency, was cried out against by
some, and that Causes were cut off too soon. But it was not with him as with a
corrupt Judge, that will put off a Hearing to a more convenient Season, as they
call it.

Before I leave this Court to follow him to the Star Chamber, I shall desire my
Reader to laugh a little with me, at a diverting Passage which happened about
his first Entrance upon Chancery. And here I shall borrow Bishop Hacket's own
Phrase, for the better Expressing of the Story. It happened once, that one at
the Bar (thinking the Lord Keeper as a Novice, might be ignorant of the Terms
of the Common Law) trouled out a Motion, crammed like a Granado with obsolete
Words, thinking with these misty (76.)
Phrases, to bassle the new Judge: But he, with a serious Face, answered him in
a cluster of crabbed Notions picked out of Metaphysics and Logic; as
Categorematical, and Syncategorematical, and a deal of such drumming stuff,
that the Motioner being foiled at his own weapon, and well laughed at in the
Court, went Home with this new Lesson, That he that tempts a Wise Man in jest,
shall make himself a Fool in earnest.

And now to view him in the Star Chamber. His Proceedings in the Star Chamber.
Here he kept up the Dignity of the Court, by driving away all those
Contentious Squabbles, which might (82.)
be better compounded at Home, by Country Justices; and admitting here only
grave and weighty Causes, as notorious Examples of Defamations, Perjuries,
Riots, Extortions, and the like. Upon which Topics his Speeches were
admirable, and taken in shorthand by several. They were neither tedious nor
virulent; for he did not love to heighten the Calamities of the Afflicted. And
so pitiful was he in his Censures, that if there be an extreme in showing
Mercy, it was his Fault. He would excuse himself from (83.)
inflicting any severe Bodily Punishment upon an Offender, by saying, That
Councils had forbad Bishops from meddling with Blood in a Judicial Form. So glad
was he to have some pretense to be over Merciful. But once he did violence to
his Nature, and the Occasion was this: One Flood had said, as was proved
against him, That our Bishops were no Bishops, but only Laymen, and usurpers
of that Title. Flood (says the Lord Keeper) since I am no Bishop in your
Opinion, I will be no Bishop to you. I concur with my Lords (the like I never
did before) in your Corporal Punishment. In Pecuniary Fines too, his Hand was
so light, that the Lord Treasurer Cranfield complained against him to the King,
for lessening his Majesty's Fees. And he was as generous too in remitting his
own; for when Sir Francis Inglefield blurted out before Witnesses, That he
could prove this Holy Bishop-Judge had been bribed by some that fared well in
there Causes; the Bishop to (84.)
clear himself, calls Sir Francis to make good his Words; which he being not
able to do, a Fine of some thousands of Pounds was laid upon him, to be paid to
the King and the Injured Party. Soon after, the Lord Keeper sends for the poor
dejected Gentleman, and told him, he would give him Demonstration, that he was
above a Bribe; and for my part (says he) I forgive you every Penny of my Fine,
and will beg of his Majesty to do the same. This piece of Generosity so
vanquished Sir Francis, that he acknowledged his Fault, and was afterward
received into some degree of Friendship and Acquaintance with him. And now my
Hand is in, I will give you another little Story, that shows much of his
Averseness to Bribery. His Lordship (201.)
being retired one Summer to Nonsuch-House, it chanced, as he was taking the
Air in the great Park, that he cast his Eye on the little Village of Malden,
from one of the Hills; and seeing there a New-built Church, he asked at whose
Expense it was. Mr. George Minors, that attended him then, told his Lordship,
who was the greatest Benefactor. And has he not a Suit depending now in
Chancery? says the Keeper; the very same, replied the other. And the same
(returns the Keeper) shall not fare the worse for Building of Churches. When
Mr. Minors had told his Neigbour this, the next Morning he sent a Taste of the
Fruits of his Orchard, and the Poultry in his Yard, to Nonsuch-House: Nay carry
them back George (says the Keeper) and tell your Friend, he shall not fare the
better for sending of Presents.

But you will say, this is but a trifle; and he that forfeits his Honor at so
cheap a rate, must be both Fool and Knave. And it is impossible a Man should
live at the rate he did, and expend such vast Sums, but he must have some Byway
to enrich himself. To this I answer, Cabal. p. 409. He numbers up Nine
Preferments, which he had when he was Dean of Westminster.
That he was liberal indeed, but then his Income was large by his Preferments,
and he knew well how to manage it to the best Advantage. Add to this, that he
never feasted the King, and very rarely put himself to the charge of any
Entertainments for the Courtiers. But what he did disburse was principally upon
poor Scholars, and decayed Gentlemen, whom he would thank any one to inform him
of: And the Prisoners at the Gate House were the better for his Charity every
week. And thus with GOD's Blessing upon his Plenty, he was able to go a great
way with his Purse.

Ay, but ( says A. W.) Williams exceeded Co. and Chapter p. 139.
Bacon in the way of Bribery; answering by Petitions, in which his Servants had
one part, himself another, and so was calculated to be worth to him and his
Servants 3000 l. per An. a new way, never found out before. And (105.)
true it is, that it was objected to him, That he dispatched a great many
Causes by hearing Petitions in his Chamber; and this he did for the Relief of
the Poor, from whom he could make no Advantage, either to himself or to his
Secretaries. But he is not the first that has been accused for his Good Works.
Some at the Bar, it is likely, were dissatisfied, because they had not a Glut of
Motions. Therefore the Keeper, to secure himself from Misrepresentations (the
Bane of honest Statesmen) directs two Remonstrances, (106.)
the first to the Lord Marquess, Sept. 8. the other to his Majesty, October. 9.
1622. In that to the Marquess, he protests, that he is fain to allow twenty
pounds a Year to a Youth in his Chamber, to take care of the poor Men's
Petitions, the Secretaries did so neglect them. In that to his Ma'esty, he
declares, that he had observed in all Orders upon Petition, the Cautions which
he had received from him. Then, says he, I humbly crave your Majesty's Opinion,
whether I may go on this way; for what reason have I to over-toil my self, in
easing the Purse of the Subjects, if it be objected as a Crime against me, and
be not a Service acceptable to your Majesty and the Realms? So the King
approved of his proceedings. (107.)
This Slander, as it troubled him very much, so he was diligent to clear
himself from it; as appears not only from the Remonstrances, but likewise from
a Letter of his at the same time Cabal. p. 292.
to the Duke.

It is not sufficient to render an Officer unblameable, that he be proof
against Bribery. He must likewise have Courage enough not to dread the Malice
and Ill Will of any, so long as he does his Duty; and so much rigid Honesty as
to stand out in a just Cause, against the Interest even of his dearest Friends,
and greatest Benefactors: for there is one to whom we are all infinitely
obliged more than to all the World beside, and that is GOD; whose Cause
therefore can never be forsaken, without the blackest Ingratitude. This, I
confess, is the greatest trial of Virtue; it being, doubtless, a harder
Injunction to Humanity, to forsake our Friends for GOD's sake, than to love our
Enemies. How secure the Lord Keeper was from the Woe, so justly denounced
against them that fear Men more than GOD, the Reader may see from several
Instances, extant in Bishop Hacket: And I shall make it evident (70, 71.)
enough, if, omitting those Passages, I only mention his Courage, in
withstanding Buckingham, when he saw just reason for it; for to be sure if he
would not yield to him, that was not only the most powerful Courtier in his
time, but likewise his very great Patron, no one will surmise that he stood in
Aw of others. And so remarkable was (207.)
his Resolution in sometimes crossing of this Great Favourite's Designs, when
he saw weighty Reasons for it; that the King when in a pleasant mood would say,
That he was a stout Man, that durst do more than himself: For the Duke, it
seems, was so great with the Prince, that the King himself was forced in Policy
to hide his Resentments from him. And his Majesty (208.)
thanked GOD in the presence of many, that he had put the Keeper into that
place: For (says he) he that will not wrest Justice for Buckingham's sake, whom
he loves, will never be corrupted with Money, which he never loved. And because
the Keeper had lived fairly for the space of three Years upon the bare Revenues
of his Office, and was not the richer by the sale of one Cursitor's place in
all that Time; his Majesty gave him a Bountiful New Years Gift, thinking it but
reasonable to encourage him by his Liberality, that never sought after Wealth,
by the sordid means of Extortion or Bribery.

I have given you a full View of the His Conduct in Parliament.
Lord Keeper in Chancery, and in the Star Chamber. In the next place I shall
bring him into the Parliament House, and see with what Prudence he behaved
himself there; a Station, perhaps, much more ticklish than either of the
former. In the first Term that he (76.)
came into Office, the Parliament sat Rush. Collect. p. 39. An. 1621.
in its second Session Nov. 20. at which time by command from the King, he
spoke to both Houses: of which Speech thus my Lord Buckingham speaks in a
Letter to him, dated November 24. I know not how the Upper-House of Parliament
approve of your Lordship's Speech, but I am sure he that called them together,
and, as I think, can best judge of it, is so taken with it, that he says, It
is the best that ever he heard in Parliament, and the nearest to his Majesty's
Meaning; which, beside the Contentment it has given his Majesty, has much
comforted me in the Choice of your Lordship; who in all things do so well
answer his Expectation.

Two remarkable occurences happened The Keeper gives his Reasons why the
Nobility should not swear by their Honor.
this Session that more immediately relate to the Keeper. For when the
Privilege of the Nobility was debated, and almost carried by a Majority, that
the Vouching of their Honor should pass with them for an Oath; he prevented
it, by the Force (77.)
of the following Reasons. That the Word of GOD allows of no swearing in
deciding of Controversies, and searching after Truth, but by his Name: That the
last Appeal is ever to the highest; And that Vengeance belongs to none but GOD.
To this he adds, That Singularities are ever to be suspected, and chanllenges
any Man to show that any other Oath, but in the Name of GOD, was used in solemn
Trials at that Day, in any Part of Christendom. He advises them to consider
too, how loath the Gentry and Commonalty would be to entrust their Freehold to
the protestation of Honor. And these Considerations prevailed with most. But
the Debate continuing very long that Morning; an aged Bishop, very infirm in
Health, desired to be excused if he could not stay it out. With all our Hearts
(said The Bishops affronted by some Lords Temporal.
some Lords, that did not much reverence the Order) you may all of you troop
Home as fast as you please; and the Earl of Essex, pressing it more
passionately than any, desired to know if their Lordships were not content to
throw the Doors wide open, and let all the Bishops out, if they would. Upon
this, up stands the Keeper, and with a prudent Animosity, replied, That if he
were commanded, he would The Keeper speaks for them.
put it to the Question, but to the King, and not to the House of Peers. For
their Lordships, as well Spiritual as Temporal were called by the King's Writ,
to sit and abide there, till the same Power dissolved them. And for my Lords
Temporal, they had no Power to license themselves; much less to authorize
others to depart from the Parliament: and so all was hushed, And this very
Passage, were there no more of the Lord Keeper remaining, is sufficient to show
him to be as Great a Man, as ever spoke in Parliament.

At this time again the House of (81.)
Commons and the King could by no The King and Commons disagree. Rush. Collect.
p. 40, 41, etc. Cabal. p. 288.
means agree; for they displeased him very much with their Petitions and
Remonstrances, insomuch that his Majesty in a Letter rebuked them severely: The
harshness of which Answer, the Keeper advised might be mitigated and softened;
for he could never bear, that there should be a Misunderstanding between the
King and his People, if it were possible to prevent it. Nevertheless, the
Ferment by degrees worked it self to such a height, that the King departed from
them in his Wrath, and Rush. Collect. p. 54.
dissolved them utterly by Proclamation, on the 6th of January. This troubled
the Keeper very much, who saw plainly of what dangerous Consequence this might
be, and how much his Majesty trespassed against the true Principles of English
Policy, by quarrelling with his Parliament. And therefore he did all he could
to persuade the King to make it his earnest Endeavor to unite with them, when
they were assembled next.

Upon Michaelmas Eve, Viscount An. 1621. Stow Chr.
Mandevile, Lord Treasurer of England, surrendered his Office up to the King,
Lord Cranfield made L. Treasurer.
and upon the next Day after but one, the Lord Cranfield was set in his place.
The Keeper giving him his Oath, (104.)
complimented him too with a short Speech at his Admission. So that as yet
there was nothing in appearance but Friendship between Cranfield and Williams;
though the Treasurer had crossed him in one or two Suits, which he regarded the
less, because he knew him to be a little rough and surly by Nature to all
People. But after the Dissolution of the preceding Parliament, some of the
Lords of the Council thought it advisable, to take off from the harshness of
it, by a Pardon of Grace, for the Benefit of those that were questioned for old
Debts and Duties to the Crown. And when the Lord Keeper had just brought it to
a Head, in steps the Treasurer, and moves, That such as took out this Pardon,
should pay the accustomed Fees, to such Officers as he should appoint, that so
he might at once enrich the King and himself: which Proposal was laughed at,
and rejected. Yet still he persisted to burden this Pardon with such
Encumbrances, which must needs render it unacceptable; insomuch that it was
laid aside, and debated no more. This as it got the Treasurer a great deal of
Ill Will, so it redounded to the Keeper's Credit, who was one of the main
Sticklers for the Pardon. This galled Cranfield Cranfield endeavors to ruin
the Keeper.
sorely, and set him upon endeavoring, first to make a Faction at Court
against Williams: but having not sufficient Interest with the Great Ones, he
tries another Trick. So he falls Cabal. p. 292.
to Pen, Ink and Paper, and Draws up some pitiful Failings, interwoven with
Fiction and Ignorance, against him; from which the Keeper found it a much
easier Task to clear himself, than his Adversary did at first to invent them.
But P. 292. The Keeper clears himself from his Accusations.
yet he complains, in a Letter to the Marquess, as very sensible of the Injury
done him; whose Answer to him was, that his Adversary was not believed, and
desired him to consider, that he had to do with one whose Illmanners would give
him no satisfaction: to which the Keeper replies, in another Letter, His
Majesty's Justice, P. 295.
and your Lordship's Love, are Anchors strong enough for a Mind more tossed
than mine is, to ride at. Yet pardon me, my Noble Lord, upon this
Consideration, if I exceed a little in Passion, the Natural Effect of Honesty
and Innocence. A Churchman and a Woman, have no greater Idol under Heaven, than
their Good Name: And they cannot fight, nor with credit scold, and least of all
recriminate, to protect and defend the same. The only Revenge left them is to
grieve and to complain. Then he concludes; Whom I will either challenge before
his Majesty to make good his Suggestions, or else (which I hold the greater
Valor, and which I wanted, I confess, before this Check of your Lordship's) go
on in my Course, and scorn all these unworthy Scandals, as your Lordship shall
direct me. But for all this in a Month's space, they wrangled themselves into
very good Friends again; and the Keeper was Godfather to the Treasurer's next
Child.

In the Year 1623. in Febr. The Parliament (175.)
met again, his Majesty thinking A Call of Sergeants.
it high time to enter into a Correspondence with his People once more. The
Lord Keeper, foreseeing (110.)
this, gets his Majesty to sign a Writ, for a Call of Sergeants; which
accordingly was performed on May the 6th. Thirteen of the best Repute being
Fifteen, according to Stow.
chosen, who on that Day made their Appearance before the Lord Keeper, sitting
in the High Court of Chancery; from whence he saluted them with a Learned and
Eloquent Oration, according to the Relish of those Times, that loved to have
their Speeches embroidered with Greek and Latin: As though the Confusion of
Tongues at Babel had been absolutely necessary to complete the Art of Oratory:
But yet a Great Man must condescend to the Follies of the Times he lives in;
and perhaps it were no impertinent Caution, to speak generally with the Vulgar,
though we may think with the Wise. But, to go on with the Parliament: When they
were met, and the King had (175.)
ended his Speech to them, he was seconded by the Lord Keeper; and so ended the
first Day. On Saturday following, the 21. of the Month, the Keeper again
declared his Majesty's Mind to the People: And so well was he (179.)
approved of for a Speaker, that within three Days after, he had work enough,
The Keeper desired to repeat the Duke's Account of the Spanish Treaty to the
Parliament.
and too much of that Nature on his Hands. The Duke of Buckingham (it seems)
had entertained the Lords and Commons in the Banqueting House at Whitehall,
with the whole Story of the Negotiation in Spain, and how well both the Prince
and he had managed their Conduct all along in that Affair; when at the same
time (if we credit some Historians) the Duke's Behavior in that Court was all
imprudent. But however (Nature making every Man Orator in his own Cause) he put
a good Gloss upon it, and so tickled their Ears with his Harangue, that they
must have it over again the next Day, and the Keeper must be the Speaker. So he
rubs up his Memory, draws up his Notes in haste upon three Sheets of Paper, and
lays his whole Scheme according to the Duke's Model presented the Day before;
for to err from that, he knew, would be no less than Treason. So, when the time
was come, he began The Duke is pleased with the Narration of it.
his Speech, and held it on for four Hours together, without the least
Hesitation or Repetition; and every (185.)
thing was so methodical, so judicious and so graceful withal, that he never
got more Applause in his Life for any thing of that kind: And so acceptable was
it to the Duke himself (though then but a cold Friend) that he said, He knew not
how to thank him enough for it.

I should be too particular should I (186.)
The Keeper's care to preserve Agreement between King and People.
make it my Business to recount how very active the Keeper was in this Blessed
Parliament (eminently so called) for the public good; how he studied to
preserve a mutual Agreement between the King and his People, by keeping up the
Prerogative of the one, and maintaining the lawful Liberties of the other; how
he would compose Discontents, and mollify the Refractory, and oblige the
leading Voices with Benefits, and what other Favors he thought might win upon
them. I shall instance only in two Passages, how very tender he was of
admitting the least occasion that might tend toward a Disgust any way between
his Majesty and his Subjects. The Lord Treasurer Cranfield Cyprianus Angl. p.
123.
(you are to understand) had disobliged the Prince, when he was in Spain, by
dissuading the King from those The occasion of Treasurer Cranfield's Disgrace.
large Supplies, which were required for the Maintaining of his Port in a
Foreign Court. And he had lost himself with the Duke, by joining (as was
thought) in some secret Practices, to lessen him in his Majesty's Favor. Now
both the Prince and the Duke had sided with the Commons in drawing the King by
their continual Importunities to dissolve the Treaty; and the Commons must now
take their Parts in prosecuting Cranfield. (186.)
This Accident troubled the King mightily, who was then at Greenwich. He had
put great Confidence in his Treasurer, and therefore tried all he could to
defend him: he sends for the Prince his Son, and charges him, That he should
not be of any Party in either House; but all to no purpose; for the Duke had
pushed him on so far, that there was no retreating. So his Majesty sent for the
Lord Keeper, and told him plainly, That he would not make his Treasurer a
public Sacrifice. Sir (says the Keeper) I have The Keeper's Advice to the King
about the Treasurer.
attempted amongst my surest Friends, to bring him off fairly: All shrink and
refuse me; only the stout and prudent Lord Hollis adventured upon the Frowns of
the Prince and Duke, and gave his Reasons, why Middlesex appeared to him an
Innocent. I were mad, if, for my part, I should not wish him to escape this
Tempest, and be safe under the Harbor of your Majesty's Clemency. When I
deliberate upon him, I think of my self; it is his Fortune to Day, it is mine to
Morrow. The Arrow that hits him is within an handful of me. Yet, Sir, I must
deal faithfully; your Son the Prince is the main Champion, that encounters the
Treasurer; whom if you save, you foil your Son. For though matters are carried by
the whole Vote of Parliament, and are driven on by the Duke; yet they that walk
in Westminster Hall, call this The Prince's Undertaking; whom you will blast in
his Bud to the Opinion of all your Subjects, if you suffer not your Old, and
perhaps Innocent Servant to be plucked from the Sanctuary of your Mercy.
Necessity must excuse you from Inconstancy or Cruelty. So with these Reasons
the King was The Treasurer is fined and imprisoned.
persuaded to yield to the Headstrong Importunities of his Parliament; and the
Treasurer was deposed, fined Stow's Chron.
a thousand Pounds, and committed to the Tower, on the 20th of May 1624. But
discharged thence again on the first of June next following. For, let but a
People (like froward Children) have their Will, when they are bent upon it, and
after the Heat is over with them, you may bring them to any thing, nay even to
undo what they so passionately acted before. And it must be an inveterate
Malice, indeed, that does not relent and grow mild, when the Revenge is over.
Great-Seal: But the Lord Keeper looking it over, after he had considered upon
it, sends it back without the Seal, with his Advice in a Letter, That The
Letter is in Bishop Hacket.
his Majesty would be pleased (if he had no private Reasons to the contrary to
make it, according to the Methods proposed by him, a little more palatable and
agreeing to the People, before it was published. And when (110.)
the King had read the Letter, and saw how very reasonable the Advice was, he
altered every thing according to the Keeper's Directions. To this I His Advice
concerning the General Pardon for the Papists.
might add, what occurs to me at this present, his great Care to prevent
Jealousies amongst the People, when his Majesty (the Treaty then going on with
Spain) sent, to have the Great-Seal Cabal. p. 297.
put first to a General Pardon of all Offenses past, with a Dispensation for
those to come, to all the Roman Catholics: And then, upon that, to issue forth
two General Commands under the Great-Seal; the First, to all the Judges and
Justices of the Peace; and the Second, to all Bishops, Chancellors and
Commissaries, not to execute any Statute made against them. The General Pardon
(says the Keeper) we have passed in as full and ample a Manner as they could
desire or pen it. The other General and Vast Prohibition I prevailed with the
rest of the Lords to stop, for these Reasons. First, because the Publishing of
this General Indulgence at one push, might beget a general Discontent, if not a
Mutiny, but the Instilling thereof into the People's Knowledge by little and
little, would not shock them so much. Secondly, because to forbid the Judges
and Justices of Peace against their Oaths, who are sworn to execute the Law of
the Land, is a thing unpresidented in this Kingdom, and would be a harsh and a
bitter Pill to digest, without some Preparative. Thirdly, his Majesty uses to
speak to his Bishops, Judges and Justices of the Peace, by his Chancellor or
Keeper, and by the Great-Seal; and I can signify his Majesty's Pleasure to
them with less Noise and Danger, especially by declaring unto them the
necessity of these Proceedings at this Juncture of Time. All these Instances
laid together, sufficiently manifest his Opinion, That where a King and People
disagree, they are like a House divided against it self; for it is impossible,
in such a posture, that either of them should stand long.

Now we have passed through the An Account of the Keeper as a Privy Counselor
Business of Chancery, Star Chamber, and Parliaments, let us at last retire
with him to the Council Board: A Retirement indeed, such as becomes a Wiseman,
and a Philosopher; not Retirement from Business, but from the Eyes of the
Vulgar. This, though I mention it last of all, was yet the Office that he was
first honored with in the State, being made Privy Counselor, before he was
made L. Keeper. And here (as Bishop Hacket very well (84.)
observes) a great part of the Work is done in secret and behind the Curtain,
and by consequence escapes our Sight, and very often our Knowledge. So that
from what we know, we cannot but imagine, that much greater Matters were
transacted, that are to us as though they had never been. He, that undertakes the
Province of a Counselor, had need of a Head well stored with Politics, a
Heart steell'd with Honesty, and a Spirit truly Public, and jealous of his
Countrey's Good and Honor: For, as Ignorance is blind, and therefore but a bad
Pilot in a troubled State, so Craft is short-sighted ever, and never looks
beyond it self; and a Cunning-man may ensnare his Prince, but never can advise.
What a great Opinion his Majesty had of the Keeper's Wisdom, as it appears from
several other passages, so more particularly from this, that Ludowick Duke of
Richmond should tell him, that the King listened to him before any Minister of
State: And that he did the oftener, because if his Majesty were moody, or any
way out of Humor, the Keeper would bring him to his Lure with some facetious
and pleasant Dash of Wit or other. He was likewise judged a great Abetter of
his Nation's Honor and Interest; which was the Reason, that he was employed by
his Majesty more than all the rest, to Negotiate with Ambassadors; in which
Affairs it is an easy Matter to disgrace one's Country, if there be wanting
either Conduct or Courage.

Thus you see how well he was qualified The Rules he followed in Council.
for the great Trust of a Counselor. And I find (says Hacket) by his own
Confession remaining in some Papers, that he was beholding to the Lord
Egerton's Directions, which were these: First, in all Advice to speak from the
bottom of the Heart, without any reserve: Secondly, when any thing was
proposed, to examine first of all if it were just; for he that will make bold
with GOD for Reasons of State, is not to be trusted by Man: in the next place,
if it were for the Honor of the King; and lastly, if it were for the Advantage
of Posterity, as well as for the present Good. To which he added this weighty
Aphorism, To ripen great Matters by Deliberation. (85.)
And his humble Request to his Majesty was, that Counsels should not be
whispered by one or two in private, but be delivered openly at the Board, by
sworn Counselors. His Advice in General to him was, to follow former
Precedents in all things, as much as possible: To let private Causes and
Actions of Meum and Tuum be confined to the Common Law, and not be admitted to
the Council Board, which his Majesty observed at his Request; to call
Parliaments often, and to keep in with them; never by his Prerogative to
abridge the Subjects Liberty, and the Rights of the Laws; and lastly to
moderate his profuse Expenses, and so to give, that there might be something
left for the Prince his Son to give after him: But that (it seems) was a Lesson
he could never teach him; though he did all he could to make his Admonitions sink
into him, by nicking the Seasons for speaking, as particularly before a
Sacrament, and at such times, as he thought his Majesty might be best disposed
to receive good Impressions.

I come now to give you a particular The King advises with the Keeper about the
Match with Spain.
Instance or two, wherein he served his Gracious Master by his great stock of
Wisdom, and mavelous Skill in Politics. And here will naturally fall in what
he acted while the Prince was in Spain. The King never advised (115.)
with the Keeper, nor any of his Courtiers before his Son went over; (though some
then suspected that Williams was privy to it) but when he came from New Market
to Whitehall, which was on the 30th of March, when first he An. 1623.
saw the Keeper, smiling he asked him, Whether he thought this Knight Errant
Pilgrimage would be lucky to win the Spanish Lady, and to convey her shortly
into England? Sir, (says Williams) If my Lord Marquess will give Honor to
Conde Duke Olivares, and remember he is the Favorite of Spain, or if Olivares
will show honorable Civility to my Lord Marquess, remembering he is a Favorite
of England, the Wooing may be prosperous. But if my Lord Marquess should forget
where he is, and not stoop to Olivares; or if Olivares, forgetting what Guest
he has received with the Prince, bear himself haughtily, and like a Castilian
Grandee to my Lord Marquess; the Provocation may be dangerous to cross your
Majesty's good Intentions. And I pray GOD that either one, or both of them do
not run into that Error. This shows that he understood the Court of Spain at
that time, as well as if he had been a Minister there. And the The Keeper
furthers it, and befriends Buckingham.
King, sensible of this, desired his Assistance in this Business to the utmost
of his power; and told him moreover, that if he would serve him faithfully in
this one thing, He would never part with him. So the Keeper bethought (117.)
himself Night and Day, how to manage this Affair, and what Advice to give; and
he sent Letters upon Letters The Letters are in Hacket, p. 16, 17, etc.
to the Duke and Prince. Now Williams was glad that he had an Opportunity given
him of Serving his great Benefactor, and expressing his Gratitude, which glowed
within his Breast. He sent Letters to Count Gondamar, to make Buckingham the
(119.)
more acceptable in that Court; wherein he desired of the Count, That he would
do that Justice to the Marquess, as to make his Character known, for a Person
of a wondrous deal of Generosity and Goodnature, with abundance more to his
Commendation. And upon such Occasions it is that a Man stands most in need of a
Friend; for I may speak for another, though I cannot with any Modesty for my
self. Moreover, (117.)
he did all he could to preserve his Repute fair, both with the King and
People, when in his Absence several Things were laid to his charge; and he
would send him a particular Account of all the Occurrences at Court; that so he
might not be trepan'd, before he was aware: And happy sure are Men in great
Places, that are blessed with such Friends, as perhaps, while they are sleeping
securely, like their Guardian-Angels, are ever wakeful, and tender of their
Charge, and ready upon all Occasions to disappoint the Treacherous and
Malicious Designs, that are ever forming against the Great. Yet, for all this,
after the Prince and Duke came over again, the Keeper declined apace in the
Duke's Favor; the Occasion of which will be fitter to be discovered (if so be
a true Discovery may be made at all, since the Springs of most Men's Actions
are so dark) when we shall come to speak of his Fall, and the Causes thereof.

A little after this, when he had been (208.)
The Keeper's Advice to the King about a Provision for the Palsgrave's Children.
now in Office about three Years and an half, he gave another proof of his
great Abilities in Counsel. The Treaties in Spain being laid aside, and new
ones set on foot in France, there was but small hopes of recovering the
Palatinate; which was the Occasion of a great deal of Concern to his Majesty,
because he could no way foresee how his Grandchildren (which were then but
young) would be able to subsist, when they grew to be Men, without being very
chargeable to England. Sir, says the Lord Keeper, will you be pleased to listen
to me, taking in the Prince's Consent, of which I make no doubt, and I will
show, how you shall furnish the Second and Third Brothers, with Preferments
sufficient to maintain them, that shall cost you nothing. (Breed them up for
Scholars in Academical Discipline; keep them strictly to their Books, with such
Tutors as will teach them not to abuse themselves with vain Hopes upon the
Greatness of their Birth. If they fall to their Studies, design them for the
Bishoprics of Durham and Winchester, when they become void. If that happen in
their Nonage (which is probable) appoint Commendatories to discharge the Duty
for them for a laudable Allowance, but gathering the Fruits for the Support of
your Grandchildren, till they come to Virility to be consecrated. George Duke
of Anhault, having Ministerial Gifts, was Ordained into that Holy Calling at
Madgeburgh, and yet put to no Shifts; as Melancthon is my Author, and many
more. The Priestly Office was esteemed from the beginning fittest for the best
Gentlemen, for the Firstborn, among them that served the True GOD. And the
Romans, who served them that were no Gods, (209.)
learned it at Athens from Theseus, that Citizens of the Noblest Blood, should
be trained up in the Knowledge of Sacred Things, and be made the Administrators
of Divine Mysteries. And I aim at another Benefit, wherein I praise GOD, that I
am assured your Majesty will concur with me, That the Office of a Bishop,
imprudently by many maligned (I might charge them with a worse crime) will be
the more Inviolable, when the Branches of your Royal Stock have so great an
Interest in it. And such provision is needful against Schismatical Attempts,
both for Religion's sake, and the Public Weal. For if such great
Superstructions should fall, all would come to ruin that is round about them. I
will yet go further: If your Majesty think a Bishopric, though of the best kind,
too little for either of them, you may be pleased to annex to each of them one
of your Principal Offices of State, as you find them trusty and discreet. When
he had ended, As I live (says the King) I will follow this Direction; I thank
you heartily for it; and I account, that it will save me more than the worth of
a Subsidy. But the Counsel as good as it was, it seems, was never put into
execution; which was no fault of the Lord Keeper's.

I proceed now to a very Remarkable Inoiosa's Plot against the Prince and Duke.
Instance of his Policy, that will show how very vigilant he was to procure
Intelligence of all secret Proceedings at Court, and how fit a Person he was to
be consulted in a Difficulty, and to unravel Plots. You must (195.)
understand, when the Prince and Duke returned from Spain, they commented so
upon the Proceedings of that Court in the Treaty, that the Parliament was full
of Invectives and Resentments against it. Inoiosa, the Spanish Ambassador at
our Court, hearing of this, he sets his Head on work, to make a Breach between
the King and his Parliament; and likewise to set him against the Prince and the
Duke, who, he knew well enough, were the main Persons concerned. So with much
ado at last, he gets an Opportunity (for he was never permitted to be in
private with the King, by reason of the jealousy the Prince and the Duke had of
him) to convey a Paper privately into There is a a Copy of it in Hacket.
his Majesty's Hand, in which were Articles drawn against the Prince and Duke,
and ill Surmises against the Parliament. The Prince and Duke's fomenting the
Parliament at this time against Treasurer Cranfield, whom the King (as we said
before) was very desirous to save, might, with some other suspicious
Occurrences at this Juncture, confirm his Majesty's Jealousies. And so far did
this Contrivance prevail (196.)
The King jealous of the Prince and Duke.
upon the King, that he grew sullen and thoughtful, and would entertain the
Prince and Duke with no Discourse, but Riddles and broken Sentences, that like
flashes of Lightning from a black Cloud, showed a Storm gathering within.
Immediately they conclude all was not right; and upon Inquiry, they found, that
the Spanish Secretary, and Maestro the Jesuit had been with the King, and that
some of the Ambassador's House had made their Brags, That they had nettled the
Duke, and that a Train would take Fire speedily, to blow up the Parliament. The
King amidst his great Anxieties prepares to go to Windsor, thinking perhaps to
leave his Cares behind him. So in the End of April, being Saturday in the
Afternoon, he takes Coach, and his Son along with him, but makes some slight
Pretense to leave Buckingham behind, as he was putting his Foot into the Coach.
At that Tears burst from him, and he humbly requested his Majesty to tell him
his Offense, that he might confess it, or clear himself: To which the King
replied only (with a Sigh) That he was the greatest (197.)
Wretch living, to be forsaken of those that were dearest to him: which
Expressions drew Tears on both sides; but the King drove away for Windsor, and
left the disconsolate Duke behind. The Keeper's Advice to the Duke.


Now the Lord Keeper was a Man that spared no cost for the best Intelligence he
could purchase of Court-Occurrences; and he would often say, That without a
deal of Money, it was impossible to be a Statesman. And of this Accident, his
Scout had brought the best Account he could from what he saw, for he heard
little. So away he goes to the Duke, then all in Sorrow at Wallingford-House;
and with much ado, gains admittance to him After solemn Protestations of the
great Concern he had for him, and his earnest Desires to serve him, he begs of
his Grace, that he would make haste for Windsor, and show himself to his
Majesty, before Supper was over; to carry himself withal the winning Address
imaginable, and to keep Night and Day close to his Person. For the Danger was,
lest any one should get the King's Ear, and persuade him to dissolve the
Parliament, and upon the Dissolution of it, get his Grace thrown into the
Tower, and then GOD knows what might follow. Lose no time, I beseech your Grace
(says he) and lock up this Advice in your Breast. The Duke, returning him
hearty Thanks, posts away to Windsor, and comes there unexpected. To be sure he
acquainted the Prince with the Occasion of his coming: So that his Highness The
Prince consults the Keeper, who detects the whole Plot.
was early next Monday Morning at the Lord's House (before they sat) to speak
with the Keeper. And taking him aside into a Lobby, he thanks him for the
Counsel he gave Buckingham: And (says he) you that have gone thus far, may
receive greater Thanks of us both, if you will spread open this black
Contrivance, which has lost him the good Opinion ofmy Father, and I my self am
in little better Condition. Sir (says the Keeper) let my Soul suffer for
Falsehood, if I know any more, than that some in the Spanish Ambassador's House
have been preparing Mischief, and have infused it abour four Days since into
his Majesty. But the Curtain of Privacy is drawn before the Picture, that I
cannot guess at the Colors. Well, my Lord (says the Prince) if that be the
Picturedrawer's Shop, no Counselor in this Kingdom is better acquainted than
your self with the Works and the Workmen. I might have been (says the Keeper)
and I am pang'd like a Woman in Travail, till I know what Misshapen Creature
they are drawing. But your Highness and my Lord Duke, have made it a Crime to
send unto that House, and they are afraid to do it who are commanded from his
Majesty. It is a Month since I have forbidden the Servants of that House to
come at me. But, says the Prince, I will make that Passage open to you again
without Offense, and enterprise any way to bring us out of this Wood, wherein
we are lost. Only before we part, keep not from me, how you came to know or
imagine, that the Spanish Agents have charged Buckingham to my Father with high
Misdemeanors, or perhaps Disloyalty. I would hear you to that Point, that I may
compare it with other Parcels of my Intelligence. Sir (says the Keeper) I will
go on directly with you. Another perhaps would blush, when I tell you with what
Heifer I plow; but knowing mine Innocence, the worst that can happen, is to
expose my self to be laughed at. Your Highness has often seen the Ambassador's
Secretary, Don Francisco Carondelet: I have discovered him to be a Wanton, and
a Servant to some of our English Beauties, but above all to one of that (198.)
gentle Craft in Mark-Lane. A Wit she is, and one that must be courted with
News and Occurrences at Home and Abroad, as well as with Gifts. I have a Friend
that bribed her in my Name, to send me a faithful Conveyance of such Tidings,
as her Paramour Carondelet brings to her. All I instructed the Duke in, came
out of her Chamber. And she has well earned a piece of Plate or two from me,
and shall not be unrecompenc'd for this Service, about which your Highness does
use me, if the Drab can help me in it. Truly, Sir, this is my Dark Lanthorn,
and I am not ashamed to enquire of a Dalilah to resolve a Riddle; for in my
Studies of Divinity, I have gleaned up this Maxim, Licet uti alieno Peccato;
though the Devil make her a Sinner, I may make good use of her Sin. Yea, (says
the Prince merrily) do you deal in such Ware? In good faith, Sir (says the
Keeper) I never saw her Face. And so this Conference ended.

Since the Keeper had gone thus far A signal Instance of the Keeper's Policy.
in this Intrigue, he was resolved to go through with it, and to sift the
Matter to the Bottom; which he knew he should never be able to do, except he
had an Opportunity of pumping the Secretary Francisco, who had (by the Duke's
Orders) been forbid the Keeper's House above a Month since. If he should merely
send for him, without any pretense, it would look (he thought) a little
suspicious, and then the Secretary would be much upon the Reserve, and not open
himself so freely. As the Keeper was musing upon this Difficulty, he chopped upon
this lucky Thought: He orders his Pursivant Captain Toothbie, to seize upon an
English Priest lodging in Drury Lane, whom Francisco (as the Keeper knew) loved
entirely. The poor Secretary, as soon as he heard of his Friend's Misfortune,
was in a woeful Taking, knowing the Law, and how severe the Parliament then
sitting would be, if he should be brought to his Trial. He had been banished
the Keeper's House long since, and he knew no body else, that was able to
assist him in his Friend's behalf. Pressed with these Difficulties, he saw it was
no time, in a Matter of so great concern, to be over-modest, and to stand upon
Punctilios: so he sent an humble Request to the Lord Keeper, to be admitted to
him that Day, though he should never see his Face again. With a seeming
Unwillingness, it was granted him; but then he must be very private, and not
venture before eleven at Night, and then to come by the Backdoor of the
Garden, where a Servant should recieve him. So at his Hour he came, and at
first sight of his Lordship breaks out abruptly, That nothing but a Matter as
dear unto him as his Life, should have forced him to break Rule, to offend his
Lordship with his presence. And then in a very passionate manner he begs that
he would obtain his Friend's Enlargement for him, who was newly taken up. And
would you have me (says the Keeper) run such a Hazard, to set a Priest at
Liberty, a Dead Man by our Statutes, when the Eye of the Parliament is so
vigilant upon the Breach of Justice, especially in this kind, to the sadding of
our Godly Men, who detest them that creep here out of Seminaries, above all
Malefactors, because they come with an Intent to pervert them, who have lived
in the Bosom of our Church. My Lord (says Francisco) let not the Dread of this
Parliament trouble you; for I can tell you, if you have not heard it, that it
is upon Expiration. By this means the Keeper was got into the Outworks of the
Project, and played so artificially with the Secretary, that he soon took the
Main Fortress. He kept him with him till Two in the Morning; by which time he
had picked out of him the Heads of all the Articles in the Paper conveyed
before into the King's Hand. And after this, to gratify him, he calls for the
Pursivant (who was at hand) and orders him immediately to free the Priest, but
upon this Condition, that he should cross the Seas that Day, or the next, that
so he might secure himself from danger in what he had done: And then the Lord
Keeper and Don Francisco parted with much show of Love on both sides, each
having compassed his Designs. By this time (I make account) my Reader cannot
but smile, to see how dexterously the whole Business was managed; and how
prettily and innocently too a Person of neat Wit may carry on his own Interest,
when you would think he was earnest about another Man's Business; so consistent
are two contrary Motions at the same time in Policy, as well as in the Workings
of Nature.

But to make an End of our Story: The Keeper having discovered Inoiosa's Plot,
acquaints the Prince with it. Cabal. p. 300.
Soon as Francisco was gone, the Keeper fell to Recollecting the whole
Conference that had passed between them. As fast as it occurred, he laid it
down in Writing, and slept never a wink that Night, nor stirred out of the Room
till Seven in the Morning; by which time he had drawn up a fair Copy of the
whole Matter; which he presented to the Prince immediately in St. James's, and
told him. He had the Viper and her Brood in a Box. Upon this the Prince was for
posting away for Windsor: Nay, Sir (says the Keeper) let your Highness be
pleased to take my Petition along with you: Where is it? says the Prince. In my
Mouth, replies he: for I humbly beg, that you will conceal me in all that I
have done in this Matter; and as you tender my Life, to keep the Knowledge of
this from your Father. I have committed two great Crimes in a Sworn Counselor;
First, to search into the King's Counsels, which he would should not be opened;
Secondly, when I have found them out, to discover them, though to your Highness.
So the Prince parting with him, gave him assurance of Secresy; and coming to
Windsor, he shows Buckingham the Papers. After The King is reconciled to the
Prince and Duke.
which, they both desire immediate Admittance to his Majesty, which being
granted, they present the Writing to him. He read it all deliberately, and
often stopping, would say, It Is well, very well; and an enlivening Spirit
danced in his Eyes. Then he embraced his Son and Buckingham, protesting, he was
very sorry, that a parcel of Traitors should ever make him jealous of them; but
now that all was right again. And that you may know (says his Majesty) how
little you shall pay me for Reconciliation, I ask no more, but to tell me who
is your Engineer, that struck these Sparks out of the Flint, and lighted the
Candle, to find the Groat that was lost. The Prince was silent, and the Duke
vowed he knew not the Author. Well (says the King) I have a good Nostril, and
will answer mine own Question; My Keeper had the main Finger in it; I dare
swear it was he that bolted the Flower, and made it up into this Paist. Sir
(says the Prince) I was precluded by my Promise not to reveal him, but I never
promised to tell a lie for him: Your Majesty has hit the Man. And GOD do him
good for it (says the King) I need not tell you both what you ow him for his
Service; and he has done himself this Right with me, that I discern his
Sufficiency more and more So by this Discovery the Keeper did not only do a
signal Service to the Prince and Duke, but likewise to his Majesty; who it is
ten to one had quarrelled outright with his Parliament, had he not been thus
convinced of his groundless Fears.

You may gather from these and some other Passages, in this Part of the Life,
how prudent and how serviceable a Counselor he was to his Majesty, and to his
great Patron and first Raiser, the Duke of Buckingham. And now I am upon this
Part of his Character, I will give you an Instance or two more of his Services
to the Duke: by which put altogether, you may see how little he deserved the
usage he afterward received from his Hands.

In the Year 1622. the Jesuits had The Countess of Buckingham turns a Papist.
Cypr. Ang. p. 100.
made (what they very much coveted) a Proselyte of the Countess of Buckingham;
and upon this the People were jealous that there was danger of the Duke's being
influenced by his Mother, (171.)
and so that from the Duke, the Contagion would seize his Majesty, and at last
from the King, spread it self among the People. The Lord Keeper saw plainly how
these Conclusions affected the People, and multiplied their Discontents; which,
for ought any one knew, might gather such a Head, as to prove fatal in the
ensuing Parliament. Therefore to secure his Majesty, and the Duke especially
from being suspected, he advises him thus. It is time (172.)
The Keeper's Advice to the Duke about his Mother.
to let your Lordship know, That by the Countess your Mother's Departing from
our Church, the Mouth of Clamor is opened; That now the Recusants have a
potent Advocate to plead for their Immunity, which will increase their Number.
When this is bandy'd in the High and popular Court by Tribunitial Orators, what
a Dust will it raise? Therefore to satisfy the People, your Mother must be
invited or provoked to hear Debates between Learned Men, speaking to those
Points of Controversy that have staggered her. Let her Ladyship bring her
Champions with her. Entertain her with many of these Conferences: let them be
solemn as can be devised, the King himself being ever present at the Disputes;
and the conflux of Great Persons, as thick as the Place will permit. Let your
Lordship's Industry and Earnestness be conspicuous, to catch at every Twig of
Advantage, much more to give Applause to every solid Reason, which may bring
your Mother Home to a Sound Mind again. If her Ladyship recovers of her
Unstableness by these Applications, you have won a Soul very precious to you,
and will raise your self up into the Fame of a sincere Protestant. But if the
Light within her be Darkness, and that she frustrate all Hopes of her
Reparation, the Notice of your Lordship's pious Endeavors will fill the
Kingdom with a good Report. The Laud, Williams and White dispute against Fisher
the Jesuit.
Duke follows the Advice; the Conferences are set on foot, and his Majesty was
Superintendent at them. Fisher the Jesuit being the Lady's Champion; he was
opposed strongly by Dr. White, then Dean of Carlisle, but especially by Dr.
Laud (as may be seen by the Controversy published after) Bishop of St. David's;
and the Cypr. Ang. p. 101.
Lord Keeper (says his cold Friend Dr. Heylyn) put in a Word or two sometimes:
But if we credit Bishop Hacket, in the Second Conference, the Lord Keeper
managed a Formal Dispute with Fisher, as White did in the First, and Laud did
in the Third. And why we have nothing of his extant concerning this Controversy
(as we have from both the other) Bishop Hacket gives us no Reason; except we
will be satisfied with what he says of the Keeper in another place, and upon
another Occasion; That he never wrote (35.)
any thing with Intention to let the World see it, unless necessity constrained
him. But for all the great Abilities and Learning (173.)
of the Disputants on our side, the Lady remained still unconverted;
nevertheless the Duke gained his Point, and the Event was as the Keeper
foretold it.

What I am going to mention next, if remembered by my Reader when he comes to
the next Part, will give some small Insight into the Reasons of his declining
in the Duke's Favor: For though it was on the Keeper's side a sincere piece of
Friendship, yet it is a Question whether the Duke took it as such. Buckingham,
you know very well, had a Grudge against Spain; to fatisfy which he must needs
make War upon it. All that he wanted was Money, (202.)
to maintain the War; and he saw The Keeper disswades the Duke from selling the
Crown Lands.
no speedy way of raising such vast sums as he needed, but by compassing the
sale of some of the Crown Lands; which he was resolved to endeavor. The Keeper
was at this time newly recovered from a desperate Fever and Flux, and durst not
venture Abroad; therefore so soon as he heard what dangerous Courses the Duke
was falling into, he sends him the following Letter, dated October. 21. 1623.

May it please your Grace,
I Hear a Whispering, rather than a Report, out of Westminster Hall, that some
great Alteration is presently to be made of the small Remainder of his
Majesty's or rather the Crown-Land. Although I know not certainly, being
unimploy'd and unprofitable, whether I ought to take notice hereof at all, or
what to advise; yet presuming upon that Favor I have ever found, and of late,
as much as ever with your Grace, I have sent you this Ticket to read and burn.
If there be any Resolution taken for the general Alteration of the Crown Lands,
yet this is not a convenient time to go about it.

First, Because there is not yet a Lord Treasurer, that it may be Christened to
be his Act.

Secondly, Because it has not been debated at the Council Table; for want of
whose Advice, it will be appropriated to be your Grace's Act.

Thirdly, It cannot be ripe for Execution, till the next Session of Parliament
is dissolved; for otherwise it will undoubtedly serve as an Excuse for not
granting Subsidies.

But setting those considerations of Delay aside, I humbly desire your Grace,
that no Universal Alteration may be made of the Tenure of the Crown Lands.

And First, Because the Money got thereby will be much, and will instantly be
gone.

Secondly, The Infamy in Chronicles will be eternal upon our most Gracious
Master.

Thirdly, The Prince cannot cordially assent thereunto; or if he do, it is
impossible (his Wisdom considered) but that hereafter he should repent him, and
much abhor the Authors and Actors of this Counsel.

Lastly, If the Prince should be of the same Mind with his Father, yet their
Successors will have good pretenses to prosecute everlastingly the Names and
Posterities of all such Advisers.


Nor did the Freedom of the Keeper's (203, 204, etc.)
Advice rest here; for when the The Keeper disswades the Duke from selling
Church Lands.
Duke was much about the same time (in prosecution of his Designs to raise
Money) set on to procure a sale of some Church Lands, he then came out of his
Chamber, to dissuade his Lordship from it by all means. But although the Keeper
prevailed for the present with his Arguments, yet one may reasonably conclude,
he got but little Good Will at the bottom from the Duke for all his Pains: for
Great Men generally take wholesome Counsels, as one would a bitter Draught: We
cannot help making sour Faces at it, though we know it is for our Good. And thus
I have done with the Keeper, considered in every Respect as a Statesman. And I
shall only add a few Things more, that happened toward the latter end of King
James's Reign, which to avoid Confusion I am forced to insert here by
themselves.

The peaceful Reign of King James (209.)
A Treaty of Marriage with France.
drew toward a Conclusion; when the Treaty about the Marriage with France was
first set on foot. The Business had An. 1624.
gone on for some time, before the L. Keeper's Advice was sought for.
Nevertheless, as he studied the Spanish Language during that Negotiation, so
now he took a Frenchman to be his Servant, and to assist him in attaining the
French. And as in the former The Keeper gets our Liturgy translated into French.
Treaty he had ordered a Translation of our Liturgy into Spanish by Taxeda, and
printed it at his own cost; so now he got it turned into French by Mons.
Delaun, Minister then of the French Church in Norwich. The Ambassadors (210.)
to our Court from France were the Marquess Fiatte, the Great Finnancer, and
Monsieur Villoclare, one of the Principal Secretaries. They had Audience from
the King at Cambridge; who (after their Return to London) sent a Message to the
L. Keeper to entertain them and their Train, upon the Wednesday following;
which (according to their Computation by the New Style) was Christmas Day with
them. So the Keeper sent to invite them to Sup The Keeper entertains the French
Ambassadors.
with him: And the Entertainment was prepared in the Jerusalem-Chamber at
Westminster College. But before Supper, he gave them first an Episcopal
Collation; for the Ambassadors with all their Attendance were brought in at the
North-Gate of the Abbey, which was stuck with Torches every where within and
without. At the Door of the Quire, the Keeper desired their Lordships to go in,
and seat themselves for a while, assuring them that nothing should be done that
might be in the least offensive to them. So the Ambassadors with their Train
filled the Stalls, where they continued about half an Hour, while Choiristers
in their richest Habits, sung three Anthems; during which time they all stood
uncovered, excepting Monsieur Villoclare. While a Verse was playing, the Keeper
Presents them with our Liturgy.
presented the Ambassadors, and those of the best Quality that were with them,
with our Liturgy in their own Language; saying at the Delivery of the Books,
That their Lordships at their Leisure might read in that Book, in what Form of
Holiness our Prince worshipped GOD; wherein he durst say, nothing savored of
any Corruption of Doctrine, much less of Heresy, which he hoped would be so
reported to the Lady Princess Henrietta. After this, when they went out, they
took all their Books along with them, except Villoclare, and his was brought
after him, as if he had forgot it.

There was at this Time present a An Abbot has the Curiosity to be present at
our Divine Service.
Gentleman that held an Abbacy in a Lay-Capacity; who, after he had read over
our Prayer Book, had a great Mind to be present in Westminster Abbey, upon
Christmas Day in the Morning, that he might see and hear how we solemnized that
great Feast, for which we were so much blamed Abroad. Whereas our Common Prayer
(211.)
Book, though it was not imbroidered so thick with Ceremonies, yet he thought it
wanted not such as might give a Decency to our Service. But least he might give
Offense to any of his own Party, he desired he might be placed where no Body
could see him, and that he might have an Interpreter of the Liturgy to assist
him. The Lord Keeper was forward to meet him in his Request; and a place was
contrived a-loft for him, with a Lattice and Curtains to conceal him. His
Lordship performed all the Service of the Day himself, that it might be done
with greater Decency. And after, And he approves of our Worship.
when they came to discourse about it, the Abbot said, he perceived that we had
been basely traduced, and that all he had heard of us was false. And though I
deplore your Schism (says he) from the Catholic Church, yet I should bare
false Witness, if I did not confess, that your Decency, which I observed at
that holy Duty, was very allowable in the Consecrator and Receivers. So, after
some further Conferences (212.)
upon these Matters, they parted with mutual Smiles and Embraces. I have dwelt
the longer upon this Narration, to show not only the Credit that was done to
our Church and Liturgy by the Keeper, but likewise to let my Reader see, what
little Reason there is to suspect him for one that stood not well affected to
our Church Discipline.

As the Court of Spain, during the Villoclare petitions for Immunities for the
Papists.
Treaty with them, took the Opportunity of Mediating in behalf of the Papists
in England; so likewise now Mr. Villoclare (a great Zealot) was set on by them,
to make large and unreasonable Demands in Favor of them, and to press the
granting of his Requests home, as one of the main Conditions to complete the
Match. The Courtiers (213.)
perceiving the Eagerness of Villoclare to obtain his Ends, and being not
willing to expose themselves to his Displeasure, shifted him off from
themselves, and told him, That they could give no positive Answer to his
Demand, till he had spoken with the L. Keeper, whose Duty it was to examine
such things upon his peril, which were fit, or not fit for the King's
Conscience, Honor and Safety, before the Great Seal were put to any Thing. And
this gave occasion The Conference is all in Bishop Hacket, p. 213, to 222.
to the Famous long Debate between the Keeper and the French Ambassador,
wherein the Keeper gave him such solid Reasons against the Dispensing with our
Penal Laws against Romish Priests. A Copy of which Conference the King ordered
the Keeper to draw up for him; which he did accordingly, it being the last
Present he (222.)
made him in that kind. Which Papers, when his Majesty had perused them, gave
him (as he used to say) more Satisfaction than he could have expected.

The King now perceiving some Indisposition The King falls sick.
in his Health, retires to Theobalds for fresh Air, and to divert himself from
Business. On Tuesday, being the 22. of March, the L. Keeper received Notice in
a Letter from the Court, that it was feared his Majesty's Sickness was Mortal.
Upon this he comes to Theobalds, and presenting The Keeper attends him.
himself before the King, he endeavored to divert him, and bring him to
cheerful Discourse, but all in vain. So he continued by his Bedside till
Midnight, but found no comfort. And next Morning, after the Consultation of
the Physicians, he saw no hopes at all left; so that immediately (like a
faithful Chaplain) he desired of the Prince, that he might acquaint his Father
with his weak Condition, and put him in Mind both of his Mortality and
Immortality. And having the Prince's Consent, he went into his Advertises him
of his Death.
Majesty's Chamber; and kneeling down, told his Majesty, That he knew he should
neither displease him, nor discourage him, if he brought Isaiah's Message to
Hezekiah, to set his House in order; for he thought his Days to come would be
but few in this World. I am satisfied (replies the King) and I pray you assist
me to make me ready to go away hence to CHRIST, whose Mercies I call for, and I
hope to find them. From this time the Keeper watched with his Majesty
continually, and never so much as put off his Clothes, to go to Bed, till after
his Royal Master's Death; which was visible enough in his Looks, on Sunday
Night, when he returned to Westminster. His whole Business was Night (223.)
and Day (except when the Physicians composed his Majesty to Rest) to pray, and
read, and to discourse about Repentance, Faith, Remission of Sins,
Resurrection, and Eternal Life. This was the Preparation on Wednesday, for the
Blessed Sacrament on Thursday. Upon Friday his Majesty grew sensibly weaker; so
that now the Keeper stirred very little out of the Chamber, and that not only to
comfort the departing King, but likewise to keep off some of the Romish Church,
that crept much about the Chamber Door; whom as a Privy-Counsellor he commanded
to keep at greater Distance. Being rid of these, he was now continually in
Prayer, while the King lingered on; and at last his Soul departing, the The
King dies.
Keeper closed his Eyes with his own Hands. Thus died King James at Cypr. Ang.
p. 130.
Theobalds, on the 27th of March, being Sunday. From thence his Body was An.
1625.
brought to Somerset House, and carried thence in great State, on Saturday the
7th of May to St. Peter's Church in Westminster, where it was solemnly
interred: And the Funeral Sermon The Text was out of the II of Chron. c. 9. v.
29. 30. and part of 31.
preached by the Lord Keeper Williams, and printed not long after, by the Name
of Great-Britain's Solomon.

Thus I have at last brought the L. Keeper Williams through great Honors, and
much Fatigue and Business to the Period at once of King James's Reign, and his
own Prosperity. And (if the Living Man may with any reason complain) well had
it been for him too, had he never lived to see those Days, which the following
Scene will represent to my Reader.

The End of the Second Part.
An Account of his Fall, and his Troubles.
PART III.
IF so be that outward Things and The severity of the L. Keeper's Fortune.
Circumstances (which, because they are not in our Power, should therefore be
looked upon as not belonging to us) are of any real Force to render a Wise and
a Great Man, either Happy or Miserable; I should count him of all Men, the most
wretched, that is cast down from the height of Prosperity into an adverse
Fortune, there to entertain himself with the ungrateful Reflection of what (to
his Sorrow now) he had once been: And I should think him to be envied for his
Happiness, who after much Toil and Trouble in the Beginning, and all unusual
Discouragements, did at the last by the mere Force and Strength of his own
undaunted Resolution and Courage break (like the Sun from a Cloud) through all
Oppositions, and surmount all Difficulties. For the Remembrance of a Danger
past, and overcome, must be as grateful to us, as the Apprehension of one to
come, is terrible. So that if the Lord Keeper Williams had been a Man capable
of being dejected, he lay under all the Disadvantages in the World. For, at his
first setting out, from the Time he came to Cambridge, quite to the End of King
James's Reign, Fortune seemed to Court him all along, and to gratify him in
every Thing; whereas now (tired, one would think, with her overfondness of him
before) she treats him with all the hard Usage, as if she had marked him out,
to give all Men in him a notorious proof of her great Inconstancy. But before
we give an Account of his Troubles, it will be but convenient to look back a
little into the former Reign, and try if we can search into the Springs of
Buckingham's Hatred to him, which was the first The Reasons of Buckingham's
Breach with Williams.
and principal Cause of his overthrow.

We have had occasion before to hint how fickle Buckingham was, and how apt to
fall out with his greatest Favorites: (107.)
The Reason of which in all probability was his great Desire to oblige every
Body; upon which Account he would often be making such Requests for others, to
those he had raised to any Office, as they could not grant either in Honor or
Justice. And thus he was often wont to trouble the Lord Keeper, who never
resisted any of his Commands, when he could safely and honestly obey them; as
appears from what he writ to him about the Cause of Sir John Michel, Aug. 8.
1622. GOD is my Witness, I Cabal. p. 291.
have never denied either Justice or Favor (which was to be justified) to this
Man, or any other, that had the least Relation to your good and most Noble
Mother; and I hope your Lordship is persuaded thereof. And the Countess, (108.)
his Mother, has been heard to say, That the Lord Keeper had sufficient Reason
sometimes not to comply with her Son: and that she never knew him disagree, but
that his Counsels were wise, and well grounded; ever tending to the Marquess's
Honor, Safety and Prosperity. But then, that he often offended her Son with
Reprehensions, that were too bold and vehement. And, indeed, it was his Humor
to be very angry with his best Friends, when they would not be persuaded to
their own Good. So Wilson. Hist. of Gr. Brit. p. 196.
that it was neither height of Spirit, nor yet Pride, that made him odious to
those that raised him; but rather his Honesty in not permitting them to attain
to those Ends by him, which they unjustly required of him. And this was the
Occasion of Buckingham's Quarrel against him; who before the End of Michaelmas
Term in the Year (107.)
1622. (when Williams had not been above a Twelvemonth in Office) let fall
some Expressions of his Disliking to the Lord Keeper, and was in his Looks very
much altered toward him. All which the Keeper took no notice of, but prudently
affected to seem ignorant of the whole Matter; for the only way to exasperate
an Adversary is to let him know, that you look upon him as such; whereas if you
treat him as a Friend, it is possible he may The Occasion of the Falling out
betwixt Laud and Williams. Cypr. Ang. p. 113.
be gained upon.

As the Lord Keeper declined in the good Opinion of the Duke, so Bishop Laud,
he grew more and more every day in Favor; insomuch that when Buckingham went
over into Spain with the Prince, he left the Bishop to be his Agent at Court.
These See Wharton's Preface, and Bishop Laud's Diary at October 3. 1623.
Accidents, together with Mis-understandings, and Mis-representations on both
sides from Tale-bearers and Busybodies, seem to have given the first occasion
to those Jealousies and Heats, that afterward arose betwixt these Two great
and unfortunate Prelates. And since we are at best left but to our Guesses in
this matter (it being so diversely represented, as Passion or Interest sways) it
were but Modesty as well as Justice (due to such sacred Memories) in us, at
this distance of time, to search no farther, but to be charitable in our
surmises, so long as we are certain, from the main History of both their
Actions, that they were Men good and serviceable in their Generation. And to
what purpose should we keep their Names at Enmity here upon Earth, who we may
be sure, are long since joined in mutual Peace and Love in Heaven; where seeing
one another Thoughts by Intuition (which prevents all Mistakes) they conclude
that nothing but this Gross Veil of Flesh could have so disguised their
Sentiments, as to make them seem at Variance, when at the same time they drove
both with all their Might to the same great End, Namely the Glory of God and
the Established Happiness of our Church and Nation.

But to proceed in our Discovery of the Duke's Resentments toward the Keeper.
When his Grace was A further Account of the Duke's Hatred to Williams (147.
150) Cabal. p. 97.
in Spain, it is not to be doubted but the Lord-Keeper's Letters of
Instruction, though Well Designed, were not so well taken: and his often Desiring
and Advising him to be Reconciled to the Earl of Bristol, (one that he ever
hated) and to proceed according to his Counsels, as being a Most able
Statesman, but above all others Experienced in the Court of Spain; this went
much against the Grain with the Duke, and the Keeper might as well have told
him, that Bristol was a Wiser Man than his Grace. At this very time too it was
told the Cypr. Angl. p. 113.
Duke (but upon what Grounds I find no where) that Williams, his Creature, made
it his Business now in his Absence to Undermine him with his Majesty. Whereas
the quite contrary (108)
is Evident, in that the Keeper endeavored all he could to excuse his
Miscarriages in Spain, and to preserve him Entire in the King's Favor. But
indeed he did drive on [18] (148)
a Design quite contrary to Buckingham's toward the latter end of the Treaty:
For the Duke strove all he could to Dissolve it, and the Keeper, according to
his Maiesty's Commands, Studied Night and Day how to farther it and bring it to
Perfection. And in truth the first Accusation that Buckingham laid to his
Charge about this Matter was, that his Lordship had told the King, who those
Gentlemen were, that importuned his Grace by their Expresses sent into Spain,
to break or hinder the Treaty to the utmost of his Power; of which Suspicion
the Keeper protested upon his Salvation that he was not Guilty. And when the
Earl of Rutland (the Duke's Father in Law) undertook to clear the Keeper from
this Objection, the Answer that his Grace returned was this, Whenever I
disagree with him, he will prove himself to be in the Right; and though I could
never Detect him hitherto to be Dishonest, I am afraid of his Wit. At which See
The Lord-Keeper's Letters in the Cabala.
Answer I admire, when I consider, that all the Keepers Letters to the Duke
about this time and before, are full of the most sincere and hearty expressions
of Love and Service. Let Cabal. p. 286.
God (says he) suffer me no longer to be, than I shall be True, Plain, Faithful
and Affectionately Respectful of your Lordship. And in a Letter Dated Feb.
Cabal. p. 298.
2. 1623. he says, I never harbored in this Breast one Thought of Opposition
to hurt your Grace, from the first Hour I saw your Face: But how Honest and
True soever the Keeper might be, yet the Duke was highly Jealous of him; and
this the Keeper knew very well, who was assured that my Lord Cabal. p. 299.
Mandevil had a Letter from Spain, signifying, that the first Action his Grace
would Imbark himself in, when he came over, should be to Displace the Keeper.
Add to this, that after [18]
the Prince and Duke came over into (167, 168, 169.)
England, Williams lost yet more of the Duke's Favor, by declaring his Opinion
in some Consultations quite contrary to his Grace. And he Vowed at the same
time, as he should have God to be his Protector, that he would suffer all the
Obloquy of the World, before he would be drawn to the least Ingratitude against
his Lordship; but when the King asked his Judgment he must be True and
Faithful. For which (168.)
Loyalty and rigid Honesty the Duke defied the Keeper to his Face, and
Threatened his Ruin in the Presence of Many. And if he promised an ill Fuller's
Chapter Hist. B. XI. p. 125.
Turn to any one he would be sure to make his Words good, if he could. But the
King was so Conscious of the Lord Keeper's Worth and great Abilities, that
during his Reign the Duke's Displeasure could avail nothing to his Ruin, though
he had several times attempted it; And his Majesty's [5]
Orders were, that they should both Agree and Unite jointly in their Services
for him.

There remains unmention'd yet a little accident or two, that perhaps might
sharpen the Duke's Resentments something more. It was I believe Some other
probable causes of the Duke's hatred against the Keeper.
the harshest Expression that his Majesty ever used concerning Buckingham,
(whom it touched to the Quick) what he spoke to the Earl of Carlisle in a
Malancholy Mood, That (168)
if he had sent Williams into Spain with his Son, he had kept Heart's-Ease and
Honor, both which he wanted at that time. And it was taken as no small
indignity by his Grace, that, the first time the Lord Keeper came into the
King's Presence, after his Highnesse's Return into England (which was a little
before Christmas) his Majesty looking Intently upon him, said thus to the
Prince, Charles there is the Man that makes us keep a merry Christmas. His
Highness looking as if he understood not his Father; Why. it is he (says the
King) that Labored more Dexterously than all my Servants beside to bring you
safe hither, to keep Christmas with me, and I hope you are sensible of it. And
after this, in Christmas Time his Majesty of his own accord, without any
Solicitation caused an Act of Council to be Entered, That the Archbishopric of
York should be Conferred upon him at the next Vacancy. For which the Lord Keeper
most humbly thanked his Majesty, That he was Pleased to think of him, when his
Majesty knew best, that he thought not of himself. This to be sure was not
taken well by the Duke, who thinking that Williams began now to rise without
his help, was resolved, if possible, to pull him down: which we may reasonably
conclude, from what this Great Favorite told Sir Fr. Bacon, when he advanced
him: That Da. Lloyd's Life of Ar. Williams.
if he did not ow his Preferment always to his Favor, he should ow his Fall to
his Frown.

These are the Principal Reasons, The Keeper's Enemies not able to hurt him in
K. J. Reign.
that I can meet with, of Buckingham's Breach with Williams, which made him
endeavor his Ruin, and set others to effect the same in the Time of King
James; but all to no purpose, for (190, 191, 192, 194.)
then the Keeper's Interest was so strong at Court, and his Worth so well
known, that all Attempts against him were but like High Winds to a sturdy Oak,
by the malicious Assistance of which it takes deeper Root. But what Buckingham
could not compass with the Father, he soon obtained under the Son; and that is
remarkable in Buckingham Rush. Coll. p. 167.
(a thing very rare) that the great Favor he had with the former King, should
now be doubled upon him by his Successor. Having thus cleared my way before me,
I go on to what concerns the Lord Keeper in this new Reign.

Our Constitution allowing of no K. Charles proclaimed King.
Cessation in the Government, and for that Reason looking upon the King as
Immortal; Immediately upon the Death of King James, Charles the March 27. An.
1625. Frankl.
First was proclaimed King; who in the Evening on the same Day came An. p. 107.
from Theobalds to St. James's. And the Day following he sent for the L.
Keeper, to him; who found his Majesty [4.]
and the Duke of Buckingham involved in a multiplicity of Affairs; with whom,
together with Bishop Laud Frankl. p. 108.
the King consulted much in all the great Concerns both of Church and State. At
this Time the Keeper was appointed to preach the Funeral Sermon of the Deceased
King, and ordered too to provide a Sermon for the Coronation; but (it seems)
before that Time his Majesty's Mind was altered in that Point. But the Chief
Object of this The Keeper's Advice to the King about the Parliament.
present Consultation was the Parliament: and the King (desiring to have it sit
speedily) was for issuing out no Writs to call a New one, but for continuing
that, which met last in his Father's Time, and was prorogued till Spring. Upon
this the Lord Keeper informed his Majesty, that the Old Parliament was
dissolved of course by his Death, who first assembled them. Since therefore
there must of Necessity be a New Choice, the King commanded the Keeper to send
out Writs immediately, and not to lose a Day. To this the Keeper objected, That
if such a hasty Summons were made, before his Majesty's best Friends and
Servants had time to make their Interest in their respective Counties, Cities
and Buroughs, they might be in danger of not being elected. But the King
answered, It was high time to The Keeper's Advice taken ill.
have Subsidies granted, for maintaining of a War with the King of Spain, and
the Fleet must go forth for that purpose in the Summer. His Lordship durst not
venture to contradict any further, because he knew not how it might be taken:
But his Approbation of the King's Proposal was uttered after so cold a Manner,
that his Majesty turned away, and gave him leave to be gone. Nor did the King
consult the Keeper [5.]
at all about the Match now in Hand with France; and the Duke began to draw off
from holding any Conference with him. So that from all these Prognostics the
Keeper could not choose but foresee, there was a Storm a gathering.

But he did not imagine, that his The Keeper apprehensive of his Eall.
Plain-dealing would turn so soon to his Prejudice; for within two Days after
news was brought him, that my Lord Duke had threatened in the presence of
several to turn him out of his Office: And the French Ambassadors were some of
the first that gave him notice of it. These things plainly intimated, that his
Downfall was not far off. And so apprehensive was he of it, that he gave
warning to those that had any Dependence upon him, to make their Interest
elsewhere, for his Service would soon stand them in no stead.

But as yet he kept his Place. And [6.]
He is ordered to pass two Warrants.
one of the first things he was employed about was, to send forth his Majesty's
Warrant for a suspension of Laws against the Papists, upon the Account May 1.
I. Car.
of the Marriage with France. The [7.]
Keeper saw, that it was not his time either to give his Advice, or to scruple
his Majesty's Orders. But yet he made But he stops one.
bold to interpose with his Advice soon after this, when he had a Warrant May
23.
from his Majesty, to pass a Grant under the Great-Seal, for two Thousand
Pounds, out of the Court of Wards, to my Lord Conway, for 21 Years to come. The
which I durst not (says he) for fear of infringing my Duty to your Majesty, and
drawing some Danger upon my self, pass under the Great-Seal, before I had made
to your most Excellent Majesty my most humble Representation of the Thing. So
the Reasons he gave [8.]
with much ado prevailed; but he made the Lord Conway his Enemy by this piece
of Service.

Now the Parliament meets at Westminster, Rush. Coll. p. 171. June 18. The
Parl. meets.
and the King makes a Speech to them, About the War for the Recovery of the
Palatinate, wherein the last Parliament had engaged his Father; and for the
Carrying on of which he wanted their Assistance. After [9.]
this, the Lord Keeper Williams made a very pertinent Speech to the same
purpose; and not the Lord Keeper Coventry, Frankl. and Rushw.
as two of our great Collectors have mistaken: for Williams was not displaced
till some time after.

The Plague at this time raging in [13.]
London and Westminster, his Majesty was for having the Parliament adjourned to
Oxford; and Buckingham was for forwarding this Motion, but Williams appeared
against it; saying, [14.]
The Keeper's Reasons for not Adjourning the Parliament to Oxford.
That it was not another Place but another Time, that must do his Majesty's
Business for him. And the Pestilence had overspread the whole Land, so that no
Man that traveled knew where to lodge in safety; for which reason the Lords
and Gentlemen would not take it kindly to be forced abroad in such a mortal
Time; and. it is likely when they come together, that they will Vote out of
Discontent and Displeasure. That his Majesty was ill advised to give Offenses,
though small ones, in the beginning of his Reign. In the next place, it is to be
considered, that the Parliament has given two Subsidies at Westminster; and
though they remove to Oxford, yet it is the same Session: and if they allege
that it is not usual for the House to give twice in a Session, (though I wish
heartily they would) yet how shall we persuade them, out of their Custom, if
they insist upon it? And it is not prudent in the King to run a probable hazard
of a Denial. To all this the Duke replied, That public Necessity might sway
more than one He acquaints the King of the Duke's Enemies.
Man's Jealousy. Hereupon the Keeper requested, that he might speak a few
Words with the King in private; which being granted, he told his Majesty, That
the Lord Duke had Enemies in the House of Commons, who had contrived
Complaints, and made them ready to be preferred, and would spend the time at
Oxford about them. And what Folly it were to continue a Session, that had no
other Aim, but to bring the Duke upon the Stage? But if your Majesty think,
that this is like a Hectic, quickly known, but hardly cured; my humble Motion
is, that this Malady, or Malice (call it which you will) may sleep till after
Christmas. For I hope to give such Account by that time, by undertaking with
the chief Sticklers, that they shall supersede from their Bitterness against
your great Servant; and that Passage to your weighty Counsels shall be made
smooth and peaceable. And why do you conceal this from Buckingham? Says the
King. Good Lord Sir (says the Keeper) fain I would begin at that End, but he
will not hear me with Moderation. This Which exasperates the Duke against him.
discovery, which the Keeper made, it is thought, completed the Duke's hatred
against him, and hastened his Ruin; for his Grace now grown very jealous, (as
is natural for one in Danger) in Defiance bid the Keeper and his Confederates
do their worst; and desired that the Parliament might be continued, that he
might clear himself. So dangerous is it to show a great Man his Ruin, though he
stands just upon the Brink of it; because he looks upon the first Discoverer,
very often, as the Author of it.

But the Duke carried his Point, and The Parl. adjourned at Oxford.
the Parliament met at Oxford, on the first of August. On the very first
Morning there was a Complaint made by a Western Knight, that he had seen a
Pardon for six Priests, dated July the 12th: whereas on the 11th, the L. Keeper
had promised in the King's Name before them all, that the Laws should be put in
Execution against them. And for him, that was a Bishop, to set the Seal to such
a Warrant; against his own professed Religion, was thought a burning shame.
This Thing indeed was at first designed to ensnare the Keeper, but it caught
another. For the Warrant was brought [15.]
twice to him, and he refused to pass it: At which the Duke of Buckingham moved
the King, to command it to be sealed in his sight at Hampton Court: which when
it came to be known, the Odium was taken off from the The Parl. set against the
Duke.
Keeper, and thrown upon the Duke. And now the Duke's great places and Eminent
Titles glar'd too much; and the People could no longer bear, that one Man
should be so overcharged with Honors. While the The Keeper's Advice to him.
Parliament bore thus hard upon the Duke, the Keeper, out of his great Fidelity
to his Grace, intruded upon him, with the following Advice. My [16.]
Lord, I come to you unsent for; and I fear to displease you: yet because your
Grace made me, I must and will serve you, though you are one that will destroy
that which you made. Let me perish; yet I deserved to perish ten times, if I
were not as earnest as any Friend your Grace has, to save you from perishing.
You have brought the Two Houses hither, my Lord, against my Counsel. My
Suspicion is confirmed, that your Grace would fusser for it. What Is now to be
done, but to wind up a Session quickly? The Occasion is for you; because two
Colleges in the University, and eight Houses in the City are visited with the
Plague. Let the Members be promised fairly and friendly, that they shall meet
again after Christmas. Requite the Injury done to you with Benefits, and not
Revenge: For no Man, that is wise, will show himself angry with the People of
England. Confer one or two of your great Places upon your safest Friends; so
shall you go less in Envy, and not less in Power. At the Close of this Session
declare your self to be the forwardest to serve the King and Commonwealth, and
to give the Parliament Satisfaction. Fear them not, when they meet again in the
same Body; whose ill Affections I expect to mitigate: But if they proceed,
trust me with your Cause, when it is transmitted to the House of Lords, and I
will lay my Life upon it, to preserve you from Sentence, or the least
dishonor. To this all the Duke replied The Duke resents it.
was, I will look whom I trust to, and so flung out of the Chamber with Threats
in his Countenance. Immediately upon this, the Commons of this Parliament were
censured at Woodstock, The Keeper begs the K. not to dissolve the Parliament.
for Spiteful and Seditious: and therefore not fit to continue, but to be
dissolved. The Keeper hearing this, did all he could with Arguments, Tears and
Supplications, to put a stop to such Proceedings; desiring his Majesty to
remember, That in his hearing, his Blessed Father had charged him to call
Parliaments often, and continue them, though they might sometimes offend him. But
chiefly, Sir (says he) let it never be said, that you have not kept good
Correspondence with your first Parliament. And the Keeper had almost all the
Lords of the Council of the same Opinion with him in this Point; but Buckingham
was against it, and so Rush. Coll. p. 191.
the King to preserve his Favorite, dissolved the Parliament on the 12th of
August.

The Duke was jealous that the L. [17.]
The Duke jealous of the Keeper.
Keeper was all along at the Bottom of the Procedings against him in
Parliament, and therefore now he charged him with it; and this Suspicion of
Baseness and Ingratitude was so far credited by some, that they have not failed
to deliver it for a truth in Heylyn in his Observe. on the Hist. of K. Char. p.
36. H. Lestrange Reign of K. Cha. p. 20. 21.
Writing, to the great Detriment of his Good Name; did not the contrary
evidently appear from a Paper, which he gave his Majesty on the 14th of August,
an Abstract of which I shall give you here.

Reasons to satisfy your most Excellent The Keeper clears himself.
Majesty concerning my Carriage all this last Parliament.

FIRST, Negatively, That I did nothing disserviceably to your Majesty, or the
Duke. Secondly, I did cross the Popular way, more than any of the Council;
which I durst not have done, if I had intended to run along with them.
Affirmatively, I offered my poor Service to your Majesty, to execute any
Directions should be given me in private, and waited several times at several
places upon your Majesty for that purpose; but my Answer still was, You had
Nothing to say to me. I did the like to my Lord Duke at Oxford, desiring his
Lordship to send me his Commands by any trusty Friend, and I would serve him to
the utmost of my Power: his Grace said, He would send, but he never did. So
that if I had any Power in either House, what use could I make of it, without
Directions? For it was not safe for me to stickle, without Countenance from
your Excellent Majesty; Because I know very well, I have a great many Enemies
in the House, and those chiefly of the Duke's creating. But nevertheless (I
told the [18.]
Duke) If I might hear your Majesty say, you would protect me in your Service,
I would venture then my Credit, and my Life, to manage what should be entrusted
to me, to the uttermost. After which he never brought me to your Majesty, nor
any Message from you. Discountenanced therefore in these and several other
Points, and standing upon such doubtful Terms, I durst not at this time with
any safety busy my self in the House of Commons, with any other than that
measure of Zeal, which was expressed by the rest of the Lords of the
Privy Council. Gracious and Dread Sovereign, if this be not enough to clear me,
let me perish.

These Reasons satisfied his Majesty, His Ruin deferred.
and deferred his Destiny for Two months longer; though strong Interest was made
to have it completed now. Nor do I admire that the Duke should be so very hot
in the Pursuit of this Man's Ruin, if what Rushworth P. 198.
Relates be true, that the Keeper at Oxford should tell Buckingham to his Face,
That he was Resolved to Stand upon his own Legs: If that be your Resolution
(said the Duke) Look you Stand fast. But since my Author quotes no Authority
for this, and since all the Keeper's Behavior otherwise, and his Letters to
the Duke are full of the Humblest Submission that can be expressed, and show not
the least Resentments, I leave my Reader to give what Credit he thinks fit to
this Narration. But within a Fortnight after, about the End of August,
Buckingham at Holdbery in New-Forest cast Williams quite out of his Majesty's
Favor; and at Plymouth in the Midst of September got an Irrevocable sentence
to deprive him of his Office. If the Queen could have befriended him, he had
stood still, for he was in Favor with her Majesty, by reason It could not be
in May; as Bishop Hacket Mistakes, for she did not Land here till the 16th of
June, says Stow, and others.
of the Speech, which he made to her in French at her coming to Whitehall. But
it was impossible now for any thing to surmount the Importunity of the Duke,
who was busy to invent some Charge to lay to the Keeper, that so he might at
least have some Color for all his Displeasure. And in September, when the King
with his [20.]
Court came to Salisbury, the Keeper was then at Foxly in Barkshire, Five Miles
from Windsor; where he had The Keeper accus^d of Treachery against the Duke.
notice given him, that after strict Examination of all his Actions since he
first came into Office, the Old Matter was Renewed, about his Endeavoring to
set the Parliament against the Duke; which though only a Cypr, Angl. p. 139.
jealous surmise, was yet affirmed with all the Assurance of a substantial
Truth. And to Strengthen it the And of giving ill Counsel to the King.
more, they Added to it, that he had given evil Counsel to his Majesty, by
Advising him to condescend too much from his Sovereignty, to a Compliance with
his People. Upon this He clears himself.
the Keeper, being hardly recovered of an Ague at that time, sends a Letter to
his Majesty on the 21st of September, to clear himself from these Imputations;
which Letter if consulted, The Letter is in Bishop Hacket; but too long to be
transcribed.
will satisfy an Impartial Person of the Keeper's great Integrity in the
preceding Parliament both to the King and to the Duke. And [21.]
when the Duke had seen the Letter, he perceived his Accusations were much
Invaliated. Therefore to Reinforce The Duke attempts another Accusation against
the Keeper.
them, he and his Party thought the most likely way to succeed would be, to
acquaint his Majesty, that they could charge the Keeper with his own Words, and
what was more, with his Letters: but then before Proofs were made, he must
first be Displaced, for so long as he continued in Office, People would be
afraid to Accuse him. But But it takes no effect.
the Keeper coming himself to Salisbury about the first week in October, and
hearing this, desired, the King and the Duke might know, that he would Answer
to any Accusation in a Legal way; and that the World would soon see how
Preposterous a way of proceeding it is first, to Punish and afterward to
Condemn: That the wrong done to him would soon startle others. For who that had
any thing to lose would think himself secure upon such Precedents? And these
Considerations made his Adversaries lay their imperfect Designs aside, and
bethink themselves how to Plot better, if they meant to Succeed. After this the
best way His Enemies not able to charge him with any Thing. Non perpetuus olim
fuit honor Cancellarii, sed Triennalis, vel quadriennalis. Spelman. Gloss. See
p. 74.
they could think of was, not to pretend to any Accusations, but to let his
Majesty barely recall the Great Seal from his Custody; because it was given to
him at first upon a Triennial Trust, and no longer; which was no unusual Thing.
And he had himself made such a Request (if you remember) to King James, when he
first entered upon his Office, that no Lord Keeper might be continued above 3
Years. So that his Enemies could lay no Accusations to his Charge, and all his
Crime was their Hatred and Malice. And this Account of the Matter is confirmed
even by that great Dealer in Scandal, whom I Court and Chapter p. 176.
have had occasion to mention so often; who says, that Williams's Ruin was
determined not upon any known Crime, but upon Circumstances and Examinations to
pick out Faults committed in his whole Life time. Which, considering the Person
it comes from, is more to the Lord Keeper's commendation, than if an
unprejudiced Pen had declared him wholly Innocent; as indeed he was in his
Behavior both to his Majesty and to the Duke, which was the only Crime
pretended against him.

On the 15th of October, The Lord [22.]
The Lord Conway acquaints the Keeper, that it was the King's Order he should
give up the Seal.
Conway came to the Lord Keeper's Lodgings in Salisbury with this Message: That
his Majesty understanding that his Father had taken a Resolution, that the
Keeper of the Great Seal of England should continue but from Three Years to
Three Years, and approving very well thereof, and being resolved to observe the
Order during his own Reign, he expects that you should Surrender up the Seal by
Allhallowtide next, alleging no other Cause thereof. And that having so done,
you should retire your self to your Bishopric of Lincoln. To which the Keeper
answered; The Keeper's Answer.
I am his Majesty's Most humble Servant and Vassal, to be Commanded by him in
all Things whatsoever. The Great Seal is his Majesty's; and I will be ready to
deliver up the same to any Man, that his Majesty shall send with his Warrant to
require it: And do heartily thank God and his Majesty, that his calling for the
Seal is upon no other Ground. Only this last Clause seems strange to me, that
I should be restrained to my Bishopric, or any Place else. And I humbly appeal
to A further conference betwixt the Lord Conway and the Keeper.
his Majesty's Grace and Favor therein: Because it is no Fault in me, that his
Majesty or his Father has made such a Resolution. Nor do I dispute against it;
although the King, that dead is, continued me in the Place after the Three
Years ended; and the King, that now is, delivered me the Seal without any
Condition or Limitation of Time. And therefore deserving no Restraint, I humbly
desire to be left to my Discretion, which I will so use as shall be no way
Offensive to his Majesty. To which the Lord Conway replied; I conceive it not
to be a restraint, but only to signify, that his Majesty intends not to employ
you at the Table, but leaves you free to go to your Bishopric. My Lord (says
the Keeper) I desire your favorable Intercession for an Explanation of that
Point. And I beseech your Lordship to move his Majesty, that I may attend upon
him, to present unto his Majesty Two humble Petitions, the one concerning my
Reputation, and the other my Maintenance; which I am the more confident his
Majesty will admit of, because I vow before God, I am not Guilty of the least
Offense against his Majesty, and am ready to make it good upon my Life. And I
make the like Protestation for any Unworthiness done against the Duke; whose
Hand peradventure may be in this Business. At parting my Lord Conway spoke
about the time of Resignation; and I said it was all one to me, sooner or
later. Then I asked his Lordship if I was restrained from the Board before the
delivering of the Seal? his Lorship answered, He knew of no such Intent. And so
we parted.

The next day after, waiting on [23.]
his Majesty to Church by my Duty and Place; after Sermon was over, at the
upper end of the Quire, the Lord Conway told me, I have acquainted his Majesty
how Obedient you were to his Commands, and how willing to resign the Seal
without any farther Dispute; and I have presented all your Requests to his
Majesty; who answered to every particular as follows; concerning your Retiring
he meant no Restraint of Place; but for some Questions that might be renewed,
and for some Considerations known to himself, he intended not to use your
service at the Council Table for a while. And for your Estate; you had no Wife
and Children: And he intended not to Debar you from any of your Church
Preferments, until he should provide you better, And he was content to admit
you to speak with him when you pleased, provided you endeavored not to unsetle
his former Resolutions.

Upon the 18th of October, I desired The Keeper desires admittance to the King.
Admittance to the King; and Mr. Tho. Carry sent me Word, His Majesty would
speak with me the next Morning. But after Sermon, the King told my Lord Conway,
that I had sent to him; and he was in a long and serious Discourse with him.
Then my Lord Conway (the King being gone to dinner) followed me into the
Cloister, and told me, That he conceived his Majesty was afraid, that I would
press him to give his Reasons, why he took the Seal from me, and caused me to
abstain from the Board. But I answered, I should falsify my Word to his
Lordship, if I should speak unto his Majesty upon any other Points, than those
of my Reputation, and my Means. After this, the Keeper gave the Lord Conway a
Letter (having first [24.]
showed it to him) to present unto his Majesty, if he thought fit; wherein was
a full Declaration of his Innocence, both with respect to his Majesty and the
Duke, which he concludes thus; If all these Informations against a poor Bishop,
that so served your Father in his Life, and at his Death, be grounded only upon
Suspicion, Malice, or Misapprehension, and be cried down (as they needs must
be) by all the Members of the one and the other House; pity me, Dread
Sovereign; and let me retire with the comfortable Assurance of your Majesty's
Favor, that I may spend my Days quietly in the Service of my GOD; in serving
whom, as I resolve to do, I shall never fail to serve your Majesty; whom GOD
Almighty prosper with all Success in this World, and with all Happiness and
Eternal Glory in that to come.

After his Majesty had read the Letter, [25.]
The King sends for him to come to him.
he sent for the Keeper, to make his Petitions, and to speak what he had to say
to him. So his Lordship presenting himself before the King, his requests,
together with his Majesty's Answers, were as they follow. First, he asked his
Majesty's Grace The Keeper's Petitions to the King.
and Favor in General. He granting it, gave him his Hand twice to kiss. 2ly
Says the Keeper, I humbly thank your Majesty for your gracious Promise, to take
away none of my Church Preferments, till you have given me better; and I
beseech your Majesty to keep the same benevolent Mind toward me. The King
replied, It is my Intention. 3ly I beseech your Majesty to remember your
Father's Promise, made before all the Lords, that whenever he took away the
Seal, he would place me in as good a Bishopric or Archbishopric as he could:
A Promise not only seconded, but drawn from your Father first by your Majesty.
There is no such Place yet void (says the King) when any falls, then it will be
time to make this Request to me. 4ly I desire that I may not be commanded away
from the Council Table, but that my Absence may be left wholly to my own
Discretion. I ever intended it so, and never said a word to the contrary; says
the King) but then, I expect you would not offend by a voluntary Intrusion. 5ly
I beseech your Majesty to declare unto the Lords, that I have willingly and
readily yielded to your Majesty's Pleasure, and that I part in your Favor and
good Opinion, and am still your Servant. I will (replies his Majesty) but I
look that no Petitions be made for you by any Man at that time, but only for my
Favor in General. 6ly I humbly beg, that your Majesty, when you think fit,
would make my Atonement with my Lord Duke, either upon, or without Examination
of those Informations, which his Grace has received against me. It becomes not
me, a King, to take up the Quarrels between my Subjects: and the Duke has never
before me expressed any such Enmity against you. So he thanked his Majesty for
the last part of his Answer, which revived him not a little. 7ly Whereas by
your Father's Direction, I bought a Pension of 2000 Marks per Annum, for 3000
l. I desire your Majesty would be pleased either to buy it of me for the same
sum again, and extinguish it; or assign it to be paid me out of the Tenths and
Subsidies of the Bishopric, as before I had Appointment to receive it out of
the Hamper. The King said, Assignments are naught; but I will take order with
my Treasurer, either to pay it, or buy it, as shall be found most convenient.
8ly I desire your Majesty would bestow the next vacant Prebend in Westminster,
upon my Library Keeper, as your Father had promised me, or let me resume my
Books. It is very reasonable, replies the King. 9ly I petition your Majesty
that you would be pleased to ratify a Grant made by your Father of four
Advousons to St. John's College in Cambridge; two whereof I bought with my
Money, and two his Majesty gave me for the use of that Society. Says the King,
I will ratify the Grant, and give way to amend any Errors in the Form, or in
the Passing. 10ly, I beg Leave to retire to a little Lodge, lent me by my Lord
Sandys, where my Lord Conway may receive the Seal, when your Majesty commands
it. Which was granted. Lastly, I beseech [26.]
your Majesty not to be offended at me, if upon my Discharge, Reports are
raised of my being discontented, which I protest I am not, going off so
comfortably in your Majesty's Favor. I will do you that Justice (says the
King) and shall little value Reports. So with a pleasing Countenance he gave
him his Hand to kiss, and dismissed him graciously.

And the Keeper thought he had obtained The Keeper's Petitions all frustrated.
much of his Majesty; but after he went away, so powerful were his Enemies,
that they frustrated all the kind Concessions made him by the King; for he
reaped no Advantage from any one of them, excepting the four Advousons
confirmed to St. John's College. After he left Salisbury (which Cabal. p. 114.
was the next Day) he could never receive any thing from his Pension, nor to
his dying Day could he ever bring it to a Hearing. It was his Expectation too,
that after some time he might be called again to the Council Board. But his
hopes (it seems) were vain; for he was never so much as thought of, and he was
resolved not to intrude without being called. But before five He gives over all
hopes of Court Favor.
Days were expired, he had Intelligence how vehemently the Duke talked against
him. Which made him give over all hopes of any Court Favor for the future; and
so, knowing the worst, he was the better able to set his Heart at rest; for the
greatest Torture to a well-pois'd Mind is, to fluctuate betwixt Hope and
Despair.

Upon the 25th of October, Sir John The Seal taken from him.
Sucklin, Controller of his Majesty's Household, brought a Warrant from [27.]
Fuller in his Chapter Hist. B. XI. p. 125. is out by some Months in his
Compuputation about the Keeper. Cypr. Ang. p. 139. Sanderson's Reign of King
Chapter p. 24.
the King to the Lord Keeper, (who was now at Foxly, near Windsor) to receive
the Great-Seal; which accordingly he delivered, but with no signs of
Unwillingness, as one intimates. For the Keeper was glad to hear that so worthy
a Person as Sir Thomas Coventry, his Majesty's Attorney General, was to succeed
him: And instantly, giving up the Seal, he put it in the presence of Sir John
Sucklin, into a rich Cabinet, enclosing the Key into a Letter The Letter is in
Bishop Hacket.
to his Majesty, sealed with the Episcopal Arms of Lincoln. Thus did the Duke
of Buckingham at last compass his Designs upon his own Creature; in the
furthering of which Cyprianus Angl. p. 139.
it is more than probable that he was assisted by the Lawyers, out of a Desire
they might have to get this Dignity once again into their own possession. And
now we have done with the Lord Keeper; so that the sequel of this Part will be
taken up in giving an Account of the Bishop's Troubles, with Reference to the
State, omitting all his Concerns in the Church, till I come to my last Part.
Notwithstanding that, according to the order of Time, they were in reality mixed
and interwoven with the State-occurrences of his Life; yet I choose to separate
them, because, as I told you before, I would not confound Characters; that so
my Reader might the better see upon a clear View how to form a Judgment of him.
Which I am the more desirous he should, because it has been the great
Misfortune of this Prelate (as well as it was Laud's) to be represented to
Posterity by contrary Parties, under quite different Shapes.

And now the Bishop being discharged The Bishop retires to Bugden.
from his Civil Affairs, he betakes himself wholly to his Episcopal Charge. And
without touching at London, he removed from Foxly to Bugden in
Huntington-shire, the Bishop of Lincoln's Seat; making the greater haste to be
gone, lest now the Malice of his Enemies being fresh he might suffer more from
them. For they that could procure the Seal to be taken from him, without
accusing him of any Mis-managment, might as well if exasparated have deprived
him of his Bishopric: for when once Peoples Wills come to give Rules to their
Actions, God alone knows to what they may proceed. But though Spies are set over
him.
his Lordship thought, that now he was retired from the sight and out of the
Reach of his Enemies, yet in [33.]
Sanderson's Reign of K. Chapter p. 24.
truth he was not so. For he had spies set over him to watch his Actions, and
to ensnare him in his Words. And that the rather, because the Bishop was of a
free, open Temper, and inclined to take that innocent and undesigning Liberty
of Speech, which a Man would not be so apt to do, did he think People stood at
his Elbow, to make the worst of every Thing, that was said. But neither was his
pleasant humor sometimes without a mixture of Policy; for by seeming to open
himself, he would often tempt others from being too much upon the Reserve. And
he was too wise after the severe warning given him, to speak any thing that
with a favorable Interpretation could turn to his Disadvantage.

The Duke of Buckingham continued [64.]
still the Bishop's implacable Adversary, and vowed, that of all he had given
him, he would leave him nothing. And the better to furnish [67.]
A Commission of Thirteen sit upon the Bishop's Actions.
himself with Accusations to compass his Designs, he had given Order to a
Commission of Thirteen to examine every particular Action of the Bishop's, and
to make a Collection of what would bear a Censure in the King's Bench, the
Star Chamber, or the High-Court of Parliament. And this was managed with that
secrecy for some time, that his Lordship with all his vigilance was not aware
of it. And the whole result of their Inquiry was, that their Malice showed his
Innocence still the more. And when they could charge him with nothing else, at
last they urged, that he Entertained such at his Table as bore a Grudge to the
Duke; who perhaps upon Old Acquaintance might make him some Visits, but never
upon any Factious Design, that could be proved. Besides all [66.]
this, the Bishop had notice that he was perpetually Slandered to his Majesty
in Private, and he had Reason to suspect that things were worse than they were
represented to him.

Now the Occasion of the Duke's [65.]
The Reason of the continuance of the Duke's hatred to the Bishop.
Resentments growing still more and more vehement, was not the Bishop's
Stoutness or Obstinacy, (to which he was but too prone) for he had almost
Cring'd to his Grace in Submission, and stooped as low as was possible on this
side a Dejected Baseness: But it was the Freedom of his Advice, that galled the
Duke. And one would think, the Bishop had had too much Experience of the
ungratefulness of that Office, ever to venture upon it again. But there is
nothing so careless and so willful as downright Honesty, which consults not
what is most expedient for it self, so much as what may be for the Good of
others. And thus when the Countess of Buckingham (his Grace's Mother) and
several other of his best Friends advised with the Bishop about him, he was so
plain as to say, that he approved not of his Grace's manner of Magnifying his
Services for the King, and that he did not seem to apprehend what a deal of
Envy he gained by his Vaunting sometimes, That he would make his Majesty the
greatest Monarch in Europe. And the Bishop too would say that he did not like
the Duke's Preparations against Cadis, which he thought would in the End turn
to his Dishonor: to dissuade him from which, he would often say, That a King
must make himself sure in the Love of his own People at home, before he bids
War abroad to such a Rich and mighty Nation. Such an Insight had this great Man
into all Affairs, that his Counsels were ever for the best; and so faithful and
free was he, that he could not endure to disguise his Sentiments. And wise Men
have that in Common very often with Fools, that they must be showing
themselves, though it be for the most part to their own Prejudice.

But the Bishop could never be The Bishop suspects not the King to be against
him.
persuaded that his Majesty had any hand in those Contrivances, that were
Designed for his utter Ruin; and that, [64.]
all proceeded in a manner involuntarily from him, by mere Impulse of such as
having too much of his Majesty's Ear, might transport him beyond his own
Merciful Temper. And so confident was he of his own Innocence, and of his
Majesty's Justice and Favor to him for his former Services, that in his
greatest Troubles, he desired no more in his own behalf but to be brought
before his Majesty to speak for himself, and to represent those things aright,
which others had set in no favorable Light. But yet certain it is, that had
not the King been disgusted with him, he would never have winked so long at his
Sufferings. However the Bishop thought nothing of all this; excepting once that
he was startled at an expression, that escaped from the King, within a few
Weeks after his Father's Death. One that came from the French Court told his
Majesty, That the Spanish Ambassador spoke openly there, (when the Marriage
with the Princess Mary was to be finished) that he could not have Two Wives,
for their Infanta was surely his. To which the King replied, there are some
English as well as Spaniards, that are of that Opinion. Which when it was told
the Bishop, he said with a low Voice, I know of none such; but if he means Me,
it will be the worse for me while I live.

The Time for the King's Coronation The Bishop desires to assist at the
Coronation.
being now just at hand, the Bishop of Lincoln comes to London and writes thus
to the Duke of Buckingham; Being come hither, according to Cabal. p. 310. Jan.
7. 1625.
the Duty of my Place, to do my best Service for the Preparation to the
Coronation, and to wait upon his Majesty for his Royal Pleasure and Direction
therein; I do most humbly beseech your Grace to crown so many of your Grace's
former Favors, and to receive a Creature of your own (struck dead only with
your Displeasure) by bringing me to kiss his. Majesty's hand, with whom I took
leave in no Disfavour favor at all. But his Petition (it [68.]
Cypr. Angl. p. 144. Fuller's Chapter Hist. B. XI. p. 121.
seems) stood him but in small stead, if in any at all. For, although the Deans
of Westminster have had for above these Three hundred Years last past a
particular Place at that great Solemnity, and although Bishop Andrews (who was
Dean) did attend at the Coronation of King James as a special Officer; yet when
the appointed Day was come, the Bishop Febr. 2. Fuller's Chapter Hist. B. XI. p.
123. I believe he is mistaken there about Williams, to be sure he was not Lord
Keeper at this time. And perhaps was not so much in Favor as to read the
King's general Pardon. Laud's Diar. An. 1625. Jan. 16. and Jan. 17.
of Lincoln had orders to absent himself, and to depute one of the Prebendaries
in his Place. Now he was resolved not to name Bishop Laud, because he took him
for his Rival and his Adversary; and to Substitute one of a degree inferior to
a Bishop, he thought would be taken ill by the Court. Therefore to avoid being
laughed at on the one hand, or censured on the other, he very prudently sends
his Majesty a List of all the Prebendaries and their several Dignities, and
leaves it to him to choose whom he pleases; and immediately he pitched upon
Laud, who accordingly attended in the Room of Williams; who insisted not upon
his Right, but yielded to the Sequestration, as he called it in his Letter to
the King.

Immediately after the Coronation The Second Parliam. called, Feb. 6.
was over, a second Parliament met. And the Duke, fearing the Bishop of
Lincoln, makes Interest with the King to have him kept out of the House. Cabal.
p. 114.
His Lordship being ready to obey his Majesty in all his Commands, was willing
to absent himself, since it was his Majesty's pleasure to spare him. But The
Bishop not summoned to it.
yet he would not forfeit his Right as a Peer, lest he might infringe that of
others; and therefore he complains thus to his Majesty; I have not yet received
my Writ of Summons unto the Parliament ( denied to no Prisoners, or condemned
Peers in the Reign of your Blessed Father) that I might accordingly make my
Proxy; the which I cannot do, the Writ being not received. So at last he
obtained a Writ, and Sits in it by Proxy.
made B. Andrews his Proxy. And the Bishop in this Letter to his Majesty, in
which he petitions for this Writ, adds these following Supplications. First,
Cabal. p. 115.
I beg for GOD's sake, that your Majesty would be pleased to mitigate the
causeless His Petitions at this time to the King.
Displeasure of my Lord Duke against me. Secondly, I beseech your Majesty for
CHRIST JESUS his sake, not to believe News, or Accusations against me, while I
stand thus enjoined from your Royal Presence, before you shall have heard my
Answer to the Particulars. Lastly, I supplicate, That in my Absence this
Parliament, no use may be made of your Sacred Name to wound the Reputation of a
poor Bishop, who besides his Religion and Duty to that Divine Character you now
bear, has ever affectionately honored your very Person, above all the Objects
in this World, as he desires the Salvation of the World to come. But I crave no
Protection against any other Accuser or Accusation whatsoever. There are in his
Letters several other Protestations of this Nature, which are too many to be
inserted into this Life; but the few I have transcribed here, and elsewhere, I
thought necessary to clear him from the Aspersions of several Authors that
agree in charging him with unfair Dealings in the preceding Parliament to the
King and Duke. And in another [69.]
long Letter to the King, much about this Time, he shows his Majesty how grossly
he has been abused to him by the Duke; and that he will venture his Life upon
the Proof of any thing his Grace can urge against him.

Yet for all this, the Bishop was The Bishop advises the Duke not to appear in
Parliament.
ready at all times to serve the Duke with his Advice: and being demanded, when
this Second Parliament was summoned, by Buckingham's Friends [65.]
to tell them what he thought would be most advisable for the Duke's safety,
with reference to this Parliament, he answered; His best way will be, not to
come near it; for it will be impossible for him to close with this Parliament,
who (contrary to my Advice) offended the former, and broke it up. Let him
remove himself by some great Embassage, till the first Session be ended; into
Germany, if he will, as far as Vienna, if he dare trust the King of Spain's
greatest Friend and nearest Ally. But this Advice did not please those of the
Duke's Interest; for rather than send him so far from the King, they would
venture him at Home, thinking their Party strong enough to secure him. Nor
could the Bishop bring them off from their Assurance: But all that he foretold
came to pass, which enraged the Duke so much the more. The Parliament grew
violent against him, and [70.]
See the whole Proceedings in Rushw. part. 1.
spent the best part of eighteen Weeks in drawing up a Charge, and prosecuting
it against his Grace. So that it was fortunate for the Bishop that he was not
in the House at this time, because he could not have appeared against the Duke,
and to stand for him had been to no purpose, and would have exposed him to
popular Hatred. But the King perceiving that they Cypr. Ang. p. 151. The King
dissolves the Parl. An. 1626. The Third Parl. called.
wounded him through the Duke's sides, and not being able to divert them from
what they were set upon, he dissolved the Parliament on the 15th of June.

After this, his Majesty designing [72.]
to call another Parliament, the Lord Keeper Coventry had orders to write Feb.
17.
to the Bishop of Lincoln to dissuade him from appearing at it. But the Bishop
(with all submission to the The Bishop sits himself in the House.
King) perceiving himself to be trampled upon, resolved to stand upon his
Privilege as a Lord, and to let it be no longer infringed. Therefore in his
Answer to the Lord Coventry's Feb. 25.
Letter, he says; I must crave some time to resolve by the best Counsels GOD
shall give me, whether I shall obey your Lordship's Letter (though mentioning
his Majesty's Pleasure) before my own Right, which by the Law of GOD and Man I
may in all Humility maintain. And so resolutely did he persist, that when March
17. An. 1627.
the Parliament met, he sat in the House himself, and not by Proxy, as before;
and continued in it to the last. And he was the more earnest to be present at
this time, out of the great Desire he had, if possible, to do his Majesty some
Service.

But his Enemies were resolved to The Bishop is censured for his Popularity.
be upon him, and to catch at all Opportunities to accuse him. So now he is
censured for growing too Popular [73.]
in this Parliament. And indeed it was high time for him to make some Friends,
since he was not only discountenanced by the King, but strongly opposed by
Buckingham and Laud, that had determined his Ruin, if possible. But yet for all
his Favor with the Parliament, he departed not from the King's Interest. But
did his Endeavor now (as formerly) to balance things equally between his
Majesty and his Subjects.

At this time, the People desiring to The Petition of Right. H. Lestr. K. Chapter
p. 76, 77, etc.
be assured that their just Liberties should no ways be infringed; Sir Ed. Coke
advises that a Petition of Right be presented to his Majesty: which accordingly
[77.]
was done. The Duke of Buckingham was very much against this Petition, for
which the Commons were resolved to be even with him before they parted. But the
Bishop of The Bishop is for it.
Lincoln was for promoting the Address of the Commons, only he was for having a
Clause added to it, That as they desired to preserve their own Liberties, so
they had regard to leave entire that Power wherewith his Majesty was entrusted
for the Protection of his People. Which the Commons would not admit of, but
ordered it to be cancelled; and had some Suspicions, as if the Bishop had been
sprinkled with some Court Holy Water. Whereas all he designed by it was, only
to keep up the Dignity of Majesty. And when the King [78.]
made his Objections against this Petition, the Bishop answered them all, and
showed his Majesty how agreeable it was to our Laws and Constitution, and no
less honorable for himself; for it made him a King of Freemen, and not of
Slaves: All which his Lordship [79.]
did so plainly demonstrate, that the King gave his full Assent to the
Petition: upon which the Houses testified H. Lestr. p. 81.
their Joy by a mighty shout. And it was said that the House of The Bishop
admitted to kiss the K. Hand.
Lords requested the King upon this Agreement, to receive again into Favor the
Bishop of Lincoln, with some other Lords. And the King perceiving [80.]
how ready the Bishop was in this Parliament to serve him, he gave him his Hand
to kiss, and he was admitted to talk in private both with his Majesty and the
Duke. But so unfortunate The first rise of the B. Troubles in Star Chamber.
was the Bishop, that even this Conference which he had at this time with the
King, gave the first occasion to all his Troubles afterward in the the
Star Chamber. For, the King conjuring him to tell him freely, how he might best
ingratiate himself with the People, his Lorship replied, That the Puritans were
many, and strong sticklers; and if his Majesty would give but private Orders to
his Ministers to connive a little at their Party, show them some Indulgence, it
might perhaps mollify them a little, and make them more pliant: Though he did not
promise that they would be trusty long to any Government. And the King
answered, he had thought upon this before, and that he would do so. About two
Months after this, the Bishop at his Court at Leicester, acted according to
this Counsel resolved upon by his Majesty; and withal told Sir Cypr. Ang. p.
172.
J. Lamb, and Dr. Sibthorp his Reason for it; That it was not only his own, but
the Royal Pleasure. Now Lamb (37.)
was one that had formerly been infinitely obliged to the Bishop; but however,
a Breach happening betwixt them, he and Sibthorp carried the Bishop's Words to
Laud, and he to the King, who was then at Bisham. Hereupon it was resolved,
That upon the Deposition of these Two, a Bill should be drawn up against the
Bishop, for revealing the King's Secrets, being a Sworn Counselor. But, that
he trespast H. Lestr. p. 152. Sanderson's K. Chapter p. 220. Rush. Coll. p. 421.
against Loyalty with his Tongue, is a very great Mistake in certain
Historians. This Information, together with some others, being transmitted to
the Council Table, was ordered for the present to be sealed up, and committed
to the Custody of Mr. Trumbal, one of the Clerks of the Council. Nevertheless;
the Bishop made shift to procure a Copy of them. And so the Business rested for
some Years.

But to return to the King's receiving The Bishop received into Favor by the
Duke.
the Bishop into Favor again. To set all things straight, and to quit all old
scores, his Lorship was kindly received [80.]
by the Duke, and no mention was made of former Unkindnesses, but Williams
tendered his faithful Service, and Buckingham accepted of it; and allowed him
to hold up a seeming Enmity, and his Interest with the People, that so he might
be the better able to serve him the next Session of Parliament. So they parted
in perfect Charity, which was a great Happiness to them both, since they never
met again; the Duke dying soon after by the Hand Buckingham killed. Stow's Chapter
Aug. 23. An. 1628.
of that Notorious Villain John Felton. And indeed the Duke promised at a
private Meeting, two Months before he died, to restore the Bishop into Favor,
[65.]
and did design a time for the open Profession of it. Which (considering the
violent Hatred he bore to him before) to me seems none of the smallest, amongst
those several strange Prognostics, which his Grace had of his untimely End.
And now to show [81.]
the Bishop of Lincoln's great Genenerosity; immediately upon the first sad
Tidings of the Duke's Death, he dispatched away a kind Consolating Letter to
his Mother, whose Answer to his Lordship's, begins thus; My Lord, It is true
Nobleness that makes you remember so distressed a Creature as I am, and to
continue a true Friend in harder Fortunes. You give me many Reasons of Comfort,
for which I kindly thank you, for I have need of them all. And he continued to
show Respect, and to do what Service he could to his desolate Relations, which
the Countess of Denbigh his Sister did often confess to Bishop Hacket, and
speak of to Williams's great Commendation and Honor.

This Parliament (which we have Stow's Chapter An. 1628. The Parliament is
dissolved.
been speaking of) continued till the 26th of June, and then was prorogued to
the 20th of October; and then upon the 20th of January began again, and so
continued unto the beginning of March following, when upon the 4th The 10
according to some.
of that Month, the King dissolved it utterly. For though 'twas thought by [82.]
some, that the Death of the Duke might occasion more Quiet, yet the People
still continued as unruly, and rather more than ever. Insomuch that the K.
dismissed them in a Passion, and so much in his Displeasure, that he called no
Parliaments after this for the space of twelve Years.

The Bishop of Lincoln (who had The Bish. Advice to the King about the Parl.
foresight enough to see which way Things were a-going) with sorrow presaged
the Ruin of the State, and did his utmost Endeavor to prevent it. And for this
End he importuned the [84.]
Lord Weston to carry this Message from him to his Majesty. That the Parliament
might meet again for all this, and that there might be a conference between
them and the Lords, to debate upon Differences. And that he hoped their House
would check, if not censure those Commons, that were so very rude; and that
they would, being ashamed for what they had done, make Amends by their
Submission. But if they were impenitently obstinate, he did not desire to
intercede for them. What the Event of this Counsel might have been, GOD alone
knows; but the King would [83.]
A Saying of the Bishop's about Parliaments.
not hearken to it. And here it is worth our while, to mention a very common
Saying of the Bishop's about Parliaments: That Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments
were most tractable, which sat but a short time, ended before they were
acquainted with one another Interests, and had not learned to combine.

It happened ill for our Bishop The want of Parl. a great cause of the Bishop's
Misfortunes.
that Parliaments were now discontinu'd; for he fell into all his future
Troubles, chiefly because he was quite out of Favor at Court, and at the [85.]
same time wanted the shelter of a Parliament to skreen him from the Storms
that were still a gathering; though if there had been any Fair Weather in the
Sky, one would think by this time that he had had a sufficient share of the
Foul. And now the Duke being laid in his Grave, some perhaps will expect, that
all should go well with him. But that is not to be expected so long as Bishop
Laud lives; who Rush. Coll. p. 637.
after Buckingham's Death grew more and more in Favor with the King, and was
about this time made Bishop of London. And as the first Differences between
these two great Prelates began by Misunderstanding on both sides, so did they
continue in their Mistakes (Time rather increasing them) to the very last, and
never had the happiness to frame right their Notions of one another. For B.
Laud ever looked upon B. Williams as a Man that gave Encouragement to the
Puritans, and that hung loose as to our Church Discipline; and on the other
hand, B. Williams took B. Laud to be a great Favourer of the Papists. Which we
may reasonably conclude from what a Person of Honor tells us in his E. of
Anglesey's Mem. p. 336.
Memoirs. And as the Opinions of these two Bishops concerning one another were
different, so likewise were [86.]
The Character of Laud and Williams.
their Natural Tempers quite opposite, for which reason there appeared the less
hopes of a Reconciliation. For Laud was a stiff and rigid Asserter of our
Church Discipline, and would not yield in the least Punctilios by any means;
for his Maxim was, There is D. Lloyd's Chapter of B. Laud.
no end of Yielding. Williams was a Man too that loved the Beauty and Decency
of our Church, as much as any Man, but then his Temper was more complying; and
his Policy was, to let Necessity govern in Matters of less weight, and to bend
his private Inclinations in such things, to the Prevalency of the Times. Laud
was for Compulsion and the Authority of the Magistrate against the Puritans:
And Williams thought Insinuations and Compliances would work the best Effects
upon them, and that the surest way would be to catch them by craft. In short,
Laud was a Man fit for Primitive Times, but Williams to comply with the
Weakness of his own; The One being fit to govern Saints, the Other to deal with
Men, the difficulter Task by far.

Thus they being Men, both very active in their way, and their Notions of
things quite different, it is natural they should be at Variance. And Laud
Laud's Diary, Anno 1626. Jan. 17.
in one main Point was grossly mistaken about Williams, who did always assert
[87.]
and maintain the Divine Right of Episcopacy, though Laud affirms he was of a
contrary Opinion. But to search no farther into the Reasons of Things, let us
now proceed to Matters of Fact, and to give an Account of such cross Accidents
as befell the Bishop of Lincoln, during the Time of Bishop Laud's Favor at
Court; which was so great, that in Affairs of State, as well as of the Church
he governed almost Orders to regulate the Preachers.
without Control. And now one of the first things that he obtained of his
Majesty was an Order to silence all Preaching, or Reading in the Universities,
upon the Questions decided at Dort. This Direction of his Majesty's the Bishop
of Lincoln obeyed, but foresaw that this Restraint would be so far from tending
to the Peace of the Church, that it would make the Zealots of each Party the
more earnest to establish their Opinion, and that in the End, it would in all
probability turn to a general Combustion. And though he for his own part did
strictly observe the King's Orders, yet because he was not so stirring in them
as was expected, he was marked out for an Opposer of the King's Commands, and a
main stickler for the Adherents to the Synod of Dort.

Now was Prince Charles born; and The Birth of Prince Charles. An. 1630. May 29.
to the great Solemnity of his Christning on the 27th of June, all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal about London [96.]
were invited, excepting the Bishop of Lincoln, who was omitted on purpose;
which troubled him mightily, that in a Day of public Rejoicing, when his
Majesty's Brow was clear to every body, it should frown upon him alone. Though
for some time before this, he was quite thrown out of the Privy Council, and
not so much as allowed the Honor of the Title, more than which he had not
enjoyed these four Years. The Bishop not knowing The main Reason of Williams's
Disfavour.
what Reason the King had for all his Displeasure against him, made bold to ask
the Earl of Holland, whence he thought it might proceed? To which the Earl
replied freely, That he must expect worse than this, because he was such a
Champion for the Petition of Right; and that there was no room at the Table for
those that liked it. And had not Williams been absolutely A Commission for
regulating Fees.
clear from all manner of Bribery and Extortion, not only during the time he
was Lord Keeper, but likewise now in his Ecclesiastical Courts, his [94, 95.]
Adversaries had brought him into a Star Chamber Trial, by Virtue of the
Commission for regulating of Fees (set on foot this Year) which sifted him
narrowly, but could prove nothing against him.

And now the Bishop declining still The Bishop's Troubles increase.
more and more in Favor, a multitude of lesser Troubles surround him, and
several must needs be pecking at him, though it were but to ingratiate themselves
at Court. Abundance of frivolous Accusations and little vexatious Law suits
were brought against him daily; and it was the height of his Adversaries Policy
to empty his Purse and clip his Wings by all the means they could invent, that
so at last he might lie wholly at their mercy, and not be able to shift for
himself. Notwithstanding all which, what [89.]
with his Innocence and what with his Courage springing from it, he bore up
against them all, and never was the Man that showed a Grudge or Malice to any
of them. But his He desires to know how he may appease the King.
Lordship perceiving himself to be thus perpetually harassed he asked the Lord
Cottington, if he could tell him, what he should do to procure his Peace, and
such other ordinary Favors as other Bishops had from his Majesty. To which the
Lord Cottington replied, That the splendor in which he lived, and the great
resort of Company that came to him, was offensive, and that the King must needs
take it ill, that one under the height of his Displeasure should live at so
Magnificient a Rate. In the next Place his Majesty would be better satisfied if
he resigned the Deanery of Westminster, because he did not care that he should
be so near a Neighbor to Whitehall. As for the First of these Reasons his
natural Temper (though to be sure he was imprudent in it) would not suffer him to
comply with it, and to moderate his Expenses in Housekeeping. And he was not so
shortsighted The Bishop refuses to quit his Deanery.
as to part with his Deanery upon such precarious Terms. For, (says he) What
Health can come from such a Remedy? Am I like to be beholden to them for a
settled Tranquillity, that practice upon the Ruin of my Estate. and the Thrall
of my Honor? If I forfeit one Preferment for Fear, will it not encourage them
to tear me Piecemeal hereafter? It is not my case alone, but every [90]
Man's: and if the Law cannot maintain my Right, it can maintain no Man's. So
in spite of all their Contrivances to out him, he kept the Deanery till the
King received it from him at Oxford, in the Year 1644. But they Contrivances to
make him uneasy in it
did all they could, since he was resolved to hold it, to make him as uneasy as
possible in it. He was not admitted to Preach before the King in Lent ( Good
Friday being his usual Course) for Four Years; and for Three Years together,
when he came to the Chapters, or to the Election of Scholars, he could not rest
above a Day or two in College, but Secretary Coke either by his Letters, or by
Word of Mouth commanded him from the King, to return to his Bishopric. So that
one time the Dav. Lloyd's Life of Williams.
Bishop very resolutely asked him, how he durst command a Man out of his
Freehold? Which wrought upon the Old Gentleman so far, that he never rested
until he had his Pardon Sealed for it. After this the Archbishop was ordered
by the King to press him to Residency upon his Bishopric by the Statute, since
nothing else would remove him; and this contrivance lost it is Effect too. For
[91.[
in answer to this he writes to his Grace thus; I confine my self to those
particular seasons, to which the local Statutes of the College and my express
Oath do enjoin me; That is to say, the two Chapters and the great Festivals.
All which space of Time does not (being taken in the disjunct spaces) make a
Bishop a Nonresident by any Law I know of, nor consequently infringe Cypr. Ang.
p. 199.
his Majesty's Instructions though a Man had no Dispensation; which Instructions
require only that a Bishop should reside: but We presume that it is no part of
his Majesty's gracious Intention, that they should be confined, or as it were
imprisoned in their Bishoprics.

And here his Vexations about the A Difference betwixt him and the
Prebendaries, An. 1634.
Deanery rested for a few Years; after which, Differences broke out between the
Dean and the Prebendaries of Westminster, upon which they drew up Six and
Thirty Articles against him, frivolous and impertinent in the main, to which
the Bishop answered with no concern at all. But if you will credit Barnard's
Life of Heylyn. p. 160, etc.
an Author that has but small affection for his Lordship (upon his Kinsman's
Account) the Things alleged against him were notorious. So I refer my Reader
to him, and to Bishop Hacket, and after comparing of them both together, let
him judge for himself: But whether the Bishop were at this time culpable or
not, yet he kept his Deanery still. And to be sure his Actions were not like to
have an overfavourable Interpretation from Dr. Heylyn, who was one of his chief
Accusers, and his professed Enemy, not only upon Bishop Laud's Account, but
likewise upon the Account of a Barnard. p. 129.
Personal Quarrel he had formerly with Bishop Williams. Justice to be sure
ought to be executed indifferently upon all without respect of Persons: But
then, if these Persons did heighten [92.]
and exasperate their Complaints, nay, or if they stretched them to the full
Rigor, against their Dean, who had been every way so great a Benefactor both
to the College and Church of Westminster; we may modestly conclude, That he
received very hard measure at their Hands; as indeed most of the good Offices
and Services he did in the foregoing Part of his Life, brought him in no small
share of Evil.

As yet you see the Bishop of Lincoln has not had the least glimpse of that
good Fortune in this Reign, which he enjoyed all along, without having it so
much as once over-cast in the former. And now by this time it was sufficiently
known to all People, how much he was out of Favor; so that it was looked upon
as a piece of Merit, to assist in his Ruin. And [96.]
this perhaps might be some incitement The Bishop unjustly accused about the
Ship Money. An. 1636.
to what Sir Robert Osborn, High Sheriff of Huntingtonshire, acted against the
Bishop in the levying of the Ship Money. Williams for his part was very
cautious to carry himself without offense in this Matter; but Sir Robert,
laying a very unequal levy upon the Hundred, wherein Bugden was, the Bishop
wrote courteously to him to rectify it, and he and his Neighbors would be
ready to see it collected. Upon this, Sir Robert, catching at the Opportunity,
posts up to Court, and makes a heavy Complaint against the Bishop, that he not
only refused the Payment of Ship Money himself, but likewise animated the
Hundred to do so too. And yet for all this, when the Bishop afterward cleared
himself before the Lords of the Council, and they were satisfied, that he had
behaved himself with Duty and Prudence, Sir Robert was not reprehended, nor had
the Bishop any Satisfaction given him, nor was the Levy regulated.

After this, was revived the long and The Trial in Star Chamber against the
Bishop.
troublesome Trial against the Bishop in the Star Chamber, which commenced 4
Car. upon some Informations (as we hinted before) brought against him by Lamb
and Sibthorp. I shall not pretend here to abstract the whole Proceedings, least
my Reader might suspect me of Partiality; as indeed the leaving out of any one
little Circumstance may give the whole Matter another Face, than what it really
has. He therefore that [110 to 127]
has so much Leisure and Curiosity Rushw. part 2d. p. 416. to p. 450.
may have recourse to those Authors that have made it their Business to be
particular in this Point. And after he has compared Hacket and Rushworth (the
former in all probability having the clearest Knowledge of the most minute
Circumstances) I doubt not but he will conclude that Bishop Williams had very
hard Measure dealt him. However, when the Business [135.]
July 11. 1637. The Bishop fined and imprisoned.
came to a final determination, the Bishop was Fined 10000 l. to the King, and
to suffer Imprisonment during his Majesty's Pleasure, and withal to be
suspended by the High-Commission-Court from all his. Dignities, Offices and
Functions.

And now a Man of moderate His Troubles in the Tower.
Spleen would think his Adversaries might after this begin to relent and grow
mild. But quite contrary, they continued all the Time he was in the Tower to
persecute him, and to bring him to such a wretched condition, if possible, as
should make even Themselves to pity him; for he had the Pity of others long
before. I should be reckoned impertinent [127.]
should I waste Time to tell, how several at this time forsook him and his
Interest, since it was no longer their own; so I proceed to an account of his
Troubles in his Imprisonment. His Fine to the King (as [128.]
I told you) was a good Round Sum; and he heard that his Majesty would not bate
any thing of it. Therefore that the Weight of it might not oppress him quite,
he desired that it might be taken up by a Thousand pound Yearly, as his Estate
would bear it, till the whole were paid; but could not have so small a Favor
granted. Upon which Kilvert (the All his Things seized and plundered.
Bishop's vowed Enemy) is ordered to go to Bugden and Lincoln, and there to
seize upon all he could, and bring it immediately into the Exchequer. Away goes
he, glad of the Office, and makes sure of all that could be found; Goods of all
sorts, Plate, Books and such like, to the value of Ten thousand pounds: of
which he never gave Account, but of Eight hundred. The Timber he feld, killed
the Deer in the Park; sold an Organ that cost 120 l. for 10 l. Pictures that
cost 400 l. for 5 l. made away with what Books he pleased; and continued
Revelling for Three Summers in Bugden House. For four Cellars of Wine, Syder,
Ale and Bear, with Wood, Hay, Corn and the like, stored up for a Year or two,
he gave no Account at all. And thus a brave Personal Estate was squandered
away, and not the least of the King's Fine paid all this while; whereas, if it
had been managed to the best Advantage, it would have been sufficient to
discharge the Whole. It were endless to repeat all the Contrivances against his
Lordship during his Consinement; the Bills that were drawn up, and the Suits
that were commenced against him, as it were on purpose to impoverish him, and
to plunge him over Head and Ears in Debt, that so if he procured his
enlargement from this Prison, he might not be long out of another: All which
you may [128. to 139.]
Read elsewhere at large. But this let His Patience in his Sufferings.
me add, for an Example to such as may fall into the like Calamities; that this
undanted Prelate bore up against all these Afflictions with the Spirit of a Man
and something more; which to me is an undeniable Proof of his Innocence; For, a
wounded spirit who can bear? And this it was that made his Enemies still more
bitter against him, to see him smile through all his Misfortunes; that had a
stranger seen his Lordship in the Tower, he would never have taken him for a
Prisoner, but rather for the Lord and Master of the Place. For here he lived
with his wonted Cheerfulness and Hospitality, and wanted only a larger
Allowance to give his Guests a heartier welcome; for now he was confined to
bare 500 l. a Year, a great part of which was consumed in the very Fees of the
Tower. He [127.]
diverted himself when alone sometimes with writing Latin Poems, at other times
with the Histories of [137.]
such as were noted for their Sufferings in former Ages. And for the Three
years and a half, that he was confined, he was the same Man as else where,
excepting that his frequent Law Suits broke his studies often; and it could not
be seen, that he was the least altered in his Health or the pleasantness of his
Temper.

But say some, Williams may thank [135.]
Conditions of Agreement offered him.
himself for his continued Troubles, since he refused the Terms of agreement
that were offered. But who must he thank for those Terms, which left him, if
accepted of, in worse Circumstances than he was in before? If he intends to be
free from any farther vexations in the Star Chamber; First, he must leave his
[136.]
Bishopric and Deanery and all his Commendams, and take a Bishopric in
Ireland or Wales, as his Majesty should think fit. Secondly, he must The Holy
Table, Name and Thing.
recant his Book. Thirdly, secure all his Fine. And lastly never question any
that had been employed by his Majesty against him. To this he answered, that he
was content to lay his Bishopric and Deanery at his Majesty's Feet, but was not
willing to go into Ireland; That he could not recant his Book, which he was
ready to justify; that he would pay his Fine, as fast as he was able; and that
he would not question any Body. Yet all this was not thought sufficient to
atone for him. Then after all, rather than contend with his Sovereign, he
offers to resign all he has in the Church, but still to live in England. And as
for his Book, he was sorry if any thing in it gave offense to his Majesty. But
since he must be stripped of all he had in the Church, he desired to know how
much should be left him of all his Lands and Leases to live upon, that the Fine
gatherers might not have all: And whether his Pension of 2000 Marks a Year and
the 24000 l. in Arears for the same, should be taken in Part for the King's
Payment. The Answer he received was, That Pensions are not paid to Men out of
Favor, as in the E. of Bristol's Case. And as for what should be allowed him
out of his own Estate to live upon, he must not know that till he had wholly
submitted himself. Upon this his Lordship writes to the Earl of Dorset (who
carried these Messages to and fro) That it were a tempting of God, to part with
all he had willingly, and leave himself no Assurance of a Livelihood: That his
Debts, if he came out of the Tower, would cast him into another Prison, no
better Provision being made for them, than he saw appearance of: That he would
never hazard himself into a condition to beg his Bread. And so from this time,
he was resolved to exercise his Patience, and wait a better Day.

After this he heard that the Archbishop The Troubles of the Nation increase.
was like to fall into no small Troubles: and his Majesty's Expedition [137.]
into the North gave our Bishop some respite from his. And when the Articles of
Pacification, made at Berwick, were burnt in London, and Hacket brought the
news of it to the Bishop in the Tower, his Lordship broke out into these Words:
I am right sorry for the King, who is like to be forsaken by his Subjects at
home, but far more by all Kings and Princes abroad, who do not love him. But
for the Archbishop, he had best not meddle with me; for all the Friends he can
make, will be too few to save him. And so it unhappily proved in a short time.
But do you not hope Sir (says Hacket) that such Concussions as you fear will
come to pass, will give you your Peace and Liberty? Possibly (says the Bishop)
they will. And he had drawn up his Case and [110.]
all his Grievances in 20. Sheets of Paper to present it to the Parliament
which met now; but it being Dissolved, A Parl. called An. 1640. Apr. 13.
when it had Sat but Three Weeks, he was prevented in his Design. Which sudden
Dissolution was [137.]
perhaps that which hastened the Ruin of all Things; and against which the Lord
Keeper Coventry had Cautioned his Majesty the Year before with his dying
Breath, desiring that his Majesty would take all Distasts from the Parliament,
Summoned against April, with patience, and suffer it to sit without an unkind
Dissolution.

On the 3d of November the Parliament Another Parl. called and the Bishop of
Lincoln set at Liberty.
Assembled again; and the Bishop of Lincoln Petitions by the Mediation of the
Queen for his Liberty, and to have his Writ to come as a Peer into the
Parliament House; which was opposed by the Lord Keeper Finch (Successor to the
Lord Coventry) and Archbishop Laud. But Lestrange's K. Chapter p. 206.
the Upper House Petitioned his Majesty for him, and on the 16th of November.
sent to the Lieutenant of the [138, 139, 140, 141.]
Tower to Deliver him to their Officer of the Black Rod, who conducted him to
the Parliament, where he sat amongst the Bishops. But he had not been many
Hours in the House, before he was amazed to see such warm Doings, and such
strong and thwarting Interests on foot. The The Bishop's Loyalty.
Disloyal Party thought themselves sure of the Bishop, and that a Man of his
great Spirit would not be unmindful at such a time of his great sufferings,
little thinking that true Magnanimity is above the Baseness of a Revenge; so
that in a Day or Two they perceived they had mistaken their Man, insomuch that
one cried out, We have Conjured up a spirit, I would we could lay him again.
For which Adherence of his to the Wilson's Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 197. A. W. Co.
and Char. p. 176.
King; and closing again when he saw the Axe laid to the Root of Episcopacy,
some have snarl'd at him. His Majesty was soon acquainted with his Loyalty, and
that he did not refrain to fall sharply upon those Lords, to whom he owed his
Releasement, for not speaking dutifully of his Majesty, and of his Actions with
Reverence. Which when the King heard, he sent for him and had conference with
him alone till after Midnight. And to make him some Amends for what was past,
he commanded all Orders Filled up against him to be canceled and eraz'd, that no
memorial of them might remain. But for the Bishop to The Bishop's Charity to
his Enemies,
blot such Things out of his Remembrance, it was the very Perfection of
Generosity; and Nature had given him a comprehensive Memory, retentive of all
Things but Injuries. He was at perfect Charity with all that were so busy and
active against him: and when some were set on to try how he stood affected to
his Prosecutors, he answered, That if they had no worse Foes than him, they
might fear no harm, and that he saluted them with the Charity of a Bishop. And
when Kilvert came to him to crave Pardon and Indemnity for all the Wrongs he
had done; I assure you Pardon (says the Bishop) for what you have done before;
but this is a new fault, that you take me to be of so base a spirit, as to
defile my self with treading upon so mean a Creature. Live still by
Petty-fogging and Impeaching, and think that I have forgotten you.

Thus have I given you a full Account of the Fall of this great Statesman, and
have brought him through all his Troubles and his long Confinement at last to
his Liberty again, though not to that Splendour wherein we have seen him in the
former Reign. Now he is absolutely Sequestered from all his Offices in the
State, being at present not so much as of the Council. So that in the remaining
Scene of his Life, his utmost Endeavors must be to maintain the Character of a
Prelate. And what Troubles shall hence forward befall him cannot properly be
called his, but the Nation's; in which indeed he bore a great share, as an
eminent Member of that Church whose Miseries now began to close her in on every
side. So that what there remains of his Life I shall refer to my Fourth and
last Part.

The End of the Third Part.
An Account of such Actions as more immediately relate to him as a Clergyman
and a Bishop.
PART IV.
HAving related his Actions as a Statesman, I proceed now to give an Account
of him as a Divine. A Character not so full of Pomp, perhaps, nor so dazzling to
the Eyes of the People; but yet, if we seriously consider it, more glorious,
and of an higher nature than the other. And I call him now from the service of
an Earthly Prince, to attend upon the King of Kings, the Lord of Hosts, the
Almighty Creator and Governor of the World.

Some Passages relating to him this A Recollection of some Things in the first
part.
way were mentioned in the First, and the Beginning of the Second Part; where
when Chancellor Egerton died, we left him, (preparing for his Cure at Walgrave)
to carry him on in his Business as in a Lay-Capacity. Now therefore we will
resume him here, and trace him in the Church, from the time of his Removal to
Walgrave in Northamptonshire, quite down to his dying Day.

After he had taken his Doctor's Dr. Williams settles at Walgrave.
Degree in the Year 1617. when the bustle of the Commencement was over, he
retired to his Cure. Where (33.)
he had been at the Expense, before he came, of Building, Gardening and
Planting, so as to make the place fit and pleasant for all seasons of the Year.
So that when he came, he had no preparations to make, but immediately to fall
to the Enjoyment of his Retirement. And to make this complete, and to secure
himself from Laziness (the Disgrace of most retired Persons) he had provided a
choice Collection of Books: to which (34.)
he applied himself so very closely, that nothing but his great Temperance in
his Diet could have pre served his Body from the Decay that his too much
studying must necessarily have brought upon him. Nor was he exemplary to the
Countrey-Clergy only as a Student, but was likewise very Religious in the
Observance of all the other Parts of his duty. For he read Prayers constantly
upon Wednesdays and Frydays, expounded the Catechism in Lent and upon all
Holy Days, and Preached duly Twice every Sunday at Walgrave or at Grafton,
performing his Turn too at Kettering, a Market Town hard by, in a Lecture
supplied by a Combination of the best Divines thereabout. It was a common
saying with him, that the way to get Credit from the Nonconformists was to
out-Preach them. And so well was he liked for (35.)
his Preaching, that his Church used to be thronged with Gentry of the
neighboring Parishes, as well as his own.

What was most remarkable of him His Hospitality at Walgrave.
while he was here, was his generous and open Housekeeping, which was indeed
very commendable in him. This made him very much visited by the Clergy all
about, Rich as well as Poor. The Nobility and Gentry too were fond of him, and
resorted frequently to his House, not for the sake of his Table, but for the
diverting Entertainment his good Consorts of Music afforded them. For he kept
with him the best Voices and Instruments he could get, being one that was
mightily given this way himself. As by these means he laid His Charity.
Obligations upon the Gentelmen, so he purchased the Prayers of the Poor by his
Charity. If any of his Poor Parishioners were sick, he was very constant in
going to visit them, to pray with them and to bless them. And, to help them all
that he could in their Afflictions, he would supply them with Money, and very
often pay their Physicians himself; and would order something that was
comfortable for them out of his own Kitching, as Broths, and Cordial
Decoctions. There are few Instances, I believe, (if any) of those that grew the
poorer for their Charity: Dr. Williams I am sure found it otherwise; for at
this time, to increase yet his plentiful Income (as though it had been so ordered
by Providence to maintain his great Liberality) he had a considerable Legacy
fell to him by the Death of his Kinsman John Panton, Servant at the same time
with him to the Lord Chancellor Egerton: and immediately (36.)
after this he was made Dean of Salisbury: So true is that observation of
Solomon's, the Liberal soul shall be made fat.

But he continued still (though Dean) He discharges well the Office of a Justice
of the Peace.
at Walgrave, the Place where he was so universally respected and beloved. And
what made him the more so, was his Office he had there of being Justice of the
Peace; which he discharged with all the Skill and Conduct, as if he had been
bred up to the Law. As he loved his Country, so he made it his Business to
serve and defend it, and that with all the undaunted Courage imaginable; but
especially if any of the Clergy were oppressed, to be sure he was very active
and resolute in maintaining their Rights. If any private Quarrels and
Bickerings were brought before him, he very rarely granted his Warrant to the
Parties to proceed; but did all he could with Advice and fair speeches to
reconcile them in his Buttery or Cellar: and rather than fail, he would pay the
Damages all or in part, which the injured Person demanded. This doubtless is a
piece of the most Christian-like Charity, that is to be met with in any
Example; to save his poor Neighbors not only from emptying their purses in
vexatious Lawsuits, but likewise to keep them from running into those most
unchristian and devilish passions of Hatred and Revenge, which (God knows)
among such inconsiderate Wretches too often end in Bloodshed and Murder. But he
had not followed this Practice long, before he was in a great Measure forced to
lay it aside, when he found how some Rogues would put upon his good Nature, and
fall out on purpose, that he might be at the Charge of making them Friends.
Which shows that there is not out of Cities so much innocence and primitive
simplicity as some have imagined, and that there are many shrewd
Countreyfellows as cunning and politic in their way, as the Courtiers are in
theirs.

Thus the Dr. continued at Walgrave doing Good, and very much esteemed for
above Two years; when He quits the Deanery of Salisbury for that of
Westminster. See p. 57.
the Deanery of Westminster being at that time void, he requested of his New
Patron the Marquess of Buckingham, that he might exchange the Deanery of
Salisbury for that of Westminster; which was granted to him. Which piece of
Preferment he valued so much the more, because it was near the Court, and so
the fitter for his purpose, who probably had still an Eye to some farther
Advancement. His Predecessors here were (45.)
Men very eminent in their Time: Two above all were such incomparable Patterns,
that it was the height of his Ambition to emulate them; Dr. Andrews for his
great Care and Encouragement of Learning in the School, and Abbot Islip for his
vast Expenses upon the Minster. As soon Takes care of the School at Westminster.
therefore as he was possessed of the Deanery, he took the School into his
Consideration first: and there was scarce a week (when he was in the College)
but he would go to the several Classes and instruct the Lads and take an
Account of them, that so he might countenance and encourage the most hopeful
and those of the best Parts. And seldom it was (even when he kept the great
Seal) that he omitted to call out some of them to stand before him at
Meal-Times (when he was most at Leisure) to give an account of their progress
and Towardliness. Which notice of his repen'd the Youth so fast, that the
Number sent out to both Universities was almost double to those that were
removed in former Elections. Thus he had compassed one considerable Part of his
Desires. And the next Obect of his (46.)
Repairs the Abbey. Heylyn in his Obs. on Chur. Hist. of Brit. p. 273. detracts
from Williams's Magnificence, but is sufficiently answered at [92, 93.]
Elumination was Abbot Islip. To give him the better opportunity to show his
virtue this way, he found the Church in a very great Decay. So he began to
repair it at the South-East part, which looked so much the more ruinous because
it joined to Henry the 7th^'s Chapel, a later Building. In the next place he
proceeded to the North-West part, which looks to the great Sanctuary. This was
very far gone, and the great Buttresses were almost crumbled to Dust through
the injury of the Weather; which he rebuilt with durable Materials, and adorned
them with elegant Statues; among which there was one to the memory of Islip,
and another for his good Master King James, as Part. 2. p. 507.
Sanderson relates in his Reign, though Bishop Hacket says nothing of it. So that
in this Work (all of his own cost) he expended 4500 l. After he had taken care
thus of the Fabric of the Church, he bethought himself of the decent
performance of God's Service in it; and to this End he procured the best Music
both for Organ and Voices, that could possibly be got. After this, he made a
very good Library of a waste room in the (47.)
East side of the Cloisters, furnished it Makes a Library.
with Desks, Chains, Books and other necessaries to the value of 500 l. and
more. And here he laid his choicest Manuscripts and Parchments. Besides these
and other Benefits the College received from his bounty, he discharged a Debt
of 300 l. for them, which he found, when he came to look into their Accounts,
they had contracted by their Entertainments and Treats. Not long after, he
founded Founds four Scholarships.
Four Scholarships, the Scholars distinguished from the rest by their violet
Gowns, for whose maintenance he purchased Lands. And he did not only share his
Riches amongst them here, but likewise, when in those Days a great part of the
Liberties of the City were threatened to be cut off by the Encroachments of the
Lord Steward of the King's Household, and the Knight Marshal, he withstood them
manfully (as appears from a Letter of his to the Cabal. p. 283.
Duke) and would accept of no Composition to let them share in the Privileges,
which by Right they never had, but preserved the Charter of the Place entire in
its Jurisdiction and ancient Immunities. So that he was happy indeed in the
Place, but the Place was abundantly more happy in him.

He had not been Dean long before he was made Lord Keeper, being sworn into
that Office on the 10th of July, 1621. having entered upon his Deanery on the
12th of the same Month in the foregoing Year. And immediately after the Great
Seal was delivered to him he was made Bishop of Lincoln, at which time, so
great was his Favor with the King, that he obtained Three Bishoprics more for
those he recommended to his Majesty. And at this [65.]
July 26. 1621.
very juncture of time it was that that famous Accident happened of Archbishop
Abbot's Killing the L. Zouch's Keeper in Bramshill-Park. Which Mischance
deferred the Consecration of these Bishops for some time; and though his Majesty
(after a long and doubtful Debate amongst the Civilians) did at the last assoil
the unfortunate and innocent Prelate from all Irregularity by the Broad Seal;
yet the scruple [68.]
stuck so much upon the Lord Keeper (as he gives his Judgment of the Fact in a
Letter to the Duke) and upon the Cabal. p. 284.
other Three Bishops Elect, that they besought the King, they might be
conscerated by some other Bishops: and so it was, the Lord Keeper on the Cypr.
Ang. p. 88.
11th of November being Consecrated Bishop of Lincoln, in the Chapel of King
Henry, by virtue of a Commission under the Broad Seal, according to the Statute
of King Henry VIII. But I cannot see how Dr Heylyn could Cypr. Ang. p. 87.
by a favorable Construction gather out of the Keeper's forementioned Letter
to the Duke, that this great Scruple of his proceeded not from his Caution, but
merely from Interest, and that he had the Chair of Canterbury in his Eye,
thinking (as he guesses) to compass it, by declaring the Archbishop Irregular.
Certainly when an Historian is left to his Guesses, he should always incline to
a favorable Interpretation of the Actions of others.

The Lord Keeper by reason of his [86.]
great Employment in the State, could not be spared, to reside upon his Diocese
and have himself an immediate Inspection over his Clergy. But though he was
absent in Body, yet was he present in Mind; and took all the possible Care he
could to have a faithful account, from such able and diligent Persons as he
entrusted, of all Occurrences in every Parish: over and above, he had the Name
of every Parson and Vicar, could tell what they were all of them, as to their
Learning, as well as their manner of Life and Conversation. He did (in short)
as much as a Bishop could do, while for the space of almost Five Years his
service to his King and his Country would not permit him to be resident. And
they knew not that they missed him, till he came to live amongst them, and made
a large Amends for his Absence when he settled at Bugden. But let his Business
be never so great, he was mindful of his Office as a Bishop, and never
neglected Ordinations; every Lent too he preached before the King at his
Chapel, and constantly upon the great Festivals of our Church, at
Westminster-Abbey: on which Days he chanted the Prayers, and administered the
Sacraments. And, it seems, there was but too great need of such Patterns, as
the Bishop was, for preaching in those Times: for the King's Indulgence Wilson.
Hist. Gr. Br. p. 198.
toward the Papists, and the Treaty with Spain going on at the same Time, made
the Pulpits perfectly Declamatory; but above all they rung against the Spanish
Match; insomuch that his Majesty silenced some, impriprison'd some, and
threatened to arraign others for their Lives, had not the Keeper interposed to
mediate for them; upon which he was set on work by his Majesty to draw up some
Directions for the due limiting of the Preachers, in which Bishop Laud too had
a hand, Cypr. Ang. p. 97.
as Dr. Heylyn says. Which Directions, together with his Majesty's Letters to
the Archbishop of Canterbury (bearing Date Aug. 4. 1622.) you may read Wills.
Hist. Gr. Br. p. 198, 199.
at large in several Historians. Which Instructions, how a great many murmured
Cabal. p. 112.
against them then, putting an ill Construction upon what was well meant, you
may see in Dr. Heylyn; Cypr. Ang. p. 99, 100.
to whom I refer you, because at the same Time that he clears the King and
Laud, he likewise vindicates Williams, who according to Hacket, [89.]
was the principal Contriver of that Scheme.

The present posture likewise of the Frankl. Annals, p. 69.
King's Affairs (in the Year 1621.) made him think it convenient, that there
should be Favor shown to the Popish Recusants, and to release the poorer sort
out of Prison; which made the People very uneasy. And our Bishop (then Lord
Keeper) being employed to copy out the King's Letters in this Affair to the
Judges, and to set the Broad-Seal to his Majesty's Writs; he [93.]
was traduced for a Favourer of the Church of Rome; nay so far, by a Ranting
Fellow about the Town, that he was not far from receiving a Cardinal's Cap from
Rome for his Services. When first he heard of this great Scandal, and that one
Sadler was the Author of it, he passed it by with Contempt, and said only, That
the Reporters saw the Oar under Water, and thought it was crooked. Nevertheless
Frankl. Annals, p. 69.
since Offense was taken at this Indulgence to the Papists, the Lord Keeper (to
vindicate his Majesty as well as himself) in a Letter to the [92.]
Lord Viscount Anan, truly satisfies the World as to the Reasons of it; which
Letter is now extant in several Cabal. p. 293.
Books.

But let this one passage suffice, to show how averse the Keeper was to the
Romish Church, and how very jealous he was of their endeavoring to establish
their Church Government amongst us: When Buckingham was with the Prince at
Madrid, he sends him a Letter, dated August 30. 1623. wherein he writes thus:
Dr. Bishop Cabal. p. 298.
the new Bishop of Calcedon, is come to London privately, and I am much
troubled thereabouts, not knowing what to advise his Majesty in this posture,
as things stand at this present. If you were shipped (with the Infanta) the
only Counsel were, to let the Judges proceed with him presently, to hang him
out of the way, and the King to blame my Lord of Cantuar. or my self fot it.
But before you be shipped in such form and manner, I dare not assent, or
connive at such a Course. It is (my Gracious Lord) a most insolent part, and an
Offense (as I take it) against our Common Law (and not the Statutes only, which
are dispensed withal) for an Englishman, to take such a Consecration, without
the King's Consent; and especially to use any Episcopal Jurisdiction in this
Kingdom, without the Royal Assent; and Bishops have been in this State, put to
their Fine and Ransom for so doing, three hundred Years ago.

Add to this, that some of the Romish [94.]
party petitioned my Lord of Buckingham for Titulary Popish Prelates in this
Kingdom; upon which (not knowing well what to think of the Matter) he sends to
the Keeper for his Advice, who immediately with the strongest Reasons he could
urge, put a stop to the Motion. After this, when the Prince [122.]
was in Spain, the Keeper was cried up afresh for a Promoter of the Popish
Interest, thinking (as they falsely urged against him) that a Match with the
Infanta would cause a Toleration of that Religion, and then who likelier to be
preferred than he for his good Services. But a Paper, which at that time he
presented to the King to cure Popular Discontents, shall answer for his
Integrity; which Proposals had been published, had not the long Treaty set in a
Cloud. But the Original Draught of them is now to be seen in B. Hacket. And I
am apt to believe, had his Book been but published, or the several Original
Papers in it, before the Historians of those Times wrote; that Bishop Williams
had escaped abundance of groundless Slanders, excepting we can suppose some of
them obstinately bent to write for a Party, point blank against their Knowledge.

And thus I have (I hope) rescued him from the Imputation of Popery; a Slander,
which it has been the hard Fate of our greatest and worthiest Prelates to suffer
under, occasioned all along by the Superstition of the Vulgar. But I shall
clear him farther yet in this Point, when I shall tell my Reader, That he was
by a far Greater Party judged to be Puritannically given; for I think [95.]
Heylyn's Observat. on the Hist. of K. Chapter p. 137. 138.
our Bishop is the only Person of his Order, that I remember aspersed with two
such contradicting Characters. And I shall therefore labor the more earnestly
to clear him in this point, because The Bp. no Puritan: Proved from several
Arguments.
this last Calumny stuck closer to him. And at this very Day there are a great
many living, that will hardly be brought over to think, the Bishop was a stanch
Churchman at the bottom. So that if I can remove this last Objection, I shall
do not only a piece of Justice to his Lordship's Memory, but likewise some
Service to the Episcopal Order it self: since the World is generally so unjust
in its Censures, as to scandalize a whole Profession, if but one of its Members
fail. And that I may not be thought to proceed out of Prejudice upon this
point, I shall make no use of Authorities, and the good Word of such as were
known to be the Bishop's Friends, but shall compare the Bishop with himself,
and then leave my Reader to judge impartially what the Result may be; and what
Interpretation his Actions will bear, making no Grains of Allowance for either
Balance.

First of all then, let me make an First Argument.
Observation, which though it may at first blush seem but a Trifle, yet if
examined to the bottom may prove of more force than any thing I know has as yet
been urged in his behalf. You may remember in the Second Part, that the King
had ordered him (when he was then but Dean of Westminster) to write a small
Treatise for the use of the Lady Catherine Manners, who being Married to
Buckingham, was newly converted from the Romish Church to ours. In the Letter,
which he sent to the Marquess with some of the Copies, he tells him, that he
translated the Prayers from ancient Writers, that her Ladyship might see, we
have not coined a new Worship, or service of God. Now it is a very fair
Conjecture, that, had he been Fanatically given, he had been apt to betray
himself at so fair an opportunity, and it is odds but the motions of the Spirit
(as they blaspheme) had led him from the reasonable sacrifice of the Ancients
to some Enthusiastical transports of his own. I leave my Reader to improve this
Argument, from the Hint I have given him, while I seek for somewhat else in the
Bishops defense. I pass by his Benefactions to St. John's College in Cambridge,
(no favourer or nursery, I am sure, of Puritans) till I shall have time to give
a more particular Account of those matters.

How great an admirer he was of Second Arg.
our Liturgy, and how forward to promote the credit of it beyond Seas, is
evident from the care he took to have it turned into Spanish and French, when
the Treaties with those two Nations were in agitation. But especially he
retrieved the credit of our Religion with the Spaniards, who before that time
took us for perfect Atheists, and thought that we had cast off all Religion
when we shook off the Pope; and that we never used the Name of God, but
profainly. Insomuch Spotswood Chapter Hist, of Scotland. p. 530.
that the Constable of Castile being sent to swear the Peace formerly concluded
with Spain, when he understood the Business was to be performed in the Chapel,
where some Anthems were to be sung, he desired, that whatsoever was sung, God's
Name might not be used in it, and then he was content they should sing what
they pleased.

I may add here as a great argument Third Arg.
of his Love to our Church, how earnest he was to dissuade the (203, etc.)
Duke of Buckingham from the sale of the Church Lands, which was a thing first
put into his Head and promoted by Dr. Preston; to satisfy whom Bishop Williams
offered to give him his Deanery of Westminster, if he would but desist and urge
the matter no farther to the Duke. He took what care lay in his power too, that
no unworthy Members crept into the Church, and would intercede for Men of Merit
with the Duke, even to the incurring of his Grace's displeasure; Dated Dec. 24.
Jan. 4. 1624. Cabal. p. 304, 305.
as may be seen from Two of his Letters yet extant. But to be sure when he
preferred any himself, they were Men the best qualified for Virtue and (96)
Learning, and well affected to our most excellent Liturgy and
Church Government. All which things may for the present serve to take off the
Reader's prejudice; not but that as we go on he will meet with several hints,
which a Man of Reason may himself improve into so many arguments for the
Orthodoxy of this Prelate. His care to keep Foreign Religions out of the Nation.


I cannot tell where to insert the Two following passages more properly than
here, and that because they seem to have some small relation to what we have
just now concluded upon. The Braziers among the poor distressed Protestants in
Bohemia petitioned King James, for leave to come over into England with their
Wives and Children; upon which condition they would bring along with them their
Substance, to the value of Two hundred thousand pounds, and submit themselves
absolutely with all they had to his Majesty's Customs and Taxes. But then they
desired that they might live in a Body, and have a free Enjoyment of their own
Religion apart from us. His Majesty, thinking it might turn to his Advantage,
was complying; but our Bishop (who was then Lord Keeper) dissuaded him, arguing
from the Example of the Dutch and French, who were settled amongst us. Who
indeed brought advantage by their Manufacture to the Nation; but then the
Discipline, which by virtue of their Patent they transplanted too, did far more
damage to our Church, than they by their Industry could profit the State.

The next thing I would mention He approves not of the High Commission Court.
is with reference to the High Commission Court, in which after he was Dean of
Westminster he always had a Vote amongst others; but so little (97.)
did he relish this Ecclesiastical Court, that all the time he was Dean, he
appeared but once at Lambeth when the Court fate. And he would say, that the
Institution of the Court was without exception good: and that no harm was to be
feared from a good Prince in that Court; but then if God should give us a King
in his Anger, given to oppression, he had a Statute would enable him to act 1.
Eliz. Cap. 1.
wickedness by a Law. And besides this he did not approve of the multiplicity
of Causes that were brought in here, and the severity of the Censures in this
Court. He thought it hard that a Minister should be stripped of all he had, if a
scandalous Crime were proved against him. But above (98.)
all (said he) there is nothing of Brotherhood nor of Humanity in this, when we
have cast a Priest out of doors and left him no shelter to cover his Head; that
we make no provision for him out of his own for Term of Life, to keep him from
the Extremities of Starving or begging, those deformed Miseries. And this is
all that I find remarkable of him as a Churchman till such time as the Great
Seal was taken from him.

So that now we enter upon a fresh From hence forward he has no Office in the
State.
Scene of his Life, which will hold on quite to the End. For from hence forward
we must not consider him in a Mixed Character, because he was no longer in any
Office in the State; and though yet a while, he had the Title of a
Privy-Counseller, yet he was never admitted to the Board. And his Adversaries
by their good Will would not so much as let him sit in Parliament; so that had
he not had courage sufficient to grapple with them, they had deprived him at
this time of his Right of Peerage. For (86.) [28.]
Four years absent from his Diocese.
Four years after his Consecration he had not time, for the multitude, of his
State Affairs, so much as to make his appearance in a Visitation amongst his
Clergy. But nevertheless his Government was such as gave content to his whole
Diocese. He managed all things with the greatest exactness by faithful
Substitutes, who gave him a just account of all things: so that he knew even
the Name and Character of every one of his Clergy, and took care to encourage
the Deserving. And they knew not that they wanted him, till he came now to live
at Bugden, and made them a large Amends for his former Absence. He found the
House here quite out [29.]
Comes to live at Bugden.
of Repair and all Order, and the Place it self indeed not very entertaining,
considering that he came here in the beginning of Winter; for it is but a very
dirty Country for that Season. But in the space of one year he made a good
Dwelling out of a ruinous Pile, and the most costly Furniture he had was the
curious Collection of Paintings he had made. He beautified the Chapel too with
all the Expense it was capable of. After this he planted Woods and Walks,
fenced the Park and stored it with Deer. And he bought in all the Leases
belonging to the Demeasns, which through mis-managment were let out to the very
Gates. His delight lay chiefly in the most innocent Pleasures of Gardening, so
that he was profuse in his Expenses this way, in Arbours, Flowers of the
choicest sort, Orchards, Pools, Fish Ponds, with a Walk raised three foot from
the Ground, of about a Mile in compass pal'd in, and shaded on each side with
Trees; for walking was his chief Exercise, which he used in fair Weather for
two Hours and more every Day.

During the Time he lived here, the [30.]
Divine Service decently performed at his Chapel.
Morning and Evening Service at his Chapel was decently performed, with the
Organ and other Music, and the best Voices that could be procured, the Bishop
himself often bearing a Tenor Heylyn's Observe. on Lestr. Hist. of K. Cha. p. 1
36, etc.
Part amongst them. And the Altar here was as in all Cathedral Churches,
adorned with all things proper, as rich Plate, and other costly Utensils. And
this (notwithstanding a worthy Person has put a different Interpretation on his
Actions) seems a convincing Argument, if you compare the Bishop all along with
himself, that he was in his Heart a great Admirer of Decency in Divine Worship
in the highest Degree; however he might think fit in some Parish Churches to
comply with the Weakness of the People, rather than give Offense to them. And I
know not what will become of Charity and good Nature, if a Man must be counted
of a Party with all those he carries himself civilly and obliging to. I am sure
if Jews and Infidels, deserve gentle usage from Us, those that have a far
nearer Relation to Us, do much more deserve it. But I go on: The Bishop's
passion for Music was so well known, that the greatest Masters resorted to him
from London, especially in the Summertime; to whom he was very liberal in his
Gratifications; to one in particular, a Gentleman of the King's Chapel, he
gave a Lease worth five hundred pounds.

The Concourse that came to the His Hospitality.
Bishop's Chapel was very great; and his Table was for the most part well
filled with Gentry, insomuch that one, who can hardly find in his Heart to
Sanderson's King James par. 2. p. 507. K. Chapter p. 24.
give him a good Word, says, That he lived at Bugden the most Episcopal of any
of his Predecessors. All the great Persons and Nobility that had occasion to
travel that way, would call upon his Lordship, from whom they and their Retinue
were sure of a hearty Welcome, and the best Entertainment. All the Neighboring
Clergy too, nay and the very Yeomanry of Fashion, were free to come to his
Table; and indeed he seldom sat down without some of the Clergy. I need not
mention his Charity to the Poor; for if he was so careful of them when he was
Rector at Walgrave, to be sure he did not take less care of them now he was
Bishop, and more he could not well take. Of all things he did not love to live
sparingly, and seclude himself from good Conversation: And it was his Saying,
That he would spend his own while he had it; for he thought his Adversaries
would not permit him long to enjoy it. And while some [32.]
thought his Magnificence would run him into Debt, he was provident enough to
look after his own Concerns, and to keep within Bounds, though they were very
large ones.

Had the Bishop not lived in the His pleasant Conversation.
Plenty with which GOD had blessed him, yet his Discourse and Artful way of
suiting himself to his Guests was so very entertaining, that he was not like to
be much alone. The Men of Wit and Learning from Cambridge and Oxford, made him
frequent Visits, so that very often, take the Company and Entertainments
together, Bugden might resemble one of the Universities in Commencement-Time.
And when he had Scholars about him, and such Company as could relish his
Discourse, he would very often keep them up till Midnight, or later. But I must
not forget one Thing of which he was always mindful at his Table. At Dinner a
Chapter was read in the English Bible, by one of the Choiristers, and at Supper
another in Latin by one of his Gentlemen, for there was none of them but had at
least so much Learning.

And this leads me naturally to speak The Government of his Family.
of the Government of his Family; in which perhaps he was something too remiss,
not out of any Neglect, or [37, 38.]
that he loved Disorder; but because he was not severe enough in punishing his
Servants for their Faults. For a small Repentance would very often with him
atone for a considerable Misdemeanour, which proceeded from a Good-natured
Opinion he had, that there was some hopes in time even of the worst of Men, and
that none were so bad, but that they had some Good in them. Hence it was that
he would chide very loud and angrily, but seldom proceeded any farther. But yet
he discarded one or two that were incorrigible in their Disorders, and one for
his Treachery, in transcribing some of his Letters, which he found in his
Study, and sending them to his Enemies, to make their Advantage of them. But we
must consider that his Lordship's Retinue was great, and not a few of them Sons
to very good Men, which were preferred to wait upon him, not for the sake of
Wages, but for the Advantage of being in a good Family. And these would not
take it well to be kept under so much as the other Servants. These
considerations do alleviate (though not excuse) what some laid to the Bishop's
Charge, that he knew better how to keep himself blameless, than those he had
about Is censured for having Plays acted.
him. But what some censured him for, was, his permitting a Comedy to be acted
once or twice before him in his Hall; nay, and upon a Sunday Heylyn's Obs. on
the Chapter Hist. of Brit. p. 243.
Evening, upon which he had Ordained too, as one affirms; which Circumstance,
if true, I wonder how it came to be omitted by the Author of his Life, who
doubtless knew the Bishops private Actions the best of any Man. And he affirms,
That Lincoln did no more in recreating himself with such Diversions, then he
had seen that Grave Prelate Archbishop Bancroft do at Lambeth. And all that B.
Williams answered, to such as objected against his pleasant way of Living when
he was in Disgrace, was, That he knew His Caution to avoid Scandal.
not what he had done, to live the worse for their sakes, that did not love
him. And we may believe, that if he thought there was any ill, or any real
occasion for Offense in what he did, that he would have abridg'd himself in his
Diversions; for he was nicely [35.]
scrupulous of any thing that he could in Charity suppose might be turned into
a Scandal: for which reason, being himself Unmarried, he kept only Men Servants
in his House. But nothing (36.)
Young Nobility educated in his Family.
can be said more in praise of the Bishop's Family, than that it was the
Nursery of several Noblemens Sons: Those of the Marquess of Hartford, of the
Earls of Pembroke, Salisbury and Leicester, with many other Young Gentlemen
about an Age, whereof some were his Relations, and his Contrymen. These had
Tutors, of whom the Bishop took an Account, how their Pupils improved in Virtue
and Learning. And to those that were in a manner fit for the Universities,
before he sent them from him, he read himself a brief System of Logic; which
Lectures even his own Servants frequented, that were capable of such
Instructions. But his principal Care was, that they should be thoroughly
grounded in the Principles of Religion; for which reason he committed not a
Trust of so great Importance wholly to his Chaplain, but every Lent examined
them every one from the Person of the highest Quality to the meanest Servant,
in the Fundamental Questions of the Catechism.

The Magnificence of his Hospitality [33.]
His Liberality.
shows that Bishop Williams was free-hearted and generous; but if we add to
this his great Liberality to Gentlemen of narrow Fortunes, and to poor hopeful
Scholars in both Universities, we shall hardly be able to find his equal. For
his Disbursements this way every year amounted to a Thousand, sometime to
Twelve hundred pounds. Wilson's Hist. of Gr. Brit. p. 197.
And there is a remarkable Instance in History of his Bounty, which I will
insert here. When Monsieur de Molin (a Famous Minister) fled over into England
in the Time of the Persecution in France; the Bishop hearing of him, ordered
his Chaplain Dr. Hacket to make him a Visit from him. And guessing that he
might very probably be in want, he bids him carry him some Money, not naming
any sum. Upon which Hacket said, that he could not give him less than Twenty
Pound. I did demurre upon the Sum (says the Bishop) to try you: is Twenty Pound
a fit Gift for me to give a Man of his Parts and Deserts? Take an Hundred, and
present it from me, and tell him he shall not want, and I will come shortly and
visit him my self. Which afterward he did, and was as good as his Word in
supplying his Wants while he was in England. Athenae Oxon. Vol. 1. p. 400.
I may mention here how great a Patron he was to his Countreyman John Owen the
Epigrammatist, whom he maintained for several years; and when he died, he
buried him An. 1622.
and erected a Monument for him at his own cost. Upon which generosity of his
to this little Poet, one Rich. Bruch. Epig. Hecaton.. Octavo. Numb. 3. David
Lloyd's Life of Williams. Printed with Cleaveland's Poems.
of the Fraternity has composed an Epigram. There was hardly an ingenious
Person in England, but what he encouraged; and that very wretch that wrote so
infamous a Libel on this Bishop, had often experienced his Liberality; so that
here I must clear Mr. Cleaveland from the scandal of it; for, not to mention
that some Authors do acquit him, I am over and above informed from a Worthy
Person now living, who has discoursed with some of Mr. Cleaveland's Friends,
that he ever disowned the Satyr in his Poems against the Archbishop of York.

We have had occasion before to His Expense upon public Works.
mention what vast Sums this Bishop laid out upon Works of Magnificence and
Building; but yet we have [34.]
not mentioned how he rebuilt the ruinous Palace of Lincoln, and brought it in
Three years Time up to as great Strength and Beauty as it was in at first. And
because the Place was remote from any helps to Learning, he designed a Library
there; Timber was hewn out, Books bought, and other Benefactions ready, but the
Founder's Troubles, coming thick now upon him, put a stop to the proceedings;
the Books were squandered away, and the Soldiers took the Timber to make
Fortifications. To Wood. Antiq. Oxon. p. 171.
these great Works of his we may add, the repairing of one side of Lincoln
College in Oxford, where the Bishop of Lincoln is their Visitor; and the
building of a most elegant Chapel for them. All which considering them to be
done by the Bishop after his Fortunes began to decline, show that, had his
Power been but equal to his Will, his public Benefactions had equaled those of
most Princes.

Having spoken of his Hospitality, his Charity and his Magnificence, we will
now consider him more immediately in his Episcopal Functions. And to mention
first the Example [39.]
that he gave to all his Clergy by his He Preaches frequently.
Preaching, his great frequency wherein made some set him out to the King as an
upholder and encourager of Non-Conformists; which did not at all make him
slacken his diligence, for he expected his praise from God, and not from Men.
And from this [41.]
His Ordinations.
Principle, I suppose, proceeded the great care he took in his Ordinations,
without any respect of Persons, to lay hands only upon such as were duly
qualified. Their Morals he could only judge of by the recommendations and
testimonials of others; but their Intellectuals he would [42.]
soon fathom, and measure the Compass of their Learning; and he would not admit
any so much as to the Office of a Deacon, that was not a Graduate with us, or
in Ireland or Scotland, and his Answer to them was, that it was not his Custom.
But so scrupulous was he as to their Competency in the Knowledge of Divine
Matters, that when one that was a Minister, a Mr. of Arts and a Wit too, was
presented to a considerable Living, when he perceived the small stock he had of
Learning, he would not give him Institution, till he had set him for three
Months to read a System of Divinity. In those that he himself preferred neither
Friends nor Favor nor any other consideration biased him. But commonly he was
a Patron to such as never sought him; such whose humility obscured their Worth.

In the Beginning of King Charles's His moderation.
Reign there broke out a Division among the great Men of our Church, some
approving and some disapproving of the Conclusions of the Synod of Dort. Which
perhaps would never have risen to such a ferment, had things been carried with
more indifferency, and had deserving Men on both sides (without regard to
Parties) been encouraged. This was always the opinion of our Prelate, who
proposed for his Pattern Whitgift, Bancroft, Harsnet, Andrews, Barlow, Overal,
and such like, who pleased all sides indifferently. Hence it is [43.]
that he was affable and kind to the Puritans, whom first he won upon by
kindness, and then would bring them over by his Arguments. And he told his
Majesty too, that he took it to be the truest Policy, to buy over some of the
Leaders of that Party to the Church with some good Preferments, that so they
might bring their Followers with them.

To bring him now into his Courts; His Courts well ordered.
his knowledge in the Laws of the Land, the Civil and the Canon Law, qualified
him excellently to discharge his duty there punctually. He used to lament the
narrow bounds the Civilians had for their Practice, and the small Encouragement
for their Studies; but then he told them, that unless they proceeded with great
integrity in their Courts, their Little would soon come to nothing. He watched
his Officers narrowly, that they were not exacting in their Fees, and would not
suffer them to make Business expensive hy needless delays; nor would he trust
his Chancellor and Commissaries in a Cause of any moment, but always took it
in hand himself. And so willing was [44.]
he to right the People and to ease them from all possible Trouble, that he
would often ride to those Parts of his Diocese that were farthest from his
Home, to keep his Court, where such as had Causes to come on might be at hand
to attend them. And he would not suffer the Churchwardens to be cited about
placing the Communion Table, nor the People for not coming to the Rail to
receive the Sacrament. Whereas the Practice of Laud was quite contrary, who
required a strict confirmity in all Things.

I shall not dwell here upon his [47, to 61.]
Consecration of Churches, nor give a particular Account of his two Visitations
His Visitations. An. 1629.
in this Diocese; in the first of which he discovered an Imposture, that
pretended to Inspiration at St. Ives in Huntington-shire; and in the second it
is worth the Readers while (that has so much leisure for his diversion) to see
how he was entertained at a Religious Family of the Farrars at Litle-Giding in
the same County, and how kindly he encouraged them to persist in the Service of
God. Nor shall I mention here the circumstances of his triennial Visitations
over the whole Diocese, and the Charges delivered by him at such Times; one of
which given at Bedford, in the end of the Year 1634 you may read at large in
Bishop Hacket, together with what things I mentioned before. But this let me
add before Is much resorted to in Differences and in scruples of Conscience.
I have done with his Episcopal Functions, that there was no Prelate more
frequented than he was, to compound Differences, and to make up Agreements,
which else might have broke out into expensive Lawsuits; and to settle Cases
of Conscience, and those mostly in Matrimonial Scruples. And when he thought
[62.]
the doubting Person would not be satisfied with Discourse, he was at the
trouble of drawing up his Resolutions at length in Writing for him. Which
gathered together, and digested as I have seen them (says Bishop Hacket) would
have made a very handsome Treatise.

And since I have mentioned his Undertakes a Comm. on the Bible.
Writing, I will insert here, That although while he was immersed in
State Affairs, he had not the leisure of a Writer; yet when he was retired to
his Bishopric, he undertook Two very great Designs for the Public. The First
was a Comment in Latin upon [40.]
the whole Bible; at which Work he studied so hard, as to impair his Health
very much. The Notes collected from all good Authors, with the Bishop's own
Hand, were formerly to be seen in the Custody of Mr. Gouland, Keeper of
Westminster-College Library. And his Lordship knowing well, that to perform
such a Task completely was above the Abilities of any one Man, he did intend to
leave it to be finished by Twelve or more of the best Scholars in the Nation,
whom he had in his Eye, and was willing to give them Twenty Thousand Pounds
rather than it should be left unfinished. The next And to publish Bp.
Grostead's Works, who flourished in the Reign of Hen. VII. Athen. Ox. p. 5.
Baleus de Script. Brit. Cent. 4. nu. 18.
thing he entered upon was to publish the Works of his Predecessor Robert
Grosthead, who wrote several Books against the Ambition and Covetousness of the
Church of Rome. These being in Manuscript, and scattered up and down, the
Bishop searched all the Libraries Foreign and Domestic where he had any
correspondence, and digested what he could get of them, and wrote Arguments
upon diverse Parts of them. But whilst he expected more daily of the same
Author, his Troubles in the Star Chamber coming on, they put a stop to both
these great Undertakings of his. Of which Troubles we have spoken before, and
how at last he was released from the Tower, and how generously he forgave his
Enemies. So that now we fall in again in the order of Time with the Conclusion
of the former Part, where we left him in the Year 1640.

It was not now a time for an Honest His Endeavors to serve the King.
Man to busy himself about his own private Injuries, when the public Interest
of the whole Nation lay at stake; which wholly took up the Bishop's Thoughts.
So that he made no delay to practice all the Arts and Contrivances he could
think of, to reduce the murmuring Scots, if possible to some Terms of
Agreement. He applies [143.]
himself in the first place to James Marquess of Hamilton (whose Acquaintance
he industriously shunned before) and advises with him what Methods were best to
make the Scots Loyal. But yet he used him sparingly and with Caution, because
he did not well know what to make of the Man; only he said, That he found him
quite contrary to the Vulgar Opinion, by which he was reputed False and
Cunning; for he thought him true in his Affections to the King, and so far from
being Cunning, that he rather seemed to want a Reach. In the next place, his
Lordship insinuates himself into Henderson, and some of his Crew; he makes
Presents to them, feasts them, tenders what Pay the King could afford to their
Leaders. But the House of Commons (knowing as well as he what Mettle the Scots
were made of) out-bid him quite, and voted such a Sum of Money by way of
Brotherly Assistance, as the King was not able to come up to, much less to
surpass. Therefore when this failed, the Bishop attacks them after another
Manner. He desires that they would not quarrel with the Church of England, but
remember what Vows their Kirk had An. 3. Eliz.
made, never to molest the Peace of this Nation. And this staggered some of
that Faction; but the Gold on the other side at last quite overweigh'd his
Lordship's Arguments, and rendered them ineffectual. So that now [144.]
he tries how he can work upon the Presbyterians, with whom he was more in
Favor than any other Bishops. He urged his Reasons to them so prudently, and
wrought upon them with the Spirit of Meekness, in such a soft engaging way,
that they could not but have a great Esteem for him, though of another side; and
they did all they could with the greatest Offers they had, to buy him over to
theirs. Some of them (when they saw how candid he was) made their Complaints to
him of the Severity of the Ecclesiastical Courts, and of the rough usage they
met with from some of the Prelates, upon which he excused the Matter; but still
pleaded for Episcopacy, and Church Government. As [145.]
far as Charity would allow, he would hear them discourse their Points civilly,
but when he saw, That they aimed more at a regulated Crown, than at a regulated
Mitre, he would bear no longer with them. But in the Committee [146, 147.]
Mar. 1. 1640. Laud's Troub. p. 174. Cypr. Ang. p. 472. Fuller's Chapter Hist, B.
XI. p. 174.
of Lay and Clergymen for the Church Affairs, where the Bishop of Lincoln had
the Chair, he behaved himself so much to the Content of the Nonconformists,
that they admired his Conduct and his Curtesy.

While the Affairs of the Nation were in this Disorder, and the Bishop [148,
149.]
was daily consulted in Matters of Consequence; The Trial of the E. of
Strafford.
he was at the same time taken up too with some Considerations preparative to
the Trial of the most Noble, and most Unfortunate Earl of Strafford; which was
the most Lestrang. K. Chapter p. 219.
Pompous and Magnificent Scene of Judgment that was ever represented in this
Island. This Great Man's Troubles gave Lincoln Occasion to show his Abilities
in Two Points: First, about the Circumstance of the Examination of the Cause:
Secondly, whether at this Earl's Trial, the Bishops might be admitted to vote
amongst the Peers, it being a Case of Blood. To which he determined, that
Bishops in England might and ought to vote [150, etc.]
in such a Case. I omit the Transcription of his Reasons and Arguments upon
both these Heads, and leave it to every Man to consult them as he thinks fit.
But for all his Opinion declared, the Bishops were not present at the Trial.

But it is objected against the Bishop [160.]
The Bishop blamed about the Earl of Strafford.
of Lincoln, that though he pleaded strongly in Parliament to his own Peril, in
behalf of the Earl of Strafford, yet he persuaded the King to consent to his
Death. It is my business to relate the Matter briefly and fairly, and let it in
all its Circumstances plead for it self; for if they cannot excuse it, I am
sure it is not fitting I should. How much the most [161.]
Incomparable Strafford was the Hatred of a Turbulent and Mutinous People may
be seen in all the Historians that mention him: As likewise how very Clamorous
they were for his Life, and how vehemently they thirsted after his Blood. The
Commons they were resolved their Sentence past upon him should stand, and they
would have his Head before they proceeded one step further in the Affairs of
the Nation. The very Person of the King was in danger, if he withstood them;
nay, and there was a Plot on foot against the Earl, in case the King refused to
sign the Bill for his Beheading; for they were resolved to have him one way or
other. When the Brave Earl heard this, he wrote to the King, That he was well
prepared for his End, and would not his Gracious Majesty should disquiet
Himself to save a ruined Vessel that must sink. So there appearing no Hopes at
all of saving him, the House of Lords send Four Bishops, Usher, Morton,
Williams and Potter, to advise his Majesty in this Difficulty, and to
deliberate whether in Conscience he might yield to the obstinate Clamours of
the People. And they state the Question thus to Heylyn's Resp. Petr. p. 149.
etc.
the King: Since his Majesty refers his own Judgment to his Judges, and they
are to answer it, if an Innocent Person suffers; why may he not satisfy his
Conscience in the present Matter, that since competent Judges in the Law had
awarded, That they found the Earl guilty of Treason, to suffer that Judgment to
stand, though in his own Mind he was satisfied that the Lord Strafford was not
criminous? The Four Bishops gave their Opinions in the Affirmative, laying the
Blame wholly on the Judges; and the Noble Earl was so far from taking it ill,
that the Lord Primate assisted him in all his Preparations for a Better Life,
and was with him on the Scaffold to the very last Moment of his Life. This is
the plain Matter of Fact, so far as I can see, without Surmises on the one side
or the other. But a certain Sanderson's K. Chapter p. 415, 416.
Historian, that relates things false as often as true, tells us, That the
Bishop of Lincoln played a base Trick, and put a Paper into the King's Hand
privately, which did the Earl's Business Heylyn's Resp. Petr. p. 153, etc.
for him: the absurdity of which Narration was sufficiently evidenced before;
but since there has been a greater insight into the Matter, and [162.]
it is well known that the Paper, which the Bishop put into his Majesty's Hand,
was only his humble Advice, to persuade him not to pass the Bill for a
Perpetual Parliament. And but two Days before, he asked the King, If his wise
Father would have suffered such a Thing as an Indefinite Parliament to be
demanded, much less have granted it? And, Whether it would be possible for his
truest Subjects to do him Service any more? But yet for all On Monday Morning
the 10. of May, 1641.
this, with the same Drop of Ink he signed the Bill for this Parliament, and
for Strafford's Execution; as if it were impossible his Royal Prerogative
should stand, when Wentworth the great Prop of it was fallen.

Now the King prepares for a Journey [163.]
Baker's Chron. 6. August. The Bishop advises the K. not to go to Scotland.
into Scotland to appease the Seditious there. But the Bp. of Lincoln entreated
his Majesty to put off his Journey thither for the present; and to consider,
That the Scotch would reveal all he did or said amongst them to their Partners
at Westminster, with whom they held a mutual Correspondence: That they had been
tumultuous now for two Years, and that to pacify them on a sudden was a thing
impossible in all probability. They have been rebellious so lately, that it is
too soon to offer them Courtesy; and they knowing in what Condition your
Majesty is, will take it not for Kindness, but for Fear. Keep near to the
Parliament, all the Work is within those Walls; do what you can to win them Man
by Man. And Sir (continues he) I wish what I shall tell you were not true; Some
of the Commons are preparing a Declaration to make the Actions of your
Government odious: Stir not till you have mitigated the Grand Contrivers with
some Preferments. But is this credible? says the King. Judge you of that, Sir,
(replies the Bishop) when a Servant of Pym's (in whose Master's House all this
is molded) came to me, to know of me in what Terms I was contented to have my
own Case in Star Chamber exhibited among other Irregularities. And I had much
ado to keep my Name, and what concerns me, out of these Quotations: but I
obtained that of the Fellow, and a Promise to know all they have in
Contrivance, with some Money that I gave him. But the King never regarded the
Bishop's Advice: and indeed his Majesty could not endure to be near
Westminster, if he could help it; for one of the Bedchamber has been heard
say, That nothing made him remove so far from his Court and Council, as the
tediousness of Intelligence brought to him every Minute, with variety of
Glosses and Opinions upon it.

While the King was in the North, [164, 165, 166.]
the Miseries of the Church began to The Bishop visits his Diocese in the
troublesome Times.
increase. But notwithstanding the universal Contempt of Episcopacy at this
time, Lincoln visited his Diocese in October in his own Person; which was the
last Visitation, during those unhappy Times, in either Province. He saw there
was great need at present to confirm and to strengthen the People, and to heal
the many Divisions, that were daily made amongst them. But as soon as he had
finished his Task, and was returned again to sit in Parliament, he heard a
Murmuring against him in the Lower House, not only for visiting his Diocese, in
such unsettled Times, but likewise because he had told the People in diverse
places, That no Power could protect them against the Statutes still in force,
that fell into Disorders and Deviations against them. So earnestly did the
Bishop urge the People to a Conformity with the Church by Law Established. And
to clear himself, at a Conference between the Two Houses in the
Painted-Chamber, he justified his Visitation and his Endeavors, to silence
unlicenc'd Preachers, who were as bold, as if they were subject to no
Government at all.

And now on the 26th of Nov. the King The King returns from Scotland.
came again to London from Scotland; and the Bishop of Lincoln, as at other
Times, so now had the misfortnne to have his Foresight of Things confirmed by
the Event. He had forwarn'd his Majesty of ill Designs, and of that
Remonstrance, which the Commons published on the 15th of December, by the
Baker's Chron.
Name of A Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, wherein all the Trips and
false Steps (in their Judgment) committed by his Majesty since he came to the
Crown, and before, to that very Time, were represented with most undutiful and
malicious Aggravations. Besides this, at his coming [167]
home, he found his Clergy and his The Parl. set against the Bishops.
Bishops in a fair way to be trampled under foot, and the Parliament were
resolved to sit it out, till they had accomplished their Designs; which were,
to seclude the Clergy from all Secular Affairs, and to vote the Bishops out of
the Parliament House. His Majesty saw the Danger of this even to Himself, and
did all he could to patronize the Bishops; and at this Time preferred some
Worthy Men to vacant Bishoprics: and among the rest translated Lincoln to the
Archbishopric Bishop of Lincoln translated to York.
of York, and gave him leave to hold the Deanery of Westminster in Commendam
for three Years longer, that he might have a place of Residence near the
Parliament; his Majesty expecting that it could not continue much longer than
that. But the Parliament held on much longer, and the Bishop never after one
half year saw his Deanery more.

His Grace proved all along in this York defends the Bishops in Parliament.
Fuller's Chapter Hist. B. XI. 226.
Parliament a stout and an able Champion for the Bishops not with standing the
great Affronts and strong Oppositions they met with. And so remarkable was his
zeal for them, that when his Majesty once saw him so very earnest to defend
Episcopacy then opposed by the Parliament, My Lord (says the King) I commend
you, that you are no whit daunted with all Disasters, but are zealous in
defending your Order. Please it your Majesty (replies the Archbishop) I am a
true Welshman, and they are observed never to run away, till their General do
first for sake them. No fear of my flinching whilst your Majesty does
countenance our Cause. And in [168.]
the foregoing May when the Privileges of the Bishops were called in Question,
Willams in a Committee of the Lords stood up for his Brethren and maintained
their Cause in a long Speech, which may be seen all faithfully transcribed out
of his own Copy. So that he laid the design of [176, etc.]
bringing a Bill against them asleep for five Months, till this time when it
began to come again into play. And now about Christmas the Mob Hollis,
Haslerig, Hamden, Pym and Strode.
was all in an uproar about the King's coming to the House of Commons to demand
their Five Members impeached for Treason. After they had The Archbishop
defends Westminster. Abbey from the Mob.
made a Tumult for some time about Whitehal, the cry went for Westminster, and
the general Voice was, Let us pluck down the Organs, and deface the Monuments.
When the Archbishop Fuller's Chapter Hist. B. XI. p. 185, 186.
of York (who was Dean of Westminster) heard of this, he made fast the Doors of
the Abbey against them; and when they would have forced them open, they were
beaten off with stones from the top of the Leads; the Archbishop in the mean
time maintaining the Abbey with a few more, for fear the Rabble should seize
upon the Regalia, which were in that Place under his Custody. But within an
hour, after the Multitude had been sufficiently pelted with stones from above,
a few of the Archbishop's Men opened a door and rushing with their drawn
Swords, dispersed them all. But from this Time the Bishops durst not come near
the Parliament House either by Land or Water, the Passages were so beset
against them, and they so vehemently threatened by the People.

Upon this the Archbishop with The Protestation of the Bishops. December. 27.
Eleven more of his Brethren meet the next day in his Lodgings. There he draws
up a Petition and Protestation, first to crave Protection, and upon want
thereof a positive Declaration, that whatsoever was done at the Lords House
during their forced and involuntary Absence was invalid, and of none Effect.
The other Bishops relying upon York's great Knowledge in the Laws, did at his
Request set their Hands to it. And the Lord D. Lloyd's Life of Williams.
Keeper when he saw it, did profess, That it was the strongest and the fullest
of Law of any that ever he saw in his Life: For the Bishop had modeled it
exactly by one of the same nature that he had found in the Records of the
Tower, which he studied there, to the no small Prejudice of his Eyes.

On the 30th of December the Petition The Bishops sent to the Tower. Nalson's
Collect. Vol. 2. p. 794, etc.
was read in the House, and the Bishops thereupon accused by the Commons of
High Treason, For endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental-Laws of this Realm,
and the Being of Parliament, by preferring this Petition and Protestation. And
upon this Accusation, they were committed to the Tower, where they must remain
for 18 Weeks. Now the Archbishop of Cypr. Ang. p. 492.
Canterbury, who had been in the Tower for some time, had a better
Neighborhood than he desired, but no better Company than before; for on both
sides they were agreed not to converse, lest their Enemies should be
exasperated at it, thinking they might plot together. But they often sent to
one another Messages of Love and Consolation. Which mutual Civilities were Laud
and Williams reconciled.
scarce omitted for so much as a Day betwixt the Two Archbishops,
notwithstanding all their great Differences before. So that whatever the former
Scene of their Life was, the concluding Act was nothing but Peace and Love; a
signal Instance both in Buckingham and in Laud, of the good Providence of that
GOD, which makes Men to be of one Mind.

Never sure were any Pack of the The Bishops libelled.
blackest Villains so servily treated, and so abused, as were the Bishops at
this Time. Whole Reams of Paper were wasted in Scurrility and Scandal upon
them, adapted to the Capacity of the Vulgar. One Notable Ballad among Nalson's
Coll. vol. 2. p. 807.
the rest, the Reader may see yet extant, which was made for a Newyears-Gift
for the Bishops, upon their being committed to the Tower. And Cypr. Ang. p. 492.
the Archbishop of York in particular was now as deep in the Hatred of the
Common People, as was the Archbishop of Canterbury. His Picture was cut in
Brass in his Episcopal Robes, with his square Cap on his Head, Bandileers about
his Neck, (with reference to his Defense of the Abbey) and a Musket on his
Shoulder, with a Rest in his Hand; and abundance of other Buffoonery, which
made him merry with the Conceit of it.

While the Bishops were thus secured The Bill passes for excluding the Bishops
from Parl.
in the Tower, and scarce any body left to speak in their behalf, then the Bill
against them was brought in, and on the the Sixth of February it passed
currently in the House of Lords. For which they Themselves after suffered in
the same sort from the Commons, as the Bishops did now from them: The Lords
Temporal deprived the Bishops of their Right, and the Commons they excluded the
Lords Temporal from theirs. Which Consequence might have been foreseen had they
listened to the Marquess of Dorchester, who upon the 21. of May asked his
Peers, Which of your Lordships can say he shall continue a Member of this
House, when at one Blow Six and Twenty are cut off?

There was nothing now wanting The King signs the Bill.
to ratify the Exclusion of the Bishops from the Parliament, and all Secular
[181.]
An. 1642.
Affairs, but the Consent of the King. For which Consent of his several have
accounted several ways; some urging Necessity, some the hopes of appeasing the
Nation by it for the present, till he saw a fitter time to restore the Bishops
again. But my Author gives us this Narration of the Matter. When the King went
with the Queen to Dover, to see her take Shipping for France, the Queen (whom
his Majesty loved entirely) would not leave him till he signed this Bill
against the Bishops; and what made her so urgent, was, that she was persuaded
into an Opinion by Sir John Culpepper (who attended there for that Dispatch)
that the Lords and Commons would press his Majesty no more so much against the
Grain, if this one Bill were but signed; upon which hopes the King complied.
And York told me (says Hacket) in the Tower, That the King had sacrificed the
Clergy to this Parliament, by Artifices contrived at Dover, a Day before the
News was brought to London. Fuller's Chapter Hist, B. XI. p. 195.
And this Relation seems to agree (bating the Circumstance of the Place) with
one Author more, who says the Bill was signed at Canterbury; as likewise Cypr.
Ang. p. 493.
does Dr. Heylyn, on the 14th of February. But upon the 5th of May P. 498. The
Bishops released from Prison.
the Bishops were released from the Tower, upon Bail, by the Peers, and dismissed
to their respective Dwellings: [182.]
at which Time York went privately away after the King, and never returned
again. So that from henceforward he enjoyed nothing but Trouble to his very
dying Day. Which makes me pity him the more, because his Miseries now took the
Advantage of him: For Adversity which is in a manner but necessary to lay a
dead weight upon the Extravagancies of Youth, and to Discipline the
unexperienced, is of no real Advantage to Age, and added to the Burden of
Years, must needs prove intolerable.

Now the King was in York, and the The ABp. follows the King to York.
Archbishop with several other Lords and Gentlemen, came here to offer their
Service to his Majesty; amongst whom no Man was readier than his Grace with his
Assistance. This was the first time he had seen his Bishopric, which was
conferred upon him about 7 Months before; and wherein he promised himself much
Satisfaction, by settling here, and living amongst the Gentry of this County,
in the Splendour and Hospitality suiting his Dignity. But the common Fate of the
Nation grew too apparent, to encourage any such hopes now, and things were so
imbroil'd, that he could never settle his Family here. But to proceed with the
Affairs [185, 186.]
in which Williams was so much concerned; no Man being more active to the
utmost of his Abilities, to serve the King in this County.

The King had at Hull a Magazine The King is denied Entrance at Hull.
of Arms and Ammunition, which was first provided for the late intended War
against the Scots, and lay there ever since. His Majesty intended to Baker's
Chron.
possess himself of this Town, and to make use of his own Arms and Ammunition
for his Preservation; but coming before the Gates of the Town, he was denied
Entrance by Sir John Hotham, who by Orders from the House of Commons had newly
taken Charge of that Place. Upon this the King proclaiming him a Traitor, was
forced to retire, and bear the Indignity, for the Parliament would give him no
Redress. But the Hothams the Father and Son, made a Sally out of the Town
after, with a Design to take Cawood-Castle, The ABp. at Midnight makes his
Escape from Cawood-Castle.
where the Archbishop was. Late at Night the sad News was brought to his
Grace, that he must remove thence, and leave the Country, as he tendered his
Life; for Young Hotham was preparing to come with sufficient Force by five a
Clock next Morning to take the Castle, and had drawn his Sword in a hectoring
manner, with a Vow to cut off the Archbishop's Head. Upon this, his Grace
knowing the Temper of the Man, and that he had spoke much against him for his
Disloyalty, and the Castle being ruinous and unfortified, he makes his escape
thence after Midnight, with some few Horse, and what Goods he could carry off
at so short a Warning, and left the Charge of the Castle to Mr. Roger
Nightinggale, a Gentleman of the King's Chapel. Thus was he forced to leave
his [187.]
Diocese, without any Provision for his Journey, without a Sumpter, without
change of Apparel, and almost without Money; for all he could gather among his
Tenants, while he was in Yorkshire, was little enough to furnish the King. But
he had the good He meets the King in his way.
Fortune to meet his Majesty in the way, raising an Army, and beating up for
Volunteers, in whose Service the Archbishop left the stoutest of his Followers,
and kept but a very slender Retinue to follow him. At parting, upon his bended
Knee (with Tears streaming from his Eyes, and hearty Prayers for his Majesty,
he kissed his Hand, and received a Pass from him, to carry him safe into his
own Country.

So now the Archbishop was come He arrives at Aberconway in Wales.
to Aberconway in Caernarvonshire, from whence he had been absent (except it
were an accidental Visit, or so) for [208.]
near fifty Years. And never did any People stand in greater need of a Wise and
Courageous Person, to advise and to protect them, than the Welsh did at this
Time; and no Man more proper for such an Undertaking than the Bishop. Who was
very watchful in the first place, to detect such as held private Intelligence
with the Enemy, several of which he secured, and made the rest fly for it. And
to procure the Blessing of GOD upon his Endeavors; he set all North Wales upon
a more earnest practice of their Religion, and ordered that frequent Prayers
should be had in all Churches, with Fasting, and that Ministers should preach
weekly, and no Man was oftener in the Pulpit than himself. After this, he made
it his Business to unite all the Great Families in one common Interest, whose
Emulation otherwise toward one another had drawn them off from the Service of
the King. And for this Reason, he thought it might be most convenient, if he
could get the Country all together, to fortify one place, and to appear in a
Body, by which means they would be more secure, and more manageable too. Which
thing at last he effected, and of which I shall give a plain and faithful
Narrative, without any Glosses upon it; because it is what makes the greatest
noise in our Historians, of all the Actions of the Bishop's Life.

Conway-Castle was the place, that the The ABp. fortifies Conway-Castle.
Bishop had pitched upon for the general Defense of the Country. And so
indefatigable was he in collecting Moneys, gathering Forces, repairing the
Castle, casting up Works, in writing, sending, and making Interests, that he
did as much as all the Adjutants besides, and more than his Health could well
bear; which before was ever florid, but [209.]
now began to droop, and continued from hence forward to decline. All this he
undertook at his own proper Cost and Peril, without any Order from, or Notice
of the King. But so soon as his Majesty heard of his Loyalty, he wrote often
very kind and affectionate Letters to his Grace, of which so many as belong to
the Business of Conway-Castle more immediately, are yet extant; one of which to
give the more Satisfaction to my Reader, I shall transcribe here.

From Oxford, Aug. 1. 1643. CHARLES R.

MOst Reverend Father in God, etc. The King's Letter to the ABp. about the
Castle.
We are informed by our Servant Orlando Bridgman, not only of the good
Encouragement and Assistance you have given him in our Service, but also of
your own Personal and Earnest Endeavors to promote it. And though we have had
long Experience of your Fidelity, Readiness and Zeal in what concerns us; yet
it cannot but be most acceptable unto us, that you still give unto us fresh
occasions to remember it. And we pray you to continue to give all possible
Assistance to our said Servant. And whereas you are now resident at our Town of
Aberconway, where there is a Castle, heretofore belonging to our Crown, and now
to the Lord Conway, which with some charge is easily made defensible: but the
Lord Conway being imprisoned by some of our rebellious Subjects, and not able
to furnish it, as is requisite for our Service, and the Defense of those parts:
You having begun at your own charge to put the same into repair, We do heartily
desire you to go on in that Work, assuring you that whatsoever Moneys you shall
lay out upon the Fortification of the said Castle, shall be repaid unto you,
before the Custody thereof shall be put into any other hand than your own, or
such as you shall recommend.


Upon the backside of this gracious Letter, this the Archbishop has written
with his own hand:

I Jo. Archbishop of York, have assigned my Nephew Mr. Will. Hooks Esquire Alderman
of Conway, to have the Custody of this Castle, mentioned in his Majesty's
Letter under his Signet, until I shall be repaid the Moneys, and Money-worth
disburs'd by me in the repair thereof, by virtue of this Warrant. And in case
of Mortality, I do assign my Nephew Gryffith Williams to the same effect. Jan.
2. 1643.

Some time after this, his Majesty The King sends for him to Oxford.
wanting the Assistance of the Archbishop at Oxford, writes to him to come
there to him, and to bring along [212.]
December. 16. 1644.
with him the best Intelligence he could procure of the Condition of his
Majesty's Affairs. Upon this he sets out upon his Journey, notwithstanding the
Ways were very much beset, and came to Oxford in January, and was kindly
received at the Court; where he foresaw his stay must be but short, for the
City was so crowded with Nobility and Gentry, that it could not entertain them
long; neither could so many of the King's Trusty Friends be spared from their
Counties any considerable time. His Grace therefore made the most use he could
of his Time, in giving Counsel to the best of his Knowledge and Experience to
his Majesty. One Prophetical Discovery which he made to his Majesty at this
Time, is worth the remarking: For, he said, That Cromwell, taken into The ABp.
Advice to the King about Cromwell.
the Rebels Army by his Cousin Hambden, was the most dangerous Enemy that his
Majesty had. For though he were at that time of mean Rank and Use among them, yet
he would climb higher. I knew him (says he) at Bugden, but never knew his
Religion. He was a Common Spokesman for Sectaries, and maintained their Part
with stubborness. He never discoursed as if he were pleased with your Majesty,
and your great Officers; and indeed he loves none, that are more than his
Equals. Your Majesty did him but Justice in repulsing a Petition put up by him
against Sir Thomas Steward, of the Isle of Ely; but he takes them all for his
Enemies, that would not let him undo his best Friend: and above all that live,
I think he is the most mindful of an Injury. He talks openly that it is fit
some should act more vigorously against your Forces, and bring your Person into
the Power of the Parliament. He cannot give a good Word of his General the Earl
of Essex, because he says the Earl is but half an Enemy to your Majesty, and
has done you more Favor than Harm. His Fortunes are broken, that it is
impossible for him to subsist, much less to be what he aspires to, but by your
Majesty's Bounty, or by the Ruin of us all, and a common Confusion. In short,
every Beast has some evil Properties; but Cromwell has the Properties of all
evil Beasts. My humble Motion is, that either you would win him to you by
Promises of fair Treatment, or catch him by some Stratagem, and cut him short.
All which the King received with a smile, and said nothing.

After the King had advised with his The K. advises with the ABp. and some
others.
Parliament at Oxford, and saw that little good came of it, but that Things
remained much in the same ticklish posture; [214.]
his Majesty called a few able Statesmen to him in private, the principal among
them being the Archbishop; who therefore was desired to speak first, and freely
to declare what means he thought most expedient to bring his Majesty and his
Followers out of those Troubles, which the Lords and Gentlemen, that lately
undertook it, had left no better than they found them. The Archbishop excusing
himself, desired to hear others first whose Experience in those weighty
Concerns might be beyond his. But this being not granted, and he being farther
pressed upon, spoke thus to the King: My Opinion, Sir, will be strange, [215.]
The ABp. Advice to the King.
and, I fear, unwelcome: If it please not, yet do not impute it to Falsehood or
Fear, but to Error and Mistaking. Your Militia is courageous, but small, not
like to increase, and then not to hold out. Your Enemies multiply, and by this
time your Army has taught them to fight: They are in Treaty with the Scots, to
make a Recruit; and the Princes and States beyond Seas, to their shame, give
them countenance. Their Treasurers at Westminster boast, that it costs them
large Moneys every Month to keep Correspondence with their Intelligencers and
Spies about you. Your Soldiers in their March and Quarters are very unruly,
and lose the Peoples Affections every where, by the Oppressions they sustain.
Out of these Premises I infer, and I engage my Life to your Majesty's Justice,
and my Soul to GOD's Tribunal, that I know no better course than to struggle no
further, since so it is the Will of GOD, and to refer all to the pleasure and
discretion of that unkind and insolent Parliament at Westminster, but with the
preservation of your Majesty's Crown and Person, to which they have all taken
an Oath to offer no hurt or violence, and have renewed it in many
Protestations: As likewise with Indemnity of your Adherents; for we save a Ship
with the loss of the Goods, not of the Passengers. If any thing will soften
them, it will be this most pacifick and gracious Condescension. The Heathen
speak rudely, that Constancy in Suffering will tire out the Cruelty of the
Gods; but certainly such Sufferance and Self-denial as resigns up your
Majesty's Cause and Trust quite unto them, will make the worst of them ashamed
of their Pertinacy, and melt the best into a shower of Repentance: But if your
Majesty disdains to go so low and will not put the good of the Church and
Kingdom upon their Faith, to which Misery, I fear, our Sins have brought us, I
am ready to run on in the common Hazard with your Majesty, and to live and die
in your Service.

Some there were that concurred with his Grace in this Advice, but the King and
the Generality dissented, and his Thanks for his free Speaking were but small.
So his Majesty being [217.]
resolved to try his Right by his Sword, the Archbishop was likewise
determined to assist him as before. And hereupon he leaves Oxford in the
beginning The ABp. returns to Wales.
of the Spring, having received a fresh Charge from his Majesty to take Care of
all North Wales, but especially Conway-Castle. So by easy Journeys (guarded
most of his way by some Forces that marched that Road) he came to Conway, which
was the last Journey of his Life.

As many in this Country as had His Countrymen lay up all their things in
Conway-Castle.
any thing to lose, were very solicitous how to secure their Things. Therefore
they desired leave of the Archbishop to lay up in the Castle all their Plate,
Jowels, Money, Writings, valuable Goods, and such like, each Person having an
Inventory of his own share. And some that were suspected for their Loyalty, yet
amongst others obtained this Favor, which was the ground of much ensuing
Mischief; though the Archbishop consented to it out of Policy, thinking by such
Hostages as they put into his keeping, to secure these Persons to the Interest
of the King. A Twelvemonth after, Sir [218.]
Athenae Oxon. p. 804. The Castle taken from the ABp.
John Owen (a Colonel for the King) coming this way after a Defeat, he obtained
of Prince Rupert to be substituted under his Hand, Commander of the Castle; and
so surprising it by Force, he entered it; notwithstanding that the Castle was
before given to the Bishop under the King's own Signet, to possess it quietly,
till his cost laid out upon it should be refunded to him, which as yet had
been never offered: and notwithstanding the Prince himself had backed his
Majesty's Pleasure therein, and had by his Letters commanded all Officers by
Sea and Land to assist him in it.

Upon this the Archbishop sends to his Majesty at Oxford this Remonstrance by
the Hand of Captain James Martin.

1 UPon the Ninth of May 1645. He complains to the King.
Sir J. Owen Governor of Conway, about Seven of the Clock in the Evening,
before the Night-Guard was sent unto the Castle, the possession whereof was
placed by the King in the ABp. of York, and his Assigns, upon great and
valuable considerations by his gracious Letters, and under his Majesty's Hand
and Signet, bearing date at Oxford August 1. 1643. did with Bars of Iron and
Armed Men, break the Locks and Doors, and enter into the said Castle, and seize
upon the Place, the Victuals, Powder, Arms, and Ammunition, laid in by the said
ABp. at his own charge, without the least contribution from the King or the
Country, for the Defense of the Place, and the Service of the King and the
said Country.

2. That being demanded by the said Archbishop to suffer two of the said
Archbishop's Men to be there with his rabble of Grooms and beggarly People, to
see the Goods of the Country preserved from filching, and the Victuals and
Ammunition from wasting and purloyning, Sir John in a furious manner utterly
refused it, though all the Company cried upon him to do so for his own discharge,
yet he would not listen to any reason, but promised the next day, to suffer all
things to be inventoried, and the Lord Archbishop to take away what he would,
Sir John acknowledging all the Goods and Ammunition to be his.

3. The next day he receded again from all this, would not permit at the
entreaty of the Bishop of St. Asaph, his own Cousin-German, any of the
Archbishop's Men to go and look to the Goods, nor suffer his Servants to fetch
forth for his Grace's use (who has lingered long under a great Sickness and
Weakness) either a little Wine, to make him some Cawdles, or so much as a
little of his own stale Beer to make him Possets, which all the Country
conceive to be very barbarous.

4. The said Sir John continues rambling from place to place, and detaineth
still all the goods of the Country, laid up in this Castle, as conceived to be
owned by the Archbishop, who was like to be responsal for them; and had duly
returned them in other Years: and threatens to seize upon the Plate, and all
things else of Value to his own use. Than which no Rebel or Enemy could deal
more outragiously.

5 The Archbishop desires his Majesty would repossess him of the Right of this
Castle, according to his Majesty's Grant made upon valuable consideration. And
that if his Majesty's pleasure be that Sir Jo. Owen (or any other Man of more
Moderation and less precipitancy) should be there, he come under the
Archbishop his Assignment, as Right requires, and as Colonel Ellis and Mr.
Chichely were content to do, and did. To the which the Archbishop (as Colonel
Ellis and Sir Will. Leg can witness) was ever willing to give way.

6. That howsoever, the ABp. may have all his Goods and Chattels, all his
Cannon, Ammunition, Arms, and Powder, Provision in Beef, Beer, Wine, Cheese,
Butter Oatmeal and Corn presently restored to him. And what is wasted and made
away, may be answered to him by Sir John: As also that all the Inhabitants of
this and the Neighbor Countries, may have their Goods presently out of the
Castle, before they be pilfered and imbezled.

7. Or otherwise, that his Majesty, and Prince Rupert his Lieutenant, will
graciously permit and suffer, with their gracious Favor, the said Archbishop
and Inhabitants of the Country, to repair with their Complaints to the
Assembly at Oxford, and the Committee there, against these, and many other
Outrages and Concussions of the said Sir Jo. Owen, under color of being
Governor and Sheriff of this Town, not warranted by any of his Commissions.

This proved of none effect, and [219.]
But has no Redress.
procured only delays from Week to Week, till at last Capt. Martin received
this cold Answer, That it should be considered at more Leisure. When he
returned thus into Wales, and brought not the least Satisfaction, nor a
Complimental Excuse to pacify the Archbishop he said nothing, lest he should
have said too much: but his great Spirit was chafed with this great Indignity.

After this, fifteen Months expired, Col. Mitton by the Assistance of the
Country possesses the Castle, advised by the ABp.
and the Archbishop had no Redress; at which time Col. Mitton (a violent Man
against the King) coming from Chester (of which he was possessed) marched over
Dee, through Flint and Denbishire, quite to Conway Town Upon this the
Archbishop consults with some few what was best to be done in this Case, to
secure the People and their Possessions. They agree to parley with Mitton (who
was sensible enough of his own Strength and their Weakness:) They perceiving
that the Col. aimed at the Castle, where all their Wealth was deposited; and
seeing moreover, That he was more haughty than covetous, they closed by
Insinuations with him, relating how Sir John Owen had surpised the Castle,
[220.]
detained their Goods, and insulted over them who had born Arms in the same
Cause; therefore they offered to join with him to put him into the Castle, upon
Condition that every Proprietary might obtain what he could prove by the
Archbishop's Inventory to belong to him; and all that was over and above, he
should be welcome to it himself. And thus the Archbishop with his Art and fair
Language, got Mitton's Consent; and immediately thereupon without the least
delay the Soldiers, assisted by the Hacket consesses it became not the ABp. to
bear Arms, but acquits him in all the other Circumstances of this Action.
Archbishop and his Kindred, with other Welsh, forced open the Gates, and
entered the Castle, which Col. Mitton possessed himself of, and kept his Word in
letting the Owners take those Goods to which they could prove their Title. And
this is a brief Narration of the Matter of Fact, transcribed, almost Word for
Word, out of B. Hacket; so that if any thing prove amiss, it is no fault of
mine, for I knew not where to seek for better Information. If the Reader thinks
the Archbishop stands in need of a Defense (especially from the black
Constructions of some Historians) Sanders. K. Charles p. 889.
he may see how B. Hacket has commented upon this Action; or if he has a mind
to read an Apology Harmar's Apolog. Land. pr. 80. 1649.
for his Grace in a Piece of neat Latin, there is one extant. So I leave him to
his own Judgment; adding only, That if the Archbishop had any such Designs as
to assist the Parliament against the King, it is perhaps one of the greatest
Inconsistencies that is to be met with (considering the whole Tenor of his
Actions to this Moment) in any Man's Life; and to think of it Fuller's Chapter
Hist. B. XI. p. 227.
was the wonder of all Men in those Times. And a certain Author affirms, that a
Kinsman of his Grace's told him, That if he might have the convenience to speak
with his Majesty but one half Hour, he doubted not but to give him full
Satisfaction for his Behavior. We are told too by another Hand, That the
dreadful Stories of his declaring for the Parliament, was nothing else, but his
garrisoning of his own House, and discountenancing some Da. Lloyd. at Penrhyn.
straggling Cavaliers that did no good, but lie upon the Countries themselves,
and draw thither whole Armies of the Enemy to lie upon it too.

We have dwelt something long upon the Business of Conway-Castle, but it could
not be well dispatched in less time. Now let us look a little again [222.]
upon the melancholy prospect of the King's Affairs, in which though our ABp. now
had it not in his Power to be active, yet he was deeply concerned The King
leaves Oxford. Baker's Chron.
all along for his Majesty. Who now seeing Oxford was in danger of a Siege from
Fairfax's Victorious Army, began to bethink himself of his own Safety, and was
persuaded by Mounsieur Mountrevile, privily to leave the Town; which
accordingly he did, accompanied Apr. 27. An. 1646.
only with two Persons, and not above ten were made privy to it. And the first
Tidings of his Royal Person was, that he was at the Scots Camp before Newark.
Which when it was told our ABp. he said, What! be advised by a Stranger, and
trust the Scots! then all is lost. The Treachery of the Scots to his Majesty,
and all the unparalled Troubles that henceforward attended the King, till
that very Hour in which he was enrolled amongst the Blessed Martyrs, suffering
from the Hands of his own Subjects, all this the Reader is too seek for
elsewhere, since it is foreign to my Purpose.

So I return to the ABp. who was The ABp. great sorrow for the Death of the
King.
extremely concerned at the Death of so good a King, whose Character in a Fast
Sermon he had once given, That [225, etc.]
he was as like Virtue it self, as could be pattern'd in Flesh and Blood. So
deep a Sense had his Grace of the Loss of his most Sacred Majesty, and of the
Guilt of his Innocent Blood that lay upon the Nation, that from this Time, he
rose out of his Bed constantly at Midnight, and without any thing on but his
Shirt and Wastcoat, kneeled upon his bare Knees, and prayed earnestly for a
Quarter of an Hour, before he went to his Rest again. And the reason why he
observed the Midnight-Season was, because the Scriptures speak of our Savior's
Coming in the Night; the principal Matter of his Prayers being this, Come,
Lord. JESUS; come quickly, and put an end to these Days of Sin and Misery. From
this time his Spirit (which no Misfortunes before could touch) was perfectly
broke, and he never looked up again. All his wonted cheerfulness, and his
pleasant Humor was quite overcast. No Man formerly more averse than he to
Privacy, yet now he thinks no Retirement too close and obscure. He shuns
Company all he can; his Discourse sparing, or if he inquires after any News,
it is after those that tried the King, especially Cromwell and Bradshaw,
expecting every Hour some signal Judgment upon them. Thus disconsolate [227.]
he continued for two Years and almost two Months, no one being able to give an
account of any thing he did, but that he prayed and read all Day, and much of
the Night. And now every Month brought on a greater Decay in his Constitution
than a Year before. Nor was he without Prognostics of his Death (as it is said)
some time before it: and sometimes, when he had said Grace after Meat, and was
rising from the Table, he would say, I am ready for the Lord.

His Death was occasioned by a sudden His Sickness and Death.
Catarrh, which caused a Quinsey, and a shortness of Breath, all which
dissolved him in the space of twelve Hours. During which time the Virtuous Lady
Mostyn (at whose House he was) spoke to him of his preparation for another
World: Cousin (says he) I am already prepared, and will be better prepared. So
he sent for the Minister that was nearest, and had the Visitation of the Sick
read twice over to him, the greatest part whereof (especially the Psalms) he
repeated distinctly himself, and received Absolution. When the Pangs of Death
were upon him, many other Prayers were read, and short Sentences of Devotion
repeated aloud in his Ears; and these Words being said often, The Lord be
merciful to thee, the Lord receive thy Soul, at that Instant, first he closed
his Eyes with one Hand, and then lifting up the other, his Lips moved, and
recommending his Spirit to his Redeemer, he expired. 1649. according to some.
Fuller's Chapter Hist. B. XI. p. 228.


[228.]
He died aged 68 Years 1650. the Day of his Birth and of his Death being the
same; which happening on the 25 of March, it occasioned some dispute, whether
his Half-year's Rents (due after Sunrise) should go with his Goods and
Chattels to his Executor, or fall to his Heir. But such was the providence of
the Parties concerned therein, that before it came to a Suit, they seasonably
compounded it among His Burial. Athen. Ox. vol. 2. p. 684, 685.
themselves. From Glodded (where he died) in the Parish of Eglwysrose his Body
was carried to Penrhyn, and there buried in In Welsh it signifies the Church of
St. Gay. He left his Heir 1000 l. per An. Da. Lloyd. Life of Williams.
Llandegay Church, in a little Vault, at the upper end of the Chancel. Some
Years after this, his Nephew and Heir Sir Griffith Williams, erected on the
North-Wall of the said Chancel a very fair Monument, with the Effigies of the
ABp. kneeling, in white Marble, and a large Inscription under it, made by Dr.
John Hacket, his sometimes Chaplain.

I am thinking whether after this His Character.
full Draught of the Actions of this great Man, it would not be an Abuse to my
Reader's Reflection to conclude with a Character of him: Especially since a
great part of this Life is wrote by way of Character, and his Actions very
often for the clearer view of him disposed under proper Heads, omitting the
Series of Time. But then again, since I find in Authors something of his
Person, and something of the Qualifications of his Mind, which I have not as
yet so fully told my Reader of, I thought it might not be unacceptable, if I
collected the few following Observations upon him. So singular was the Strength
D. Lloyd's Life of Williams; and Fuller's Chapter Hist; B. XI. p. 228.
of his Constitution, so strict his Education, so unwearied his Industry, and
so vast his Capacity, that it is a hard matter to determine to which of all
these he was most indebted, for all his more than ordinary Qualifications. His
Learning was copious, his Judgment stayed, his Apprehension clear and
searching, his Expression lively and effectual, his Elocution flowing and
Majestic.

His Person was proper, his Countenance comely, his Complexion fair and lovely;
his Gait so stately, that most People mistook it for Pride, but his
Conversation free and familiar to a Fault; Judge of the greatness of his [75.]
Spirit, by his refusing the Offers of his Friends, when he was in his lowest
Condition in the Tower, saying, That he knew not how to take from any but a
King. He was subject to sudden Passions, [63.]
but never so as to lose himself, for at such times he would reason with all
exactness of a calm Temper. He understood how to nick an Opportunity; and would
say, That every Man had it sooner or later. When he was to appear in Public,
he took great care about his Preparation; And the greater the Performance he
was to undertake, the more Liberty and Recreation he took, saying, That we
could add nothing to what had been done before, but Method and Perspicuity.
Which Judgment of so great a Man I desire may plead for me, in attempting this
Performance, after a Reverend and Learned Prelate.

And now having brought so considerable a Person ( by Honor and Dishonor, by
good Report and evil Report) at Fuller's Chapter Hist. 228.. 31.
last to the Period of a busy, active and troublesome Life; I shall moralize
upon the whole, with what his Lordship himself once said to a grave Divine,
coming to him for Institution to a Living: I have (said he) passed through many
Places of Honor and Trust, both in Church and State, more than any of my Order
in England these seventy Years before. But were I but assured, that by my
Preaching I had converted but one Soul unto GOD, I should take therein more
Spiritual Joy and Comfort, than in all the Honors and Offices which have been
bestowed upon me^

The END.
AN APPENDIX To the LIFE of ABp. WILLIAMS.
Wherein is a true Account of his Benefactions to St. John's College in
Cambridge; with a brief Vindication of that College from the Aspersions that
have been unjustly thrown upon it with reference to this Most Reverend Prelate.

I Hope my particular Relation and Obligations to this Worthy Society, and the
heinousness of the Charge laid against it (and yet credited by a great many)
will excuse me for troubling the World with these few following Pages, which I
have Collected from some Papers, drawn from the College Writings, by a late
Member of the Society, on purpose Dr. Morton.
to rectify the World in a mistake, which might prove of ill Consequence to
the Credit of Colleges in general, but of ours in particular.

A certain Author, who seems industrious Fuller's Chapter Hist. B. XI. p. 227.. 26.
to defame us (upon what provocation we know not) makes bold to tell the World
(bringing no Authority at all for so black and malicious an Aspersion) that
Archbishop Williams at St. John's College in Cambridge Founded two
Fellowships, Built a fair Library, and furnished it with Books, intending more,
had his Bounty then met with proportionable Entertainment; and then he
concludes with this cutting remark, But Benefactors may give Money, but not
grateful Minds to such as receive it. The application of which to our Society I
shall demonstrate to be wholly impertinent and false to all candid Persons, who
shall read the following true State and Account of that our noble Benefactor's
Liberality.

And first, to do him more Right than this our great Accuser has done, we do
most gratefully acknowledge, that besides his two mentioned Fellowships, he
Founded four Scolarships, and gave us the perpetual Advouson The Rectories of
Freshwater and Souldren and the Donatives of St. Florence and Aberdarron.
of four Ecclesiastical Benefices, Two with Cure and Two without Cure; besides
a very fair large gilt Bowl with a Cover, for public use at Festivals. From
this Acknowledgment I proceed to a short Vindication of the College, beginning
with that, whereby his Lordship gave us the first and that a very pregnant
Instance of his Munificence, which is his building of a very fair Library. The
Old Library of the College being not capacious enough for it is intended use,
and a second Court being added to the College for the most part at the vast
Charge of that magnificent Lady, the Lady Mary, Consort of the Right Honorable
Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury; they were now casting about, by what means they
might procure a New Library. And there was no one on whom they could with
better Hopes cast their Eyes, or with more consident Expectations make their
Addresses to, to begin and carry on so great and noble a design, than Dr. John
Williams, at that time Dean of Westminster, Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal: one who had a particular knowledge of most and a friendly
familiarity with some of the Fellows, and a special kindness for this Place of
his Education, wherein he laid the first Grounds of all his future
Advancements. Being besides of a Liberal and Generous Spirit, and by his great
Office and Promotions in a full Capacity alone to undertake, advance and
complete such (or a more expensive) Public and beneficial Work; the Society
encouraged with all these favorable and inviting Circumstances, they make
Application to him, and their humble suit finds a very kind Entertainment. In
pursuance whereof a Model is drawn, presented, approved, and Materials
providing for the Fabric. And in this lucky juncture of Things, that noble
Gentleman Sr. Ralph Hare of Stow-Bardolf in the County of Norfolk, Knight of
the Bath, having some time before read Sr. Henry Spelman. De non temerandis
Ecclesiis, and thereupon resolving to restore to some pious use his Impropriate
Rectory of Cherry-Marham by settling it upon this College, did forthwith very
seasonably bestow Three years Rent of the said Impropriation (which lay
sequestered by him for some good design) amounting to 192 l. to begin the
Foundation of the New Library. The most bountiful Prelate prevented by this
unexpected Gift from laying the first Stones, yet follows the Work begun with
continued and large supplies, at several times, in the years 1623 and 1624. to
the value of 2011 l. 13 s. 4 d. And the rest of the Charge for the entire
finishing of the whole Work fell upon the College it self, which was (besides
the daily allowance of Bread and Beer to the Workmen) in ready Money 787 l. 6
s. 61/2. The whole cost of the Building amounting to no less then 2991 l. 10 s.
101/2.

Now we have been so far from disobliging this so profuse a Benefactor, with
respect to his first Essay of bounty toward us, that we have not envied him
the Glory of the whole, in commonly reputing him the sole Founder of this
goodly Building, in as much as he was so deeply concerned in bearing well near
Two third parts of the Charge: But seeing we are forced to this in our own
Vindication, we could no longer suppress the truth (though it somewhat derogate
from his Lordship's supposed Munificence, as the only Erecter of the Library)
lest we should be found too injurious to the Honor and Memory of that generous
Knight, who so freely contributed to the first Foundation, and false to the
Society it self, which underwent the great Charge of near a Thousand pounds to
perfect the Work.

As to any Books, with which this great Founder is represented by our
calumniating Historian to have immediately furnished the New-erected Library,
we declare that we find no Memorial, but on the contrary have Grounds highly
reasonable to believe, that he did then confer none. One Reason for all may be,
that our Predecessors (who provided a fair Vellam Book to perpetuate the
Memories of all the worthy Benefactors to the Library, that either have been,
or are to be) took care to have his Lordship's Picture at length and Arms drawn
therein, and that his special Benefaction should be most advantageously
transmitted to Posterity, have done it in these Words. Reverendus in Christo
Pater Johannes Episc. Lincoln. etc. hanc splendidam Bibliothecam praeter duos
Socios and quatuor Scholares, fundavit. At non contenta hisce magnificis
aedibus tam effusa honoratissimi Praesulis Benignitas, propriae Bibliothecae
Libros (uti patet ex Syngrapha) nobis dicavit. Which words as they plainly show
only a design and voluntary obligation on his Lordship's Part for the future to
give his own Library, so they do by implication strongly infer, that he had not
then actually extended his Bounty that way. And let the World now judge,
whether the then Society did hereby give any the least suspicion of
ingratitude, in that their lasting Memorial of his Bounty, which might justly
hinder his intended future Munificence; when they thus openly and freely
recognize him as well the Founder of the Library it self (notwithstanding the
other forementioned Disbursments for the Fabric) as of two Fellows and four
Scholars: and what pretense or reason our Historical Caviller had for
publishing such an Assertion, that the unthankfulness of the College, and their
unsuitable Reception and Return of their great Benefactor's Liberality had put
a final stop to all other his Lordship's designed Favors.

His Lordship indeed did soon after this, upon second Thoughts, (but chiefly
upon the humble suggestion of the College, that a present Supply of Books would
be more acceptable) take in his former Instrument, whereby he gave his own
whole Library after his death to the College, and in compliance with their
Request obliged himself by Indenture, to the Annual Payment of One Hundred
pounds for Ten years together then next to come, for the more speedy furnishing
of the Library with Books; and for further security thereof did anew make over
his own Library, and sent a true Catalogue of his Books to be kept among the
Records of the College. Which Annuity of one Hundred pounds for Ten years, or
any part thereof being never paid, (by what neglect or mischance is not known)
his Lordship foreseeing the Troubles coming upon him, wherein he was for
several years after sorely involved, did order his said Library (then in the
Custody of one Kilvert and by him much imbezled) to be delivered up into the
Possession of the College, for the satisfaction of that Thousand Pound, for
which his own Bounty had made him a Debtor. And accordingly impaired as it was
it came into the College-hands, and so continued till the year 1640. when his
Lordship was set at Liberty from the Tower, and in some measure restored to his
Majesty's Grace and Favor, and advanced to the Archbishopric of York. Upon
which his happy Restitution and high Promotion, his Library, as received, was
at his Instance returned back, and lent unto him again (no ungrateful
disobligation we hope) and by him removed to his Study in the Deanery of
Westminster. And upon his Lordship's removal first to York, and then his
retirement into Wales, they were seized upon by the Parliament, and committed
to the Custody of some Gentlemen for seven years. After which time, at the
Archbishop's Suit the Keys of his Study were delivered to one Mr. Gouland, as
Trustee for the Bishop during his Life, and some of the Books in the mean time
sent down by his Lordship's order to him in Wales. Upon his Lordship's Death
the remainder of the Library fell into his Administrator's hands, from whom the
College at last received them, and gave both him and Mr. Gouland and other
Persons concerned legal Discharges as well for the Annuity aforesaid (for which
being unpay'd they accepted the mangled Library as a full Compensation) as for
the Books themselves. The truth of which does fully appear from the several
Releases given by the College An. 1650. under their common Seal to the
interessed Persons; which to insert here would be too tedious.

The Books being thus come into the Possession of the College, it was next to
be advised, how they might be most advantageously bestowed according to the
Noble and Right Reverend Donor's Mind, and for the benefit of the Society. It
was therefore at length concluded by and with the approbation of Griffith
Williams Esquire, his Lordship's Heir and Administrator, that such Books as
were entire and not before in the Library should be reserved and there
disposed; and the rest either Imperfect or Duplicates to be sold, and with the
Moneys thereby raised (after charges deducted) a Purchase of Lands should be
made, the Rents whereof should be determined partly to the Annual Increase of
the Library-Keeper's stipend (as he himself had designed) and partly for buying
of Books, to be for ever reputed as of his Lordship's Gift, that so he might
continue a perpetual Benefactor to that Library, whereof he truly was the chief
Founder. The account of all which both Sale and Purchase (the Particulars being
yet to be seen) as left us upon Record under our Auditor's own Hand, makes it
appear, that the College did expend 125 l. 4 s. 7 d. more about the Books and
the Purchase than they had then received for them. Which Sum they did first
reimburse themselves with (as in all Reason and Equity they ought) out of the
yearly Rents of the purchass'd Lands, and after that did yearly pay the full
Rents of those Lands in the following manner.

To the Library Keeper for the Augmentation of his stipend. l. s. d. 06. 13.
04. l. s. d. 20.00.00 For Books for the Library, as his Lordship's perpetual
Gift. l. s. d. 13. 06. 08.

I doubt not now but that this Account, as it is true, so also will be
satisfactory to all unprejudiced Persons, and justify both it self and our
Predecessors, as well as the living Members, that neither the past nor present
Society have in this Instance in the least wronged our great Patron's Donation,
or done any thing unworthy of those vast obligations he has laid upon this
College. And if perchance in the Judgment of any one who is Impartial, they
have been mistaken in their Measures, and have not set out our Benefactor to
the fairest advantage; yet the Concurrence of his Heir and Administrator with
them (the properest and most likely Assertor and Promoter of his Honor) will
vindicate that their Error from any malicious and ungrateful design of
derogating from his Bounty and deserved Glory.

I have been something particular in the Account of the Library, because it was
but short, and because it has been and is much talked of still to the great
discredit of the College. I should in the next place go on to give an Account
of his other Benefactions to us, and that neither our Predecessors nor we have
ever abused any of them; as likewise with what Respect and Gratitude the
Society behaved themselves to him while he was alive, and how they always
looked upon his Requests unto them as so many Commands. But to give the
particulars of all this (as might be done from the College Writings) would make
this Appendix Voluminous, and would be but to trouble the Public perhaps too
much with a private injury. And I shall only add one of all his Lordship's
Letters to the College to show how far he was from charging it with ingratitude
to him.

My Reverend and Worthy Friend,
I Do recommend to you the Bearer hereof John Williams, a Scholar from my poor
Foundation at Westminster, to succeed in that vacant Scholarship void in your
College sithence the last Commencement. So that what I subscribed to a Petition
of one Robinson, a Pensioner of that Society, is hereby become void; I not
knowing at that time of any of that Foundation which would accept thereof. I do
acknowledge I am much bound to you and the Seniors, for many Favors done to my
poor Scholars from time to time; and shall hardly be able to make any Requital
for the one part, much less am I in case to be a Petitioner for those to come.
But if you shall be pleased, with those of the Seniority that have any
Remembrance of me, for his own Worth (which, as I conceive by some Exercises of
his, is more than ordinary) and at the Entreaty of a Beadsman of your College
(who lies buried here in an heap of Stones) to choose one Thomas Tylden now
Student in your House, and an Oxfordshire Man (of which County you were wont to
have but very few) into a Foundresse's Place, whereof (if I remember your
Statutes) he is very capable, you shall thereby do a worthy Act, which includes
much of the Recompense in it self, and oblige me (if GOD ever bring me from
this `Place) to study upon all Occasions to requite it. You may have many
Bishops that can better gratify your Courtesies at this Time, but not one that
loves your Society more affectionately, and prays for it more devoutly than

I recommend me heartily to your self and all the Seniors.

To my Reverend and worthy Friend Mr. Dr. Beale Master of St. John's College in
Cambridge.

Your Loving Friend and Servant, JO. LINCOLN.
Tower, this 23. Sept. 1640.

Now, where I wonder, in all this Letter is there the least Appearance of any
disgust taken by his Lordship at the College, so as to make him repent either
of his former Kindnesses to it, or to put a stop to any future; when it grieves
him that he is not in a Capacity of doing more than he had done? And that he
continued to have the same benevolent Mind toward this his Mother-College to
his dying Day, we have very good Grounds to believe. For Mr. Thomas Wharton
sometime of Gray's-Inn, diverting himself one Christmas (since the Bishop's
Death) in this Place of his Education, upon occasion of Discourse concerning
his Lordship's Foundation, did upon his Credit declare to several Members of
this Society, That for some time before this Renowned Prelate's Death, Wharton
was at that time Secretary to the Archbishop.
he often heard his Lordship mention the Kindness of the College to his
Foundation, and how unhappily his Designs of making them Reparations for the
Detriment they had sustained thereby were frustrated. For they accepted of his
Foundation of Fellows and Scholars (merely out of Gratitude to him) at less
than half the Revenue, which was sufficient to maintain it, for which reason
after the sustaining of much Loss, they were at last forced to sink the
Fellowships in their own Defense, and in compliance with a Statute of the
College. But (continues Mr. Wharton's Account) that he was finally resolved to
be as good as his Word, and leave them a large and lasting Testimony of his
additional Bounty: that in Prosecution of this generous Resolution he had
pitched upon an Estate of Three Hundred Pounds per An. to be settled upon the
College for ever to this End and Purpose; That the Writings of settlement were
actually drawn, and read over to, and approved of by him. But it being somewhat
late at Night, and his Lordship much indisposed, he deferred the signing and
sealing of them, till the next Morning, before which time it pleased GOD to
take him out of the World. By which we and our Successors were not only
deprived of a Noble Benefactor, but of a perpetual Advocate; this his last
Design (had it but by a short continuance of his Life taken effect) being
sufficient to stop the Mouths of all our Accusers, and to vindicate the
Innocence of the Society from those ill surmizes that it has for some Years
very unjustly labored under.

The End of the Appendix.
The Inscription upon the Archbishop's Tombstone, composed by Bishop Hacket.
HOspes lege, relege. Quod in hoc Sacello, paucis noto, haud expectares,
Hic situs est Johannes Wilhelmus, omnium Praesulum celeberrimus:
A paternis natalibus e familia Wilhelmorum de Coghwhillin ortus,
A maternis e Griffithis de Pentrin.
Cujus summum ingenium, and in omni genere literarum praestantia
Meruit, ut Regis Jacobigratia ad Decanatum Sarum
Post Westmonasterii eveheretur.
Ut simul, atque uno munere, tanto Regi esset a consiliis secretis and deliciis,
Magni Sigilli Custos, and Sedis Lincolniensis Episcopus:
Quem Carolus primus infula Episcop. Eboracen. decoraret.
Omnes scientias valde edoctus: novem linguarum thesaurus:
Theologiae purae and illibatae medulla: prudentiae politicae cortina:
Sacrae, canonicae, civilis, municipalis sapientiae apex, and ornamentum.
Dulciloquii cymbalum, memoriae tenacissimae, plusquam humanae:
Historiarum omnis generis myrothecium.
Magnorum operum, usque ad sumtum viginti mill librarum, structor.
Munificentiae, liberalitatis, hospitalis lautitiae,
Misericordiae erga pauperes insigne exemplum.
Postquam inter tempor a luctuosissima
Satur esset omnium, quae videret, and audiret;
Nec Regi aut Patriae, per rabiem perduellium, amplius servire potuit;
Anno aetatis 68o. expleto, Martii 25o. qui fuit ei natalis,
Summa fide in Christum, inconcussa erga R^gem fidelitate,
Animam, angina extinctus, piissime Deo reddidit.
Nec refert quod tantillum monumentum, in occulto angulo positum,
Tanti viri memoriam servat.
Cujus virtutes omnium aetatum tempora celebrabunt.
Abi viator, sat tuis oculis debes.

