The New Discoverer DISCOVERED.

By way of Answer to Mr. BAXTER his Pretended Discovery of the GROTIAN
RELIGION, With the Several Subjects therein Contained.

To which is added AN APPENDIX Containing a Rejoinder to diverse Things both in
the Key for Catholics, and in The book of Disputations about Church Government
and Worship, etc.

TOGETHER WITH A Letter to the Learned and Reverend Dr. Heylis, Concerning Mr.
Hickman and Mr. Bagshaw.

By THOMAS PIERCE Rector of Brington.

(...). Arrian. Ep. l. 4. c. 5. Their own Tongues shall make them fall. Psalm.
64.8. LONDON, Printed by I. G. for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivye-lane.
1659.

A Preadvertisement to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
IF thou desire to know the Reason, why I begin to Mr. Baxter with more
respect than thou allow'st him; whereas I treat him in my Appendix with little
more than he deserves, (making almost as great a difference in my style to him,
as is observable in his to me,) be pleased to accept of this hasty, but just
account.

I was indulgent, in the beginning, to mine own particular Inclinations; but at
the end I consulted his greatest Needs. My Inclinations would ever lead me to
speak as (...). Romans 15.2.
pleasingly as I may, but that my Judgment sometimes corrects them, and makes
them give way to my (...). Romans 15.2.
Neighbor's profit. His bitter Enmity against my person, which he has
sturdily concluded in a state of Damnation, and so by consequence a Reprobate,
after his way of reasoning, (though, blessed be God, his Conclusion is not
deduced from any premises, save what his Passion and his Fancy have shap^d out
to him,) I say his Enm^ty to my person, did only move me to forgive, and to
use him gently. But when I beheld him a second time, as the bitterest Adversary
of Truth, reviling the Fathers of the Church, and the Church herself, more than
any Presbyterian I ever met with, (unless I except Mr. Hickman, with whom I
shall reckon in due time for his great uncleanness,) I durst not Gal. 1.10.
seek to please men, so as to cease to be the servant of Jesus Christ. And
therefore however I have begun my ensuing papers with what was most pleasant
for me to write, yet have I suffered my self at last to add such things in the
Conclusion, as I found Mr. Baxter had need to read. For if, after my having
been very liberal, I find my Client so much the worse; the likeliest method to
make him better, is to become for the future but strictly just. He is a
different man in his book of Government and Worship, and in the later part of
his Key for Catholics, from what he was in his Discovery of the Grotian
Religion, (for so it seems he was pleased to word it) and that did make him the
fitter for somewhat a different Entertainment. Grot. Rel. ^r^f. Sect. 3.
It is not long since he made profession, that if any should gather from his
Discourse, my being such my self as he affirmed Grotius to have been, he
protested against all such Accusations as no part of his intention: but in his
two last Volumes his mind is changed, (or else his Members have prevailed
against his mind) so far forth as to accuse me of downright Popery, and of
having a hand in the Grotian plot, which (if we may prudently believe him) is
to bring Popery into the Land, and together with that a Persecution. He takes
it ill that I am suffered to have a Key for Cath. p* 385, 386.
Rectory here in England; and thereupon bewrayes his judgment, that I am fitter
for the Key for Cath. p* 385, 386.
Strappado: which whilst he says that such as he cannot escape in my Church,
(implying me to be one of the bloodiest Papists, (whether Spanish or Italian,
he does not say) he does abundantly insinuate his kindness to me

Had I a heart to return him Evil for Evil, I might fitly proclaim him either a
Jesuit, or a Jew. For without question he is either, as much as I am a Papist:
but I will not vie slanders with men of Tongue, nor try the strength of my
Invention to beat an Enemy at his own weapon; for this were only to be at
strife, who should be the most impious. No, let the Rigid Presbyterian take
such victories to himself, without receiving the trouble of being contended
with at all. I may often times punish, but never wrong him: and when I punish
the Malefactor, I spare the Man. (...). Agape^. Diac. (...). p. 83.
Vengeance is a thing which I leave to God, I being fully content with a
Vindication. It Is true I prove him to be a See Append. Sect. 5.
Papist by fourteen Arguments; but they are Arguments only ad Hominem, and
professedly urged by a Prosopopoeia, and only in order to his Conviction, that
more may be said against him, than he can say against Grotius; and that his
injuries to Grotius do only prove his own hurts. And having thus proved him to
be a Papist, I freely Ibid* p. 175.
profess to believe him none.

I hope his Calumnies of Grotius, and the Episcopal Divines, will now obtain
the less credit with his most credulous Admirers, for that he has poured out
the same (and a great deal worse) against a person of great remarke amongst the
Counselors of State. Compare The Vindication of Sir Henry Vane, with Mr.
Baxter's unchristian usage of him in his Key for Catholics.
The Vani or Vanists (for he is pleased to speak in both Dialects) are made the
burden of his invective in his Key for Catholics. In his Dedicatory Epistle,
(which some have called his Court-Flattery,) he make's a grievous complaint
against ten sorts of men, of whom he declare's he is very jealous. [The third
of these are the Vani, whom God by wonders confounded in new England, but have
here prevailed far in the dark.] To explain his meaning in the Epistle, he
tell's us Key for Cat^. p. 330, 331.
plainly in the Book, that the first sort of Iuglers, or Hiders of their
Religion, under whom the Papists do now manage their principal design, are the
Vani, whose Game was first played openly in America in New England, where God
gave his Testimonies against them from heaven upon their two Prophetesses, Mrs.
Hutchinson and Mrs. Dyer; the later brought forth a Monster with the parts of
Bird, Beast, Fish, and Man. The former brought forth many (near 30.) Monstrous
Births at once, and was after slain by the Indians. This providence (he add's)
should have awakened the Parliament to a wise and godly jealousy of the
Counsels and Designs of him that was in New England, the Master of the Game,
and to have carefully searched how much of his Doctrine and design were from
heaven, and how much of them he brought with him from Italy, or at least was
begotten by the Progenitor of Monsters. And lest his Readers should be to seek
on whom he fasten's such ugly calumnies, he frequently Ibid. p. 319, 329, 338.
names Sir Henry Vane, neither regarding the Quality, or Learned parts of that
Knight, nor any the least Reverence or Care of Truth.

Of this, and many the like prancks, I am particularly concerned to take some
notice, first because Mr. Baxter has coupled Ibid. p. 391.
the Vani with Mr. P. And both with four sorts of men, by whom the Popish
design is kept on foot; to wit the Seekers, the Infidels, the Behmenists, and
the Quakers. Next because mine own sufferings have taught me to look with
indignation on other Men's, how little soever their principles agree with mine.
And though I suppose Sir Henry Vane is very far from being partial to the
Episcopal Divines, (with whom I will rather choose to suffer the greatest
hardships, than embrace the Iam^s 4.4.
Friendship of the world, H b. 11.^5.
or enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season,) yet are we bound to do him right,
and to be sensible of his wrongs, and to afford him that deference, which both
his Birth and his Breeding have made his due. When St Paul had to do with a
person of honor amongst the Heathen, (...). A^ts 26.25.
he was so civil as to call him most noble Festus. And he is sure a gross
Christian, who think's it his duty to be a Clown. I cannot tell what judgment
that Learned Gentleman may be of; but he has this commendation (as well as
Grotius) that he is hated by Mr. Baxter beyond all measure; and is sufficiently
averse to the Presbyterians.

Christian Reader, have the patience to be pre-admonish'd of one thing more.
The greatest abuse and the most groundless which I have suffered from Mr.
Baxter (in no less than three distinct Volumes) is his endeavor to represent
me, as an Enemy to Purity and pious life. Which however he has done in as
gross a manner, as if he had tried to what Extremities both of absurdity and
Falsehood, depraved Man may be transported by abusing the Liberty of his Will,
(which God could never predetermine to such uncleanness,) yet some at least of
his Followers who have never yet seen him without his Vizard, have been
betrayed by that confidence (with which he has written against his Conscience)
to encourage his calumnies with their belief. As for reason, or proof, he has
not offered any thing toward it, but to supply that defect, he has thought it
enough to declaim against me, for being supposed to have declaimed against
Purit^nes, neither naming any one passage in any papers which I had published,
nor so much as referring to any page where any such passage was to be found. I
received letters of inquiry, [ where I had written against Puritanes, that Mr.
Baxter should so largely rebuke me for it before the world? My answer was, that
I never did it, for ought I was able to remember; and that until Mr. Baxter
could show me where, I should not believe I had been forgetful. Indeed I
(...). chapter 3. p. 75.
cited that part of King James his Letter, which told the Bishops they had to
do with two sorts of Enemies, Papists and Puritanes, and willed them to go
forward against the one and the other. But it appeare's by these words, not
that I, or Archbishop Spotswood, (by whom the Letter is recorded) but that King
James, who writ the Letter, had sharply written against Puritanes. In so much
that Mr. Baxter has dealt with me, as he has also dealt with Sir Henry Vane,
whom he Key for Cath. p. 331.
supposes to have brought Corrupt Opinions out of Italy, when it appeare's
that Sir Henry was never there.

But now admit that I had written against the Puritanes, before his clamor was
put in print, (as very possibly I did, though I profess I know not where, and
much desire to be informed) yet I had done no other thing, than had been donby
the most eminent in point of Piety, Learning, Judgment and Moderation, from the
days of Queen Elizabeth, to these our own. And if I am an Enemy to Religion
for having cited the words of others, what will be said by Mr. Baxter of
Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop Bancroft, Judicious Hooker, Judge Popham,
Bishop Andrews, Bishop Carleton, Bishop Hall, Dr. Sanderson, (with diverse
others, whom I have cited in the first Chapter of this Book) whose just
severity to the Puritanes may serve to put Mr. Baxter to shame and silence.

If he means no more than this, that I have cited out of the Writings of
English and Scottish Presbyterians, their own See The Sel^* Revenger exemplified
chapter 3. p. 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, etc.
Confessions of their own principles and practice too, he should have honestly
told his Readers, that I had written no worse of the Presbyterians, than
themselves had written of themselves. Nor should he have called them Puritanes,
whom I had called Presbyterians, (as themselves in their Writings have called
themselves) unless he was willing to acknowledge that they were both the same
thing. Observe (good Reader) how the Case stands between us. It is confessed by
Mr. Knox, that James Melvin (with two more) did privately murder the Archbp. of
St. Andrews, which the same Mr. Knox does withal commend for a Godly Fact.
This Confession I Ibid. p. 8^
observed, and showed his page where it is printed. Again by 52. Ministers of
the Province of London it was confessed (from the press too) that instead of a
Reformation they had a Deformation in Religion, -- having opened the very
Floodgates to all Impiety and profanen^sse, etc. This Concession I Ibid p. 81.
observed, and showed the page where it was printed. That proceeded from the
Scottish, this from the English Presbyterians. What may now be the reason, that
Mr. Baxter pursues me with so much Rancor? Was it my fault that the things were
printed, (without my knowledge or consent) and printed by the Authors from whom
I had them? Or may not a man relate a passage, as he find's it printed before
his eyes? Which was worst of the two, that Mr. Knox the Presbyterian commended
Murder, or that a man of the Church of England did fairly cite his
commendation? Let it be judged by my writings, and by the Authors whom I
produce, whether I am so like an Enemy to Christian purity, as they (who say
it) are Friends and Fautors to the most Heathenish Impurity to be imagined.

And because I have met with a sort of men, who having been led by blind
guides, have stuck so fast in the ditch of error, as to believe the word
Puritan is of a fair signification, and import's a man of a pious life, I
think it my duty to declare, (before I admit them to read my Book) that
whenever I shall be found to speak severe^y concerning Puritanes, (and that
in mere satisfaction to Mr. Baxter) I mean no other then have been meant by
Bishop Andrews of blesse^ Memory, or by the learned and Reverend Dr.
Sand^^son, with other persons of renown hereafter mentioned. Puritanes properly
are things, which being inwardly full of Filth, do either esteem themselves
pure, or would fain by others be so esteemed. And for the very same reason,
that Bishop Andrews fastened the name of Puritanes on those old Heretics, the
Catharists, I may bestow it on the Ipsi Impuri cum essent alios a se ut impures
arcebant. Sicut Samaritas Geographus Arabs clamass^ ait, Ne Attingas. Ejus
Samaritarum moris etiam ad hunc locum meminit Hieronymus. vid. Grot. in Isa.
65.5.
Samaritans, those older Schismatics amongst the Hebrews; who reckoned others
so impure in comparison of themselves, that if a man drew near them who was not
one of their Faction, they would send him away with a [ Ne Attingas] touch me
not thou man of Sin. Such like Puritanes were they, whom God himself has
described by the Prophet Esaias [A Rebellious people, which walks in a way that
is not good, after their own thoughts: A people that provokes me to anger
continually to my face, that sacrifices in Gardens, and burns Incense upon
altars of Brick, -- which say, STAND BY THY SELF, COME NOT NEAR TO ME, FOR I AM
HOLIER THEN THOU. Isa. 65.2, 3, 5.] Yet as Godly, and as pure, as in the pride
of their hearts they esteemed themselves, God denounces them as fuel to the
unclean Fire of Hell. For so the Chaldee Paraphrase does understand the next
words. These shall be a smoke in mine Anger, and a Fire that burns all the
day. Ibid. Such again were those Puritanes (for I may boldly parachronize by so
great an example as Bishop Andrews) of whom we are told by the Royal Preacher,
[there is a generation who are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed
from their filthiness. Prove. 30.12.] These are persons the more desperate, and
incapable of cure, the more difficult it is to make them feel that they are
sick. Continuing pure in their own eyes, we cannot persuade them to 2 Cor. 7.^.
cleanse themselves from any manner of filthiness, of flesh, or spirit. Thence
said our Savior to the Puritanes, who thought too well of themselves, to
accept of him for their Physician, [Verily I say unto you that the Publicans
and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you. Mat. 21.31.]

If when I show my aversion to such as these whom God abhors, and give my
inst^nce in Mr. Knox, with other rigid Presbyterians, (as the Lord Chancellor
Egerton had done before me) adding the reasons of what I do from Notereity of
Fact, and commonly too from their own Conf^ssions; If (I say) in such case, Mr.
Baxter and Mr. Hickman conclude themselves to be concerned, without so much as
demanding whether or no I mean them, they are ipso Facto their own Accusers. It
is not my fault, that Hypocrisy is a Sin; nor that I labor to make it odious.
If men are conscious to themselves of being Hypocrites, as I am not able to
make them less conscious, so neither would I, if I were able. My public
Premonition prefixed to (...). p. ult.
professions might h^ve ^ufficed, that when my word^ are general, I ai^e at
none in particular, unless I name them. I such as must acknowledge they were
not named, will needs be naming themselves in print, or otherwise make
applications where I make none, they themselves must acknowledge, I cannot help
it.

And therefore whatsoever unchristian speeches, I may continue to suffer for my
Good will, from such as (in order to their gain) do put on godliness for a
disguize, I will not cease (Good Reader) to put thee always in remembrance,
that the difference is as wide betwixt Purity and Puritanism, as betwixt
Holiness and Hypocrisy. Let Epicharmus his Apophthegm never depart out of thy
mind, (...). be sober and distrustful. Let the wisdom of the serpent protect
the innocence of the dove. A prudent diffidence is a lesson which is at least
as needful, as it is difficult to be lear^t. Take that from (...). Euripid. in
Helena.
Euripedes; and this from N^vi and Artus s^pientiae, non temere credere. Cicero
de pe^itione Consul.
Tully; that not to be swayed over hastily by the outward Mat. 23.28.
appearances of men, is no less then the Sinew and strength of wisdom. And
therefore however it is natural for Gold to glister, yet remember that Art is
the Apc of Nature, and that many things do glister which are not Gold.

Before thou see my first sheets, be pleased to know that they were printed,
before I saw the two Volumes to which I speak in my Appendix. If thou think
that I have erred in my civil Expressions to Mr. Baxter, whose incivilities
toward me made him unworthy of such a treatment; remember my errors are on the
right hand, whilst his are exceedingly on the left. And although I have taken a
special care, not to be censured in his next Volume (like them that sent him
kind Letters) for one of his Note the b^^barous Requital of C^v^l usage.
flattering and fauning Adversaries; yet I conceived it my advantage, to use
him better then he deserved. But if thou art not of my opinion, and art so
rigid an exactor of Arithmetical proportion in every exercise or act of
vindicative justice, as not to allow those errors in me, which thou yieldest to
be of the better sort; it is but taking thy Pen and Ink, and putting them all
in the Errata.

The general Contents of the several Chapters.
The Introduction. Of David and Peter in Mr. Baxter's Title Page. Of Puritanes
and Sequestrations in the same,

CHAP. I. Concerning Grotius.
SECT. I. His Religion and Design. Sect. 3. His English Followers. Dr. Hammond
and Mr. Thorndike in his defense. Sect. 4. To calumniate Grotius confessed
odious by his Calumniator. Sect. 5. Mr. Baxter's promise of Repentance ex
hypothesi. Grotius accused of turning Papist. But proved none by XIX.
Arguments. Drawn from other men's Testimonies, and from his own. From his own
both private and public Professions of himself. An Account of his Religion
from his Animadversions upon Rivet's. From his Annals and Histories. His Notes
on Cassander. His Votum pro Pace. His Epistles to the French. His De Imperio
Sum. Pot. circa Sacra. His Discussio Apologetici Rivetiani. From the last Act
of his Life, his Death, Burial. -- Sect. 6. Of his pretended Dissimulation, and
how it reflects on his Accuser. Sect. 7. Grotius at last is but a Papist with
an if, etc. Sect. 8. Popery disclaimed as well by Grotius and Mr. P. as by Mr.
Baxter. Sect. 9. Mistakes in reading Grotius, ariseing from a nescience or
hatred of his design. Sect. 10. How much may be offered to purchase peace.
Sect. 11. Grotius his Doctrine and Design more Catholical than Mr. Baxter's.
Sect. 12. And the terms to which he calls us, less impossible. Sect. 13.
Grotius does not cut off the holiest parts of the Church. Sect. 14. His way is
not uncharitable. Sect. 15. It does not tend to per^ecution. Sect. 16. It does
not engage in a way of Sin. Sect. 17. Men's thoughts of Grotius must be esteemed
by their words. Sect. 18. The Conclusion, containing a muster of those
Reproaches which are cast on Grotius by Mr. Baxter, and what disadvantage does
thence ensue.

CHAP. II. Concerning Subjects of several Natures.
Sect. 1. Mr. Baxter's acknowledgment of Charity, with his uncharitable
Requital. Sect. 3. The title of Arminian unseasonably applied. Sect. 4. Neither
Grotius nor any else can be too severe against blasphemy. Sect. 5. What
differences are verbal, and what are real. Sect. 6. A material difference
indeed. Sect. 8. Of heads of Controversy reconcilable. Sect. 9. Grotius made
not uncharitable inferences, but recited only already made.

CHAP. III. Concerning the state of David and the Godly, whilst yet Impenitent.
Sect. 1. A strange difference between the Godly, and the notoriously ungodly.
Sect. 2. The excessive danger of making the greatest sinners to dream
themselves into a Saintship. The danger exemplified in a Presbyterian woman
Sect. 3. The sins of David with their Circumstances. Sect. 4. Peter's sins very
different from those of David. Sect. 5. Of Solomon's state and its uncertainty.
Sect. 6. The Reprobates are granted by Mr. Baxter to have grace sufficient. Mr.
Baxter's Description of Common Grace and its effects. Sect. 7. Of men twice
sanctified. Sect. 8. Concerning the importance of Heb. 6. and 10. Sect. 9. Gods
testimony of David twofold, each to be compared with the Rule, Ezekiel. 18.24.
etc. Sect. 10. How far charity was decayed in David; and how hard it is to
murder wilfully in love. Sect. 11. Of David's Prayer Psalm. 51. Sect. 12. His
being clearly unsanctified by his accumulated sins. Sect. 13. A signal
quick-sand to be avoided by all that are ensna^ed with the novel notion of
perseverance. Sect. 14. Of Faith as a practical adherence unto God. Sect. 15.
David was soberly put to it. Sect. 16. The fallacious use of the word
Graceless. Sect. 17. Some are thinkers to their own prejudice. Sect. 18. It is
an other quick-sand to be avoided, which leads men to think they are the better
for their Hypocrisy. Sect. 19. What it is, and what it is not, to build upon a
rock. Sect. 20. The horror of a Doctrine should teach its vassals to disclaim
it. The equivocal refuge of being obedient in the maine. Sect. 21. What was
predominant in David when he deliberately sinned. Sect. 22. None in adultery
and murder can be really good men before the time of their repentance. Sect.
23. The danger of the great error proposed to consideration, what desperate
Doctrines have been applauded by some of the ablest Presbyterians, no whit
better then those of Wickliff.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Subjects of several Natures.
Sect. 1. A tacit and groundless accusation sadly reflecting on the accuser.
Sect. 2. Of condemning brethren. The accuser is the most criminal. Sect. 3.
Wants of charity examined, and found to be in the accuser. Sect. 5. The
accusers character of himself. Sect. 6. His obligation to re^ant, if not
resolutely mischievous.

CHAP. V. Concerning Puritanes.
Sect. 1. The Puritanes lives no better then their doctrines. Sect. 3. Their
partiality to their own Tribe. The contrary lives of Antipuritan^s. Sect. 4.
The Accusers concurrence with the Jesuit. Sect. 5. Fitz-Simmons his Artifice
discovered, and the Puritanes service-ablenesse to the Papists. Sect. 6. King
James his description of a Puritan. Sect. 7. What Puritan signifies with the
Papists. Sect. 8. A mistake of the old Catharists who yet were Puritanes before
the word was fitted to the thing. Grotius groundlesly calumniated afresh. Sect.
9, What the Puri^anes were with the old Episcopal party. The judgment of
Archbishop Whitgift and judicious Hooker concerning Puritanes, Dr. Sanderson's
judgment of the same. Sect. 10. Bishop Andrews his judgment of Puritanes in
his Sermon of worshipping imaginations, p. 29. A.D. 1592. published by supreme
Authority. Sect. 11. Sir John Harrington's judgment of Puri^anes. The
judgment of Queen Eliz: and her Privy Counsel, and Archbishop Bancroft p.
12.13. and Archbishop Whitgift. ib. p. 7.8. Of Judge Fopham. Sect. 12. The Lord
keeper Puckering's judgment of Puritanes by the direction of Queen Eliz:
delivered in the House of Lord in Parliament assembled. Sect. 13. The judgment
of Dr. R. Clarke, one of the Translators of the Bible, conce^ning the
then-Puritanes, in his second Visitation Sermon Zech 11.17. Sect. 14. An
account of Puritanes from the Examen Historicum. Wichliff's new Gospel. Their
helping on the Popish interest. Their rebellious Principles. Sect. 15. Bishop
Montagues judgment of Puritanes. Sect. 16. Grotius his judgment concerning
Puritanes. Mr. Thorndike's judgment of Puritanes; Bishop Hall's judgment of
Puritanes in his Latin exhortation to the Synod at Dort, on Eccles. 7.16. Sect.
17. King James distinguished the Knaves-Puritane, from the Puritane-Knave.
Sect. 18. Of the word Roundhead, and praying aloud in private. Sect. 19. How
the Puritanes are the worst kind of swearers. Sect. 20. The tale of drinking a
bloody health to the Devil, no less impertinent, then uncharitable. A gross and
dangerous falsification in the management of the tale. Men should be taught by
their sufferings not to do wrong. A Caveat against Raisers of false reports.
Confident corrupting of plain words. Sect. 22. How some Puritanes have
excommunicated themselves. The Monopolizer of Censoriousness no good Projecter.
Sect. 23. A strange kind of Catholic, who is against the whole Church, yet
partially cleaves unto a Sect, whilst he condemn's it. Sect. 24. A wilful
imposture, or else a Patronage of impiety.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Sequestration of Episcopal Divines.
Sect. 1. Of Episcopal Divines and the Archbishop of Cant. Sect. 2.
Sequestrations misliked by their very Abettors. Sect. 3. Sufficient information
for such as want and desire it. Guilty men must keep their secrets or not be
angry that they are known. Sect. 4. A sad plea for injustice from an opinion
that it is good Sect. 5. Sequestrations disowned by their Defender. Sect. 6.
Accusations are of no value, when only general, and without proof. An ill man
may have a good title to his Estate, and must not be wronged for being
unrighteous. Evil must not be done in pretense of good ends. Romans 3.8. Sect. 7.
He who craves help must have the patience to receive it. Sect. 8. The
shamefulness of Mr. Whites Centuries, worse were put into livings then the
worst that were put out. Sect. 9. Unseasonable bitterness to the Protestants,
from one who would not befriend the Papists. The indefinite Accuser brought to
his trial by some particulars. A signal Confession, that what is called a
Reformation was but a change unto the worse. Presbyterian confessions to the
advantage of the Prelatists. The National Covenant confessed faul^y. Sect. 10.
A strange way of arguing in the behalf of Cruelty. Its consequence subversive
of all humane society. Sect. 11. Concerning Usurpers and Restitution. Sect. 12.
What sequestrations are misliked, and what not. Sect. 13. Of growing Lu^ty on
Sequestrations, and self-denial in usurpation.

CHAP. VII. Of the Dort-Synod and the Remonstrants.
Sect. 1. A confessed (...). Sect. 2. The Synodists unexcusable by standing out
after yielding. Sect. 3. Of grace which is really, not verbally sufficient.
Sect. 4. Austin confessedly against the Synod of Dort. Sect. 5. The extent of
grace. Sect. 6. The Synod of Dort paralleled with the Jesuits even by its own
Advocates. Sect. 7. The Denial of original pravity falsely charged on the
Remonstrants. Sect. 8. How much there is in the will of man. Sect. 9. To
convert a sinner no breach of charity. Sect. 10. Who it is that abuses the
choicest of Gods servants. Sect. 11. Made appear by an example.

The Contents of the APPENDIX. Concerning several Subjects both in The Key for
Catholics, and in the Book of Disputations of Church Government and Worship.
SECT. I. The chief occasion of the Appendix Sect. 2. Mr. Baxters charge of
Popery attended with self-contradictions. Sect. 3. Made the more heinous in
four respects. Sect. 4. He is showed his Danger, as well as guilt. Sect. 5.
Himself proved to be a Papist by fourteen Arguments, according to his own
Logic. Grotius vindicated and cleared from all appearance of Popery (from.
Sect. 6. to Sect. 26.) The testimony of Poelenburg opposed to that of
Sarravius. Mr. Baxters confounding a Primacy of order with a supremacy of
power. And the New Canons of Rome with the ancient Canons of General Councils.
His many and grievous mistakes in translating Grotius his Latin; whether from
wilfulness, or weakness, is referred unto the Reader. Grotius his design had no
influence on our English changes. No Church-preferment was offered to him.
Franciscus a Sancta Clara had a contrary design. Dr. Bezier cleared from an
implicit Calumny. The Popes Primacy allowed by all sorts of Protestants as well
as Grotius; Bishop Andrews, Bishop Bramhall, Dr. Hammond, etc. A conjecture
passed upon the letters which Mr. Baxter says were sent to him of the real
presence in the Lords Supper. Material and formal Idolatry. Two sorts of
P^pists. The granted Primacy a Bulwark against Popery; Pacificks are not a
cause of discord. The Pri^acy of the Pope; how it removes the whole mistake.

Sect. 29. By whom our Breaches were first made, and are ever since widened.
The wrong sore rubbed by Mr. Baxter, and Presbyterians galled upon the
Prelatists backs. The Prelatists beaten for being abused yet are earnest
desirers of Reconcilement. The Church of England justified by the Confessions
of her Desertors. The Presbyterian separatists apparently unexcusable. They are
obnoxious to men of all sides for their sin of schism. Especially to the
Episcopal, whose sufferings have made them the more conformable to the
Primitive Christians. Sect. 30. Lay Elders condemned by such as had sworn to
assert them. Sect. 31. A Calumny cast upon our Preachers to the sole disgrace
of the Calumniator. Once a day Preaching and Catechizing, a great deal better
then Prateing twice. The Accuser most criminal. The Presbyterian Readers are
many more then the Episcopal. And their Preaching much worse, if we may credit
their own confessions. An agreement in point of Raileing between the Quakers
and Presbyterians. Sect. 32. A fair Confession how far a Protestant may go, and
be still a Protestant.

Sect. 33. Of Bishops and Presbytery. Bishop Hall's censure of the disturbers
of settled Government in the Church. The Lord Primate's censure of Presbyterian
Ordinations, as invalid and Schismati^al; Dr. Holdsworth's sufferings a
Declaration of his judgment. Sect. 34. The Presbyterian excuses are
Aggravations of their offenses. Sect. 35. Bishop Prideaux confessed a Moderate
man, though the sharpest Censor of our English Presbyterians. He does
Characterize them by Ravenous Wolves. By ambitious low shrubs conspiring
against the goodly Oak. By a petulant Ape on the house top. By the greedy Dog,
and the Sacrilegious Bird in the common Fable. By Baltasar and Achan. By the
title Smectymnuan, importing a monster with many heads. By the Bramble,
consuming the Cedar of Lebanon. Bishop Prideaux used worse then any scandalous
Minister.

Sect. 36. A vindication of Bishops, and Doctor Hammond's Paraphrase. Sect. 37.
A Refutation of the prime Argument for Presbyterian Ordinations. Mr. Baxter
proved to be an Heathen by his own Art of Syllogizing. Sect. 38. Presbyterians
are not Bishops by having Deacons under them. Sect. 39. Immoderate virulence
toward those of the Episcopal way. Mr. Thorndike's judgment of Presbyterian
Ordinations.

Sect. 40. A parallel case between the Pharisees of old, and our modern
Puritans.

Sect. 41. What has been meant by the word Puritan by Learned men. The Lord
Chancellor Egerto^'s judgment of Puritans. Bishop Bramhall's judgment of the
same. Bishop Hall of Pharisaism and Christianity.

Sect. 42. The Presbyterian Directory exceedingly abominable. The Kings reasons
against the Directory. And his reasons for the Common Prayer.

Sect. 43. Concerning Coppinger and Hacket, and the communication of their
Design to the Presbyterian Ministers. Sect. 44. Dr. Steward's Sermon at Paris.
And Dr. Heylin's Antipuritanism.

To the Reverend Mr RICHARD BAXTER.
Reverend Sir,
Sect. 1. AFter so many of my endeavors to disappoint the open enemies of
Truth and Reason, thereby to rescue poor Christians from the worst kind of
thraldom, in which too many have been held by the Mythologie of the Turks,
whose desperate Doctrine of God's Decrees does seem to me more terrible then
all their Armies, by how much the bondage of a man's Spirit is more to be
feared then that of his Flesh, (for the effecting of which Rescue, I verily
thought you had labored with me, till what you raised with one hand you also
ruined w^h the other; which made me think many times of Penelope's Web,) I
pleased my self with an opinion that my Disputes were all ended; and that a
liberty would be allowed me to pass the remnant of my days in my proper
Element: I take the words of old Hesiod as if they were spoke unto my self,
(...). For although perhaps I may not say I have as great an averseness to all
Contention, as that of the Fish unto the Fire; yet am I not able to endure it,
but when I steadfastly believe it to be a Duty. And being persuaded that it is
mine, I dare not shrink from a discharge, how much soever it may cost me in
self-denials. That alone is the time of my being employed in my proper Element,
when I am studying the Doctrine and Life of Christ, as both are ordinable to
practice; when I am preaching the glad tidings of the Gospel of Peace, as one
to whom is committed the Word of Reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5.19.
when I am teaching the Ignorant, admonis^ing the Guilty, procuring settlement
to the Doubtful, and binding up the brokenhearted; when I am anxiously
pressing for Love, and Loyalty, and Evangelical obedience to every one of
Christ's Precepts, that the profession of Christianity may not be brought into
In nobis Christus patitur opprobriu^, in nobis patitur Lex Christiana
maledictum, aestimari it aque de cultoribus suis potest^ille qui colitur.
Salvian de Gubern. lib. 4. Romans 2* 24.
disgrace, nor the name of Christ be blasphemed among the Gentiles, through
them who call it their duty to live in a course of disobed^ence, and even boast
that they have learned it in Chris^s own school.

Sect. 2. But the opinion which I was of, that it would once more be given me
to live in peace, (I speak of peace from without, for mine enemies cannot rob
me of peace within,) and to employ my whole time in those more acceptable
endeavors, to which the bent of my soul does most puissantly incline me,
although it was innocent and pleasing, (whilst it was able to stay with me,)
yet it appeared upon a sudden to have been a very fugitive and false opinion.
For no sooner had I begun to bea^ my sword into a Plow-share, and to try if
men might be brought into an unity of Love (of which the first fruits are since
made public) when an unity of Judgment appeared to be so unattainable; but
straight I found my self alarmed, and bid to stand upon my guard, as being
openly defied to a fresh encounter. So little hope is there of peace to one who
finally resolves not to have friendship with the world, (I mean that Iam. 4.4.
friendship which is enmity with God) that I am not afforded some little truce.
I have not only been assaulted by a su^cession of Aggressors, for some years
past, but commonly diverse of them at once have fallen hastily upon me in the
very same quarters; hoping the number of their men might distract my thoughts,
when the weight of their Arguments could not be able to o^press them.

Sect. 3. Of all those persons who have at any time discharged their Pens upon
me, from Doctor Reynolds to Mr. Hickman, (that is, from the worthiest to the
unworthiest of my Assailants,) none has ever more exercised either my joy, or
sorrow, or admiration, then your very much applauded and reverend self. First,
it was matter to me of joy, that I should now have to do with a susficient
adversary; whom (after the reverend Doctor Reynolds) I had esteemed one of the
ablest of all that are enemies to the Church. Next, it was matter to me of
sorrow, that so famous a Writer as you have been, should call me forth into the
field in so poor a Quarrel, and that you made not choice of a fitter subject,
which might have made you less liable then now you are. But I was taken with
admiration, when I found you calling me Arminian, and inveighing against me
even as such, when you your self (with as much reason) had been written against
as an Arminian, and that by the men of your own dear party: methinks by your
own unjust sufferings you might have learnt compassion on them that suffer as
unjustly as you can possibly have done. I wish you had taken more Optimum
emenda^di genus est, si scripta in aliquod tempus reponantur, ut ad ea tanquam
nova and aliena redeamus, ne nobis tanquam recentes foetus blandiantur. Quintil.
time to weigh the matter you were to write of, then you would seem to have
taken to write your book. I wish it for mine own sake as well as yours. Because
the greater your failings are, the less you are capable of excuses, for which I
should be willing to yield some place. And the easier it is to subdue your
forces, I have the less encouragement to strive with you at all; and so the
less to rejoice in in my i^ployment. But being one of Christ's soldiers, and
warring under his Barner, I cannot make mine own enemy, or must I choose mine
own ground or way of Castrametation. I am to f^ght against Error and Sin in
general; and because I cannot ^o all at once, I am bound to fall on wheresoever
I am appointed by my commander in chief, or where mine Adversaries challenge
has made it needful.

O^ David and Peter in the Title page.
Sect. 4. Should I begin with your Title Page, and say as much against that, as
that has given me occasion, my Introduction would be in danger to be as long
as your Preface. Which though but almost half your Book, yet it seems to me
much more then the whole; at least in my sense, if not in (...). Hesiod. l. ^.
(...).
Hesiod's. And the Portal being the chiefest part of the House, puts me in mind
of what was said by Diodorus of Sicily, (...). Diodor. Sicul. l. 20. p. 746.
That there are some Historians who have made their whole story a mere Appendix
unto their speeches. I will not therefore incur the danger of a voluminous
Introduction, by insisting on the unfitness of every part of your Title Page,
but only remove one special stumbling block, which you were pleased to put in
your Readers way.

In the Title of your book, you pretend a vindication of David and Peter, etc.
as if you would intimate to your Readers that I had wronged them. I might have
said with more reason in the Title of mine, that I vindicate the truth of the
Holy 2 S^m. 11.2, 4, 8, 13, 15, 25, 27.
Scriptures, in maintaining that David committed Adultery and Murder, besides
his making Uriah drunk, and his foul dissimulation with God and Man. Of which
although he repented, 2 Samuel 12.4.9.
and writ against, and put his repentance upon Psalm. 51.
record too; yet before he repented he was impenitent, and that for more then
nine Months. These (you know) were the things which I denied to consist with
the power of Godliness, or with a state of salvation, during the state of
impenitence in which he lived. And I had good reason for it, because you h^d
said in plain English, that a man must be wickeder then David was at his worst,
before he could be said to be notoriously ungodly, or in a state of damnation.
And considering the ground (or quick-sand rather) upon which you build such
killing Doctrine; I thought my self bound to leave an Antidote to defend my
poor Contrymen from being poisoned. For they who can but presume that they
are absolutely elected, and cannot possibly fall away, or be in a state of
damnation, may be apt to sin greedily, (which is somewhat more then without
regret,) at least as far as David is affirmed by some Preachers to have sinned
in safety; and for this they may appeal to several books of Mr. Baxter. I did
not give this Caveat in any ill will to you, Si^, much less to David; but in
great good will to my weaker brethren, who the more they (...). 1 Cor. 10.12.
seem to themselves to stand, the more I would have them to take heed lest they
fall.

Sect. 5. Hereupon I ask you, Did you promise in your Title Page to vindicate
David as an Adul^erer, or as a Murderer, or as one who repented of all his
wickedn^ss? If the former, you are professedly a Pleader for gross impiety; if
the latter, you have not spoken to the purpose, nor resisted any thing at all,
but what was the fruit of your private fancy.

Sect. 6. The same I may say of S. Peter also. Of Peter, Puritans, and
Sequestrations in the Title Page.
For I spoke against nothing in all his life, except his cowardice, and his
perjurie, and his flat denial of the Lord Jesus, for which he hated himself,
and did not write a vindication. I only spoke of such Puritans as I described
to be hypocrites; having only a form of godliness, but denying the power of
it; the impurest creatures in the sight of God, and good men, as for other
reasons, so for this also, that they are the Pro. 30.12. Isa. 65.5.
purest in their own. I spoke of such Sequestrations as were confessed to be
unlawful by eminent Ministers of your own party, and that in print, nay
detested by your self, if I may credit your own words, p. 111. Of all which
when you profess to take upon you a vindication, I know not how you will free
your self from siding with sin on the one side, or from strange impertinence on
the other. I will have so fair an opinion of you, as to think you incurred this
inconveni^nce by writing hand over head, as egged on by the heat of your
present interest and passion, which gave you not time to consider that you were
writing against your interest, and against your intentions of writing for it.
If this were the worst, (as it is really the best that I am able to make of so
bad a matter) I shall be very glad of it, and hope, that as you have offended
through too much haste, so you will make amends for it at greater leisure. I
say, I hope it so much the rather, because if you find you are mistaken, you
have offered me your promise of recantation.

Sect. 7. You see how willing I am to put the best construction upon your words
that your words will bear: which course I wish you would have taken with me and
Grotius, in stead of the worst that you could fancy either of his words or
mine. I shall hope to overcome you in nothing more then in the measure of my
civility and candid usage. And therefore I pray do me the justice, whenever you
find your self afflicted with any portion of my Discourse, to consider from
whence the affliction rises. It shall not arise from any such bitterness of
words or ce^sures, as you and others have poured out against me, (you indeed
much less then others) but from the nature of your own matter, from the
condition of your own failings, and from the evidence of the conviction which
my conscience forbids me to let you want.

Sect. 8. I shall begin with your Preface, and, in that, with your thoughts of
Grotius; which lying scattered up and down in many parts of your Book, I shall
endeavor to gather up (as far as my leisure will permit, and occasion serve)
to be considered by themselves in the following Chapter. I shall direct my
speech unto your Reverend self, not upon any other motive then a civil
compliance with your example. The former half of your book (which you call a
Preface) being only divided into Sections, and the later h^lf being printed
with a notification of the pages; I think it will be my easiest way, so to
distinguish in my citations, as to note the Sections only of the former, and
only the pages of the later. It is in order to my ease, that I resolve on this
course; and in order to yours, that I take this care to advertise you.

CHAP. I. Concerning Grotius, his Religion and Design.

Sect. 1. IN the entrance of your Preface, [ you profess to render m^ that
account of your thoughts of Grotius, and his English followers, which I was
pleased to demand and make your duty. And that you had much rather have been
excused from stirring in this unpleasing business any more. Sect. 1.] I had
wonder^d that in your Title Page you should say you did what you did at Mr.
Pierce his invitation. I wonder more that in your preface you would say you did
it at my demand. Truly if I did either, it is more then I know. And I may say,
(...); where, and when, and by whom did I demand any such thing? Two lines in a
letter will suffice you to answer this easy Question.

Sect. 2. It is well you call them your thoughts of Grotius, which may be
strangely mistake^, and yet your thoughts still. It had been more for your
interest, if you had not pretended in your Title to an undoubted Discovery of
the Grotian Religion, meaning his being turned Papist; as you have often
explained your self. For now we have it under your hand, that you h^ve but
discovered your thoughts of Grotius. This indeed is a modest and proper speech,
because your thoughts are such private and hidden things, that God alone can
discern them whilst you are silent: we silly mortals cannot come at them, but
by that discovery which you are plea^'d to make of them. But Grotius, whilst he
was living, was at once a public and a most Exemplary person: much more are
his writings, since his Translation, To make a Discovery of the Sun, who is
best discerned by his own Light, were to suppo^e the world is Blind, and he
alone quick- sighted who undertakes to show him to all the rest. But to
discover what a man thinks of the Sun or Moon, as to the nature of his
substance, his sphaere, and motion, has nothing in it either of singular, or
absurd. It is for want of a better thing, that I content my self with this
Resemblance, in comparing Grotius unto the Sun. His works give Light unto the
world. They all lie open as well to me as to your self. You are led by some
Reasons, to think that Grotius was a Papist; and I have met with many more,
which make me know him to have been none.

Of his Engi^sh ^ollowers.
Sect. 3. But what do you mean by his English Followers? Has any Englishman
of late (either dead or alive) written any Design of pacification between the
Protestant and Popish parties? All that can be said is this, that the
unwavering men of the Church of England do love the writings of Grotius much
more then those of the Presbyterians, and more then the Presbyterians love
them. Now if to read his Books and to admire them does make us fit to be
reckoned amongst his Followers, your self must pass for one of the chief;
because you tell me (p. 4.) You must i^ gratitude profess, that you have
learnt more from Grotiu^, then from almost any Writer in those subjects that
ever you read.] Hardly any can speak higher, unless I except Dr. Owen, who
says that Grotius was almost-wise above the pitch of humane Nature, (if that
is the meaning of his Latin, ultra humanitatem pene sapuisse) and that in In
omni literatura.
all manner of learning; insomuch that he thinks there is nothing comparable to
him, (if that is his meaning by Quicquam ei sim^le esse vix credo.) Yet this
Gentleman and you have been so far from avowing the being Followers of Grotius,
that ye are the only men amongst us who have showed your selves his public
Enemies. Although ye vehemently d^ffered between your selves, yet ye agreed in
this, that ye were both against Grotius. Nay, in this your Agreement ye
differed too with a witness. For he would have Grotius a Socinian, and you a
Papist. Now a Papist and a Socinian are not only so different, but so utterly
irreconcilable, that nothing but Grotius his moderation can afford any excuse
to one or other of his Accusers. You have justified Grotius from the Heresy of
Socinianism, which you confess he has too often been charged with, p. 89. And
so you have sided with the Prelatists against the man before mentioned. He
again has freed Grotius from the suspicion of being a Papist, (if no Socinian
can be a Papist, as you know none can) and so has sided with the Prelatists
against your self. I mean by Prelatists the unchangeable Divines of the Church
of England. Such as those two Reverend and Righteous men, Dr. Hammond and Mr.
Thorn^ike, whom I only single out for this one reason, because they have
vindicated Grotius from each extreme of the Calumny, which (betwixt you two)
has been cast upon him. And to prepare you for the evidence with which I shall
afterward entertain you, as well as to give you some ground to suspect your
own judgment, by letting you see how it differ's from such as theirs, I think
it as useful as it is pertinent to give you some of their words.

There is no color for this suggestion (of Grotius his closeing with the Roman
interest) as far as Grotius his writings give us to judge, Dr. Hammonds words
in his second Def^nce of Grotius, p. 5.
(and farther then those I have no perspective to examine his Heart.) For the
Fomenters of the Divisions in Christendom being the only persons whom he
professed to oppose, (the irreconciliabiles, and qui aeterna cupiunt esse
dissidia) it is consequent, that the pacificatory interest was the only one by
him espoused and pursued most affectionately. And I could never yet discern by
any pregnant indication, that this is the Roman interest.

We have seen two men of repute now amongst us censure Grotius his Labors upon
the Scriptures. Mr. Thorndikes words in his Epilogue to the Tragedy of the
Church of England. Epist. to the Reader, p. 5.
The one has made him a Socinian, the other a Papist. Both could have given us
no better Argument that he was Neither, then this, that he cannot be Both. -- I
do but instance in an eminent person, who must needs be a Papist, though never
reconciled to the Church of Rome; who must needs be a Socinian, though
appealing to the original consent of the whole Church. Upon what Terms should
there be any such thing as Papists or Socinians? I remember an Admonition of
his bitter Adversary Dr. Rivet, that the Sea of Rome will never thank him for
what he writ. And from hence I inferred, as charity obliged me to infer, that
the common good of Christianity, and of God's Church, obliged him to that, for
which he was to expect thanks on no side. Thi^ for certain, Grotius never lived
by maintaining Division in the Church: whether any body does so or not, I say
not; their Master will judge them for it if they do.

Now Sir, let me tell you, that unless you think you have read more, or can
better judge in your Reading of Grotius his writings, then the so venerable
persons who speak before us, you ought at least to suspend your censure; until
you shall find, by all that follows, upon whose Misadventure you ought to place
it. If you shall possibly, say that these are two of the English Followers of
whom you speak, you cannot do Grotius a greater pleasure; they having both
given blows to the Church of Rome, more then all the whole party with whom you
join.

To calumniate Grotius confe^sed odious.
You say, you do confess it an odious thing to calumniate so Learned a man as
Grotius, and all others of his mind and way; and that you must needs rep^nt and
recant, if you be guil^y of so great a Crime. Sect. 1.]

Sect. 4. I would very fain know, which are the men of his way, as that is
distinguished from his mind, and seems to signify his practice. And what way
it is which here you allude to obscurely, but do not name. I for my part can
think of none, but his not communicating in France with either Papists or
Protestants. And amongst us here in England, I know nothing like it, except the
way of the Presbyterians, many of whom for diverse years have been so averse
unto Communions, that in their Churches, the world knows, they have not had any
at all: yet even this way of his is sufficient to evidence his being no Papist.
As I shall show most clearly in due time and place.

Repentance promised ex hypothesi.
Sect. 5. Because you promise Repentance and Recantation, if you be found to be
guilty of so great a Crime, as you call it, to calumniate such a man as
Grotius; I will first set down how far forth you have accused him; next I will
manifest his innocence of that whereof he stands charged; and then I will leave
you to consider whether you ought not to make him some Reparations.

You do not content your self to say, Gro^ius accused of turning Papist.
he was a Favourer of the Papists, and one who thought not so hardly of them as
other Protestants have done; or that he was strongly inclined that way, and put
the best interpretation upon their Doctrins that they were capable of bearing,
that the Peace of Christendom might not seem so impossible as some would make
it; or that he stood in a preparedness of mind to reconcile himself unto the
Papists, upon condition the Papists also would reconcile themselves unto the
moderate Protestants, and the moderate Protestants unto them; (for this had
been to say no more then I can say of Thuanus, that he favored the Protestants
on all occasions, although he remained a Papist still:) But you have said in
gross Terms, That he took it for his glory to be a Roman Catholic, Sect. 2.
That h^ turned Papist, p. 11. That he dropped by thi^ means into a deplorable
Schism, Ibid. So as if I shall demonstrate that there was never any such thing,
and that Grotius did not turn Papist, no, no more then Mr. Baxter himself, (who
yet h^th been branded for a Papist as well as Grotius; and by an eminent
Presbyterian also, that is, by one of your own party;) I shall at once open a
way to show the Nullity of your reasons, and the Necessity of your Repentance,
of which you have made me to live in hope. My Reasons o^ Arguments are these
that follow.

Arg. 1. In his Epistle to Laurentius, Proved to be none by 19. Arguments.
G^ot. Animadv. in Animadv. Riveti. p. 83.
who had written against him as a Papist whilst yet he lived, (as you have
done after his Death) intitling his Book, Grotius Papizans, he does ex^resly
disown the charge, -- facile videbis no^ Grotium Papizare, sed Laurentiadem
nimis Calvinizare. Now when I find him expressly disowning Popery, (even after
his Notes upon Cassander,) who certainly knew his own mind best; and when I
find you declaring, that every man shall by you be taken for that which he
professes to be, (p. 23.) and again, that you would take men to be of the
Religion which they profess, p. 98. and that you will believe the profession
of G^otius (p. 89.) I know not how you can choose but see your error. But come
we from writing to word of mouth.

Arg. 2. There lives a Person of great Honor and of great Romark for his
Wisdom, as well as for hi^ great Learning and Moderation; and the eminent
employments he has been in, who has affirmed in my hearing, (and not in my
hearing only,) That being conversant with Grotius during his Embassy in
France, he took his time to ask Grotius, why h^ did not communicate with either
party. G^otius made him this Answer, That with the Papi^ts he could not,
because he was not of their mind; with the Calvinists he could not, (not only
because of his Embassy from Swedeland, where they were not Followers of Calvin,
b^t als^) because he was deterr^d by their pernicious: Doctrins of God's
Decrees. To this he added, That he would gladly communicate with the Church of
England, if his condition of Ambassador would well permit, expressing an ample
This part will be attested by a Reverend person of our Church, Mr. Matthias
Turner, who was personally conversant with G^otius some years in France, and
whose excellent skill In Greek and Hebrew did make him the fitter for such
converse: so will it also by a great Personage distinct from him in my Text.
Approbation of our Doctrine and Discipline, as also heartily wishing to live
and dye in that Communion. I do not name that Noble person who is the Author of
this Relation, because I have not yet asked his leave. If you can must to my
integrity, I need not say more; if not, I can prove it by so unquestionable a
witness, as I am very confident you cannot but trust. However, you find it to
be agreeable to what himself whilst he was living made known in print; and you
shall find it agreeable to that which follows. For,

Arg. 3. Many are able to attest, that 'twas the last advice which he though^
it his duty to give his wife, that she would declare him to dye in that
Communion in which he desired than she her self would still live. This she
manifested accordingly, by coming on purpose to our Church at Sir Richard
Brown's House, (the King of England's Resident them in France,) where from the
hands of Mr. Cro^de^ she received the Of this Sir Thomas D^r^l professes
himself an Eyewitness, and that her two daughters ^^^^ived with her.
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. And this i^mediately after her Husband's
Death, as soon as Reasons of state did cease to hinder.

Arg. 4. This is agreeable with the reports which I and others have met with in
the public place of his conversation for diverse years toward his last. I took
my pension in Paris near Cleromont College, in which P^ta^^ius h^d then a
being: and all I could learn from ^y inquiry was truly this, that all took
Grotius for a person of imparallel'd abilities in every kind, but yet extremely
to be lamented, as one who could not be brought into the bosom of the Church,
that is to say, they could not persuade him to be a Papist. And I was lately
assured by Mr Castiglio, (a learned person, and a religious, and so a very true
speaker,) that in a conference which he had with some Augustine Friars with
whom he traveled, he found that Gro^ius was an heretic in their ^steem, as
much as any other Protestants who were not followers of Calvin. And I am very
much mistaken if that which Mr Knott has cited from Grotius (p. 167.) against
Mr Chillingworth, is not purposely ci^ed as from one of our own sid^. I have
also been told (by a worthy person) of^ a message sent from Groti^s to Doctor
Cous^n^ [that he should die in the Faith of the Church of England.] But because
I want the same evidence of this, which I am sure I have of other things, I do
not urge it as any new Argument.

Arg. 5. But it is (to me^) another Argument, and of very great moment, that so
judicious an Author as Docto^ Hammond, Dr. Ham. Cont. of Def. of H. Grot. p. 25.
in his Continuation of the Defense of Grotiu^, did think he had g^ound
sufficient to say what follows, viz. That Grotiu^ had always a sig^al val^e
and kindness for this ou^ Englis^ Church and Nation: expressing his opinion,
that of all Churches in the world, it was the most careful observer and
transcriber of Primitive antiquity; and more then intimating his desire, to end
his d^^y^s in the bos^m^ and com^uni^^ of our M^r^e^. Now because it is added
by so credible a speaker as Doctor Hammond, that Ibid.
of this he wants not store of witnesses who from time to time had heard it
from his own mo^^h, whilst he was Ambassador in France, and even in his
return to Sweden immediately before his death; and because my witnesses (before
mentioned) are distinct from his, who yet agree in the thing attested; I have
added his intelligence as a very good Argument to back mine own, which having
said, I proceed to argue as I began, from several testimonies of Grotius
concerning himself.

G^ot A^nal. l. 1. p. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Arg. 6. As in his Annals (de rebus Belgicis) he strictly censures the
corruptions which by little and little the Popes had obtruded upon the Church,
and discovers the Need of Reformation into which Christendom had been brought
by the power and prevalence of those corruptions; so likewise in his Histories,
(which I have reason to believe were some of the last things he perfected) he
clearly sides with our English Protestants against the pretentions of Religion
which came from Rome. P^aemium addidit sceleri scelerum immunitatem, etiam apud
Deum: atque alia id genus ludibria, quae rudibus seculis haud invalida nunc
tantum in spec^em dantur, in speciem accipiuntur, etc. Hist. lib. 1. p. 117.
Sixtus Q^intus (the then-Po^e) together with his Anathema's and Indulgences
and other tricks of Religion, are exposed both to the Censur^ and the Derision
of all his Readers. He shows himself pleased in his observation, that as the
Romanists had imposed upon the rudeness and simplicity of former Ages, so they
had happily been detected by the sagacity of the later. And what is this but to
applaud (though not the seditious lovers of change, such as the Annal. l. 1. p.
9.
Tailor was at Munster, and the Pictur^-drawer at Leyde^, yet) the Regular
attempters of Reformation?

Arg. 7. In his Poem praefixed before his Notes upon Cassander, he did not
only commend Cassander, and call his writings veracia scripta, for
acknowledging the corruptions of the Church of Rome, and favoring the Articles
of the Augustan Confession, (which by the way gives answer to one of your
princi^al objections p. 31. occas^on'd by your mistake of veracia scripta) but
he magnified very much the pacifick methods of Melanchthon, Quem proedulce
juvat stillante Melanch^hone Nectar; Qui Wiceli chartas Modreviique. leg's;
Quique putas Regem mul^um sapuiff^ B^itan^um, C^ sua ma^davit s^n'a
Cas^ubonidae; Accipe.. sed nos^^o labor hic si displicet ^evo, A gra^a pretium
posteritate feret.
Wi^elius, Mo^revius, the Bishop of Spalato, in his departure from Rome, K.
James, and Casaubon, (of who^e pacifick design King James was Author) who being
confessed to have been Protestants, and to have meditated the peace of the
Christian world without any prejudice to the Reformed parts of it, had not
certainly been applauded, without exception to their design or to the mea^s
they contrived for its attainment, by so intelligent a person as Grotius was,
if he had really been a Papist, as you suggest: much less had he reckoned their
several purposes and endeavors as so many Standards or Measures by which he
hoped Posterity would judge of His. It is true, he set down the Canons of the
Council of Trent, as one of the great things to be considered toward an union;
but so did he also the whole Protestant Confession agreed upon at Augusta,
betwixt which and the other a reconcilement was to be made. If the former spoke
him a Papist, the later spoke him a Protestant. And if at once he was both, he
was indeed a great Hocus. But he ^leads for himself, his having set out the
Creed as well of the Protestants as of the Papists (Discuss. p. 7.) as it were
on purpose to show the difference betwixt a making of peace, and a turning
Papist.

Arg. 8. In his Animad versions upon Rivet's, he puts a very vast difference
between the Synods at Dort and at Augusta; and between the Page 4^
Protestants who follow either: the want of which observation in all his
Concili^tory writings, I suppose a main cause of your numerous mistakes. And
the supply of that want will serve to show you the levity of the greatest part
of your objections. Indeed the rigid Presbyterians, whose Life and Doctrine
proclaimed them Boutefeus and Rebels, he commonly marks as an implacable and an
unreconcileable sort of men, as it were made for the subversion of Church and
State; and professed enemies to Peace Quod ta^ ^perr^ se non dicam mihi. sed
paci profitetur inf^stum (D. Rivetu^) in eo vicit expectationem meam. Animadv.
in A^imadv. p. 3.
it self, as well as to those that dare attempt it. But for Melanchthon and
Casaubon, and other such Protestants as did desire to reconcile, not to rule
over their brethren, he every where commends them, and joins himself to them,
and professes he can never Sunt mihi communia cum viris nunquam satis
laudatis, ibid. p. 5.
enough commend them. Nor could he be any whit more a Papist for speaking
fairly of the Canons of Trent; then Bisho^ Caraffa could be a Protestant for
speaking Ibid. p. 4, 5.
as fairly of the Augustan Confession. You should therefore have distinguished
betwixt Protestants and Protestants, (as the rest of the World has ever done)
when you said that Grotius did write against them. For there are Protestants
that disgrace, and there are that adorn the Reformation. There are that would
have peace, and there are that will have none. Grotius speaks no more kindly of
any Papists, then you your self do of some (p. 10.) He speaks no more sharply
of the worst Protestants in the world, then you do of the best (p. 113. etc.)
So that pelting at him, you have hit your self. To the sons of sedition and
disobedience, who look upon themselves as twice-resin'd Christians, our
Reverend Doctor Sanderson has been as severe as any Grotius. But will you say
in general terms, that Doctor Sanderson reprocheth Refo^mation it self, and
that (without a distinction) he writes against Protestants? yet thus p. 73, 74,
76.
you use Grotius in diverse places; nay in one you use him wo^se. For you say,
he reprocheth the Reformation, as an impious, tumultuary, r^bellious thing (p.
76, 77.) when the Latin which you cite, had you translated it into English,
would have made the common people your great admirers. They would have seen
(what now I tell them) that Grotius spoke not a word of the regular Protestants
here in England, nor of such in Germany and France as were of the spirit of
Melanchthon; but he spoke of those Seditiones, vim contra Princ^pes, Imperiorum
mutationes ^x usu suo, mor^m frangendiaeces sacras, and bella excitandi and
sovendi, sub sancto Evangelii nomine; invenerunt quidam and dogmata in id
comparata, ut ho^ines de misericordia Dei nimium sibi pollicente^, in peccatis
indo^miscer^nt* Discuss. p. 16.
Incendiaries, who measured the truth of Religion by their distance only from
Rome, and did as well introduce, as cast out Errors; and that not peaceably,
but by sedition and sacrilege, and force of arms, by inventing also such
Doctrines as might make men presume upon the mercy of God, and so lie snorting
in those sins which opened them a way to Wealth and Greatness, by the violation
of Gods Law, in pretense of propagating his Gospel. Will you, Sir, take part
with such Protestants as these, or write against Grotius as a Papist for
writing against such as uphold the Papists by their profaneness? I will not
guess at your thoughts when you were writing your 53d Section; nor spread a Net
of Dilemma's whereby to catch your true meaning; Insanlentibus Brunistis, and
si qui eorum sint similes, etc. ibid.
because I would not be more pungent then the subject matter does enforce.
Grotius spoke of the Brownists, and of those that like them, as well as of
those that are like unto them. Quibus quis placere, ab eorum veneno intactus,
postulet?

Arg. 9. In the same book of Animad versions I find him joining with the
Protestants in what they say touching the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Eucharist; speaking of the most moderate, whom he ever concludes the most
worthy Protestants. And with them he demonstrates how the most moderate Papists
may be agreed; by a commodious explication of words and meanings on either
fide. Nor does he say in that place that the Protestants Article should be
conformed to the Papists, but that This should be made to comply with That. Si
quiescant Scholasticae Disputationes, quid est cur non verba Concilii
Tridentini explicari commode possint, etc. aut etiam recipi illa formula quam
ex Actis Possiacenis desumpsi, and quam omnes qui ibi ^^m erant Protestants
(excepto un^ P. Mart.) approbarunt? Animadv. p. 29, 30.
Nay he adds expressly, that the whole Protestant Form should be received and
accepted, as he had taken it out of the Acts agreed upon at Poissy; where,
excepting Peter Martyr, not one dissented.

Arg. 10. After this, when he speaks to the twenty-first Article, he reckons
himself with the Protestants, by way of discrimination from all the Papists,
comprehending even the French as well as the Spanish and Italian.

[If we should count them all Idolaters who live in Communion with the
Romanists, it would extremely hinder our wished for union. Videbam mul^um
obstare concordiae, si omnes eos qui in communione sunt Romana pro Idololatris
haber^mus, gnarus Idololatriam esse eminentissimum seculi crimen, ib. p. 43, 44.
] This he renders for the reason, why he who labored a Reconcilement (which
would have carried with it a Reformation) was not in reason to accuse the whole
Universe of Papists (without exception) of the greatest crime in the world;
making them odious to others, as well as implacable in themselves, and most of
all with the Reconciler: It being his office, not to widen breaches, but to
contract them; nor to imbitter, but emolliate the minds of men, especially of
the great and prevailing party. The words of Grotius have this rational
importance, [I saw it would hinder out Reconcilement, if we (who are
Protestants) should repute for Idolaters even all that are of the Roman Church
or Communion, though too many of them indeed are such.] This appears by the
word omnes, compared with habe^emus, and with the person's Religion to whom he
speaks.

Arg. 11. In his Votum pro pace, he professes that even the moderate and most
peaceable Romanists were of a different communion from that whereof he
professes himself to be. Verti me ad eos legendos qui etsi fuere in Communione
diversa, animum tamen magis ad sananda, quam ad fovenda divortia appulere. Vo.
pro pace, p. 9.
p. 7, 8, 9.
He deploreth the superstition, with other corruptions and abuses, which he saw
had invaded the Church of Rome. He says Cassander's Consultation was commended
to him by p. 10*
G^saubon a famous Protestant. And that his labor thereupon was approved in
France ibid.
by both the opposite parties. He shows what Prompta sunt in Galliis
Hispaniisque Remedia quibus impediantur Papae, ^e aut Regum aut Episcoporum
jura invadant. p. 12.
Remedies there are to cure the Popes of their Disease, to put Hooks in their
Nostrills, and in despite of their ambition to preserve the just Rights of
Kings and Bishops. Nay he acknowledges the ibid.
Right of the Kings of Britain about all Ecclesiastical both Things and
Persons: which for a Papist to have done, would have implied a contradiction.
But any thing will be Popery with them that out-act their Master Calvin; who Et
illam mutationem, quae Buceri Consilio in Anglia erat instituta, Papismi
accusavit. page 115.
accused that change in the Church of England, which was made by the advice of
so known a Protestant as Bucer, of no lesser a crime then downright Papisme:
which unreasonable censure of our Church, whether hi^ passion or his judgment
extorted from him, and whether it was not a contradiction to what he spoke of
her at other times, I leave you to guess by his large Epistle to the
Protector, and that (you know) was in the days of King Edward the sixth. But
if to accuse were sufficient, it i^ sufficient that Mr. Calvin was accused of
Iudaisme by one; by another, of Turcisme; by a third, Redolens plane Calvini
spiritum contumeliosum illu ac turbulentu^. Animadv. p. 81. Quum sciam quam
inique and virulente tractaverat viros multo se meliores, etc. ibid. page 9.
of Fratricide; by almost all the Latherans, of the Arian heresy; and even by
Grotius himself, (who hardly ever spoke in passion, or without a just ground)
of a co^tumelious and turbulent spirit, and of virulently handling such men as
were much his betters.

A^g. 12. In his Epistles to the Frenchmen of either party, he does so
frequently and so clearly discover himself to be a Protestant, that out of them
it were easy to write a volume in his defense. To give you an instance in as
few as I may, and not in as many as I am able. Epist. 154: Iohanne Cordefio, p.
378. Epist. 166. Eidem, p. 408.
He writes against the seven Sacraments (I mean against the number of them, and
against four of that number) so tenaciously retained by all Rome. He speaks
s^arply of the Epist. 154. p. 377.
Jesuits, (from his mere humanity to one of the best of which order, you
hastily conclude him to be a Papist, p. 86.) and would have the^r evil Arts set
out to the life; as an anonymous Iansenian has lately done. If his esteem of
Petavius, a lover of unity and moderation, could make you think him a Papist;
you must also suppose him to be a Protestant, for disesteeming many more of the
very same Order; especially when he reckons that he and they are of two
Religions: as indeed he does in one Epistle; Dubium est, apud meos, an apud
Iesuitas magis vapulem, etc. Epist. 14. page 36, 37. Hotm. Villerio.
where he also calls the Pope the Patriarch of the West, and shows what it is
which he would have toward a peace, even the spirit of Melanch^hon on the one
side, and of Cassander on the other, and a mutual forbearance with one another
[(...)] in things which are not simply necessary. Will not every good
Protestant desire the same? yet he went farther, and accounted them of Apud
meos quidem, quod illud apud ipfos (...) defendo, posse in unaquaque Ecclesia
ferri eos qui dissideant in rebus non plane necessariis, ^bid*
his party who would not hear of any such thing. Such was his moderation
toward that sort of men who had none at all.

Arg. 13. I find that Grotius his desire of helping forward the peace of
Christendom was the same in the former as in the later part of his life; and so
was his love to the Church of England: In ist's Remediis quae (...) medici
vocant, parum est auxilii. Neque potest partium unitas, nisi a corpo^is
unitate, sperari. Non possum non laudare praeclarum A^gliae Canonem An. Dom.
1571. etc. De Imperio sum. po. circa sacra, cap. 6*
witness his sixth Chapter De Imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra, wherein
he does not only insist upon the same means of union, for which he pleads in
his later writings, but exceedingly commends our English Canon agreed upon in
the ye^r 1571. exactly tending to the very same end. Inprimis vero videbunt
Concionatores, nequid unquam d^ceant pro Concione quod a populo religiose
teneri and credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit Doctrinae Veteris ac Novi
Testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa Doctrina Catholi^^ Patres and Veteres Episcopi
collegerint. Because the Scripture is made a Lesbian Rule by a great variety of
Professors who are irreconcilable amongst themselves, therefore no Exposition
ought to be taken for authentic, so soon as that which has been made by the
Catholic Fathers and Ancient Bishops of the Church. In a word, it does appear,
as well by Casau^. Epist. 220. Hu. Gro. 1612* and Epist. 221. etc.
Casaubon's and Bishop Overall's Epistles to Grotius, as from his to them, and
to Thua^us, and diverse others, that his desires of union were no other then
what were common to him with the soberest Protestants in the World; in
particular with Melanchthon, whom he proposes as his exemplar in all his
writings of that affair. Nay in two Epistles to Duraeus (which a learned Mr.
Clement Barksdale in his M^morials of Grotius.
admirer of his Works has very usefully made English) he is as palpably a
Protestant as Cardinal Bellarmin was a Papist; for he clearly justifies our
breach with Rome, and heartily wishes our agreement amongst our selves,
however hindered by those who defile themselves with a proud conceit of being
holier and purer then their Fathers and Brethren of the Church. He unites his
Consultations with both our English Ambassadors how our union may be
accomplished: to which he exhorts so much the rather, because he observes that
our Division does strengthen Popery, and make Proselytes for Rome. Such were
Grotius his Counsels no longer since then in the year of our Lord 1637. And
though you confidently say, that He mentions the Protestants with distaste, as
pretended Reformers (p. 33.) yet I know the contrary to be a very great truth.
Traxit in auxilium sui Reform^torum Principes; and Pontificlorum fervidiores
meam praesentiam aliis de causis suspectant. Epist. 172. p. 422. A.D. 1635.
For how severely soever he uses to speak of the rebellious and sacrilegious,
who by their Heathenish practices and o^inions had put a public disgrace on
the Reformation, (in pretending themselves the Authors of it,) yet of regular
Protestants he never speaks without love and reverence, and simply calls them
the Reformed, in opposition to Pontificians who stand in need of Reformation.
That unavowable sort of Protestants whom he reproves with sharpness, the meek
and moderate Look forward on chapter 5. sect. 9.
Dr. Sanderson rebukes as sharply as he has done, yet he is not the likelier
to be a Papist.

Arg. 14. From many places of his Discussio (printed in the year 1645.) as well
as from its whole design, his aversion to Papism does very sufficiently appear.
And as that is the book from whence you draw your objections, so from that very
book you could not have failed of satisfaction, had you impartially either read
or considered all. Discuss. p. 10.
His desire that the rules of Vincentius Lirinensis might be observed, was
common to him with King James, Isaac Casaubon, yea with Gregory Calixt^s, and
Doctor Reynolds against Heart. Nec aliud desiderat Confessio Augustan^. Di^unt
enim qui eam amplexi sunt Principes and Civitates, de nullo Articulo Fidei
dissentire se etc. sed paucos abusus a se omitti, qui novi sunt, and contra
voluntatem Canonum, vitio Temporum recepti. ib. p. 14.
He would not only have the Canons of the Council of Trent to be commodiously
expounded in order to peace, but also in order to reformation; he would have
all taken away which evil customs and manners have introduced. In a word, he
would have that, then which the Augustan Confession desires no more. And many
moderate Papists desired no less. He allows the Pope no Ibid. p. 1^.
other Primacy then is allowed by the Canons of ecumenical Councils, and may
consist with the rights of the several Patriarchs of the East; disapproving his
usurpations no less then Casaubon himself. Ibid. p. 15.
He loves to style that Usurper by the modest name of the Bishop of Rome; and
fastens the Primacy (which he allows) not so much on the Pope, as the Church
of God, for Zanchy himself does so express her.

Arg. 15. To prove he speaks as a Peacemaker (which he was) not as a Papist,
(which he was not) he cites the Declarations of some chief Ibid. p. 69.
Protestants in the behalf of such a Primacy as he and they have thought due to
the Roman Prelate. Not only King James, who granted as much (in a manner) as
Cardinal Perron exacted of him, in order to the Unity and Peace of Christendom,
nor only Bucer a moderate Protestant, but even Blondel, the Patron of
Presbyterians, and even Calvin himself are brought in speaking to his
advantage: (to whom I might add Franciscus Iunius, and our learned Mountague
in his Appeal to Caesar.) The words of Blondel are very remarkable, Non negari
a Protestantibus dignitatem Sedis Apostolicae Romanae, neque Primatum ejus
super Ecclesias vicinaes, im^o aliquatenus super omnes, sed referri hoc ab iis
ad jus Ecclesiasticum. Nor can I remember I ever read, that Grotius pretended
to any more. For obedience due from all seculars unto the Bishops of the
Church, he cites the Ibid. p. 70.
Augustan Confession. For the want of reformation in the Presbyterian Churches,
he cites the Ibid. p. 73.
Confession of Mr. Rivet. For the admitting of such words as Transelementation
and Transubstantiation, with their convenient explications, in order to Peace
and Reconcilement, Ibid. p. 77.
he cites Modrevi^s and our King James. For the Protestants return to the
Church of Rome, upon condition that that Church will also return unto the
Primitive, he cites the Prayers and Protestation of learned Zanchy, Ab Ecclesia
Rom^na non ali^ discessimus animo, quam ut, si correcta ad priorem Ecclesiae
formam redeat, nos quoque ad illam revertamu^, and communionem cum illa in suis
porro coetibus habeamus. Apud Grot. p. 14. apud ipsum Zanch. in Confess. Art.
19. p. 157.
who notwithstanding his being a Presbyterian, concluded his moderation like an
Episcopal Divine; Ego Hieronymus Zanchiu^ septuagenarius, cum tota familia mea,
testatum hoc volo toti Ecclesiae Christi in omnem aeternitatem* The same Zanchy
did acknowledge (in the seventieth year of his age,) that the Church of Rome
was a true Church of Christ, (however defiled with innovations) because she
retained the fundamentals of Christianity. See Zanchy's Preface to his Edit.
Neostadii Palate. A.D. 1585.
Confession, and compare it with what he says in the Confession it self, Art.
8. de Eccles. Milit. p. 149. and again with his p. 157. where he does not
scruple to use these words. [ Non ab Ecclesia Romans simpliciter and in omnibus
defecimus, sed in illis duntaxat rebus in quibus ipsa defecit ab Apostolica,
atque ad^o a seipsa veteri and pura Ecclesia; neque alio discessimus animo etc.
ut supra. Zanch. ib. p. 157.
We have not simply, and in all things made a defection from the Church of
Rome, but in those things alone wherein she has departed from the Church
Apostolical, and so by consequence from her ancient and purer self. Nor have we
left her (even so) but with an intention to return, as soon as she shall return
her self to that pitch of integrity from which she fell.] All which being
considered, either let Grotius have been a Protestant, as well as Zanchy and
Blondel; or let them both have been Papists, as well as Grotius. No other
Primacy to the Popedom did he allow but what Farente Melanchthone, Primatum
(secundum Canonas) necessarium esse ad retinendam unitatem, Discuss. p. 255.256.
Melanchthon thought necessary to conserve the unity of the Church. Nor would
he have all to join with Rome as Rome now stands, (which yet you confidently
suggest, p. 35.) but upon friendly condescensions on either side; implying Vide
(inter alia compluscula) Grot. Animadv. in Animadv. A. Riveti p. 35. Vot. pro
pa. 7, 8, 9. Discuss. p. 160.161.18.20. etiam p. 71, 72.
Reformation in some particulars, and mutual forbearance in many others. You
confess that Bishop Bramhall allows the Pope to have his old Patriarchal
power, and his Primacy of order, and somewhat else, p. 22. whom yet you take
not to be a Papist, p. 23. Nor can I see that Grotius allows him more. And as
Principium unitatis, or Concordiae coagulum, you will certainly allow it as
well as Grotius.

Arg. 16. If you compare one passage of his Discussio (p. 256.) with his
Epistle to Cordesius (p. 352.) you will find him so steadfastly and
pertinaciously a Protestant, that the largest offers of a King could not make
him any thing else. You say, the French moderation is acceptable to all good
men, you think that many such Papists are blessed souls now with Christ; and
you pronounce that Nation an honorable part of the Church of Christ, p. 10. yet
all the advantages in the world could never work upon Grotius to have communion
even with them, no not at that point of time when the Calvinists had deprived
him of his liberty, of his livelihood, Gratias ago summas Regi, quod in me
etiam absentem beneficia sua depluere voluerit; and amicis, quod meis commodis
tam perseveranter invigilent. Caeterum ego, ex quo Gallias reliqui, nullam cur
tali beneficio utar probabilem causam video; ideoque comiter excusari volo.
Epist. 143. ad Cords. p. 352.
and (in preparedness of mind) of his very life. In the depth of his poverty,
immediately after his bonds, and banishment, and confiscation of goods, he
refused the great offers which daily courted him in France. I pray observe in
what words he confuted that calumny which Rivet was bold to cast upon him. Si
Grotius, tanto viro invitante, voluisset id promittere, quod eum promisisse
fingit D. Rivetus, poterat ille, per malos Calvinistas exutus patria, exutus
bonis, ampla illa honorum and commodorum promissa adipisci, quae a Rege Galliae
nunquam aut habuit, aut speravit, neque illi opus fuisset exire Gallia, and
rebus alterius regni operam suam addicere. Et nunc quoque, cum omnia adferat ad
pacem Ecclesia restituendam quae potest, nihil illi dat Gallia, and si dare
velit, nihil i^le accipiat, Discuss. p. 256. Here you see the great reason why
he went out of France, when courted in it; and why he chofe to serve a poorer,
because a Protestant State. As he never had been brought to accept of any thing
from France, so you see he resolved he never would.

Arg. 17. That Grotius did never once communicate with any part of the Church
of Rome, Discuss. p. 59, 60, 61.
is a manifest sign he was never of them: and he gives such reasons for his own
abstinence from all communion in France (with either Papists or Presbyterians)
as could not possibly be pr^tended by any Romanist whatsoever; and so they
prove him (by consequence) to have been none, for whose excuse or defense they
were pretended.

Arg. 18. Whilst you say he turned Papist, you clearly grant him to have been
Protestant: it lies upon you then to prove that he renounced the one, in
exchange for the other; and you must show both when and where he did it. For
whosoever turns Papist, is ever bound by them to whom he turns, to make an
abrenunciation of all other Churches; upon which he is solemnly reconciled, and
received into the bosom of that at Rome: of which you have the Queen Christina
and the late Minister of Montanba^ exhibited as examples in the Weekly
Newes-book. Had Grotius been such a Convert, (in their language) or such an
Apostate, (in ours) the Church of Rome had been proude^ of it then of a
thousand such Queens as now I mentioned, and their Gazetts had told us of it
with great ambition. But in the whole that you have said (in a matter of Fact
too) you have not pretended any such thing, how unadvisedly soever you have
impli'd it.

Arg. 19. Notwithstanding all that I have urged to prove that Grotius was no
Papist, I shall add one Argument from the signal manner of his Death, which
will also be much confirmed from the place and manner of his burial: they are
both attested by Doctor Quistorp a Lutheran Divine, and so no Papist, at the
earnest entreaty of an eminent person, as known a Protestant as Quistorp; and
they are published by both, to embalm the memory of that Phoenix of learned
men, as learned Quistorp does fitly call him. Had Grotius been a Papist upon
his deathbed, he would not have admitted, much less have sent for, a
Protestant Minister to assist him in his last and greatest trial. Nor would
the chief Pastor of Rostock, the public Professor of Divinity, have given his
Narrative to the World with so much Eulogie as he has done, much less would
he have buried him in the most honorable place of the chiefest Temple; nor
would the Protestant Governors have consented with so much readiness as they
did, had there been any the least suspicion of Grotius his dying a Roman
Catholic. Now though the testimony of Quistorp was printed first at Amsterdam,
and again by Merick Casaubon in his De usu verborum, (1647.) translated in part
by the very reverend In his Answer to the Animadv. on his Dissert. p. 132.
Doctor Hammond, and wholly by Behind his Translation of Grot. de Iure Billi
and Pacis.
Master Barksdale; yet because the manner of that religious man's end has been
most slanderously reported, and because the true Narrative is not ordinarily
known, as well as earnestly desired to be made as ordinary as may be (there
being thousands who have not seen it in the books before mentioned) I think fit
to subjoyn it in Doctor Quistorp's own words.

Hugonis Grotii P. M. ultima: Quibus Joanni Quistorpio S. S. Theologia D.
Professori, Facultatis ejusdem Seniori, and Primarii Templi Rostochiensium
Pastori, suum ob peccata dolorem, and spem salutis confessus est.
COntendis a me, N. N. ut perscribam, quem, mundo huic valedicturus,
Literatorum Phoenix Hugo Grotius se gesserit. En pauci^ id habe. Conscenderat
ille Stockholmiae navim qua Lubecam ferretur: vehementibus per triduum in mari
jactatus procellis naufragium patit^^, and aeg^r ad Cassubiae litora appellit.
Inde perquam incommodo curru, pluvia tempestate, per sexaginta and plura
milliaria, tandem Rostochium nostrum devehitur. Divertit ad Balemanniam. D.
Stocmannum Medicum advocari curat, qui aetate, naufragio, incommodis itineris
fractas vires adverte^s, vitae terminum imminere praesagit. Secundo ab ingressu
in hanc urbem die (qui still. vet. erat 18. Augusti) me hora non^^ vespertina ad
se vocat. Accessi: propemodum in Agone virum constitutum offendi: compellavi,
and me nihil maluisse affirmavi, quam ut mihi cum ipso incolumi sermones
sociare licuisset. Regerit ille, Ita Deo visum fuit. Pergo; ut ad beatam
emigrationem se componat, peccatorem agnoscat, super commissa doleat, moneo:
quumque inter loquendum Publicani peccatorem se fatentis, and ut Deus sui
misereretur precantis, meminissem; respondet, Ego ille sum Publicanus.
Progredior; ad Christum, extra quem nulla est salus, ipsum remitto. Subjicit
ille, In solo Christo omnis spes mea est reposita.

Ego clara voce precationem illam Germanicam Germanice recitabam, Herr Jesu,
wahrer Mensch und Got, etc. Ille complicatis manibu^ submissa voce me
insequebatur. Quum fi^ivissem, quaesivi an me intellexisset. Respondit, Probe
intellexi.

Pergo illa recitare ex verbo Dei quae jamjam morituris in memoriam revocari
solent: Quaero, an me intelligat. Resp. Vocem tuam audio, sed quae singula
dicas difficulter intelligo.

Quum haec dixisset, plane conticuit, and brevi post spiritum exhalavit, in
puncto duodecimae nocturnae. Habes Catastrophen vitae ab Grotio summo viro
actae. Cadaver* Medicis post commissum est. Intestina lebeti ah^neo imposita,
at in Templi apud nos Primarii Mariae Virgini sacri locum h^noratissimum
reponerentur, a Templi Praefectis facile impetravi. Molliter cineres cubent.
Vale. Dabam Rostochii propedie Michaelis, Anno 1645.

Tuus, J. Quistorpius.


My Argument from hence is short and easy. For if Grotius were really a Roman
Catholic, he was reconciled to that Church, either 1* before, or 2* at his
death, (for after his death, you have only reconciled him in your opinion,
without his knowledge or consent,) or 3. at least he thought himself obliged to
call (at his death) for such a reconciliation; and so, voto saltem, at least in
wish or desire, (that is, as much as in him lay) to seek the peace of that
Church from which he had lived so long divided. Not the first, for then he
never would have received the Lutheran Minister as he did; much less (as he
did) have purposely sent for him. Not the second, nor the third; for then
Doctor Quistorp's Testimonial had told us which, and had put the whole matter
without dispute. I shall once more mind you of Doctor Owen's pretensi^ns, that
Grotius was a Socinian; because I since find him disowning the jealousy of
Grotius his being a Papist, at least the management of any such thing. If these
preten^ions have truth in them, Grotius his ghost is delivered from Popery. If
they have no truth at all, you must answer to Doctor Owen your having condemned
him of calumny, which to do, you confess, is an odious thing, a great Crime,
such as needs Repentance and Recantation. ( Sect. 1.)

Of Grotius his pretended dissimulation.
Sect. 6. Notwithstanding all this evidence, whereof the far greater part might
have been seen by your self before I showed it, you have not scrupled in your
Preface to proceed as follows, viz. [ That you join with m^ in charity to
Grotius; in that you vindicate him from dissimulation, as I from Popery, Sect.
2.]

Is this then your charity, to call him Papist who was so certainly none? to
offer proofs for it by such* concluding Arguments, as those must needs be which
are brought against this evidence in point of Fact? and then to say, that you
vin^icate him from dissimulation? I pray Sir tell me, do you take those men for
your own Assertors and Hyperaspistae, who in their books against you have cited
passages out of your writings whereby to conclude you an Arminian, yea a
Socinian, perhaps a Jesuit sometimes, I am sure a Papist, and of the worst
sort of Papists (which are the Jesuits) when you profess you are neither? Can
those your Adversaries and Brethren be said to have vindicated your person from
dissimulation, who are as known a Pr^sbyterian as any of them? I am bold to
give you that name, because I think you more that then you are any thing else;
and because you are vulgarly so accounted, though what you are wholly I cannot
learn. Do you not teach an evil lesson against your self? and will your writing
a Confession of your particular Faith be able to secure you from Calumniators,
whilst this method takes place, that he who calls an honest man what he
professes he is not, does but vindicate and clear him from dissimulation? I
pray bear with me on this occasion, whilst I recount how others have dealt
with you, and then how you have dealt with others.

You tell us Disput. 5. of Sacram. p. 484.
that Doctor Owen took pains about your person, to prove from your writings you
are hypocritically proud, and that he seemed to accuse you of heresy* Ibid. p.
486.
That in his anatomizing of your pride, he played his af^er-game more plausibly
then they who before had published abundance of calumnies of you to the world;
telling them not only that you were a Papist, but what books they were that
made you a Papist, and what Emissaries you have in all parts of the land. Ibid.
p. 487.
That you and the Worcestershire Profession of Faith give too much coun^enance
to the Socinian abominations. Again Ibid. p. 487.
you say, that the hardest measure you had from Doctor Owen, was in his
Socinian* Parallel in (no less then) eleven particulars. Ibid. p. 516.
That Master Crandon bestows a whole Epistle to tell the Reader how he detests
your BLASPHEMY. Postcript to an Admonition to Mr. Air of Sarum.
And that the main substance of his Book against your Aphorisms is this, That
you are a Papist, and the worser sort of them too.

Now if such men as these, whom you acknowledge to be your Brethren, both
learned and judicious, are not hastily to be credited in what they write
against you, notwithstanding their number as well as quality; how much less may
you look for credit in what you write against Grotius? For first the Advocates
for Grotius will except against you as his enemy (vel si^ de po^te dejiciendum)
and so not fit to be a Witness, much less a Judge. Next you are but a single
person. Thirdly, you fasten the name of Papist so very wrongfully upon some, as
if you were willing not to be credited when you cast it upon others. For you
tell Master Tombs, Dispute with Mr. Tombs, of Infants Church Membership and
Baptism, Edit. 3. ^. 397. Doctor Tailor no Papist.
that if he has read all the books of Doctor Tailor, he will no more reckon
him among the Protestants, having so much of the body of Popery in them. But,
Sir, if you have read his Book of Transubstantiation, (which must needs be one
of the all you mention) you will find new matter of Retractation. Add to that
his two Letters which do wholly concern the whole Body of Popery; and which as
soon as you have read, you will not think his Discourses of Original Sin can
(by their single force) become sufficient to metamorphise him into a shape,
which he does not only disclaim himself, but enable others to disclaim also;
and does antidote some against the contagion of that Disease with which you
peremptorily speak him to be infected. One thing comes into my mind (upon this
occasion) of which I would be glad to have some account. You say in See your
Chr. Concord. p. 49. and compare it with p. 46. of the same book, and with p.
100. of your Grotian Relig.
one Book, wherein you speak of Popish Bishops who lurk under the name of
Episcopal, That all their Writings or Discourses do carry on the Roman
Interest: That in those of them who write of Doctrinals or Devotion, one may
find the plain footsteps of common Popery. (You say) You are loath to name men,
but you could show a great deal of Popery in diverse such books which you see
much in Gentlemen's hands, as written by an Episcopal Doctor. In contradiction
to one important part of which words, [ your being loath to name men] you do
name Doctor Tailor in your book above cited. Bishop Wren and Bishop Pierce you
also name in that Book in which you profess you are loath to name them, as I
shall show by and by. In the mean time I must challenge you (but in the spirit
of love and meekness) to make good your words above written, or to retract
them. That if Popish Divines do lie lurking under the name of Episcopal, they
may be punished for their Hypocrisy: Or if it is only your fiction, that you
may make reparation for so much wrong. For again, Christ. Conco^d. p 45, ^6,
etc.
your charge of Cassandrian Popery is indefinitely laid against Episcopal
Divines, who lie masked here in England to do the Pope the greater service. And
although you now plead, that you did not intend to raise a jealousy on all the
Episcopal Divines (p. 103.) yet I believe you intended to raise a jealousy on
the most, because you feared not to name Bish. Wren and Bish. Pierce, as a
couple of your fancied Cassandrian Papists, who yet are known to be as perfect
persevering Protestants, as you to be a Presbyterian (if yet I may say you are
truly such.) And though you judge it unmeet to name even those who (you say)
have given you just cause of suspicion, because it may tend to breach of peace,
and to the harder censuring and usage of the persons, which (you say) is none
of your desire, (p. 100.) yet you have named too many (it seems,) against your
own judgment, who gave you no cause at all, and have left your Readers to judge
by them of the rest. Nay without exception or dis^rimination, you name the
Bishops and the Kings Chaplains, and other Doctors. Admit some Papists did lurk
amongst them, I hope you will argue nothing from thence, but that themselves
were no Papists. For now you openly confess, that the Papists are crept in
among all sects, the Quakers, Seekers, Anabaptists, Millenaries, Levellers,
Independents, yea and the Presbyterians also, (p. 99, 100.) Nay you farther
make a Confession, (for which I commend your ingenuity) that the Pope and the
Italians might very probably have a considerable hand in raising our wars (p.
106.) Nor do you wonder if it be true that the Papists did not only kindle our
wars here, and blow the coals on both sides, but also that it was by the Roman
influence that the late King was put to death, Claud Salm* Defens. Regis; c.
10* etc. 11.
(p. 108.) When I compare your words with the words of Salmasius, I guess that
the Papists and Presbyterians were both assistants to one another in contriving
the mischieves of which you spoke.

Sect. 7. You say on in your Preface, Grotius at last is but a Papist with an
^f, etc.
that had Grotius been living, you think you should have had more thanks from
him then I, and that if you understand him, he took it for his glory to be a
Member of that Body of which the Pope is the Head, even to be a Roman
Cath^lick, Sect. 2.]

Thus it pleases you to speak, though without any tolerable show of truth; nor
is there any proof offered, but that so you think, and if you understand him.
Its very strange that the one point on which your machine is wholly founded,
(of the Grotian Religion, and the new way in which the Prelatists are involved)
to wit Grotius his being a Roman Catholic, should be thus feebly introduced
with an [ I think, and if I understand him.] An humble begging of the Question
were a gentile quality to this. There is hardly any the least of your baffled
Adversaries* but will be able to say as much in his own defense against your
Aphorisms; your Adversaries think, (or else they speak against their
conscience) and if they understand you, it is thus and thus, you are a Socinian,
and a Papist, and the worser sort of them too, as some of your Brethren did
think, and if they did rightly understand you. How often therefore are you
pleading that they do misunderstand you? And against all their
misunderstandings, you write a thick b^^k in qua^to for the confession of your
Faith. (If the diseases had not been numerous, I suppose you had been sh^rter
in your prescribing the means of cure.) Grotius his Ghost may well make much
shorter work, even by telling you in a word, that you knew not his mind, nor
understood his designs in writing Notes upon Cassander, which were only
P^cifick, not Apostatick; and so your whole Fabric is very speedily at an end.
And the one remaining Engine whereby to keep up Presbyt^rianism, to wit, the
jealo^sies and fears of the deep Grotian design, (so deep indeed, as not to
have the least bottom) in the very same instant does vanish also.

Popery dis^claimed as well by Grotius and Mr. P. as by Mr. Baxter.
Sect. 8. You proceed to tell me, that if any shall gather from your words, my
being such my self as you say you manifest Grotius to have been, you protest
against such accusations, as no part of your intention. But you say, I have
given too much occasion of them by my vindication, and that it is in my power to
remove that occ^sion, by disowning what in Grotius I dislike. Sect. 3.]

A fair expedient to conclude this controversy, to allow Grotius the same
quarter which is given to me as his Advocate. If I shall disown what you
dislike, this shall vindicate me from being a Bapist. The like privilege you
imply is due to Grotius. First for my self, I declare that I am none. And if
Grotius was a Papist, then he and I are of two Religions. But secondly for
Grotius, he has also disowned his being a Papist, as well as you and my self.
And that may suffice for his vindication. If you will disown what is disliked
by your adverse brethren, you will remove that occasion which they took to call
you Papist and S^cinian. But you will say, it is enough that you disclaim being
either. Grotius was for an Union (so is the Spirit of Peace and Unity)
presupposing a Reformation secundum Canones in respect of the Papal power, and
presupposing a Reformation of the form of Doctrine according to antiquity and
universal Tradition, as the best Expositors of Scripture, where Scripture is
not agreed to expound it self. This is according to the Rule of Vincentius
Lirinensis, of all the Fathers of the Church, and of the late Acute King in his
Dispute against Henderson, who is acknowledged by you to have been no Papist
(p. 105, 106.) though calumniated as such, you know by whom. And however you
are said to have fought against him, yet I observe that in this, and some other
things, you are for the King against the Parliament. But to pursue the third of
my Discourse; Grotius l^ft other things to be reformed and adjusted by
Sovereign Princes, with the assistance of their Prelates in their several
Kingdoms. Now he that likes this Doctrine and Design, and only thinks it a
happiness too great for this Age, wherein there are on both sides so many
irreconciliabiles, (to wit, Jesuits on that side, and Presbyterians on this)
and therefore appeals to posterity, (as Grotius did) i^ very far from being a
Papist in the common acception of the word, (as you do easily pretend Sect. 3.)
much less is he such in the thing it self. But it is easily foreseen by your
close of that Section, how you are resolved to understand it.

Mistakes in reading Grotius, arising from a nescience or hatred of his design.
Sect. 9. Now for your manifold mistakes of Grotius his words in his Discussio,
arising chiefly from the byasse which had been put upon your judgment, (I know
not whether by your nescience, or overgreat hatred of his design,) and which
you urge as so many arguments to prove that Grotius turned Papist; I take such
arguments to be answered by the bare removal of such mistakes. Your mistakes
are removed by being proved to be mistakes: and they are proved to have been
such, by the fifth Section of this Chapter, containing eighteen arguments for a
matter of Fact, whereof there are some so irrefragable, that perhaps I may be
blamed for adding others: and unless you say you are not, I shall comfortably
hope that you are convinced. Indeed the writings of Grotius would have
convinced you of themselves, if you had read them all, and at leisure, and with
those necessary cautions, or remembrancos, which the Reverend Answ. to]
Animadv. on the Dissert. touching Ignatius his Epistles, p. 135, 136, 137.
Doctor Hammond had timely given. Or had you but weighed what I had told you
touching the nature of an (...), or rather of the way conducing to it, in my
(...), Chapter 3. p. 92, 93, 94. of which I see you determined to take no notice
(p. 3.) I told you early (would you have marked it) that Grotius as a
Peacemaker betwixt the Papists and the Protestants, had labored to show his
moderation as well to them as to these; and to excuse many things at least a
tanto, to which he had not afforded his approbation. For he who attempted a
Reconcilement of two great Enemies, was not in prudence to declare a personal
enmity to either, but to mitigate the exceptions and animosities of both; and
to insist on those things, whether faulty or indifferent, which he desired
might meet with (in either party) an interchangeable pardon, and an
interchangeable compliance. Melanchthon (I told you) had done the same, and was
accused (as well as Grotius) as a sly friend to Popery. The same was done by
Thuanus amongst the Papists, who was Io. Baptista Gallus obstinata vesania
pernegat, Thuanum Catholicae fidei ^enacissimum and Ecclesiae Romanae etc. vide
Epist. Anonym. p. 103. Tom. 5. ad calcem lib. 6. Aug. Thuani de vita sua.
accused for his labor of having turned Protestant. Indeed his favor to the
Protestants was so much greater then that of Grotius and Melanchthon unto the
Papists, that his friends of that Church, as their friends of this, were fain
to write his vindication. He might indeed have been a Protestant by the
Confession of his Faith in his last Will and Testament, the like to which (I
suppose) has hardly been made by any Papist. And whilst you intimate your
opinion that Thuanus was a Papist of a deeper die then either Cassander of
Grotius was, (p. 9.) you infer that Grotius was none at all; or else the
Writings of Thuanus are strangers to you.

Sect. 10. I find that rigid Presbyterians would be at peace with the Papists,
How much may be offered to purchase peace.
as the Sea The Royal L^brary, Sect. 4. Number. 15. p. 339. to p. 359. See also
the second part of that Collectio^, p. 465. to p. 480. especially p. 517. to p.
526.
Houses of the long Parliament would have made peace with their King; to wit,
if he would comply with them in all things, and they with him in nothing at
all: where as if we make a (...) by mutual Offices of Friendship, and not a
Conquest by acts of Force, there must be Abatements and Allowances on either
side. They are not worthy to be employed in making Amity or Union, who
understand not how much it is worth. There are a great many truths of so small
importance, that one would part with them all for a dram of charity: and I
should think that to purchase the peace of Christendom, no Protestant Merchants
can bid too high, so long as they part not with old Fundamentals, nor do accept
new Articles of Faith, nor acknowledge subjection to a power, which whenever
it pleases may do both the one and the other. Now by your way of arguing that
Grotius turned Papist, because in order to reconcilement he offered allowances
to the Papists, which he would not yield upon other terms, (as many peaceable
Christians will rather part with some petie rights, then perpetuate contention
by suits at Law,) Thuanus also turned Prot^stant, and so did Cassander, and
Hofmiesterus, and hundreds more whom I could name, who did offer at least as
much, on the same condition of reconcilement, they for that side, as he for
this. This must therefore be considered by all that read his pacificatory
writings: and it ought to be esteemed the ^oblest submission in the World, to
part with the utmost of ones own right, Plusquam humanae virtutis est, tantae
spei m^derari, and velut manibus conclusam fortunam dimittere.
that may in conscience be parted with, for the redemption of such a peace as
cannot otherwise be purchased. The victorious Emperor Charles the fifth
thought good to quit some of his Empire (not driven by necessity, but drawn by
love) for the settling of Religion and Peace in Germany; so did Philip his Son,
the potent King of Spain, and Archduke Albert his son in Law, make an humble
offer of reconcilement to the Hollanders, which for forty years together they
had denied them. By De Ney the Franciscan, by Lewis Verreich the Archdukes
Secretary, and even by Spinola himself, with diverse others whom Grotius Epist.
ad Clariss. Virum N. P. de pace Germanica. Sane in privatis quoque negotiis,
transactiones, dato allquo, and aliquo retento, (ut nostri loquuntur
jurisconsulti) perficiu^tur: quanto magis, ubi de salute publica and pacis
incomparabili bono agitur, omnes de jure suo cedere debent?
names (as it were justifying himself by way of anticipation,) they even
supplicated for peace to their natural subjects. The same Philip the second did
even buy reconcilement with Henry the fourth, King of France, when that lofty
King would not bid any thing toward it. Yet Lewis his Son, (the Duke of
Mant^a's Renitency notwithstanding) gave a portion of Monferrat to the Duke of
Savoy, as a price laid down in exchange for Amity and Peace. Nay the Emperor
Ferdinand the second was content to yield a good part of Hungary, and so to
purchase one peace, though it was but to exclude or break another. After all
these examples (which do put me in mind of the Christian-like Doctrine in
(...), etc. Hierocl. p. 61.
Hierocles, however he was a Heathen, and writ a Book against Christ) let me
add one more, which is nearer home, and more to my purpose then all the rest,
and which I shall earnestly recommend to your most serious consideration.

When his Majesty, at the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, did offer for three
years the confirmation of the Directory, and the Form of Church Government
presented to him, and the leasing out of the Bishops lands as far as 99. years,
will you say he was turned a Presbyterian? I know you will not; because they
were offers upon condition of public Nec deerunt rations, quibus pulsis sua
ditione Principibus satisfieri possit, qui magni beneficii loco habebunt, in
partem saltem missarum ditionum restitui. Praeterea compensationibus and mutua
permutatione res expediri poterit. Idem in E^ist. ead.

Potior esse debet s^ae saluti^, quam alieni damni, p^iorq^e conservandi quam
prof^r^ndi Reg^i ratio. Ibid.


peace, not absolute concessions at all adventure. And conditio non impleta non
obligat fidem, is a very good rule in the Civil Law. Nor did he offer what he
thought best, precisely considered in it self, but what he thought to be the
fittest in that juncture of time, when he found himself placed 'twixt two
evils, whereof in great wisdom) he chose the least. For although he offered
toward the settling of a peace, no less then 100000 pounds, to be raised out of
the Bishops lands, yet first it was only toward the settlement of a peace,
(and a little of that is worth money;) next it was with a Proviso, That the
inheritance and propriety should still continue to the Church; thirdly, the
peace being denied him, he also denied to confirm his offer into a Grant. Nor
would he ratify the Directory, no not so much as for a day; which (for the
buying of peace) had else obtained for three years. But for the Solemn League
and Covenant, as he neither would sign it, or consent to it himself, so would
he not have it to be imposed upon the consciences of others; no, not in order
to any ends, whether personal safety, or public peace.

This is just the Case of Grotius, excepting that it differs to his advantage;
for he offered not so much, and he asked for more. Nay farther yet, if Grotius
turned Papist by seeking to reconcile the Council of Trent with the Protestant
Articles of the Augustan Confession, then did Franciscus a Sancta Clara (by
your Logic) turn Protestant, because you Christ. Concord. p. 46.
confess he did endeavor to reconcile the Articles of the Church of England
with the Council of Trent. The absurdity of the consequence is in both cases
alike. Again, you confe^se Ibid. p. 45.
a little before, that Grotius his design had many favorites, both of the
better sort of Pa^ists, and of the colder sort of Protestants: from whence I
gather this comfort, that however I am a favourer of Grotius his design, I am
yet allowed to be a Protestant, though one of them whom you call the colder
party; that is to say, (as I interpret) I am none of those hotheaded furious
men, who not understanding what spirit they are of (on supposition that they
are Christians) are for fire from heaven (if not from hell too) upon all that
are not of their persuasion. But as your better sort of Papists are sure the
colder, so your colder sort of Protestants are sure the better, (it being
clear, that by the colder you mean the more moderate:) and it is much for their
honor, that they are lovers of Reconcilement the most of any.

Grotius his Doctrine and Design more Catholical then Mr. Baxter 's.
Sect. 11. You object against Grotius, That he was not truly Catholic in his
designs and Doctrines (p. 11.)

Yet he excluded not any, but only said who they were that would not endure to
be included. He knew that some peace was better then no peace at all. And shall
not parties of moderation seek an agreement with one another, because they
cannot agree with the two Extremes? Can you name any one person whom he forbad
to accept of the terms proposed? Or is an offer the less Catholic, for being
made upon conditions to every Creature? You cannot say this, who are for
Catholic Redemption: or when you write your self Catholic, and set forth
terms of Christian Concord, can you imagine that your design is half so
Catholic as his? I cannot imagine that you can. You indeed will be at unity
with all the World, if all the World will agree with your Worcestershire
combination. But so the World will be at Unity, if all will embrace the design
of Grotius; nay all the World had been at Unity if all had agreed with John of
Leyden. Sed nihil hoc ad Iphicli boves. And what you say against Grotius, is
gratis dictum.

And the terms to which he calls us, less impossible.
Sect. 12. But you stick not to affirm, that Grotius calls us all to impossible
terms of unity, as the only terms, (p. 12.) every whit as impossible as a
medicine from the Moon, or the Antipodes, or the brains of a Phoenix to cure a
Patient, p. 13.]

1. You seem to forget what you had said at another time, to wit, that Grotius
was a man not of great reading only, and much learning, but that he had also a
Christ. C^nc. p. 45.
mighty judgment to improve it. Nay that you take him for so learned and so
judicious a man, as you do not judge your self worthy in any such respect to be
named with him, p. 4. Now whether it suits with a man of judgment to prescribe
a medicine from the Moon, or what is equally impossible, and to spend so many
years in it, as Grotius professes to have done, I shall only leave to your
future consideration.

2. You are unmindful of the parties to whom the terms of peace were more
immediately propounded; even the moderate Papists, who were of the temper of
Thuanus, and the moderate Protestants, who were of the temper of good
Melanchthon: not the rigidest of the Papists, who were wholly devoted unto the
Papacy; nor the rigidest of the Protestants who perfectly dote on the
Presbytery: and yet the only way imaginable whereby to draw them to
moderation, were for those that are moderate to allu^e them to it by their
example. For whom was it possible to agree, if not for the soberest of either
party? nay for whom was it probable, if not for them who desired it with so
much fervor?

3. You little think how many, or how important persons there have been, who
having the same aims with Grotius, and having used the same endeavors, have
expected to reap some better fruit, then merely their labor for their pains,
even Emperors, Kings, Cardinals, Bishops, and diverse others as wise personages
as the Christian world has lately had, and as well of the Protestant as Roman
party. The words of Zanchy are worth observing, What can be more to be desired
by every man that fears God, De Ecclesia Romana jam tum locutus, Quid (inqui^
Z^nchius) p^o cuique optatius, quam ut ubi per baptismu^ renati sumus, ibi
etiam in finem usque vivamus? etc. In Confess. Art. 19. p. 157.
then that we live and die in that Church (meaning the Roman, of which alone he
there speaks) wherein by Baptism we were born again? yet he was then no Papist,
but only a moderate Presbyterian.

4. You profess not to distaste the pacificatory desires or designs of
Grotius, (p. 6.) how much soever you accuse them, (p. 15, 16, 17, 18.) And you
say, You are a person of so little worth or interest, that you cannot in reason
expect that your endeavors in such a work should have any considerable
success. But yet that you will speak and write for peace, though you saw not a
man in the World that would regard it, or return you any better thanks then a
Reproach, p. 6. Allow to Grotius the same zeal, who was a man of great worth,
and great interest in the world, knew (better then you) what peace was best,
and which were the best ways to gain it, and was regarded for what he did by
the best men in the World, however reproched by the most envious. You have a
confident Preface to D^sp. of Sacram. p. 15.
saying of your own project, to make up the breaches which have been betwixt
the Lutherans and Calvinists, the Jesuits and the Dominicans, etc. [That if
your Principles propounded shall have an impartial Reception according to their
evidence, you will give us security to make good your confidence, that they
shall quiet the Christian World hereabouts.] When you have thus set forth your
self, you should permit me with patience to speak as highly for Grotius too.

5. But I desire you in special to make reflection upon a Passage you have
printed in your debate with Master Tombs: where having said, in the Defense
and Commendation of Erastus, Plain Script. proof of Infants Church-Memb. and
Baptism, p. 227, 228.
That he was a very learned judicious man in Divinity, Philosophy and Physic,
and having justified his meddling without the sphaere of his own calling in the
business of Divinity, and having also said of him, that some of his book is
erroneous, his arguments very weak for mixed communion, and that he seems often
to contradict what he there pleads for; you proceed in these words, which
seem to me very remarkable:

Ibid.
For my part, (were my judgment of any moment to others) after my serious study
in this point, both in Scripture and Antiquity, (specially the Writers of the
three first Centuries) I am confidently persuaded that the true way of Christ's
Discipline is parcell'd out between the Episcopal, Erastian, Presbyterian and
Independents, and that every party has a (...) of the Truth in peculiar -- And
I verily think that if every one of the four parties do entirely establish
their own way, they will not establish the Scripture-way.]

These are all your own words: and to these you add more, [ That let it be
taken how it will, you will acquaint the world with your thoughts of this also,
if God will so long draw out your life.] But if you put forth such a work, you
will quickly find your self more. No Ishmael had ever more hands against him,
for your hand will be against all. And may not your medicine from the Moon with
the bruins of a Phoenix, be applied by me against your attempt, as well as you
have applied it to that of Grotius? Such a design as this is, would make the
unity and peace of the Church seem impossible, and our Divisions desperate.
Turpe est Doctori, quem culpa redarguit ipsum. It should seem by this, that in
your judgment the true discipline of Christ has been revealed only to you, or
at least, that you only have found it out by your industry. Nor are you only
a Presbyt^rian, but an Episcopal Divine, an Erastian als^, and Independent; or
if you are not all, you are neither. Nor indeed can you be either in point of
Di^ci^line, unless you are professedly against the Scripture. When you say you
would cleave to any party that you could perceive were in the right, (p. 24.)
you do but say in effect, that you cleave to none, you having declared your
belief, that none of those entire ways is the Scripture-way. But why was a
National League and Covenant both sworn and fought for? and persecutions made
use of, for nonconformity to the Covenant? Why were men so expensive of Blood
and Conscience for the pulling down of Episcopacy so well established, and for
the setting up of a Scottish Presbytery in the room, if the former was partly,
and the l^ter but partly the way of Christ's discipline? May not the
Independents and the Erastians do as much against Presbytery, as Presbyterians
have done against the Prel^cy of the Church, and cite your judgment, as one
defensative of their own? Of all the Ministers in the land, the Presbyterians
who were Preachers within the Province of London A. D. 1647. and See the book
int^tuled, A t^stimo^^ to the t^u^h of I^^us Christ; and compare it with the
Covenan^, as well as with the ^^d^rs for To. ^ra^on^
protested so much against all toleration, which did not well comport with
their solemn League and Covenant, will least of all thank you for your
discovery. It Is true, you have also your Pacisick De^ign: but so little has it
of Catholicism, and so impossible it is to prove effectual, that (after your
having accused Grotius) it only serves to make you fall under your own
condemnation. When you say that Christ's and the Scripture way is parcell'd out
between four parties, and that every party has a piece of the truth in
peculiar, (that is to say, not common to it with any one of the other three)
and so that the whole of the Truth must be compounded of four Ingredients; some
of your readers will reflect on the onceit of Tamerlane, that Religion ought to
be like a Posie, which smells best, when made up of the most variety. And I
have read that Mahomet (of the Tribe of Ishmael) thought fit to make up his new
Religion, Celrenus p. 347. Baronius ad A. D. 629, 630.
by borrowing (and blending with his Inventions) one parcel from the Pagans,
another from the Jews, a third from the Arians, a fourth from the Nestorians, a
fifth from the Manichees, that so he might (with the greater ease) reconcile
them all unto himself. And (with pardon to the comparison, which is not
intended to run on four feet) if in the Medlie which you propose, the component
parts will so temper and correct each other, that the whole will be grateful to
every party, you will not only grow famous as the first Discoverer of the
thing, but (nature being thus changed and tamed) our Lambs will dwell safely
within the neighborhood of the Wolf, and the Leopard inoffensively lie down
with the Kid. You who have given in your (...) after serious study of the
point, both in Antiquity and the Scriptures, may speak unexpectedly in your
account. But you have left me to wonder, (and I suppose some thousands more)
which ingredient of the four shall be praedominant in the mixture, or which
shall be the Basis of all the structure, so as to give satisfaction to every
party; or whether in the mixture all parts can be equal, and a Structure
erected without a Basis. If four distinct parties have the Truth of Christ's
Discipline divided betwixt them, unless it be equally divided, they will not
all own an equal right to the inheritance on every side. Else when the
Presbyterian Ministers were so hard put to it by his See Reliquiae sacrae
Carolinae, in the Papers which pass^d etc. at Newport, p. 275, and 367, 368,
369.
Majesty at the Isle of Wight, to give in their Answer to these Queres, 1.
Whether there be a certain Form of Government left by Christ or his Apostles to
be observed by all Christian Churches; 2. Whether it bind perpetually, or be
upon occasion alterable in whole, or in part; 3. Whether that certain form of
Government be the Episcopal, Presbyterian, or some other differing from them
both, (and we know how shamefully they did again and again decline answering
the Queres, though they confessed them to be of great importance) your
quadri-partite way might have served their turn, had it not been for their
usual boast, that since the times of Christianity their own is the only Divine
Model in the World. To the glory of which privilege the Episcopal party laying
claim, with fairer reasons for their pretension, how will you do for the share
of the other two, (the Independent and the Erastian) and reconcile Extremes of
so great a distance? If I say not (in civility) that the terms imply a
contradiction; yet I know there are of your Presbyterians who will say that the
mention of such terms does carry in the Forehead its own confusion.

Sect. 13. Your following reasons of dislike (from p. 15. to p. 19.) are at
least as feeble as your two first, Grotius does not cut off the holiest parts
of the Church.
they having nothing to support them but your particular wants of apprehension,
if not the strength of your prejudice against Grotius his Doctrine and Design.
For first when you say, that in the name of a peacemaker he divides and
cutteth off the holiest parts of the Church on earth, (p. 15, 16.) it is gratis
dictum, without so much as a show of proof; and a pitiful begging of the
Question, which no man living will grant you, who is not partially addicted to
all you say. You fitly confess (in a Parenthesis) you do but speak your own
judgment. And what is your judgment compared with that of immortal Grotius, who
knowingly judged those men to be the greatest subverters of Church and State,
(and that incessantly by their Principles, as well as frequently by their
Practice, even as often as they have power to reduce their Principles into
Practice,) whom you affirm without scruple, as without color of excuse, to be
the holiest part of the Church on earth? What you say, and but say, of my
reproching Puritans throughout my book, (very politickly forbearing to cite so
much as one page or passage) does not belong to this place, and shall be duly
spoken of in a peculiar Chapter. And when you tell me that Grotius does make
the name of the Reformed or Protestants a note of reproach, to those that will
not be reconciled to the Pope, you do not only beg the Question, and speak
without an offer of reason for it, but as contrary to truth, as if you had
affected its opposition. For I have made it appear, that he did honor the name
of Protestant, and reckoned himself with the Reformed. But he noted with a
black coal, those rebellious Schismatics in the Protestant Churches, (if yet I
may so speak without implying a contradiction, for they cease to be of our
Church, by their separating themselves from our Communion) who usurped the
title of the Reformed, and helped to justify the Papists in all their
clamours, by still pretending to be R^formers of our most excellent
Reformation. I can prove (by your own Logic) that you your self are a reviler
of the Protestant name, by throwing such Cart-loads of dirt upon the Regular
Sons of the Church of England, who will ever be esteemed (do what you can) the
most judiciously-reformed of all the Protestants in the World. Again you
dishonor the Pro^estant name, by calling the irre^oncilia^iles, the holiest
men; and by pleading so much for Puritanes (as the godliest part of the
Protestants) who call a Rebellion, a Reformation, and stick the term of
Christian purity on the most palpable hypocrisy to be imagined. For these
alone are the Puritanes whom both Grotius, and Bis^op Andrews, Bishop Hall, and
Doctor Sanderson, and indeed the most renowned of all the Protestants in the
World have taught us to know, and to avoid, under that very name. And therefore
let me entreat you to be so just for the future, (even to those whom you are
pleased to single out for your Adversaries) as to suffer their own words to be
the interpreters of their own meaning.

Sect. 14. The next reason of your dislike ( p. 16.) is but an uncharitable
Assertion (without so much as pretending to any proof) that Grotius his way was
uncharitable, His way is not uncharitable.
and a trap to engage the souls of millions in the same. But they that read and
understand him do know the contrary, that Peace, and Loyalty, and Obedience,
and mutual Love, were all the traps wherein Grotius would very fain have
engaged the souls of men. You think not so ill of his design, as your Fathers
and Superiors do think of yours: yet i^ it lay in your power, you would engage
the souls of millions in it. And if you may be so zealous in your contrivance,
much more may Grotius be allowed to have been in his; you having confessed you
are not worthy to be so much as named with him, and that a small measure of
humility may make you serious in your profession, p. 4. And if you fall so very
short both of his learning and of his judgment, take my word you fall shorter
of his integrity of life, if you will but allow me to take your own. And I
shall cite your own words in their proper place.

Sect. 15. As your fourth reason (so called) was the same in substance with
your third, It does not tend to pers^cution.
so now your fifth (if not your sixth) is the same in substance with the two
former. As affirming a tendency in the design of Grotius to engage the Princes
of Christ^ndom in a persecution of their subjects that cannot co^ply with these
unwarrantable terms, p. 17. In this you say no more of Grotius, then any man
living may say of you, or indeed of any man living. But as you nakedly say it,
with a great deal of confidence in stead of reason, so is it known to all the
World, to whom the meekness of Grotius is not utterly unknown, that he was as
far from such ^ project as he was from being a Pr^sbyterian. If to hinder
subjects from treading all under their feet, (as well their Sovereigns, as
fellow subjects,) must pass with you for a persecution, then was Grotius as
guilty as you express him; for he indeed exhorted Prin^es to beware of those
Ministers who taught the people to be rebellious, and to call it by the fine
title of setting Christ upon his Throne. He would not have Sacrilege, and
Murder, and all manner of Rapine, to be freely exercised and used as the proper
means of Reformation. He could not endure that the filthiest fruits of the
flesh should be ascribed to the suggestions of Gods good Spirit. And if men are
grown to such a pitch of impiety, as not to be satisfied with less then with a
liberty of Conscience to cut men's throats, they ought not to call it a
persecution, to be happily bound to some good behavior. What you add of the
attempts of pride, when men have such high thoughts of their own imaginations
and devices, that they think the Churches wounds can be healed by no other
plaster, but by this of their compounding, (p. 17, 18.) is so unduly applied
to Grotius, that it has many reflections upon your self; for you know you have
been a great promissor in your days. You mislike the Plaster proposed by
Grotius, and that of some late Episcopal Divines, which yet you prefer before
that of Grotius (p. 21.) you mislike the ^l^ister of Bis^op Bramhal, (p. 22,
25.) and indeed what is there, which (in other men) you do not publicly
dislike? But you like your own Plaster, as abundantly sufficient to heal the
wounds of the Church; at least, as better then other men's. It appears by what I
have cited from you in the twelfth Section of this Chapter, and by what you
said in your Preface to your book of Sacraments, Iam. 3.5.
and by what you now say in your Grotian Religion, (p. 29.) that though the
Tongue is a little member, yet it boasts great things.

It does not engage in a way of sin.
Sect. 16. You say the sixth reason of your dislike of Grotius his
Pacification, and all such as his, is because it engages the Church of Christ
in a way of sin, both in false Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, p. 18.] still
a confident affirmer of what your interest or your passion suggesteth to you,
without the appearance of any ground excepting your absolute Decree to
reprobate Grotius and his Design. But it is enough that I deny, what you think
it enough but to affirm; and do know that Grotius his Pacification was as much
superior unto your own, (in all imaginable respects) as you and your Writings
are confessedly inferior to him and his. A little while since you were
professing, that you distaste not Grotius his Pacificatory designs, and that if
you could find such a heart within you, you would cast it in the dust, and
condemn it to shame, and sorrow, and recantation; (p. 18.) yet now you say in
plain terms, that you dislike his pacification (p. 18.) nay you vehemently
dislike it, as appears by the enormities with which you charge it. It was the
Motto of King James, who had it out of Christ's School, Beati pacifici, Blessed
are the Peacemakers. And therefore Grotius, as a pacifick, was much esteemed
by that King. Nor can he be one of Christ's family who does not love
Pacification. But if by that word you mean his Pacificatory de^ign, how came
you to dislike (at your eighteenth page) what (but twelve pages before) you
highly liked? If you say you distinguish his particular way from his design, it
seems your qua^rel is only this, that having chosen a good end, he did not
jump with your humor in choosing the means of its attainment. But methinks for
this you should never have used him as you have done, because he knew not you
were an Oracle, and so he could not consult you concerning the course he was to
take. You do avow your approbation of Pacificatory attempts between us and the
Papists, p. 30. where then lay the fault, when Grotius attempted such a
pacification with the greatest Industry and Wisdom that God had given him? Had
you been as Grotius in point of power and prudence, (to say no more) you would
have taken his course; and so if Grotius had been as you, he would no doubt
have taken yours. But Grotius being as he was, one of the wisest and most
learned of all mankind, and you continuing as you are, neither the wisest, nor
the most learned, what matter of wonder can it be, if he was otherwise advised
then you would have him? If you do really take Grotius to have been so learned
and so judicious as you express, (p. 4.) and do as really judge your self
unworthy to be named with him, as in the page I now cited you have
acknowledged; methinks it is pity that your whole Book should be little else
then a preferring your opinion before his judgment, your jealousies and fears
before his knowledge, and your fortuitous conjectures before his exact
deliberations. Whereas you add, that you abhor their disposition who can
despise or violate the Churches. Peace for every pety conceit of their own,
which they have called by the name of truth or Duty, (p. 19.) you oblige your
self and your party to do some very severe penance for having violated the
Peace of the Church of England, which for so many happy years had been
established. The Presbyterian way of Discipline was a pety conceit of their
own, as you at least must acknowledge, who have written against it, as has
been Look back on Sect. 12.
showed. The Common Prayer book (you Look on what shall be said chapter 6. sect. 9.
number. 2.
confess) was more perfect then the Directory, which was therefore another of
the pety conceits, for which the peace of the Church was despised and violated.
Nay you complain to Of Inf. chapter memb. and Bapt. p. 122, 123.
Mr. Tombs, that plain duties were wiped out, and excellent things taken from
us, which we were in actual possession of. Your National-Covenant it self you
must acknowledge was a pety conceit of your own, for which you have cause to
repent, if we may credit your Ibid. p. 123.
own words. Why then did you violate the Churches peace? or if you abhor your
self for it, why do you not make us some satisfaction? You are often an admirer
of Bishop Davenant, who had told you all in good time, Sent. Daven. ad Duraeum,
p. 39. and A^hort. ad Pac. Eccl. cap. 11. p. 148, 149.
that rather then have troubled the peace and quiet of the Church under which
you lived in sub^ection, and of which you did profess you all were members, you
should quietly have depar^ed into some other Church, to which you could have
been pleased to yield obedience, or have remained in ours without disturbance.
Nay this (said the Bishop) you should h^ve done, though you had thought your
opinions had been of such moment, as that salvation it self depended on them.
How much mo^e should you have done it, when the things you stood upon so stiffly
were pety conceits of your own, and confessed such at long running, however
magnified at your first setting out? I ever ap^lauded those dissenting and
dissatisfied brethren, who peaceably went into New England and other parts of
America, until I was taught that they intended a very unpeaceable return. Be
not angry at your M^n ^r but meekly receive the admonition, not at all for my
sake, but Bishop Davenant's. And if according to your own Doctrine, Truth ought
to be suspended for love of peace, then be not offended with this consequence,
that you must judge the way of Grotius or Bishop Bramhall very much worthier to
be followed then your own or Mr. Chillingworths (p. 29.) in case they are
likelier to take effect. This I say you must do, unless you can give some
better reason then I am able to expect for your refusal.

Sect. 17. Now that you see what you have gotten by the six Reasons of your
Dislike, Men's thoughts of Grotius must be esteemed by their words.
(for such it was in your power to call them, though not in power to make them
such,) be pleased to reflect on your profession (p. 9.) that [ your thoughts of
Grotius are not either bitter, censorious, or uncharitable.] In which
profession if there is Truth, why would you write what you never thought? Did
you think it was enough to think well of the man, whilst you spoke as ill of
him as it was possible for you to speak? If your expressions are so bitter when
you are full of sweet thoughts, I wonder what words you could have used in case
your thoughts had been bitter too. Or what advantage could you aim at, in
pouring out so many bitter censorious words, and in professing at the same time
a contrariety of your thoughts?

(...)
(...)
But perh^ps you may deny that there is bitterness in your words, and therefore
that shall be tried before I leave you. If you forget what is past, it will be
good for your memory to look before you.

Sect. 18. For now I hasten to conclude my Vindication of Grotius. The
conclusion.
And I hasten so much the rather, because I hear it will be done in an
elaborate manner, and ex professo, by a great admirer of his perfections, and
because I hope I have said enough to make you sensible of your mistake. For
methinks you should not take leisure in trying to make men believe that the
learned of mortals at last turned Papist; or (in case that that is too bold a
word) one so richly accomplished with all variety of secular and sacred
knowledge, joined to wonderful endowments of Grace and Nature, but for nothing
more remarkable, then acuteness of research, and depth of judgment. Now that a
person of such importance should in the full maturity of all these excellencies
forsake the Protestant Religion in exchange for the Papist^, would be a greater
advantage to our adversaries then I am willing to afford them, and I heartily
wish you had not done it. For the Roman Catholics are too apt to take such
honors unto themselves when they can find the least ground or occasion for
them. Had Grotius really been a Papist, how many Protestants had we lost by the
powerful attractive of his example? Nay if Mr. Crandon and others durst call
you Papist, and one of the worst sort of Papists, even before you contended for
Grotius his turning from us to Rome, how much more will they call you such, if
you shall possibly persist (as you have begun) to do the Papists so great a
service? I do assure you for my sel^, that if it lay in my power to prove an
Apostasy of Grotius from us to Rome, although the Pope should reward it with a
Cardinal's Cap, I would not yield the Church of Rome so great advantage: so
great is my love to the Church of England. I know it is not your meaning to
serve and gratify the Romanists, because you speak as ill of Grotius as if he
were not worth having. You say he was Christ. Conc. p. 45.
exasperated by his imprisonment, etc. That he was too much Grot. Relig. Praef.
Sect. 5.
guilty of uncharitable censures; That he was a Ibid. Sect. 2.
Dissembler, if not a Papist; p. 11.
That he dropped into a deplorable Schism; p. 15, 16.
That his way is uncharitable and censorious, wounds under pretense of
healing, in the name of a Peacemaker he divides and cuts off the holiest
parts of the Church on earth; p. 16.
That his Design is a Trap to tempt and engage the souls of millions into the
same uncharitable, censorious, and reprochful way; p. 17.
That it tends to engage the Princes of Christendom in a persecution of their
subjects that cannot comply with uncharitable terms; p. 17, 1^.
That this is the unhappy issue of the attempts of pride, when they have such
high thoughts of their own devices, and depart from the word of God and the
simplicity of the Faith; p. 18.
That his Design engages the Church of Christ in a way of sin, both in false
Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship. p. 73.
(You imply that he calumniated the Patriarch Cyril.) You say of him expressly,
p. 78.
That the injustice and partiality shows the meaning of the man; p. 83.
That his Design was Schismati^al, Partial, and Cruel; p. 90.
That you dare boldly say, he was an unjust man, etc. putting a more odious
vizor on the face of the Calvinists Doctrines of Faith, Justification, etc.
then beseems any judicious man that understood the state of the
Controversies, or the strength of an Argument, and had any Christian charity
left. p. 91.
You reproach him further, with falsehood and abomination of inhumane ca^umnies;
wi^h too high an esteem of his espoused conceits, and too odious thoughts of
the contrary way; p. 92.
with noise and bitter accusation poured out against the Reformed Churches;
with censures running upon mere mistake, and odiously aggravating the opinions
that deserve it not, and that were far nearer his own then he imagined; p. 92,
93*
with bitter censures, reproaches, clamours, and a factions uncharitable way of
pacification. Again you say p. 93.
he is guilty of his own mistakes, upon which he changed his Church and
Religion.

Thus you speak of that holy and learned man, in such a strange and amazing
strain, that Mr. Hickman himself could hardly have used a greater virulence.
And yet you pretend great honor to him, yea a debt of p. 4.
Gratitude which you owe him for the great benefit of his works. p. 5.
Yea, that if you might be partial for any man, it were very likely to be for
Grotius. Leaving your readers to imagine how vile a creature that man must be,
of whom his very partial and obliged and thankful Client (or Disciple) was
forced to publish such ugly things. And as if this were not sufficient, you say
you ever stopped your ears against the accusation of the blemishes commonly
reported of his life, in some points, and suspended your censures of him. (p.
5.) By which unchristian Paralipsis you leave your Readers to imagine that he
was a very scandalous ungodly liver, which is accounted by some the very worst
way of slandering, where notoreity of Fact does not excuse it. I therefore
shall antidote your Readers (if they are mine) with this short Declaration,
That by all I have been able to learn of Grotius, (either from other men's
writings, or from his own, or from those excellent persons who had many years
enjoyed a friendship with him,) I cannot but value his godly life by many
degrees above his learning.

You have done your self a shrewder turn then I could possibly have wished you,
by writing so bitterly of so good, etc so great a Christian. And though I hope
you will ac^nowledge that I oppose you (in his defense) without distemper; yet
do I heartily wish you had not writ against him, that so I might not have been
obliged thus to write against you. That Grotius may be defended, you will not
deny, having defended him Append. to Aphor. p. 138. to p. 145.
your self against the attempts of a modern Doctor. And as you have defended
him in one case, I have but defended him in another.

CHAP. II.
An acknowledgm^nt of charity,
Sect. 1. YOu very readily acknowledge [ my brotherly and moderate dealing with
your self, and you say, you must acknowledge my gentleness and charity, Sect.
4.] I am glad my charity, gentleness, and moderation were so conspicuous in my
Writings that you could not but see them; and so undeniable, that you could not
but acknowledge them to all the World, even at that very time too, when you
made it apparent how willing you were to find faults. For you accuse me (in the
same breath) of wanting charity to others, and of making my learning
subservient to partial interest or passion. But you name not where, or when, or
wherein, or toward whom, I had showed such passion or partiality; which had
you been able to have done, I am forbid to believe you would have spared me. If
I was partial to you, Sir, by being more brotherly, more moderate, more
charitable and gentle, then you seem to your self to have deserved, you ought
in all reason to have 2 Cor. 12.13.
forgiven me this wrong. Had others deserved no worse of me then your self had
then done, my gentle dealing with others had been as signal. And had you been
either as slanderous or as blasphemous as others were, the ex^re^sions of my
dislike had been as freely distributed unto your self as to any others with
whom I dealt. I must not be unwilling to ^lear mine own innocence (as to the
calumnies c^st upon me) much less to clear God from the evil repor^s brought up
against him, for fear the friend^ of the malefactors should accuse me (as you
have done) of partial interest and passion.

Sect. 2. Nor did you only say this, With an uncharitable requ^tal.
but ^roceeded to the worst that could be said, even to censure me as a person
in a state of damnation, and somewhat worse then so too; (that is to say) in a
wo^se ^state of damnation then David was in before Nathan sp^ke to him; Sect.
20.] Before Nathan spoke to him, he was in a state of impenitency; and why
should you rather choose to die in such a state, a murder^r, adulterer, and an
hypocri^e, and impenitently such, (at that time) then in the state that I am
in, whom you confess to have committed no such sin, (sect. 20.) if you did not
think me to be a Reprobate? for if I am one of the elect as well as David, I
shall also repent as undoubtedly as David, let my sins be what they can be. Do
you think my greatest sin is this, that I am not guilty of such sins as
David's? or that Adultery and Murder are qualifications for a Saint? I pray
examine your own heart, and be jealous over your self; and say, if my charity
toward you (which you acknowledge under your hand) did deserve a requital so
void of c^arity. I assure you, that by this and some other passages in your
book, you have been heavily censured, even by many of your way; and utterly
lost their good opinion^ who once admired you. If you continue to write much,
and so to write as you have done, no man living will have need to write against
you. As for your bitterness to me (in this and some other places) I am no more
concerned in it, Acts 7.^0.
then I ought to be for your sake, and do most earnestly pray, That it may
never be laid unto your charge. It is not the least of my comforts, (for they
are many) that, when I pray for the repentance of you and others, (by whom I
have been most f^ulely ^udged,) I do not ^ray without Faith, or without
sincerity: and though I desire you Luke 6.37. Mat. 7.1. 1 Cor. 4.5.
not to judge, that you may not be judged; yet judge the worst of me you can, I
will judge of you the best I may.

You say [ I seem, as Grotius, to be too much affected to my opinions, commonly
called Arminian, and too much imbitte^ed against other men's, Sect. 5.]

Sect. 3. Indeed I was told you meant me, when you flung a side-cast at the
Northamptonshire Arminian in your voluminous book of Disputations. The title of
Arminian uns^asonably applied.
And though I would not sustain a double person, by taking an offense where
none was given; yet now I conjecture you did really strike at me by that
expression, although you fortuned to hit your self. That I am affected to my
opinions, as Grotius was, who was so eminent an example both of Judgment* and
Piety, and Impartiality, is by much a greater advantage to me, then I could
ever have pretended to have deserved. And therefore for this, I thank your
bounty. How you your self have been ^ffected to the very same Doctrines which
are as commonly called Arminian also, not a few of your party have made us know
by their censures; for which you gave them as just occasion, as either Grotius
or I have ever given. Will you own the opinions of Cameron, Amyrald, and
learned Daille? If you say no, it will be at your See your Appendix to the best
of your ^ooks, viz. Of Justification, p. 164.
pe^ill. I suppose (by what you have printed) you must needs say yes. And then
in the judgment of Spanhemius, with other persons of great name, (who are as
fit to judge of Amyralds Doctrines, and so of yours, as you can be to judge of
mine,) you deserve the name of Arminian, Puccian, Pelagian, Semipelagian, and
not only so, but Socinian also: so easy it is to give men names. You had
never (I am persuaded) writ against any man as an Arminian, if you had not
forgotten that words have (...)* Him.
wings. And so perhaps you will say, when you shall read my fifth Section.

Sect. 4. Nor are you any whit hap^ier in the second part of your accusation.
For first, if Grotius and my self have been embittered against the Doctrines of
other men, Neither Grotius, nor any else can ^e ^oo severe against blasphemy.
who have made God to be the Author and Fautor of Sin; and have been so far
embittered as to accuse them of blasphemy; you will wrong your self extremely,
by saying we are too much embittered, for Doctrines less impious are called in
Scripture, 1 T.m. 4.1.
the Doctrines of Devils. No^ have the Fathers of the Church, whether Ancient
or Modern, been less embittered against the same. (As I have plentifully See
Divine Purity defended, chapter 4. s^ct* 5, 6, 7.
snew'd in another place.) Next I conceive that you your self have been much
more embittered upon much less ground. For not to speak of your bitterness to
the most worthy Grotius and my unworthy self, and to the excellent Tilenus, it
seems the men of your way have not escaped you. Do not you ask God pardon for
bitter speeches in your Treatise of Judgment? I am sure you deplore them in
your Sect* 68 p. 143, 144.
Apology against Mr. Blake, Kendal, Moulin, Air, and Crandon, by thi^ good
token, that you are most bitter to Doctor Kendall, whilst you confess your
bitterness to be your crime. Insomuch that Master Hickman has showed his
bitterness to me by your example to Doctor Kendall. What you have said to the
m^n who renounced his Orders and the Lo^d's Prayer I neither know nor will make
a search, but I may guess there was bitterness by his to you. How you have used
M^ster Pemble and Doctor Twiss, I hope I need not put you in mind. I remember
your bitterness to such as were S^ints Rest, p^^t. 3. sect. 6. p. 57.
spruce in their apparel, and delighted in May-games, Morice-dances, Shows, or
Stage Plays, whom you ea^ily adjudge to the pains of Hell. I am no friend to
those follies* and thieves of time: but had I been of your Counsel, I would
h^ve advised you to speak from Scripture, and to have showed your severity to
Rebellion rather, or Sacrilege, to Schism and bloodshed, and other fruits of
the flesh; of which a See 2 Timothy 3. and compare v. 2, 3, 4. with v. 5.
formal godliness is not the l^ast, and of which I shall speak as occasion
serves. For many strain at those Gnats, who yet can swallow these Camels. Wh^t
bitterness you h^ve used to the wearing of Surplices and Not only Processi^ns
and Perambulations, b^t the observ^tions of Holidays, repeating the L^tany,
the lik^ form^ in the G^mm^n-Prayer, ^he bowing at the name of Ies^^, receiving
the Sacram^nt upon the kn^e, are reckon^d up in the sam^ p^ge.
other things which are indifferent, (considered simply in themselves) but made
your duties as well as ours, when commanded by that authority which God has
commanded us to obey, you may see in your Saints Rest, part 3. p. 91. And how
severely such bitterness against the Rites established in the Church has been
censured by S. Paul, yea by God the Holy Ghost, you have been told by that
learned and peaceable Divine Doctor Sanderson, in his fifth Sermon ad Populum
p. 291, 292, 293. I pray Sir bear with me, whilst I speak the words of truth
and soberness: Remember what it is of which you have accused both me and
Grotius. And that in order to your amendment, (which is an act of the greatest
friendship) as well as in order to our Defense (which implies the onset to have
been made from your pen) I have but warned you for the future, to Mat. 7.3.
cast the beam out of your own eye, before you say to your brother, ver. 4, 5.
Let me pull the mote out of thine eye.

You confess [ you are grown to a very great confidence, that most of our
contentions about those points are more about words then matter, Sect. 5.]

What differences are verbal, and what are real.
Sect. 5.] So you told that learned person whom you describe by his six
Metaphysical Exercitations (in your book of Saving Faith, p. 5.) and by his
living in the public Library at Oxford ( p. 6.) that he was indeed your
assenting Adversary, and maintained your Assertion by a pretended Confutation;
which was strange he should do and be learned still. So you told another who
writ against you, as you against him, that you did but angrily agree. (Disp. p.
483.) Indeed it were happy if all the World had got that knack of differing
into agreement, and of falling out into perfect friendship. Rebus congruentes
Nominibus diffe^ebant. Una and consentiens duo^us vocabulis Philosophiae forma
constituta est. Cicero in Quaest. Acad. l. 1.
What Cicero says of the Academicks and Peripateticks, that agreeing in Things
they only differed in appellations, I wish I could say of all our contentions
here in England, in the Points you speak of. You have confidently said it, and
so it lies upon you to make it good: it is not incumbent upon me who never said
it. And first of all you must show that there are few material differences
'twixt you and me. To which it is consequent, that you have embraced the
greatest part of the very opinions which I assert with so much eagerness; not
that I have receded from my Assertions, for my adherence unto which you are
pleased to call me an eager man. Again it follows from hence that there are few
contentions 'twixt me and Mr. Barlee, unless it be about words; or that your
self and Mr. Barlee are really differing in opinions. What a fallacy is there
in your phrase, [ Our Contentions] if you mean your self and me? for you know
the eagerness, interest, and passion, which you make the subjects of your
rebuke (though of no larger a size then you deal to others) were not dealt
against you, as you dilucidly confess (Sect. 4.) but against some of the
Consistory, from whom you differ in point of Doctrine, and with whom you agree
in point of Discipline. So that the Case in effect lies clearly thus: I have
written severely against some rigid Presbyterians, who have written against
universal Redemption, and for God's tempting, stirring up, exciting men to sin;
and you (a singular Presbyterian) are severe to these Doctrines, as well as I;
but think the only found way whereby to answer an Arminian, is by asserting
the Doctrine of universal redemption, and the natural consequences thereof,
(that is) by yielding unto me (bearing the name of an Arminian from you, as you
from others) one of the chief of my concernments. For this alone being granted,
(as by you it is) I shall not contend for any thing else which shall not be
consequent and agreeable to this one principle. Yet see and wonder at your own
excess of partiality, which has made you so far consider your
fellow-Presbyterians, as to rebuke your fellow-Arminians for their passion and
bitterness against those Doctrines, against which you have written with equal
keeneness, and so contracted upon your self the odious title of Arminian, which
yet to you should be the less odious, because Arminius and his followers were
but the better sort of Presbyterians. I cannot but wish you will declare what
you are for, and stick to what you shall declare: for he is called a Ecclus.
2.12.
sinner, that goes two ways at once, (...) was the great fault of the
Gnostics. And (...), in Homer, did not better fit Mars then it will fit any
man else, who is against what he is for, as well as for what he is against.

A material difference indeed.
Sect. 6. Whereas you add so distinctly, [ That I and my Antagonist do make our
selves and others believe that we differ much You say as much even of Grotius
himself, p. 91.92.
more about them then we do, Sect. 5.] You do not lessen but raise my wonder:
for can there be any two points more different then those in which Mr. Barlee
and I have differed? our difference stands in those things, which have set the
Calvinists and the Lutherans so irreconcileably at odds. Observe the words of
that holy and learned man Doctor Iackson, Doctor Iackson in his Marathan Atha,
cb. 40, p. 37 11.
who having spoken of several sorts of Idolaters, (says he) Besides all these,
I am to give you notice of some in reformed Churches who commit the same error
which they so much condemn in the Romanist. The Romanist transforms or changes
the nature of the incorruptible God, and of Christ himself into the similitude
of earthly Kings and Monarchs, yet not of cruel and prodigious Tyrants. But
these Writers whom I mean (as the Romanists object, and the Lutherans prove)
transform the Majesty and Glory of God into the ^imilitude of cruel Tyrants,
yea of such base and sordid Pedants, as the meanest among you would disdain
should have any authority over your children; (that is) such as delight more in
punishing and correcting them, then to direct or amend them in learning or
manners.] Now if so learned a part of the Reformed Churches as the Lutherans by
all must be acknowledged, have broken off all League and Amity with the
Calvinists, even because they h^ve conceived that they did not agree with them
in the worship of the same God, or transformed Gods nature into the similitude
of his enemy, into hatred and cruelty it self, (as the same Ibid. p. 37 12.
Doctor has it) sure the difference must needs be more then verbal, where one
party says (as I have done) that God's decree of Reprobation is with respect
had to sin, which God foresaw from all eternity; and another party says (as my
Antagonists have done) that God's Decree of Reprobation is without respect had
to sin. I need not name more Instances of the material differences which pass
between us. Or if the difference were more in words then matter, then how much
has that party to answer for, by opposing my notes with so much violence?

You farther add, (and desire my pardon for the addition) That I do not well
understand the true state of the Controversy, or else I would not take the
breach to be wider then it is, Sect. 5.]

Sect. 7. Who best understands it, you, or I, neither you nor I must be the
Judge: I pray let our Readers enjoy that Office. You scrupled not to tell that
learned person, whom you so far honor as to profess you should have thought it
an honor to you to have been one of his Pupills, (of saving Faith, p. 5.) I
say you scruple not to tell him, that you would have him understand you, before
he confutes you. (p. 83.) Nor do I expect you should use me better. Nay you
charge even Grotius with the same mistakes and misunderstandings. p. 90, 91,
92. But what Controversy do you mean? if that which I have managed with
several persons who had opposed me, my very Opponents will say, I understood
it. Nor do I think that you have read the whole state of the Controversy
'twixt me and them. If you s^eak of the Controversy 'twixt me and you in these
points, you know that there never was any such. I have showed sometimes how you
and I are at agreement in many points which they call Arminian. And you confess
that most of them are but (...). So that if this is the thing which you call a
Controversy, I cannot choose but understand the state of it, whilst I am able
to believe that your words have truth in them; and so by a consequence
unavoidable that either you are an Arminian, or I am none. You see 'twas fitly
done of you, to ask my pardon, Of heads of Controversy reconcilable.
and I think it as fit for me to grant it.

Sect. 8. One of the first heads of Controversy, about which you suppose all
quarrels will be laid aside (Sect. 5.) is no less then the whole Supralapsarian
Doctrine of Pre-destination and Reprobation (and so the Twissian by consequence
which so vehemently condemns the Synod at Dort) besides the Doctrine of
Christ's dying only for the elect, together with Physical Predetermination,
(which contains the irresistibility of Grace) A second is, all matters
unrevealed. Part of the third, about Methods (as whether Prescience be before
Decrees, etc.) All which it seems are so far yielded by your self, that you
suppose I will consent they never be drawn into dispute, which you have not any
the least reason to suppose, unless you readily grant what I assert in these
points. For if we differ, how can we possibly agree, as to the things about
which we differ? and if we agree in these points, let us go lovingly together
against the rigid Presbyterians who will not partake of our agreement.
Accordingly you profess (Sect. 8.) to wish no more in this Controversy, then
may consist with rational prayers, and thanksgivings for Grace, in which you
have my full grant. Nay in a very plain manner, you grant what we call
sufficient Grace, in the very sense in which we mean it, to the very worst of
them that perish, (Sect. 8.) And then (excepting your Doctrine, that whosoever
is once justified can never totally fall away, which I wonder how you can
retain) what difference remains 'twixt you and me? nay even here too you yield
me one great advantage. For besides that you often seem to waver in your notion
of perseverance, and pretend to no more then a probability; your Confession
stands upon Account of the controv. of Persev. etc. in setting down the fourth
opinion, p. 4.5.
Record, That S. Austin was of my mind, and that the Lord Primate said as much
in the hearing of Master Kendall. Nor am I out of all hope but that in tract of
time you will come over to S. Austin, and so to me in this point also.

Grotius made not uncharitable inferen^es.
Sect. 9. What you say is not owned by the Synod of Dort, ( Sect. 5.) I forbear
to exagitate, as well and easily I might, both because Tilenus is only
concerned in that subject; and because I should be glad to find it so as you
say, and not to dispute against that which I would fain have true. All your
Sections which next ensue, from Sect. 6. to Sect. 18. are the sole portion of
Tilenus, whom though you call my friend, and seem to suspect him to be my self,
yet you know you do not know, that he is so much as known to me. The odious
inferences you charge on Grotius, and his uncharitable censures thereupon, of
which you affirm him to be too much guilty, having been only raised in your
fancy, do only redound to your dishonor. Grotius did not make loads of
inferences, but observe and transcribe them from the printed writings of the
Calvinians, by whom the inferences were made. And so the want of charity must
lie at your door, you having unjustly censured Grotius, who with very great
justice had censured them. I am exactly of your opinion that we differ little,
if at all in the point of Free Will (Sect. 5.) For if I discern any difference,
I do conceive it to be in this, that some of your expressions concerning the
freedom of the will, have looked more like Pelagian then mine have done. But of
this I accuse you not, for nothing can be Pelagian, that looks but like it.

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. NO sooner are you returned from Tilenus unto my self, A strange
difference between the Godly, and the notoriously ungodly.
then you implicitly tax me of injustice in three respects, Sect. 18.]

How swift you are to speak hardly, and to be guilty whilst you reprove, even
of that which you reprove, I think I may make your self the judge, if you will
but read when you are cool, what you seem to have written, when too much
heated. For how could I fail in point of justice, by not noting some difference
between the men that are godly, and not notoriously ungodly, when you know your
own words did contain this difference, as I had faithfully and friendly set
them down out of your book? since your Book lies printed, I (and thousands
besides) can declare what you have written, as well as you, which makes me
wonder (not a little) at the very strange nature of your put-off. For under the
first of the two heads, to wit the godly, See your words by me cited in The
Self-Revenger Exemp. chapter 4. Sect. 3. p. 115. and compare them with your pages
which there are marked.
you reckon up such as have been oftentimes drunk, such as rashly rail, and
lie, despise reproof, and defend their sin, guilty of Schism, and disobedience
to their Guides, and doing much to the hurt of the Church; yea they that commit
greater sins then these, the denial of Christ, Perjury, Adultery, Murder,
Incest, Idolatry, as Peter, Lot, David, Remember what you call the opinion of
most of your Divines, p. 326. and how you excuse Solomon for his Idolatry, p.
317. in contradiction to the Text and to your self, p. 328.
Solomon, are affirmed by you to be in the number of the godly. For (besides
that you give them the style of godly more then once) you further add, that to
be notoriously ungodly, or unsanctified, (which is the second head) a man must
be worse then all these. Do but mark your own words: A man must be guilty of
more sin then Peter was in denying and for swearing Christ that is notoriously
ungodly. Observe I pray Sir, you say not [ of as much] but, of more sin then
Peter was guilty of, etc. Nor only of as much, but of more sin then Lot, whose
sins you reckon up thus. [ He was drunk two nights together, and committed
Incest twice with his own daughters, and that after the miraculous destruction
of Sodom, of his own wife, and his own miraculous deliverance.] Nor do you say
he must be as great, but a greater sinner then Solomon was with his seven
hundred wives, and his three hundred Concubines, and gross Idolu^ries, when his
heart was turned away from the Lord God of Israel, which appeared unto him
twice, and commanded him not to go after other gods, but he kept not that which
the Lord commanded.] Now compare what you say of your godly men, with what you
say of the notoriously ungodly, and how wicked you say a man must be to be
such, not only as great, but a greater sinner then all these, (remembering also
what filthy Uses some men may make of such Doctrine) and judge what wrong you
have done your self, by doing so great a wrong to me, who had done you none.

Sect. 2. I must expostulate again about your second Accusation of my injustice
( Sect. 18.) for first did you not say, The excessive d^nger of making the
greatest sinners to dream themselves into a Saintship.
(in the place by me cited) that a man who is notoriously ungodly, i. e.
unsanctified, must be a greater sinner then Solomon was? etc. Secondly, Where
did you add, that it is the common opinion, as that does signify not your own?
you are not singular in all you think, the opinion may be common and the more
likely to be yours, nor do I doubt but that it is: if I thought it were not,
you should hear more from me then now you shall. Thirdly, What if you desired
all men to take heed? etc. that is no more then to dig a pit and then to bid
men beware that they fall not in. But how can you or I be sure that they who
believ^ what you have taught (to wit, that such sins cannot unsanctifie, or put
them into a state of damnation, or make them cease to be Godly,) will abstain
from such sins when strongly tempted? O Sir, take heed that you scandalize not
your weak, or your wilful brethren: that you strengthen not the hands of
evildoers: rather then so, it were better that you were cast into the Sea. (
Mat. 18.6.) Fourthly, This Caution was peculiar to Solomon, not to any of those
sinners you named besides. Fifthly, Your supposing the sin of David with an Et
caetera, (which must regularly include the sins of Lot and Solomon, the Railing
Professor, the Rebel, and the Schismatic, and all the rest which you reckon up
in your ample Catalogue) to have been extremely different from the like in a
graceless man, will prove a sad principle of all security in sinning to one who
doubts not but that himself is a gracious man. For he (poor wretch) will be
sure to hope that his Drunkenness is like Noah's, his Incest like Lot's, his
Adultery and his Murder, of all the world, like David's, and not at all like
the sins of the graceless man. Suppose a man shall be convinced of having been
many times drunk, besides a Railer, a Liar, a Rebel, and a Schismatic, may he
not plead for all that, he is a sanctisied man, and in the number of the godly,
and cannot possibly miscarry when once he has been sanctified, as he takes it
for granted that he has been? Nay may he not fiercely stand to it, and cite
the words of Mr. Baxter in his justification; and what are the words of Mr.
Baxter but these that follow? [ Disput. 3. p. 329. etc.
He that has oftentimes been drunk may yet have true Grace, and be in the
number of the godly. How many Professors will rail and lie in their passion?
how few will take well a reproof, but rather defend their sin? How many in
THESE TIMES that we doubt not to be Godly, have been guilty of disobedience to
their Guides, and of Schism, and doing much to the hurt of the Church?] If the
horrid nature of these sins be pressed home to such a Wretch, he may presently
fly out into a greater indignation, and urge (in the words of Mr. Baxter
again) Grotian Relig. Praef. Sect. 18. toward the end*
That his Drunkenness, Perjury, Railing, Lying, Rebellion, Schism, and
persecution of the Church, are Grotian Relig. Praef. Sect. 18. toward the end*
exceedingly different from the like facts in a graceless man, in regard of
manner, ends, concomitants, etc.

The danger exemplified in a Presbyterian woman:
Sir, I cannot but tell you on this occasion, that I have labored for four (if
not five) hours together, (and there is witness of what I say) to make a
woman in this County (not many miles from this place) ashamed and sorry for her
adultery, which she took an occasion to profess unto me she had committed,
(naming the person with whom, and many circumstances with which) and that in
the presence of others also, who together with my self were much amazed at her
confidence, we having never seen her face before. She did not believe that the
sin had done her any hurt, or any whit lessened her in the favor of God. She
acknowledged that Adultery was a damnable sin in the Graceless, but not in her
who had Grace. And (as she was indeed the most fluent Disputant from Scripture
that I have ever met with of either sex, she seeming to have had the whole
Bible in her memory, so many chapters and verses came so readily into her
mouth,) She urged David and Solomon, (as you have done) with as many more as
would make you wonder, in her excuse. She told me how she had been grounded in
the opinion she was of by the Ministers of the Lecture which she frequented,
naming one in particular of great authority and eminence in that side of the
County (whom I shall not name, unless need require, as being more careful of
his credit, then his followers have been;) She alleged the great difference
between the sins of the regenerate and unregenerate. She said she had learned
from the Pulpit (of that noted man before hinted) that the sins of the
regenerate were ever committed with a reluctance, and trouble of mind; which
reluctance she had in her commission of adultery; upon which she concluded
'twas but an infirmity of the flesh, not an obliquity of her will, that her
temptations were unresistible; and the spirit was willing to be obedient,
though the flesh was weak. She made the same perverse use of the seventh
chapter to the Romans, by 2 Pet. 3.16.
wresting it just to serve her turn, as the Preachers whom she admired were
wont to do. But (by the blessing of God on my endeavors) I convinced her of
the danger as well as madness of her opinions, and of the deadly influence they
had had upon her practice, and how the Scripture was grossly wrested from its
true intent and importance to serve for such vilo offices of which she had had
some sad experience. I made it manifest that she had fined against conscience,
and that her sin was Est actuale mortale, in labente post reconciliationem,
actio interior, vel exterior, pugnans cum lege Dei, facta contra conscientiam.
Melanchth. de Pecsat. Actual* p. 83.
aggravated by that, which she had alleged as an excuse and a lessening of it,
to wit, the reluctance of her mind, which showed her sin to have been wilful.
Now whether this Presbyterian woman (for such she was in all points when first
she came into my house) were sent on purpose to baffle me with her command of
words, and prodigious memory of the Scriptures, or whether she came of her own
accord to hear what I could say in opposition to her Teachers, I cannot tell.
But I have witness of her conviction before she went out of my doors (which was
about four or five hours from after the time when she came in)and since that
time I never saw her but once, when meeting me and another walking togeher in
my Churchyard (about four or five miles from her own abode) she heartily thanks
me for my instructions. Sir, I have told you this great truth with a most
charitable intention to you, and others, upon a most pregnant occasion which
you have offered me from the Press: and had it not been for this occasion, this
Narrative might have died in perfect silence. Had I not known that there were
Gnostics in the Apostles times, and what the Ranters in these times are wont
to hold, and upon what Principles they ground their Doctrines, and how avowedly
they have practiced according to what they have believed; nay had I not read
some books which I shall cite in due place, and compared my other readings with
what I have read out of your own; I should hardly have had the courage to tell
a story so strange as might seem to some people to be hardly true. But besides
that I have witnesses from within, and without me, I have a witness above me
too, for 2 Cor. 11.31.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore,
knows that I lie not. Hugon. Grot. Anim. in Animadv. Andr. Riveti, p. 80, 81.
Miror vero conscientiam aliorum lacessere eos qui omnem vim conscientiae
adimun^ suo dogmate, cum doceant justificatis five electi^ suis non imputari,
non auferre st^tum Gratiae, Adulteteria and Homicidia, ideo quod ea faciant
animo reluctante, id est. contra conscientiam.
I will shut up this Section (but not this subject) with an useful passage out
of Grotius in his Animadversions upon Rivet. I wonder (says he) that they
should vex the con^ciences of others, who do enervate by their opinion all
force of conscience, when they teach that Murders and Adulteries are not
imputed to the justified, or to them whom they call Elect, nor take away from
them the state of Grace, and that for this reason, because they do such
villa^ies with a reluctant mind, that is to say, against their conscience.

The sins of David with their circumstances.
Sect. 3. But let us consider the sins of David in regard of manner, ends, and
concomitants, and see how they difference his sins from the like in a graceless
man, as you affirm Sect. 18.] First David deliberately defiled Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4. Next, to palliate his adultery, he cogg'd with her husband.
(v. 8.) Thirdly, finding that would not take, he dissembled with him yet
farther, and made him drunk, (v. 13.) Fourthly, Seeing that that plot had
failed, he contrived the murder of the Husband, that so he might carry away the
wife (v. 15.) Fifthly, when Uriah's death was certified to David, he played the
hypocrite with the Messenger, and bid him tell Ioab, That the sword devoureth
one as well as another, (v. 25.) Sixthly, Uriah being thus basely murdered,
David married his Widow, which was to kill him over and over, even after he was
dead, (v. 27.) Seventhly, his murder was the more horrible, because he
gratified the Ammonites, and caused the murder of a great multitude of his
loyal subjects, merely that Uriah might be murdered with them, (v. 15, 16, 17.)
Eighthly, All this while he played the Hypocrite with God, both in his public
and private acts of Religion, lifting up unclean hands, and impure eyes,
unhallowed lips, and a stony heart, by which, how his sacrifice was polluted,
I pray (Sir) see, and consider in the first Chapter of Isaiah, v. 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Add to all this, that David was 1 a King, and should have given a
better example; 2 a Prophet, who should have taught whom he perverted; 3 a
person of high endowments of Grace and Nature, the abuse of which was the
greater sin; 4 One who had women enough at home, both Wives and Concubines,
which made his seeking abroad the more unexcusable; 5 One to whom Vriah was an
2 Samuel 11.11.
affectionate friend, as well as a faithful and valiant subject; fighting
against the Kings enemies, whilst the King was acting enmity to him and his.
Besides so many distinct sins, and so many aggravations, which could not but
make them Romans 7.13.
exceeding sinful: he lived indulgently in them from month to month; was lulled
in carnal security; and as if his conscience had been 1 Timothy 4.2.
seared as it were with a hot iron, he never so much as said, Iorem. 8.6.
what have I done? he was not startled with Nathans Apologue, (2 Samuel 12.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.) until he was fain to indigitate the moral of it, applying it home
unto himself, with a Tu es homo, Thou art the man. (v. 7.) Now if with all that
I have spoken of David's guilt, you will compare the whole speech which God
sent Nathan to rouse him with, and consider the greatness of his ingratitude
(from ver. 7. to v. 10.) which is the Homicidae, Tyranni, Fures, Adulteri,
Raptores, Sacrilegi, Proditores erunt. Sed infra ista omnia ingratus est.
Senec. l. 1. de Beneficiis cap. 10. mihi p. 386.
greatest aggravation that sins are capable of; and how great an occasion he
had given to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, (v. 14.) whereby he became a
very scandalous and hurtful sinner. I doubt it will set you very hard, to show
me the difference (of which you speak) between this, and the sin of a gra^^less
man, in regard of the manner, ends, concomitants, or what other circumstances
soever, the complication of impieties was clothed with.

Peter's sins very different from those of David.
Sect. 4. The sin of Peter I shall not prosecute, as having been (in all
points) extremely different from that of David, and much more capable of
excuse. For 'twas by sudden surreption that Peter sinned; his temptation was not
only great, but came upon him by a surprisal: And sudden fear, more then any
thing Wisd. 17.12.
betrayeth the succors which reason offers. Besides, he speedily repented
with Mat. 26.75.
bitter tears, and brought forth such early (that I may not only say, such
ample) fruits as were indeed most Luke 3.8.
worthy of repentance. Yet I pray Sir, reflect on your own acknowledgment, you
say that Peter as well as David was put by his sin into a present incapacity
for heaven (Sect. 18.) which what is it but to say, he was in a state of
damnation? for being incapable of heaven, he must needs (at that time) have
been capable of hell; unless you will feign him in good earnest, (as the
Papists in jest have drawn the picture of Erasmus) to have been in a capacity
neither for heaven nor for hell, which being not to be imagined, you have
granted the thing that I contend for, and blown to the ground with one breath,
what you bestowed so much cost and care in building. And why do you add, [
that repentance actual, deep and serious too, was necessary to the recovery and
forgiveness of Peter and David] but because you inwardly confessed that without
their repentance they had been damned, and that before they repented they were
in a state of damnation; for if they were not, in what respect was it needful
they should repent? If they could have been saved without being forgiven, then
their forgiveness was not necessary to their salvation. Or if they could have
been forgiven without having repented, then their repentance was not necessary
to their forgiveness: but if both were necessary to both, (as you evidently
acknowledge) then whilst they were destitute of both, they were in a state of
damnation. And thus you see every way you establish my Doctrine, whilst you
resist it. Yet after all I must tell you, that your acknowledging the necessity
of repentance to the recovery of the regenerate after their degeneration, will
make a very poor amends for the Pit I spoke of (in my second section) whilst
Perseverance is so See the sixteenth Sect. of your Pr^face.
taught, as you have taught it.

Sect. 5. Having done with your eighteenth, I now proceed to your nineteenth
Section: Of Solomon's state and its uncertainty.
where, of Solomon's case you profess you are uncertain, though you know where
you said, that a man must be a greater sinner then Solomon, to be notoriously
ungodly: but now it seems you are doubtful whether he repented before his
death; or if you think that he did, and that he wa^ one of the elect, then it
seems you are doubtful whether some, even of them, may not become so
unsanctified, as to be in a state of damnation, till they repent: which
uncertainty you mean, I am not certain, and so I pass him over, as you have
done. David and Peter are again ill coupled, the one sinning by surreption, and
straight recovering; the other deliberately sinning, contriving mischief to
Uriah, and plotting how to get Bathsh^ba, and continuing in his wickedness no
little time, and therefore he is most fit for our consideration. For since you
affirmed even of Peter that his sin had put him at that present into an
incapacity for heaven, how much rather must you acknowledge the same of David?
To your particulars of him, I shall speak in order.

Sect. 6. To your Preparatory praefixed before your Reasons in the entrance of
your Sect. 19. I briefly say (in preparation to my answers) that it is not said
on either side, The Reprobates are granted by Mr. Baxter to have Grace
sufficient.
that David was utterly graceless; nor need it be said by either side; it being
frequently your Doctrine, [That even the Reprobates have grace and grace
sufficient, Look back on the eighth Section of your Preface.
and that this is given to the worst that perish, and that in the notion of the
Jesuits; and that this is granted by the Dominicans and the Synod of Dort.] Nor
do I say, that he needed any other new birth then Repentance is. Repentance was
necessary, which was truly equivalent to new bi^th. (and so much you confessed
Sect. 18.) It was in order to his repentance that Nathan was sent; and before
he had not that special grace; in which respect (if you please] he was
unsanctified and graceless. But Grace he might have, as that signifies no more
then the gift of God, by which he was sufficiently enabled to repent: such
Grace he had, and made use of it when Nathan came, nor do I doubt of his having
it long before, whilst yet (we know) he made no use of it at all. Again I will
prove from your own Concessions, that he might have some degree of other
virtues, and those the effects of the Grace I spoke of, and yet be fallen from
a regenerate state: my reason is, because this requires an universality of
obedience, and is not reconcilable with living in any such mortal or deadly
sin, as Adultery and Murder are known to be. Sir, I heartily wish, that whilst
you are writing new books, you will carefully remember what you have written in
your old ones. Before I go any farther, I will premise a few things which you
have taught in your Treatise of Saving Faith, which you pronounce to be
specifically, not only gradually different from all common Faith, and this in
the Ti^le-page of your book.

Mr. Baxter's Description of Common Grace and its effects.
Now you say (p. 43. of that Tract) That men are sometimes enabled by common
Grace to be abased in the feeling of their sin and misery, to be humbled by
attrition, to cry out of their sin and folly, and day and night to beg for
Grace and Mercy; they like the word and ways of God, think his servants the
best and happiest men, wish that they were such themselves, avoid as much of
gross and wilful sinning, and continue as much in hearing, reading the word,
enquiring, consideration, as common Grace may bring them to do. They have as
much belief of the Gospel, as much desire after Christ, and holiness, and
heaven, and as much to God, and the Redeemer, and the Saints, as common Grace
can lead them to. They have either a knowledge of their being yet short of true
Christianity, or at least are much afraid of it, (which no doubt but common
Grace may bring them to) Ibid. p. 44.
and therefore are under a prudent impatiency till saving Grace come in, and
the Spirit have sealed them up to the day of Redemp^ion, and are crying out,
what shall we do to be saved?] In a word it seems you take common and special
Grace to be so like unto each other, that you profess Ibid. p. 49.
to fear very much, lest many learned, civil, orthodox men do take common Grace
to be special, and so delude their own souls in the trial of themselves. You
farther add, Ibid. p. 49.
That there are many common gifts in man which are no more loseable then saving
Grace. You add in the same Treatise (by way of Postscript to the Reader,)
Ibid. p. 91.
That an unsanctified man may love the true God, and believe in Jesus Christ
the Redeemer. And again, Ibid. p. 94.
that by common Grace men may have true Faith and Love. And again, Ibid. p. 96.
That we know not in our change just when common Grace left, and special grace
began. (where I am glad to find you condemning the practice of the triers.)
Again you lay down this Proposition, Ibid. p. 92.
[ That one and the same man may have two contrary ultimate ends of his
particular actions, Look forwards on the twelfth Section of this Chapt.
even the pleasing of God, and the pleasing of his flesh.] In your first reason
you say, [That the very same heart may be partly sanctified, and partly
unsanctified.] You say in your second, [That a godly man when he is drawn to
eat or drink too much, does it not only as a mistaken means to Gods glory, but
ultimately to please his flesh.] Peter and David are your examples, and of them
you thus speak. [Peter did not only mischoose a means to Gods glory when he
denied his Master. Either David in adultery did desire flesh pleasing for it
self, or for some other end; if for it self, then it was his ultimate end in
that Act: if for somewhat else as his end, for what? no one will say his end
was Gods glory. And there is nothing else to be it.] Having premised these
things for several uses which I foresee, I now return to the particulars of
your nineteenth Section which lies before me.

Of men twice sanctified.
Sect. 7. [ You do not find in Scripture, that they or any others were twice
regenerate or sanctified, Sect. 19.] But taking Repentance for a Regeneration,
you find in Scripture what you say you find not; to wit, that some have twice
repented, that is, they have risen by Gods grace to undertake his service, and
have fallen after that, and by the Grace of God they have risen again, so says
the Article of our Church. [ After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may
depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the Grace of God we may rise
again and amend our lives.] Artic. 16.
Nor will any deny this, except the Montanists and the Novatians, and the
Family of Love, the Catharists, and the Iovinians, and such as are of their
kindred. (I wish that no such heresy were still alive.) But I think I may say
of the Novatians, that though they would not yield place of absolution in the
Church, for such as had fallen, after Baptism, into any deadly or wilful sin;
yet for Repentance with God, they willingly yielded them a place. And I am sure
the Church Catholic has always held both.

Concerning the importance of Heb 6. and 10.
Sect. 8. You tell me what two passages (Heb. 6. and 10.) do seem to import,
Sect. 19.] Wherein you did well to say they seemed so, for you do more then
seem not at all to understand those famous passages of Scripture. It is not
absolute impossibility, but an extreme great d^fficulty, which there is meant:
nor is it any less fall, then into wilful Apostasy from the profession of
Christianity, which is there spoken of. To show you the greatness of your
mistake, I cannot take a more short, or effectual course, then by referring you
to the Notes of the learned and Reverend Doctor Hammond on either place, more
particularly, on Heb. 6.4. and Heb. 10.26. And since those places do not serve
for your turn, you need not be told how exceedingly much they make against it.

You say that David by Gods own Testimony was one of those hearers (in our
Saviors parable) who like the good ground that gives deep rooting to the seed,
do not fall away in trial, Sect. 19.]

Sect. 9. Whatever David was before his Adultery and his Murder, Gods testimony
of David twofold, each to be compared with the Rule, Ezekiel. 18.24, etc.
or whatever he was from after the time of his repentance, he was not good by
God's testimony, in the whole matter of Uriah, or in any part of it. For that
is 1 King. 15.5.
excepted by God in Scripture, and you cannot but know that this is the David
of whom we speak; so that before you were aware (if not on purpose) you have
made a Transition ab Hypothesi, ad Thesin. It is true that God has given a
good testimony of David in the place I cited, and with the exception of which I
spoke. But this was also God's testimony concerning David, [ 2 Samuel 12.9.
That he had despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight.
That he had killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword; (and not only so, but)
that he had killed him also with the sword of the (profane) children of Ammon;
(nor only so, but) that he had taken his wife from him to be his own wife.]
With this particular testimony you may do well to compare God's general rule.
Ezekiel. 18.24. and 26.
That when the righteous turns away from his righteousness and commits
i^iquity, -- all his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned. In
so much, that David must be confessed, notwithstanding the Parable of the good
ground, to have fallen away in time of trial. My way of arguing is, ab actu ad
potentiam, which you know is uncontrollable. David fell, therefore he might
fall. And against matter of Fact, your way of disputing is most unhappy.

But no Scripture tells us (say you) that David was void of charity, though as
to the degree, and act, and sense, it was decayed, and so far David beggs for a
recovery. Sect. 19.]

Sect. 10. If no Scripture had so told us, How far charity was decayed in
David; and how hard it is to murder wilfully in love.
your negative Argument would be of no force. But Scripture tells enough, as I
lately showed you, when God excepted his dealings with Uriah, that exception
was as much Scripture, as any other passage which you can name. The Scripture
tells how he continued in his wickedness without repentance, until the message
of Nathan, which was near a whole year, if not a great deal beyond it, for his
child by Bathsheba was See 2 Samuel 12.14, 15.
born I know not how long before he repented of his uncleanness, which shows a
greater decay, then you acknowledge. And accordingly he prayed, Create in me a
clean heart, Psalm. 5.^.10.
O God, renew a right spirit within me. I pray Sir mark it, the clean heart was
now to be created, and the right spirit to be renewed; which had certainly been
needless, had its cleanness and rectitude continued to him. Besides, Of saving
Faith, p. 92.
you tell us of David, That he desired flesh pleasing for it self, and not at
all for Gods glory, nor is it imaginable he should commit Adultery to please
God: and so out of your mouth I do infer his having been unsa^ctified, because
you say that the same man, by designing to please God, and to please his flesh
too, as two ultimate ends of his particular actions, may be partly
unsanctified, as well as partly sanctified. Then is not he wholly unsanctified,
who intends not the pleasing of God at all? or is he not wholly unsanctified
who designs to please God by heaping Murder upon Adultery, and adding
Drunkenness to Thirst? The murderous Jews were not, sure, the less unsanctified
for killing the Apostles to do John 16.2.
God service; nor was Saul the less unsanctified before the time of his
conversion, for that he thought it his (...).
duty to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus. Whatever David's ends
were, his sins were such (by your confession) as did put him into no less then
an incapacity for heaven. But where was his charity you speak of, when he
contrived and effected Uriah's death? To say he murdered a man in love will be
of very ill consequence: and he that loves not his brother whom he has seen,
1 Ioh. 4.20.
how can he love God whom he has not seen? even Injustice and Charity do seem
to me irreconcilable. And though there are who have pretended to hate and
persecute their neighbors in the fear of God, yet am I assured by an Apostle,
That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, Iam. 2.10.
and yet offend in one point, (that great point especially of doing his duty
toward his neighbor) he is guilty of all. And whereas you said at the
beginning of your Section, you believe not that David had wholly excussed the
spirit of God: Melanchth. de bonis operibus. p. 179.180.
I oppose the belief of the great Melanchthon; Excussit David fidem and
Spiritum Sanctum, cum raperet alterius conjugem, and quidem multipliciter
Spiritum Sanctum perturbavit. Primum in cord suo, unde pulsus est in
Adulterio; deinde in multis sanctis, quorum aliis scandalum attulit dolorem,
aliis fuit occasio exi^ii, etc. I need not use this Authority, (having
abundantly done my work without it) but think it more then sufficient thus to
counterpoise your own.

You urge yet farther [David prays Psalm. 50. That God would not for that sin
take his Holy Spirit from him, which implies yet that he had it. Sect. 19.]

Sect. 11. But (1.) he made that Prayer after the time of his repentance, Of
David's Prayer Psalm. 51.
whereas the excussion of God's Spirit was in the commission of his sins. (2.)
Nor does it signify any more, then that God had been highly provoked by him so
to do. And (3.) if God had not utterly withdrawn his grace, but left him what
was sufficient to enable him to repent a great deal sooner then he had done,
that was the height of God's goodness which inferrs the Romans 2.4, 5.
heightning of his sins, in that he had so long abu^'d it. For I must put you
in remembrance, that it is not merely the having of Grace, (to-wit, the habit)
without the actual employment of it, that will ever stand us in any stead; but
on the contrary, Mat. 25.25, 26, 30.
a Talent wrapped in a Napkin will evince us to be sloathful and unprofitable
servants, whom our Judge will cast into out^r darkness.

But say you, [ The thing in it self seems utterly improbable, that David and
Peter should have no love to God, after those particular sins, Sect. 19.]

Sect. 12. What can be your meaning of [ no love to God, His being clearly
unsanctified by his a^c^mulated sins.
] when you See of saving Faith. p. 47, etc. p. 49.91.94.96.
confess that the unsanctified have some love to him? Will you prove a man
Regenerate in the complication of his impieties, by having that left in him
more then which you do allow to the unregenerate? you know what I told you out
of your self in the sixth Section of this Chapter. 2. What do you mean by your
other phrase, [ after those particular sins?] a great while after, he repented,
and was no longer that impenitent of whom we both speak. If your meaning is,
that immediately after his sins committed, he had some love to God, but in the
acts of commission had none at all; you confess there was a time when he was
wholly unsanctified, and had less Grace then many, who yet have not saving, but
common Grace. 3. When you add that his sins were odious, and deserved an utter
desertion of God (Sect. 19.) Do you s^eak after the Tenor of the Second
Covenant, and as God has threatened every man to reward him Romans 2.6.
according to his works? Then it is true (what you say) that the sins unrepented
of deserved utter desertion, and so damnation; which is the granting of all
that I contend for. But if you mean by utter desertion, God's withdrawing that
Grace which was absolutely necessary to his Repentance, then you grant more
then I should ever have demanded; not knowing that God in the Gospel has
threatened such sins with such desertion, 'till death has seized upon the
sinner, or the sinner hardened his heart to such a desperate degree as Pharaoh
did, Exodus 9.14, 16, 27, 34. However it be, God's not inflicting so sore a
punishment is no argument at all, that the sinner was not fallen from Grace, by
abusing that Grace which God had given him, and that abuse of Grace given, is
the thing which God punishes because he hates; not the negation or want of
Grace, which by being not given, cannot be said to be abused.

You say, This sudden prevalen^y of sensuality did not so far change the
judgment of David, that hereupon he habitually esteemed the creature above God,
and valued the pleasures of sin, before the pleasing, and the favor of God,
Sect. 19.]

A signal quicksand to be a^oided by all that are ensnared with the novel
notion of perseverance.
Sect. 13. Here you speak of a sudden prevalency, whereas you cannot but know
(what I largely showed out of the Text) that David was a contriving and
deliberate sinner. And I pray Sir tell me, Did not David habitually, (to wit)
at least for a year, value the pleasures of sin before the favor of God? Here
is a very great Quick-sand which must be carefully avoided, or else a sinner
may go-on, in Adultery, Murd^r, and other villainies, contenting himself with
this Co^dial, (but I beseech you give no more such) that he does not habitually
esteem the creature above God. Sir, Your soul is very precious and dear unto
me, and by the interest which I have in the perfect happiness of my Brethren, I
shall conjure you to consider, whether such Doctrine has not been hurtful, as
well to your self, as to weaker men. If actually in the time of sinning,
sensuality prevailed against the act of charity, then the sin of David being
deliberate, (as in Peter 'twas not,) and very long continued in, (as again in
Peter it was not,) how can it modestly be denied, but that for so long a time
as David lived in his impieties, and as to those species of impieties in which
he lived, it habitually prevailed in him? which should you possibly deny, you
know what follows. Your pleading that the judgment of David was not changed,
would do you no service, if I should grant it: for there is hardly any sinner,
who does judge of the creature as more valuable then God, when asked which he
does value most; nor is a man the less but the greater sinner for deliberately
acting against his judgment. And again remember how much you gave to the
unsanctified man.

Yet again you say, That David's Faith was not habitually extirpated, nor was
he turned unbeliever. Of Faith as a practical adherence unto God.
Sect. 19.]

Sect. 14. But neither are they unbelievers, whom you allow to have Faith, and
yet deny to have saving Grace, as I showed you from your writings in my Sect.
6. But as Faith is a Practical adherence unto God, and implies an uniform
obedience to his commands, you know that David wanted Faith; he obeyed not God,
by which believing is expressed in holy They have not all obeyed the Gospel.
For Esaias faith who has believed our report^ Romans 10.16.
Scripture. It was not that Faith which works by love, which is the
fulfilling of the Law, which consisted with so much injury, as the robbing
Uriah both of his honor and of his life. To be brief, If Faith be truly
inseparable from charity, and David can no more love God and Bathsheba (
another man's wife) then Luke 16.13.
God, and Mammon; then must David needs have wanted both Faith and Charity.
When you say ( of saving Faith p. 92.) that one and the same man may have two
contrary ultimate ends of his particular actions, even the pleasing of God, and
the pleasing of his flesh, (giving your instance even in David,) you seem to
imply a contradiction to the words of our Lord, who says, Ibid.
no man can serve two Masters. Dagon and the Ark cannot dwell under a roof, but
that the one will subvert the other. And even he is Mat. 12.30.
against Christ, who is not for him. Indeed there are in the world who make a
mixture of Religions, like the 2 Kings 17.32, 33.
people of Sepharvaim, Chuth, and Hamath, fearing the Lord and serving their
own gods. But the former was in Hypocrisy, for it is said in the following
verse, ver. 34.
they feared not the Lord, which (...), or literal show of contradiction, does
evince the truth of our Saviors words, that no one servant can really and
truly serve God and Mammon, for either he will hate the one and love the other,
or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. But what kind of
Principles those are, which lead the people to such mixtures, and of how
dangerous importance such mixtures are, I leave to the guess of the considering
Reader.

David was soberly put to it*
Sect. 15. What you think that David would not have done had he been put to it
upon sober deliberation (Sect. 19.) is as little to the purpose as all the
rest, and only needs to be referred to my former answers, or to what I
collected Sect. 6. yet here I can add, that David was soberly put to it, (as
having acted deliberately, with a great deal of project and contrivance) yet
did he not choose the love of God before the pleasure of sin (as Moses did,
Heb. 11.25, 26.) which indeed was contrary to the love of God.

You say, It is not likely that this one act should turn his heart into as
graceless a frame, as the ungodly themselves that never were sanctified, Sect.
19.]

The fallaciou^ use of the word Graceless.
Sect. 16. As it is not likely, so it need not be said. For if graceless here
signifies or supposes such a sinner, as from whom God's grace is so far
withdrawn, that he has not left what is sufficient for his return; all
unsanctified men are not such sinners as these. Recessutum non deserit antequam
deserat Et facit ple^^mque ne deserat; aut etiamsi recessit, ut redear,
Prosper. Respon. ad object. Vincent. 14.
You affirm that grace suffi^ient is given to the worst of them that perish,
(Sect. 8.) and therefore you cannot prove that David was sanctified, (whilst
impenitently guilty both of Adultery and Murder) for having just as much grace
as you allow to Reprobates, whom you will not allow to have been sanctified.
Whereas you speak of one Act as unlikely to turn the heart of David, you know
that David committed many, and with a manifold aggravation. Nor do I doubt but
he had power to have repented sooner then he did, if he had not been wanting to
himself. 2 Pet ^.^0, 21.
Yet the Scripture having pronounced that the estate of those men who have
fallen from grace is much more hardly to be recovered, and worse (by
consequence then theirs, who never knew the way of righteousness; certainly
more Grace was necessary for the reducing of David (as he was) then if he had
never been a sanctified man. Now seeing that David was effectually reduced, and
that by Grace, I am obliged to avow, that either more grace was left, or more
was given. And for this last, you have my reason. But however it be, it cannot
but be to my advantage, it being no extenuation, but an aggravation of his
crimes, throughout the time of his impenitence.

You say, you think it was the habit of Grace, which the words of Nathan to
David excited, and did bring again to act, Sect. 19.]

Sect. 17. But sure your thinking is no proof of the point. Some are thinkers
to their own prejudice.
I may rather conclude it was not the habit of Grace excited, if you your self
do but think so, for whose interest it is to have it so without question. And
if it were as you think, by so much the greater was David's guilt; that having
so great a gift of God as that habit of Grace, he acted contrarily to it, in so
heinous a manner, and degree. To have an habit of Grace, and not to use it, yea
to abuse it by gross impieties, will no more excuse a man's wickedness, then
the bare having of a Talent, and Mat. 25.25.
thrusting it into a sink. What you add of S. Peter is not home to the
purpose, and that for those reasons, which I have given Look back on Sect. 4.
of this Chapter.
already once for all.

It is another quick-sand to be avoided, which leads men to think they are the
better for their hypoc^isie.
Sect. 18. Your verily thinking that David after his sin went on in his
ordinary course of Religion, and obedience in all things else, (Sect. 19.) will
not stand you in any stead, (besides that again you do but think it,) unless it
be to make proof, that many goers to Church, and doers of some things in the
service of God, may yet deliberately sin in a hideous manner, and so become
liable to condemnation. Many desperate sinners are the more punctual in their
outward acts of Religion, and strive to grow eminent for some good deeds, to
the end that they may sin with the more security and success, but they are not
the better for being Hypocrites, and therefore not the more excusable; this I
take to be another great quick-sand, in which because many are swallowed up in
these times, I was not at ease with my self till I had publicly given some
warning of it in the first chapter of the second part of my Sinner impleaded.
And which I do more wish read, then all the things that I have written. I pray
Sir, consider on this occasion, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. As for
David's daily going unto God, in public and in private, all the space of his
continuance in sin without repentance, it was not joined with that love of God
which does exclude the love of Mammon; it having been joined with the love of
unlawful pleasures, and by consequence unavailable in the sight of God. You
add that these things are to you improbable: still implying a confession that
you are not certain, or assured of what you so zealously contend for. The truth
being proved, and demonstrated to lie on S. Austin's and Prosper's side, (both
which Fathers, and those others that went before them, you have publicly
confessed to be against you) it matters not what may seem improbable, much
less improbable to you.

You say that David had built upon a rock, and that they who build on the rock,
persevere in trial, Mat. 7.25. concluding herewith your nineteenth Section.

that it is, and is not to build upon a rock.
Sect. 19. But his lying with Bathsheba was not building on a rock, much less
his murdering of good Uriah; and that he really did both, the Scripture tells
us. That phrase of building upon a rock does not signify (in general)
whatsoever building upon God. (for some build so, and yet but slightly.) But it
peculiarly signifies a building firmly, a rooting deep, as that is opposed to
building on the sand, to which nothing can be fastened. And that David at first
did not build thus firmly, does appear by his falling (even deliberately) in
time of temptation. I add no more, because you conclude, as you began with an
ingenuous confession of what you think.

You say you are willing to learn better that Doctrine that is according to
Godliness, and to disclaim all that is against it. But I must not take your
expressions of the worst that the mercy of God will cover in a man obedient in
the main to be your descriptions of godly men, Sect. 20.]

Sect. 20. You have told us over and over what crying sins may well consist
with the power of Godliness. The horror of a Doc^rine should teach its vassals
to disclaim it.
That David was not unsanctified or made ungodly by his Adultery and Murder,
and other sins. Be pleased to reflect on what I have said in the first Section
of this Chapter. And consider within your self, whether men may not be taught,
by such expressions as you have used, to believe they may deliberately (as
David did) commit Adultery and Murder, with diverse other abominations, and yet
be godly, sanctified, spiritual men. Can there be any thing in the world more
treacherous to their souls then that opinion? since you are willing to learn, I
hope the horror of the Doctrine will teach you speedily to disclaim it.

Again, The ^quivocal refuge of being obedient in the main.
I would know what you mean in this place by being obedient in the main. Is it
for a man to be obedient in more particulars then those in which he is
disobedient? or else in mainer or greater things? O remember the words of our
Lord and Savior: Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men
so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven. And together with
these, Iam. 2.10.
compare the words of S. James, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all. They that teach otherwise, are blind
leaders of the blind. They cheat themselves and their Disciples. What is it
then to be obedient in the main? Is it for the main, that is to say, the
greater part of the life? sure that is not it, for we know it is possible a
lesser part may serve turn. Or if that be all, then it is readily granted that
David having lived godly before the matter of Uriah, and again very godly after
Nathan came to him, he found acceptance with the Almighty. But what is this to
the interval betwixt these two? David the Murderer and the Adulterer, is the
man we now speak of. David the just and the penitent i^ of another
consideration.

What was predominant in David when he deliberately sinned.
Sect. 21. It is true what you add, that no Act will prove us holy, but a
praedominant Habit, Sect. 20.] The reason is, because all circumstances are
required to make a thing completely good; But then withal you must grant,
Bonum ex Cau^a integra. Malum ex quolibet defectu.
that any deliberate act of sin will pronounce us unholy; Because the want of
one circumstance is enough to name a thing evil. And he that offends in one
point is guilty of all: but David offended in more then two. Again, the
estimation, election, resolution, operation of the Soul cannot truly be said to
be praedominant to good, when the deliberate acts are quite contrary,
transcendently evil. And a sad continuance in a sinful course (such undeniably
was David's) is also as opposite to Habits of Virtue.

None in Adultery and murder can be really good men before the time of their
repentance.
Sect. 22. What you add of blind unjust judgment, (Sect. 20.) upon an
Hypothesis of your own framing, concerns not me, in any measure. For did I ever
speak of judging the whole lives of men, by one hour, or one day, be it good or
bad? you know I did not. Yet thus we may judge, that that hour, or that day,
wherein a man shall live both in Adultery and Murder, without repentance he can
be no good man, nor in the Romans 8.8, 13.
favor of God, whatever he were before, or whatever he may be after. And
remember that David had dwelt in sin, for a year and a day, (for ought appears
in Holy Scripture) in sin deliberately committed, and not repented of at all in
so long a time.

Sect. 23. Now Sir, The danger of the great error proposed to consideration.
your Arguments being answered whereby you have labored to beget a strong
conceit in your ea^^e Readers, that if a man is once sanctified, he cannot
possibly be otherwise, notwithstanding all the wickedness that he can possibly
commit, (an ample catalogue of which I have recited to you out of your self, in
the first Section of this Chapter,) I beseech you to consider in the Spirit of
meekness, whether your Doctrine is not as dangerous to the professors of
Christianity, as that of Master Pemble, and Doctor Twisse, [Of Christ's
immediate actual delivering us from guilt, wrath, and condemnation,] which you
Appendix to Aphorisms of justif. p. 164.
profess to be the very Pillar and Foundation of the whole Frame and Fabric of
Antinomianism. And as you say a little before, Ib. p. 163.
that Socinianism were the soundest Doctrine, that Christ never needed to
satisfy, if we were justified from eternity; (to which you add your
confession, that you remained long in the borders of Antinomianism, which you
very narrowly escaped;) so I entreat you to examine whether you are not already
fallen into as formidable an error, as that is which you escaped.

There is a Book entitled, What despera^e Doctrines have been applauded by some
of the ablest Presbyterians, no whit better then those of Wickliff.
The Marrow of Modern Divinity, which has dangerously built upon your
Foundation, and is publicly commended by some of your way; Master Caryl,
Master Buroughs, Master Strong; Master Sprigg, and after all Master Samuel
Prittie. Evangelista (in the Dialogue) being a Minister of the Gospel, does
instruct Neophytus, or the young Christian, in these following words: See The
Marrow of Modern Divinity, p. 20^ Edit. 3.
[ In case you be at any time by reason of the weakness of your Faith, and
strength of your temptations drawn aside, and prevailed with, to transgress any
of Christ's commandments, beware you do not thereupon take occasion to call
Christ's love to you into question; but believe as firmly that he loves you as
dearly as he did, before you thus transgressed; For this is a certain truth, as
no good in you, or done by you, did or can move Christ to love you the more, so
no evil in you, or done by you, can move him to love you the less.] Upon this
bit of marrow (as the Author calls it) an idle Maid was found chewing; The very
sight of which would overturn a clean stomach. For what scruple could she make
of transgressing any of Christ's Commandments (whether filtching for her
profit, or playing the wanton for her pleasure) having been taught before hand,
(and having believed what she was taught) that Christ could love her
nevertheless: If this is Divinity, the Author did well to call it Modern, for
nothing was like it in Antiquity except the Heresy of the Gnostics, that I
can think on. From what kind of Bone that Marrow was picked, and whether it had
not some hand in the sins of these times, it will be revealed in that day when
all hearts shall be opened. There are other things in that book, as Ibid. p.
161.
[ That the Law of Christ neither justifies nor condemns. Ibid. p. 119.
That in the Covenant betwixt Christ and his, there is no more for man to do,
but only to know and believe that Christ has done all for them; Saints Rest.
part. 1. c. 8. Sect. 2. p. 158.
] which I suppose you disrelish as much as I, because you hold, that the first
sanctification is before justification. For which perhaps some Ignaro's may
have thought you a Socinian, (men no better advised then Master Channel) though
you are able to cite for it Master Richard Hooker, and Peter Martyr, and the
Reverend Doctor Hammond. Nay since I writ my last words, I find you Append. to
Aphor. of justif. p. 99. to p. 107.
excepting against that Book, as being guilty of heinous Doctrine, of notorious
and dangerous mistakes; of denying the plain sense of the Text (Mat. 10.28.) of
intolerably abusing the Scripture, and making Paul a legal Preacher. Of
shamefully abusing 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and of many other intolerable errors. In
which your just reprehensions, as I fully concur with you, (and in the most
that you have written in those your Aph^rismes) so I hope, in some time, you
will concur in mine also. Had you considered that those Ministers, who so
zealously recommended that venomous book unto the people, were some of the
noted London-preachers, whom you exceedingly commended, (to wit in your Epistle
before your Treatise of Judgment,) I do not think you would have done it
without a discrimination. But now in faithfulness I must tell you, that not a
few of those errors which you so worthily have condemned, do seem to flow from
the Principles, which you your self have espoused, as well as they. And when
the Murderer of his bedfellow was taught by some, to See Poe^it. M^rd. printed
A.D. 1657 p. 10, 11. and p. 23.
commend his sin for its greatness, as being a rouzing, awakening, yea a
sanctified sin, a sin from which was producible the eternal salvation of his
soul, the accidental cause of a good fruit, as that which startled conscience,
which would not with the noise of a lesser guilt be awakened; it is easy to
guess at the source of so foul a stream. To conclude this subject, I can truly
say with learned Grotius, Hostis non sum, nisi eorum dogmatum, quae credo
noxia, aut p^^tati, aut Societati humanae; etc. Vot. pro Pace p. 115.
that I am not an enemy, unless it be to those opinions, which I conceive to be
enemies either to piety or peace. Such I take to be that of Marlorate, a
Calvinistical Commentator, [That such sins as David's, to wit, Adulteries and
Murders, are not imputed to the elect.] Such I take to be that which you have
hitherto asserted, that a man once justified can never fall; That such sins as
David's cannot unsanctifie the sinner; That a godly man may be a Murderer, an
Adulterer, (and deliberately such) and yet a godly man still, whilst yet
impenitent. A man is tempted by such a Doctrine to live as he lists, to commit
as many sins as are grateful to him, and at the hour of death to send for a
Minister, Quae est illa poenitentia vivere ut lubet, deinde instante morte
dicere ministro, nollem factum, and credo justitiam Christi imputari, idque
verumesse quia id credo. Cum hoc Viatico statimille in Coelum avolat. Id. ibid.
to wish his impious deeds had been undon, to believe the righteousness of
Christ is imputed to him, and that so it must be even because he believes it.
With this Viaticum (says Grotius) he flies up instantly into heaven, if he
does not go securely, and confidently to Hell. (For that you know must be the
meaning of his Antiphrasis.) You well objected against the Marrow of New
Divinity, that no unrighteous person, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Fornicator, Adulterer, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. David was an
Adulterer, and before he repented he was impenitent. Repentance and Reformation
must go This you acknowledge in Append. to Aphor. p. 103.
before pardon. To be incapable of Heaven is to be somewhat more then capable of
Hell. And were David alive upon the earth, he would not endure to hear his sins
apologized for in such a manner, as might encourage the greatest sinners to the
like Apologies for their own.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. HAving done with the Argument, you fall upon the person with whom you
deal. You bid me try whether in the very omission of some duties to my flock,
or condemning of my brethren, etc. I may not have sins that are accompanied
with as little love of God, as David 's more disgraceful, and (materially
heinous sins, Sect. 20.]

A tacit and groundless accusation sadly r^fl^cting on the Accuser.
Had I been a Presbyterian, I do not think you would have dealt so foulely with
me, as to have hinted to your Readers some strange omission toward my Flock,
when you knew that you knew not my least omission, and what an omission must
that have been which could equal the guilt of deliberate Murder and Adultery?
Had you known my life to have been any way Reprovable, what Tragical work would
you have made, who could not here contain your self from such a groundless
insi^uation? Or who can be so inoffensive, whom you might not have used (or
have abused) in like manner? As for the work of my Ministry, when I consider
the weig^t of that, how much I owe to the great Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, 1 P^t. 2.25.
and how strict an account I am to render, I cannot but say I am an
unprofitable servant, Lu^ 7.10.
and am forced to take up that Apostolical Erotesis, ^ Cor. 2.16.
who is sufficient for these things? But when I consider mine own weakness,
and my endeavors to serve God with the poor utmost of my ability, and that God
will accept according to what a man has; 2 Cor. 8.12.
when I examine all by that Rule in conformity to which we are bound to act: I
can say to you, and to Master Hickman, (who has also printed an unhandsome,
indeed an unmanlike In his Preface to the Reader, p. 6.
insinuation in this kind) what Saint Paul did to Felix, Act. 24.13.14.
Ye cannot prove those things whereof ye (tacitly) accuse me. But this I
confess unto you, that after the way which some call heresy, (some
superstition) so worship I the God of my fathers. And now I pray Sir consider
whether I might not with greater reason have turned your motion upon your self,
since you have given me (in Saints Rest. Edit. 2. part 3. p. 99.
print) a perfect knowledge of your failings, in the discharge of your
Ministry, whilst you have nothing concerning mine, but in your voluntary
surmisings.

You certify to the world, that you are many times lazy in your performance:
your words are these; [ One sheet for the Ministry, p. 13. and 14.
It is not a want of abilities that makes Ministers use Notes; but it is a
regard to the work and good of the hearers. I use. Notes as much as any man,
when I take pains, and as little as any man, when I am lazy, or busy, or have
not leisure to prepare. It is easier to preach three Sermons without Notes,
then one with them.] If it is really so, as here you say, that the using of
Notes is for the good of the hearers, and for the better performance of Gods
work, then indeed I have been guilty of great omissions toward my flock: for
in all the course of my Ministry, I never made any use of Notes. But I have
this for my excuse, that I was charged not to use them, by very venerable
persons, when I was first ordained to be a Preacher. And the reasons given for
it were these especially; first because your reading Preachers were more
despised at that time, then of late they have been, (and where the Preachers is
not valued, the Sermon finds the less attention.) Next because such a Preacher
as speaks out of his memory, is better able to speak out of his heart and mind,
then one who is often, or altogether forced to look into his book. Not will his
work be so lifeless, as when he reads. He will not be so very apt to preach his
Auditory asleep, (which you modestly condemn in your self and others.) But
since you say the use of notes is for the benefit of the hearers, and since I
know they are used by many eminent Preachers besides your self, I begin to
suspect my former judgment, and perhaps may change my practice too. For as I
never thought the worse of others whom I have known to use Notes, or the better
of my self for having never used any, so have you given me an occasion to put
my self on this question, whether I have not been faulty in bestowing that time
to put my Sermons into my memory, which might better have been employed in
making them worthy to be remembered. I am really in a strait, and apt to state
it in the affirmative; for he who spends his whole time, in giving weight and
worth to his compositions, may make them useful for the public, and fit to be
preached from the Press; whereas the man that is obliged to speak at large upon
a little, and to content himself with the sudden effusions of his soul, can
attain to nothing beyond the Pulpit, where he speaks little else, then what
must perish whilst it is spoken. I do intend (if God permit) to make a trial
of your way; and if I shall find it to be the better, will never return unto
mine own.

Of condemning brethren.
Sect. 2. If you mean by my brethren, the Episcopal men, who have not changed
with the times, but (after all temptations to Apostasy) have still contended
for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints, Iud. 3.
you know I never condemned them, but cleared them rather from their Accusers.
If you mean by my brethren, the P^esbyterians, I have condemnd them no farther
then by their printed blasphemies, confessions, and contradictions they have
condemned one another, and very often their own selves. I condemned them only,
whom I caught in the act of many scandalous sins, such as you may see a good
account of, both in my See (in particular) Introduct. p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and
the places there referred to.
(...) and (...). See Chapter 3. p. 73.77. to p. 83.
I did carefully distinguish betwixt the Rigid and Moderate Presbyterians: I
condemned the former out of their Writings; but the later I At the end of my
premonition to my (...).
declared to be of their number, whom I do very unfeignedly both love and
honor, which I have also made apparent by my inviolable friendship with diverse
of the^: in a word, I did timely preadmonish my Readers, (and your self as one
of them,) That my words cannot reach unto all Presbyterians indiscriminately,
but to such and such only, of whom the Authors by me cited are found to speak.
That what I say from the History of Master Knox, I mean of those whom Master
Knox himself meant, who was a Chieftain of the Party. That when I name Paraeus,
Buchanan, Hacket, and the like, it is plain I mean them. If when no body is
named, any one or more persons shall name themselves, (as one in the World has
very publicly done) and apply my words to their particulars, which I had left
only in common, (to be seized on by none but the proper owners) they will be
in that case their own Accusers.

And now that you see how I am innocent, The accuser is the most criminal.
observe how ill you were qualified for my Accuser. For if you reckon, amongst
your brethren, the regular sons of the Church of England, you have condemned
them more then any man I ever heard of; and reviled them even for that, for
which their Reward will be great in heaven. Mat. 5.12. Luke 6.23.
To repeat your bitterness, not only to your Brethren, but to your right
Reverend Fathers and Superiors, Heb. 13.17.
who are over you in the Lord, were to write a large volume in this one
Paragraph. It shall suffice me to put you in mind what wants of charity you
have showed in your Reformed Pastor, in your Christian Concord, and (not to
rake into all your books) in your Grotian Religion from p. 109. unto the end;
what your charity was to Grotius, has been shown already; and what to me, will
be seen anon. If you mean by your Brethren, the several Sectaries of the times,
you have condemned them all, as they have all condemned you, (the Presbyterians
not excepted.) Of very many instances, I shall detain you but with a few. You
have condemned Master Colyer, Append. to Ap^or. p. 99.
Sprigs, and Hobson, for abominable Pamplets. And all the approvers of the
Marrow of Modern Divinity. You have highly condemned both Doctor Twiss and
Master Pemble, as has been showed. Ibid. p. 163, 164.
Nay many of your Divines are condemned by you, for fighting against Jesuits
and Arminians, with the Antinomian weapons, and for running thereby into the
WORSE EXTREME. Having called Maccovius an excellent Doctor, you yet profess to
be ashamed to confute so Ibid. 147.
senseless an Assertion as his is. After Master Tombs had condemned you for a
Railer, See your history of the Conception and Nativity of your book entitled
Plain Scripture Proof etc.
you did condemn him also of stark brazen-faced and unconscionable dealing,
grosser then you had found in any Iesuite^; Ibid. p. 174. Edit. 1. p. 175.
of playing the Devils part, yea worse, yea very far worse in several respects
then if it were the Devil that did it; Ib. p. 202, 203.
of covetousness, liberty in sinning, and many more things then I have leisure
to repeat. You have condemned your own men, (whom you call the Godly) Disp. 3.
of Sacram. p. 330.
for disobedience to their guides in these times, for Schism, and for doing
much hurt to the Church. Nay you have publicly condemned your own
long-Parliament, and your whole Assembly of Divines, for the iniquities of
their See Edit. 3. of your pla^^ Script. proof, etc. p. 120, 121, 122, 123. and
Append. to Aphor. p. 107.
Solemn League and Covenant, and of their Directory, of their too great enmity
to Episcopacy, of their Grot. Relig. p. 111, 112.
cruelty and injustice to Episcopal men, of their Plain Scrip. proof. p.
120.122.
discarding the practice of Confirmation, and of their contentions for
Presbytery, which you declare against as Ibid. 227.228.
unscriptural, in a great part of it, which as I have in part made bare
already, so I shall do it more largely in due time and place. Lastly speaking
of your Antagonists, who were especially Presbyterians [ Disp. 5. of Sacr. p.
516.
You marvel what is the matter that the Wasps of the Nation are gathered about
your ears.]

Sir, You see my fair dealing in laying no more to your charge, then I have
cited your Writings for; and I have done it so much the rather, because you
have charged me in general, without producing the least proof; which was so
unhansom a dealing with me, that I have showed you (by my example) how you
ought to have dealt with your very enemies, of whom you confessed that I was
none. Yet mark how you proceed --

[ You little suspect that the uncharitable passages in this very learned book
of yours, are as probable a symptom of the absence of charity, as the sin of
David or Peter was. Sect. 20.]

Sect. 3. Thus again you affirm, Wants of charity examined, and found to be in
the A^cuser.
without the least show of proof, that there is any want of charity in any one
the least passage throughout that book; unless you can think it a want of
charity to others, that I had some for my self in confuting some calumnies then
cast upon me. And I can now evince mine innocence (as to that whereof I was
accused) from the very handwritings of my Accusers. But having received some
satisfaction (and a little of that will serve my turn when I am wronged) I will
not causelessely revive, what I have long since buried with my forgiveness. So
little do you oblige me by calling my book very learned, whilst you also call
it very uncharitable, that as soon as you have upbraided my wants of charity,
you do immediately compel me to tax your own.

For you shut up your Section with these incomparable expressions [ If I must
needs choose one of the two, I had rather die in the state of David before
Nathan spoke to him, (which was a state of Impenitence added to Murder and
Adultery) then of Mr. Pierce who has committed no such sin, etc. Sect. 20.]

Sect. 4. Twice I have told you of this already, but very briefly; and till you
seriously repent, you cannot be told of it too often. Yet will I not grieve you
with repetition, but only add those things which may probably convince you of
your unkindness. I cannot better introduce it, then by showing you first your
Look forwards on chapter 5. Sect. 22.
partiality, for very remarkable is the difference betwixt your dealings with
me, and with other men. I was apparently the friendliest of all the Opponents
you ever met with, for you acknowledge my gentleness and charity, my brotherly
and moderate dealing with you. Sect. 4.] Yet because you find me an Episcopal
Divine, (for what other reason can be imagined) you are pleased to judge more
hardly of me, then of the bitterest Presbyterians that have ever railed at you.
Reflect (if you please) on a few Examples. Disp. 5. of Sacram. p. 487.
When Dr. Owen had affirmed in sundry particulars, that you and the
Worcestershire profession of Faith give too great a countenance to the Socinian
abominations, you said no worse of him then that hi^ passion had quite
conquered his ingenuity. Ibid. p. 489.
Your censure of Master Black was much less terrible then this of me, when yet
you put him i^to tears and trembling. Ibid. p. 517.
When Mr. Crandon called one of your Principles most blasphemous, and professed
to abhor it with greatest detestation, and indignation, you did only call him
judi^ious Paed^gogue. Ib. p. 516.
Nay you hope that such men as Mr. Robertson, are justified, whose works (you
say) are such as you once hoped no man had been guilty of that had the least
fear of God before his eyes. D. Kendal 's Answer to Mr. Goodw. chapter 4. p. 143,
144.
When D. Kendal jeered you for setting so high a price on the Freshmens books,
and for being said to be (...), as if you scarcely had been bred in either
University; and added also to this, that somewhat more of the University would
have done you no harm* the worst you said of him, was, That you would not come
near him, until his breath smelt sweeter. But a man may be in a present state
of salvation, for all his ill-smelling breath; which no man can be thought to
be, whose state is worse then David's was, before Nathan spoke to him. Yet this
is the censure you fix on me, whom alone you had acknowledged, to have dealt
very brotherly and gently with you.

The Accuser's character of himself.
Sect. 5. If you so very much abhor the dying in such a state as mine, how much
less can I be willing to die in yours? for although you have professed, One
sheet for the Ministry, p 11. (...) Ephesians. 3.8.
you take your self to be a Saint, (whilst you say you have reason to take
your self for the least; almost as modestly as S. Paul, who thought fit to say,
that he was less then the least;) yet you openly Disp. 5. of Sacr. p. 482.
confess in another volume, that you are guilty of pride and prejudice; Ibid.
p. 486.
that you are conscious to your self of being proud and selfish. You say you
must and will confess the truth of that accusation from D. Owen; that Ibid. p
484.
you were aware of pride and hypocrisy in your heart before he told you of
them. So you say to Mr. Tombs (p. 272.281.) that your heart has pride in
every work you take in hand, and that your heart is mortally or desperately
wicked. Again you confess (in your Preface to that Book) how loath you were to
publish the later part of your third Disputation, which shows what sins do
consist with godliness, as knowing how unfit it was for the eyes of the
profane, yet you have printed it with a witness, and affirmed that such sins do
consist with godliness, as I have cited out of your text, in the first Section
of my third Chapter: worse sins then which, it is hard to name. And
notwithstanding you do acknowledge, that Sabbath-breaking i^ England is taken
for a sin inconsistent with grace, Disp. 3. p. 330.
yet you positively affirm, that every one is not ungodly, who lives and dies
in that sin without particular repentance. You confess in that page, that
spiritual pride is worse then common swearing, and you elsewhere confess that
you are spiritually proud. You See your Epistle to the poor in spirit prefixed
to your directions for peace of Conscienc^.
confess that you go on in the same fault your self, for which you had accused
the pride and ignorance of others; professing you have no excuse or argument,
but those of the times, NECESSITY and PROVIDENCE. Sir, I think the better of
you, for ingenously confessing such sins as these, but not the better that you
commit them; and heartily pray you to believe that they stand in need of a
particular repentance. Concerning me you know nothing, but that I have written
against sin, and so (by necessary consequence) against such sinners as
patronize it, yet you implicitly pronounce me in a state of damnation. If this
is one of those sins which you will have to consist which the power of godliness,
your danger cannot but be the greater, by how much the likelier you are to
fancy that it stands not in need of a particular repentance. Compare your
censoriousness in relation to me, with what you are more guitly of in the later
pages of your book, and in the pages before cited from out your Saints
everlasting rest: though you are clearly a guiltier person then the Episcopal
men whom you condemn, yet I will not judge you, as you judge others. I had
rather for mine own part, have a Millstone tied about my neck, and to be cast
into the sea, then take upon me to be a judge of quick and dead, by parting the
tares from the wheat before the harvest. Some will justify the wicked, as
vessels of absolute election, because they stick to their party, and condemn
the righteous as moral men, for at least as bad, if not a worse reason, which
is to interpret God's secret will, in opposition to his revealed on^. I will
not resemble then so far, as to judge of their end, though I see their way; For
secret things belong to God, and spiritus ubi vult spirat. And though late
Repentance is seldom true yet true Repentance is sometimes late. It is to their
Master they stand, or fall. I judge not of any man, but by his fruits; nor any
otherwise by his fruits, but by the Rule revealed.

His obligation to reca^t, if^ not resolutely mischievous.
Sect. 6. Your next short Section being nothing but a Reference to what you
have said in another Book, I have nothing to do but to circumscribe. Not
understanding what you mean by the last words of it, [ That that is it you yet
stand to.] For if you retract what you have taught in your Disputation
concerning Sacraments, and will now stand to nothing but what you have said to
Master Tombs, and in the other places which you refer to, (as the Particle [
yet] does somewhat seem to imply,) I shall only entreat you to do it plainer.
But if you stand to what you have said in the place by me cited, I also stand
to my exceptions, and am not concerned to look out farther. Your judgment
cannot be mistaken touching the sins of the godly, when you have told us so
very plainly that godly men may be Drunkards, and live a long time in Swearing,
yea, in Rebellion and Schism, and other Crimes, and yet you do not doubt of
their being godly. You had said enough, had you said no more then that you
would rather choose to die in the state of David (whilst yet impenitently lying
in Adultery and Murder, and other deliberate impieties) then in the state of an
Episcopal Divine, (naming me) whom you acknowledge to be free from any such
sin. Whereby you put me in mind of the aforesaid Nathanael Butler in the
N^rrative of him, p. 8.
Malefactor, who after his Thievery and adulteri^s, and deliberate murder of
his Bedfellow, did pity the ignorance and blindness of those his Visitants, who
offered to aggravate his bloody fact, and asked him whether the sight of the
baggs (for after his Murder he stole two purses, containing 120 l.) were not
his first temptation to the murdering of his brother. He did ill requite them
for their faithfulness to his soul, who knew it was needful to cleanse the
wound with some corrosives, before it could safely be closed up. Their question
was very pertinent, for he once confessed the money tempted him, (p. 3, 4.) yet
this poor Malefactor (if Master Case has not wronged him) was taught the
confidence to bewail his Monitors ignorance and blindness. To which he added
(says Master Case) that they who never had committed such gross and scandalous
sins, are accounted as guilty of all sins before God, and as incapable of
heaven, as if they had committed them in the highest degree; these he also
bewailed as poor Ignaro's, as if original corruption were more powerful in them
who never committed such heinous sins, then in him who had committed them in
the very worst manner: or as if their natures were not as likely to have been
changed and re^ew'd, who had abstained from fulfilling their fleshly lusts, as
his who had been so indulgent to them. 1 Pet. 2.11. Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.16.
Or as if it were not the Grace of God, (which the Murderer called the
restraining power) whereby others are preserved from such foul sins. Its true
indeed Master Yearwood did very prudently endeavor to keep the sinner from
presumption, (a sin the more to be avoided because it is commonly swallowed
down under the notion of assurance, and so dispatches too many souls very
comfortably to Hell,) even by seasoning his ears with this great truth, that
David himself if he murders, is in danger of damnation, (p. 11.) But now
suppose that Malefactor was indeed a true Penitent, and that it was not
presumption but saving Faith, which made him say, he did not doubt of his
salvation; and so (by a consequence unavoidable) that he was one of the Elect,
as well as David; (as for ought we know he was) will you say that his crimson
and scarlet sins were no more then the sins of a godly man? and that they could
never once place him in a state of Damnation, before the instant of his
Repentance? if you say yes, consider whether it tends; if you say no, you yield
the cause, and are obliged to publish your Recantation.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. I Am now arrived at the largest subjects of Discourse, on which
notwithstanding I shall endeavor to say the least. My reasons for it are
chiefly these, First because I am informed that others will handle them ^x
professo, who are qualified for it, by greater leisure then I enjoy. Next
because I am called upon to undeceive the admirers of Master Hickman, who may
perhaps turn Libertines, if they are not speedily disabused. These especially
are the reasons why I shall labor for brevity in all that follows.

You say, It Is strange that in an Age, which knows the lives of those that I am
for, and against, I can make it the ground of opposing Puritanes, because their
Doctrines lead men to licentiousness, and destroy godliness. And that Grotius
says the same. Sect. 22.]

The Puritanes lives no better then their doctrines.
Sect. 2. A thousand to one but it is true, if Grotius says it, who had one of
the soberest and most discerning spirits that the World has known in many
Ages. Nor is truth the less truth by being spoken by me, as well as Grotius. If
you include your self in their number, whom you commend for godly living, Luke
18.11.
how differ your words from those of the Pharisee? Lord I thank thee that I am
not as other men are. Nay if you speak of those Puritanes of whom I speak, it
is just as if the Publican should take up the words of the Pharisee, Verse. 13*
instead of those which are fitter for him, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
For the lives of those whom I am against, are well nigh as ill, as the Devil
can wish them; Blasphemous, Rebellious, Sacrilegious, Perjurious, Schismatical,
and all in public; what they are secretly, God only knows: But then the
fathering of all these sins on God, and committing them under pretense of
Godliness, and the not allowing them to be sins, must needs be the greatest
aggravation and heightning of them. And why should not this become a ground,
(both with Grotius, and my self,) whereby to conclude of their Doctrines, that
they lead to licentiousness, and destroy godliness? Although I cannot call to
mind that I branded the Puritanes with those expressions, and had you seen any
such words, you should have noted my page wherein you saw them. I think you
would, had you been able, or had you thought it for your advantage.

Sect. 3. Whereas you say, Their partialit^ to their own Tribe.
that their lives are so much better, then their Doctrines (Sect. 22.) It is
enough for me to say, you do but say it, you offer no proof that so it is. If
your particular life is better then others of your party, it is but agreeable
to your doctrines, which are (most of them) better then those of your party,
and for which they have proclaimed you a great Arminian. But whether your life
is so, or not, I will leave it to God to be determined: of this I am sure, that
when you had fastened on Mr. Tombs (one of the authorized Triers) as ugly a
character as was possible (throughout your book) and on the men of his way,
Pl^in Script. proof. etc. Edit. 1. p. 281.
yet you professed that those things do not diminish your affection to him. And
why so? your reason runs in these words -- [ Because I find we are all naught,
even almost stark naught, and that Saints have less sanctity and more sin in
them, then ever I imagined, etc.] Let some men sin never so much, they do not
cease to be Saints, but only grow to be naughty Saints. Let others sin never
so little, (as to the eye of the World) they do not cease to be ungodly, but
only grow to be moral and civil men. If it is true (what you have told us)
that your heart is desperately, mortally wicked, and that you are conscious to
your self of being Proud, and Selfish, and Hypocritical, you do not well to
call your self the least of Saints, whilst you make us believe that you are no
Saint at all.

As for the lives of those men, The contrary lives of Anti-puritanes* Psa^.
15.4.
whom I am for, they are such as are for God, and for his persecuted spouse,
for the keeping of Promises and Oaths, although it be (outwardly) to their
hurt; they are such; whose great learning is far inferior to their lives; such
whose enemies are not able to defame them without calumny; such, whose
converse is so unblameable, that their enemies confess they are moral men, and
are fain to tell them they have not grace in their hearts, because they see
nothing in their actions which is ungracious. In a word, they are such, who
rather choose to suffer affliction with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. If there are any who are not
such, I never was for them, I never will be; yet scandalous livers may suffer
wrong in some cases, wherein it is a duty to plead their right.

You say, that Fitz Simmons a petulant Jesuit, divides us English Protestants
into Formalists and Puritanes, and inveigheth against the Puritanes as their
greatest enemies. You were sorry that mine did use so much of his language, and
that the Jesuit and his formalists should accord about so ^ad a work* Sect.
23.]

The Accuser's concurrence with the Jesuit.
Sect. 4. Here you argue against me, and your self, and not at all against me,
unless against your self also; for you confess that the Jesuit does call the
men of my way by the name of Formalists, in which calumniating language you do
fully close with him. If I must be blamed for using one word, which is also
used by a Jesuit, much more must you, Sir, who accord with a Jesuit in
another. I say much more, because you do, what you condemn. And is not
Formalist as scandalous, as reproachful a title to the Prelatists, as Puritan
is to the Presbyterians? nay do not you use it as a word of obloquy? then mark
the sum of the whole matter. Master Baxter may freely declaim against
Prelatists, (that is, the regular sons of the Church of England,) calling them
Formalists, Arminians, Cassandrian Papists, or what he pleases. But Master
Pierce must not dare to say there is any such thing, or name, as Puritan in
the World. It were better his right hand were used as Cranmer's, (Sect. 24.) It
were better he were in the state of David before Nathan came to him, (Sect.
20.) What a privilege is this, that you must have the enclosing of
contumelious language unto your self? If mine were such, you are not fit to be
my Reprover, but I have showed you that mine was none.

Sect. 5. Be it so, Fitz Simmons his Artifice discovered, and the Puritanes
serviceableness to the Papists.
that Fitz Simmons did rail against Puritanes as his greatest enemies, (though
you cite no page where that is visible) what do you mean to prove by it? that
the Puritanes are really his greatest enemies? then all is true that Fitz
Simmons says. But if they really are not, Fitz Simmons lies, which sure he
may, being a Jesuit, especially if he holds their prodigious Doctrine of
Probability. The Iesuists use to say that, which is most for their turn; and
it is for cunning men's interest to rail at them most, that do them most service:
which the Puritanes certainly have done, in destroying, or suppressing the
greatest enemies of the Papists, the unchangeable men of the Church of England.
For this I have frequently your own confession: You say the Papists had a hand
in ^asting out of our Bishops, p. 95. and in the killing of our King, p.
106.108. Do men endeavor the destruction of their enemies or their friends?
Again you say, that the Papists are crept in among all sects; Quakers, Seekers,
Anabaptists, Millenaries, Levellers, Independents, and For this last you cite
the News book.
Presbyterians, p. 99, 100. To what end, but to cherish and abet each Sect? Do
men cherish and abet their greatest enemies, or their friends? It has indeed
been the cunning of certain Papists to pretend great kindness to Episcopal men,
nay, to the XXXIX Articles of the Church of England, (of which you have
Franciscus de San^ta Clara for an Example) nay to whisper among the people,
that his Grace of Canterbury was a Papist; nay farther to offer him a
Cardinall's Hat, or any thing else in the World, to make it believed that the
Prelatists were Popishly affected; that as such they might be hated, and so
destroyed. Consider how you have helped them in this design, and then I shall
hope you will do so no more. Consider also the insufficiency of your arguing,
and abstain from such arguing for time to come. Your self (at one time or
other) have inveighed against all, and yet you would be thought to be hardly an
enemy unto any. The Iansenians and the Jesuits do inveigh against each other,
as much as may be, yet both against Protestants, for both are Papists. Salma^us
inveighed against our E^glish Presbyterians, as the worst creatures to be
imagined, and yet himself was no Papist, or Episcopal Divine, but a more
peaceable Presbyterian then those against who^ he had whet his pen. You might
have saved me the l^bour of this whole Section, had you considered what I said
on the like occasion in page 98. Chapt. 3. of (...).

You say, I was to blame that I would not give you my description of a
Puritan, that you might know my meaning; and that a Puritan is not the same
thing to one man as to another: whereupon you reckon up your several notions of
a Pu^itane,. 23.

King James his description of a Puritan.
Sect. 6. As you do not cite any page wher^in I u^ed the word Puritan, so I
suppose if you had done it, you could not have spoken what now you speak: for I
cannot remember that I ever used that word, when I did not abundantly unfold my
meaning, even as much as you have done, when you have spoken of Papists, or
Presbyterians, of which you know there are many sorts. How many sorts are there
of Independents, of whom you many times speak, without declaring distinctly
which sort you mean? Yet it appears by my writings, that I have meant by
Puritanes; what was meant by King James, with whom you confess that a Puritan
was a turbulent seditious Seper^tist, or Nonconformist. But you might have
confessed much more, had you been pleased, for he (...).
called them the unruly, and phanatick spirits among the Ministe^y, as bad as
Highland or Border Thieves for Ingratitude, Lies, and vile Perjuries. When you
say he meant not all Presbyterians, you do infer, he meant some, and more then
some I never meant; n^y, I often professed I meant not all. But which, and how
many Presbyterians were understood by King James, you may collect by two Books
already printed, my Divine Purity defended, chap. 2. p. 8.9. and my
Self-Revenger Exempl. chap. 3. p. 71. to p. 84. of which your Grotian Religion
does take no notice. The truth is, the word Purita^e wa^ brought hither out of
Sco^land (I think I am not mistaken, though if I am, its no great matter,) and
so King James was the fittest definer of them, though their name was in the
World before his time, viz. Anno Dom. 1564. So that after it was evident I
spoke of such, what needed the muster of so many other notions? yet to give you
satisfaction, I shall speak to each of them.

You say, With a Papist a Puritan was a zealous Protestant, etc. Sect. 23.]

Sect. 7. If that does signify a firm, What Puritan signifies with the
Papists.
or a constant Protestant, who building upon rational and truly Catholic
grounds, is not only no Papist, but never can be; then the notion of Puritan
belongs to no other Protestants then those you commonly call Prelatists and
Episcopal men. But if by zeal is meant violence, ignorance, noise and
virulence, or calling the Pope the Whore of Babylon; then it belongs to those
men who declaim against Bisho^s, as Antichristian; and against a public Form
of Prayer, as a stump of Dagon. And so the soberest of the Papists do call them
Puritanes who are enemies to Protestants as well as Papists. You know who they
are that are thus entitled to the word: and for those of King James, I have
accounted to you already.

You say, With some Protestants, a Puritan is one of the old Catharists, that
thinks a man may be perfect without sin in this life, as Grotius and the
Papists do, etc. Sect. 23.]

Sect. 8. But could you not tell us what Protestant has used the word as you
say? A mistake of the old Catharists, who yet were Puritanes before the wo^d
was fitted to the thing*
or could you not tell in what writings either Grotius or the Papists have h^ld
such Doctrine, as that a man in this life may be without sin? you often lay too
great a weight upon your private fancy, or bare assertion; perhaps indeed some
of the Papists may have said of the ever blessed Virgin, that she was free from
all sin in this present wo^ld; but she was a woman, and therefore cannot be the
man you are pleased to speak of. Nay are you sure the old Catharists did ever
teach any such thing? I doubt you are not. Bishop Andrews called the
Catharists, Puri^ane^, inferring the Puritanes to be a new sort of Catharists;
but for quite other reasons then you here fancy, as I shall show you* at large
in my following Sections. The Scripture notion of the word [ Perfect] you must
acknowledge does belong to diverse men in this life, it being ascribed both to
Zachary, and to Elizabeth his wife. But such perfection is one thing, and
sinlesness is another.

Grotius groundl^sly calum^iated afr^sh.
Your bidding me take heed least by vindicating Grotius I make folks believe I
am a Puritan my self, (ibid.) is a most groundless intimation, that all the
vindicaters of Grotius do make themselves, or some others, to be without sin,
which, what a calumny it is, I need not tell you. At first you bid me take
heed, lest by vindicating Grotius I be suspected to be a Papist; if now a
Puritan too, my case is hard, especially when Grotius himself was neither,,
for the vindicating of whom, I must be suspected to be both. Perhaps your
brethren did call you Papist for the very same reason, even because you have
appeared in vindication of Grotius, and taught that the righteousness of a
Christian (even in this present life) is either perfect, or none at all. In
this you have spoken as high as Grotius, see if you have not, [ Aphoris. of
justif. These. 24. p. 129. and 133. and These. 22. p. 122.123. These. 27. p. 141.
Saints Rest. part. 4. p. 296.] What I have Self Revenge^, chapter 1. p. 35, 36, 37.
spoken for Castellio, to that I refer for you, and Grotius.

You say, with the old Episcopal party, a Puritan was a Nonconformist, Sect.
23.]

What the Purit^^es were with the old Episcopal party.
Sect. 9. And glad I am of the Confession, for it is not long, since that party
was the prevailing, and so had the Norman loquendi abiding with it: which being
granted, what need we more to discover the vulgar use of the word Puritan? If
you consider the ill things which Nonconformist does import, ( a schismatic,
Boutefeux, a strainer at Gnats, and a swallower of Camels*) you have not spoken
much amiss. And as touching the late Prelates, How (good Sir,) does it appear
that they had any other notion? you bring just nothing to prove they had: and I
can bring something to prove they had not. For Bishop Carleton could say, (even
then when he end^avour'd to speak in their favor, or excuse) that Puritanes
were This is conf^ssed by Master Hickman, p. 40.
disquieters of the Church, about their conceived Discipline. p. 99.
Master Fuller, to the word Discipline, does add Church Government, from which
the Puritanes dissented in former time. And he says, in probability the word
imported Non-conformists. To the other two words you now add Doctrine; and
what an unruly sort of people must they have needs been, who were ever snarling
and disquieting the Church of God (in which they lived) for her Discipline, and
Government, and Doctrine too? Our Learned and Reverend Doctor Sanderson you do
professed^y reverence in very great measure, (p. 2.) and whether you do esteem
him a new Prelatist, or an old one, it will equally be to my advantage. First
see him P^^face to the fourth Edit. of of his first Sermons, Sect. XXIII.
citing the old Prelatists concerning Puritanes, and then together with their
judgments, compare his own. [ The Reverend Archbishop Whitgift, and the learned
Hooker, men of great judgment, and famous in their times, The judgment of
Archbishop Whitgift and judicious
did long since foresee, and declare their fear, that if ever Puritanism should
prevail among us, it would draw in Anabaptism after it. At this Car^wright,
Hooker concerning Purit^ns.
and other Advocates for the Disciplinarian Interest in those days, seemed to
take great offense, etc. but without reason says Doctor Sanderson: Doctor
Sanderson's judgment of the sam^.
for those Godly men, (meaning Hooker and the Archbishop,) were neither so
unadvised, nor so uncharitable, as to become Judges of other men's thoughts or
intentions, beyond what their actions spoke them; they only considered as
prudent men, that Anabaptisme had its rise from the same Principles the
Puritanes hold, and its growth from the same courses they took; together with
the natural tendency of those Principles and Practices thith^rward. And that it
was no vain fear, the unhappy event h^th proved, and justified them, since what
they feared is come to pass, and that in a very high degree.] Thus you see
that Presbyterians, and the prime of that party, even such as Master Cartwright
(in Queen Elizabeth's d^yes) were styled Puritanes, and Disciplinarians by
these unquestionable men. And I wish you would read (once at least every week)
that most excellent Preface of Doctor Sanderson: See Sect. XVII. and compare it
with XXI. where he says the right English Protestant is in the middle between
the Papist and the Puritan.
you will find him placing the Church of England, and the regular sons of the
Church of England, in the middle betwixt the two extremes, Papists and
Puritanes; highly applauding the Episcopal Divines as the greatest enemies of
Rome, and converters of Papists from that Church to this, which hardly ever a
Presbyterian was known to be. You will find him showing how your party have
been the great promoters of the Roman interest among us, and that by many more
ways then one. You will find him confuting your Book of Concord. p. 46.
showing how you and your brethren have hardened the Papists, Sect. XVIII.
and betrayed the Protestant cause. Nay how Libertinism it self has over
spread the whole face of the land, by the means of fiery turbulent
Presbyterians. Sect. XX.
You will find him discovering that dangerous point, wherein the very mystery
of Puritanism consists (they are his own words) and from whence as from a
fountain so many acts of sinful disobedience issue. How the enemies of our
Prelacy are both multiplied, Sect XXIII.
and divided into Fractions, and Factions, not more opposite to truth (many of
them) then to one another: their opposition to the Truth being the only
property wherein the Factions do all agree. Ibid.
Yea you will find him express his fears (which are extremely to be heeded,
proceeding from so good, and so wise a man.) that our Atheists are more
numerous then either our Papists or our Sectaries, (and perhaps go masking in
all their vizors) since the pretended Reformation you so much talk of. Sect.
XXIV.
To put an end to this Paragraph, you will find him distinguishing, as I have
many times done, (as well before, as since he did it,) between the moderate,
and the rigid, Scotized, through-paced Presbyterians. The former he professes
to love and honor: but such he says the madness and obstinacy of the later,
that it is vain think of doing any good upon them by Argument. But becau^^ you
may obje^t that Doctor Sanderson is one of the ne^ Episcopal Divines, or say of
him (as you did of Grotius) th^^ he is an exasper^^ed man, (as having been cast
out of hi^ own by the barbarous violence of your Reformers) I will ad^ some
judgments, to which you cannot have such exceptions

Sect. 10. Bishop Andrews (of blessed memory) has described a branch of the
old Cathari or Puritanes, Bishop Andrews his judgment of Puritanes, in his
Sermon of worshipping imaginations, p. 29. A.D. 1592. published by supreme
A^th^rity.
who call themselves Apostolici, for an extraordinary desire (above other men)
to have discipline, and all things to the exact pattern of the Apostles days.
He cites Epiphanius for the Catharists (Haeres^ 6^.) so that it seems he
thought Puritanes a sort of Heretics revived. He calls it fitly Cacoz^lia, an
apish imitation, to retain all in use th^n, seeing diverse things even then were
only temporary. He also shows them to be a parcel of the Donatists, for
pressing all things alike which they found in Scripture. Both which (he tells
us) have not a little harmed the Church. Ib. p. 30.
He discovers their Hypocrisy and Superstition (so unfit are the Puritanes to
accuse others of it) with another riot and licentious liberty, which (he says)
is a great deal worse then the former. In a word, he does conclude them to be
partly Idols, and partly Idolaters; See from p 32* to the end.
for besides their vain imaginations touching the Apostles fellowship,
(Lay Elders and the rest of the Presbyterian inventions) to which (he says) a
great number of the de^eived people bow down and worship, (p. 34.) and besides
their babbling after the manner of the Papists, yea, of the Heathen, in their
long and (pretendedly) extemporary prayers, (in w^h he says they err no less
then either Papists or the Heathens do, p. 37.) He concludes of all their
tricks together, which he condemned in particular throughout his Sermon, [ These
are of many imaginations, some set up and magnified by some, and by others
worshipped and adored, under the names of the Apostles1 Doctrine,2 Government,3
Sacraments,4 Prayers.] In diverse others of hi^ Sermons he sets them out in
their proper colors. See his second Sermon of sending the Holy Ghost, p. 610.
As mistaking their humors, and misterming them the spirit; calling that the
spirit of zeal, which is indeed a hot humor, only flowing from the gall.
Another windy humor they have proceeding from the spleen, supposed to be the
wind, Act. 2.3, 4. with which being filled, they term themselves. THE GODLY
BRETHREN I wish (says He) it were not needful to make this Observation. But
you shall easily know it for an Humor. Non continetur termino suo; its own
limits will not hold it. They are ever mending Churches, States, Superiors,
mending all save themselves; alieno, non suo, is the note to distinguish an
humor by -- Ezekiel. 13.13.
Many follow their own ghost, in stead of the Holy Ghost. For even that ghost
takes upon it to inspire. And Mat. 16.2.
flesh and blood (we know) have their revelations. -- Having set up and shrin'd
the worldly spirit in their hearts) up shall all the golden Calves to uphold
the present estate; down shall Christ, ne veniant Romani, that the Romans come
not and carry us all away. -- See his ninth Sermon of the same, p. 694.
Again he calls them the Automata, the Spectra, the Puppets of Religion,
Hypocrites. Wi^h some spring within, the eyes are made to roll, and their lips
to wag, and their breast to give a sob; all is but Hero's Pneumatica, 2 Pet. 3.5.
a vizor, not a very face; an o^tward show of godliness, but no inward power of
it at all. -- And are there not somewhere in the World, some such as will
receive none other spirit, or Holy Ghost, but their own ghost, and the Idol of
their own conceit, the vision of their own heads, the motions of their own
spirits? And if you hit not on that that is there in their hearts, they reject
it, be it what it will? That make their breasts the sanctuary? That (in effect)
say with the old Donatists, Quod volumus sanctum est, that they will have holy
and nothing else? Men causelessly puffed up with their fleshly mind? Col. 2.18.
-- ib. p. 696.
It is an old worn error of the Donatists, and but new dressed over by some
f^natical spirits in our days, that teach in Corners; one that is not himself
inwardly holy, cannot be the means of holiness to another. And where they dare
too, that, one that is not in state of grace can have no right to any
po^session or place, for they of right belong to none, but to the true children
of God; that is to no^e but themselves. And These the Bishop there call's, Fond
ignorant men. Again See his tenth Sermon* on the some, p 703.
Not only mission, but submission is a sign of one truly called to this
business. But -- of all pr^positions, they endure not super; all equal, all
even at least. Their spirit is not subject to the spirit of the Prophets, nor
of the Apostles neither, (if they were now alive,) but bear themselves so high,
do tam altum sapere, as if this spirit were underling, and their spirit above
the Holy Ghost. There may be a spirit in them, there is none upon them, that
endure no super, none above them.]

You see how Puritanes were described by that so eminently judicious and godly
Prelate, who long before his preferments, had been See a brief view of the
Church of England, as it stood in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James,
p. 143.
earnestly dealt with by a great person (being his Patron) to hold up a side
which was even then falling, and to maintain certain state points of
Puritanism; but he had too much (...) (as my Author alludes unto his name) to
be either scared with a Counselors frown, or blown aside with his breath: and
therefore answered his Tempter plainly, It was against his learning and
conscience too. His Patron seeing he would be no Friar Pinkie, (to be taught in
a Closet what he should say at Saint Paul's) dismissed him then with some
disdain; but after did the more reverence his integrity, and became no hinderer
to his ensuing greatness.

Sect. 11. Now since the Author of this Relation was Sir John Harrington of
Kelston, Sir John Harrington's judgment of Puritanes. Ibid. p. 7.8.
a knowing person in those times, of which he has left a view behind him, it
will be pertinent to observe his private judgment, of those old Puritanes who
then disquieted the Church. When the Puritanes (says he) whom some defined to
be Protestants scared out of their wits, did begin by the plot of some great
ones, but by the pen of Master Cartwright, to defend their New Discipline,
their endeavor was to reduce all, in show at least, unto the purity, but
indeed unto the poverty of the Primitive Church. Ib. p. 150.
That is to say, they were sacrilegious. For speaking after of the same men,
This (says he) was the true Theorique and Practique of Puritanism. One,
impugning the Authority of Bishops secretly, by such Lectures (as that which
was lately founded by a sacrilegious Grandee, and read by Dr. Reynolds) The
other impoverishing their livings openly, The judgment of Q. Eliz. and her
Privy Counsel, and of Archb. Bancroft p. 12.13. and Archbishop Whitgift ib. p.
7.8.
by such leases as would yield good fines to the Procurers.

He inferrs the judgment of Queen Elizabeth and her Council, in that he says
the learned Bancroft obtained the favor of Queen and State, for his endeavors
to s^ppress those fantastical Novellers. And it is known that his reward was the
Archbishopric of Canterbury. Dr. Whitgift also (though a great Anti-Arminian)
was then an eminent Confuter of Cartwright's Writings. And (as a step to his
Archbishopric (was first rewarded with the Bishopric* of Worcester. Of Judge
^opham.
Nay, Judge Popham, who was unwilling to have them called Puritanes, was yet
accustomed to call them seditious Sectaries, which he would not have done, had
he not judged them to be such. Having said how the Queen did approve the books
of Dr. Bancroft, I did not add the opinion he had of Puritanes, because his two
books have done that for me; the one discovering their discipline, the other,
their dangerous positions in point of Doctrine, more especially that Doctrine
which has a tendency to the subversion of Church and State.

Ib. p. 118.119.
I will not give you my whole account of that Author, but only in brief put
you in mind how the Puritanes in Cambridge had courted Dr. Iohnstill to abet
that party; and how they reviled him in their pulpits, because he would not
join with them, (yet he was after made Bishop of Bath and Wells.) How every one
made reckoning that the Mannor-house and Park of Banwel should be made the
reward of some Courtier, which suspicion was increased in that Sir Thomas
Henage was said to have an oar in the matter, being an old Courtier, and a
zealous Puritan, whose conscience, if it were such in the Clergy, as it was
found in the Duchy, might well have digested a better booty. Ib. 135. in
Doctor Herbert Westphaling Bishop of Hereford.
How Queen Elizabeth at Oxford had schooled Dr. Reynolds for his preciseness;
willing him to follow her laws, and not to go before them. But it seems he had
forgot it when he went last to Hampton Court; so as there he received a better
schooling.

The Lord Keeper Pu^kering's judgment of Puritanes by the direction of Q.
Elizabeth, delivered in the House of Lords, in Parliament ^ssembled.
Sect. 12. Very remarkable are the words of the Lord Keeper Puckering, touching
the parity of the danger to Church and State which the Puritanes and the
Jesuits had brought on both. Remarkable, I say, as having been uttered in
Parliament, by the special command of Queen Elizabeth. And here the fitter to
be inserted, because they are not to be had, but from his own handwriting:
from which, by the favor of a most noble Gentleman, I got (about a year ago)
^his following transcript. A transcript, not of the whole, but of as much as
concerns the case in hand.

And especially you are commanded by her Majesty to take heed, that no ear be
given, nor time afforded to the wearisom^ solicitations of those, that
commonly be called Puritanes, wherewithal the late Parliaments have been
exceedingly importuned: which sort of men, whilst in the giddiness of their
spirits they labor and strive to advance Mark who they were that were the^
called Puritanes.
a new eldership. They do nothing else but disturb the good repose of the
Church, and the Commonwealth; which is as well grounded for the body of
Religion it self, and as well guided for the discipline, as any Realm that
professes the truth. And the same thing is already made good to the world, by
many the writings of learned and Mark who they were that were so esteemed.
godly men; neither answered, nor answerable by any of these newfangled
Refiners. And as the present Case stands, it may be doubted, whether they, or
the Jesuits, do offer more danger or be more speedily to be repressed. For
albeit the Jesuits do empoison the hearts of her Majesty's subjects under a
pretext of conscience, to withdraw them from their obedience due to her
Majesty, yet do they the same but closely and only in privy corners; but these
men do both publish in their printed books, and teach in all their
Conventicles, sundry opinions, not only dangerous to the well-setled Estate
and Policy of the Realm, by putting a Pike between the Clergy and the Laity,
but also much derogatory to her sacred Majesty, and her Crown, as well by the
diminution of her ancient and lawful Revenues, and by denying her Highness
Prerogative and Supremacy, as by offering peril to her Majesty's safety in her
own kingdom. In all which things, (however in many other points they pretend to
be at war with the Popish Jesuits, yet) by the separation of themselves from
the unity of their fellow subjects, and by abusing the sacred authority and
Majesty of their Prince, they do both join and concur with the Jesuits in
opening the door, and preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion that is
threatened against the Realm. And thus having according to the weakness of my
best understanding) delivered her Majesty's most Royal pleasure, and Mark what
was wisdom in Q. Elizabeth's days.
wise direction, I rest here, with most humble suit for her Majesty's gracious
pardon in supply of my defects, and recommend you to the Author of all good
counsel.]

Here you see the Presbyterians were then the Puritanes, the newfangled
r^finers of giddy spirits. The Episcopal persons were then the godly, as well
as the learned of the land. O what times do we live in, when a new-named
godliness is grown in fashion.

The judgment of D^. R. Clerk, one of the Translators of the Bible, concerning
the then-Puritanes, in his second visitat. Sermon. on Zech. 11.17. Vae Pastori
Idolo, p. 251.
Sect. 13. In the time of Doctor Richard Clerk, (not a Courtier, nor an
Arminian,) to whom with Doctor Saravia the translation of the Bible was
committed, as far as from the Pentateuch to the Paralipome^a, you may see what
judgment was made of Puritanes by several passages of his Sermons. Amongst very
many others, take that which follows.

The two Universities, the very eyes of the Realm, being so well able to
furnish God's Flock with seeing Shepherds, our Church is little beholding to
her Patrons for preferring to the Regiment of her Flock so many unlettered and
unsufficient Priests, either Idols, or Idols fellows. Whose eyes have either a
film grown over them, that they see nothing; or a Pin and Web in them, that
they see but little. And these are the men, whose tongues are fiery indeed,
but not cloven; that is, zealous, but not learned; preach against learning,
pull down the Prelacy, to rear up a Presbytery; Bray-forth intemperate
censures against the lawful ceremonies of the Church, as being superstitious,
the dregs and relics of Popery; kneeling at the Sacrament, the repetition of
certain prayers in our Liturgy, the singing of Service, the sound of the Organ
in Collegiate Churches, the square Cap and Surplisse, the painted windows,
marrying with the Ring, and christening with the Cross, and such like: In some
of which, were our Prelates as courageous, as our Puritanes ^re presumptuous,
they would be either enforced to order, or turned out of Orders.] You see the
opinion of that both learned and pious man; who tells us who were the
Puritanes, and what they were; and that the Prelates were never too cruel to
them, unless it were in being too kind. Observe what he says in another
Sermon.

Our factious Pharisees join with the Herodians, In his 1. Visit. Sermon. on Number.
16.3. p. 242.243.
and that against Christ. Iudas-like they betray him into the hands of sinners.
The pragmatical Presbyterian, preaches against Prelacy unto Lay-ears. A
pleasing Argument unto some Seculars, either Schismatical, or Sacrilegious both
men of zeal, passive in the one, The zeal of God, house eat them up: active in
the other, They have a zea^ to eat up God's house: cry with Zeba and Zalmunna,
Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession. 'Twas once Simeon
and Levi brethren in evil. It Is now Reuben and Levi; Levi must be one. -- Our
^orah's and Dathan's have not risen yet. Not come forth in public. The wisdom
of our Senators has prevented that they should not swa^m. But they have lain
out often. They have gathered together, sometimes sixty at once in Corners.
Their Classes, Synods, Conferences, have been at least in Moses his moderate
term, gatherings together. Their Petitions, Supplications, Admonitions,
Demonstrations, what were they but gatherings together? Works but of some one
head happly, but of many hands. Their very motions are commotions, penned by
some one, maintained by multitudes. Ib. p. 245.
-- Some of the Titles which they envy the Bishops, they can be content to
assume unto themselves. Right Reverend Fathers; yea Cartwright most This the
Title of an Archbishop.
Reverend. The best is, Calvin and Beza differ here. Beza's wrong to Bishops
Calvin rights, and calls even Archbishops a moderate honor.

Sect. 14. If you would see a great deal in a little time, An account of
Puritanes from the Examen Historicum.
concerning the nature of a Puritan, before he had gotten himself the name, (as
well as after,) you may be pleased to consult the l^te Exame^ Historicum, set
out by that exact and learned Writer, whom you name without his due title, as
if you thought him an under-graduate, although you could not but know him an
eminent Doctor in Divinity. p. 91 92. etc. W^ckliff's new Gospel.
He will show you a part of Wickliff's Gospel, and what a Protestant Religion he
would have brought into the World, fitly said (by that Reverend Author) to
contain the lineaments of the Puritane-platform. He will show you where you may
read p. ^06.
that the Dominicans, with a Puritan, can pass for Orthod^x in judgment. p.
109.
And they who approve of good works, for Prela^ica^ly affected. p. 128.129.
There you may see a Den of Schismatics Canonized and Sainted by a
Time-serving Historian; whilst Things prescribed by God's Church are Toys and
Trinckets. p. 130.
You may read of a Puritan's immortal malice, pursuing the Protestant's
Champion into his Bed of Rest, as if the Jesuits had hired him to kill their
enemy when he was dead. ^.156.157. Their helping on the Popish I^terest.
You may see a Puritan defending those scurrilous Libels which Job
Throgmorton, Penry, Fenner, and the rest of the Puritan Rabble, (it is the
Authors own word) did publish in ^rint against the Bishops, having first
exclaimed against the Que^n and her Council, (for being Protestants in their
wits, that is, as they phrased it) for opposing the Gospel. Such service for
the Papists was then done by the Puritanes, whose Libels were cited and
applauded by those of Rome: even Hacket himself has an Apology made for him,
although as execrable a miscreant, as most have been of that paste. p. 256.
The libellous Pamphlets of Martin-Mar Prelate (that early Puritan in Queen
Elizabeth's days) were urged by the Papists as Authentic Witnesses, and
sufficient Evidences for the disgrace and condemnation of the
Protestant-Church. So true was that which I showed you from the Lord Keeper
Puckering, that the Puritanes do join and concur with the Jesuits.

Their reb^llious Principles.
What p. 138 139.^^3.
Principles of Rebellion were scattered abroad among the people by the Puritan
leaders in seve^al Countrey^, ^uch as Wickliff, Clessel^us, Knox, and Winram,
that excellent Examen will quickly tell you. p. 178.179.
And what Heath^ni^h Notes the Genevians put upon ^he B^ble. p. 151.
How Felton a zealous Puritan com^it^ed his murder upon the Duke. How
Covetous^ess and Nonconformity were so married together, that 'twas not ea^e
to divorce them. p. 153.
How an Act of Parliament was made against Puritanes, 23 Eliz. c. 3. p. 156.
And a High Commission enforced to curb them. p. 158.
How mock-ordinations were made at Antwerp, by a mongrel sort of Presbyterians,
consisting of two blew Aprons to each Cruel Nightcap. In a word, it will tell
you their sabbatizing, their downfall, their essays to rise, their
disappointments, their new attempts by the way of Lecturing, (in which the
Jesuits went before them,) their pride without parallel, their malice without
measure, and their acts of injustice without remorse.

Sect. 15. That irresistible Champion of the Protestant Church against her
Adversaries of Rome, Bishop Montague' s judgment of Puritanes.
(I mean) the learned Bishop Montague, who was employed by King James to write
the Annals of the Church Catholic, and (all along as he went) to reform
Baronius on the one side, as the Magdeburgenses on the other, does often
justify and distinguish the Church of England, no less from the Puritan, then
Popish party. He calls them in one place, Religiosi nebulones nostrates Deum
and Ecclesiam emulgentes, aiunt, Deum cul^u mere spirituali (...). Montac. in
(...). ad An. Chr. 2. See his Appello Caesarem, ^art. 2. c. 1. p. 11^.111* 112.
the sacrilegious hypocrites of our Country, who rob God and the Church, under
color of spirituality; saying that God is well pleased with no other worship
then what is spiritual. In another place he speaks of them as our Savior spoke
of the Pharisees, Ecclesia Anglicana recte, quicquid vacillent Puritani, (...),
He had long before noted, [That many were arrant Puritanes in heart, who for
preferment did conform, holding with the Hare, and running with the Hound. And
that many once Puritanes, turned often Papists. Fleeting being commonly from
one extreme to another. Men of moving, violent, quicksilver, gunpowder
spirits, can never rely upon midling courses, but dum furor in cursu est, run
on headlong into Extremes. And so I may avow I will not be a Papist in haste,
because I never was a Puritan in earnest or in jest; having found it true in
my small Observation, that our Revolters unto Popery, were Puritanes avowed or
addicted first. Ib. p. 113.
] -- A little after, he calls the Jesuits, the Puritane-Papists; and for the
Protestant-Puritanes he does not reckon them as Members of the Church of
England, but only [ an overweening-faction, which was wont to be shrouded
under the Covert of the Church of England; and to publish their many idle
dreams, fancies, and furies unto the World, under pretext of the doctrine of
our Church. And our Opposites of the Romish side did accordingly ^harge our
Church with them.] which words when I compare with diverse things before
mentioned, I am apt to think that many Papists did call themselves of the
Church of England, and acted their parts on our English Theater, under the name
and disguise of the Puritane-party, that so they might help the real Puritanes
to bring our Protestant Church into disgrace and misery.

Sect. 16. To this I will add some words of Grotius, because he was so great
an honor to the true Protestant Religion, Grotius his judgment concerning
Puritanes. Serenissimi, and si per Puritanos licea^, Potentissimi Regis
Britanniarum beneficio, etc. Discuss. Riv. Apol. p. 57.
not more for his learning then moderation: who speaking of the King of Britain
and of some obligations received from him, thought fit to say [ The most
serene, and if the Puritanes will suffer him, the most potent King of England.]
words most worthy your consideration, as having been written in the year 1645.
when you cannot but remember how much his Majesty was promised, to be made the
mightiest King in Christendom. It is but seldom that Grotius does name the word
Puritan (although sometimes Rex Iacobus se Puritanis semper exosum fuifse
dicit, non alio Nomine quam quod Rex effe^. Ibid. page 92.
he names it too.) but he gives us so often a just account of their Ten^ts,
which have commonly broken forth into Blood and Rapine, that I need not stay
longer upon his exact judgment.

Mr. Thorndike 's judgment of Puritanes. In his Epilogue to the Trag. of the
Church of England, Con^lus. p. 405. Ib. p. 423.
I will conclude my whole Catalogue with what I lately met with in my perusal
of Master Thorndike. [ It is evident (says he) that Preachers and People are
overspread with a damnable Heresy of Antinomians and Enthusiasts, formerly
when Puritanes were not divided from the Church of England, called Etonists,
and Grindeltons, according to several Countries, etc. -- well had it been had
that most pious and necessary desire to restore public penance, been seconded
by the zeal and compliance of all estates^, and not stifled by the t^res of
Puritanisme, growing up with the Reformation of it. -- In fine, if any thing
may have been defective, or amiss, in that order which the Church of England
establishes, it is but justice to compare it with both extremes which it
avoideth. (meaning Popery on one hand, and Puritanisme on another.) If you read
his whole Book, you will probably return to the Church of England, by being
convinc^d that you have left her. If you will read but some part, you will find
him showing what I shall now but say from him: Id. lib. 1. p. 77.
viz. 1 That the Scottish Presbyterians have done like them, who oblige subjects
to depose their Sovereign, if the Pope excommunicate them; making both subjects
and Sovereigns the Popes vassals; Ib. p. 78. Conclus. p. 4^4*
them to rule, and those to obey, at his discretion who can excommunicate them.
2 That it is Puritanism, or Popery for subjects to fight against their
Sovereign; yea a Branch of Puritanism, which came from Popery. 3 That there is
one Principle of some Puritanes, from whence the true conclusion being drawn
makes mere Popery of the whole duty of a Christian. And that the Church of
Rome holds no error in the Faith, any thing near so pernicious. What he says
of Presbyteries, as to the sacrilege of Schism in the constitution, and the
nullity of Gods' promises in the effect, you may read at large in his
conclusion, p. 417.418, etc.

Sir, You have now the conclusion of the whole matter, as far as concerns the
whole importance of those two words Nonconformity, and Puritanism. And that
however you were pleased to make a difference betwixt the old and new Episcopal
Divines, yet in their judgment of Puritanes, there is none at all; Bishop Hall
's judgment of Puritanes in his Latin exhortation to the Synod at Dort, on
Eccles. 7.16.
unless in this, that the old ones were more severe. Our excellent Bishop Hall
(now with God) was one of those late Prelates of whom you speak; and what his
thoughts were of Puritanes you may judge by his Exhortation in the Synod of
Dort. For as in the days of Queen Elizabeth (and thence downwards) they were
wont to compare the Puritanes to the Papists, so did that Vide Acta Synodi
Dordrectanae, p. 57. Sess. 16.
excellent Prelate compare the Papists to the Puritanes: and that for no reason
more then their pretending to be p^rer then others are, or then indeed they are
themselves. And this does lead me to that which follows. For

You say, Among the vulgar, a Puritan ( all over England where ever you came)
was one that would speak seriously or reverently of God or heaven, or of the
Scripture, and that would talk of hell, and the life to come, etc. that would
not swear, or would reprove a swearer, or a drunkard, or a prophaner of holy
things, etc. Sect. 23.]

King James distinguished the Knave's Puritan, from the Puritan- Knave.
Sect. 17. If any man living did ever call such men as these Puritanes, (as you
do nakedly affirm, but do not prove) he must answer to God, for his having done
so like a Puritan himself. It being as unjust to call such Puritanes, as it is
now for Mr. Baxter to call the Prelatists, Papists, nay Formalists, nay what he
pleases, p. 111, 112, 113, 114, 115. But really, Sir, I cannot imagine, with
what color of justice you should first make this the vulgar notion so contrary
to that which you confessed to be the King's, the old Episcopal Divines, and
the late Prelates (for you know the King's way is the vulgar way,) and that
then you should imply it to have been mine, and so against me confute your own
fancy, and nothing else. I have ever distinguished (as well as K. James)
between the Knave's Puritan, and the Puritan-Knave. But we must not be afraid
to call Puritans, hypocrites, because there are that are not hypocrites, who
yet are called Puritanes. Must not one have his right name, because another
has a wrong? Let every man have his own, though some have that which is
another. For my use of the word Puritan, I am encompassed about with a cloud
of witnesses, that I have used it as I ought. And my witnesses are such, as for
greatness, wisdom, piety, learning, or whatever else is most lovely, I
suppose you will grant beyond exception.

You say, my party gave the Puritanes a new name, and the Puritan was called a
Roundhead, ( a learned invention, intimating that the Puritanes do speak, and
not as Long-heads, bark, or grunt,) and when the ^arrs had given lib^rty to the
rage of such as hated Puritanes, then ordinarily he was a Puritan, or a
Roundhead, that was heard to pray, or sing a Psalm in his house, Sect. 23.]

Sect. 18. Though I have nothing to do with the name of Roundhead, Of the word
Roundhead, and praying aloud in private. Petrus Crinitus de b^llo Rusticano.
nor ever called any so, (that I can remember) by word of mouth, much less in
any of my writings, (so as I wonder what you meant in telling me of it without
cause,) yet perhaps that title is not so new as you imagine. For Petrus Crinitus
could have told you of some soldiers in Germany, above a hundred years ago, Qui
Agmen Tonsile, a rotunde detonsis Capitibus, dicebantur. And it is better to
have the (...), etc. Hom.
long-head of Thersites, then the long-ears of such an Issachar as Midas was.
As it is very much better to bark in Is^. 56.10.
one sense, then to bray in another* which things concern not your self, or me.
And therefore to speak without impertinence, I would very fain know where that
godly man lives who was ever called Roundhead for being godly, or merely for
praying in his house: which I suppose is done even by men of all parties,
excepting them who are transported above all ordinances, by the presumption
which they have of their absolute election, and their impossibility to fall
from Grace. But if he who was HEARD to pray in his house, did pray so LOUD, and
so near the street, that passengers could not choose but hear him, it was not
his praying, but his hypocrisy, which was likely to be reviled. A great deal
of naughtiness may be committed, though not in prayer, as prayer; yet in a
contrived Pharisaical both length and loudness. When our Savior did call the
Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, yea Serpents, and generation of vipers, Math.
23.33.
(notwithstanding they were esteemed the godly party) it was not merely because
they prayed, nor only because their Prayers were long, but because they made
their long prayers for a pretense; verse. 14.
that so the Orphans and Widows houses might be swallowed down the more glibly.
When thou prayest (says our Savior) thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are;
Mat. 6.5.
for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues and in the corners of the
streets, that they may be seen of men. And he that prays in his house to be
heard of men, is near kin to him who prays on purpose to be seen: therefore it
follows in the text, When thou prayest, enter into thy closet and shut thy
door. -- And thy Father who sees in secret shall reward thee openly. verse. 6.


You say, Sometimes the sign of purgation, by which men must prove themselves
no Puritans, was, if they could swear nine Oaths in a br^ath. Sect. 23.]

How the Purita^es are the worst kind of swearers.
Sect. 19. I will not say what has been said, That this is certainly a Hummer.
But I hope i^ is an untrue report, which if it is, it is prodigiously such. I
never heard any thing like it, and you ought to have given some kind of proof
that you might not be concluded the Raiser of it. If the Tale has truth in it,
why did you not name the Malefactors, that (for the good of themselves, and
others.) they might be brought to some exemplary punishment? such scandalous
sinners before these times, would have been paradigmatiz'd in the Bishops
Courts. Nor could any thing less then extirpation of Episcopacy, have gained an
impunity for such a crime. And now to tell you the very truth, if I may judge
of Antipuritanes, by those whom I am acquainted with, they are as free from
this vice, as most of the Puritanes are guilty of it. I speak not of swearing
nine Oaths in one breath, but of swearing and forswearing, as many times in
two breaths (whereof the one is hot, and the other cold) as they conceive to be
for their carnal interest. Are there not Puritanes who have sworn, first an
Oath of Allegiance, 2. An Oath of Supremacy, 3. An Oath of Canonical obedience,
4. An Oath entitled the Negative Oath, 5. An Oath which was called the solemn
League and Covenant, 6. An Oath which was taken by the name of an Engagement,
besides their University and Collegiate Oaths? And I have heard they swore an
Oath to live and die with my Lord of Essex. Put all together, and you will find
them to be Nine, with some advantage: and the Sacrament taken at ordination of
Ministers under the Bishops, is the solemnest Oath that can be taken. Much more
I could say, but that a word to the wise may seem sufficient.

You say, The way that one Company of the Kings soldiers testified their
freedom from this crime, by (as credible impartial witnesses in Somersetshire
told you, that saw them do it) was by pricking their fingers, and letting their
blood run into the Cup, and drinking a health to the Devil in their own blood,
Sect. 23.]

Sect. 20. If this were true, it were not any thing to the purpose as being
neither for you, nor against my self. I having spoken of Puritanes in the words
of King James, The Tale of d^inking a bloody health to the Devil no less
impertinent then uncharitable.
not in words of my framing; and as I found them in an Historian of
unquestionable prudence and moderation. Again, I spoke ex professo of
Presbyterians, and of Puritanes only by accident. Nor did I speak of them
otherwise, then Queen Elizabeth, King James, Archbishop Bancroft, Archbishop
Whitgift, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Hall, Doctor Sanderson and others had afforded
me a warrant from all their styles. Yet see with what Stories you entertain me,
without the least offer of any proof. Nay see if it is not so contrived as if
it were purposely intended to pass for incredible with all that read it. For
let me put you to a few questions, 1. Was there ever any Company of his
Majesty's soldiers who were in very good earnest suspected to be Puritans, so
as to need a testimonial that they were none? 2. Were they so far suspected of
being Puritanes, that nothing less then their own blood, and a Health to the
Devil, could satisfy the suspecters, and gain their freedom from such
suspicion? when the Tale in it self is so incredible, what professor of
Christianity would not suspect the very ^i^n^sses, (however professing to be no
less then eyewitnesses) who should suggest so strange and so incredible a
thing? or who would cite such testimonies in materia tamgravi, without the
naming of persons, time, and place, and without the specifying of all other
circumstances, to free himself from being reckoned a False-Accuser? which of
the two is the greater sin, to drink a health to the Devil, or to gratify the
Devil by falsely affirming that some have done it to free themselves from being
Puritanes, I leave it to be judged by the indifferent Reader.

But now^suppose it to be true, A gross and dangerous falsification in the
management of the Tale.
that some did swear nine Oaths in a breath, and others drink their own blood
at a health to the Devil, must you infer that they did it as a sign of
purgation, (as you word it in your first story) or to testify their freedom
from the crime of Puritanism, (as you express it in your second?) it were very
easy to pay you home in your own coin, and to load you with more of it then
you are able to bear. But I will only speak of some notorious matters of Fact,
to let you see the advantage you now afford me. There was an eminent Mr. Barker
of Pitchley.
Presbyterian in this County of Northampton, an able Preacher by rep^te, and a
godly man, who for Incest and Murder was hanged in the ^ight of diverse
thousands, there are thousands now living, who saw it done; his trial and
execution were so public, that I need not tell you from whom I heard it. But
how would you take it if I should say that such a Puritan did purposely defile
his Niece, and consent to the murder of the child he had by her, and end his
days upon the Gallows to prove himself free from the Prelatical party? if you
find in your self, that you would take it in ill part, then learn not to speak
what you would not hear. I could also tell a story of a ^everend man of the
Presbytery, (of whom it will hardly be believed) that taking upon him to be a
Fighter, as well as a Preacher in the Army, he killed a soldier of his own
Company in the Town of Warwick.

Men should be taught by the^r suffering, not to do wrong.
But of all the men in the World, you and I should be careful not to speak
without ground, of other men's failings, since others have spoken so very
groundlessly of you and me. Disp. 5. of Sacram. p. 489.
Mr. Robertson (you say) did talk confidently of his discourses with Mr.
Hotchkiss, though Mr. Hotchkiss professed he never saw him. And so you say that
Mr. Blake has printed things of your self, Ibid. p. 500.
so false and groundless, that he might as well have said, you take your self
to be King of Spain. Of Mr. Tombs his Aspersions, you very frequently
complain. And you know by whom you have been accused as a Papist, and a
Socinian. In all which I am obliged to take part with you by my resentment, and
to profess my disbelief of many things I hear of you; I having suffered my
self, in the very same measure that you have done. I will not mention men's
names in a more public manner then they do mine; because I am tenderer of
them, then they have been of themselves, or me. But this I cannot forbear to
say, (upon so pregnant an opportunity) that malicious slanders are raised
against me, and unworthily whispered from one enemy to another, though most
evident Contradictions to the plainest matters of Fact. The Tem^ter many times
betrays his Instruments, whilst he Imployes them. As if in very good earnest
he had owed them a spite, as we use to say by a kind of Proverb. He puts them
upon speaking such ill-made stories, as are not only false, but Impossible to
be true. It Is said I did this, and that, which was impossible to be done. Ju^t
as if it should be said, that I created my Parents, or sq^ar'd the Circle.
Indeed I have read of Apollonius Tyanaeus, that he could tell at Ephesus, what
in that very hour was done at Rome; the Devil was such a Familiar to him. But
that I should speak a thing in England, whilst my Body and my Soul were both
in France, is the wildest Invention I ever heard of. It is my comfort that I
suffer the most Incredible of Slanders, which are as Innocent in one sense, as
they are criminal in another: And that I suffer for well doing, even to those
very persons, from whom I suffer. But that a Sermon of Love should procure me
more Hatred, than All the Actions of my whole Life, would seem as wonderful a
Thing, as that Elijah with water should set the green wood on fire, but that I
consider what Age we live in; And that the Fire is more common which comes from
Hell, then that which Elijah prayed down from Heaven. Besides, I know it is
part of the Chr^stians Lot, which I take in good part, and do thank God for it.

But it were well if most men would make a Covenant with their Ears, A Cav^at.
against Raisers of false R^ports.
not to listen to mere Rumors which do not bring their warrant with them. And
another Covenant with their Lips, not to utter such Rumors without all reason.
For through a defect of these two, what Calumnies have been raised upon men of
all sorts, which (with one sort or other) have found great welcome, and
entertainment? I will give you an Instance in some particulars, which are many
ways pertinent to my present Enterprise. It was dogmatically affirmed by the
whole Assembly of Divines, in a Letter which they sent to all the Protestant
Churches beyond the Seas, That the King and his party had an intent to set up
Popery, and even to extirpate the true Reformed Religion. See Biblioth. R^gia
part. 1. Sect. ^ p. 58.59. to p. 65.
And that they had not only attempted, but in great measure prevailed for the
putting thereof in execution. A thing so far from being true, that the King
protested his intentions were directly contrary, and from the Primate of Armagh
received the Sacrament upon it, solemnly wishing that that Sacrament might be
his damnation, if his heart did not join with his lips in that protestation. He
also declared the same thing to all the Transmarine Protestant Churches. Nay it
was part of his last words, the sincerity of which he also sealed with his
blood. And now you publicly confess, (as Mr. Prin had done before you in his
Signal* Memento, p. 12.) You do not believe he was a Papist, but a moderate
Protestant, and that his Conference with the Marquess of Worcester may satisfy
men for that. p. 106. By the same excess of injustice, Archbishop Bancroft,
Archbishop Laud, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Bramhal, and Doctor Cousins have been
exhibited to the people as downright Papists, though as great adversaries to
Rome, as Rome has had since the Reformation. How many others in particular,
and the Prelatists in general have been traduced, you know very well, and
Doctor Sanderson has told you with what injustice. It was not only the saying
of Doctor Bernard, Of the judgm. of the late Archbishop of Arm. p. ^61.
concerning the late Archbishop of Armagh, that some of the simpler sort
hearing of a conjunction of Popery and Prelacy, have thought they could not be
parted in him; but it was also the complaint of the Primate himself, that
exceptions were taken against his Letter, Ibid. p. 19.
as if he had thereby confirmed Papism, and Arminianism. Which yet I believe
was as far from truth, as what was said by your Adversaries of you; or by you
of Grotius, Bishop Wren, Bishop Pierce, and Doctor Tailor; Bolsec. in vita
Calvini. Pref. to Disp. against Master Tombs. Exam Hist. p. 204.
or by Bolsec of Mr. Calvin, that he was eaten up of Lice; or by the Papists of
the Waldenses, that they were Sorcerers, and Witches; or by some of Saint
Austin, that he was a Manichae^n; or by the Puritanes of Bishop Andrews, that
he was guilty of superstition; or by the same of Bishop Montague that he was
turned unto the Papists; or by Standish of Erasmus, that he denied the
Resurrection, and blasphemed Christ's miracles, as d^ne by Magic; or by
Bellarmine of the same, that he was a friend to Arianism; or by Mr. Hickman of
my^self, that the printed Doctrines of Zuinglius, etc. (who were dead and
buried before I was born) were the mere Chimaera's of my brain. I pray consider
these things, and set a guard upon your pen from this time forwards.

You say, I must be supposed to mean by a Puritan, a man that fears God,
etc. Sect. 23.]

Sect. 21. I more admire at this speech, A confident corrupting of plain words.
then at all the rest that have fallen from you; for your own conscience is my
witness, and so are all my Readers eyes, that my notion of a Puritan has been
ever agreeable with those which I have lately set before you from Bishop
Andrews, and Bishop Hall, Doctor Cleark, and Doctor Sanderson, with diverse
others beyond exception. How can you hope to be believed in what you say of
nine Oaths in a breath, and drinking healths unto the Devil, when you can
wilfully corrupt the plainest words that can be spoken? And say, I MUST be
supposed to mean a man that fears God: whereas there is not so much as any
circumstance of any the least probability that I should mean as you say; but
the contrary is as visible as the Sun at noon, that I mean such Puritanes as
have a right to that Title. Neither fearing God, nor hating covetouness;
neither seeking God's Kingdom, nor the righteousness thereof; but making a
stalking-horse of Religion, whereby to come at their carnal ends.

You say, I deviate lamentably from Catholicism, in my uncharitable censures of
the Puritanes and Presbyterians. That its no Catholic Church which cannot hold
such men as these, ^or a Catholic Disposition, that cannot embrace the^ with
that unfeigned special love that is due to Christians, Sect. 24.]

Sect. 22. Still you lamentably beat upon the very same hoof, How some
Puritanes have excommunicated themselves.
standing still a great deal faster the^ some can gallop. With unsignificant
Repetitions, naked affirmations, and want of any thing like a proof, you are
able to advance another Section concerning Puritanes and Presbyterians; not
referring to any word, which I had spoken of either; nor to any one page, where
my Censure may appear to have been uncharitable. My opinion is, you durst not
cite my words or pages; for then your foul dealing had been too vi^^ble to the
Reader. Nay then you must have written another book to some purpose; not This,
which you know is to none at all. Had you answered my Book, or any little part
of it, I must have given you a Reply. But since you still begin with me, I can
but answer. And that I can do very sufficiently, by barely denying what you
affirm without proof. But if you will fairly consult my book, you will find I
have said no other things of the Puritanes, then I cite them saying of
themselves. And are you angry with me, for believing the men upon their words?
Or are you so kind to their Rebellions, their Sa^rileges, and Murders, (all
recorded by some of themselves, from whom you know I have my proofs) as that
you have not the patience to hear them censured? I know not how you will give
me a more colorable account, unless you confess in the end (what should have
been done at the beginning) That you knew not what I had written, or thought it
best to take no notice of it. Now how can Catholicism bind any man, not to
censure such Puritanes, as were so rigidly either Scottish, or Scotized
Presbyterians? Or how can the Catholic Church hold, what will not endure to be
held? The Church of God is like a Net, in which are fish of all sorts,
excepting the violent and the slippery, which break out into the Ocean. They
who cast out their Bishops, and Jude 19.
separate themselves from the Regular way of God's worship, are (...) in St.
Paul's own notion; And T^t. 3.10.
Rejected by others, for being Ver. 11.
condemned of themselves.

The Monopolizer of Censoriousnesse no good Projecter.
Again I may ask you, why I may not be Catholic, and censure Pu^itanes, as well
as you may censure Prelatists, and yet be Catholic: Must none be censorious,
except your self? Or is it lawful for Mr. Baxter, to revile his Fathers and
Brethren for being constant in their obedience to the most persecuted Pre^epts
of Jesus Christ? And is it not lawful for Mr. Pierce, to convince the sons of
Disobed^enc^ of their impieties, when he does it by no less then their own
Hand-writings? you Sir (sooner or later) have passed your cen^ure upon all
sorts of men; (even them that draw nearest to your Religion) and will you not
allow me to censure One? Compare your self with you^ self, and tu^ne your
eyes inward, and rather repent what you have written, then continue to write
what you must repent of. Whereas you question my love to Puritanes, I wish your
love to the Prelatists were no whi^ less^. Did I not love their Souls, whose
Hypocritical Sanctity I ought to loath, I would not pray (as I do) for their
Conversion; nor would I labor (as I have done) to make them ashamed of their
Simulations. Did I not love them in my heart, I would rather suffer their
sins upon them, then suffer their hatred by my Reproves. I will never
consent, that men (whose Souls are dearer to me than all the things in this
world) shall be carnally secure in a course of sin, upon a dreadful
supposition that they are Saints, and cannot possibly fall into God's
Displeasure, so far forth as to incur a real danger of Damnation. I say I
will not consent to such a mischief; no not so much as by being silent: for He
that says, Levit. 19* 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, does also say, Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy brother, and shall not suffer sin upon him. And yet I
know as well who says, Matthew. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls before
swine. And therefore if the Puritanes shall make me know that they are such
(either by barking, or biting, or trampling my Admonitions under their feet) I
shall resolve at last, to allow them no more of my Correption; Resting
satisfied in this, Ezekiel. 33 9.
that I have freed mine own soul.

Sect. 23. Having eased your self a little of your reproaches against me, you
immediately proceed to commend your self. A strange kind of Catholic, who is
against the whole Church; yet partially cleaves to a Sect, though he condemns
it.
For you say [ You can say, and that with boldness, that you have attained to
so much impartiality in your Religion, that you would gladly cleave to any
party, how much disgraced soever, that you could perceive were in the right, --
loving all Christians of what sort soever, that may be truly called Christians,
Sect. 24.] Yet am I not able to discern by all I have read of your writings, to
what party in Christendom you either do, or can cleave; unless by your cleaving
you mean your being partial, which is a flat contradiction to your pretended
impartiality. A Presbyterian properly you cannot be, though by an usual
Catachresis I do afford you that name, for your being so very Look back on chapter
4. Sect. 4.
partial to that sort of men. How you declare against their Discipline, I have
put you in remembrance by the twelfth Section of my first Chapter. How
inconsistent you are with them in point of Doctrine, your Disputings and
Apologies, and other writings do evince. What Christians in the World do you
not justify or condemn, as present interest or passion do chance to sway? that
out of many sorts of Christians you would faign have one of your picking, is
very evident. But if I am asked what side you are wholly for, I must profess to
believe you are of none. And I can give such reasons, as I do verily think you
can never answer, which makes you appear the most partial of any man I ever met
with, for turning your Byasse, to those Abettors, who (you confess) have taken
the wrong way. Or if this were otherwise, you could not prove you were
impartial. For every Skeptic or Seeker can say as much, nay an Atheist may
plead he is not partial to any party, because he professes to join with none.
(...). Athan. (...). p. 1058. which compare with a Sheet for the Ministry, p.
11.
Which things being considered, abstain for the future from depredicating your
self, and defaming others. To what purpose is it that you publish you are a
Saint (in one Book) and (now in another) that you can boldly say you have
attained to an impartiality in your Religion, and again (in the same) that you
feel [an excellent affection] to reign within you, and that you will not
conceal the work of God upon your soul, and how your soul is inclined when you
let your prayers loose, (p. 7.) I say to what purpose does your own mouth
praise you, when (if we may take your own word at another time) you Look b^ck
on ch 4. sect 5.
cannot deserve such commendations? How unfit was the same mouth to s^eak so
bitterly of Gro^ius, as I have L^ok back on chapter 1. sect. 13.
showed you have done in another place? By your d^alings with him, and the
Episcopal Divines, I take the sense of your Conclusion to be but this, that
they alone are true Christians, whom you can love. And if you love not Grotius,
nor the Episcopal Divines, the reason is, they are no true Christians.

Sect. 24. You say, A wilf^ll Imposture, or else a Patr^n^ge of I^pi^ty.
You had rather your right hand were used as Cranmer 's, then you should have
written against Puritanes what I have done, Sect. 24.] yet still you name not a
page where I have done it, nor a word that I have spoken. Nor do you speak of
the Puritanes, of whom I spoke; or if you do, you are a Patron of impiety. If
you would not have written as I have done, against Puritanes; how much less
would I, as you, against Episcopal Divines? Have not I chosen, so well as you?
Then follow you your own (...).
course, and let me follow mine. If they were Christians in deed, whose works I
showed you out of their words, the frighted Pagan will cry out, Sit anima mea
cum Philosophis. And so perhaps some frighted Protestants, Sint animae nostrae
cum Pontificiis. But what will you say of your self, if you have written
against Puritanes, at least as sharply as I have done? I know you have not
given them that very name, but you have lashed them shrewdly to whom the word
Puritan of right belongs; which shows how little you have been scared with
that terrible saying of our Lord, Mat. 18.6. which you apply in such sort, as
if you understood not its true importance. For to rebuke men for sin, is not at
all to scandalize them, in Scripture phrase, nor in the phrase of any Scholar
who knows the English of the word Scandalum. They are rather scandalized who
have pillowes sowed under their Ezekiel. 13.18.
Armholes, who are flattered and commended, and soothed up in their sins. He
that says to the wicked, thou a^t righteous, him shall the people curse,
nations shall abhor him, Prove. 24.24. To offend a little one, in English, is
(...), in Scri^ture-Dialect. If you make men to ^in by your example, or
encourage them in sinning by your instructions, (as by instructing them to
believe, that being once Regenerate they cannot pessibly be otherwise, although
their sins should be as David's, deliberate Murder and Adul^ery, etc.) you are
truly said in such case, to offend those little ones in the faith, to
scandalize them, to gall them, to make them stumble. See Dr. Hamond hi^ learned
Treatise concerning Scandal, if you are not too haughty for my Advice.

CHAP. VI.
Of Episcopal Divines, and the Archb. of C^nt.
Sect. 1. THere is little remarkable in your next Section, but what has been
spoken to already; or what may be satisfied with very few words. You
implicitly accuse me of injustice i^ cal^ing my book A vindication of
Episcopal Divines from Mr. Baxter, Sect. 25. whereas you cannot be ignorant,
that I called my book by another name, (...). And that the words which you
mention, ^er^ only a part of the General Conten^s as fa^ as a Title Page was
fit to hold them. You might h^ve said as truly, that I called my Book A
vindicatio^ of Mr. B^xter from Mr. Barlee, for that was also one part, a^ your
eyes can witness. It Is true I said in that Book, that you spoke in general
against Episcopal Divines, But I also said in your Vin^ication, That your words
were wrested beyond your me^ning (in being applied to my particular) chapter 3. p.
100. But now that I find you so unth^nkful for my brotherly dealing, I must
tell you that my dealing was much more b^o^h^r^y th^n you Look back on chapter 1.
sect. 6. toward the end*
deserved. For when your words were so general, as to include the Bishops, the
Kings Chaplains, and other Doctors, who stay in England under the name of
Episcopal Divi^es to do the Pope the better Service; and when they were also so
particular, as to point out for Papists, as firm Protest^nts as live, Bishop
Wren, Bishop Pierce, etc. I know not how a True Protestant can miss your
Censure, if he performs the whole part of an Episcopal Divine, in so avowed a
manner as to arrive at your knowledge. Nor ca^ I think you will deny, that you
include those Prelatists, who will not approve of your Association, by allowing
a mere Presbyter the Prelatical Power to excommunicate. Which I believe will be
allowed you by no Episcopal Divine; And then (forsooth) they must all be
Papists.

You forgot your self much, when you directed me for Instruction about the
Bishop of Canterbury, to the several writings of Mr. Prin, his most exasperated
Enemy, at that time of the day, when his Eyes were not opened, as now they are.
But if you will read his Rome's Masterpiece, you will see that pious Bishop
designed to Death by the Papists (not to be revenged upon his being of their
side, you may be sure, but) because they saw him too strong an Enemy to Rome;
so far from helping on the Introduction of Popery, that they found it could
never be introduced, so long as a Primate of his Wisdom, Vigilance, Zeal to
the Protestant Religion, and the Glory of God, was permitted to enjoy both Life
and Greatness. You talk of I know not what matters of Fact, which you must
specify first, before you prove. And you must do your poor utmost to make
some proof, before you can be fit for a Confu^ation.

Sect. 2. You begin your next Section, Sequestrations misliked by their very
Ab^ttors.
I should say in a strange manner, but that it is such as you are used to, and
with which you have forced me to be acquainted. For you say [ I express with
reproach and bitterness my dislike of Ministers living on Sequestrations. And
that you perceive I do it without distinction. Sect. 26.] But you produce not
one word of reproach or bitterness, nor refer to any page, where your Reader
may try before he trusts you. Much less do you show that I express my Dislike
without Distinction. To have quoted my words had been just, but not at all for
your Interest. For then your Readers would h^ve found, that the Sea and
consider my Self-revenger, Exem. chapter 3. sect. 1. p. 69, 70.
reproachful expressions were but repeated by me from an Eminent man of your
own Tribe. Who went away with my Reproof, for having used his own party with so
much Rigor. Which yet I have since been sorry for, because he was of my
Judgment in what he spoke against Sequestra^ions; my Dislike of which i^ the
same with his. And I will say in his words, that to cast a Brother out of his
Livelihood, or to seize upon that which is another, is an unneighbourly,
unscholarly, unchristian thing. I am far from favoring any Minister, who is so
ignorant, or ungodly, as you express. And I know there is a time when
Ministers ought to be suspended ab officio and beneficio. But even then I must
say, as Mr. Barlee has done, I am for justa just, and Ecclesiastica
Ecclesiastice. It is a very good Rule in the Civil Law, Quae a judice non
legitimo, aut non legitimo modo facta sunt, ea praesumptionem habe^t contrase.
And such were our late Sequestrations, that although they were made by his
beloved long Note, I speak with the vulgar, meaning only the two Houses (as
Mr. Hickman calls them p. 45.) or rather the Remnant of the two Houses, of
which Judge Ienkins has well informed us*
Parliament, yet M. Hickman himself undertakes not in all things to acquit them.
(p. 46.) And Mr. B. did avow in his very last Book, that 'twas a way he was not
satisfied with. (p. 52.) Nay a very great part of their proceedings you your
self do disown, even in this very Section; Nay toward the end of your Book
you profess your detestation of them (p. 111.) And if you may detest what you
have got so much by, much more may I who have lost no less. Not to speak of
their losses, who have been very dear to me, and for whose losses I was
afflicted, when (I thank God for it) I was not afflicted for mine own; knowing
how, and for what, and from what sort of men my sufferings came. Sequestrations
are scandalous and sinful things, when they proceed, and are inflicted, either
a non-Iudice, or in non-Reum, or modo non debito or in f^^em non rectum. The
particular consideration of which four things, applied to all the
Sequestrations which have happened within these eighteen years, would
administer matter for a very just volume, had I time sufficient for such a
work. Yet should I have spoken more largely then now I shall, (to give you that
information which you particularly desire) were I not told of an able
Gentleman, who has sent a Treatise unto the Press upon this one subject, and
addressed it in particular to all your wants.

Sect. 3. Whereas you say [ You are d^sirous to be better informed in this
thing, Sufficient Information for such as w^nt and desire it.
to avoid much guilt, which else you may and do incur, if you be mistaken,
sect. 26.] I have two or three things to return unto you. First, that as I am
glad of your good desire, so I shall also be sorry if you are never the better
for my Assistance. Next, for sufficient Information, I had thought it enough
that you knew the tenth Precept, Non Concupisces, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house (much less take it into possession, with all the good land
that lies about it) nor any thing that is thy neigebour's, (much less All that
is thy Neighbor's.) Of the Fundamental Laws of this land, and the established
Canons of the Church, I thought you had a sufficient knowledge. If not, you may
when you please. Read but the Works of Judge Ienkins, whom God preserve from
all Evil, and reward at last with a Crown of Righteousness. Read Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right. And compare with both, You may see a Copy of this in
Biblioth. Reg. part 1. ^ect. 4. number. 10. p. 324.
The Proclamation against the oppression of the Clergy by the Insurrection of
factious and Schismatic persons into their Cures, etc. And compare with all
Three The Declaration of the Lord General and his Counsel of Officers, showing
the Grounds and Reasons for the Dissolution of the long Parliament, 1653.You
will find in the three former [ That the Church, amonst others, has these
Privileges; that regularly no Ecclesiastical Possessions can be extended,
separated, or sequestered, but by the Ordinary. That Distresses may not be taken
of Lands wherewith Churches have been anciently endowed, and that Churches
presentative cannot be filled, and the lawful Incumbent thereof removed, but
by the Ordinary; nor the Cure of the Incumbents served by Curates, Lecturers,
or others, but by their own Appointment; or in their defect, by the Appointment
of the Ordinary. Nor are any subjects of the Laity, by the Common Laws of this
Realm, capable to take or receive Tithes (which are the Portion of the Clergy)
unless by Demise from Them, or such as are approp^iate, or made Lay-fee, etc.
In the 28 year of King Edward the third it was declared and enacted by
Authority of Parliament, (which is also ratified in the Petition of Right) That
no man of whatsoever estate or condition be put out of his Land, or Tenements,
nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death, without being
brought to answer by due Process of Law. So by the Statute called [ The Great
Charter of the Liberties of Engl.] it is declared and enacted, That no Freeman
may be taken or imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or
his free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but
by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, etc. Note
that these are such Laws as are still in force by all confessions; they who
have broken them the most, cannot pretend they have been repealed. You cannot
object your Scottish Covenant; for you have written Plain S^r. proof of Infants
Chapter mem. p. 123. which compare with 120, 121, 122. and with p. 274. and with
your A^en. to Aphor. p. 107.
against That. And if you had not, your case were worse. The Remnant of the two
Houses you cannot urge, for the very same reasons, and many more. Nay since the
writing of these words, those very Houses which did obtrude you upon another
man's Living (or Freehold) do now implicitly stand charged with the Sin of
Sacrilege, as well by your self, as by Mr. Vines; as may be seen by his Five
Disp. of Chapter Gov. and Worsh. p. 350.349.
Letter which you have printed, and by your words thereupon, in the page going
before it. From hence consider very sadly, whether they who transgressed so
much in one thing, do not deserve your suspicion in many others. And now I
will hope, you are sufficiently informed: if you are not, you shall be before I
leave you.

Guilty men must keep their secrets, or not be angry that they are known.
But by the way let me tell you, that you were never in my Thoughts, when I
expressed my Dislike of Sequestrations. I never knew you had any, until you
told me: Nor had I known it to this hour, had you but kept your own
counsel. So little Reason had you to use me with so much Bitterness and
Virulence in diverse Books. But worser dealing then from your self (though not
in print) I have h^d from a Minister in this very County, of whose
Sequestration I was as ignorant, as yet I am of his Face. I kno^ him by nothing
but his Injuries, and his is it Nam^, which I s^all therefore in Charity forbear
to publish. I shot but at Rovers; and because by accident he was hit, he was as
angry with the Arrow, as if it had been its own Archer, and vainly concluded
that he was aimed at, when (the very truth is) he only stood in Ha^ms way.
These things put me in mind of a certain Proverb, which I heard a while since
from a worthy man, That it is dangerous speaking of a Halter in a jealous man's
House, whose Father was hanged.

Sect. 4. You proceed to tell me, A sad plea for I^j^^tice from an opinion that
it is good.
You must confess it your opinion that the thing is lawful, and that you take
it for one of the best things you can do, to help to cast out a bad Minister,
and to get a better in the place, so that you prefer it as a work of mercy
before much sacrifice. Section 26.] Thus you say what you think (and whether
you think as you say, God only knows.) But what Transgressor in the world
may not say the same Thing? Will you do that thing upon bare opinion that it
is good, when the learned part of the Nation profess a Knowledge that it is
evil? Let the most learned Dr. Sanderson be heard to speak in this matter, (as
exact a Casuist as you can likely name any) and judge by that one person how
many thousands and millions will vote against you, It should suffice to deterr
you from taking that which is another, that the lawfulness of it is still in
controversy; and even many of your way are (in this particular) of ours,
blessing God with great joy, that they have never had the least finger in what
you boast of. Besides you must grant, that it may be possibly a Sin to
deprive a man of his Freehold; whereas not to deprive him, can be no Sin at
all. And whilst you call it your Formido est de Intrinseca ratione Opinionis;
quippe cui potest subesse dubium.
opinion that you are right, you acknowledg^ it possible you may be wrong. From
whence it also must needs proceed, that you profess to be desirous to ^e b^tter
informed. But then you should lay down the stake, until you have found whose
reasons win. Not dispossess your Brother first, and then debate whether the
action is right, or wrong. That has too much affinity with Hallifax Law. Again
consider how sad an Argument from Opinion to Practice some men have drawn; that
whilst your own is no other, you may suspect it. The cursed Jews had an John
16.2.
opinion, that in murdering Christ's Messengers they did God service. Having
also an opinion, that they were very bad Ministers. But certainly one Injury is
no excuse for another. And since I 2 Cor. 12.14.
seek not yours, but you (which I also do at your Entreaty) be not offended if
I put the case home. Can you take it for one of the best works you can do, to
despoile a Brother of his lawful possession, and then (over and above) to call
him a bad man, thereby to justify, or countenance the Depraedation? Was Mr.
Dance a bad man? It Is more then all my inquiries could yet discover. He has a
better Report then you can comfortably believe. And is not his That Benefice
you now possess? Or if he is a bad man, Are you better then He, who have
confessed your own See your Disp 5. of Sacr. p. 484.
Hypocrisy, as well as Pride, whilst sincerity and meekness are most
commended in M. Dance? How many hundreds are cast* out from their several
Places in the Church, who must be granted (even by you) to be exceedingly good
men, at least exceedingly better, then those that are thrust into their Rooms?
Who is now in the Canonry of Christ-Church, out of which Dr. Sanderson was
rudely cast? Or who has the Parsonage of Penshurst in his possession, out of
which D. Hammond was long since thrown? You would blush if I should tell you
what change is made. I do not instance in these two, as being better then all
others (I cannot be so injurious to all their Equals) but because I think you
may know them. Judge by these of the rest; which I will also name, if you
desire it. But they would fill up too many sheets to be writ at this time. And
as large as you may think me, I strive for brevity and speed. Let me ask
therefore in short, If M. Baxter in some respects is a better man then some of
his Brethren (who are not fit for any Livings, and yet are put into other men's)
why not in all things, as well as some? Why is he not better then his Brethren,
in absteyning from the Enjoyment of that Revenue, which the Law of the Land
has as truly and solidly made Another's, as any Lay-man's Freehold is his?
Sir, I wish you so well, that I would have you as (...), Luke 1.6.
blameless as good old Zachary: I would not have it in my power, to say an
unpleasant thing to you: I long to see you a Bright Example of so necessary a
Duty as Restitution. Hundreds may follow, if such a man will but lead. And when
Righteousness shall flow as a mighty stream, it will probably carry in the same
channel the most desiderated Blessings of Peace and Union. We who have Livings
of our own will most readily resign them on that condition; and intercede with
our Patrons, that such as give back their Brethren's may be presented. All
shall be theirs (by my consent) who most desire to have All, if they will do us
but the favor to take it fairly. I would not wish any thing from them, except
their Sins. I could wish the Lovers of this world had as much of it as they
could wish, could I but have any assurance that they would fa^e never the worse
in a world to come. Nor should I care by what courses a man grows rich, if
Riches could do him any good in the day of wrath. Prove. 11.4*
Riches restored when ill gotten, I know to be profitable for ever, to those
that want them for a season by such good means. Which strongly tempts me to
wish, that I were just in your case (that is to say, In a Sequestration) that
so I might be in a capacity of making an eminent Restitution, and of showing
the way unto my Brethren by that Example. Remember what you say of Tithes, when
the Quakers accuse you of being covetous; [ The same Law of the Land that makes
the Nine parts Theirs does make the Tenth Ours. If we have no Title to the
Tenth, they have none to the rest.] The same Law of the Land is as good an
Argument against you in the mouth of a Prelatist, as it can be in your mouth
against the Quakers. And what was done by one Ordinance against the Lands of
the Bishops, Deans and Chapters, etc. may as well be done against Tithes by some
other Ordinance or Order, the Law of the Land being as valid in one case as in
another. If Mr. Dance may have a Trial by the Law of the Land, I know not how
you can keep his Living.

Sequ^strations disowned by their Defender.
Sect. 5. But you proceed to tell me, That for the casting out of able,
faithful, godly Ministers, because they are Prelaticall, Presbyteriall,
Independent, Arminians, or interested in the Civil Differences, this you
utterly disown Sect. 26.]

If you speak in good earnest, how then can you justify the casting out any,
by any means, unless by that very Law, by which it is granted they stood
possessed? Will you say in your defense that the Law is now changed, and that
the Committees for Ejection can do the same things now, which only the Bishops
and their Officers could do before? But your Concession disinables you from
saying This: For then as many as were concerned in the civil Differences, as
opposing this new Law, might be justly cast out by your good leave, which you
profess notwithstanding, that you do utterly disown. Nay then even your self
must be acknowledged by you self, to be justly expulsible from the Living which
you possess, for your disowning and detesting (and that in print) the several
Ordinances and Actions of Them that thrust you into your Living. You cannot
therefore say that the Law is changed: and being not able to say that, you must
confess your Sequestration to be illegal: your Predecessor being not ejected,
nor you succeeding into his Place by the Law of the Land, which is still in
force. And which I have made it appear, you unavoidably confess: I therefore
give you my solemn Thanks, for so publicly disowning all those Parliamentary
proceedings against a multitude of as learned and as godly Protestant Divines
(called common^y Prelaticall) as the Ch^istian World has ever had since the
Times of Luther. Not only those holy and learned Fathers of the Church, whom
you may possibly call Arminian, but even those who have most of your own
Applause (as Bishop Morton, Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant, Bishop Prideaux,
Doctor Oldsworth, Doctor Sanderson, and so the rest) have been all cast out, as
the Dung of the Earth, for no imaginable reason, but the Civil Differences you
speak of. None were ever ejected for being merely Presbyterial, that I can
think on. It having been quite another thing, for which Dr. Reynolds was so
suddenly cast out of Christ-Church. How Independents may have suffered for
being sus^ected to be Arminians, you may guess by the partial and shameful
dealings of the Triers, whom Mr. Goodwin has displayed in his book on that
subject. And had it not been for an Army which put a Hook into their Nostrils,
the Presbyterians (in all likelihood) had ruined All.

Sect. 6. You tell me further, Accusations are of no value, when only general,
and without proof.
that the casting out of the utterly insusficient, ungodly, unfaithful,
scandalous, or any that do more harm then good, you take to be one of the most
pious and charitable works, (supposing a better put in the place) that you can
put your hand to, sect. 26.] But who (by name) are the ungodly, and all the
rest of the ugly things, which here you call them in a breath? Mean you the
Readers of Common Prayer, the Sons of Order and Obedience, who stand fast to
their Principles in time of trial, and rather then be perjured, will gladly
perish? Were I pleased to recriminate, perhaps I could make your ears tingle.
But this is only to inveigh against the Prelatists in general, as the Quakers
do against Presbyterians; and by such practices as these, you justify the
Quakers against your selves. When you read me writing against the Puritanes,
you read my evidences, and reasons, and undeniable proofs, and that from
matters of fact which themselves have put upon Record. Consider your own words
in their natural consequence; and then suppose that Anabaptists should prevail
as much by the sword against your party, as yours has done against Episcopal
Divines; Casting you all out of the Livings, of which at present you are
possessed; and putting in others of their persuasion. Would they not plead for so
doing, as you for the things that you have done? Would they not say that they
had cast out the insufficient, and the ungodly, and put better into their
places? and that this was one of the most pious works that they could possibly
put their hands to? Did not the Puritanes in Saxony, who threw down Oratories
and Churches, and Churchmen too, as Antichristian, call themselves the New
Jerusalem, A holy people sent from God to deliver his Saints out of Egypt, the
spi^itual Egypt of Superstition? Did they not enter into a League of
Association, to throw down all Scepters at the feet of Christ, that themselves,
being the meek ones, might inherit the earth? And did they not begin with
greater appearances of Godliness then the men of your party have yet afforded?
Or did you ever yet read of any Persecutors in Christendom, who oppressed the
just as they were just, and not rather under the notion of the unfaithful and
the ungodly, that so they might seem to set their hands to a pious work? Nay
did not the Papists say the same for their casting out the Protestants in the
Valleys of Piemont, and the Bohemian Churches in the Kingdom of Poland, which
you (who profess to be Catholic) do now allege for the ruining of English
Protestants? It is so easy to find a staff for the beating of a Dog, and to
reproach those persons, who are designed for a Rejection, that I wonder you can
write at so low a rate.

A^ ill m^n may have a good title to his Estate, and must not be wronged for
being u^^ighteous.
Again, consider your own Principle: you think you cannot do better then to
remove a bad man, that a better may come into his place. As if the worst of men
might not have right unto the greatest Estate or Possession, whilst the best
have no right, unle^s it be unto the least. The veriest Atheist in the world
may lawfully come by an Estate, whether by gift, or purchase, or inheritance;
whilst godly Lazarus must thankfully enjoy his scarceness, and be content with
those crumbs which daily fall from the rich man's table. He must not bid Dives
come out of his House, and deliver up his purple, Luc. 16, 19, 20, 21.
because they both are too good for so great a Sinner, but meekly stand or lie
down at the Great man's Door. And therefore admitting they were ungodly, whom
you have helped to cast out, you should have turned them out of their Rights,
before you had meddled with their Possessions. Bishop Hall has told you that
God loves Adverbs better then Adjectives, the Been better then the Bonum: Good
Deeds may be abominable, if they are not well done. I am as willing as any
other, that every scandalous Minister should be made to reform, or to remove.
But if it must come to a removal, let his punishment be legal: let him enjoy
the Law whilst he endures it. For even a Murderer, or a Thief has certain
Privileges and Rights, both in the manner of his Trial, and Execution. It is
an intolerable mistake, to think the wicked cannot be wronged, because they
really deserve to be soundly punished. And the mistake is no less, to think a
man can be godly who wrongs the wicked: If the Devil himself has any Dues, the
Proverb tells us we must allow them; And we know there is a case wherein we may
deal with him unjustly.

Again, Evil must not be done in pretense of good ends. Romans 3.8.
let us take another view of your words. If you cast out the bad, and not by
Law, your putting in of a better will nothing help you: for you must not do any
evil that any good may come of it. God has much a better way to be served then
so; Ecclus. 15.12.
he has not the least need of an unrighteous man, or of any one act of his
unrighteousness. Were it lawful to perpetrate an evil act to a good end, we
might laudably do wrong, and defraud our Brethren, that (like the true penitent
Zachaeus) we might restore fourfold. This indeed would be as charitable and as
pious an injury (if an injury can be such) as a man can set his Heart or his
Hand unto: for we should make them the richer for having robbed them. And out
of the evil which we do, it is but just that we should draw the utmost good
that we are able; which makes it customary to me, whenever I speak of
Repentance, to press as hard as may be for Restitution: a point of greater
consideration, then some may imagine till they are told. For if we would
Covenant with our Hearts, (and be severe Covenant-keepers) to restore no less
then fourfold to every man whom we have injured, or possibly shall injure from
thi^ time forward, our very fear of being Banckrupt would keep us honest. And
such is the crookedness of our nature, (as we have made it) that we had need
make use of some moral Arts, whereby to keep it in some due straitness.

Sect. 7. This I say in Intuition of your very next words, to wit [ that if you
be mistaken in this, He who crave^ help must have the patience to receive it.
you should be glad of my help for your conviction; for you are still going on
in the guilt. Sect. 26.] This is now the third time, that you have called for
my assistance, and given me encouragement in my attempt. God forbid I should
refuse you my best endeavors of conviction, or dare to dawb with untemper'd
mortar; especially when you urge me to so much Freedom. And indeed, we
Shepherds have extreme great need of one another, we are so apt to go astray
into richer Pastures then our own. David was a Prophet, as well as a Prince;
yet Nathan was fain to be sent to David, one Prophet unto another, nay a lesser
Prophet unto a greater, and to rouse him out of his Sin with a downright
form of Reprehension, 2 Samuel 12.7.
Tu es homo, Thou art the man. Had I begun thus with you, Sir, you might have
called it my Rudeness, not my Faithfulness to your Soul. But it happily
falls out, that you have discovered your self to me, when I had not the power
to discover your self unto your self. You have said in effect, Ego sum homo,
I am the man. And since you publicly avow, you will be glad of my help, I hope
you will not be angry that I have helped you.

The shamefulnesse of Mr. White's Centuries.
Sect. 8. Whereas you say, You need not go to Mr. White 's Centuries to be
acquainted with the qualities of the ejected, Section 26.] I must show you your
Error before I go a step farther. You speak of Centuries in the plural,
whereas indeed there was but one: And that so scandalous a Pamphlet, that its
Author was ashamed to pursue his Thoughts of any other. It was the Boast of Mr.
White (as I was told by one, who will be as likely to tell you of it) that he
and his had ejected 8000 Churchmen in four or five years. And if one hundred
of eight thousand had been as really scandalous, as that matchless Pasquiller
was pleased to make them, it had not been so strange a thing, as that One of
the Twelve should be a Devil, one hundred in eight-score hundred is exceedingly
less then one in twelve. But Mr. Fuller himself, however partial to your
party, (as our excellent Doctor Heylin has made apparent) does take himself
up with a kind of doubt, that there might want sufficient proof to convict them
of that they were accused of: and indeed there was wanting a sufficiency of
proof, See Exam. Hist. p. 256.
no witness coming in upon Oath to make good the Charge. So that the utmost of
that performance was but to treasure up wrath against the Day of wr^th, and to
make new sport for the Protestants Enemies of Rome, who did not spare to look
upon that whole Business, as on an act of Divine Retaliation, in turning so
many of the regul^r and Orthodox Clegy out of their Rights, by the violent
hands of our new Reformers, under color of some enormities of which they were
forged to have been guilty; as the Monks and Friars heretofore were turned out
of their Cells, with like Inhumanity (say the Papists) by those that founded
our Reformation.

But now suppose it were very true, Worse were put into Livings then the worst
that were put out.
that many Episcopal Divines had been as scandalous Livers, as many more
Presbyterians are known to be, they should have had a legal Trial, and have
been legally divested of their Preferments, nor should men more scandalous have
been commonly thrust into their places. Much less should many swearing and
illiterate Presbyterians have been rewarded with these spoils, which had been
taken from pious and learned men. How many Centuries might be made of debauched
creatures, who were not only not punished, but very carefully preserved, and
advanced also, because they could cotton with the Times, and preach the people
to Disobedience? Mr. Fuller himself has paid you home with one Truth, That his
Majesty then at Oxf. would not give his consent, that such a Book should be
written of the vicious lives of some Parliament Ministers, when such a thing
was presented to him. Whereby you see that vast Difference betwixt the Spirit
of Majesty, and the impotent spleen of Mr. White.

Sect, 9. You next go on to accuse whole Countries, out of which the Ejected
must all be one of your two Heads, and the best of them profane, Unseasonable
bitterness to the Protestants, from one who would not befriend the Papists.
and yet very few esc^p'd Ejection. Have you not written against Popery to very
good purpose, against which your very sh^rpest Discharge was this, That you
knew not hardly any Papist, but what was Ignorant or Scandalous, or some way
ill? Now behold what you have done, even taken away the force of that your
Argument against the Papists, by saying the same and somewhat worse of the
Protestant Ministers here in England, who were violently cast out of their
Livings, and that by men of their own Profession. Some (you say) never
preached, (and if others had never preached, the Church of God had been happier
then she has been by their preaching for Schism and Bloodshed) but read the
Book of Common Prayer; (and was not that better then some of your preaching, if
you preach no better then you have printed, as you are said to print little but
what you preach?) Some (you say) preached worse then they that were never
called preachers. (How much worse did they preach, who preached against their
own Governors, and blowed the coals of Sedition into a conquering Flame?) You
say, and say only, That some understood not the Catechism, or Creed. (But did
they better understand it, who dreamed themselves able to make a better? To
depart from such Evil is understanding. Job 28.28.) You say that many of them
lived more in the Alehouse then in the Church, and used to lead their people in
Drunkenness, Cursing, Swearing, Quarrelling, and other ungodly Practices, etc.
And thus you pour out your passion to a considerable part of your Sect. 26.

The Indefinite Accuser brought to his trial by some particulars.
But now it comes to my turn to propose a few things to your consideration.
First, did the men of your party cast out none but such as these? Or was it for
such things as these, that any Complier was ever ejected, who would but take
the Negative Oath, the Scottish Covenant, rail against the King and Bishops,
cry [ Curse ye Meroz] or raise up good store of loan upon public Faith? But
let us come to some particulars, which may put your Generals out of
countenance. I will but give you a Specimen in several kinds. Did Bishop Hall
never preach? or Bishop Duppa pre^ch worse then they that were never called
Preachers? Did not Bishop Davenant understand his Catechism? nor Bishop Morton
his Creed? yet how were They spoiled of their Estates, and clapped up Prisoners
in the Note, that of the 12. Bishops who were voted to the Tower, Bishop Morton
and B. Hall at least were two.
Tower, whilst the most ignorant and the most scandalous had both their
Livelyhoods and Liberties indulged to them? Of those that preached in the Great
City, the first occurring to my mind were Doctor Holdsworth, D. Howel, Doctor
Hacket, Doctor Heywood, Doctor Westfield, Doctor Walton, Doctor Featly, and
Doctor Rives; Doctor Brough, Doctor Marsh, Mr. Shute, Mr. Hall, and besides,
the Reverend D. Fuller, now Dean of Durham; since the naming of whom I think of
the Reverend Mr. Udall. These did not live more in the Alehouse then in the
Church: The Fame of their Piety and their Learning is long since gone
throughout the Churches: yet Mr. Shute was molested and vexed to death, and
denied a Funeral Sermon to be preached by Doctor Holdsworth as he desired.
Doctor Holdsworth was cast out of his Mastership in Cambridge, sequestered from
his Benefice in the City of London, a long time imprisoned at Ely House, and
the Tower. Doctor Walton (who has put forth the late Biblia Polyglotta) was
not only sequestered, but assaulted also, and plundered, and forced to fly.
Doctor Rives, Doctor Howel, Doctor Hacket, and Mr. Hall, were sequestered and
plundered, and forced to fly for their lives. Doctor Marsh was sequestered and
made to die in remote parts. Doctor Brough was plundered as well as s^questred,
his Wife and Children turned out of doors, and his Wife struck dead with grief.
Doctor Westfield was sequestered, abused in the streets, and forced to fly.
Doctor Featly was sequestered and plundered, and died a Prisoner. Doctor Fuller
was sequestered and plundered, and withal imprisoned at Ely House. Mr. Udal was
not only sequestered himself, but his bedridden wife was also cast out of doors,
and inhumanely left in the open streets. Doctor Heywood was sequestered, and
tossed from prison to prison, put in the Counter, Ely House, and the Ships, his
Wife and Children turned out of doors. Could the Ejection of a few scandalous,
unlearned men (supposing them really such, and regularly ejected) have made
amends for such Riots, as were committed upon men of so exceeding great worth?
Go from the City into the Country, and you will find the case the very same:
Such venerable persons as Doctor Gillingham, Doctor Hintchman, Doctor Mason,
and Doctor Rauleigh, Mr. Sudberie, Mr. Threscross, Mr. Simmons, and Mr.
Farrington, and a very great multitude of the like, (whom nothing but want of
Time and love of Brevity does make me forbear to reckon further) were used like
Dunces and Drunkards (by your Reformers) though powerful Preachers, and pious
Men; men so eminent for learning, and so exemplary for life, that it is
scandalous to be safe, when such men suffer as Malefactors. To let you see
briefly what it was, by which they were qualified for Ruin, I will tell you a
story of Mr. Simmons, the most exemplary Pastor of Rayn in Essex, who being
sent for up to the House of Commons by a Pursevant, was told, That being an
honest man, he did more prejudice to the good cause in hand then a hundred
Knaves, and therefore would suffer accordingly. So he did in great plenty his
whole life after. And who should be sent into his place but a scandalous
Weaver, who cannot seemingly be named? Do but read that sober and useful Book,
entitled Angliae Ruina, and then you will be likely to change your style. If
none had been thrown out of Oxford, but Doctor Sheldon, Doctor Mansell, Doctor
Sanderson, Doctor Hammond; or none out of Cambridge, but Doctor Lany, Doctor
Brownrigg, Doctor Cosins, and Doctor Collins, Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Gunning, Mr.
Oley, and Mr. Barrow, no excuse could have been made for so great a Dishonor
to Religion. See Angliae Ruina, ^r Mercurius Rustic.
But above all, let me commend a famous passage to your remembrance. Doctor
Stern, Doctor Martin, Doctor Beale, men of eminent Integrity, exemplary Lives;
and exceeding great Learning, and Heads of several Colleges in the University
of Cambridge, were carried away Captives from thence to London, there thrust up
into the Tower, thence removed to another prison; They often petitioned to be
heard, and br^^ght to Judgment, but could not obtain either Liberty, or
Trial. After almost a years imprisonment, they were by order from the Houses
put all on shipboard; (it was upon Friday Aug. 11.1643.) No sooner came they
to the ship called The prosperous Sayler, but straight they were put under
Hatches, where the Decks were so low, as that they could not stand upright, and
yet were denied stools to sit on, yea and a burden of straw whereon to lie.
There were crowded up in that little Vessel no less then 80 Prisoners of
Quality. Where that they might stifle one another, the very Augur-holes and
Inlets of any fresh Air were very carefully stopped up. And what became of them
after I have not heard. But let these things serve to make up my first
consideration.

Secondly, Because you would make the world believe, that you have not only
made a change, but a Reformation, (worth more, A signal Confession That what is
called a Reformati^^ was but a ch^nge unto the worse.
you may be sure, then all the Blood of the Christians which has been poured
upon the earth, or then all the money which has been spent, or then the
Widows and Orphans which have been made, or then the Consciences and Souls
which have been ship-wrackt) I shall convince you of the contrary by the
public Confession of your own party, and by your own confession in particular.
First the most eminent of your Brethren have unanimously confessed to all the
world. See the Testimony to the Truth of J.C. subscribed by the Ministers
within the Province of Land.
That in stead of true Piety and Power of godliness, they had opened the very
floodgates to all Impiety and Profaneness; and that after they had removed the
Prelatical yoke from their shoulders by their covenanted endeavors, there was
a rueful, p. 30.
deplorable and deformed face of the affairs of Religion -- swarming with
noysom Errors, P. 29.
Heresies and Blasphemies in stead of Faith and Truth; P. 30.
torn in pieces with destructive Schisms, P. 26.
Separations, Divisions and Subdivisions, in stead of Unity and Uniformity. P.
31.
That in stead of a Reformation, they might say with sighs, what their Enemies
said in scorn, they had a Deformation in Religion; and in stead of extirpation
of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc. they had an impudent and general
inundation of all those Evils.] Can you possibly have more (Sir) against the
change in the Church, then here is publicly attested by them that made it?
There were no such things in the Bishops times; nay none such could be. Gods
Enclosure was then so mounded wi^h a Hedge of Discipline and Order; and even
the Hedge was so fenced with a double Wall of Law and Canon, that either no
unclean Beasts could enter in, or if they did, they were soon cast out and
impounded.. Our Savior noted him for a Fool, who should begin to build what he
could not finish. What then is He, who pulls down what is built, that he may
build it up in a better Frame, when he is not assured he shall be able to
begin, much less to finish his new Design? You now profess D^sp. of Chapter Gov.
and Worship. p. 275. etc.
you are all for Bishops, but when you had them, you would have none. How very
little of your Presbytery had you erected, when (blessed be God) you were
restrained by better men then your selves? And yet your Brethren have confessed
a good Confession, (they say they do it with Sighs, I would it were with
Sincerity) that in stead of Reformation, (which was fairly promised unto the
people) a Deformation in Religion is most conspicuous. Agreeable to this, See
your Pl. Scr. Pr. of Inf. Chapter Memb. and Bapt. Edit. 1. p. 174.
I find you saying to Mr. Tombs [ That Satan in these times has transformed
himself into an Angel of Light (Is the Devil himself turned Puritan?) And his
servants into Ministers of light, and has deceived men so far, that there is
scarce an Error so vile, but is pretended to proceed from Glorious light. I see
also that this Cancer is a fretting and growing evil. -- Note that this you
speak of these men whom you call Mr. Tombs his Brethren, who were at first
against nothing but Inf. Bapt.
Some are zealously preaching against the Godhe^d of Christ; and some of them
are grown so far, that the Parliament is fain to make an Act lately against them
that call themselves God, and that say, Whoredom, Murder, etc. are no sins, but
he is likest God that commits them, etc. -- I hope their zeal will at last
be raised a little, (you speak this of your own Parliament) to befriend Christ
the Mediator, as well as God the Creator; And to put in one Clause against them
that shall deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, or deny his Godhead, or that
make a scorn of him openly, or that prefer Mahomet before him, or that call the
Scripture a bundle of Lies, etc. I hope at last they will not only honor the
Father, but kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and they perish in the way.]

Now Sir, Presbyterian Confessions to the advantage of the Prelatists^
consider what you have said, (and printed in the year 1651.) in recounting
these Fruits of your Reformation. Consider what you say of your very Parliament.
You hope their zeal will at last be raised, (as is till then it had not been,)
and at last be raised a little, (as if till then it were none at all) and to
befriend Christ the Mediator, (as if they wanted even a zeal for Christianity
it self.) And you hope at last they will honor the Son too, (as if till then
they had honored the Father only.) Now this being compared with your other
Confessions, Ibid p. 120.
That many things in the Common Prayer, and Rubric, and Canons of the Church,
were Excellent and Necessary, and therefore unjustly laid down; P. 123.
That plain Duties were wiped out, and the Directory more defective then the
Common Prayer; That those [excellent] things were taken from us which we were
in actual possession of, P. 123.
for that the substance of these was in the Common Pr. That you have cause to
repent of your National Covenant, as containing in it things Political and
Controversiall; (for this you know is the sum of what you say in those pages,
wherein a man would have thought you somewhat Prelatically affected;) Methinks
you should easily be persuaded to lay aside your Vatinian hatred of the
Episcopal Divines, and allow them to be constant unwavering men. If there were
nothing else with me to make me love mine own P^inciples, The Notable Mixtures
in your Books would force me to it.

Thirdly, The National Cov. confessed faulty.
Consider what you have said, as touching Episcopacy in the National Covenant,
that it is one of the smaller and controvertible points; Ibid. p. 121.
And that you would not have such a Coven rashly imposed upon the Churches. Yet
you know very well, both by whom it was taken, and by whom it was imposed, and
what they suffered who did refuse it. 'Twas not for swearing, (as you
pretended) that men were cast out of their Livings, but chiefly because they
would not swear. And now your self have well absolved them, when it was said by
Cov. with Narrative. p. 12
Mr. Nigh, (whom I need but name, Caetera Fama dabit,) That the National
Covenant was such an Oath, as for Matter, Persons, and other Circumstances, the
like has not been in any Age or Oath we read of in sacred or humane Stories:
his meaning certainly should have been, That it is absolutely the worst that
ever was. For if he meant it was the best (even the best we read of in sacred
stories) the man was blasphemous beyond Example. And however I do not doubt,
but that some Prelatists in judgment were Anti-prelatists in practice, by
either quarrelling, or cursing, like any Puritanes; and that some Drunkards
might be Episcopal, as well a^ others Presbyterian; yet I conceive you must
yield, that to impose such a Covenant is a greater Sin then to be drunk. And
let this suffice to have been spoken to your indefinite Accusations.

A strange way of arguing in the behalf of Cruelty.
Sect. 10. To the rest of your Section (as being but a Tautology) I shall
return in fewer words. [ You think it a charity to Souls, and honor to Christ,
and the Church, and Gospel, to cast out these men till they be reformed. And
your reason is, Because you are a Christian, and believe there is a God. Sect.
26.] A very fine Argument. Because Mr. Baxter is a Christian, he must be a
Ruler and a Judge, and cast out men (who are his Equals at least) from their
undoubted possessions, as well as his Bishops and Superiors, whom God has set
over him. And who was ever sequestered from his Parsonage, or Prebendary, or
Fellowship, or the like, until the time of his Reformation? There was an
eminent person cast out of his place for once not taking the Engagement, when
yet the taking of it Twice was not sufficient to cast him in. Reform, or not
Reform, a man is sequestered durante vit a. And so you speak of Sequestrations;
not as they are, but as they should be, in your Opinion.

^s consequence subversive to all humane Society.
Your reason why others more fit must be put in their Places and have the
maintenance, is, because the maintenance is for the Ministry, etc. Sect. 26.]
But how comes the fifth part to be allotted for the Owner who is ejected? If he
was an usurper, why is he gratified so far? if no usurper, it is his Right. And
how does such a man, by his supposed viciousness lose his Right to the
maintenance which once he had? Does any Landlord, by being a Swearer or a
Drunkard, eo ipso cease to have a right unto his Manor, or his Rents? Consider
well to what this tends. Let a man live never so warily, yet if he is rich he
shall be guilty; though if he is poor enough to be safe, he may pass for an
innocent, or godly man. I am so weary of this stuff, that I will hasten to a
Conclusion. For until you can take away a right, all you say is worth nothing.
Your saying that a man's viciousness does make him cease to have a Right, is
very equivocal; and being taken in the most obvious sense, implies an Error
extremely dangerous. For it tends to the subversion of all Humane Society.
Every man being so vicious, as to lose his right to an estate, in the judgment
of such Neighbors as are willing and able to take it from him. And since you
frequently desire to be better informed (implying you want information, Aliud
est de possession is justitia agere, aliud de personae. -- Est hoc inter ea,
quae in Wicl^fo damnata sunt; and recte sane. Nam si electi ad eas res, quas
homines rejecti possident, jus nunc habent, sequitur, ut ea^ res vindicare
possint. Grot. Discuss. p. 93.
in as much as you desire it) you must be taught to distinguish between the
justice of a Person, and the justice of a Possession. He is no just person who
does not truly serve God; yet a just Possessor of those Things, which he holds
by a Title the Laws approve of. The confounding of which things, Grotius tells
you, was rightly condemned in Wickliff. For if the Vessels of Election have a
right to those things which the Reprobates have in their possession, it
follows that the Elect may challenge all as their portion. But then the
strongest Arm, and the longest Sword will be sure to judge, and to state the
Difference. The weakest, and the most plunderable, will ever pass for the
vicious, and so for the reprobated party, who cease from having right to the
Creature Comforts, if yet they may be said to have ever had it. For toward the
close of your Paragraph

Sect. 11. You profess to think (a strange thing) That so long as the
fore-described men did keep their Church-maintenance, Concerning Usurpers and
Restitution.
they were usurpers before God; and therefore that they are bound, if possible,
to make restitution of all the Ti^hes or other maintenance that ever they
received (while they were such) as truly as if they had broke men's houses for
it, or robbed them by the high way. Sec. 26.] This does prompt me to a Dilemma
concerning your own Predecessor, whose sequestered Freehold you have possessed
for some years. He was one of your fore-described men, or he was not. If he
was, it must be proved, before he can lawfully be condemned: If he was not,
with what Conscience can you approve by your practice, what in diverse pages you
have detested with your Pen? After the utmost enquiry I have been able to make,
I hear a much better Character of your ejected Predecessor then of your self.
But now supposing him to be one of your foredescribed men, I am to ask you this
question. To whom must he make that Restitution of which you speak, for all the
years during which he enjoyed his Benefice? You, who lay the Obligation as far
as it is possible, (and so by consequence as far as his present fifth part at
least will go) ought to have showed him the very place in which the payment is
to be made; whether in any Neighbor's House, or rather in the Church Porch.
You should have named the person also, who is to receive the Restitution;
whether your self, who have the profits arising out of his Sequestration, or
the several Churchwardens in former years, or the respective Parishoners who
paid his Tithes, all the while that he did them more hurt then good. (For so
you suppose him to have done, whilst you compare him to the Physician that
takes money for killing men by ignorant applications, poisons, or neglect.)
Again you should have showed, what kind of death such Ministers are bound to
die. For if they are bound to restitution, as truly, as if they had broken men's
houses, or robbed by the high way, (which is your peremptory assertion,) what
can free them from other punishments which bear proportion to their offenses?
Nay do you not charge your own Committees with great injustice, for allowing
such heinous Malefactors a fifth part of that Revenue, even after the time of
their Sequestration, of which you pronounce them to have been Usurpers, even
before they were sequestered? I perceive you think it not enough, that your
Predecessor has lost what you have gotten into possession, unless you may be
freed from paying back the fifth part. Nor can that content you neither, unless
he will antedate his Sequestration, and restore all the Tithes that ever he had
received, be it twenty or thirty years before the least Accusation was framed
against him. Nor can you deny what I say, but by denying your willingness that
men should repent and do their Duties. For you say they were Usurpers, and are
bound to make Restitution. By which it appears what you would have, had you the
power of the Sword; and how ill you were qualified to say of Grotius, that his
design had a tendency to engage the Princes of Christendom in a persecution of
their Subjects, p. 17. I might here examine (had I but leisure) what
restitution is to be made by such as have usurped their Neighbors Livings, if
you require it so strictly from such as were scandalous in their own. And how
you can pay a fifth part to so intolerable a person, as your Book has
concluded your Predecessor. And what Restitution you will allow to the most
eminently learned and godly men in the Ministry, who have been cast out of
their Houses, and for ever deprived of their Revenues, for nothing else but
their care to keep God and a good Conscience. And why you approve of those men
who placed your self where you are, whilst you professedly detest so great a
part of their Proceedings. And whether the Drunkards (as you call them) might
not be some of your Look back on chapter 3. sect. 1, 2, etc.
godly men (though none of ours) to whom you have indulged so great a
privilege, as to be worse then Drunkards, yet godly still. Compare your
Description of sequestered Ministers with the Characters you have given of godly
people, and at least you will wish for a better memory, if you do not make use
of a slower pen.

Sect. 12. To your conclusion I answer, What Sequestrations are disliked, and
what not.
that I would not have any Minister either ignorant, scandalous, or
insufficient, to enjoy the least Benefice within the Church. But 1. I would
have them exactly tried before they are censured and condemned, lest the most
able and pious men be taken away by a pretense. 2. I would have them severely,
but justly dealt with, and precisely according to Law established. 3. I would
not have the Genesis 18.23.25.
righteous destroyed with the wicked; much less that twelve such as Peter, and
James, and John, (with an humble distance in the comparison) should be cast as
dung out of the Church, for one or two such as Judas, cast as dung out of the
same. 4. I would not have even the scandalous or insufficient so ejected, as
that others more scandalous, and less sufficient should be obtruded in their
Rooms. 5. Much less would I have notorious Drunkards, or Dunces, usurp the
Rights of the most pious and learned men. 6. I would have the word scandalous
to be duly applied and understood, knowing that many are no Drunkards, who yet
are more scandalous then if they were. The Devil himself is no Drunkard; but he
is proud, and envious, and hypocritical, rebellious, sacril^gious, and many
other ways worse then a common Drunkard. His frequenting the Church, and
transforming himself into an Angel of Light, appearing like a Saint, and
putting on Godliness for a Disguise, does make him much more scandalous then
he could possibly be, if he could be drunk. Remember what I told you concerning
scandal, both the word and the thing. Which compare with Matthew. 24.5.24. 2
Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. Lastly, although a Drunkard is so detestable a thing, as
not to deserve a toleration in the meanest of the people, much less impunity or
connivence in any Priest, yet I would not have him punished more for his
judgment, then his life, (as I can prove many have been) because a Drunkard
may be Orthodox, and a dry man may be an Heretic. A Drunkard may be loyal to
Gods Anointed, whilst one who never was drunk may be a Rebel. Nor can I think
it praiseworthy, Ad Rempublicam perdendam (aut Ecclesiam) sobrium accedere.
And when a Drunkard is sequestered, not at all for being a drunkard, but either
for refusing to swear a new Oath (such as was your solemn Covenant) or for
somewhat else which is the best thing in him, and for which the holiest men
have been sequestered as well as he, I know not how you can excuse it. If the
Papists shall condemn a drunken Protestant to the Fire, for merely refusing to
renounce being a Protestant, you will (I doubt not) allow him the Reputation of
a Martyr. I pray consider the particulars of this last Paragra^h. And when by
accident, o^ choice, you speak confusedly of any subject, do not take it in
ill part, in case I help you to a Distinction.

Sect. 13. Your 27. Sect. which next ensues, O^ growing lusty on S^questrations.
has so little of what is pertinent or material in it, and so indecently much
of what is personal, that a very short Answer will serve its turn. 1. If you
had cited the very page, or at l^ast the Chapter, where I spoke of some persons
who were known to grow Lusty on Sequestrations, you should have had such an
account, as you had rather have been without. 2. Your Paralipsis was a mark of
your greatest policy; because if I h^d grown lusty, it had been only upon mine
own. And so for your want of a Retortion I th^nk your weakness, but not your
will; for even by saying what you will not say, you show your woulding
concerning me, as before you had done concerning Grotius. 3. That you are below
some of your brethren, it is enough that you have told me without my asking; I
am not concerned to contradict you. Yet some may say you contradict your own
self, because you add you would presently quit the Place that you are in, if a
probable evidence could be given you of a Better supply. Every Usurper may say
as much, if he is but well qualified with a haughty opinion of Himself. 4. You
tell me what you would do, if you know what is in your heart. But having
confessed to Mr. Tombs, that your Heart is desperately wicked, and having
confessed to Dr. Owen, that Hypocrisy and Selfishness and Pride are in it, I am
not the wiser for what you tell me, unless you can give me some kind of
Evidence that you know your own heart. 5. The more you have Declared your being
Selfish, the less I can believe of your Self-denialls. How men do value their
Sequestrations, It Is best to judge by their Actions, and not their Words. If
the Flock were in their Eye, and not the Fl^eces, less Revenues would content
them, then what they are known to have seized upon. Has not the Richness of
the Living been in lieu of Malignancy to the best Divines of our Church,
whilst the Poverty of others has afforded Pro^ection to their Incumbents? 6.
Let every man Enjoy his own, until he be legally dispossessed, and then I
doubt not but your Abilities will quickly commend you to a Living, as good as
that which you possess. But how full or how void of Self-denial your brethren
are, I cannot judge by your Example. Nor will I judge of your own, but by your
Practice. Men may talk what they please, because their Toungs are their own:
But when God has said plain'y, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, It
cannot enter into my Thoughts, how a man can invade it without Coveting, or how
he can covet with Self-denial, whilst he so far covet's, as to invade it.

CHAP. VII.
A confessed (...).
Sect. 1. HAving done with Sequestrations, you interpose in a Controversy, in
which (you make your confession, that) you find no Call to interpose. Sect.
28.] But still it seems you have a courage to engage your Pen in those
Quarrels, for which you have not a Call, or a Qualification. Had you not caught
a kind of Itch at your Fingers Ends, you would not probably have imployd them
in such a wilful (...). For you having not a Call, I take your word; and you
may pleafe to take mine, for your not having a Qualification. How much, or how
little you understand of the Synod at Dort, and the several Parties of the
Calvinists, who do resolve either to follow, or not at least to contradict it,
I should have taken upon me to make you see, if you had not made That the
peculiar Province of Tilenus; whose Publication of your Failings coming
yesterday to my hands, makes me willing to ridd them of this Employment.

The Synodists unexcusable by standing out after yielding.
Sect. 2. If it is true, what you say, That the Calvinists do extend the mercy
of God, and the merits, sufferings, and Grace of Christ, as much to All, as I
do, (Sect. 28.) And confess that God has from eternity decreed, that Faith and
repentance shall be the Conditions of Life, and that none but the persevering
shall be saved, (Sect. 29.) That the sins of all the whole world were l^id on
Christ, who procured a grant and offer of pardon and life to all, on condition
of Faith and repentance, (Sect. 30.) That all men (who hear the Gospel at
least) have so much grace bestowed from Christ, as that the matter is brought
to the choice of their own wills, whether they will have Christ, or not, (Sect.
31.) And lastly that God gives all men to persevere if they will, (Sect. 32.)
Then what excuse can the Synodists and other Calvinists make, for writing so
much in contradiction to what they acknowledge to be true? Why do they plead
with so much fierceness, that the Decree of Reprobation was irrespective, which
they evince to have been otherwise, by their confession that Christ has
purchased a Salvability for all men? Why do they persecute their Brethren under
the Notion of Arminians? Why do they Couple them with the Jesuits, by way of
contumely and reproach, whilst they acknowledge so near a parallel betwixt the
Jesuits and themselves? How come you and your own Brethren to pursue each
other with so much virulence, if you do all agree so fully with the Synod at
Dort? Or what meant the Synod in falling so foul on the Remonstrants, for
merely holding such Tenets as were but the sequels of their own, if their own
were such as you here describe? If they were not, you must eat your own words,
which you will find (in the Digestion) exceeding windy. If they were, I am glad
that all our Dissentions are at an end, and admire the Evidence of the Truth
which extorts a submission from her Opposers.

Sect. 3. I shall not quarrel with their opinion, who say that God, in giving
Grace, gives more to some than sufficient, provided that That which he gives to
all be very really sufficient; and that the overplus be not such, as for the
want of which no man is able to come in and receive his Savior: for if it is,
it will follow, that none is really and truly sufficient Grace, but what is
sufficient and somewhat more. Instead of enlarging upon This, I do solemnly
recommend it to your most serious consideration. For here lies the point, at
which we are parted from one another. When some men have acknowledged
sufficient Grace unto All, (driven to it by the ^bsurdities which they find
would fall on their Denial) They are so terrified with the Thought of going
over to their Antagonists, (whom they have customarily b^anded wi^h the Title
of Arminians,) that they interpret the word sufficient into the importance of
unsufficient: for they declare it to be im^ossible, that sufficient Grace
should be available to the receiving and retaining of Jesus Christ, without the
addition of somewhat else, which you call the will and perseverance it self,
(Sect. 23.) which however it im^lies a contradiction in Adjecto, (as that the
Grace which is sufficient is not sufficient) yet they resolutely swallow so
huge a Camel, because they strain at the Gnat of seeming to be the Converts of
their Opponents. They will not be thought to be convinced by Them they Hate.

Again, let it be granted, that whilst all have sufficient, some f^w have more;
upon condition it be proved from God's own word, that to all his Elect he
give's this more; or at least that it be granted, (in default of such Proof)
That a man may be saved by Grace sufficient. Let Salvability for all (which you
frequently acknowledge) be allowed to signify what it does, to wit a
possibility that all may be saved. And then let nothing be subjoyned for the
placing of any under an impossible, for fear of implying a Contradiction.

Austin confe^sedly against the Synod of Dort.
Sect. 4. Whereas you grant it to be true, That Augustine thought The Elect
only do eventually persevere, and some who are Sanctified, but not Elect, do
fall away, to which you add, that the Synod do judge otherwise, (Sect. 33.)
First I obse^ve a good confession, that St. Austin was for that, which you call
Arminian, against your Dear self, and the Synod of Dort. Which makes me wish
that all Calvinists would either accept of St. Austin, when we urge him
s^eaking against Themselves; or at least not urge him, when they imagine him
speaking to their advantage. Secondly. If the Synod does judge otherwise, as to
the former part of St. Austin, they judge that men may be saved who were never
Elected unto life, or else that men may persevere, and yet not be saved. But if
the Synod does judge otherwise, as to the later part of St. Austin; They judge
that all who are sanctified are als^ absolutely elected, from whence they incur
this great Absurdity, (in case St. Austin be in the Right) That men may be
absolutely Elected, and yet eventually condemned. Which also implye's this
other Absurdity, That God's Decree can be absolute, yet not immutable. Which
again imply's a Contradiction.

Sect. 5. They do not truly extend Grace further, The Extent of Grace.
who extend it to fewer then others do. And you know that Grace which here you
speak of is only extended by the Synodists to the smallest part of mankind,
which prove's your expression not rightly chosen. (Sect. 33.) I will thank the
Synodists, as for a Favor, if they abstein from doing wrong to any. But yet I
will ask, by what Toxt they are so liberal to a few. Your two propositions
are impertinent to that very end for which you use them. For the Grace of God
and his goodness is advanced especially in this, That he is wanting to none,
who are not first provokers of him by being wanting unto themselves, and that
he give's sufficient Grace to persevere, even to them who are not found to
reduce their Ability into Act.

Sect. 6. Whilst you think you may conclude, The Synod of Dort paralleled with
the Jesuits even by them that plead for them.
that the Synod give's as much as the Arminians or Jesuits to universal
Grace, both in D^cree, Redemption, and execution by collation of Grace. (Sect.
34.) Implying how very reconcilable the Jesuits are with either sort of
Presbyterians, the followers of Arminius, and Calvin too; I wonder why you
beseech me to judge impartially, whether it be Christian dealing to give out,
that they do by the restraint of Grace, make God a Tyrant, a Dissembler, with
abundance of the like, (Sect. 35.) For I call your own Conscience and Eyes to
witness, (your Eyes, in case you have read my writings, and your Conscience, if
you have not, as well as if you have,) That I never laid any such charge upon
those that gran^ sufficient Grace unto All. For then I should have laid it upon
my self. But if they who grant it in one place, do also deny it in an another,
(as the Gnostics by turns did both own, and disown our blessed Savior as
they found it most for their present purpose,) their self-Contradictions must
not excuse them. The Absurdities which I charge, I charge on them who deny
sufficient Grace unto all, and when I catch them in the Act of their bold
Denial, I cite their words and their pages, and condemn them out of their own
Mouths. Which honest course would you have taken, you could not have published
so many Books. Every five or six days may well produce a New volume, from any
man of any Trade who dare's to write out of his Fancy. I pray Sir consider the
wrong you do me, and how your Readers may be mistaken, concerning me, by your
Means. Although I heartily forgive you, yet I beseech you do so no more. But
either resolve not to meddle with what I have sent into the light, or at least
produce my words and pages.

The Denial of original pravity falsely charged on the Remonstrants.
Sect. 7. As to your 36. Section, I perceive you are fallen under the Hand of
Tilenus, And so I will not oppress you whilst you are sincking. Yet because you
call him my Tilenus, (which I take for an honor, h^wever you cannot so intend
it,) I shall observe a few things which I find he passed by, as not
sufficiently deserving his Time and Paper. Why do you charge the Remonstrants,
or Presbyterian Followers of Arminius, (for they, you know, were the great
Adversaries of the Synod at Dort, with the Error of denying Original Pravity?
Consult their writings, and then repent of this Rashness. If I am able to sound
you, I discover the bottom of your Contrivance. The sufficient Grace that is
given, you allow to Adam to have been really sufficient, or to those that are
exempted from a state of Depravation. But this is only a Trick, whereby to
retain the word sufficient, whilst you let go your hold of its signification,
which make's you fit to be interrogated afresh. When you say that God has
given sufficient Grace unto All, do you mean it is sufficient to depraved
Nature? sufficient for the bringing of every Son of l^psed Adam (who shall not
be wanting unto himself) into a state of salvation? Else, what did your former
Concessions mean? Did Christ dye for Adam whilst yet unfallen, whereby to
procure his salvability? Or did he not rather dye for those who were dead in
Adam, whereby to restore them to life and safety? If he did it not sufficiently
for all mankind, what did he for them? But if he did this sufficiently, your
Synodists Opponents desire no more.

Sect. 8. To your Remarkable Question on which you lay a great stress, How much
there is in the Will of man.
[ Is there any thing in the will besides a natural Power or Faculty, and an
Habit, Disposition or Inclination to Act, and the Act it self? Sect. 36.] I
answer, yes. There is somewhat else besides those three, to wit sufficient
strength, or grace given, or at least on God's part ready to be given [non
ponentibus obicem] to all that stand not in their own light. But this is
neither a natural Power, (for it is a spiritual) nor an Habit of Grace, (for
before it can be such, it must be received and rooted too,) Nor yet a bare
disposition or Inclination to act, (for that may be without strength to go
through) nor the Act it self, (For we know it is clearly praecedent to it.) You
did therefore say well, that you knew no more. For things may very well be, and
yet be seated beyond your Knowledge.

Cannot, and will not, are not one and the same thing, as you affirm (Sect.
36.) For what a man will not is co^sistent with what he Can, and thence it is,
that wilful Sins are the greatest. But to say, he cannot do what he can, is to
imply a Contradiction.

Sect. 9. How uncharitably soever it pleased your passion to suggest, To
convert a sinner no breac^ of charity.
(Sect. 37.) I shut out None from my Peace and Charity, though you and others
would shut me out from the Peace and Charity of the world. To endeavor their
Conversion, who affirm that God has a chief hand in sin, And that sin it self
(if a positive Entity) must either be God, or God's Creature, will be esteemed
by the judicious as the strongest Argument of my Love.

Can you believe it a want of Love, that so unpassionate a writer as I shall be
glad to know the Reason, by which you were moved to call him Mine.
my Tilenus thought fit to Antidote the Readers of Mr. Bagshaw's two Sermons,
supposing the Dedicatory Epistle might hardly be An^idote enough? Or was it
(think you) his want of Charity either to you, or Mr. Hickman, which made him
publish the Impiety of both your Doctrins? I am as confident as of any thing,
of which I have not a perfect knowledge, that he had nothing in his Eye but the
Public Good. Yet what you now say of me, you will be as likely to ^ay of him,
and so of our Excellent Dr. Gauden, or indeed of any man else, who either
confuteth what you are for, or defends what you are against, unless my
seasonable Caveat shall work your Cure. Consider how many of your own
Brotherhood you have endeavored to ex^ose to shame and laughter, before you
censure those men who give you Examples of Moderation.

Who it is that abuses the choicest of G^d's Servants.
Sect. 10. I know not well what you mean by the choicest of God^ servants; it
being become in these Times a most equivocal Expression. If you mean King James
his Puritans, I have spent a whole Chapter for the Rectification of your
mistake. If such as truly serve God, who have also written against Puritanes,
whereof I have given you a speoimen in Bishop Andrews, Doctor Sanderson, and
other Episcopal Divines, you know that Those are the men whom I am constantly
defending. If God has any choice servants in any sense, you are certainly the
man who have writ against them: for you have writt^n even with bitterness
against your own Saints, as in your calmer moods you sometimes call them. But
your Bitterness to the Bishops, and to the Regular Sons of the Church of
England, and to all persons of honor in any part of the Land, who either
partake of the Common Prayer, or attend to the preaching of the E^isco^al
Clergy, (I say) your Bitterness ^o These is so ineffably great, that mo^tal man
cannot express it, but by re^eating your own Terms. I should proceed to show
you your frightful self, from the Ten last pages of your Grotian Religion, but
that I see you have reprinted the substance of them, in your Enormous Preface
to your New Book of Church G^vernment and Worship, which I intend to consisider
toward the end of my Appendix.

Sect. 11. It shall suffice in this place to put you in mind of your Malignity
to a profound and pious Episcopal Divine, Made appear by an Example:
whose Certificate touching the Primate I was constrained to make public. You
call him a man of the New Way, (a Grotian-papist it is thought you mean.) You
say he blasted a good business by an unpeaceable writing, and did not only
foment a Schism, but fomented it by poor Insufficient Reasonings, (p. 118.)
Pretty words for a conclusion to your Grotian Religion. But such as will
sufficiently put their speaker to Rebuke, as soon as your Readers shall be
informed that your Bolt was shot at Mr. Gunning. For how can you hope to be
believed when you shall let fly your Censures of other men, after the liberty
you have taken to write so grossly of Mr. Gunning? The world will conclude you
extremely incontinent of your Passion, when they shall find you throwing it out
in three such palpable Contradictions, as that Mr. Gunning was the Author of an
unpeaceable writing, that Mr. Gunning was guilty of Fomenting a Schism, and
that any thing poor or insufficient fell from Mr. Gunning. Had you been
honored with the Advantage of having sat for some years at his learned Feet,
you had certainly attained a greater measure of Understanding, than to have
mentioned his Writing with such irreverence.

AN APPENDIX. Containing a Rejoinder to Diverse Things, both in The Key for
Catholics, and in The Book of Disputations of Church Government and worship,
etc.
WHilst I was drawing toward an End of what I thought fit to advertise you,
The chief Occasion of this Appendix.
concerning the principal Misadventures of your Grotian Religion, my Stationer
sent me two books, at least as bitter, and as irrational, as the worst of that
stuff which was laid before me. It seems my silence was hurtful to you; And
what I intended in my Advertisment (behind my (...)) for nothing more than a
promise that I would Answer you at leisure, with an addition of Reasons for my
Delay, you fall upon with as much confidence, (and that in two Books at once,)
as if you had hope'd that That Promise had been the only Performance that I
had meant you. So very little is my Concernment in what you Entitle a Reply,
(wherein you add little or nothing to your Grotian Religion, how much soever
you borrow from it,) That I might well have abstained from giving you the
Trouble of this Appendix, by referring you to my Answer, as a sufficient
Rejoinder to your Reply, but that I hear you are a scorner, and so unhappily
inclinable to flatter your self with your misfortunes, as to think you are
feared, when you are but pityed, and passed by. Some men must be dealt with, if
not for other men's sakes, yet for their own; if not because they deserve
Resistance, yet because they may want it to check their Pride. It being pity
(in my opinion) so to despise any man's weakness. as to make him dream he is
irresistible.

The Patient's acknowledgment of his Disease.
Sect. 2. This is the chief consideration, by which I am moved to this
Appendix; there being nothing more visible in your two last Books, than that
you are sick of a shrewd Disease, which having swelled up to your Throat, and
broken out at your mouth, does serve to justify the charge which was framed
against you by Dr. Owen, without the Help of your own See your Disp. of right
to Sacram. 5. p. 486. Where you also confess you are Hypocritical. Making
bolder with your self, than I should ever have allowed you by my consent.
Acknowledgment, that you are proud and selfish. Very feign would I follow my
Inclinations, to treat you as gently in the Conclusion, as in the Beginning of
my Book. And what incredible pleasure should I have taken in the present
Discussion of Diverse Truths, had you but left me the possibility to be as
respectfull toward your self, as you must acknowledge me to have been toward a
Couple of your Superiors, (by name) D. Reynolds, and Dr Bernard? But so
thoroughly have you convinced me, (by your Key for Catholics from p. 381: to p.
194. Five Disp. of Church Gov. and Worship. Preface. from p. 16. to p. 38.
two late Volumes) of the irrefragable Orthodoxie and Truth of what you have
put upon Record in another Place (to wit) Disp. 5. of Sacram. p. 486.
That your Pride neede's sharper Reprehensions then your friends have ever used
about you, (I do but Echo your own words,) that I must Cross my Inclinations,
and change my style for no other end, then to serve your Needs. For you give
it me under your hand, both that your Malady is dangerous, and that it needs a
rough Cure. You are not like Alexander's (...). Diod. Sic. (...).
B^cephalus, to be subdued with soft usage. My Brotherly Gentleness (you Grot.
Rel. Praef. Sect. 4.
spoke of) has but enraged you; my Moderation (which you Ibid.
acknowledged) has made you Fierce; my Charity toward you (which you Ibid.
applauded) has accidentally Occasioned your greatest Hatred. For (not to
speak yet of your innocent Railing, which I may therefore call Innocent,
because it is too gross to hurt me,) mark how desperately you strike both at my
Livelihood and my Life. And that with often-repeated Blows, even in Book upon
Book.

Sect. 3. You do not only say, An Instance of its malignity*
in indefinite Terms, [ Praef. to disp. of Chapter Gov. and Worcester. p. 6.7.8.32.33.
That some of the New Party of Episcopal Divines are of Grotius his Religion,
that is, Papists,] Implying me to be one of Them in all that fallows; Nor do
you content your self with saying, that we are Papists, or Grotians, (p. 7.)
That we teach the Church of Rome to be the Mistress of other Churches, (p. 8.)
That we own Grotius his Popery (p. 32.) That we must take heed how we continue
Papists, (p. 33.) But Naming me, and me only, (p. 35.) you proceed to tell us,
without Complement, That we have gone far beyond such moderate Papists as
Cassander, Hospitalius, Bodin, Thuanus, etc. p. 36. Nay speaking of Grotius his
Popery, you boldly add (even against your clearest light of Knowledge, and
against your loudest checks of Conscience, if it is not seared with an hot
Iron,) Key for Cath. p. 386.
That I have defended this Religion, and that you have Rectors in England of
this Religion, and that those that call themselves Episcopal Divines, and
seduce unstudied partial Gentlemen, are crept into this Garb, and in this do
act their parts happily. Again you single me out by Name, and profess to Ibid.
p. 391.
see by many others, as well as by Mr. P. that the Design is still on foot: And
that the Papists that are got so strong in England, under the mask of the Vani,
the Seekers, the Infidels, the Quakers, the Behmenists, and many other Sects,
have much addition to their strength by Grotians, that go under the mask of
Episcopal Divines. Nor does your Fury stop here^for, that your Readers may
suppose me one of the worst sort of Papists, you say that Ibid. p. 390.391.
Grotius, called by Mr. Pierce a Protestant, did far out-goe Them in Popery,
whom the same man confesses to have been Papists. He goe's much further then
Cassander: much further then Thuanus, etc. Quite forgetting what you had said
in another place, Grot. Religion p. 9.
That though you Dissent much from Grotius his Pacification, yet are not your
thoughts of Grotius, Cassander, Erasmus, Modrevius, Wicelius, or others of that
strain, No Nor Thuanus, and many more moderate Papists, either bitter,
Censorious, or uncharitable. There you rank Grotius with Cassander and Erasmus,
and imply Thuanus the greater Papist. But now forsooth he out-went them all. So
in a fit of humanity, you said that Christian Conc. p. 45.
Grotius designed to reconcile both Parties in a Cassandrian Popery. But now it
grieve's you that Grotius should far out-go the Cassandrian Papists, the
remembrance of whose Wisdom, Moderation and Charity, is very grateful to your
Thoughts. p. 390. I pray Sir, get you a better Memory, if you will not learn to
speak Truth. But what is the Design, which you see, by me and others is still
on foot, p. 391? Ibid. p. 46.
Even a strong Design laid for the Introduction of Popery, and the five parts
of the Plot have taken such effect, as gives it a strong probability of
Prevailing, if God do not wonderfully blast it.

In four respects.
Sect. 4. Thus you make me not only a kind of Seminary Priest, but one who
has counterfeited the Protestant in such a Dangerous Degree, as to have gotten
into a Rectory where I have daily opportunities to serve the Pope; and so by
consequence being discovered by the subtle Endeavors of Mr. Baxter, I am
liable to die a most shameful Death. An Imputation the more heinous in these
following respects.

First, because you had a warning in my (...), not to Ps. 50.20.
slander any man Living, much less a Man whom you must reckon to be Ps. 50.20.
your own Mothers son, if you pretend to be a son of the Church of Engl. much
less with a plot to bring in Popery, rather than Judaism, or Witchcraft, or
whatever else is most absurd. For though I earnestly pray for the peace of
Christendom, and think as well of the Papists, as an unpassionate Protestant
may be allowed, yet do I abhor being a Papist, as much as being a Presbyterian;
and will as soon be a Turk, as I will be either. Compare my praemonition before
the book abovementioned, with the beginning of the first Chapter, and with the
middle of the third, that you may see the aggravations of your offense.

Next, because it is a groundless, and so by consequence a spiteful, inhuman
charge. For where have I ever defended Popery? Or when did I write one word for
Grotianism, as you expound it by page 381.
Popery? Or where did I ever use the word? Name the book, and the page, and
the numerical lines which I have written, if I have written any such thing. Are
you an Answerer of Books, whilst you forge, and falsify, and declaim at random
against your Dreams, to which you entitle your Brother's Name, without
directing your Readers to any one page, or expression, whereby to give some
color to your Inventions? What unstudied Gentleman have I seduced? or where
are the footsteps which I have trodden, toward the management of a plot to
bring in Popery? for shame do somewhat like a Man, (if not at all like a
Christian) either to prove I am a Papist, or to make me at least some
Reparations, in as public a manner as you have wronged me.

Thirdly, because your Accusation could not but fly into your Face, and
significantly call you a false-Accuser. For you know it never was my
profession, that I was of Grotius his Religion, (let his Religion have been
what it would) but rather that Grotius was of mine, by being a Protestant and a
Peacemaker. If I was mistaken in my opinion, you should have gathered from
thence, that I am fallible; not at all, that I am a Papist; because a man may
be a Protestant, and yet be mistaken in his opinion. You are a wilful Deviator
from the Thing under Dispute, and shall be made to acknowledge that you are
such. For it is not our Question, Whether Grotian Popery is Good; but, whether
Grotius (good man) was indeed a Papist. Had I affirmed the former, I might have
been liable to your charge; but you know I only denied the latter; and cannot
conceive any such thing as Grotian Popery, more then any such thing as
Baxterian Paganism. For though you S^ints Rest. Edit. 2. part 1. p. 155, 156.
favor the Pagans, yet does it not follow that you are one. Even L^ther, and
Zuinglius, and I think Paraeus, do hope for Salvation for diverse Pagans,
although the two latter were Presbyterians. You are not so thick of
understanding, as not to be able to distinguish between a matter of Fact, and a
matter of Faith. From whence it fallows that you are wilful, and speak in
despite to your understanding, when, the Question being put [ whether Grotius
de Facto turned Papist, or not] you tell the world I am a Papist because I
think that he was none. There may be men of both parties of both opinions in
point of Fact, whilst yet they retain their Parties too. Nay the Question may
be put to a Mahumetan, or a Jew, who retaining their own Religions may judge
impartially of a Christian, whether they think he either changed, or changed
not his Religion, for that of the Jews, or the Mahumetans. It was lately a
Question twixt Dr. Bernard and my self, whether the Primate of Armagh had
changed his Judgment: wherein though He was of one mind, and I of another, yet
I did not infer, that He was a Calvinist, nor He, that I was an Arminian. The
Question being not put concerning what we approve, but concerning the Truth of
the thing done. So in the Case of Grotius, it is not disputed by you, and me,
whether Grotius did well in turning Papist, (for if he turned Papist, we both
condemn him,) but whether he actually did, or did not turn Papist. And to say
he did, when he did not, is not to oppose, but to make a Papist. He look back
on chapter 1. p. 11. Arg. 1.
affirmed that he did not, and I believe his affirmation. But it is not Popery,
to take a man upon his word; if it is, you are a Papist for the very same
reason: for certainly there are Papists, whom you believe when they tell you
that they are Papists. Behold the Case in another Color. The Iansenians do
profess to detest the several propositions, which were condemned by Pope
Innocent: but Consulatur Mysterium Jesuit.
approving the Pope's Sentence, they deny the Fact, to wit that Iansenius
affirmed the Contrary: (where by the way let it be noted, that either Austin
and Iansenius are of the Judgment that I am for, Or their greatest friends and
Abettors are no less Oppugners of the Calvinists than the Molinists
themselves;) will you say they love what they detest, because they deny that
Iansenius said it? you will be hooted at, if you do, as a very strange
Creature. And yet you have done as absurd a thing. For I am a^ different from
a Papist, as any Protestant can be of the Church of England. Yet because I deny
that Grotius turned Papist, you make no scruple, to call me Papist for my
reward. A Calumny favoring of as much weakness, as if St. Basil should have
pronounced Athanasius himself to have turned Arian, for conceiving all to be
Orthodox in Dionysius his Writings (of Alexandria,) in which, St. Basil was of
opinion, that something of Arianism was couched.

Fourthly, your Accusation is the more heinous, because it reaches to the
D^shonourning of the Ablest Protestants in the world, who deny that Grotius
turned Papist, as well as I. In particular Doctor Hammond must needs be One of
your Grotian Papists, for having vindicated Grotius from the charge of Popery,
although he has written against the Papists, (O how infinitely better than you
have done! and) to much better purpose, than all the men of your way. Another
of your Papists is Mr. Thorndike, whose Learned book against Popery and
Puritanism together, I pray be sure to understand, before you Answer. Nay
Arnoldus Poelenburg the Presbyterian (but one of the learned of that way, as
being a Follower of Arminius, and not of Calvin,) must pass with you for a
Papist, (as you with your fellow Note once for all, that ^ call you
Presbyterian, only (...).
Presbyterians,) because he has lately made it appear, that Grotius dyed a
true Protestant. I shall give you his words in their proper Place.

Sect. 5. Having discovered to you the guilt, Mr. Grand^n's Advantage.
I now proceed to acquaint you with the unskilfullness of your Crime. Mr.
Crandon you call a Judicious Paedagogue, from whence I conclude, that he
Teaches School. He was one of those Brethren, who Disp. of Sacram. 5. p. 486.
told the world you are a Papist and one of the worst sort of Papists, and what
the (particular) Books were which had made you a Papist, and what Emissaries
you have in all parts of the Land. Now observe the Rod which you have made; and
the several Twiggs of correction out of which ^t is composed; and how you have
put this Rod into the hands of Mr. Crandon; who being a Paedagogue, know's how
to lay it o^, especially when he finds you so bare and naked. Do no^ kick at
the Expression. For you have told us your needs, and what it is that must do
you good. Too much respect it seeme's destroys you. And though it is cross to
my Inclinations, yet I can put on Severity for an hour or two, when I think it
may tend to so good a purpose, as to make you for ever cast off your Railing.

The Accuser of Protestants proved a Papist by 14. Arguments, according to his
own logic.
In the Person of Mr. Crandon, and by the force of your Logic against your
self, It will be easy to prove you an arrant Papist in a Disguize. For 1. We
have your Confession, that some of the Brotherhood it self have publicly laid
it to your charge, who being judicious and godly men, would never have accused
you of such a Crime, if they had dot had Grounds and Reasons for it. 2. You
have not hitherto cleared your self, as you would certainly have done, if you
had been able. For though you have writ against the Papists a great deal more
then enough, yet that is no more then a Blindation to escape the rigor of the
Law. How could you hold a Sequestrasion, if you did not act the Presbyterian?
Dr. Tailor writ against Papists, and yet you know what you have Disp. with Mr.
Tombs p. 397*
called him. Dr. Hammo^d and Mr. Thorndike have writ against Papists, But you
know what they are for defending Grotius. Archbishop Laud writ against them in
an unanswerable manner, And yet you know how you have slurr'd him for having
Praef. to Grot. Rel. Sect. 25.
befriended the Grotian Plot. Nay 3. Your Books against Popery become an
Argument to prove you its greatest Friend; Because they are Armed with so much
weakness, as is a treacherous strength against the Protestant Cause. Some are
hired to resist, that they may certainly be beaten, and led in Tri^mph. We who
know how Caligula did hire the Gauls, ^an guess at the use of your Key for
Catholics. Had you intended them any Hurt, you would have left them to the
rigor of Abler Pens. For you were told by Dr. Pr^f. Sect. 17.
Sanderson, That the sufficient Disputants with the Papists are the Episcopal
Divines. 4. You have vilified the Protestants of every Sect and Division, and
the best in the greatest measure. Neither Bolsec nor Fevardentius have gone
beyond you. Look back on Chapter 1. Sect. 12.
You have declared in point of Discipline, against the Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent, and Erastian, as not the Scriptural way, nor the way of Christ.
And if all Protestants are reducible to those 4. Heads, (as sure they are,)
then it is clear that you write against all the Protestants, and make men run
into Popery by way of Refuge. Or if you fright them also from thence, by your
winding sheet, or your Key, you leave them to be nothing but Jews, and
Heathens. And I would very fain know, what sort of Christians in all the world,
you have not endeavored to Disgrace, at one time, or another, either in
earnest, or in jest. I do seriously profess, I can think of none. 5. You do
exceedingly commend the very same sort of Papists, and with the same kind of
Praises which Grotius give's them. You say, Grot. Rel. p. 10.
[ when you read their public writings, you think they are now Blessed Souls
with Christ. You read them with a great deal of Love and honor to the writers.
The French moderation is acceptable to all good men: That Nation is an
honorable part of the Church of Christ in your Esteem. Much more must yo^
honor the Pacificatory Endeavors of any that attempt the healing of the
Church.] Can you blame Mr. Crandon, or any real Presbyterian, for thinking or
saying you are a Papist, when they read such stuff and compare it with what
you say against Grotius? will they not shrug, or shake their heads, with a
Totus Mundus exer^et Histrioniam? 6. Why should you labor to deceive the vulgar
people into a Belief, that the ablest Protestants in the land are Grotian
Papists, (in the number of which, I am far from reckoning my self,) unless it
were to this end, that the simple ones may fly from such as are Protestants
indeed, and shelter themselves under the Papists for fear of Popery? I mean
the Papists who march about, eject the Protestants, and succeed them, as well
in the profits of their Places, as in the privilege of their Pulpits, under
the Title and Mask of Presbyterians. So very fitly was it said by our Learned
and Reverend See his Unanswerable Preface to the second Edition of his first
Sermons.
Dr. Sanderson, That your Party have been the great Promoters of the Roman
Interest among us, that you have hardened the Papists, and betrayed the
Protestant Cause. 7. You refuse to join with us Protestants in the Public
Liturgy of the Church, and to Communicate with us in the Sacrament of Eucharist
according to the prescription of Laws and Canons; which does the rather become
an Argument of your being turned Papist, Because in all such s^tatutes as have
been made (since the first year of Queen Elizabeth) against Popish Recusants,
The refusing to be present at Common Prayer, or to receive the Sacrament
according to the Forms and Rights mentioned in that Book, is expressed as the
most proper legal Character, whereby to distinguish a Popish Recusant from a
true Protestant. In so much that Use has been made of that very Character in
sundry Acts, since the beginning of the long Parliament, for the taxing of
double Payments upon Recusants. Which very Argument was used by Reasons of the
present Judgment, etc. p. 34.
the University of Oxford, against the Ordinance for the Directory imposed on
them. 8. In that you profess your self a Protestant, and yet declare against
all four ways, ( Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, and Erastian,) giving
out that the way of Christ must be compounded of all four, you help to
justify the Papists in the reproaches which they cast upon our Religion, Ib.
p. 5.
That we know not what our Religion is; That since we left them, we know not
where to stay; and that our Religion is a Harding confut. of Apology part 6.
chapter 2.
Parliamentary Religion. Would you have done them so great a service, if you
had not been of their side? A likely matter. 9. Your not allowing the Civil
Magistrate to be Supreme in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, does
very clearly discover your partiality to A Pope. The Oath of Supremacy here in
England was purposely framed for such as You. 10. It was observed by Bishop
Bramhall against p. ^5*
Militiere, that the private whispers, and printed insinuations of Papists,
touching the Church of England's coming about to shake hands with the Roman in
the points controverted, was merely devised to gull some silly Creatures, whom
they found too apt to be caught with cha^f. And That Art which was used to
begin our Breach, you have craftily continued to make it wider. For intus
existens prohibet Alienum, whilst the Episcopal Protestants are kept from being
cast out, the Roman Religion can never enter. 11. You are a Papist as much as
Grotius, though you should prove as much a Protestant as Grotius was. But you
do every where contend that Grotius was a Papist; and so (at least in that
Notion) you must needs be a Papist as well as He. 12. You Grot. Relig.
profess to approve of pacificatory Attempts between us and the Papists; p. 30.
and that you are zealously desirous of it; p. 20.
and that you honor the peaceable Dispositions of the late Episcopal Divines.
p. 21.
Which being duly compared with all you say against Grotius, and against the
late Episcopal Divines, and this again being compared with what you have
written both for, and against the Directory, as well as for, and against the
Common Prayer, and against the very Covenant which you pretended to be for, and
for Episcopacy it self which yet you Covenanted against, may lay a ground of
Suspicion that you have gotten a Dispensation, to use your Tongue and your pen
as you see occasion: you having been both for, and against the Papists, as well
as for, and against the Presbyterians. 13. Whilst you labor to prove that
Grotius turned Papist, you are doing the Papists a special service, by robbing
our Churches of such a prop, and by tempting as many to turn Papists, as do
believe that Grotius knew what was best. Whereas the true Protestants (on the
contrary) are encouraged to adhere to the Church of England (however disgraced
and forsaken by a revolting people) by the Judgment of Grotius that she was
nearest unto the Primitive, in point of purity, and pious Order. 14. The Design
which is laid by you and others for the Introduction of Popery, is driven on
by those means which you have See your Christian Concord. p. 46, 47.
acknowledged your self to be proper and suitable to the work, notwithstanding
you have hid them with other Names. The first part of the plot is, to blow up
the sparks of Schism and Haeresie, that our Church being divided may become
odious, and men be prepared for a Remove. The second is, An Incessant Endeavor
to infect all persons, especially those in power, Civil or Military, with the
opinion of Libertinism, (for which look back on Chap. 3.) that so your
Doctrines and Practices may have vent, and exercise. Your third plot is, to get
down the learned, judicious, Godly, painful Ministers, (such as by name I
lately mentioned Chap. 6. Sect. 9.) at least to take away their public
Maintenance; that the people may take such Ministers as will humor them most,
and do their work best cheap. The fourth part of the plot is, to hinder the
Union of other Protestants with Episcopal Divines, and the regular exercising
of Discipline, or maintaining of Church Order; that the Papists may say we have
no Church, no Government, etc. and that by division we may be disabled from
opposing them. The fifth part of it is, to keep afoot a party of learned Men,
who under the Name of Presbyterians may keep an Interest in the people, and
partly draw them from Unity, and from obeying their Superiors by pretending a
Necessity to abolish Episcopacy and Presbytery, and to set up Presbytery in its
stead, or somewhat else without a Name, expressed at random by The Scepter and
Way of Christ, thereby to widen our Breaches, and so prepare a way for Popery.

The Bishop of Canterbury cleared from his Accuser, and his Accuser from
himself.
Thus you see how exactly your Satyrs fit you, which you have framed against the
soundest of all the Protestants in the world, whom you will needs (because you
will) call Grotian Papists. If you deny your being a Papist, we are not bound
to believe you, in case we believe you when you avow the having Disp. 5. of
Sacr. p. 484.
Hypocrisy in your heart. When you proclaim your self an Hypocrite, (for so
you did from the Press, or I had not read it) you cannot blame me for my
Belief. For either your proclamation was true, or false: if true, you are an
Hypocrite, because you say it in sincerity: if false, you are an Hypocrite,
because you are not when you say you are. Besides, you were not angry with Dr.
Owen, although he told you of your Hypocrisy, a little before you told him;
much less may your Anger break out on me, for having only believed what you
have told me. Add one thing more. The Bishop of Canterbury protested before
God and his holy Angels, and that upon the fatal Scaffold, even immediately
before he laid his Neck upon the Block, that he had never any h^nd in any D^^gn
whatsoever to bring in Popery, or to al^er he Religion by L^^ est^blish't. He
never told you of any Hypocrisy in his heart, much less at the Instant of his
Departure, yet how have you and Mr. Hickman done your worst to desile his
spotless memory? And if you cannot believe Him, nay if you cannot believe me,
when I profess to be a Son of the Protestant Church here in England, atte^ted
to by the Blood of our English Martyrs, (who were Prelates, and Prelatists, not
Presbyterians,) How can you hope to find credit, whilst you profess what I have
done? Yet in conclusion I must tell you, I do not believe you are a Papist, how
much soever some of your Brethren have charged you with it. I have only spoken
in this Section by a Prosopopoeia, to show you the folly of your reasonings
whilst you dispute against Grotius, and call us Papists who think him None.

Sect. 6. Now to the Testimony you Disp. of Chapter gov. and worcester. Pref. p. 3^.
bring from Claud. Sarravius, Grotius his second vindication:
I oppose a better Testimony from Arnoldus Poelenburgius, a learned Protestant
of the L^w Count^ies in the North part of Holland, a person acquainted with
Grotius his Wife and Children, and one who dedicates his Book to William
Grotius, an Eminent Lawyer now in Holland, made much more eminent by being
Brother to Hugo Grotius. Arnoldus Poelenburg having premised how great a Man in
all points this Hugo was; (so great, that This Age has not brought forth a
greater,) H^s wonderful knowledge in the Law, His unfathomable Depth in the
Things of God, His exact Command of all story both ancient and modern, as well
sacred as secular, His Incredible evolution of Books for number not to be
reckond, His stupendous Comprehension of all the languages in the world, by
which a person of his Importance might be advantaged or adorned, His poetical
Supere^^inence, His Elo^^tion not to be equaled, Hi^ weight of matter and
blessed style, His singular Temperance, and Modesty, and other virtues, His
being persecuted at home for sticking to God and a good Conscience, His being
sued to from abroad by Kings and Princes and principal persons of the world,
and last of all His being envied for his unimitable performances by such as
thought him too happy for one single Man as yet in via; I say, Arnoldus
Poelenburg having premised a page or two to thi^ purpose, proceeds to vindicate
his Memory from the Aspersion under Debate.

Arnol. Poelent Pastoris Ecclesiae Remon. Hornanae in Epist. praef.
Dissertationi Epistolicae. p. 13, 14.
Ad Papismi criminationem facilis est Responsie. Nam sicut is, qui duobus viris
de possessionum Terminis inter se litigantibus Arbitrum se offert, vix
alterutrius odium effugit, quia uterque sibi plurimum vindicat, and quisque
suspicatur sibi minus attributum quam Justitia flagitabat; Ita qui parts in
Religionis Negotio dissidentes componere satagit, vix poterit, quin ab altera
part pro host habeatur, quia in diversae partis homines liberalior fuisse
visus est. D. Grotium autem nobis ad extremum usque addictum fuisse satis
liquet ex illo posthumo scripto, cui maxim Adversari^ ejus infensi sunt. Ibi
enim D. Vtenbogardi aliorumque Antistitum nostrorum non sine laudis Elogio
meminit. Praeterea Uxor Ipsius, Honestissima Matrona, cum post fata Mariti ex
illo glorioso non minus quam diuturno exilio Hagam Comitis reversa sedem
Do^icilii ibi collocaret, statim illa se nostrae Ecclesiae adjunxit, sacram
synaxin nobiscum celebravit; denique affirmavit Maritum suum, neque in Galliis
UNQUAM, neque extra Gallias alicubi Templum Pontificiorum frequentasse, aut
eorum sacris interfuisse. Puto hoc Argumenti satis esse, quod Defectionem ad
Pontificios meditatus non fuerit; Quod nonnulli aut Malevoli homines, aut certe
nimium suspicaces opinantur.

His wife his Witness.
Here is a witness beyond exception, even the Friend of his Deuteronomy. 13.6.
Bosom, a very honorable Matron in herself, and therefore fit to be believed,
although she had been but a common Friend; whereas we know she was more than a
common Wife; for she contrived his safety with the utmost hazard of her own.
She was (...) Ephesians. 5.23. Quia uxoris salus a viro dependet, sicut Ecclesiae
salus est a Chri^^o. Beza in locum.
The Savior of the Body, in the words, and sense of the Apostle Concerning
Husbands. An Individual Partner and Companion in all his Sufferings. One who
endeared him to Herself; by her so many great effects of her Love and Loyalty,
(which have made her a pattern to other women, and hereafter will make her a
proverb too,) that he could not conceal his Religion from Her, whom he had
worthily seated so near his Heart. What need we more in so clear a Case? The
Wife of Grotius was both a Protestant herself, (as well at her residence in
Paris, as at her return unto the Hague) and has constantly Look back on chapter 1.
Sect. 5. p. 12* 13.
affirmed (to all desirous of Information) that her Husband and herself were
never divided in their Religion. That he did never Neque in Galliis unquam,
neque extra Gallias alicubi, etc.
at any time, Neque in Galliis unquam, neque extra Gallias alicubi, etc.
in any part of the world, so much as permit himself to be Aut eorum sacris
Interfuisse.
present at any papistical Devotions. Never was there a Wife of greate^ Wisdom
and Gravity, and Christian courage, in the esteem of an Husband, than she in
his. Never was there a Husband, who left behind him a greater Monument of
honor and gratitude to a wife. And could he (think you) be a Papist without
her Knowledge? Or could he (think you) turn Papist without his own? He made
profession to Laurentius, who writ the Grotius Papizans, (which you are now so
unskilful as to object,) that he was not turned Papist, as had been
slanderously reported, which having told you of already ( chapter 1. p. 11, 12.) I
will encourage you to believe whatsoever his Wife has affirmed of him, by
letting you see how much he prized her.

Nos quoque, si quisquam, multum debere fatemur Sylvae Grotian^ (...) ad
Augusti Thuani Franciscum Filium* p. 5, 6*

Conjugio. Memini, post tot tua vota precesque,
Cynthia cum nonum Capto mihi volveret orbem,
Qualem te primum, Conjux fidissima, vidi
Carceris in Tenebris: Lachrymas absorpserat Ingens
Vis Animi, neque vel gemitu Te Luctus adegit
Consentire malis. Rursus nova vincula, sed quae
Te Socia leviora tuli, dum milite clausos
Nos Mosa and tristi Vahalis circumstrepit unda.
Heic Patriam toties and inania jura vocanti
Et proculcatas in nostro corpore leges,
Tu solamen eras. Heic jam Te viderat alter
Et post se media plus part reliquerat Annus,
Cum mihi jura mei per Te solerte reperto
Reddita. Tu, postquam jam caeca acceperat Alvus
Dulce o^i^s, oppos^^s libabas oscula claustris:
Atque ita semoto foribus custode locuta es.
Sum Pater, rigido si non. Adamante futurum
Stat tibi, sed precibus potis es gaudesque moveri,
Hoc quod nostra Fides lucem servavit in istam
Accipe Depositum, tantisque exolve periclis.
Conjugii testor Sanctissima jura, meaeque
Spem sobolis, Non huc venio pertaesa malorum,
Sed miserata virum: possum sine Conjuge, possum
Quamvis dura p^ti. Si post exempla ferocis
Ultima saevitiae nondum deferbuit ira,
In me tota ruat: vivam crudele sepulchrum
Me premat, and triplicis cingat custodia Valli,
Dum meus aetheriae satietur pastibus Aurae
Grotius, and Casus narret Patriaeque suosque.
Dixerat, atque oculis fugientia vela secutis
Addit; Abi Conjux, neque Te nisi Libera cernam,
Quod mea si auderet Famam spondere Camaena,
Acciperet quantis virtutem laisdibus istam
Posteritas? --
A Rejoinder to as much of the Key for Catholics as pretend's to be ^ Reply to
my old Advertisement.
Sect. 7. I now pass on (as you direct me) to the latter part of your Key for
Catholics, of which your Pen has made great Boast. But every man's cause is
not the best, who has the fondest opinion of his performance. For then there
were no disputing with you. You would be constantly in the right, which part
soever you undertook. You say, the Business of Grotius is it, upon which you
are to meddle with me. p. 382. And first you promise me to yield (what I told
you) That for the very same reasons, upon which you conclude that Grotius is a
Papist, you must also conclude him to be a Protestant, unless you think as
hardly of the Augustan Confession, as you seem to do of the Council of Tre^t;
But you will not perform it till the Greek Calends. For you condition with me
to prove, That a Protestant is one who holds to the Council of Trent, etc.
And are you fitted to be a Disputant, whose strength is only to be sturdy in a
mere begging of the Question? welfare the Downright Dr. Kendal for faithfully
telling you in his Book, That A little more of the University would have done
you no harm. See and wonder at your unhappines^, (which was Rivet's as well as
yours.) You objected against Grotius, his having set out the Canons of the
Trent Council in his Conciliatory Design. To which I answered, that he did
equally set out the Articles of the Protestant Council at Augusta. So as if
that does prove him a Papist, This must prove him also a Protestant. Whereas
indeed they both prove him a Reconciler. You confess it is not Popery to be a
Peacemaker; Nay you pretend at least to be one your self. You often wish for
peace and union between us and the Papists; But how can Peace be ever made
betwixt two Adversary parties, without a mutual Collation of both their
Doctrines? which if they are thought so to differ, as to be quite
irreconcilable, who would labor to reconcile them? When At Grotius non eam
Bullam -- solam edidit, sed and confess nem Augus^ nam, existimans, com^^de
acceptas Doctrinas Tridentinam and Augustanam inter se non ita pugre, ut multi
credidere. Discuss. p. 7.
Grotius told Rivet, that he had put forth the Doctrines, as well of the
Augustan, as the Tridentine Council, because he believed they differed less
than many others did apprehend, he conceived the Papists Doctrines might be
made to conform unto the Protestants, not the Protestants unto the Papists,
(meaning not the Presbyterian, but sober Protestan^s, such as those at Augusta,
remember That,) for in the very same page (as in twenty others which I have met
with) He pleads for the Reforming of Popish Errors, (whether the Pope will or
no) by Kings and Bishops within their Bounds. But never yet could I find, that
he acknowledged the least Error, in either the Discipline or Doctrine of sober
Protestants; such as the Followers of Melanchthon, and the unchangeable Sons of
the Church of England. The words of Grotius, Ibid.
which have opened shall stop your mouth: Licuerit sane Regibus, and legitime
constitutis Episcopis, intra suos fines quaedam corrigere, quae videbantur
corrigenda. There he approves of the Reformation^ in the Dukedom of Saxony,
and here in England. Ibid. p. 8.
At quo jure privati, ubi Ecclesiae erant, Novas constituerunt Ecclesias,
nullis ab Episcopis ortas, nullis cum Episcopis cohaerentes? There he condemns
the Reformations (so called) which were made by the Scottish, and other
rebellious Presbyterians.

To beg the Question must not pass for a Reply.
Sect. 8. To the next part of your Reply ( p. 383.) I easily give you this full
Return. 1. You do not so much as pretend a proof, that you did not mistake the
drift of the most excellent Discussio; but poorly ask, if his words are not
plain enough; and bid the Readers of his words become the Judges, Thus you are
still an arrant Beggar of the Question; and as to the duty of a Replicant, a
mere Tergiversator. Any child might have said the first; and why do you write
so many books, if you quit your self manfully in the second? In stead of all
your Disputes, you might have appealed once for all to your partial Readers;
but then you must not pretend to give any Answer, or Replies. You ask if
Grotius his words are not plain enough; thereby implying that they are, when
yet you prove they are not; for I have showed, and shall show you your gross
mistakes. I am ever as ready, as you can be, to submit my Cause to the
indifferent Reader; but I suppose it my duty to plead it first. Indeed to
Poelenburg and Mr. Thorndike, and so unerring a person as Dr. Hammond, the
words of Grotius are plain enough. Plain enough to let them see that Grotius
was but a peacemaker, not a Papist: And it seems they are plain even to me,
because I see the same thing. But even for that very reason they cannot be
plain enough to you, Sir, because you seem to see from them that their Author
was, what he was not. The printed Judgments of those three above mentioned, are
directly contrary to yours. Whether They, or you, are best able to interpret
the Words of Grotius, I may very well say, Let the Reader judge. The learnedest
persons in all the world (nor only the learnedest, but the most too) as well
of the Romish as of the Protestant Church, do judge of his Words, and his
Religion, as I have showed you. And could you content your self to say, (when
you could say nothing better) -- Are not his words plain enough, and frequent
enough to open to us so much of his mind as I have charged him with? It is but
answering, No, and then where are you? I beg your pardon for my prolixity, when
such a Syllable would have sufficed.

2. You craftily omit the chiefest part of my charge; which was that you did
either not traslate your Citations, or that you did it so lamely, Note that the
later words are those, of which I tax you for the omission.
as to conceal the true meaning from English Readers. You translate so much, as
might make him seem to be a Papist, but you forbeared the translating of what
would have proved him to be None. Which was (to use King James his instance) as
if an Atheist should cite those words out of the Psalmist, There is no God,
concealing the words going before, The fool has said in his Heart. Had you
translated either all, or none, or as much as had cleared the Authors meaning
in the whole, you had not met with a reprehension. And therefore you wrong your
self extremely, by saying you purposely omitted to translate the words of
Grotius, foredeeming that such men as I would have said they were
mistranslated, (p. 383.) For you did frequently translate them, but you did it
with partiality, as has been See my Advertisement p. penult. and compare it
with both your books.
showed. And so you speak against your knowledge in a public matter of Fact.
Having printed your doings, you now deny the things done; as it were lifting up
your right hand against your left. If you foredeemed as you pretend, why did
you dare to translate a little? if not, why would you say it? and why did you
not translate a little more? Happy is the man who condemns not himself in
that thing which he allows.

3. Now at last indeed you translate his wish, that the Divulsion which fell
out and the Causes of the divulsion might be taken away. The primacy of the
Bishop of Rome according to the Canons is none of these, as Melanchthon
confesses, p. 383. But you conceal his next words, which make for his and my
advantage, to wit, The opinion of Melanchthon, That the Bishop of Rome's
primacy is also Qui ( Melanchthon) cum primatum etiam necessarium putat ad
retinendam unitatem. Discuss. p. 256.
necessary to the retaining of unity. Which opinion, if it made not Melanchthon
a Papist in your account, (no nor our own Bp. Bramhal who yet is one of your
late Prelates) why should not Grotius have been a Protestant, the
Melanchthonian opinion notwithstanding? Did you think that Primacy and
Supremacy were (...), two words for one thing? That Primacy of Order in the
Church, is the same for substance, with Supremacy of Power over the Church?
learn to think so no more from this day forward. The Primacy yielded unto the
Bishop of Rome, is in respect of Order, not at all of Jurisdiction; and that in
Grotius his sense, as his next words teach you. Ibid.
Neque enim hoc est, Ecclesiam subjicere Pontificis libidini, sed reponere
Ordinem sapienter institutum. Which shows the error of your Confidence in your
Grotian Religion, p. 35.

Sect. 9. Whereas you say, you supposed that all you wrote this for understood
latin (p. 384.) You do imply your self faulty for putting part of it in
English, unless you thought us unable to understand the whole. But you
confidently add, you translated none of the sentence, (ibid.) although you
translated a part of it, no less than twice in one page. And though you thought
it no Injury to give account in english but of part, yet I have showed it was
an Injury, and told you why. If I did not translate what I recited out of
Grotius to my Advantage, you should have thank't me for such a favor, as the
advancing your Interest by the neglecting of mine own. But if you look on my
Advertisement, (as I have done at your appointment) you will find me
complaining of your silence, as to the Causes of the Breach, which Grotius did
wish might be taken away. I had no doubt translated more, but for the hastiness
of the Carrier, which did not allow me so great Advantage. I meant by your
silence, your not acquainting your English Readers with that which served to
clear Grotius, but only with that which you thought against him. The Negation
of Causes, viz. that of the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, cannot suffice for
your task to prove Grotius a Papist, because for that, he cites Melanchthon.
Nor does the Primacy signify the universal Headship, (as you do wilfully aver,
or very weakly, p. 384.) because of the reasons so lately rendered.

Sect. 10. You confess that Grotius does charge the Papists with the Causes of
the Divulsions, ( p. 385.) But you add, that he charge the Protestants much
more. You must distinguish of Protestants, as I have told you over and over.
The true and regular Reformers he never charge, but only the subverters of
Church and State, who used the Title for a pretense. As our Savior charged the
Scribes and Pharisees, not with pouring out prayers, (as if to pray were a sin)
but with using them as a cloak (as some have used the word Gal. 5.13.
Liberty for an occasion to the flesh) to cover their Mat. 23.14.
devouring of widow's Houses. If he charged the Papists, but not with Popery,
(the second part of your evasion) why does he frequently complain of the lust
and Tyranny of the Pope, and the Corruptions of the Papists in point of
Doctrine, as well as manners? exhorting Princes and Bishops, if the Pope will
not join, to reform without him?

Sect. 11. You say the things were but two, which Grotius found faulty in the
Papists, (Vot. pro. Pace. p, 7.8.) And those you lamely represent too, p. 385.
Read again, Vidi a Scholasticis -- multa introducta dogm^ta -- non ex
Conciliorum Universalium Auctoritate; Dogmata vero in Conciliis stabilita minus
ab illis commode, explicata: praeterea inter Ecclesiae praepositos eum
invaluisse Typhum and Avaritiam, and mali exempli mores, ut ii --
and you will find them to be Three: for first he says, that by the Schoolmen,
many opinions were introduced, and that from a liberty of arguing, not at all
from the Authority of General Councils (Mark the Councils which he was for.)
2. That the opinions established by the Councils were by those very Schoolmen
incommodiously expounded. (These are two distinct things, to forge New Doctrins
and to misinterpret the old ones, which you have confounded in your Recital.)
3. That Pride and Avarice and manners of ill example had prevailed in such a
measure among the Governors of the Church, (of which remember the Pope was
chief) that they were neither sollicitous, as they ought, to press upon the
people those wholesome Tenets, nor to Reform those vices [which reigned amongst
them] But rather made use of the Peoples Ignorance, and withal of their
Superstition, which, arising out of their ignorance, administered nourishment
unto their vices, to promote their [sel^ish and sordid [ Interest.] Now Sir
observe what you have done. You have not only hudled up the things that are
different and distinct, but you have ended with an and caetera, which cut's off
the Prime of your Account. As if you durst not make it known to your English
Readers, how deeply Grotius had charged the Popish Prelates, and Schoolmen, for
fear your bitterness toward Grotius should lose its sting, and that in the act
of its exercise, or execution. To what purpose do you ask, if the Council at
Lateran and Florence did not decree that the Pope is above a General Council,
when you knew that Grotius was quite against it? They are the General Councils
which Grotius had in great Reverence, of which the Lateran and Florentine you
know were None, unless your knowledge is less then I would very fain think it.
Grotius was constant to the Rules, of Wise Vincentius of Lyra, and adhered to
those things which were always, and every where, perseveringly delivered in
what Church soever he Chan^'d to find them; which whosoever does not, cannot be
a true Christian. He did not hold all in the Council of Trent, (as you often
calumniate, but never prove,) but told us what might be done, for the love of
Peace, for the Accomodating of that to the Protestant Synod at Augusta.

I thank you for your promise, never to call me an Arminian; but not for making
me a Papist in the very next period. If you are grieved, that in these
Churches, I and the men of my mind have leave given us to be Rectors, you may
ease your self by a Course at Law: For you are never like to do it by writing
Books, though it is said of you, as of him in Scotland, That you can put them
out as often, as your Belly aches. Whilst you say that such professors, as Master
Hickman, and your self, cannot have license to be Rectors, no nor so much as to
escape the strappado in my Church, you either mean you are departed from the
true Church of England, or that I am revolted to that of Rome. If the first,
you confess your own Schism; If the second, God will rebuke you for your
Slander.

Sect. 12. When you have done with my Advertisement, Compare this with Sect. 14.
you have not yet done with me. And for want of new forces, to make a stand
against Evidence of Truth and Reason, you repete a great part of your Grotian
Religion, as if you thought a Repetition were aequipollent to a Reply. First,
you scruple not to say, [ That Grotius his Religion is that which is contained
in the Council of Trent with all the rest. p. 386.] Yet in the passage which
you translate, there are these things against you. Inveniet ea commode and
convenienter, ^um S. S. tum veterum Doctorum locis ad marginem positis, posse
explicari. Discuss. p. 14.
1. He says that those Acts may be commodiously explained, by the marginall
Citations both out of Scripture and Ancient Doctors, not that they ought to be
received in gross, without such commodious explications: where by the way you
may amend your gross mistake in the Translation, by carrying the adverbs to the
verb, which you have linked unto the substantive, mi^taking the Ablative, for
the Dative Case plural. Quorum Act^ si quis leget animo ad p^cem propenso, Is
inveniet, etc.
And by this you have perverted the Author's sense. 2. He says that this may
be done in any man's judgment, who has a mind propense to Peace. In order to
the unity and peace of Christendom, all the most favorable Constructions, must
be put upon the Doctrins of either party. And by whom is this to be said, but
by a Professed Reconciler? 3. So far is Grotius from turning Papist, though
such commodious explications should be allowed him, (as some have taken the
Covenant, and Engagement too in their own sense, who would not take it in the
Imposers) that nothing less will content him (no not in order to public Peace)
than a Removal and Tollantur ea, quae cum pia ista Doctrina pugnant, etc.
Abolition of those Corruptions in the Church, Ibid.
which had obtained their Introduction by evil manners and customs, not by
ancient tradition, or the Auctority of Councils. 4. He does not say he is
content with what he has, but that he H^bebit id quo possit e^^e contentus.
shall have that wherewith he may be contented, upon this Quod si pr^terea
tollantur ea, etc.
condition or proviso, that Reformation shall be made. 5. He condition's that
this be done Quod si, cura Episcoporum and Regum tollantur ea, etc.
by Kings and Bishops in their respective places of Jurisdiction, without
taking notice of the Pope, whose consent he thought needless as well as
impossible to be had. 6. He add's the chief thing, (which you were pleased to
take no no^ice of unto your Readers, hopeing they would not take the pains to
examine Grotius in his Original) Nec aliud desiderat Confessio Augustana* Ibid.
Ibid.
That the Augustan Cenfession does not desire any thing else, in order to a
closure of both the Churches. He add's the Profession (not only of Zanchie, a
single Protestant, but) of the Protestant Princes and Cities, De nullo articulo
Fidei dissentire se ab Ecclesia Catholica: sed paucos abusus a se omitti, qui
novi sunt, and contra voluntatem Canonum, vitio Temporum, recepti. You see that
Grotius has expressed a lesser propensity to the Papists, than the Protestants
who adhere unto the Augustan Confession, Et optima est and auctoritate maxima,
quippe in Regnis aliquot, etc. Discuss. p. 15.
which of all the Protestant Confessions is judged by Grotius to be the best
and of the greatest Authority, as being Received in some Kingdoms, and in some
of the greatest Principalities, and in diverse free Cities or Commonwealths.
Bucer was one of that Synod, who (you know) was assisting to our true English
Reformation.

Now what a hard hap is this, that That must be Popery in Grotius, which is not
such in any one else? Let all the Kingdoms and Commonwealths which embrace
the Augustan Confession be reckoned Papistical, as well as Grotius; or else let
Grotius be a Protestant, as well as Them. But you are implacable to Grotius,
who must be therefore what you will have him, rather then want a staff to beat
that Dead lion, (who can less resist you than a live Dog) you are resolved to
call it This you do in your. C^et. Relig. p. 37.
his way to Peace, au^ per Papae eximie beni authoritatem, aut Concilium
Generale, etc. (Vot. pro pace p. 9.) which, your Eyes have made your Conscience
witness, was the way of some other pacifick Persons. Did you not know the true
English of vidi eos in id incumbere Omnes -- and again, eos sentire ineundas
vias --? Besides, of Eas autem esse Tres. ^ot. p. 9.
three ways, you name but two. 1. The Authority of a Pope extremely good. 2.
Or a General Council, righly called during the vacancy of the Popedom, (which
later words you leave out.) 3. Or the Conferences of Kings directed by the
Bishops with that intent, that the Result of their Thoughts might be brought to
the Sea of Rome, as nothing else but a Coagulum, a kind of cement, and means
of Concord. This whole third way you would not mention.

Sect. 13. You object against Grotius, Discuss. p. 185.
that In interpreting places of Scripture, He professed he would not cross the
Rule, which was delivered by himself, and by the Council of Trent. p. 386] But
you name not the Rule, nor direct your Reader where to find it. If you knew it
not your self, why would you vilify you knew not what? And if you wanted no
knowledge of it, why would you argue against your knowledge? Why would you brand
him as a Papist for adhering to a Rule, which is the Rule of the Protestants,
as well as Papists? I will convince you of your rashness (from whatsoever
principle it issued out) by telling your Readers the very Rule, of which you
either were ignorant, or else dissembled your understanding. It was Regula
prudentissima ejus Synodi de non interpretanda Scriptura contra unanimem
Consensum Patrum, etc. Discuss. p. 18^. lin. 30.
the most prudent [and Protestant] Rule, of not Interpreting Scripture against
the [full and] unanimous consent of Fathers. Are you so near to the Socinians,
as to decry such Rules as These? O^ is every thing Popish, for being ap^roved
by the Council of Trent? Go to Sir, go to; I understand you better and better.
The better to make you understand your self, I am to mind you of the style
which Grotius speaks in. Ibid.
Nihil fecisset Grotius ne contra Synodum quidem Tridentinam. If you should say
of your self in some particular, That in this you do nothing contrary even to
the Council of Trent, would any man from hence conclude you a Papist, and not
rather the contrary? Consider the force of Ne quidem, and you will know what
you have done. Again, the addition of those words (immediately after the place
you cite.) Quam multo melius intellexit Alcazar, does show a different meaning
of the Place, then you were willing to apprehend. He speaks of his own
Interpretations of some Places of Isaiah, against which it was objected, that
he receded from those of the ancient Fathers. But he Non obstat (Regula) quo
minus ad loca Scripturae, historica praesertim aut Prophetica, adferatur nova
expositio, etc.
answers to the objection ( p. 182.) That to Places of Scri^ture, especially
Historical and Prophetical Places, It is lawful to bring new expositions, so
that they be not repugnant to Doctrins anciently delivered. And this liberty he
cites from the Romanist Alcazar. ( p. 183.) adding Maldonate, and others, and
so going on, till he concludes, That by the advice of learned men, He will use
this liberty; but so as not to cross the Rule, which Himself has set unto
himself as well as that Council, (to wit the Rule of doing nothing against the
joint consent of the Father;) which Alcazar understood, as well or better than
Mr. Rivet. Where it is evident, what he speaks is of the liberty he uses in
his Interpreting of Scripture, not of enslaving h^mself unto the Council of
Trent's Interpretations; but he will use his liberty in such a manner, as not
to break his own Good Rule, though it is also the Rule even of that very
Council. If our Enemies, the Pa^ists, do make a good Rule, or repe^e it rather
from Vincentius Lirinensis, we may observe it as being good, though not as made
or repeted by him, or Them.

D^scuss. p. 139.
Sect. 14. You add out of Grotius, That the Augustan Confession commodiously
explained, has scarce any thing which may not be reconciled with those
opinions which are received with the Catholics, by Authority of Antiquity and
of Synods, as may be known out of Cassander and Hoffmei^ter; and there are
among the Jesuits also who think not otherwise, p. 386, 387.] All the weight
of this Testimony does lie on that phrase, Dogmata quae Antiquitatis and
Synodorum authoritate sunt recepta. And what injury is it to the Augustan
confession, to think it may be so reconciled? reconciled with those Dogmata,
which the Catholics have from Antiquity? If some of the soberest of the
Jesuits, such as Pe^avius and Sirmondus, would (for the love they bear to
peace) subscribe the Augustan Confession, it might be much for the honor, but
could not be for the prejudice of our Religion; for if we rejoice for the
Conversion of now and then a Jew, why not for that of a Jesuit also? Again,
supposing that Grotius had been able, in his own sense to subscribe the Trent
Articles, (in order to the peace and unity of Christendom) it would no more be
an Evidence of his being turned Papist, than of any Papist's turning Protestant,
who should subscribe the Augustan Confession. Compare this with Sect. 12.
The very utmost of your Objections against Grotius is, that he designed to
deal with the Articles of Trent, as Sancta Clara with the Articles of the
Church of England; to wit, by drawing them aside to another Sense, than what is
most obvious in the words themselves. And admit it were so indeed; yet 1. He
had better grounds for it than Sancta Clara, to wit, the places of Scripture,
and Ancient Doctors in the Margin, which may be used as a Key to unlock their
meaning when it is Doubtful. And if the meaning of the Text is truly agreeable
to the Margin, there is then a just ground of public peace, in case the
Scripture and Antiquity do contain a good meaning, which I hope you will not
refuse to grant me. 2. But however you must be minded, that this is a thing
which the Papists do most of all blame in our Reconciler, to wit, his assuming
so great a liberty, as to misinterpret their Definitions. Just as we who are
Protestants do lay a blame upon Sancta Clara, for misexpounding our Articles
against our mind. From whence, notwithstanding the Papists were never so
irrational, as to conclude that Franciscus a Sancta Clara turned Protestant:
Much less may we infer that Grotius turned Papist, from his making their
Doctrins comply with Scripture, who had wrested the Scripture to serve their
Doctrins. 3. If he could find a sense in the words of Trent, which being
agreeable to Scripture and to the Protestant Confession, might be by
Protestants subscribed to, what hurt were it to us, or gain to them? Even This
would evince him to be no ^apist. For if he were, what need could there be of
such commodious Explications? 4. Add to this, (as I said before Sect. 12.) his
Qu^d si praeterea, Quod s^ praetere^ tollantur ista quae cum pia ista Doctrina
pugnant, etc.
But if besides; (not and if as you translate it) noting this to be required
yet further toward a peace, (before the Peacemaker himself can rest
contented) that all the Errors of the Papacy be taken away: which having never
been introduced by Authority of Councils, or ancient Tradition, (meaning no
other Councils then what are ancient, agreeable to the Tradition which comes
immediately after) he resolves may be Reformed by Kings and Bishops in their
several Regions, without the making of any Breach in the Church of God. 5. And
once for all let it be noted, That Grotius his use of that Especially taking in
an old Tradition, etc. p. 386.
phrase, (which you lately perverted to your own ends) is only to signify
against the Romanist's Errors, that they are not introduced by ancient
Tradition; and therefore wanting that Authority to which they lay a dishonest
claim, they are unquestionably fit to be taken away.

Discuss. p. 71.
Sect. 15. What you recite out of Grotius in your p. 387. Must receive its true
sense from the words of the Author before, and after. You must observe the
Resolution both in France, and else where, In^e^im and in Gallia and alibi, Duo
constare video; neque pro Concilio universali l^abendum id quod a
Patriarchalibus fedibus aut omnibus aut plurimis est improbatum, etc.
That no one Council is to be reckoned for universal, which is disliked either
by all, or by the major part of the Patriarchal Sees. This then must assure us
what his Notion is of Councils, when he speaks of them in gegerall without
naming which. And for the passage which you cite, I pray Sir, tell me; Has not
France the Scriptures and the Dogmata, (that is the Doctrins, in this place,
not the opinions, as you translate it,) explained in the four Ecumenical
Councils, and also the Decrees against Pelagius? If so, why do you quarrel? if
not, why do you say, that you esteem that Nation an honorable part of the
Church of Christ? (Grot. Rel. p. 10.) If you did not strive to deceive your
Reader, why did you not faithfully translate the passage, but purposely leave
out the special words, which would have served to clear their Author? you know
his sentence is plainly this. That in those Churches which join with the
Roman, In Ecclesiis illis, -- non Scriptura tantum manet, sed and dogmata,
explicata in Magnis Synodis, Nicaena, Constantinop. Ephesina, Chalcedonensi.
Discuss. p. 71.
not only the Scripture does still remain, but the Doctrins also explained in
the GREAT COUNCILS, Those of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and the
Things decreed against Pelagius by the Bishops of Rome. But in your
Translation, you neither express the word Great, (which is of vast consequence)
nor do you name so much as one of the four Great Councils. As if you were
willing that your Readers should imagine, he might mean some partial and
trivial Councils, and lay as much weight upon such as those, as if indeed he
had been a Papist. Now concerning the Canons of those great Councils, for
Reformation of manners in the Bishop of Rome, (which Grotius call's, for that
reason, Egregious Constitutions,) They are also received by Rome it self. And
were they put in execution, there could not be any such thing as Popery.
Because according to those Canons, the Bishop of Rome must quit his claim to
the Universality of his Pastorship, or to his being an Universal Judicial Head,
and must leave the Church to be governed by her several Primates. Hence it it is
that such wise and pacifick Protestants, as Melanchthon, Isaac Casaubon,
Grotius, and Bishop Bramhall, do still exact a Reformation Secundum Canones.
Yet this is but one of those many things, for which good Canons have been
enacted. And thus you see at every turn, how very little you were qualified to
intermeddle in these Things.

Sect. 16. The next passage you translate in as fraudulent a manner as any
other. Discuss. p. 48.
Read and Repent what you have done. These are the things, which thanks be to
God the Catholics do not thus believe, though many that call themselves
Catholics so live as if they did believe them: But Protestants (so live) by
force of their Opinions, and Catholics by the decay of Discipline, p. 387.]
First you omit the word [ Quidam] which is of greatest moment to show the
meaning of the Author; as if you had purposely laid a Trap for your illiterate
Readers, to make them fall into a hatred of so incomparable a man, for having
written thus sharply against Protestants in general; whereas, you know, he
only spoke of some Sed Protestants quidam ex vi Dogmatum, etc. lin. 13.
certain Protestants, who live wicked lives by force of their Doctrines or
O^inions. And do you know any one Protestant, who will not say the very same?
2. You do not take the least notice, what kind of Doctrine his words belong to:
Indeed if you had, you had spoiled your own plot: For the passage refers unto
the Quomodo vivas, ni^il interest. Sine condition pro paena quam ipsi debent
satisfecit Christus. Sine Condition gloriam aeternam ipsis ^^t meritus. Ibid.
Doctrine of Unconditionall Promises, uncondition^l Satisfaction, unconditional
Glory. And did he not say very truly, that Catholics do not b^lieve this,
though many live as if they did? Did he not as truly say, that (at least) some
Protestants do hold these Doctrines, and live accordingly? you see the whole
fault i^ in your tre^herous translation. You promise me to translate as well as
you can, (p. 383.) If to do it very falsely, is as well as you can, I will not
tax you for breach of promise, But then repent of your gibeing, p. 383. l.
penult.

Sect. 17. Your next Quarrel to Grotius is for calling the Roman Church the
D^scuss. p. 95.
Mistress of other Churches, p. 387.] But in this your misfortunes are more
than One. For 1. He speaks of the Roman Church, not in her present but ancient
state; and this you could not but know, if you knew the English of jam olim
senserit. Or if you read as far as those words, quae tempora respiciens
Grotius, (p. 96. l. 1.) 2. Zanchy was a strict Protestant, and (which is more
against you) a Presbyterian; yet he professes the Roman Church to have been
pure whilst she was ancient, and desires no more for her Reformation, than that
she return to her former self. Look back on chap. 1. p. 23. and you will find
in my Margin his words at large; words most worthy your meditation. You will
find in the same paragraph the affirmation of Blondel, (which being there in
Latin only, I will here give you in English) look back on chapter 1. p. 22.
That the Dignity of the Roman Apostolical Bishopric [or See] is not denied by
the Protestants, no nor her primacy over the Neighboring Churches, and in some
respect over and aliquatenus super omnes.
all the Churches, but this by the Protestants is referred to her
Ecclesiastical Right. Is this an Argument to prove that Blondel turned Papist,
who lived and died the chief prop of the Presbyterians? yet this is every whit
as good, as any you bring against Grotius. 3. It is the point of
Praedestination, which occasions Grotius to use those words, wherein the
Arminian Presbyterians do jump with Rome. And when he calls her a a^iarum
Magistra.
Mistress, (not to tyrannize, but) to teach her Neighbors, he calls her no
more than indeed she was; she having been often appealed to by other Churches,
as by the African, and the French, when any point of Tradition was called in
Question. You Grot. Rel. p. 8.
profess your very honorable and grateful thoughts of the Jesuits and Friars
for their labors to convert the Infidel Nations unto the Faith, of which you
will not deny the Roman Church to be the Mistress. 4. Higher Titles than this
have been afforded to that Church by the Apostolical Father Iren. adversus
Haeres. lib. 3. c. 3. mi^^* p. 232*
Irenaeus, who allowed her no less than a Principality, in regard of which he
thought it needful that all other Churches should be conformable to This, as
being the greatest and the most ancient, and known to all to have been found^d
by the most glorious pair of Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul. Ad hanc enim
Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem Principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire
Ec^lesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique Fideles; in qua semper ab his qui sunt
undique conservata est ea quae ab Apostolis Traditio. The reason of this (I
suppose may be fitly given out of Eusebius: Eusebius. Hist. l. ^* c. 8.
(...) -- (...). In a word, if you will know how great a Deference has been
given to the Roman Church, by such as St. Cyprian, Tertullian, St. Ambrose, St.
Ierom, St. Austin, Sozomen, and diverse others among the Ancients, nay by such
as our Protestant King James, and learned Bucer, and Mr. Calvin himself;
Grotius his p. 68, 69, 70.
Discussio will strait inform you. 5. What Grotius says he will subscribe with
a most ready mind, is nothing else but the true Doctrine of Praedestination, and
other Doctrines depending on it, which all the Remonstrant Presbyterians are as
ready to subscribe, as any Grotius. And what is this to his turning Papist? no
more than it is to the D^minicans being turned Presbyterians.

Sect. 18. The next passage which you cite from p. 7. (in your p. 387.) is much
the same with what you cited from p. 14. and may be sent for its Answer to the
12th. Section of this Appendix, Discuss. p. 7.
but yet I will add, that this makes more to your disadvantage; because it
makes it more manifest, how that passage was to be rendered concerning the
Scriptures and the Fathers (in the Margin of the Articles) being made a fit
medium for a commodious Interpretation.; and so it shows you the less
excusable, that when you had seen both Places, you should yet be guilty of such
a misinterpretation. 2. There is added in that place, That Grotius did set out
the Augustan Confession, as well as the Bull of Pius Quintus; It being the part
of a Reconciler, to compare the Pretenses of either Party, and then to pitch
upon a moderate commodius sense, wherein both Parties may likely meet. But
remember that the middle cannot be either of the Extremes; and therefore
Grotius was aequedistant from a Papist and Presbyterian. The Sy^^d at Dort and
Assembly-m^n add Articles to those in the Creed.
3. Whereas it is said, that the Bull has Articles in it besides those of the
Creed, But that the Synod of Dort has more: First I answer that it is True,
and therefore blameless, as will be acknowledged by any of the Arminian
Presbyterians. Next that Grotius did only use it as a most pertinent retorsion
upon the Man with whom he was dealing. Mr. Rivet who approved of the Synod at
Dort, had no reason to object against the Bull of Pius Quintus, [its having
some Articles besides those in the Creed,] because his own Synod of Dort had
many more. Compare with both (if you please) Mr. Baxter's Confession of Faith,
and that of the Westminster Assembly, wherein (it seems) there were added so
many Articles to the Creed, that the Parliament thought fit to lay aside a Viz.
cap. 30. and. 31. and Sect. 4. of c. 20. and also a great part of cap. 24.
great many, yet such a confidence there was in that Assembly, that they posted
their Issue into the world, before the Parliament had declared their
Resolutions about it. Which though I guessed at before, by the Division I had
observed amongst See the Testimony to the Truth of I.C. p. 37.
the 52. Ministers within the Province of London, whereof a Party did still
wait for the Pleasu^e of the Houses, whilst a greater party of the same Tribe
would not be patient of such delay; yet I never knew it so fully, as since I
saw the Declaration of the Congregational Churches, wherein the Dealings of the
Assembly are very usefully Praef. p. 10. and ^2.1^*
exposed to public view. 4. As for the Novity or Newness of those Articles in
the Bull, That must be judged of (says Grotius) by such a right understanding
of them, as is to be taken from the Scriptures and ancient Doctors in the
Margin. And if it once come to that, they will cease to sound as now they do.
How this project can be effected, without forceing and wresting the words of
the Coun^il, I must ingenuously profess I cannon hitherto understand. But
Grotius his understanding could reach to see many things, which are above the
comprehensions of yours, or mine. Or if he came short of such a way, as to
which the Papists would have agreed, then the Peace which he designed was still
to continue in his Design. And he would ever have this to object against them,
that we Protestants had offered them Terms of Peace, Such, as by their own
Margin, (to wit the Scriptures and Fathers there,) they stand obliged to accept
of; And so the Blame of our Breaches is to be laid at their door, who refuse
such Terms of Reconcilement.

Now can you think it any dettiment to the Protestant Cause, That we alone are
the men, who as much as in us lies would live peaceably with all men? And that
others of each extreme will rather continue unreconcileable? If you think it a
foolish thing, in so angelical a Person as Grotius was, to propose such Terms
as were so utterly unlikely to take effect, To this I answer two Things. 1. He
professed to lay-in this Provision for Posterity, to which he makes his Appeal
in diverse places. He hoped that men in tract of Time would grow to be weary of
contending, and place Religion in good life, as now they do in maintaining
Parties. 2. You have Grot. Rel. p. 6.
professed for your own part, that you will write and speak for Peace, though
you saw not a man in the world that would regard it, or return you any better
thanks then a reproach. And though you propose some Terms of reconciling the
Protestants with the Papists, Ibid. p. 2^.
that the work may not seem to be utterly Hopeless, yet you proclaim in your
Title Page to your Key for Catholics, That your Proposals are made for a
hopeless Peace; as if you thought you had the Privilege (above all other
mortals) to approve what you practice, even whilst you practice what you
condemn.

Sect. 19. The passage about the Real Presence in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, The Real Presence in the Lords Supper.
(at the bottom of your page 387, ^isc^ss. p. 35.
) is placed by Grotius in the midst of many more, taken from writers of all
sorts, both Ancient and Modern; and amongst the modern, as well Protestants, as
Papists; to show the smalness of the difference, as to that particular. But of
this you were resolved to take no notice. 2. He adds another passage of the
Council of Trent, to wit that This Sacrament is the spiritual food of the
Soul. Another from the Gloss of the Canon Law, a third from Clement the fourth,
a fourth from St. Bernard, and then he shows their affinity to Philip
Melanchthon, and the Waldenses, to diverse Protestant Churches, and in a word
to Mr. Calvin, who has said as plainly as any of them, Calvinus: Deum non
ludere inanibus signis, sed reipsa praestare quod per symbola testatur,
communicationem Corporis and Sanguinis: -- verum substantiam nobis donari: --
substantiae corp. and sang. nos fieri participes. p. 36.
[That God does not mo^k us with empty signs, but does really exhibit what he
does testify by the signs, the communication of his Body and blood. -- That
the very substance is given unto us, -- That we are made partakers of the
substance of his Body and Blood.] Will you infer from hence that Calvin also
turned Papist? or will you say the Council of Trent was as well Protestant as
Popish, for saying that Christ in that Sacrament is sacramentally present, and
not according to the natural manner of existing? in earnest I know not what
should hinder you, could you but think it for your Advantage. 3. As for that
which you add, [And the Council has found words to express it, that there is
made a ^hange of the whole substance of the Bread into the Body, and the whole
substance of Wine into the Blood, which conversion the Catholic Church calls
Transubstantiation,] Gretius (you know) has nothing like it; nor does he any
way appear to approve of that notion, nor to go a step further than Melanchthon
and Bucer, nay the Waldenses and Mr. Calvin. Nay he approves the Diallacticon,
which was clearly written by a Protestant. The whole malignity of the passage
lies wrapped in your addition about Transubstantiation; which yet you have set in
such a manner, as I believe your english Readers will think you have taken it
out of Grotius, if they ^o not observe what now I tell them, That Grotius has
not any such thing; but that all the Addition is your D^vice. Your Translation
is also faulty in two respects, for the Latin runs thus, Iesum Christum verum
Deum atque hominem, vere, realiter, ac substantialiter, sub specie earum rerum
sensibilium contineri. Your English thus, Jesus Christ true God and truly man,
is really and substantially contained under the form of those sensible things:
applying vere to hominem which belongs to contineri. Again, those words in the
Latin, assequi possumus, you render thus, we may be certain: of which as I see
not any reason, so I verily believe you will show me none.

Sect. 20. What Grotius says of the Synod, Material and Formal Idolatry.
[ that when the Synod of Trent says, the Sacrament is to be adored with
divine worship, Discuss. p. 79.
it intends no more but that the Son of God himself is to be adored, in your p.
388.] he cites out of the Synods words, which explicates herself, as he has
recited her explication, Sess. 13. C. 6.] And could it be possible for Grotius
to do amiss in so doing? was it his fault that he did not lie? or is a man
turned Papist, who relates a matter of Fact as he finds it printed before his
Eyes? Is any Protestant to be blamed merely for saying that the Papists do
profess to worship none but the Son of God, when accused of Idolatry for
yielding worship to bread and wine? Of what a happy Generation were you
descended, that you can make a man guilty (though never so innocent) by
somewhat less than an Affirmation? But to come from Grotius to the Papists, is
it not absolutely necessary that they should make that Excuse, whilst they
suppose (as they do) that the Elements are converted into the very body and
blood of Christ? For we know in that Case, though what they worship is very
Bread, which implie's them guilty of material Idolatry, yet Christ is That
which they mean to worship, which free's them from the guilt of being formally
Idolatrous. It is not Popery, to do the Papists no wrong. The way to convince
and convert the^, is to accuse them in measure of their Corruptions. A
Puritanical opposition ^onfirmes a Papist, and make's him conclude he is
Orthodox, because he Conquer's.

Two sorts of Papists. Discuss. p. 15.
Sect. 21. Your two last passages out of Grotius, (which you sadly translated
in your p. 388.) are joined together in his Discussio, p. 15. and tell us what
Papists he understood, when he spoke of them in ^n Epistle. And what hurt can
there be in either part? Did not Grotius do well, in calling those men by the
name of Papists, who approve of all the sayings and deeds of Popes, and that
without any difference? What a Papist must you be thought, if you will not call
such Papists, as well as Grotius? But I perceive, by what you say in your
Grotian Religion, (p. 58, 59.) You collect from those words, (or would make
your Reader at least believe it) that none were Papists with Grotius, but such
as these. [You hope there be few Papists in the world, if th^se Only be
Papists, p. 59.] Nor can you mean any otherwise, but by denying that These are
Papists. Here then I must show you as great a wilfulness or weakness in your
objection, as was ever committed by any Writer in this kind. For in the page by
you cited, Grotius make's a Distinction of two sorts of Papists, (as you have
often times done Grot. Rel. p. 9. Sect. 4.
your self,) and tell's Mr. Rivet which sort he meant. Not, which he meant in
all places, but in illa, Epistola, in that particular Epistle, which Rivet
spoke of. Mark the end of the period, as well as the beginning.] Papistas
Grotius in illa Epistola -- eos intelligebat, qui sine ullo discrimine Omnia
Paparum Dicta Factaque probant, honorum aut lucri, ut solet fieri, causa: Non
eos, qui, salvo jure Regum and Episcoporum, Papae sive Episcopo Romano eum
concedunt Primatum, quem mos Antiquus and Canones and veterum Imperatorum and
Regum edicta ei assignant. Here are distinctly two sorts of Papists described
to us. In the Epistle spoken of, he meant the former, who promiscuously approve
of all that come's from the Pope, right, or wrong; good, or evil; not the later
sort of Papists, who allow the Pope such a Note that the later sort of Papists
are agreed with in this one particular by Melanchthon, Bishop Bramhall, David
Blondel the Presbyterian, and many more.
Primacy, as Ancient Custom and the Canons and the Edicts of Emperors and
Kings do assign unto him. Did you not know, that the second [ eos] was a
pronoun Adjective, as well as the first? And that Papistas was the Substantive,
with which they did equally agree? Dr. Kendal would have said (in such a case
as this is) That a little more of the Grammar School would have done you no
harm. If you shall plead in your excuse, that your offense was committed
through want of Charity toward Grotius, not through any the least defect of
skill in Grammar, you will enforce us to believe you a better Scholar, than a
Christian.

2. But suppose it were, as you affirm it; yet considering what is meant by
sine ullo Discrimine, there can be no such ill in it, as you suggest. For they
who approve of as many sayings and doings of the Pope, as they discern to have
Truth and reason in them, and also disapprove of those, which have no
appearance of truth and Reason, (amongst whom you may reckon the Presbyterian
Followers of Arminius, who applaud the Decree of Pope Innocent the tenth,)
cannot properly and strictly be called Papists. Next, what hurt is there in
adding, that they who thus approve of all that come's from the Pope, do it
either for honor's, or Lucre's sake? Sure they do it not for God's, or for
Conscience sake. And being not on Christian, it needs must be on carnal
Grounds. The chief of which in this matter are Gain, and Greatness. Some
indeed there are or may be, who may do it only out of Ignorance. But to the
consideration of such as Those, he had no occasion to descend in that
particular passage of which we speak.

3. The negative part of the whole sentence, which you cut asunder from the
Affirmative, and set in lieu of a New Argument against its Author, (whether
more wilfully, or ^eakly, time will show,) I have showed you the meaning of, in
the first part of this Section. But here I will add for your behoof, that there
are Papists in the world, who are therefore called by the name of Papists,
because they continue in Communion with the Church of Rome, and yet do concur
with many Protestants (as well of the Presbyterian, as the Episcopal way,)
touching the Primacy of Order which does belong to that See. From whence we
must not conclude, that Thuanus turned Protestant, but that he was a moderate
Papist. Nor that Blondel turned Papist, but that he was (in this point) a very
moderate Presbyterian. Remember the words of Bishop Bramhall See your Grot.
Rel. p. 22.23.
[ Cyprian gave a Primacy or principality of Order to the Chair of St. Peter,
as Principium unitatis; so do we.] And yet you profess of this learned Bishop,
Ibid p. 23. Sect. 13.
that you do not take him for a Papist. If to agree in many things, whilst in
many others we disagree, were to be of one Church, or of one Religion; then
would the Papists be all Protestants, and all the Protestants would be Papists;
when Dr. Owen thought you had enrolled him into the Troop of Antinomians, Disp.
of right to Sacram. 5. p. 485.
you pleaded fairly for your self, that you reckoned not all to be Antinomians
who held only some one or few of their Opinions. How then could you resolve to
reckon Grotius among the Papists, who came no nearer unto the Papists, than the
Papists come to the Protestants? No man living can be a Papist, for this one
thing, of allowing the Pope such a Primacy as Grotius speaks of, but denying
him the Prerogative of being the universal Pastor, or the Supreme head and
Governor of the Catholic Church. And Grotius give's a good reason in his
following words. Qui quidem Primatus non tam Episcopi est, quam ipsius
Ecclesiae Romanae, caeteris omnibus praelatae communi consensu; etc. Discu^^.
p. 15.
Because the Privilege of the said Primacy was by the common consent [ of the
Ancient Church] ascribed rather to the Church, then to the Bishop of Rome; as
having been the most eminent of all the Churches in the world, I say the most
eminent in two respects. In respect of the Purity of her Faith, when first she
was planted by the two chiefest of the Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul; and in
respect of the City Rome, being considered as the (...). Vide Cod. Can. Eccl.
Vniv. Can. 206.
Seat of the Western Empire. So far is this one consideration from showing
favor unto the Papacy, that it is a principal Bulwark set up against it. 1. It
fallows unavoidably that the Pope cannot pretend to the granted Primacy, from
the words of Christ unto St. Peter, but only from the common consent of the
Church, and so it is not by Divine, but Eccclesiastical right. 2. It is not
granted unto the Pope, who may at any time err, as Liberius did; but to the
pure unerring Roman Church, (such as Zanchie the Presbyterian does acknowledge
her to have been,) which when the present Church of Ro^e shall appear to be, by
such an impartial Reformation of her Corruptions as may reduce her to her
Primitive and purer self, we shall be ready to pay her Her Ancient Honor. Nor
do we gratify her at all, as now she is, by acknowledging (with the Fathers)
that she was Primitively pure; because we are able to demonstrate the several
growths of her Corruption. The light and evidence of which, as it does justify
our depar^ure, so does it make us unexcusable, if we preposterously return.

Sect. 22. There is nothing more strange, Grot. his design had no influence on
our English changes. Discuss. p. 16.
than that from words so innocent as those you cite out of Grotius, (in your p.
389.) you should conclude his Design to have had an influence upon England, in
the changes which occasioned our late civil Wars. For the Book you cite was the
last he wrote, and so it was not very far from the final conclusion of all our
Wars: or suppose it had been a great deal sooner, yet I am left to admire at
what you are willing to infer. Grotius tells us that his Labors for the peace
of the Church were not displeasing to many equal [impartial] men, not only in
Paris and all France, In Anglia non pauci placidi pacisque amantes.
Insanientibus Brownistis, quibuscum D.R. quam Angliae Episcopis convenit, etc.
but in Germany, Poland, and England too. And that the men to whom his pains
was pleasing here in England, were men of mild Tempers and Lovers of peace.
Such as to whom he opposes the raging Brownist, better suiting with Mr. Rivet,
then with the Bishops of England. From hence you conclude, (I wonder why) He
had Episcopal Factors here in England. If you mean Factors to bring in Popery,
I demand your proof or your repentance; if Factors for Peace, you have my
pardon. It Is pity so many sheets of paper as you have written and printed on
this one Subject, should all conclude with nothing better than a confident
begging of the Question. Yet mark the bottom of the Invention with which you
have been so long a brooding. There is a party of Prelatists here in England,
who are Factors for Grotius, and so Papists, (this you know is the scope of
all,) when first it is apparent that Grotius himself was no such thing. And
secondly, the Prelatists are not agreeable to Grotius, in that for which he was
most suspected; to wit, his thinking that the Bull of Pius Quintus may (for
peace) be subscribed in a commodious sense. Wherein, as I am not of Grotius his
mind, (I being not able to subscribe it in any sense I can imagine) so neither
am I of Mr. Baxter's, that Grotius for this o^inion may be concluded an arrant
Papist: no, I find great reason to conclude the contrary. For had he been
really a Papist, he might have subscribed those Articles without a commodious
interpretation. And you have no pretense of proof that he ever subscribed them
at all: He only spoke as an Agitator, a studious Contriver of public peace,
for which he made propositions, but all conditional; and showed how far he
might go to so great an End.

He had no Church-preferment offered to ^im from hence.
Sect. 23. Whereas you say, some tell you that Grotius had Church-preferment
here offered him, and thought to have accepted it, (p. 389.) you give me
occasion to suspect, that either you hear amiss what you are told, or do ill
remember what you hear, or imperfectly relate what you remember. 1. At best it
is but a hearsay, and such, as if it were true, would prove him a Protestant
in grain. 2. But Grotius was not a Churchman, and was a great deal too old to
quit his secular employments for the taking of orders here in England, whereby
to be capable of Church-preferment. 3. All that looks like truth in it, I
think, is this; that the King of England having heard of his incomparable
Merits, and of his Love to our English Church, did determine to offer him, if
ever the times should prove Peaceable, some very honorable condition within
this Realm: Perhaps the Provostship of Eton might have been suitable to the
purpose, having been given a little before to some excellent persons of the
Laity. Sir Henry Savile, Mr. Murrey, and after that, to Sir Henry Wotton. Yet
this at most was but a purpose, which was never advanced unto an actual offer.

2. Your conceived objection is not so strange, but your answer to it is
somewhat stranger. For what can you mean by the Church of England of the second
Edition then in the Press? Dating this (as it must be dated) about the end of
the war, a little before the death of Grotius, nor long before the death of the
King, I know not what you will do for any good meaning of your words: was the
Church of England then Popish, or was she not? if Popish, was she such either
in capite, or in membris? I need not tell you your unhappiness, let your answer
be what it will. You have Grot. Rel. p. 105.106.
freed the King from the suspicion of being a Papist, although you make him
much inclined to a Reconciliation. If she was not then Popish, you see how well
you have written against your own writings.

3. I never heard that St. Clara was the Queen's Ghostly Father, Franciscus^
Sancta had a contrary design.
nor can I imagine from what Familiar you may have received your Intelligence. I
grant he continued a perfect Papist, for all he labored to reconcile the
Church of England's Doctrine with that of Rome. But then you must grant (by the
same reason) that Grotius continued a perfect Protestant, for all he proposed a
Reconcilement of the Tridentine Articles with the Augustan. If St. Clara did
the former, to draw the Protestants to be Papists, Grotius also did the later,
to draw the Papists to be Protestants. Can the designs of Grotius, and St.
Clara be both the same, when Grotius endeavored so to moderate, and soften
Popery, as to rob it thereby of all its poison? whilst St. Clara made it his
business to infuse a poison into the Articles of the Church of England? Behold
a strange partiality. The poor Protestants of England must suffer on both
sides. It pleases a Papist to interpret our English Articles as a Pacifick,
and thereupon our Archbishop must needs be warping toward Popery: An eminent
Protestant does the same by the Romish Articles, which by analogy should infer
that the Pope is warping toward the Protestants; But still it must be quite
otherwise; this must also become an Argument against the Prelatists of England;
who, if they approve of that Protestant's Labors, or but refuse to rail at
him for being turned unto the Papists, must needs be turned Papists as well as
he.

4. Why do you say, that I assure you of Grotius his Followers here in England?
If you mean here are Pursuers of his pacifick design, I shall confidently
challenge you to name One man, who is employed at present in any such
enterprise. Not but that we do desire and wish for Peace as much as any; but
seeing the Papists are more invasive and more at enmity with us then ever, we
find it more needful to betake our selves to our defense, then either to offer
them Terms of peace, or to expect such from them as we can yield to. If you
have read the late writings of Bishop B^amhall and Dr. Hammond, two impregnable
Propugners of the Protestant cause, (and let the Reverend Dean Cosins be ever
remembered as a third) you cannot but know that the Prelatists are more the
adversaries of Rome, than the Presbyterians.

5. You ask in th^se words, [ Is it any more proof that Grotius was a
Protestant for joining with them, than that they are Papists who join with him?
ibid.] Thus whilst you ask, if it is any more proof, you implicitly confess it
to be as much: that it must be as much you cannot modestly deny; and even this,
Ad Hominem, will serve the turn. For it is plain you make them all Papists who
join with Grotius, (whilst you call them the Grotian Cassandrian Papists) and
therefore according to your reasoning, Grotius who joined with our Episcopal
Divines must have been a prelati^al English Protestant.

6. What you add of the late King does serve to prove him a Protestant, and
what you add of Dr. Bailey does serve to speak him a Papist, but what of this?
Grotius was not that Doctor, any more than that King. Our Episcopal Divines
made a discovery of the cheat, and reckoned Bailey no other than what they found
him, rather a man of the sword than a true pacifick. Though it was observed by
learned Montague, that our Puritans were the men who did commonly turn Papists,
yet he did not conclude they were the likelier to be Papists who never turned.
Dr. Bezier ^leared from a^ implicit C^^^^y.
No, to argue in such sort is your own peculiar.

Sect. 24. What you cite from I. B. to show the judgment of those on whom the
Judgment of Grotius had any influence, p. 390.] is every way to your prejudice.
For 1. The Author is Dr. Bezier, a French Protestant by birth and by education,
not one whit the likelier to have been po^ishly affected, for having been
preferred by the Bishop of Durham to be a Prebend in that Church, the Bishop
himself being so contrary, and that in your knowldge. 2. It is more then you
know, that the Judgment of Grotius had any influence upon His, or that he ever
took Grotius into consideration. Take heed of s^eaking things out of your mere
Imagination. Dr. Bezier is a person, of whose practice in France I have been an
Eyewitness; and that (I know) did evince him a sober Protestant. But 3. Why
should not a Frenchman (preferred in England) have leave to wish for the
ancient Union, so as each enjoying their true Liberties, they might reform all
Errors in point of Doctrine for Themselves? 4. The design of that Tract being to
prove against the Papists, that in casting out the Papacy we are not guilty of
Schism or Heresy, urging Barnes his Book as a good Confession on their side,
and his monstrous usage for that Confession,) what need was there of more than
to clear the Liberties of our Church? 5. Since the Gallican Church had the same
Liberties with the British, He could not take a fitter hint to express his
wish for our Union. 6. Si utraque pars absque pre judicio sese mutuo
intelligeret, and pars extrema de rigore suo vellet remittere, ea Britannicae
Ecclesiae cum Gallicana consensio non foret adeo improbabilis, atque prima
front videtur Ecclesiam utramque vel alterutram ignorantibus. I. B. de Antiq.
Eccl. Britan^ libert. p. 34, 35.
What he speaks in their favor is only this, That if the French Church would
u^derstand us rightly, and would thereupon remit of her present Rigor, (which
you know implies a Reformation) our Agreement would be likelier than appears at
first sight, to such as have not a knowledge of either Church. And will not
you say as much as this of that or any other part of the Roman Church?
certainly these are to be thought those very tolerable terms, upon which you
profess for the French Papists, that you would run with the forewardest to meet
them, (p. 390.)

Sect. 25. Your odd Resolution, Pacificks are not a Cause of Discord.
that bellum and discordia non sunt nisi a pacificis and propter pacem, (p.
392.) can only be verified through the wilfulness of the unreconcileable. For
Love of Peace, by it self, would never be apt to make war. If any contention
shall arise about the means of union, that again must be charged on them that
di^^ike the mean's proposed, and yet propose no better, nor more prob^ble,
perhaps much worse, and more unlikely to take a confortable effect, whereas the
Pacifici, if they really propose the very best means they can, and do the
utmost that in them lye's to live peaceably with all men, as they cannot be
blameworthy for doing no more, so it is their comfort, if they miscarry, that
they have freed their own souls.

Of the Pope's Primacy.
Sect. 26. You seem to forget the thing in Question, when you inveigh against
an opinion of the necessity of an universal visible Head, p. 302.] For the
Primacy allowed unto the Pope by the learned Adversaries of Popery, (
Melanchthon, and Bishop Bramhall, Dr. Hammond, and Blo^del, as well as
Grotius,) is not an universal Headship, as that signifie's Pastorship, but (at
the most) a Patriarchate of the west, which does not imply but exclude a
Mona^chy, and is exactly reconcilable with an Aristocratick Government of the
Church. And even this is but according to the Ancient Canons, by which he is
qualified (if he please) to advance the Honor of Christianity, but not to
hinder, or obstruct it. Again, this Primacy thus allowed is not so properly the
Proposal, as the Concession of the Protestants, with a proviso that the Pope
will require no more. And for the buying of Peace, I told you long since how
great a price is to be paid.

How it removes the whole mistake.
Sect. 27. To conclude the whole subject, and to remove the cause of your
Mistakes, to make it very hard for you to persevere in your impertinence, or to
make you unexcusable in case you do so, I give you warning to distinguish
between the New Romish Canons, and the Note, that the four Genera^l Councils
were confirmed in Engl. by Act of Parliament in the first year of Queen Eliz. as
Dr. Featly well observed in his Letter to the late Primate.
Ancient Canons of the universal Church; between a Primacy of Order, and a
Supremacy of Power; and not to delude your self any longer by fixing your
thoughts upon the one, when Grotius and other Protestants do not approve but of
the o^^er. You profess to approve of the Pacifick design. It was Grotius his
judgment, that the likelyest way to make it take a good effect, is to take
from the Pope his universal Supremacy over the Church, and to make him content
himself, with a Primacy of Order, a^ that Principium unitatis (for the peace of
Christendom) which Melanchthon, King James, Isaa^ Casaubon, Bishop Bramhall,
Dr. Hammond, David Blondel, and all intelligent Protestants have still allowed
him. By this means the whole Church should have one Common Regiment, under
Bishops, and Metropol^tans, and Primates, and Patriarchs; which as it i^ much
cast down, if not destroyed, by the universal Monarchy of the Pope, so it well
consists with his Primacy according to the Canons of General Councils. Upon
these precise terms, an universal peace might be begun, if all Protestants
would agree under the Government of Bishops, and the Popes descend from their
usurpations; and all other things might be reformed by the Supreme Magistrates,
and Bishops, in their respective places of jurisdiction. Now this being the
utmost that Grotius pretend's toward a Peace, you are highly injurious, whilst
you join the Grotians and the French Papists in making the Pope to be the
ordinary judicial Head. (p. 380.) For the Ancient Canons make him but one,
although the first of five Patriarchs; and allow every Primate to be (...) in
his own Province; as Dr. Hammond has made apparent in his most satisfactory
Treatise concerning Schism, which has been twice or thrice railed at, but
never answered. Dr. Hammond of Schism Chap. 5. S^ct. 6. p. 100.
Especially from the Canon of the Ephesine Council, in the particular cause of
the Archbishop of Cyprus, over whom the Patriarch of Antioch (though he
extended his Patriarchate over all the Orient) was adjudged to have no manner
of Power.

I hope you see your obligation to make amends for your Calumny; in which you
cannot persevere, without incurring the danger of calumniating others, as well
as Grotius, Ibid. chapter ^. p. 59.
even the ablest Supporters of the Protestant cause. For Dr. Hammond has told
us, as well as Grotius, (and sure I am that they were both of the same
Religion,) That if we respect order and primacy of place, the Bishop of Rome
had it among the Patriarchs, as the Patriarchs among the Primates, that City of
Rome being the Lady of the World, and the seat of the Empire. Ibid. chapter 5. p.
100. Sect. 5.
Again, speaking of the preeminence of the Roman See heretofore, though he
denies her any supreme Authoritative power over other Primates, yet he allows
her a precedence or priority of place in Councils, an eminence in respect of
Dignity, which is perfectly reconcilable with the (...) and Independence, the
no-subordination or subjection of other Primates. Thus our Reverend Dr.
Hammond, whom, I am verily persuaded, you will not dare to call Papist, for
fear of derision from your most popular Admirers. However you do acknowledge
that Bishop Bramhall is a right Protestant, and he has told you very lately,
Bishop Bramhall in his Schism Guarded, etc. p. 4.
That the main Controversy, nay (he thinks) he might say the only necessary
Controversy between them and us, is about the extent of papal power. If the
Pope would content himself with his exordium Unitatis, which was all that his
primitive predecessors had, and it is as much as a great part of his Sons will
allow him at this day, we are not so hard-hearted or uncharitable, for such an
innocent Title or Office to disturb the peace of the Church. Nor do we envy him
such a preeminence among Patriarchs, as St. Peter had (by the confession of his
own party) among the Apostles. Ibid. p. 24, 25, 26. Primatus P^tro datur, ut
una Christi Ecclesia and una Cathedra monstratur. Cyprian. Epist. ad Actonium
de Uui^ate Ecclesiae.
Together with this compare his citation of Bishop Andrews, expressing his own
sense, and the sense of King James, yea and the sense of the Church of England.
To which having added the like sense of St. Cyprian, he does thus very briefly
conclude his own, p. 26.
This primacy neither the Ancients nor ^e do deny to St. Peter, of Order, of
Place, of Preeminence. If this first Movership would serve his turn, this
Controversy were at an end for our parts.

A C^njecture passed upon some L^tters.
Sect. 28. It is not amiss to take notice of the applauding Letters of which
you boast, ( p. 393.) and to conjecture at their design, if there were any such
things. Some who saw in your Aphorisms (and in some other things which you had
published) more of Truth and Moderation, than in other writings of
Presbyterians, were willing to pardon many things which they saw amiss in you,
for the love of that Truth of which they found you a Patronizer. No doubt but
that Charity, which hops all things, did make them hope that more study would
daily discover more Truth, which (for want of good study) you had not hitherto
discerned, and which as soon as you had learned might serve to rescue your
Inward man from all schismatical and factious ways. In which charitable hope
if they were very much mistaken, theirs was the error, but yours the fault; and
you alone are accomptable for having so guiltily deceived their expectations.
Their hopes of your Amendment (as well in some things as in others) were very
discreet, as well as sanguine: for who could easily have suspected, that the
Presbyterians by their Railing (at you and all that came from you) should more
oblige you to their side, than others reduce you into the way by gentle usage?
What if some of those Epistlers might write in Latin, (as it is credibly
reported) it was not to buffet but to oblige you; and therefore you should not
have entertained them as so many Messengers of Satan. Yet since I can but
conjecture, I shall address my request to every one of those persons, whom you
accuse of their applauding and flattering Letters, (for this you know is the
language, with which you publicly requite them for all their favors) that
they will clear their Intentions from this Aspersion, and say in the
uprightness of their Hearts, whether they sent you kind Letters to drive on an
Interest of their own, or only to perfect your Reformation.

Sect. 29. From the second part of your Key for Catholics, By whom our
Breaches were first made, and are ever since widened.
I now return to your long Preface before your five Disputations of
Church Government and Worship, where you show your good breeding to the best
part of the Nobility, as well as of the Gentry, and Commons of this land, who
still adhere unto the Prelacy so long established in the Church. You say
indefinitly to some, that they speak to the shame of their understandings, and
uncharitableness, but you beseech them to bear it, if you touch the sore; for
your work is healing. p. 2. You charge them all with want of charity to their
brethren, meaning thereby the Presbyterians; and you adventure to judge of the
reasons why. In some there are confused apprehensions of the case. In some a
co-interest and consociation with the Divines of their way. In some as
stiffnesse and stoutness of disposition. In too many (miserable souls!) it is
mere ungodliness and e^mity to that way of piety, which appears in many they
differ from. In the best of them it is (too bad) a remisness of charity, and
want of zeal for the Churches Peace, etc. p. 23. Thus you bestow your gentle
touches (as you please to call them) upon your honorable, worshipful, beloved
Countrymen, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of this land who adhere to
Prelacy, p. 1. But they must not presume to take it ill. For you say, they have
a sore, which MUST be touched, and that you will do it as gently as the case
will bear. p. 2.]

The wrong sore ^ubb'd and Presbyterians galled upon the Prelatists backs.
1. Now I pray Sir reflect upon the years that are passed, and compare them
with the state of things at present; consider the Acts of many full
Parliaments, and compare them with the Ordinance of less than one; read the
Articles and Canons of the Church of England, and compare them with the
medlings of the divided Assembly of Divines; remember by whose power your
Assembly-men sat, and against whose prohibition they boldly acted, with which
compare their proceedings in contempt of that power by which they were called
an Assembly; recollect what you have published against the Directory, the
Covenant, the Presbyterian-worthies and way of Discipline, and compare it all
with your confessions of Disobedience to Governors, doing hurt to the Church,
taking excellent things from us which we were in actual possession of; and
when you have done, tell me truly* whether (before you were awar) you have not
been rubbing the wrong sore, and galled the Presbyterians upon the Prelatist's
backs. For since you take in the Clergy of the Episcopal way, and say we
separate from you for other men's doing, (p. 10.) I shall desire to know of
you, who are the Schismatics and Separatists and so the breakers of charity,
and peace, and brotherly union; We, who continue and persevere in the good old
way of the Church of England, in which we were born and baptized, and to which
we have vowed a due conformity and obedience; Or you, and your darling
Presbyterians, who have departed from our Assemblies, and separated your selves
from our Communions, receded meanly from your subscriptions, and bound your
selves by an oath to extirp^te your Fathers who were over you in the Lord, whom
you had solemnly promised you would reverently obey? For brevities sake I refer
you to my (...) chapter 2. p. 50, 51, 52.

2. Again, The Prelatists beaten for being abused,
I would gladly be informed, which sort of men are most unpeaceable, and
injurious: We, who sought not your goods, Or you, who bereaved us of our own?
We, who would fain have sat still in Peace, Or you, who ruined us (whilst you
had power) with the specious style of Reformation? We, who complained when we
were wronged, Or you who wro^g'd us? For pity do not beat us the first time for
noth^ng, and then a second time beat us for being beaten. If we did you any
injury by having suffered extremely without a cause, it was not ours, but your
fault. For all we suffered was against our wills. We did no more Court, then
deserve such usage. We would fain have enjoyed the many and excellent
Advantages both spiritual and temporal, which by the Petition of right, and
the great Charter, and other Laws of the Land, as well as by the Statutes and
Laws of God, were as undoubtedly our own, as whatsoever it is which you are
able to call yours. And will you hate us so far, as not to be able to forgive
us, because you have wronged us in such a measure, as that you can never make
us amends? When the Fox in the F^ble is resolved to prey upon the Lamb, he
quickly make's it a Malefactor. But when men are sadly beaten, for nothing else
but their refusing to break the peace, they cannot certainly break it by being
beaten.

3. Once more I would know, Yet are earnest Desirers of Reconcilement.
who are averse to a Reconcilement. We, who earnestly desire it, Or you, who
widen our breaches, with as little regret as at first you made them? We, who
labor to reduce you to your ancient Order and Uniformity; or you, who have
improved one single Schism into an hundred? Notwithstanding the heinous and
horrid things, which you have done, and we suffered, God and the world is our
witness, we do not shut you out from our Communion: Our Chapels and
Churchdores lie open to you: We contend for your Fellowship, and daily pray for
your coming in; if you, by name, should have occasion to pass this way, and
present your self, with other Guests, at the holy Supper of our Lord, no man on
earth should be more welcome. But if you and your Partners will continue your
several separations, and shut your selves out from our Communion, as it were
judging your selves unworthy of the Kingdom of God, and excommunicating your
selves, (without our consents, and against our wills, and in despite to our
invitations,) we cannot do less than declare, that we cannot help it. We are no
rigid exactors of Reparation. Do but return to our Communion, and we are
satisfied. Do but accept of our forgiveness, and we are pleased. If you cannot
agree with us in every act of our obedience to the established Canons of the
Church, at least come back to that station from whence you fell, and no small
matter shall ever part us.

The Church of England j^stified by the Confessions of her Deserters.
4. You profess to be for Bishops, as well as we. (p. 5.) you acknowledge a
stinted Liturgy is in it self lawful; and that in some parts of p^blick holy
service it is ordinarily necessary; and that in the parts where it is not of
necessity it may not only be submitted to, but desired when the peace of the
Church requires it; that the Ministers and Churches which earnestly desire it
should not by the Magistrate be absolutely for^idden the use of a convenient
prescribed Liturgy, etc. (p. 358.359.) Nay farther yet you do acknowledge, That
the use of the Surplice b^ing commanded by the Magistrate, you would obey him,
and wear that Garment, if you could not be dispensed with. Yea though
secundarily the whiteness be to signify purity, and so it be made a teaching
sign, yet would you obey. (p. 409.410.) Next for kneeling at the Sacrament, you
say that as sinfully as this gesture was imposed, you did for your part obey
the imposers, and would do, if it were to do again, rather then disturb the
peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. (p. 411.) You confess you
see no reason to scruple at the lawfulness of the Ring in Marriage. (Ibid.) You
say that Organs or other Instruments of Music in God's worship, being a help
partly natural, and partly artificial, to the exhilarating of the spirits for
the pr^yse of God, you know no argument to prove them simply unlawful, but
what would prove a cup of wi^e unlawful, or the Tune and Meter and melody of
singing un^awfull. (p. 412.) Again for Holy Days you confess, That some time
for God's worship besides the Lord's Day must be appointed, and God having not
told us which, the Magistracy may, on fit occasions. (Ibid.) Nay for the great
Holy Days of the Church to which you have the most aversion, (such as
celebrate the memorial of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting,
Transfiguration, Ascension, and the like) you freely profess to be resolved, if
you live where such Holy Days as these are observed, to censure no man for
observing them, nor would you deny them liberty to follow their judgment if
you had the power of their Liberties, etc. (p. 416.) Yea more, if you lived
under a Government that per^mptorily commanded it, you would observe the
outward rest of such a Holy Day, and you would preach on it, and join with the
Assemblies in Gods worship on it. (p. 417.) For the name and form of an Altar,
you think it a thing indifferent, whether the Table stand this way, or that
way. The primitive Churches (you confess) used commonly the names of Sacrifice,
and Altar, and Priest, and you think lawfully, and you will not be he that
shall condemn them. (p. 417.) Last of all for the Cross in Baptism, which you
have most suspected to be unlawful, you dare not peremptorily say it is
unlawful, nor will you condemn the Ancients and Moderns that use it, nor will
you make any disturbance in the Church about it. (p. 418.)

5. After all these acknowledgments (and many more in other places) I wonder
how you can excuse your departure from us, The P^esbyterian Sep^r^tists
apparently unexcusable.
or what should keep you from your return. Will you not live in Communion with
us, because we observe the Rites and Orders of the Church, which you confess to
be very innocent? Or do you abandon what is innocent, because we use it? Are
our Bishops the worse for being derived from the Apostles, as our Reverend Dr.
Gauden has lately proved by an induction? Are they the worse for being in
England ever since the first time that Christianity was planted? Or the wor^e
for being settled by the fundamental Laws of the British land? They are not the
worse for being approved, and contended for unto the death, by the learned
part and the most pious of the Reformed Churches, of which our Confessors and
Martyrs do make up a great and a noble Army. That our Church was a true
established Church (in the year of our Lord 1641.) You have so plentifully
granted, that it is too late to deny. They that See Bishop Hali's peacem^ker
Sect. 7. p. 58.
fly out from a true established Church, and run ways of their own, raising
and fomenting Sects and Schisms amongst God's people, are sent for their Doom
(by our late Reverend Bishop Hall) to those notable words of the Apostle, Romans
16.17, 18. And whether or no the Presbyterians have not thus flown out, judge I
pray by the Sea Dr. Ham. of Schism. chapter 11. p. 178, 181.
last Chapter of Dr. Hammond's Treatise concerning Schism. Or let the men of
that way but lay their hands upon their hearts. Now when you seem to have
profited (not a little) by that excellent Preface of Dr. Sanderson, (wherein
you are personally concerned,) in coming up so far, as has been showed, to the
most disputable things of the Church of England, what can make you stand off at
so great a distance? what kind of answer will you return unto your own
expostulations? Shall the breach be healed, or would you have it to continue?
If it must continue, tell us why, and how long? Would you have it go with us to
Eternity? Do you censure us to Hell? Or will you not go with us to Heaven? I
pray return to us in time, rather than wish you had done it when it is too late.
They are obnoxious to men of all sides for their sin of Schism;


6. You cannot charge any sort of men for having separated from you, without
incurring the same charge, for having separated from us. When Mr. Cawdry writ
against Independency, and gave it the Title of A great Schism, I could not but
smile at the retortion which Dr. Owen very speedily and ^itly made him. Nay it
is publicly declared by a great Body of congregationals, Praef. p. 13.
That they did not break from the Presbyterians, but the Presbyterians rather
from them. You are so far from agreeing with one another, that you can never be
expected to be at unity with your selves, unless by being reconciled to the
Church of England, whose Calamities have obsc^r'd, but not destroyed Her. The
sin of Schism is contracted (says the Judicious Dr. Hammond) either by some
irregularity of Actions, loco supra citato.
contrary to the standing Rule and Canons of this Church; or by Disobedience to
some commands of Ecclesiastical Superiors. And then by whom it is contracted I
need not tell you. But, Blessed be God (as he goes on p. 179.) the Church of
England is not invisible: It is still preserved in Bishops and Presbyters
rightly ordained, and multitudes rightly baptized, none of which have fallen
off from their profession.

7. To your preposterous Demands then, Especially to the E^iscopal, whose
sufferings have made them the more comfortable to the primitive Christians.
why we separate from you, and refuse to go to your Communion, the first and
shortest Answer is this, that we are passively separated, because you actively
are separatists. We, by remaining as we were, are parted from you; and you, by
your violent departure, have made our Difference unavoidable. We are divided by
necessity, and you by choice; we from you our Dividers, but you from us, and
between your selves. You (like Demas) having forsaken us, and having embraced
this present world, it is our lot (as it was Paul's) to be un^voidably
forsaken. It is God's own Method, to turn away from his Deserters. When the
Times are changed by some, and others are changed by the Times, you must at
least excuse (if not commend) us, that we Prove. 24.^1.
meddle not with those who are given to change. For you to go from us, and then
to chide us for being parted, is the greatest injustice to be imagined; because
it requires us to verify the two Extremes of a contradiction. A second Answer
I shall give you in better words than mine own; even the same which Dr. Hammond
once gave the Papists;

S^e Dr. Hammond of Schism, p. 180, 181.
The Night-meetings of primitive Christians in Dens and Caves, are as pertinent
to the justifying of our Condition as they can be of any; and it is certain that
the forsaking of the Assemblies, Heb. 10.25. is not (...) our wi^ful fault, (v.
26.) but only our unhappy Lot; who are forced either not to frequent the
Assemblies, or else to encourage (and incur the scandal of seeming to approve)
the practices of those that have departed from the Church. That we do not
decline Order, or public communion, and consequently are not to be charged for
not enjoying those Benefits of it, which we vehemently thirst after, is evident
by the extensive Nature of our persecution; the same Tempe^t having with us
thrown out all Order and Form, Bishops and Liturgy together. And to that
Curstness of theirs, not to any Obstinateness or Vnreconcileableness of ours,
(which alone were the guilt of non-Communion) is all that unhappiness of the
constant Sons of the present English Church to be imputed.

L^y-elders condemned by such as had sworn to assert them.
Sect. 30. I am glad to find you thinking, that unordained Elders wanting power
to preach, or administer the Sacraments, are not Officers in the Church of
God's Appointment: and that as far as you can understand, the greater part, if
not three parts for one of the English Ministers that we stand at a distance
from, are of this mind, and so far against Lay Elders as well as we; of whom
you confess your self one, and Mr. Vines another, p. 4. But I am not glad to
find you excusing what you condemn. It Is true, ye all swore (when ye took the
Covenant) to preserve the Discipline and Government in the Church of Scotland,
and to reform the Church of England in Discipline and Government according to
the example of the best Reformed Churches, (of which the Scottish was implied to
be the chief) yea to bring the Churches in the three Kingdoms to the nearest
conjunction and Uniformity in Church Government, etc. Lay Elders in Scotland
were pretended to be by Divine right. The Platform of Geneva was highly
magnified (that I say not blasphemously) for the Pattern showed in the Mount.
The Scepter of Christ, and Evangelium Regni Dei, were noted expressions of
their Device. But since you have printed your own opinion, that ther^ were no
such Lay Elders of God's appointment, you should rather have recanted your
having sworn the Scottish Covenant, than have tried by all means to make the
best of so bad a matter. Whilst you believe a fourth part of the Presbyterians
are directly against the other three, in thinking Lay Elders of God's
appointment, you give us to hope that your Kingdom will never stand. And indeed
if you will read but the first 5. Chapters of Bishop Bancrofts Survey of the
pretended Holy Discipline, you will find that no Sect has been more divided
against it self. See what is said by Dr. Gauden (in his excellen^ p. 17.
Dendrologia) concerning the Pertness and Impertinen^y, the Arrogance and
Emptiness, the Iuvenility and Incompetency, the Rusticity and Insolency of some
Ruling and Teaching Elders too; the disagreement that was found betwixt
High-shoes and the Scepter of Church Government: especially mark what he p. 18.
says of the Decoy and Fallacy, the Sophistry and Shooing-horn of bringing in
Lay Elders by Divine Right; and perhaps when you have done, you will hardly
excuse your own Excuses; much less the manner in which you make them, for to
excuse the Lay-e^ders as men not preaching.

Sect. 31. You say, A Calumny cast upon our Preachers to the sole disgrace of
the Calumniator.
In that, our Readers are much like them, p. 4. And again you speak of our
Ignorant, Drunken, Worldly Readers, and Lazy Preachers, that once a day would
preach against doing too much to be saved, p. 16.] But 1. that any have so
prea^hed, of the regular Clergy, is your ungrounded Intimation, for which you
are answerable to God. They have commonly been accused of having preached for
the doing too much to be saved. Their earnest pressing for the Necessity of
Universal Obedience to the Law of Christ, which carries along with it all
manner of good works, has very frequently procured them the name of Papists,
Socinians, Pelagians, Moralists, any thing in the world to express the dislike
of your Presbyterians. The Antinomians are the chief men, who preach against
doing too much to be saved; and as the Fautors of that Heresy, you your self
have accused both Mr. Pemble and Dr. Twisse, who were not Prelatists but
Presbyterians. And such were they who applauded The Marrow of modern Divinity,
which you have shar^ly written against for the like dangerous positions. Nay
you your self are more liable to undergo your own censure, than any Prelatist I
ever heard of, for teaching the people how greaf a wickedness may well consist
with their being Godly. Of this I have given so many Examples, that I shall
add but one more: You put the Question, W^ether if men live many years in
swearing or the like sin, See Disp. of right to Sacram. 3. p. 330.
it is not a certain sign of ungodliness? To which you answer in these words, A
godly man may long be guilty of them, as it is known, some well-reputed for
Godliness are in Scotland. Reputation does much with many even that are godly,
to make sin seem great or small. With us now a swearer is reputed so great a
sinner, that he is reckoned with Adulterers and Drunkards. But Censoriousness,
Backbiteing, Church-division, Disobeying those that rule over us in the Lord,
(I pray let that be remembered) spiritual pride, etc. which are greater sins
than swearing, do not so brand a man, nor make him odious with us. This again
deserves your notice.

Once a day preaching and Catechizing, a great deal better than prateing twice.
2. That Preaching once a day, and once a day Catechizing, is better than
prating twice a day (without either Preaching or Catechizing) will be granted
by all, who shall consider the meek saying of the most eminent Preacher, Bishop
Andrews, that when he Preached twice a day, he prated once. And what dishonor
has been done both to God, and his Church, by turning the whole public
worship into two Sermons upon a Sunday, you may collect at your leisure from
Mr. Thorndike. It is a proverbial observation, that two Sermons (of the new
mode) do seldom differ more from one, (excepting the labor of lips and lung^)
than two distinct sixpenses from one whole shilling. And though (since the
departure of my assistant) I have also preached twice a day, yet I think not
the better of my performance.

3. Your lazy Preachers are they who will not take the pains to meditate; The
Accuser most criminal.
and only make up in the number of their Sermons, what their hearers would
rather receive in weight. That you your self sometimes are a One sheet so the
Ministry, p. 14.
lazy Pre^cher, you have publicly confessed in your odd sheet for the
Ministry. Which make's it the more unseemly for you, to be an accuser of your
brethren.

4. And as unseemly for you it is, The Presbyterian Readers are many more than
the Epis^^pal,
to upbraid them so much with their being Readers. For the notorious Readers of
their Sermons are the eminent men of your way. I do esteem Dr. Reynolds as the
most learned and the most eloquent of all your Preachers. Nor do I value him
the less for being a Reader, but rather the more for his resolution to preach
no more than he can write. Not to tell you of Mr. Mant^n, and all the rest of
that party, let it suffice that Mr. Hickman is observed to be one of your lazy
Readers. And if he preaches, as he has printed, the printed language and
matter of English D^. Heylin, Mr. Goodwin. Mr. Morris, Mr. Prinn, etc.
writers (not only not acknowledging, but) defaming and reviling the several
owners, it is not an honor to your party, that he is one of your chief men.
Nay since you told us from the Press, that ubi supra, p. 13.
you use notes as much as any man, I and others have thought you a
Reading-preacher. And so you see your misfortune in this other part of your
accusation. There are twenty Readers of your way, for one of ours.

5. Because you are not afraid to add, And their preaching much worse, if we
may credit their own Confessions.
[ That in abundance of our most applauded Preachers, the things of God were
spoken with so little life, and seriousness, as if they had not been believed
by the speaker, or came not from the heart, (p. 17, 18.) I must put you in mind
of that public Penance, which both your Person and Party were condemned to do
in your Saints rest. Where (and to speak one syllable from common fame, or from
known experience,) when you had reckoned up many and great faults in the
dispensation of the word, Saints Rest. part 3. Sect. 5. p. 99.
you shut up the Bill with these expressions, [ the Lord pardon the great sin
of the Ministry in this thing, and in particular mine own.] And what were
those aggravations which made your sin so exceeding sinful? Even as many as
you had mustered in several pages going before. Such as -- your seldom fitting
your Sermons, Ibid. p. 98, 99.
either for matter or manner to the great end, your people's Salvation, your
Sacrificing your studies to your own credit, or your peoples content, or some
such base inferior end, your formal frozen lifeless Sermons, your handling
sins gently, your tender dealing with careless hearts, your telling the people
of Heaven and Hell in such a sleepy tone and slighty way, as if you were but
acting a part in a Play. In a word, your want of seriousness about the things
of heaven, which charms the Souls of men into formality, and that brought
them to that customary careless hearing which undoe's them.] With these and
many other things you charge your brethren in general, as well as your self in
a peculiar manner. So very ill were you advised in your indefinite accusation
of our Episcopal Divines, for being guilty of but one of those many faults,
which you discover in your self, and your Presbyterians.

An agreement in point of Railing between the Quakers and Presbyterians.
6. That Ternary of Epithets which you disgorge against the Prelatists. [
Ignorant, Drunken, Worldly,] I shall only leave you to lick up again at your
leisure, and entreat you, for the future, to leave your railing. The Quakers
may thank you for joining with them, in bringing the Priesthood into disgrace.
But sure you will not thank the Quakers, when they shall rationally demand, [if
some of the Prelatists are so unworthy, how extremely much worse are the
Presbyterians?

7. I will shut up this Section, concerning Preachers, with a certain passage
in your Epistle before your Treatise of judgment. Which though I could not but
observe without a prompter, yet I should not at present have told you of it,
had not another observed it, as well as I; and also taken it so unkindly, that
you should Court the rich Citizens, whilst you seem to contemn the poorer
Inhabitants of the Country, as to desire I would give you some Item of it. Your
words I allude to are briefly these. Epist. Dedic. p. 10.
[ Let us in the Country have the honest raw young Preachers, and see that you
have chief Fathers, and Pillars in the Church.] An honest Husbandman in my
Parish was much offended at this expression. And having ruminated upon it, took
occasion to tell me his Meditations. He thought the Souls in all Countries
(within this Island) were both as many and as precious as those at London, and
every way as d^ar to God. He thought it as much pity, for young Preachers to be
raw, as for old ones to be rotten. He could not but put the Question, (if I may
help express his mind) in which of those two ranks Mr. Baxter did reckon
himself to be. If he thought himself one of the raw young Preachers, why did he
take upon him to censure the eminentst Preachers in the Church? If he thought
himself a Father and Pillar in it, why did he give so gross a Hint, that he
would fain be sent for up to London? He does not deserve a Country Pul^it, who
thinks himself too good for it. Besides, the right Reverend Bishops are the
chief Fathers, and Pillars of the Church, of which the Dioeces of London can
have but one. And so the plain Countryman does no exactly understand you.

Sect. 32. Whilst you say that some Protestants, A f^ir Confessi^n how far a
Prot^stant may go and be still a Protestant.
as Bishop Bramhall and many more, do hold the Pope may be obeyed by the
Transmarine Western Churches as the Patriarch of the West, and be taken by us
all to be the Principium unitatis to the Catholic Church, and the Roman
determinations still may stand, except those of the last 400. years, and
those, if they obtrude them not on others, (p. 7.) You help your Reader to
conclude, that Grotius might well have been a Protestant by the very allowance
of his accuser. And supposing my Reader to be intelligent, I shall make no
other use of your large Concession.

Sect. 33. You very confidently say, Of Bish^ps and Presbytery.
that in the pulished judgments of Bishop Hall, Bishop Usher, Dr. Holdsworth,
Forbes, and others, they would have all Presbyters to be Governors of the
Churches, one of them having a stated Presidency or Moderatorship, and this
will content them. p. 9.] I know not what they have declared in other parts of
their writings, which I have never yet seen. Nor am I sure I know your meaning
(by the word Presbyters, Presidency, and Governors of the Churches,) much less
am I sure that you your self do know theirs. But I know what Bishop Hall has
done and suffered for that Episcopacy, which had been established in this land
with Christianity it self, and had also been confirmed by 32. Acts of
Parliament, (nor need I tell you how much an Act does differ from an Ordinance,)
and was abundantly provided for by Magna Charta, which by statute is 25. of
Edw. 1. chapter 1, 2.
declared the Common L^w of the land. I say, I know what he has done against
the many-headed Smectymnuus, in which are compendiously represented the
chiefest s^icklers for the Presbytery, as Dr. Gauden has expressed in that
crooked low shrub, which ambitiously supplanted the well-grown Cedar. Again I
know what he has suffered by his imprisonment in the Tower, where yet the
reason of his imprisonment made it a comfortable restraint. I farther know what
he was for, when he writ his Peacemaker, See Bishop Hall's Peacemaker, p. 48,
49, etc.
to wit the Primitive Government universally agreed upon by all antiquity, for
which he refers you to the writings of Clemens, and Ignatius. He makes use of
the Confessions both of Camero, and Beza, of Marlorate, and Calvin, that in
Calvin Inst. l. 4. ^. 4.
very City there was chosen one Bishop, least an equality in the Clergy should
engender strife. That the Bishop was indeed the very Marlorat. in Apoc. 2.
Prince of the Clergy. That he was above the Presbyters in point of Beza de
Grad. Minist. Evang.
order. That being chosen by the College of the Presbyters, he was to be their
President, and that not without some I. Camer. Myroth^c. in Tim 4 14.
Authority over the rest. Now though the Bishop does consent, that he be called
a Moderator, a President, a Superintendent, an Overseer, or by any other such
name, if the name of a Bishop is displeasing, (as thinking it pity that words
should break square where the things are agreed,) yet, says he for the
fixedness, or change of this person, Bishop Hall, p. 50.
let the ancient and universal practice of God's Church be thought worthy to
oversway. And he had said a little p. 48.
before, that the President must be constant, as well as o^e. Now had you
sworn, in taking the Scottish Covenant, to change the name of a Bishop, and
there had stopped, you might have cited the Peacemaker with much more reason
than now you do. But you swore to endeavor the extirpation of the thing, of
Church Government it self, by law established. For that you might not be
mistaken, you explained the word Prelacy by the word Church Government, etc. by
a good token, that in conclusion, you superstitiously held it for Anchristian.
And because you often take the confidence to cite that Treatise of Bishop Ha^l,
as if it had yielded you some fig leaves to cover the shame of your
undertakings, I pray observe your concernments in his Epistle before the book.
I will but put you in mind, when the Book was first printed, (to wit in the
yea^ 1647.) and who were the very first men who did quieta movere, and then I
will give you his Golden Paragra^h.

It is felony by our Municipal Laws for a man to burn but the frame of a
Building intended for an house; Bishop H^ll's ce^sure of the D^stu^bers ^f
s^tled Government in the Church.
how hainously flagitious shall the God of heaven account it, to set fire on
his complete spiritual House, the Church, whereof every believer is a living
stone? Doubtless how slight soever the world mak's of the^e spiritual
distempers, it shall be easier in the day of judgment for Thieves, and
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, then for the breakers of public Peace. Never was
there any so fearful vengeance inflicted upon any Malefactors, as upon Corah
and his Combination. Surely if we consider the sin it self, other offenses had
been far more heinous; but in that it was a presumptuous mutiny, tending to the
affront of allowed Authority, to the violation of Peace, and to the destruction
of community, the earth could not stand under it, hell only is fit to receive
it.

Now (Sir) consider with your self, both what you have done in these times, and
with what success. You did not open your mouths wider against Moses and Aaron,
(pretending they had taken too much upon them,) than all the people of the
earth have opened theirs against you: Presbytery (like Corah) was swallowed up
quick. If the Bishops you were against, did differ so little as you pretend,
from those very Bishops which you are for, why was the public peace broken for
private interesses and ends? Let me tell you in the words of the right Reverend
Bishop Hall, that you and others of your way, who were born and bred under
Authority Ubi supra, p. 93, 94.
[ should have contented your selves to be Disciples rather than Judges, and
have entertained reverent thoughts of those that were set over you; not more
for the Gravity and Wisdom of their persons, then for the Authority of their
Places. Even Timothie's youth may not be contemned. -- Hereupon it was that
holier antiquity (even from the days of great and gracious Constantine)
thought it very conducible to the good success of the Gospel, to put respects
of honor upon the sacred Messengers of God. Damas. Epist. de Chor^piscopis.
-- It is too true an observation of Damasus, where the name of
Church Governors is grown contemptible, the whole state of the Church must
needs be perturbed.] Could you expect any thing less from the common people,
than that they should pay you in your own Coin, and say ye took too much upon
you, and that all the Congregation was at least as holy as themselves? Had your
spiritual Superiors been more venerable in yours, ye had not certainly been
so vile in the Peoples eyes.

Th Lord Primate's censure of Presbyterian Ordinations, as I^valid, and
Schismatic. Published by Dr. B. p. 125.126.
2. Next for his Grace of Armagh, (whom I can never find you calling by a higher
Title then Bishop Usher,) I shall but mind you how he has pleaded for the
Prelacy of England in other works; and only recite his words at length out of
that very piece, in which you seem to have taken the greatest pleasure. For
even there he has concluded your Ordinations by Presbyters to be invalid, in
as much as they were made, where Bishops might have been had; there being
nothing but necessity (in case Bishops cannot be had) which in the judgment of
the Primate can make such valid. And that you may not flatter your self, his
Grace intended such a necessity, as against all reason you sometimes offer to
pretend, you shall read him subjoyning these following words.

Holding as I do, that a Bishop has Superiority in degree above a Presbyter,
you may easily judge that the ordination made by such Presbyters as have
severed themselves from those Bishops unto whom they had sworn Canonical
obedience, cannot possibly by me be excused from being, Schismatic.]

You see what necessity the Primate admitted for an excuse, and in what respect
you are unexcusable. For, besides that you are not under any necessity of
ordaining Presbyters without a Bishop; no necessity can happen, but what will
be of your own making; and such an home-made necessity will but aggravate the
wickedness of them that made it. I make no doubt but you will say the same
thing, if a power succeeding shall deal with you, and your Function, as you
have dealt with your Superiors. I shall not add more of the Primate now, than
that the Reduction of Episcopacy is a posthumous work, and yet pretend's to no
other model than what may stand with the preeminence both of Bishops and
Archbishops.

3. Dr. Holdsworth's Judgment is as well known, Dr. Holdsworth's sufferings a
declaration of his judgment.
as what he suffered for his judgment, during the memorable Reign of the
Presbyterians. Which puts me in mind of what was said by that learned Gentleman
Mr. Morris, -- The N^w-inclosures broken down. Sect. ^1. p. 212.
the digladiations about Discipline have laid open Doctrine to those destructive
wounds it bleed's under; the discountenancing and depressing of so many learned
Champions of the truth, has been the leaving [the Church] without a Guard.
When you were swearing and fighting to level the Bishops with the ground, for
want of merit and su^ficiency to seat your selves among the Bishops, you had
not the patience to consider, or not the prud^nce to believe, that you were
laying out your strength (as blinded Sampson did his) to pull down a house upon
your heads by laying your hands upon its Pillars. Judge. 16.29.
But now you are taught by sad experience, that what you covenanted against was
even the glory and support of your own profession, you will I hope be so just
as to blame yourselves, if you shall live to suffer, as heavy things as you
have done.

Sect. 34. Whereas you say in your excuse, The Presbyterian excuses are
aggravations of their offenses
that some of your party did not swear obedience to the Bishops, or did not
disobey such Bishops as Bishop Usher assures us were the Bishops of the
Ancient Churches, and that the Schism is not such, as makes men incapable of
our Communion, and that since Bishop Prideaux dyed, there has been none in his
place, (p. 12.13.) I briefly answer, first that you speak against your
knowledge, unless you know not what you did, when admitted into the Priesthood.
And that I may not repeat two or three pages of what I have said in another
book, I refer you for a sight of your great and manifold obligations to obey
your Ordinary with reverence, and other chief Ministers unto whom the
Government and Charge was committed over you, to acknowledge the order of our
Church (as then it stood) to be according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to approve of Bishops and Archbishops, to use the Common prayer, to observe the
Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, and all according to the Laws of this
Realm, I say I refer you for a sight of your great and manifold obligations, to
my (...) chapter 2. p. 51.52, 53. Next I must mind you that the Lord Primate did
only speak of Communion with the Transmarine Protestans in France and Holland,
upon this supposition, that he were in those Countries. But our English
Presbyterians were under another consideration. He never received the blessed
Scrament at any one of your hands, nor would he ever hold Communion with any
one of your Revolting Scotizing Churches. But if you return to our Communion,
from which you fell by transgression, both our Arms and our hearts are always
open to receive you. And that you may do it so much the sooner, let me admonish
you of the disorder, which the Lord Primate wondered at in your late
Presbyterian ordinations. A disorder so great, that it suffices of it self
(without your other imperfections, to say no harder things of them,) to make a
nullity in the things that you most confide in. See the Primates judgment of
Ordinat. by Pres. set out by Dr. Bern. p. 136.137, 138, 139.
[ To give the Seal of Ordination (as some are pleased to call imposition of
Hands) without any express Commission annexed, or Grant of Authority to the
person, the Primate was wont to say, seemed to him to be like the putting of a
Seal to a blanck.] Your Presbyterian Ordinations he judged no better: and the
reasons of it at large you may find in those pages which I have cast into the
Margin. What Bishops there were in the Ancient Churches, or what the Primate
thought of them, it matter's not. Your disobedience was not the better, for
being acted against those to whom you had promised to yield obedience. And
those alone are the Bishops, which here it is pertinent to speak of, for they
alone were the Bishops, to whom the men of this Age had sworn Canonical
obedience, through the Non performance of which obedience, you had extorted
from the Lord Primate that heavy censure. If, since the Death of Bishop
Prideaux, none has succeeded in his place, remember what I said lately of
self-created necessity; and do not imagine your Sin is lessened by a principal
part of its aggravation. Add to this, that there are Bishops, though not
perhaps in your County. And where Bishops are to be had, you were forbid by the
Primate to ordain without them.

Sect. 35. Whereas you say of Bishop Prideaux, Bishop Prideaux confessed a
moderate man, though the sharpest censor of our English Presbyterians. See his
Fascic. Controv. Epist. Ded.
[ that he was one of the Ancient and moderate sort. p. 13] I heartily thank
you for the Confession, than which, I could not have wished you had made a
greater. For he was undoubtedly one of them, whom you covenanted against, and
under whom you should have lived in due obedience. How much he abhorred your
Scottish-Covenant, and all your Covenanted attempts, especially those against
your Bishops; how severely he censured the Smectym uan sawciness, and ambition;
how zealously he asserted the established Government of the Church by
Archbishops, and Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, etc. How very heavily he sat
upon the skirts of the Presbyterians, both for their Schism, and Sacriledg, and
immoderate railing against their Bishops; and how by these very courses he
thought them assisting unto the Jesuits in bringing an odium and disgrace upon
the Protestant Religion, and Rome at last into Britain; I pray be pleased to
see at large in his remarkable expressions which now ensue. 1. He does in print
Characterize them by Ravenous Wolves.


Rapaces Lupi non tantum irruunt ex vicinis spelaeis, sed ebulliunt ex nobis
ipsis, (...). Nostis quis praedixit, and quid nos sentimus.

Sub patulae cujusdam Quercus tegmine Arbusta nonnulla olim latitantia, 2. By
ambitious low shrubbs conspiring against the goodly Oak.
putabant se fuisse impedita, per adumbrantium ramorum stilli^idia, ne in
altunt (quod ambiebant) crescerent; Iovem igitur implorant ut quercus
averuncetur. Dictum, Factum; quid sequitur? Ingruunt procellae brumales, solo
penitus aequantur, succedit aestivale incendium, and stirpitus exare scunt. 3.
By a pe^ulant Ape on the Housetop.
Intelligentibus non opus est Oedipo.

Simia in tecto praetereuntibus tam diu capita diminuat, donec ipsa ab
irritatis tandem deturbetur.

4. By the greedy Dog, and the sacrilegious Bird in the common Fable.
Canis umbrae inhians extentiori amittit quam in faucibus possidebat offam; and
notum est, quomodo frustulae sacrificii ab altari direptae adhaesit pruna in
nidi aquilini and pullitici vivicomburium.

Deus noster ignis consumens est. Non impune feret Baltassar temerata Temp^i
vasa; and lingua aurea e consecratis per Achan subducta, 5. By Baltasar and
Achan.
Sacrilegium in Anathemate maranatha eloquetur.

6. By the Title Smectymnuan importing a Monster with many Heads.
Atque hic inter caetera mirari subit, cur Episcopi titulus (quo tamen
Salvatorem nostrum insignitum esse legimus) adeo recentioris censurae
Smectymnuanis sudes esset in oculis, ut necessario characterem Bestiae fronti
inustum manifestaret. Number Cranmeri, Latimeri, Ridlei, and ejusdem classis
symmist^, Antichristiani tandem audiant proxenetae? Et Juelli, Whitgifti,
aliorumve ejusdem Hierarchiae scripta aut facta Antichristianismum redolent?
Quin de vivis ( ut^unque conculcatis) illud spondeam; delectum inter se habeant
hi nostri Demagogi, and proferant primipilos suos in aciem: accinctiores,
valentiores, aut constantiores, contra quoslibet Orthodoxorum hosts, quam ex
evessis Episcoporum and Decanorum pharis, Duces aut Triarios profecto vix
inveniant.

7. By the Bramble consuming the Cedar of Lebanon.
Norunt hoc, qui turmis Protestantium turbatis, se latenter immiscent
versutissimi Sinones Loiolitici, ideoque nil punctius urgent, quam ut per
flammas erumpentes ab hujusmodi rhamnis seu cynosbatis, Cedri Libani
absumantur, quo facilius in Britanniam Roma redeat.

8. By Papal and Antichristian Arrogance.
Memini me olim puero, in depicta quadam tabula, ad nomen [PAPA] hunc
Acrosticum legisse; (P) Pastorum (A) Ambitio (P) Peperit (A) Antichristum. Quis
autem esset major, lis erat jamdudum inter Apostolos inchoata, sed determinante
Salvatore, nunquam acquieverunt posteri. Dominari volunt omnes, nemo (ut
oportet) obtemperare; sic ut tandem fiat hoc non gladio oris, sed ore gladii
decidendum problema, An suprematus PAPALIS habeatur potius ANTICHRISTIANUS quam
PRESBYTERIALIS, aut Enthusia^ticu^.

En quam modicum Ambitionis fermentum totius Christianae humilitatis corrumpat
massam! 9. By uncle^n Separatists and Animals puff^d up.
(...) igitur and (...) Apostolica ista sunt nobis, and ^ nobis fratribus
inculcanda, (...), Gal. 5. Cavete canes, cavete malos operarios, cavete
concisio^em, Phil. 3. Siquidem qui seipsos segregant sub cu uscunque afflatus
pretextu, inflati ta^dem animales, and Spiritum Sanctum non habentes
invenientur, Iudaever. 19. Gustus etiam distinguet inter vinum vetus and novum
(quod jamdudum indicavit Salvator) and certo pronunciabit, ve^us esse utilius,
Luke 5.

In these several particulars you have partly the History, and compleately the
Character of our late English Smectymn^ans or Presbyterians. And you have it
from Bishop Prideaux, who is one of the ancient and moderate sort. It is at
last become a Question (says Bishop Prideaux) not to be otherwise decided than
by the Mouth of the Sword, ^Whether Papal Supremacy is to be reckoned
Antichristian, rather than the Presbyterial or Enthusiastical.] And thi^ he
tells you in an Epistle, wherein you were personally concerned, if you were one
of his Diocces A. D. 1652. He also tells you in that Epistle, (I pray observe
it as from a Bishop who is both of the Ancient and moderate sort,) That
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline in every well-ordered Church, are Always and
by All to be looked upon with a Religious eye. That the first is contained in
the 39 Articles, the second in the Liturgy and Liturgick Monuments, Ista
premun^^ expendunt, defendunt Insequentia (...).
the third in the Canons and Constitutions of the Church: which being piously,
and providently, and prudently consigned and delivered down to us from the
purest fountains of Antiquity, and in especial manner by the Reformed Bishops,
He thought it his duty to defend in the several Controversies and Questions
which there ensue. Bishop Prideaux used worse than any scandalous Minister I
ever heard of.


2. I pray, Sir, think on these things, and one thing more, that neither his
Piety, nor his Learning, nor his approved Industry, nor yet the Reverence of
his Years, no nor his being of the Ancient and moderate sort, could prevail for
a protection from being banished from his Books, and sequestered from his
studies, and presbyteri^nly despoiled of that subsistence, which by God's and
Man's Law was undisputably his own. Many scandalous Mini^ters h^ve been
preserved by your party, and many too have been exal^e^ into the best men's
Rights by wrong and violence. But Bishop Prideaux, and Bishop Hall, and Dr.
Holdswor^h, and Dr. Hammond, and whatsoever was most conspicuous for height of
Piety or depth of Learning, (of which sort it were easy to name some hundreds)
were all exposed by the Presbyterians (at least as far as in them lay) to the
utmost extremities of want and beggary, without the least Mercy or Moderation.
Had they been Heapers up of Riches (as Presbyterians and Jews are observed
generally to be) you might have squeezed them as spunges without much harm. And
if the men of your party (upon the present shifting the scene of things) shall
be forced to feel what they inflicted, (as some have presaged whilst they were
reading your two Dedicatory Epistles, wherein you are subscribed a Faithful
Subject, and wherein you complain of the Epist. Ded. before K^y for Cath. p 10.
Democratical Politicians, who were busy about the change of Government,) they
will feel it so much the less, by how much the greater the Treasures are, which
their Avarice and Rapine have raked up for them against their Winter.

A Vindication of Bishops and D. Hammond's Paraphrase.
Sect. 36. Your principal Argument against our Bishops, by law established in
England, which you urge from Scripture and Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase (from p.
22^to p. 27.) I do the rather think fit for my consideration, because I think
it not fit at all, that so learned a person as Doctor Hammond should ever take
it into his own. Its pity a Person of his employments should descend to a task
of so little moment. And whilst he is doing those things, which cannot be done
but by himself, let me have leave to do that, for which your Argument's
inability has made me ab^e.

You know the sum of it is this; that Preaching, Confirming, Discipline, Care
of the poor, Visiting the Sick, Baptizing, Congregating the Assemblies,
Administering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, guiding the Assemblies,
Blessing the people, Absolving the Penitent, and more then these (p. 27.) are
the works of the Ancient Episcopal Function. But no one man can now perform
all these to so many hundreds of Parishes as are in one Dioecess; Ergo our
Dioecesan Bishop is not the same with the Ancient Bishop.

This being the sum of your chiefest Argument, may be enlarged (by my
consent) in the Major Proposition, to the utmost pitch of advantage, to which
your own heart can wish the difficulty improved; to wit by urging that the
Bishops were at first invested by the Apostles, with all manner of
Ecclesiastical both Power and Office. And so the Bishop in every Dioecesse,
being lineally the successor of that numerical Bishop who was ordained by the
Apostles, is by consequence invested with all this power. From whence there
flow's another Sequel as unavoidable as the former, that not the least part of
this Sacred power can be possibly received but from the Bishop.

3. All which being granted as very true, and my thanks being returned for your
service to the truth whilst you resist it, (for Presbyterian Ordinations are
hence evinced to be null,) I show you the vanity of your Minor by putting you
in mind of a plain distinction, [per se, aut per alium, mediate, vel
immediate,] your mere forgetfullness of which (for ignorant of it you could not
be) made you imagine there was a force where you will speedily acknowledge there
can be none. For what a Bishop is not able to do by himself, he may very well
do by the help of others, ((...).) There is nothing more obvious, then that
when Moses is Exodus 18.18, 22, 26.
overtask'd, he should take in others in partem Curae, and yet lose nothing of
his Preeminence. And even for this very reason had the Bishops all power, as
well as power to communicate it either in whole, or in part, that what they
could not perform alone, they might by Proxy, whether by Presbyters, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Archdeacons, Chancellors, Officials, (I will add Churchwardens,
and Overseers of the Poor,) what is done by their Delegates is done by them.

4. Now that this was the case in the earliest times of the Church, our learned
and Reverend Dr. Hammond has irresistibly Consulatur Summi viri. Disse^t. 4.
p. 210, 211.
evinced. And had you first been well acquainted with his four Latin
dissertations, you had not stumbled at the light of his English Paraphrase.
(...). Clem. Romans
Clemens Romanus would have told you, that in the Regions and Cities where the
Apostles had preached and gathered Churches, they constituted Bishops to Rule
those Churches, and likewise Deacons to be subservient to those Bishops. Why no
Presbyters as yet, Epiphanius would have informed you out of the oldest
Records. For whilst there was not (says he) so great a (...), etc. Epiph.
Haer. l. 3. t. 1.
multitude of believers, as to need the ordaining of any Presbyters, (between
the two above said orders Bishops and Deacons,) they contented themselves with
the Bishop only; who together with his Deacon, whom he could not conveniently
be without, did then abundantly suffice for so small a Diocese. But when
believers did so increase in the single Diocese of a Bishop, as that there
needed more Pastors, and fit men were to be had, then they admitted into the
Priesthood (I do not say into the Prelacy) that other sort of Church Officers
whom we now call Presbyters. And I conceive that such Presbyters were ordained
in Asia by St. John, because Ignatius (in Trajan's time) throughout his
Epistles to those Churches of Asia, does distinctly make mention of all three
orders. If then the Primitive Bishops did thus communicate of his power to
Inferior Pastors, and still reserve unto himself the super-intendency over
all, what should hinder their Successors from doing according to their example?
And why should any man presume to take any power unto himself, but he whom the
Bishop has first ordained unto the office of a Deacon, (a kind of secundary
Presbyter,) and after that, to a Cure of souls, (which belongs to a Presbyter
plenarius,) and after that too, to the Episcopal Office of Ordination?

5. Having showed you the full agreement betwixt the Ancient and modern
Bisho^s, I hope you see your Inadvertency, and acknowledge the vanity of your
Argumentation. For (1.) In the Infancy of the Church, (...) -- (...), and ^.
Epiph. l. 3. t. 1.
none were worthy to be made Bishops in diverse places; and in such, the
Apostles did all themselves; at least the place remained vacant (...). Id. Ibid.
(2.) Where need required, and worthy persons were to be had, in such, the
Apostles ordained Bishops. But (3.) Whilst the Churches were so thin, as that
the Bishops (with their Deacons) could well discharge the whole work,
Epiphanius tell's us expressly (and that from the eldest of the Church Histories
there was not yet a constitution of single Presbyters, (...), etc. And of this
we have the first instance in James the Bishop of Jerusalem, to whom were added
seven (...) Act. 6.1, 2, 3, 4,
Deacons, without the least mention of any Presbyters. Yet (4.) Many mere
Presbyters were ordained, (not with a privilege to ordain, but to di^^ense the
Word and Sacraments,) as soon as the number of Believers had made it needful.
And I pray (Sir) forget not to take due notice, that what is spoken by
Epiphanius is against the Heretic Aerius, the very first Presbyterian that
ever infested the Christian Church.

6. After the levity and unfruitfullness, consider the danger and unlawfulness
of thi^ your arguing. It being just as much against all the Monarchs, as
against any one Bishop throughout the world. For 'ti^ the duty of every King,
and of every other supreme Magistrate, (let his Dominions be never so large) to
reward, to punish, and to protect, to deal out Justice to every subject,
whether corrective, or distributive, as their merits or offenses shall seem to
challenge. Now comes a Disputant like your self, who first displayes the
several parts of the Magistrate's Office; next he proposes to consideration,
how many hundreds of Parishes, and how many Myriads of Men may probably be
found in his Dominions; and then conceiving it impossible that any one Mortal
should know them all, much less be able to perform his several offices to each,
he presently sends the chief Magistrate his writ of ease; and then forsooth in
every Parish, one or other of his subjects, who thinks himself able to be a
Ruler, must take upon him to play Rex within that Territory or Precinct: Never
remembering or regarding the famous Division of the Apostle, much less his
Precept with which the division is introduced. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as (...) --
(...)*
Supreme, or unto (...) -- (...)*
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. From which
words I entreat you to make this pertinent observation, that as a single
supreme Magistrate may well be qualified and fitted for the largest Taskes of
the widest Kingdom, by all those Emissaries and Envoyes, who are deputed to act
by his Commission; so (with a greater force of reason) is every Bishop in his
own Diocese very sufficiently enabled for every part of his office to every
person, by the assistance of those Presbyters, and other officers under them,
who are [(...)] by him sent out into their several charges.

7. You see how unhappy you have been even in that way of Arguing, in which you
seem to have taken the greatest pleasure; there being less force in it against
the Bishop of a Diocese, than against that person to whom you dedicated your
Book, and acknowledged your self a faithful subject. May you be faithful to
those Superiors, who are not only permitted, but appointed and Authorized to
Rule over you in the Lord. You see the people of this Land will no more be
ridden by your Presbyteries. For though you found amongst them some patient
Beasts for a while, who loved the novelty of their Riders, (if nothing else,)
yet rideing them (as you did) with switch and spur, as soon as you got into the
saddle, you provoked your tamest creatures to reprove the 2 Pet. 2.16.
madness of the Prophets: Saying implicitly to your selves as you did
frequently to them, (and with every whit as much reason) remember them which
have the rule over you, Heb. 13.7. That is to say (says our learned
Paraphrast) set before your eyes the Bishops and Governors that have been in
your Church, etc. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, v. 17. that is, be subject unto the Bishops, as St. See the Note of Dr.
Ha^. on Heb. 13.7. A resutation of the prime Argument for Presbyterian
Ordinations.
Chrysostom and the said Paraphrast do well explain it.

Sect. 37. As this may serve for a specimen of your voluminous medlings against
our Bishops, in which you say little against them, which your enemies may not
say with greater reason against you, and with as much pretense of reason
against the Ministry it self, and with much more reason against their
maintenance by Tithes; so it suffices for a specimen of what you plead in the
defense of your Schismatic Ordinations (to use the word of the Lord Primate)
that I acquaint you with the absurdity of your first and chief Argument. In
your second Dispute of Episcopacy, chapter 7. p. 199. l. 8, 9, 10, etc. You strive
to prove, your Ordination is by Scripture-Bishops. (Meaning your titular
Ordination without Dioecesan Bishops,) whose Episcopal Office you
sacrilegiously invaded. And you think you prove it by this sad Syllogism. The
Scripture-Bishops were the Pastors of particular Churches, having no Presbyters
subject to them. Most of our Ordainers are such Pastors: Therefore most of our
Ordainers are Scripture-Bishops. The major of this Syllogism you prove from Dr.
Hammond, and the minor from Mr. Pierce. At least you are confident that you
prove it; though I shall prove you prove nothing, except your forgetfulness of
Logic, and somewhat else to your prejudice, of which anon.

2. First for your Syllogism, by the disposition of the medium it appeare's to
be in the second Figure; and yet (which is wonderful) it consist's of three
affirmative Propositions, which the second Figure cannot endure, any more than
the First can admit of three Negatives. And so again you are obnoxious to the
public assertion of D. Kendal, that a little more of the university would have
done you no harm.

3. Next to know what you have done, by disputing thus in figure, without all
mood, observe the Conclusiveness of your Syllogism, by an other just like it in
all respects. Suppose (in the person of Diogenes) you were to prove that a Cock
with his Feathers strips from him alive, is a Man as well as Plato, though not
as able to teach School; you may thus argue for him, as you have done for your
self. A man is a living Creature with two feet and without Feathers- A Cock
deplumed (like that of Diogenes) is such a living Creaturo: Therefore a Cock
deplumed (like that of Diogenes) is a man. But then you have taught an ill
Sophistry against your self. For the plainest person in all your Parish may
prove you to be an arrant He athen by the very same Logic which you have erred
by. An arrant Heathen is an Animal endued with reason Mr. Baxter is an Animal
endued with reason: Therefore Mr. Baxter is an arrant Heathen. The major at
least must be as true, as that which you take from Dr. Hammond. The minor
infinitely truer, than that which you take from Mr. Pierce. And you know the
conclusion is undeniable. For if the premises are true, Falsehood cannot flow
from them by any regular Deduction. And if the Deduction is irregular, why is
your dealing the very same, to prove your irregular Ordinations exactly regular?

4. Come we now from the Form, to the matter of your Syllogism. Your major is
proved from the words of Dr. Hammond, that the Sea the whole Annotation on Act.
11.30. B. p. 406. to p. 409.
Title of (...), in Scripture times, belonged principally, if not only to
Bishops; there being no evidence that any of the second Order were then
instituted. Which words, (if you observe them) do not deny, but suppose, that
as soon as any of the second order were admitted into the Church, they were
immediately subject unto the First; that is to say, to the Scripture-Bishops;
there having been given him in Scripture a twofold power; first a power of
ordaining inferior Presbyters, next of Governing or Ruling them, when so
ordained. Had you but fairly transcribed the Doctor's whole Period, you must
have added to your Citation these following words, [ though soon after, even
before the writing of Ignatius Epistles, there were such instituted in all
Churches:] And had you read unto the end of that excellent Annotation, you
would have found Epiphanius for Bishop Timothy his power (or jurisdiction) over
Presbyters, from 1 Timothy 5.1, 19. Where whatever the word Presbyter may be
concluded to import, whether a single Priest (in the common notion of the word
Presbyter) subjected to the Bishop, or a Bishop subjected to the Metropolitan;
it equally make's against you, that Bishop Timothy had power to rebuke, and to
receive an Accusation against a Presbyter, which no mere Presbyter can pretend
to have over another. This would imply a contradiction, to wit, that an equal
is not an equal (because a Ruler and a Judge) to the very same person to whom
he is an equal. The same use is to be made of what is cited from Theophylact
concerning Titus, Ibid.
to wit that the (...) Judgment, as well as (...) Ordination of so many
Bishops was committed to him. And I pray Sir remember one special Emphasis,
which evidently lye's on the Doctor's words. Which do not run thus, the Title
of Presbyters in Scripture times belonged only to the Bishops; but if not
only, yet at least Principally to them. And therefore however the case might
be, (whether only, or not only,) all the course of his arguing will be
equally cogent and unresistible.

5. Now for your minor, [that most of your Ordainers are such Pastors] you
prove it by saying, first they are Pastors. But this is petitio principii with
a witness, to say they are, because they are. And it is a gross transition ab
Hypothesi ad Thesin, to say they are such Pastors, because they are Pastors.
The word Pastor in our days does commonly signify a Priest, to whom is
committed a Cure of Souls. And when I have lately so used it, it has been
only in compliance with that vulgar Catachresis. But in the use of Scripture
and ancient Writers, Pastor signifies him, to whom the charge of the Flock is
Originally entrusted; whereas our English acception of the word Rector (which
is not the Scriptural or ancient style) is wholly extended to a deputed or
partiary Government in the Church, to wit, a Government over part of the
Pastors Diocese, which Pastor (in the old style) has the plenary charge
committed to him. Your error therefore was very great, in confounding the
Pastors with the Rectors of the people, unless you spoke with the vulgar (...);
and supposing that so you did, you spoke completely besides the purpose. And
whereas you say in your Margin, [Mr. T. P. call's himself Rector of Brington.]
I know not what you can mean by it, unless an unkilfull intimation, that I
arrogate to my self somewhat more then is my due. And therefore to undeceive
either your self, or your Readers, I must tell you that in all Records which
concern this Church, or its Incumbent, in all Leases, and Compositions, and
Judgments of Law, in all Directions and Orders, which have ever been sent by
Supreme Authority, the Church has been styled the Rectory, and the Incumbent
the Rector of it. You may gather the reason from Mr. Sparrow's Learned
Rationale upon the Book of Common Prayer. The chief Rector o^ a Parish (called
the Cardinal Priest of old, quia incardinatus in Beneficio) was (...), and the
rest under him his Clerks. -- Where there were Chantries, as there were in most
Churches of England, their assisting the Rector of the Church made up that Form
of speech, the Priest and Clerks. And Brington being a Parish consisting of
five distinct Members has occasioned the Rector in all times to be at the
charge of an Assistant. I have told you what I mean, whenever I write my self
Rector of Brington. If Mr. Cawdrey has meant more, when he has written
himself as publicly, the Rector of Billing, I leave him to give you a Reason
for it.

Having done with your Argument, and with your perso^all reflection, I shall
observe but one thing more; to wit that whilst you say most of your Ordainers
are such Pastors, as Dr. Hammond spoke of in Scripture-times, (which yet I hope
you will retract) you imply a confession, that some are not. Nor can I see by
what means you will excuse your selves unto your selves, for having admitted
of such Ordainers. As for your second and third sentences in your Sect. 5. p.
199. You have an answer included in what went before; and so you will have in
that which follows. For,

Sect. 38. In your seventh Chapter, Presbyterians are not Bishops by having
Deacons under them.
p. 203. Sect. 18. You again pretend to fetch an Argument from the words of the
Reverend Dr. Hammond. Your naked affirmation is expressed in these words. Where
there are no such Presbyters with a President, it is yet enough to prove him a
Bishop, that he has Deacons under him, or but one Deacon. Your pretended proof
of this assertion is from the words of Doctor H. which now ensue. [When the
Gospel was first preached by the Apostles, and but few converted, they ordained
in every City and Region no more but a Bishop, and one or more Deacons to
attend him, there being at the present so small store out of which to take
more, and so small need of ordaining more.] Reduce this proof into a
Syllogism, which may serve your interest in any measure, and it will be like
your former, most dishonourably false. For thus you must form it, (do what you
can) if you intend to make it in imitation of a proof. A primitive Bishop had
no more then a Deacon or Deacons to attend him: A Presbyter has no more then a
Deacon or Deacons to attend him: therefore a Presbyter is a Primitive Bishop.

Here you see are three affirmatives in the second Figure. And by an Argument
so formed I will prove you to be anything (either Fish, or Foul,) with which
you have any the least Agreement. Reduce your proof then (a second time) into a
syllogism truly made, and your case will be altered, but nothing mended. Your
fall into the Fire will indeed be regular, but you will get no more by it, than
if you continue in the drying pan. For your truly formed Syllogism will be but
thus, whosoever has none but a Deacon or Deacons to attend him is a Primitive
Bishop: A Presbyter has ^one but a Deacon or Deacons to attend him: Therefore
a Presbyter is a Primitive Bishop.

Here the matter is as untoward, as the Form was before. The Major proposition
being admirably false. For though a man may be a Bishop who has no more, to
attend him, when no more are to be had; (and that because no more are needful,
which is the thing that Dr. Hammond has often taught you) yet his having no
more, does not prove him to be a Bishop, which was the thing to be proved from
Dr. Hammond. When Ignatius reckons the Three Orders, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, it is as impossible for him to mean, that Priests are Bishops, as that
Deacons are Priests. For though every Bishop is a Priest, it can no more follow
that every Priest is a Bishop, than it can possibly follow that every Animal is
a man, because it is true, that every man is an Animal. A Primitive Bishop and
a mere Presbyter may have a Conversion per Accidens, and another conversion by
Contraposition, but a simple conversion they cannot have. To say they can,
without proof, is but the begging of the Question; which being sure to be
denied you, I shall advise you to beg no more.

I will conclude this subject with a remarkable passage of Mr. Thorndike. And I
will do it so much the rather, because the weightiness and the price of that
excellent Volume may probably keep it from the perusal of vulgar Readers, who
only meddle with the cheapest Books.

Mr. Thorndik's judgment of Presbyt: Ordinations, etc. In his Epilogue to the
Tragoed. Of the Chapter of Engl. Concl. p. 408.
The Presbyterians, sometimes plead their Ordination in the Church of England,
for the authority by which they ordain others against the Church of England,
to do that, which they received authority from the Church of England to do,
provided that, according to the order of it. A thing so ridiculously senseless,
that common reason refuses it. Can any state, any society do an act, by virtue
whereof, there shall be right and authority to destroy it? Can the Ordination
of the Church of England, proceeding upon supposition of a solemn promise,
before God and his Church, to execute the ministry a man receives, according
to the order of it, enable him to do that which he was never ordained to do?
Shall he, by failing of his promise, by the act of that power which supposed
his promise, receive authority to destroy it? Then let a man obtain the
Kingdom of Heaven by transgressing that Christianity, by the undertaking
whereof he obtained right to it. They are therefore mere Congregations,
voluntarily constituted, by the will of those, all whos^ acts, even in the
sphere of their ministry once received, are become void by their failing of
that promise in consideration whereof they were promoted to it. Void I say,
not of the crime of Sacrilege toward God, which the usurpation of Core
constituteth, but of the effect of Grace toward his people. For, the like
voluntary combining of them into Presbyteries and Synodes, creates but the
same equivocation of words, when they are called Churches, to signify that
which it visible by their usurpation, in point of fact, not that which is
invisible, by their authority, in point of right. For want of this authority,
whatsoever is done by virtue of that usurpation being void before God; I will
not examine whether the form, wherein they execute the Offices of the Church
which they think fit to exercise, agree with the ground and intent of the
Church, or not. Only, I charge a peculiar nullity in their consecrating the
Eucharist, by neglecting the Prayer for making the elements the dody and blood
of Christ, without which, the Church never thought it could consecrate the
Eucharist. Whether, having departed from the Church, Presbyteries and
Congregations scorn to learn any part of their duty from the Church, least
that might seem to weaken the ground of their departure; or, whether they
intend, that the elements remain mere signs, to strengthen men's faith, that
they are of the number of the elect; which they are, before they be
consecrated, as much as afterward; the want of cons^cration rendering it no
Sacrament that is ministered, the ministering of it upon a ground destructive to
Christianity, renders it much more.

Immoderat^ vi^ulence toward those of the Episcopal way.
Sect. 39. I now return to your long Preface, from whence I stepped into your
book, that the things of one Nature might be considered together in one Head.
That for which I am next to complain of you unto your self, is your immoderate
bitterness to the Episcopal way, and to the men of all qualities who dare to
own it. Many Gushes of it there are, of which I will here transcribe a few.
Praef. to Disp. of Church-Gov. p. 17.
We see that most of the ungodly in the land, are the forwardest for your
ways. You may have almost all the Drunkards, Blasphemers, and Ignorant haters
of godliness in the Country, to vote for you, and if they durst, again to
fight for you at any time. -- The spirit of profaneness complyeth with you,
Ibid.
and doteth on you, in all places that ever I was acquainted in, -- Grot. Rel.
p. 113.
should one of you now pretend to be the Bishop of a Diocese, -- you would have
a small Clergy and none of the best and the people in most Parishes that are
most ignorant, drunken, profane, unruly, with some civil persons of your mind,
etc. -- P. 114.
The cause of their love to Episcopacy is, because it was a shadow (if not a
shelter) to the Profane heretofore, and did not trouble them with discipline,
and because they troubled and kept under the Puritanes, whom they hated. But if
you did not exercise Discipline on them, your Churches, would be but the very
sinks of all other Churches about you, to receive the filth that they all cast
out, and so they would be so great a reproach to Episcopacy, that would make it
vile in the eyes of sober men: So that a Prelatical Church would in the common
account be near kin to an Alehouse or Tavern (to say no worse.) -- ^. 11^.
So that for my part, were I your enemy, I would wish you a toleration; but
being really a friend to the Church and you, I shall make a better motion, etc.

Whilst you rail at this rate, not only without but against all reason, nor
only beside but against your own knowledge, (as if it were your design to be
voted for an ill man, and never more to be heeded in what you say) you do but
show us your Doctrine thus breaking out at your Fingers ends. For it is part of
your Doctrine, Disp. of right to Sacram. p. 330.
[ That many professors do rashly rail, and lie in their passions, whom yet you
doubt not to be Godly.] Not considering that a Railer is yoked together with an
Idolater, a Drunkard, an Extortioner, and the like, 1 Cor. 5.11. for it is also
your Doctrine Ibid p. 3^9.
[ that a man may be a Drunkard, and yet have true Grace, and be in the number
of the Godly.] Nay according to your look back on chapter 3. Sect. 1. and 2. p.
62.63, 64.
Doctrine, Godly men may be worse, even Murderers, Adulterers, Incestuous
persons, Perjured, R^bellious, Schismatical, Deniers of Christ, of which I have
showed your own words in (...). c. 3. p. 115.
another place. So as in case it were true, that the men of our way are such as
you would fain have them, they would be better than the most of your Godly men.
But if the Apostles had been alive, you give us to guess ho^ ^ou would
probably have used them, by your bitter (...) of those persons, who have not
fallen from their principles, nor broken their oaths, nor receeded from their
subscriptions, nor changed with every turn of Time, nor invaded any man's
possessions, but have ever made it their choice (with Heb. 11.25.
Moses) rather to be on the suffering, than on the persecuting side. When I and
others have been pungent in our expressions of such as you, we have said no
more than we have proved by undeniable mediums, and commonly out of your own
writings. From whence it is we stand justified on every side, and free from all
violation of Christian Charity or Candor. But you, in revenge of such honest
dealing, content your self with many naked and groundless general Affirmations
concerning the men of our way, without so much as an appearance of Reason for
it. We do approve of a severe, but we cannot endure a false Accuser, who never
considers what is likely, much less what is true, but giddily throws out the
dictates of Pet and Rancor. When our Lord and Master was lying in torment upon
the Cross, He was not only Mar. 15.29.
railed on by them that passed by, but even one of the Malefactors (who
suffered with him on the Cross) did Luke 23.39.
railingly vomit up his gaul against him. Thus you deal with his Spouse, and
his younger Heb. 2.1^.
Brethren, who have not been ashamed of the Cross of Christ, which you and
others have laid upon them; and who do pray for your persons, whilst they
reprove your ways. Nay since the Downfall of the Presbytery, your self are one
of the Malefactors, who justly suffer with those Innocents at whom you rail.
Innocents I mean, as to the Presbyterian Calumnies, upon which their sufferings
were heaped on them. But there are some of your own party whose eyes are
opened, and now do justify the Prelatists, whom they had formerly condemned.
These will be ready to Luke 23.40.
rebuke you, (like that other Malefactor who was Verse 39.
hanged together with our Lord,) and probably bespeake you in these very words.
Verse 40.41.
[ Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art i^ the same condemnation? And we
indeed justly; for we [Presbyterians] receive the due reward of our Deeds; but
these men [the Prelatists] have done nothing amiss.] I pray consider what you
have done, and do so no more if you are wise. Either forbear your Accusations,
or bring your Proofs along with them. For this you know is my method; and if
you will follow my example in my Self-Revenger exemplified, (chapter 3. from p. 77.
to p. 85.) Where I prove, as well as accuse, the Presbyterian Principles and
Practice, (and that from the chief of your own Champions) your Accusations will
be such as become a Christian.

A parallel ^as^ between the P^arisees of old, and our modern ^uritanes.
Sect. 40. As in your Grotian Religion, so again in this Preface, you plead
the cause of the Puritanes, and boldly say, they were taken for men seriously
Religious where e're you came, and thereupon you run on in your usual way of
defamation, p. 18.19.] But first suppose it were so indeed; could it be
possibly any fault in all those holy and learned men, who have sharply written
against the Puritanes, that they did not ^rre with the vulgar, with whom alone
you were conversant? It Is true, the Puritanes with the Puritanes have ever
passed for serious Christians; and you say in effect, that your whole
Conversation has been with Puritanes, whilst you say how very highly you have
ever found them to be reputed. Mark how ill it fare's with you by a parallel
case. Bishop Hall'^of Pharisaisme, and Christianity. p. 373, 374.
Bishop Hall has told you of the Pharisees, that they prayed often and long;
they read the Decalogue at least once every day; the holiness of their carriage
was such, as they avoided every thing that might carry any doubt of pollution;
they paid Tithe even of all, that is, of more than they needed; God would have
a Sabbath kept, and they overkept it. -- The poor Jews (says the Bishop)
were so besotted with the Admiration of these two [The Scribes, and the
Pharisees,] that they would have thought, if but two men must go to Heaven, the
one should be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee. It was not the person of these
men, nor their learning, nor wit, nor eloquence, nor honor they admired so
much, but their righteousness. -- Herein they seemed to exceed all men. Do but
think how the amazed multitude stared upon our Savior, when they heard this
Paradox, except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Exceed the
Pharisees in righteousness? It were much for an Angel from Heaven; What shall
the poor sons of the earth do, if these Worthies be turned away with a repulse?

Now, Mr. Baxter, apply the case. Was our blessed Savior to be reviled as an
Enemy to the Saints, for pronouncing so many woes to these Scribes and
Pharisees, and for calling them Hypocrites, Mat. 23.13, 17, 24, 33.
blind guides, Fools, Serpents, Generation of Vipers? Was he (I say) to be
reviled, for setting them out in these colors, because (forsooth!) the Common
people did think them Saints? Or did our Savior forbear to acquaint the world
with their Hypocrisies, for fear their Favorers and Abetters should call him a
Wine-bibber and a Glutton, a foe to the Godly, but a Friend to Publicans and
Sinners? was Bishop Andr^wes a slanderous person, for preaching and writing
against our Pharisees, and setting them forth by the name of Puritanes, because
Mr. Baxter is of opinion that the Puritanes were Godly and holy men? Or dare
you say that Dr. Sanderson did play with the Apple of God's eye, (as you
unconscionably word it, p. 19.) When he writ so much against Puritanes and
Puritanism, in that incomparable Preface where you are personally concerned?
yet such as these are the men, at whom you thrust through my sides. Its true
that now I have largely spoken concerning Puritanes. But when you first of all
railed against Antipuritanes, I had not written upon the subject, unles^^ it
were in a Citation, and that by chance. And therefore all your former
bitterness was poured out against others, (of whom I reckon Bishop Andrews and
Dr. Sanderson with the chief) although your latter evomitions have partly
lighted upon my self.

What has been meant by the word Puritan by learned men.
Sect. 41. You make an excellent Confession, that in the Universities, and
other intelligent Auditories, the no^ion of a Puritan was so far understood,
(as I and others do understand it) that though you have heard before the King
many a Sermon against Puritans, which you judged impious, yet it had this
excuse, that much of the Auditory partly understood, it was not piety as such,
that was directly reviled. p. 19. But then you add, that it was not so among
the common people through the land; ibid.

It were worth a man's knowledge, from whom you heard those many Sermons, which
you impiously profess to have judged impious. Whether it were from Bishop
Andrews, who preached more against Puritanes than any Bishop I ever read; or
whether it were from Bishop Hall, from Doctor Sanderson, or from whom. Or
whether you ever heard a Sermon before the King. I do not think it the liklier,
because you say it. The most I have learnt from your writings, is to beware how
I believe you. For you know where you have told me such things as these -- that
it was safer in all places that ever you knew, Grot. Relig. p. 109.
for men to live in constant Swearing, Cursing, and Drunkenness, then to have
instructed a man's Family on the Lord's day. -- Well said Mr. Baxter. If you
are not confuted by your own sayings of this kind, you never shall be by my
consent.

But be it so, that the common people do understand the word Puritan as you
would have them; yet give me leave to understand it with the Universities you
speak of, with Bishop Andrews, and Dr. Sanderson, and all the rest of those
glorious lights, whose judgment of Puritanes I have elsewhere recited. It is
for us to instruct the seduced people, not to cherish them in their errors, and
misunderstandings of Names, or Things. I wish that all the common people would
read that Preface of Dr. Sanderson, so much commended by all good men; that so
they might know the word Puritan, as well as he. I wish them as knowing in
this point, The Lord Chancellor Egerton's judgment of Puritans, in the Case of
the Post-Nati p. 99. Apud Antidot. Lincolniense p. 35.36:
as the Lord Chancellor Egerton; who speaking of a dangerous rebellious
Doctrine, affirms it never to have been taught, but either by Traitors, or by
treasonable Papists, or by seditious Puritanes and Sectaries. He gives an
instance of the first, in Spencers Bill in Edward the second's time. Of the
second, in Harding's confutation of the Apology. Of the third, in Buchanan de
jure Regni apud Scotes, Penry, Knox* and such like. By these (says the Lord
Chancellor) and those that are their followers and of their faction, there is
in their pamphlets too much such Traitorous seed sown. Upon which Dr. Heylin
does thus infer, the Puritanes are, I see, beholding to you for lending them so
fair a Cloak to hide their Knavery: Directing this speech unto the
Lincolnshire Minister, who had too much favored the Puritanical Faction. I
wish the people were as knowing, Bishop Bramhals judgem^nt of Puritanes. In his
Answer to Militiere. p. 46.
as the right Reverend Bishop Bramhall in this particular; who call's it no
less then a damnable slander, and also the venom, which the Puritan Faction
infused into the hearts of the people, that the King and Bishops had an
intention to reestablish the Roman Catholic Religion. I wish the common people
would yet consider (though it is late) that Luke 23.27, 28.
whited Sepulchers appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's
bones, and all uncleanness. Even so ye also (says our Savior Blessed for
ever) appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy
and Iniquity. And the outward appearance of Righteousness notwithstanding, our
Savior's Erotesis is very no more terrible, then it is just. Ve^se 33.
How can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? Sir, I wish you would consider the
damning nature of Hypocrisy, and how far D. Owen has charged you wi^h it* nay
how far you were moved to charge your self. And boast no more (as now you do p.
29.) How many there are in your own charge, who make a show of the fear of God.
The Scribes and Pharisees made a show, beyond the best of our English outsides.
Those Citizen-Puritanes made a show of the fear of God, whom yet our Excellent
Bishop Hall did entertain with these words.

Bishop Hall, of Pharisaism and Christianity. p. 38^.
How many are there of you, that under fair faces have foul Consciences? -- All
is good save that which appeare's not. How many are there every where, that
shame Religion by professing it? Whose beastly life makes God's truth
suspected: for as, howsoever the Samaritan, not the Jew, relieved the
distressed traveler, yet the Iew's Religion was true, not the Samaritan's; so
in others, truth of causes must not be judged by acts of persons; yet, as he
said, it must needs be good that Nero persecutes; so who is not ready to say:
It cannot be good that such a miscreant professes? Woe to thee Hypocrite: Thou
can not touch, not name goodness, but thou defilest it; God will plague thee
for acting so high a part: See what thou art, and hate thy self; o^ (if not
that) yot see how God hate's thee; he that made the heart, says thou art no
better then an handsome tomb; the house of death. Behold here a green turfe,
or smooth marble, or engraven brass, and a commending Epitaph; all sightly:
but what is within? an unsavory, rotten carcass. Though thou were wrapped in
gold, and perfumed with never so loud Prayers, hol^ semblances, honest
protestations; yet thou art but noisome carrion to God: Of all earthly things,
G^d cannot abide thee; and if thou would see how much lower yet his
detestation reaches, know that when he would describe the torments of Hell, he
calls them (as their worst title) but the portion of Hypocrites. Iam. 4.8.
Wherefore cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye
double-minded: For unless your righteousness exceed the Hypocritical
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Sect. 42. You express your displeasure to me for saying, The Presbyterian
Directory exceedingly A^ominable.
that I was and would continue (by the grace of God assisting me) free from the
great Abomination of the Presbyterian Directory. And ask what Papist would
talk as Mr. P. does, and not be able to name one thing in it that is
abominable. p. 33.] Perhaps the Papists have kindness for it, as tending to the
disgrace of the Protestant name; and acting here in Disguizes, might likely
have instigated your brethren to that work of Schism and Disobedience. But to
all sound Protestants it is an Abominable thing, as you must needs have known
by your experience, if you know but the English of the word (...), or of the
easier word Abomination. It Was an Abominable Directory, for all those reasons to
be collected. First from Mr. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, the writings of
Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bilson, Dr. Cosens, Bishop Buckridge, Bishop
Morton, Dr. Burges, before the Directory was made, of which you are minded by
Dr. Heylin, P. 64, 65.
by whom you lately had the Honor to be exceedingly well instructed. Secondly
and chiefly, from Dr. Hammond's view of the Directory, unanswered and
unanswerable. Thirdly from the Preface of Dr. Sanderson so often cited. Attempt
an answer if you are able. Fourthly from Dr. Heylin his History of Liturgies.
Fifthly from a large Preface before a Liturgy, very commonly thought to be Dr.
Taylor's. (How truly or falsely I cannot tell) wherein amongst thirty one
Enormities justly imputed unto the Directory, it is observed to be composed to
the dishonor of the Reformation, accusing it of darkness and intolerable
inconvenience. A Direction without a Rule. A Rule without restraint. A
prescription leaving an indifferency to a possibility of licentiousness. Into
which Heresy and Blasphemy may creep without prevention* Which still permit's
children in many cases to be unbaptiz'd. And suffer's them not to be confirmed
at all. Ioyne's in Marriage, as Cacus did his Oxen. Will not do piety to the
dead. Never thinks of absolving Penitents. Recites no Creed, but entertain's
Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Manichees, or any other Sect for ought
appears to the contrary. Consigns no public Canon of Communion, but leaves
that as casual and fantastic as any other lesser offices. Never thanks God for
the Redemption of the world by the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension
of our Lord, but condemns the memorial even of Scripture-Saints, and that of
the miraculous blessings of Redemption of mankind by Christ himself; wi^h the
same accusation it condemns the legends and portentous stories of the Roman
Calendar. Leaves no signa^ure of piety upon the Lords day, and yet its
Compilers do in^oyne it to a Iudaical Superstition. Implicitly undervalues the
Lords Prayer, as never injoyning, and but once permitting it. Without
Auctority, and never established by act of Parliament. But it is farther yet
abominable, for being made, and put in use by a spirit of opposition to the
best Liturgy in the world by Law established; for being highly Schismatical,
and so far perni^ious to the Souls of men, as it beguiled them of the
nourishment which their Mother the Church had provided for them, and which by
Law unrepealed became their due. Again, Abominable it was, by being a work of
Disobedience to the Supreme Governor of the Land, who by a purposed
Proclamation did most strictly command the public use of the Common Prayer,
and as strictly forbid the use or Admission of the Directory. (Of which anon I
may tell you more.) Farther your Directory was abominable for the Reasons given
in against it by the University of Oxford. Sect. 9. p. 32.33, 34. And for those
of Mr. Thorndike in his Epilogue to the Tragoedy of the Church of England; and
for what your self (Mr. Baxter) have writ against it. Which I do not here
recite, because I have done it Look back on chapter 6. p. 147.
elsewhere.

See Biblioth. Reg. Sect. 4. p. 335*336.
2. Having mentioned a Proclamation set out against the Directory by the
then-confessed Supreme Magistrate, I will in order to your conversion, and for
the benefit of them who may chance to read me* (and may also need such
information) set out the Reasons which are there rendered for the prohibition of
the Directory, and for the constant use of the Common Prayer. The Reasons
against the former are no more then fiv^.

I. It is a means to open the way, The Kings Reasons against the Directory.
and give the liberty to all ignorant, factious, or evil men, to broach their
own Fancies and Conceits, be they never so wicked and erroneous, and to mislead
people into Sin and Rebellion, and to utter those things even in that which
they make for their Prayer in their Congregations, as in Gods presence, which
no conscientious man can assent to say Amen to.

II. And let the Ministers be never so pious and religious, yet it will break
that uniformity which hitherto has been held in God's Service and be a means
to raise Factions and Divisions in the Church.

III. And those many Congregations in this Kingdom, where able and religious
Ministers cannot be maintained, must be left destitute of all help and means
for their public Worship and Service of God.

IV. No reason is given for this alteration, but only inconveniency alleged
in general (and whether pride and avarice be not the ground; whether Rebellion
and Destruction of Monarchy be not the intentions of some, and Sacrilege and
the Churches possessions the aims and hopes of others, and these
new-Directories the means to prepare and draw the people in for all, we leave
to him who searches and knows the hearts of men.)

V. And this alteration is introduced by color of Ordinances of Parliament
made without and against our consent, and against an express act of Parliament
still in force; and the same Ordinance is made, as perpetual binding Laws,
inflicting penalties and punis^ments; which was never before these times, so
much (...) pretended to have been the use or power of Ordinances of Parliament,
to which we are to be parties.

On the contrary the Reasons for the book of Common Prayer are eight or nine in
that pr^clamation. The Kings Reasons for the Liturgy.


1. It was compiled in the times of Reformation by the most pious and learned
men of that age. 2. Defended and confirmed with the Martyrdom of many. 3. Was
first established by Act of Parliament in the time of King Edward the sixth. 4.
And never repealed or laid aside, save only in that short time of Queen
Marie's Reign, upon the return of Popery and Superstition. 5. In the first year
of Queen Elizabeth it was again revived and established by Act of Parliament.
6. The repeal of it then was declared by the whole Parliament, to have been to
the great decay of the due honor of God and discomfo^t of the professors of
the truth of Christ's Religion. 7. Ever since it has been used and observed
for above four-score years together, in the best times of peace and plenty that
ever this Kingdom enjoyed. 8. It contains in it an excellent form of Worship
and Service of God, grounded upon the holy Scriptures, and is a singular mean^
and help to Devotion in all Congregations. 9. That, or some other of the like
Form, is simply necessary in those many Congregations, which cannot be
otherwise supplied by learned and able men, and keeps up an uniformity in the
Church of England.

Add to this the confession of the Parliament-Commissiners at the Isle of
Wight, that if his Majesty would See Biblioth. Reg. Sect. 4. p. 353.
not agree, which depended merely upon his will, no other Government could be
set up, and by consequence no other Liturgy, or any thing else in lieu of it.
Add to that also their protestation, p. 354, 355, 358.
not to offer the least violence to his Majesty's Conscience. Who also
protested it was his Conscience which enforced his Denial of their petition in
that point. I say petition, because their style was no other, than p. 354.
We humbly beseech your Majesty. p. 355.
Add to all, his observation, that his Conscience concurred fully with all
other Parliaments (except that One) since the Reformation: and that if he
should give way to remove all Ecclesiastical Sanctions which by Law are
exercised, p. 356.
by that rule even the Presbyters themselves might be taken away. For
questionless (says he, and I pray Mr. Baxter observe his reason) the Civil
Sanction gives the legal acting power to all Divine Institutions; otherwise the
Christian Clergy would now be in little better case than they were before they
were Christians.

3. How Abominable your Directory has appeared to all Protestants beyond the
seas, you may partly judge by a little Book entitled A Character of England,
sent (it seems) by a French Protestant (residing here in England) to a Nobleman
of France. Your Party is all along concerned from p. 12. to p. 23. But I took
the more notice of what he says p. 16. That the Religion of England is
preaching and sitting still on Sundays, because our learned Mr. Thorndike has
often touched on that string: showing what care there has been taken that
there should be Mr. Thorndike's ^^. to the Trag. of the ^b. of Engl. Conclus.
p. 420. which compare with p. 405.
two Sermons a Sunday, with a prayer at the discretion of him that preaches;
provided nothing be done to signify that humility of mind, that reverence of
heart, that devotion of Spirit, which the aweful Majesty of God is to be served
with. And he adds in that place, (what I beseech you to lay to heart) that even
the frequency of preaching, which was the outside of the business (even
granting it to be by the true rule of Faith) has been so visibly so pitifully
defective in the performance, that he must have a hard heart for our common
Christianity, who can think that there is wherewith to defend it from the scorn
of Unbelievers, had they nothing to do but to mind it.

4. Let me conclude this subject with that signal prophecy of the holy Martyr
Hippolitus, That in the days of Antichrist Liturgy shall be extinguished,
(...). Bib. Patr. Gr^c. Tom. 2. p. 357.
Psalmody shall cease, Reading of the Scriptures shall not be heard. In which
three (says our Reverend and Religious Preface p. 5. before his parap^rase and
Annot. on the Psalms.
Dr. Hammond) as the public service of God was by the Ancients thought to
consist; so the destroying of all and each of them must needs be a branch, if
not the whole body of Antichristianism; a direct Contradiction to Christ, who,
by his own prescription or practice of each of these, impressed a sacred
character on each, Concerning Coppinger and H^cket and the communication of
their Design to the presbyterian Ministers.
Luke 11.2. Mat. 26.30. Luke 4.17.

Sect. 43. I now proceed unto the last, which is withal the most desperate
instance of your Impiety, Rashness and wilful Railing; for which you are
utterly unexcusable, whether you spoke in the dark, or quite against your own
Light, concerning the Presbyterians Ministers in Queen Elizabeth's time, whom I
had affirmed from Bishop Bancroft, (as he from letters which ^ass'd between
them, as well as from Messages and Confessions publicly taken in the
Star Chamber) to have been privately made acquainted with the bloody design of
Mr. Hacket, Coppinger, Arthington, and the rest; of which you say they knew no
more than either Augustine or Luther; and that I might as honestly have said the
One as the Other. Nor does your Daringness rest there, but you (or rather your
furiousness, for you could not certainly be your self, when you flung about you
in such a manner) affirm, I could not have u^tered more falsehood then I had
done, if satan had dictated to me. Thus you precipitate your passion, not so
much against me as against Archbishop Bancroft, from whose Authority I spoke,
and whom you fear not to call The most violent persecutor of the Puritans, p.
34, 35.]

Now (Sir) cool your self a little, and honestly answer to my Dilemma. Did you
know the business whereof you spoke, or did you not? If you knew it, why did
you write against your knowledge in so plain a matter of Fact? or why did you
not attempt to prove your Negative, to wit, That Cartwright and Traverse and
the rest were not privy to the plot? Why did you not consult with Bancroft's
dangerous positions, to which I referred in my Margin, naming his chapters and
his pages, and specifying the year in which 'twas printed, that you might not
be capable of an Error by any mistake of the Edition? Nay why would you say in
plain terms, That you know not, nor much regard what I have read in Bancroft?
as if you should have said, [ you were resolved to give Mr. Pierce the Lie, and
to compare him with satan right or wrong, without examining his Citations,
without knowing what he has read, and without regarding what is written by
Learned Bancroft, or upon what kind of Evidence that Book proceeds.] Do not you
think there is a God? or do you imagine he cannot see you? or do you hope he
will not judge you according to your works? what should make you thus fearless,
I can never sufficiently admire, if you knew the business whereof you spoke.
And if you shall say you knew it not, how durst you say at all adventure, that
if satan had dictated to me I could not have uttered more falsehood? I for my
part had a perfect knowledge of what I writ. And since the reading of your
b^ldness (which I could not have thought possible, but that I have read it) I
have called the eyes of others to bare witness with mine own. And in my
necessary Defense, I am enfo^ced to discover you to all that read me, first, by
desiring them to compare my Self-Revenger Exemplified, chapter 3. p. 73. with the
pages of my A^thor referred to in the Margin. Next, by directing all my Readers
to a later Edition of Bancrofts Dangerous positions, much more easily to be
had, as having been printed no longer since than the Year 1640. by R. Young and
R. Badger. Thirdly, by pointing them to the pages wherein the Narratives are to
be seen, and that from the Letters partly, partly from the Mouths of the
Malefactors themselves, partly from their hand-writings, partly from witnesses
upon Oath in an eminent Court of Jurisdiction, with a perfect knowledge of all
which, that equally prudent and pious Autho^ had been abundantly furnished and
instructed, toward the making of that elaborate and useful Book. Viz. Chapter
VI. p. 144. Their Fast was kept at Mr. Lancaster's house a Schoolmaster. Then
p. 145. Coppinger wrote of his Instigations to some Preachers in the Realm, by
name to one Gibson in Scotland. Then p. 146. He sent a letter to Mr.
Cartwright. The effect of which fallows p. 147. Especially p. 149. It Was dated
Peb. 4. 1590. And began, Right Reverend Sir, your most wise and Christian
Counsel, together with offer to take knowledge by writing from me, etc. It
mentioned the number of his Fasts, his several Callings, and his writing to
some Preachers within the Realm, as well as without. Then p. 150. Mr.
Cartwright sent a message to Coppinger, that he should attempt nothing but by
Advice, that he should be wise and circumspect. And a time for conference was
appointed. Then p. 151. It appeare's, that Coppinger sent Letters also to Mr.
Clark, Mr. Traverse, and Mr. Egerton. Then concerning the appearance in the
Star Chamber, his Letter to Mr. Udall, Mr. Carthright's resolving some
Questions for him, the eight Preachers fasting and praying for Coppinger's
success, see Chapter 8. p. 156.157. Especially p. 158. For his Letter to Mr.
Chark, July 9.1591. and to a Preache^ not named, and Penry's Advertisement out
of Scotland, see Chap. 10. p. 163.164, 165. That this Conspiracy wa^ for
Discipline, see Chapter 12. p. 168, etc. And how far the Ministers were
accessory, see Chapter 13. and Chapter 14. from p. 171. to p. 176. Lastly see
how Hacket's Treasons, had they but prosper'd, had been defended by the
Disciplinary Doctrine, chapter 15. p. 176. to p. 182.

Now, Mr. Baxter, consider sadly, and repent in such a measure (of your
uncharitable speeches) as to beware what you speak, much more what you write,
much more what you publish to your indeleble dishonor. Consider what you have
printed of Sir Henry Vane, and the Vanists, and compare your Author (if you
have any) with the Wisdom, Learning, Piety, Renown, and Archiepiscopal See of
our incomparable Bancroft; who was dese^vedly advanced by Queen Elizabeth, and
King James, for having contributed so largely to the timely preservation of
Church and State, as well from the Papists on the one side, as from the
Puritanes on the other. Could you not think it was crime enough, to deny the
Sun's shining, when we behold him in his Moridian, (I mean a truth as bright as
that) but you must bitterly rail against him that says it, with a Cochlaeus,
and a Bolseck, and a slanderous tongue, imposed on him? This (you know) is the
language, with which you treat me for speaking truth, p. 35. l. 1.2, 3. and
which does most of all reflect upon the memory and fame of Bishop Bancroft. O
do not suffer your eyes to sleep, nor the Temples of your head to take any
rest, till in the bitterness of your afflicted repentant soul, you have sought
to God for a Remission of this impiety.

I shall not now handle your other Calumny, whereby you make me an arrant
Papist, (p. 36.) Because I have told you enough of that, in the beginning of
this Appendix. What I said of the Presbyterians, their bloody Principles, and
Practice, you do so far confirm, as you appear to have nothing to say against
it. And hence I rationally conclude, that you are not so stupid, as not to see
your Enormities; but so desperately stomachfull, as not to mend them.

Sect. 44. After your Preface, Of Dr. Steward's Sermon at Paris, and Dr.
Heylin's Antipuritanism^.
there come's a Postscript. Wherein you do not at all discharge, but poorly
sneake from a duty incumbent on you. The end which was clearly aimed at in
recommending the Sermon of Dr. Steward to your consideration, you might have
seen (had you been pleased) in the last part of the Preface. For that Sermon
having been preached by so eminent a Prelatist and Antipuritane, in defense of
the Protestants against the Papists, and that to an Auditory of Prelatists in
the chief City of France, become's an Argument not to be answered, that such
Episcopal persons as Dr. Steward (who yet was one of the highest strain and as
near the Archbishop as it is possible to imagine,) had not any design to
introduce the French Popery, as you in several public writings had most
uncharitably suggested. Now of this one thing, which was most pertinent, you
were resolved to take no notice. Whereas you say that Dr. Heylin disclaimeth
Grotianism, you either lamentably aequivocate, or speak against your own
Conscience. For as I take the word, the Reverend Doctor does espouse it as much
as I. And as you scandalously mistake it, I disclaim it as much as that
Reverend Doctor. The name of Grotius import's a Protestant, a Peacemaker, an
Antipuritan and a Prelatist. In which sense (if you please) we all are
Grotians; and Dr. Steward as much as an^. In that you call Dr. Heylin an
Antipuritan, you do him very much Right; for that has gained him the favor of
God and good men. But in that you say he is a hot one, you do your self as much
wrong, because you give him an uncivil and saucy Epither. And well it were if
this had been the worst of your dealings with him. Remember the quality of his
person, the universality of his Learning, the dignity of his place in the
Church of God, and the honor due unto his sufferings for Conscience sake, and
you will find it agreeable to a man of your pitch, rather mannerly to bow down
your knee before him, than contumeliously to lift up your fist against him. You
confess that he sent you a moderate Letter, and that Grot. Rel. P^aes. Sect. 4.
my dealing with you was moderate, brotherly, charitable, and gentle. What then
should move you to use us worse, than the severest of them that have writ
against you, unless you thought that our Civility was only an Argument of our
Fear? you told Mr. p. 281.
Tombs you have a spirit of keenness in you. But it see^es that spirit was
exorcized for a season, when you deal^ with that person whose very See your
Tract of saving Faith, p. 14.
Scholar had told you, you could not speak congruously; and whom you affirm to
have called you Ibid. p. 87.
unlearned Scribler, tyring the Press with your impertinencies, if not with
impious and monstrous Heresies. You answered as calmely to these expressions,
as if you had purposely reserved your whole stock of virulence for whosoever
should happen to use you gently. Dr. Heylin and I (whilst you were capable) did
use you as gently as you could wish. You have acknowledged our Candor, and put
it also upon Record. Yet in how prodigal a manner have you bestowed your whole
stock upon him, and me? allowing me only a treble portion, for having most of
all exceeded in my expressions of Love and Moderation. Compare my first
behavior toward you, (which had something in it to oblige, but nothing at all
to provoke you,) with your acknowledgments of the same in the first address
which you made unto me; and call your self to an account, what it was which
could engage you in such an uncharitable Requital. You made Confession to p.
281.
Mr. Tombs of your guilt in this kind; But pleaded too in your own excuse,
Ibid. p. 274.
that you had not the twentieth part of Mr. Calvin's keenness to Baldwin and
Cassander; Ibid. p. 281.
and that you are less Censorious now then ever. Is this to the credit of Mr.
Calvin, that he was twenty times worse then Mr. Baxter, in point of railing?
Never did Bolsec revile him more. And if in your last three Volumes you have
showed us the fruits of your amendment, we do earnestly desire you to mend no
more. But if you meditate an answer either to me, or to any else of the Church
of England, do not addict your self to Calumny, and think it sufficient to call
it keenness. It was not keenness, but Falsehood, which made me think it my duty
to change my style. If it shall prove to do you good, I shall change it again
in your Commendation. Deal but Faithfully with me, and show your Favor to whom
you please. For if you bring but Truth with you, your greatest Freedom will
^ind most welcome.

For the Reverend and my much respected Friend Doctor Peter Heylin at Lacies
Court in Abbingdon.
REVEREND SIR,
HAving so far complied with my inclinations, as to begin with the second part
of your Certamen Epistolare, wherein you have excellently cleared our Common
Mother from the Historical part of a dishonest Rhapsodie, which Mr. Hickman the
man of scorn (as you have fitly P. 19^.
described his Nature by the signification of his Name) had most dishonorably
purloined from those two Ordinary Collections, [Mr. Prinn's Antiarminianism,
and his Canterburie's Doom,] in which your pertinent observation you have many
men's eyes to bear you witness, (who had long since observed as much in
private, as you have now made P. 149, 150.
known in print,) and having read it quite over with as many degrees of
satisfaction, as our deplorable Filtcher has done with grief, I hold it my
duty to send my thanks in as public a manner of conveyance, as that by which I
received my obligation.

My obligation would have been weighty, although it had lain upon me no
otherwise, than upon every true Son of the Church of England; and even so you
might have challenged my hearty thanks. But that you were pleased to P. 116.
consider the multiplicity of my Employments, and (in that consideration) to
bear a part of my Burden, that you were pleased to chastise so inconsiderable a
Scribler, and to do it chiefly at my inc^tement, (notwith^tanding my being a
stranger to you) this I take to be a favor, for which it is not sufficient to
pay you thanks, unless I also de^^re your pardon.

I say, your pardon so much the rather, because I knew the Disparity between
your persons; I well considered it was below you, to o^pose your strength to so
much weakness; I knew the man was unworthy of so much Favor, as to fall under
the weight of so Grave a hand. Nay (not to conceal any thing from you which
stand's in need of an excuse) I did esteem him the meanest Disputant, that I
had ever yet dealt with in these affairs. I found Mr. Barlee some Forms above
him, and wondered why he made use of so poor a hel^er. Nay though I always
intended (and still intend) to call his Rhapsody to account, not so much for
the weakness, as the extreme great wickedness of the thing, yet did I intend it
as nothing el^e, but a resolute act of my Cond scension, to which (for the
safety of his Disciples) I shall cheerfully stoo^, as my Leisure serve's me.

But being engaged with Mr. Baxter, before Mr. Hickman had put his name to the
English writings of other men, (as I shall manifest hereafter in greater
me^^ure then you imagin^;) and timely foreseeing i^ would be late, before my
manifold Employments of greater moment would give me leave to descend to so
mean a task; and having been importuned by diverse persons, to let out the
wind of that Bladder which popular breath had puffed up to so great a Bigness;
and verily thinking it unsafe, (as well for him, as his poor Admirers,) to let
him prosper in his impiety and pride himself in his unhappiness, until I could
have leisure to m^ke him humbler; and conceiving that Mr. Prinn was a Learned
person, (as well as a person of years, and Quality,) who could not cease to be
the Author of all those Arguments of which Mr. Hickman is the Transcrib^t, by
their being reprinted in any Plagiarie's Name; and knowing well that those
Arguments might very usefully be answered, though not as filtch'd by Mr.
Hickman, yet as belonging to Mr. Prin; and calling to mind the great Readiness,
as well as exactness of your Conceptions joined to the zeal which you had
showed for the Church of England, and your personal concernment in diverse
Calumnies, and slanders, which the Brasier (as you call him) had cast upon you;
I took upon me so great a Confidence (how unhappily soever a stranger to you)
as to solicit you to engage against the Historical way of arguing, which yet
(you know) I did acknowledge too much below you.

As for the part which is remaining, concerning the positive entity of Sin, in
which alone I am peculiarly concerned, and which you tell me you P. 149.
leave to my sole management, (making me also a greater Complement, then either
my Modesty or my Merit is any way able to support,) I make no doubt but I shall
publish such an account of that affair, as will no^ fail of your approbation.
'Twere easy to do it in a few pages, so as to give satisfaction to men of
Learning; but then it would not be so easy to vulgar Readers, whom I do
chiefly consider in what I publish, that they may not be in danger to think
that Sins are God's Creatures, by thinking God is the Creator of all things
real. And it being my purpose, not only to humble and put to silence, but to
Convince and convert so bold a Libertine, I shall contentedly be as large in my
intended enterprise, as needs I must be, to be p^rspicuous. For Truth to some
Readers is nothing worth, if it is not brought to them with light and
plainness. And if I shall prove it as bright a Truth, that Sin is positively
something, as that the parts of the Circumference are aquedistant from the
Center; or that equal parts being taken from equal parts, the parts remaining
must needs be equal; I hope the scorner himself will be my Convert. And
indeed when I consider his several gross Contradictions; his being forced to
confess (in a lucid interval) what he does stomachfully deny, whenever he
think's it a shame to yield; his most deliberate mistaking the thing in
Question, that he may have what to say, though not to Answer; his wilful
Omissions to speak at all to the greatest part of my many Arguments, and his
not attem^ting the force of One by any thing like unto a pertinent and fair
resistance; when I consider with what R^^uotanc^ he proceeds at last to that
subject, in which (and in which alone) he was particularly concerned; with how
many and long P^efaces transcribed verbatim from Mr. Prinn, and other late
English Writers (whom I shall name in due season) he has labored to hide his
main cause from his Reader's eyes, posting it over in a few pages, toward the
end of his Hotch-Potch, or Gallama^frie; I think I have reason to suspect, that
the man is exactly of my opinion, (as to the positive entity of Sin) but only
remember's I am a man whom they call a Prelatist, and he is a rigid
Presbyterian, (thatis) a Puritan in grain, and so he will seem to resist me,
as far as slandering and Railing come's to, for fear his Abettors should
apprehend that I have wrought a change in him.

I must therefore endeavor to overcome his perverseness as well as to dissipate
the error which he pretends to. That if he shall finally persevere in his
present course, and write against his own light, the common people may clearly
see, he is rather obstinate than erroneous, or else affectedly erroneou^ by
being obstinate. And in order to the attaining so good an end, I intend to
satisfy their Objections, which Mr. Hickman by adoption has made his own; and
which for want of apprehension, or something else, he has not managed as he
ought to his best advantage. I am not ignorant of the Quiver, out of which he
has taken his heaviest Shafts, and which I shall choose so much the rather to
break in shivers before his eyes, that he may hurt himself no more with such
leaden weapons, as he shall f^n^ by ^xperience he cannot weild.

The man conf^sseth in his Conclusion, that in the body of his Book there are
certain See the Book Edit. 2. p. 108. l. 3. and 4. from the bottom.
sore places; by this good token that h^ so bids me to stick upon them: but
what he means by so^e pl^ces, or where they lie, he has the policy not to tell
me. Again he confesses (in the same page) that there are several Ibid.
sick and weak parts of his Discourse; by this good token I am forbid to fall
on them: but he conceals what parts are understood by himself to be sick and
weak, for fear I should carefully avoid them, and only fall upon that which he
thinks is soundest, and thereby leave him without excuse. For this expressly he
tells his Reader, that if I shall stick only upon a sore place, and fall on
the sick and weak parts of his Discourse -- he will vindicate himself only
with contempt and silence. And so by this he has compelled me to undertake his
main Body, and to charge it quite through, (whether sick or sound) because he
has not afforded a mark of Difference. For if I am left to mine own judgment,
I shall pronounce his main Body (as he ridiculously calls it) to be nothing
else but a great sore. All the parts of his Book (if yet you will allow me to
call it His) do seem to me to be extremely both sick and weak: so as according
to that condition, upon which he threatens contempt and silence, I am not to
meddle with him at all, as being sure that I shall fall upon a sick and sore
part.

For if I begin with the Hateing of God, A Fore-tast of Mr. Hickman's
condemnation of himself for the worst of Blasphemies.
which he first confesses to be an Action, and secondly confesses to be a
Sin, and thirdly confesses to be a Sin of that nature, that it can never be
any thing else, by any circumstance of Time or Place, and fourthly confesses
to be a positive Entity, and fifthly confesses to be a whole Sin, and sixthly
confesses to be complexum Quid, (as I had often affirmed and he denied) and
seventhly confesses by unavoidable implication, that half a sin is not a whole
one, and that it was a whole sin which was the subject of our Debate, and that
one part alone cannot make up the whole which is confessed to consist of two
parts together: and if I shall ask him hereupon, whether the Divel's Hateing
of God, which he once confesses to be a sin and a positive entity, is taken by
him and his Abettors to be one of Gods creatures or God himself, (as every
positive entity has been affirmed by him to be;) I say, in case I shall begin
to show him the Blasphemy of his Doctrine, and to show it out of his own
Confessions, the man will be apt to require me with contempt and silence, for
sticking so fast (at the beginning) on such a very sore place. For he
confesses to the Lecturers to whom he dedicateth his book, that the making God
the Author of sin is not only the sin of Blasphemy, but the worst sin of the
kind too; yet he teaches in his book, that God is the Author of the Devils
hat^ing of God, which is the worst of all sins. And such himself does confess
it in downright terms, that I may do him no wrong, (which he will be ready to
object, how much soever Note his fraudulent intimation that I had not instanced
in the bateing of God, (p. 93.) when yet I had done it, (...). chapter 2. p. 83.
and elsewhere.
against his Knowledge) I will set down the pages and the lines, in which I
find him affirming these following things.

Mr, Hickman's conf^ssions of what is Truth.
1. That the hateing of God is the very worst, and most intrinsecally evil of
all actions, p. 93. l. ult. and penult. 2. That such actions are c^lled
intrinsecally evil, both because they are evil an^ecedently to any positive
Law, and because they are evil ex genere and objecto, and not merely through
the want of some circumstance, p. 94. l. 6, 7, etc. 3. That the hateing of God
is such an action, as no circumstanee of time or pla^e can make lawful, p. 94.
l. 16, 17. His u^avoidable guilt of Blasphemy.
4. That it belongs to the universality of the first Cause to produce not only
every Real Being, but also the real positive Modifications of Beings, p. 95. l.
ult. and penult.
His Inconsistencies with himself.
Now I would know of Mr. Hickman, (and require him to give me a Categorical
Answer) whether for Satan to hate God is a sin or no sin: if he shall answer it
is no sin, he will not only declare himself to be a downright Libertine, but
directly contradict his own confession in the first affirmative of the four
which I have just now cited. If he shall answer, it is a sin, and the very
worst of all sins, I would demand a second time, whether that Hateing of God
(which he thus confesses to be a sin) is a Real Being, or not? if h^ shall
answer that it is, then he concludes it to be produced by God himself, the
First cause, unless he will eat his own words in the fourth affirmative I just
now cited. But if he shall answer that it is not, he will not only contradict
the concordant Judgments of all Mankind, but ^l^tly deny his own words in the
third affirmative of the four, which I have just now cited. For there he says
it is an action, which he must grant to be a Real Being, which is somewhat more
than a real positive Modification of Being, of which he also makes God to be
the Author.

I say the Author for this good reason, How he m^^es God the Author of sin in a
way of expression more unexcusable.
because he must needs be the Author of every thing which he produces, and he
must needs produce every thing, which it belongs to him to produce: and Mr.
Hickman is express in his fourth assertion above cited, that it belongs to
the universality of the first Cause to produce every Real Being, etc. Hereupon
I would ask him, which is the worst of the two, the saying of God, that he
produces the Devils hateing God, or that he is the Author of it? Both are
fearfully blasphemous, but yet the former is more horrid, and the later more
capable of a comparative ex^use, however in it self it is unexcusable. For to
say, he produces, implies him to be the efficient Cause; whereas the word
Author does often signify somewhat less; as I have made appear from Classick
Writers ((...). chapter 3. p. 188.)

Again I would know of Mr. H. which of these Blasphemies is the worst; His
^ther way of expression the most horrible of all.
to say that God is the Author, or that he is the Creator of the Divel's
hateing of God, which he confesses to be an act at once intrinsecally and
essentially evil. To say he is the Creator, is the more formidable expression,
and that for the Reasons which I have rendered in my (...). Yet of this
formidable Blasphemy this wretched Caitiff must needs be guilty, unless he
will timely renounce his most irrational Dichotomie, (which was the very first
cause of our whole dissension) to wit, that every thing positive must either be
one of God's Creatures, or God himself; there being no medium (says he) inter
Deum and Creaturam; meaning Creaturam Dei, as he has often expl^in'd himself.
For when I told him that those Sins which were positive things (to wit, such
Sins of Commission, as Adultery, Blasphemy, and the hateing of God, were
neither God, nor God's Creatures, but only the Creatures of men and Devils,
abusing the Liberty of their wills by such acts of Rebellion against their
Sovereign, who could not possibly produce them against himself; the man of
Prove. 1.22, 25, 29, 30.
scorn betook himself to mock and laugh at my instruction. And yet he appeare's
to be ashamed of his Blasphemous Dichotomie, in that he does not twice mention
it (for ought I am able to remember) throughout the whole Progress of his
defense. And yet he knew that that alone was made the Apple of Contention, in
the 18. Section of the third Chapter of my (...), to which he knew he was
obliged to shape his Answer.

Perhaps (Sir) your leisure may not have served you, to have read any more of
Mr. Hickman, then what you had read in Mr. Prinn, before Mr. Hickman, could
have affixed his Name to it; I mean the Narrative and Historical part, which
has not any thing to do with the positive entity of Sin. At least you may not
have had the patience to compare particulars with particulars, as being
resolved to leave that to be performed by my self, to whom indeed it does
belong as a peculiar Province. And hence I think it the less impertinent, to
entertain you with a few more of the man's Assertions; that by his mixtures of
Truth and Falsehood, his Confessions of what he denies, and denials of what he
confesses, you may see how inconsistent he is with himself, and how (before he
is aware) he is forced to stoop and bow to me. His assertions I mean are these
that follow.

Another taste of his Contradictions and Blasphemies.
1. That sin is an abstract word, and does not in its signification connote, any
subject. p. 53. l. 4, 5. Nay that sin is so perfectly an abstract, that if we
conceive not of it as an abstract, we conceive not of it as sin. p. 54. l. 9,
10.

And yet he as peremptorily asserteth,

2. That the hateing of God is Complexum Quid, and must not be spoken of as if
it were one. p. 95. l. 14, 15. Nay that there is a material part of sin and a
formal part of sin, and odisse Deum is totum Complexum. (p. 94. l. 20, 23, 24.)
And that in evil works there are two things considerable: The works themselves
and their pravity, of which the works are from God* p. 96. l. 6, 7, 8.

He further Add's,

3. That sin and sinfulness are Synonymous to him and therefore he may use them
promiscuously, mea^ing by them, what the Latins do by Peccatum, pravitas,
malitia. p. 53. l. 3. from the Botom. etc. p. 54.

And yet he peremptorily says,

4. That the hateing of God is an action, which no Circumstance of time or
place can make lawful. p. 94. l. 16, 17. And that it is an act intrinsecally
and essentially evil, -- because evil antecedently to any positive law, and
because evil ex genere and objecto. p. 94. l. 6.7, 8, 9.

And yet again he affirms,

5. That in the hateing of God, the vital action of hatred is a thing positive,
but the terminating of that act to such an object which is altogether lovely,
that is the sinfulness of the action, and not positive, but privative, p. 95. l.
16, 17. etc.

After this he says expressly,

6. That all positive things are from God. p. 96. l. 9, 10. And

7. That their pravities add no new entities to them, Ibid. l. 11, 12.

Now (Sir) not to take notice of his not knowing any difference between a
Logical, a Physical, and a Metaphysicall abstract; nor to course him (as in
the Horse-faire) for making hatred to be an action, which every Sciolist know's
to be a quality, as if he knew not yet the difference betwixt odium and odisse,
and had not so much as a taste or tincture of Aristotle's well; it were too
easy to write a volume, in numbering up and displaying the many Absurdities,
Blasphemies, and self-contradictions, which this Reviler of the Archbishop (and
of all that is venerable or sacred) stand's guilty of in his Adventures. -- 1.
Sin is perfectly an abstract; and yet it is Complexum Quid. 2. We cannot
conceive it as it is sin, unless we conceive it as an abstract; and yet it
consists of two parts, or two things are considerable in it, (as Doctor Twisse,
Mr. Whitfield, Mr. Barlee, and indeed his whole party, have still
distinguished, as well as he.) 3. The hateing of God is essentially evil, and
yet it is (forsooth) from God. For it is an action, and so a positive thing,
and all positive things (he also says) are from God. 4. The hateing of God
must not be spoken of as one; and yet he confesses, some do but feign that
such an act i^ separated from its pravity (p. 94. l. 26.27.) 5. In the hateing
of God, he says the action is positive, and so God's Creature, (according to
his division of all positive things) and so exceedingly good; and yet he says
the hateing of God is an act or action essentially evil, evil intrinsecally,
evil antecedently to any positive Law, evil ex genere and objecto. 6. The
determinating of that act to a lovely object he call's the sinfulness of that
action, and yet that action of hateing God is a sin, yet sinfulness and sin are
to him Synonymous. 7. To hate God is a sin, and yet an action, the pravity of
which he says is the sinfulness of the action, yet sin is perfectly an
abstract, and the same with sinfulness. 8. He says that sinfulness is merely
privative, and yet he calls it the determinating of the act to the object, and
to determine such an act is the positive action of the will, and so the
positive must be privative because it is positive. 9. In the hateing of God he
does di^tinguish two things, the one good, the other evil; and yet confesses
it is wholly evil; and must confess it (in despite of his obstinacy) because
hatred not fastened upon God, is not hatred of God, and so it is not the thing
in Question. 10. To hate God is an evil work, a work of darkness and of the
Devil. Yet in all evil works, Mr. H. says the work it self is positive and
from God. 11. If he thinks it a sin to hate God, he thinks that sin an evil
work, and a positive action, and so grants what he denies. But if he reteineth
his opinion, that all positive things are from God or Gods creatures, then he
denies what he gran^s, that to hate God is a sin; or else it is clearly his
o^inion, that the sin of hateing of God is one of Gods creatures, and by
consequence that God is the Author of it, which he confessed in his Epistle to
be the worst of all Blasphemies. 12. To conclude, if he will stand to what he
has printed, that the hateing of God is an action, and so a positive thing,
and so from God, and so no sin, then be it known to all the world that Mr.
Hickman is a Libertine in the most desperate degree, for as much as he believes
it no sin to hate God.

And now we need no longer doubt, How his principles run out into practice.
whether he thinks it a sin to hate his Neighbors, especially them whom he
has injured both by railing, and slandering, and filching too. Had he not
sinned against you (Sir) in all three kinds, against the Bishop of Lincoln, Mr.
Morris, and Mr. Prinne in the last, and against Mr. Goodwin both in the first
and the last: Had he not sinned in the second kind, by slandering the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, and our Reverend Dr. Hammond, both as conspicuous as
the D^y for their exceeding great Learning, and for the spotlesness of their
Lives. And had he not added to all this, his contempt and scorn of Tilenus,
calling him Scribler, Ethiopian, a poor Fellow, and objecting to him a piece
of Impudence; and had he not provoked me yet infinitely more, by dishonouring
that God, for the passionate Love of whose Glory we ought to hate our own
Souls; I had not treated the Malefactor with so much strictness as now I do.
Nebuchadnezzar made a Decree, That whosoever should speak any thing amiss
against the God of Shadrach, Dan. 3* 29.
Meshach and Abednego, they should be (forthwith) ^ut in pieces, and their
houses be made a danghil: Had Mr. Hickman but spoken what he has printed at
the critical time of that Decree, he had infallibly been cut in pieces. The God
of Shadrach is the God whom I serve; and though I know too well what spirit I
am of, to cut mine Adversary in pieces, yet I will choose my self to be cut in
pieces, (as by slanders and forgeries I have sufficiently been) rather than
suffer the poor people to be perverted into Libertines, whilst I am able to
hope that I may possibly prevent it. Had I but one drop of Ink in my disposal,
I would employ it in the Cause, in which by Conscience I am engaged. For if the
people be brought to think, that Adultery and Murder are the works of God, (as
even Zuinglius and Dr. Twisse, men exceedingly superior to Mr. Hickman, have
taken the boldness to affirm and defend) nay, if the Divel's hateing God is
confessed to be a positive thing, by the same Mr. Hickman who also teaches,
that all positive things are either God's creatures, or God himself, and if as
many as do mistake him for a good scholar, or a good man, shall by the help of
the tempter embrace the Doctrine, alas how greedily will they run into sin and
hell? supposing that sin is nothing more than a term of policy, invented by
Ch^rchmen and Politicians to keep their people in good obedience; and that all
real Beings must needs be good, as being produced by the first cause, (says
Mr. Hickman) or else that blasphemies, cursings, and hatreds of God, if they
are not good and produced by God, are no real Beings, and that will serve their
turn as well. When the people cannot separate, nor so much as distinguish the
hateing God from the sin of hateing God, and also find it to be the judgment of
the learned Divines in all the world, that the Act and the obliquity (in the
hateing of God) are so inseparably united, as that the Author of the one must
needs be the Auhor of the other, how can they keep out of the snare which Mr.
Hickman has laid before them, unless we make them see clearly, that Mr.
Hickman is a blind and deceitful guide? The more the man is esteemed by certain
short-sighted souls, who discern not the difference betwixt Purity and
Purita^ism, or betwixt a Preacher and a Divine, by so much the more (like 2
Kings 10.31.
Ieroboan^) he h^th the miserable privilege of making Israel to sin; and so by
a consequence unavoidable, the greatest charity to his soul, is to make him
less scandalous, by making him vile in the people's eyes; or rather by proving
him as vile, as he and he only has made himself.

See his Pr^f. Ep^st prefixed to his Calvinists Cabin^t Unlockt.
Tilenus Junior has said enough to stay the stomach of the scorner, and I hope
in time he will cast it up. In order to which I shall endeavor (at my next
time of leisure) to make him hate his constant Fallacy, A recte conjunctis ad
male divisa, in his pleading for sins being merely privative.

I can very hardly hold back my hand from setting down more of his assertions
concerning the sin of hateing God, and showing the manifold impieties, of which
his own words do prove him guilty. But having already too much exceeded the
usual bounds of a Letter, and made a greater excursion than I intended, I
shall not speak of this subject, until I shall do it ex professo, and once for
all. It appears by this little (thus accidentally spoken of) that Mr. Hickman
will be apt to except against me, for having stuck thus long on so sore a place.

But what then can I do for the escaping of his contempt, The ^^ter
impossibility of escaping his Cont^mpt.
wherewith he has threatened to entertain me? If I shall call him to account
for what he has written of Risibility, of the intellect, and the will, and the
subject of inhesion to whatsoever either proper or common accident; and shall
prove him a man of the greatest ignorance in the things of Logic and
Philosophy, or the greatest Contemner of God Almighty in writing wilfully and
studiously against h^s Knowledge, of any pretender to Grace or Wit that in all
my life I ever heard of; and shall manifest that his Trophies are most
ridiculously erected where his own Misadventures are most remarkable, as if he
had purposely intended to make his shame the more signal, by mocking himself
with an Ovation in being worsted; if (I say) I shall examine him concerning
such things as these, he will be ready to cry out, that these are the parts of
his Discourse which I ought not in mercy to meddle with, in regard of their
being so sick and weak. So again if I demonstrate by many more than an hundred
conspicuous Instances, that he has affixed his own name, and so dishonestly
pretended to be the Author of the Wit and Language of other men, (which any Boy
might have done who was but able to write and read) and if besides I shall
observe, how he has not only not quoted (or acknowledged with thanks) but
bitterly rayl'd at some persons, out of whose writings he has stolen both
words and matter, notwithstanding the Authors are still alive, to give notice
of his robbery and railing too, and to pursue the bold Felon with Hue and Cry,
the man would certainly exclaim (at least in the presence of his Abettors) that
I have stuck like a fly upon very sore places, and unmercifully fallen upon his
sick and weak parts. So well is he armed cap a pe by this one Declaration of
his Infi^mities. The sad mark of a desperate Patient.


And here it is pertinent to deplore the sad estat^ of this Patient, being of
kin to that wound which Ier. 15.18.
refuses to be healed. He is conscious to himself of having very sore places,
and loudly complains to his Physician, that there are sick and weak parts in
the body of his D^scourse; and yet he preferrs the peccant humor before the
pain of being cured. To all the rest of his maladyes he has added this also,
that he is fallen in love with his Diseases, and hates the means of his recovery.
D. Prosperi R^sp. ad Ca^itul. Gallor. Ob. 6. p. 320.
Prosper gives it as the character of an unregenerate and graceless man, Quod
amat languores suos, and pro sanitate habet quod aegrotare se nescit, donec
prima haec medela conferatur aegroto, ut incipiat nosse quod langueat, and
possit opem Medici desiderare, qua surgat. We see the condition of him is sad,
who does not know that he is sick; and is not his a great deal sadder, who
proclaims his sick and sore parts with his utter averseness to have them
touched? I find a Horse with a galled back is less difficult in the dressing,
than such a rigid Presbyterian wi^h a galled Conscience and a galled Cause. I
did but move toward the former (I mean the galled Conscience) and point at it
as with a finger, when yet he fell a wincing beyond all measure. Its true, I
rubbed the later (I mean the galled Cause) and so for his biteing I must not
blame him. If at last he will stand fair, and endure a dressing of the sore
places of which he warns me to stand aloof, (groaning sometim^s, but never
grumbling) I shall not scruple to warrant a p^rfect cure. At least by
abstersive and cleansing medicines I shall hope to keep the sore places from
putrefaction, that they may not infect his over- ^asie and catching Readers;
who may really be in danger of the contagious disease, which has been lately
called Rantism, unless the noysomness and stench of his sorest places shall
make them stand at a wholesome distance.

No remedies too ro^gh in order to his Recovery.
I suppose, Sir, I need not desire your pardon for any Roughness in my
expressions, though you are pleased in much humility to p. 192.
desire my pardon for your own. Could I believe you had offended in your
austerity to the Scoffer, I would not have followed your example in this
praevious execution of punitive Justice. Whatever language you may have given
him, I can easily justify to all your Censors, that is, to all of his
incurable Scotized Sect, (as our Reverend Dr. Sanderson has very fitly See his
Preface to the last Edition of his first Sermons, S^ct. 24. p. ult.
characterized them.) Its true, you call him a p. 131.
man of Brass, but do you not prove him to be such, by his making you worse
than any Tinker, when you had never so much as named him in any kind? Its true,
you p. 132.
compare him to the Cuckowe, but I know not how you could avoid it, when he had
taxed you so unmannerly for defiling your own Nest, whilst he was laying his
Ordures in other men's, and also guilty of the rapacity which there you mention.
Its true, you admonish him of his p. 134, 135.
Sacrilege, but first you prove it, and you prove it out of his mouth. For
when you had but accused him of a lesser Robbery in the College than he
committed, he scoffed at you for your mistake, and proved his Robbery to be
greater than you imagined. Its true, you compare him to p. 144.
Aesops Dog in the Manger, but himself had made the resemblance extremely near;
neither affording the Archbishop a good word himself, nor suffering others,
without snarling, to do him right. Its true, you parallel his p. 145. p. ^9^
Railing with his Brother Burton's, and affirm his Language to be p. 145. p. ^9^
libellous, but you abundantly make it appear by that Scandalum Magnatum, of
which I should think his very Favorers would find him guilty. And they would
do it so much the rather, because (as you very well p. 133.
observe) whilst he excuses them of Rapine, he condemns them of Perjury. Nay
if Sennacherib is affirmed in Holy Writ to have sent Letters to 2 Chronicles. 32.17.
rail on the Lord God of Israel, because he wrote against Gods Omnipotence,
how very fitly may Mr. Hickman be said to have railed against the same, by
teaching the people to believe, that all things positive (and all Blasph^mies
by consequence) are either Creatures of God, or God himself? For has he not
See his p. 96. l. 8, 9.
expressly taught, that in all wicked works (such as the hateing and cursing
God) the works themselves are positive and from God, as all other positive
things, (such as the loving and blessing God?) And what is this but to write
against the purity of God, with a pen as much worse then that of the Heathen
King Sennacherib, as it is more puritanical, and against greater means of
Light? Its true, you charge him with p. 141.
slander too, but so no doubt will his Abettors, if they will read what you
have written. For (not to speak in this place of what he has vented against
your self) the slander he raised on the Right honorable and most Reverend
Father in God, My Lord of Canterbury his Grace, you have evinced to be such out
of his own handwriting. And in stead of a recantation he has dared to offer
at an Excuse. But it is an excuse so unexcusable, that (as you have said very
well) it may justly render him contemptible to the silliest Schoolboy. It Is so
extravagant an impiety, to say of so wise, so learned, so great and holy a
Divine, that He was turned out of the Schools, that (to speak my opinion in
your words) the foulest mouth (except his) could never raise so lewd a slan^er.
Its true, you call him a p. 184.
Filcher, and say he has made things his own, as some unhappy boys make
Knives when they do but steal them. p. 150.
Could you have possibly done less, than to detect a Robber of such sturdiness,
as that he thinks it a little thing to take the purse, unless he may fly in the
very face of him that follows the Hue and Cry? If you had not known in what
manner he plundered other men^ Treasures, you had enough to prove against him
for having ri^led one of your own. One of the very best pieces of wit and
language to which he has put his own name, (in hope to enjoy the honor of it
for a season, till his works of darkness should come to light) he has stolen
verbatim from your Antidotum Lincolniense. Which I say so much the rather,
because although in your late book you take some notice of the stealth, yet you
name not the Treasure from whence the Margarite was stolen, (for such it is
thought by those persons who think it his) and perhaps you knew not so well as
I; at least I am sure I first observed it, merely by dipping into the book
without design. But whereas you say p. 147, 148.
you are able to trace the steps of this young Serpent in all the cliffs and
precipices of the Rock upon which he glideth, so as to follow him not only in
his proofs and Arguments, but many of his phrases and flourishes also, some who
are partial to the Purloiner do think you have done him great wrong; or at
least they say what they do not think, that those are only Citations which you
are pleased to brand with the name of stealths. And truly the principal
inducement to this my present Publication, is to vindicate your Honor in this
particular, and to stop the mouths of the Snarlers, who speak so much either
against or without their knowledge of the Fact; and who may say with as much
reason, that Achan did not purloyn, but only borrow the wedge of Gold; and
that Rachel did no more than take the Teraphims of Laban without his leave,
though she is branded in Scripture for having stolen them. Had Mr. Hickman's
whole book been only a heap of Citations, you would no more have condemned him
in the notion of a Filcher, than you condemn Mr. Prinn for his Anti
Arminianism, or Grotius himself for his Annotations on the Gospels, which are
as full of Citations as can be wished, and much the better for such a p. 150.
Fullness. But when you said that Mr. Hickman had taken all his Arguments from
Mr. Prinns Anti Arminianism and his Canterbury's Doomsday, (which had been
long ago observed by many more than your self, who are minutely in a readiness
to make an ocular demonstration) you fitly added that he did it without
acknowledging his Benefactor, (that is to say in plainer English) without
citeing the places from whence he stole them; for stolen them he had not, had
those been cited.

Now Sir be pleased to take notice, that the Filtcher (as you call him)
deserves that name, in greater measure then you imagine. For as it appears by a
Collection lately put into my hands by a Neighbour-Minister (a person of very
good note for life and Learning) whose exact notification both of the pages and
of the lines is attested unto by my Amanuensis, (and for a great part of them
mine eyes are witness) I say it appears by that Collection, that not only all
his ablest Arguments and Proofs, with some of his flourishes and phrases, (as
you imperfectly discover) but even all his flourishes and fancies, all his
Sarcasmes and j^eres, all his all^sions and si^^ile's which have any appearance
of smartness in them, yea all his sentences and phrases which savor of Wit and
Ingenuity, are most shamefully and grossly (and word for word in most places, if
not in all) transcribed by him in his Hotch-Potch, from a few of our late
English Writers, whom he partly does not name, and partly rayle's at, but never
once cites for the things I speak of.

Had he been but as honest as Theodectes, and owned other men's writings by a
grant of Liberty from the Authors; or had he commended the proper owners with
the spoils of whose Pens he had been enriched, I think you would not have
showed him in so naked a manner as you have done. But to steal a Goose (as the
proverb speaks) and not to set up a feather, or to set it up only for a
Reproach to the proper owner, did seem to you a greater Crime, than he could
safely be suffered to prosper in. It is not certainly for nothing, that the
word Plagiary should signify (in Classick writers) a stealer of other folks
children, and of other folks Wit; the fruit of the body, and of the brain. And
you know what grievous punishments were inflicted on the former by the Flavian
Law. The fittest punishment for the later, and that which tend's most to the
Malefactors Reformation, is (in the judgment of Martial) to tell it out among
the people, and make the Plagiary ashamed. It being probable that his shame
will be Gentleman Usher to his amendment.

Mart. l. ^.
Hoc si terque quaterque clamitaris,
Impones Plagiario Pudorem.
And this I take to be the reason, why St. Paul took care with his
Thessalonians, that some sinners should be (...) -- (...). 2 These. 3.14.
noted, and as if it were marked with a black cole, and that to the end they
might be (...) -- (...). 2 These. 3.14.
ashamed. Besides it ought to be considered, that a looker on may be Psalm.
50.18. Paena peculatus (Furti scilicet pecuniae Publicae) inprimis fuit
pecuniaria in Quadruplum, postea fuit de por^atio.
accessory to another man's stealth, by knowingly concealing his ill gotten
goods. And when the very same person who is accused of a Plagium, is convicted
at the same time of a Peculatus, (for which his Restitution should be no less
then fourfold as I have somewhere read in the Civil Law) I know not how you
could do less, then draw up an Indictment, and I am bound to assist you to
bring in Evidence.

But here I am in some strait what kind of course I shall take to make the
evidence irresistible. Should I use that brevity which you thought best for
your Readers ease, and nameing one or two Proofs, referr my Reader for all the
rest to the several Authors, (without a notification of lines and pages) I
might suffer from the incredulous, as you have done in my hearing. And yet to
give in an Inventory of all particulars in my power, were not only in effect
to reprint the Rhapsody, but twice at once to reprint it. Once, as I find it in
Mr. Hickman; and again, as I find it in the true and just owners. To avoid
prolixity on the one side, I shall omit the many passages which he has taken
verbatim out of the two common storehouses, Mr. Prinn's Anti-Arminianism and
his Canterburies Doom; both because it would fill up some whole sheets of
paper; and because it is matter of many men's talk and observation, as well as
of mine and my neighbor- Ministers; and because you have already p. 150.
assured your Readers, that from thence he has taken all his Arguments, except
that of Gabriel Bridges and Mr. Simpson, and perhaps these also: which in case
Mr. H. sh^^l adventure to deny, there are many who can prove it, besides your
self. And yet on the other side to attain the chiefest end of my present
writing, which is the silencing of them who open their mouths for Mr. Hickman,
and say you wrongfully represent him in the ugly shape of a Purloiner, I shall
(as briefly as may be possible) give such a Catalogue of his Gleanings, as I
suppose less obvious to common notice, and which I have reasons to believe
has escape'd your own. Only my Catalogue shall begin with a signal instance
of his Audacity, which however it has not escaped your notice, yet you name
not the Book* much less the page where it is printed, nor do you set it so
fully as now I shall. Next shall follow Mr. Morris, because himself has
observed how his Book has been pilfer'd. My method shall be, to set the Author
on the right hand, with the Purloiner on the left; observing the pages and
lin^s of each; not every line, (for that would be troublesome, and needless
too) but one or two at the most, by which it will be easy to find the rest.

Mr. Hickman.
Only I will make bold to deal with him, as Alexander did with his Bucephalus,
take him a little by the bridle and turn him to the Sun, that other men may see
how he lay's about him, though himself will not. Book. p. 7. l. 19, 20.

Dr. Heylin.
Only I will make bold to deal with you as Alexander did with his Horse
Bucephalus, take you a little by the bridle, and turn you toward the Sun, that
other men may see how you lay about you, though your self do not. Antidot.
Lincoln. chapter 1. p. 5. l. 3.4, etc.

Mr. Morice of Werrington his New Enclosures broken down.
Mr. Hickman.
The importunity of friends -- the common Vouchee for publications. Epist. p.
1. l. 18, 19.

As did the heathen persecutors by the primitive Christians, putting them into
beasts skins. ib. p. 2. l. 11.

So coursely and undecently dealt with as I have been. ib. p. 9. l. 11.

Seasonable Counsel which Galba gave to Piso, Nero a pessimo quoque
desiderabitur, mihi and tibi providendum est, ne etiam a bonis desideretur. ib.
p. 9. l. penult, etc.

Notwithstanding all his Bustle and Ratlings, impartial and judicious men may
discern, he is but like that Goth in Procopius, who though he fought fiercely,
had the mortal Arrows sticking in his Helmet, whereof he soon after fell. Book.
p. 2. l. 2, etc.

I am fallen into an age in which I have learned to admire nothing, not so much
from any knowledge I have attained unto, of the causes of things, as from the
multitude of strange effects. Pref. p. 4. l. 1. etc.

That commune Dei hominumque odium, Mr. Hobbs. Book p. 7. l. 1, etc.

As Ithasius, who having no other virtue but his hatred to the Priscillianists,
etc. ib. p. 8. l. 3, etc.

That I might well say with Jerome, Qui non ignoscit ingenio, ignoscat tempori.
ib. p. 16. l. antep.

A blasting of all graces, and an alloy to all endowments; as if it might be
sai'd of his opinion, as Austine speaks of discretion, Toll hanc, and virtus
vitium erit. ib. p. 17. l. 18. etc.

I have the thousand witnesses to attestate. ib. p. 22. l. 12.

The desires of my soul are to receive -- a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
not as concurring with me, etc. ib. p. 22. l. 13* etc.

My cordial affections to -- are as well known, as I my self am. ib. p. 22. l.
18.

To inodiate. ib. p. 22. l. 26.

Profess, as a precise and measured truth. ib. p. 23. l. 18.

Judgment often varieth with interest, and things acquire a price, not so much
for what they are in themselves, as for what they are relatively to our ends
and purposes, -- no good money when he should take it, is current coin when he
should pay it. ib. p. 59. l. 20, etc.

An Essay of the Spartan's valor, who being struck down by a mortal blow, used
(...) stop their mouths with earth, that they might not be heard to quetch or
groan, thereby to affright their fellows, or animate their enemies. ib. p. 3.
l. 6.

Cannot fall down and worship the idols, which these men have set up, they must
expect to be thrown into the fiery furnace, nay they are tormented in it
already in Austine's sense, who calls the mouth of an angry adversary by that
name. ib. p. 31. l. 15, etc.

Seeing the heat of these epidemicall controversies has produced more writers,
then (to use Plautus his similitude) an hot summer brings forth buzzing flies.
ib. p. 107. l. 24.

Has made a Coward fight for once. ib. p. 108. l. 1.

Neither can I undergo the judicious trial of the learned, nor am I willing to
hazard the passionate censures of the ignorant. ibid p. 108. l. 3.

But if his reply shall be seasoned with the salt of Momus, not of Mercury: or
if it be stuffed and colored only with an ignorantia Elenchi, defending that
which is not impugned; or if he shall like the flies seek for, and stick only
upon a sore place, fall on the sick and weak parts of my discourse, and never
attempt to charge through the main body, I shall vindicate my self only with
contempt and silence. ib. p. 108. l. 20.

Nor have I observed, that many have been healed by going into the troubled
waters, though moved by the best Angels of the Church. ib. p. 108. l. 6, etc.

Nothing -- which has weight enough in it, to turn those scales at Sedan of
which Capellus says, that they would break with the four hundredth part of a
grain. ib. p. 68. bot.

Have the same quarrel with me, that Fimbria had with Scaevola, because he did
not totum telum in se recipere. ib. p. 93. l. 21, etc.

Who drew the Scheme of their opinions after that Bishop Land was Lord of the
House. And I think it no uncharitableness to say, that some of later times, in
making their judgments, had very great respect to the stars that were
culminant. ib. p. 25. l. 6, etc.

Mr. Morice.
The importunity of friends, the common vouchee to warrant publications. Epist.
p. 8. l. penult.

As the persecutors lapt the primitive Christians in beasts skins. Book. p.
194. l. 5.

So coursely and indecently dea^t with as I have been. Preface. p. 22. l. 16.

Seasonable Counsel which Galba gave to Pico, Nero a pessimo quoque
desiderabitur, mihi and tibi providendum est, ne etiam a bonis desideretur.
Book. p. 93. l. 29.30, etc.

Notwithstanding all their Bustle and Rattling, impartial and judicious men will
discern, they are but like that Goth in Procopius, who though he fought
fiercely, had the mortal Arrows sticking in his Helmet, whereof he soon after
fell. ib. p. 149. l. 13, etc.

We are lapsed into an age, etc. (and so forward, with some transposition,
until those words) -- the multiplicity of strange effects. Preface p. 11. l.
2, etc.

That commune odium Dei atque hominum, the Anabaptists. Pref. p. 19. l. 19.

Like Ithasius, who had no other virtue but his hatred toward the
Priscillianists. Book. p. 43. l. 43, etc.

That I might plead with Jerome, Qui non ignoscit ingenio, ignoscat tempori.
Pref. p. 3. l. 7.

A blasting of all graces, or an alloy to all endowments, as if it might be
said of this, as St. Augustine speaks of discretion, Toll hanc and virtus
vitium erit. Book p. 159. l. 31.

I have the thousand witnesses to attestate. Pref. p. 15. l. 32.

I desire, to receive a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, and not a
concurrant, etc. Book p. 166. l. 1.

My affectionate respects, to -- are as well known as I am. ib. p. 165. l. 21.

For inodiating. ib. p. 165. l. 29.

Profess it, as a precise and measured truth. Pref. p. 9. l. 34.

Judgment often varieth with interest, and things acquire the price, not so
much for what they are really in themselves, as what they are relatively to our
ends and turns; -- no good money when they should take it, is current coin
when they should pay it. ib. p. 113. l. 31.

An Assay of the Spartan valor, who being struck down by a mortal blow, used
to snatch their mouth full of earth, that they might not be heard to quetch or
groan, thereby to affright their fellows or animate their enemies. ib. p. 256.
l. 17, etc.

Cannot fall down and worship the image, that -- has set up an occasion to
bring me into the fiery furnac^ (as Saint Augustine calls an adversaries angry
mouth.) ib. p. 30. l. 8. with p. 67. l. 16.

When the heat of those epidemical controversies has produced more writers,
(to use Plautus his comparison) then an hot summer brings forth buzzing flies*
Pref. p. 10. l. 24.

Have made a Coward fight. ib. p. 11. l. pen.

As I cannot undergo the judicious trial of the learned, so I am not willing
to hazard the passionate censures of the ignorant* ib. p. 12. l. 6.

But if any reply be seasoned nigro sale Momi non sale candenti Mercurii; or if
they shall stuff and color it only with an ignorantia Elenchi, -- defending
that which is not impugned; -- shall like flies seek for, and stick only upon
a sore place, and falling upon the sick or some single parts of -- without
charging through the main body; I shall vindicate my self only with contempt
and silence. Pref. p. 25. l. 29. and p. 26. l. 3.

Very few are healed by going into the troubled waters, though moved by the
best Angels of the Church. ib. p. 12. l. 27.

They will not turn those very scales at Sedan, which Capellus tells us would
break with the four hundredth part of a grain. Book p. 153. l. antep.

Their quarrel against them like that of Fimbria against Scaevola, totum telum
non recipit. ib. p. 256. l. 17, etc. Compare also Pr. p. 4. l. 4. and B. p.
292. l. 27.

(This is out of Mr. Morice exactly, the words only transposed) when they draw
the scheme of --, they observe who are Lords of the House, they have chief
respect to the stars that are culminant, and accordingly make their judgment.
Book p. 43. l. 11, etc.

There are many more Instances to be given in from Mr. Morice, which for
brevities sake must be omitted.

Mr. John Goodwin. Triumviri.
Mr. Hickman.
Nonnulli citius volunt exagitate quod non intelligunt quam quaerere ut
intelligant: and non fiunt humiles inquisitores, sed superbi calumniatores.
Aug. de Tem. Sermon. 72. Title Page.

Solent veritatis hosts suis jactantiis etiam de nihilo theatrum quaerere.
Calvin. in Mar. 9.14. ib.

I cannot but recall what I have often read from Gilbertus Cognatus, of a man
with an Ulcer in his face, who passing over a bridge, where the passengers were
to pay a certain piece of money for every ^alady of body found upon them, was
required to pay the accustomed tribute for the Ulcer in his face; but he
refusing to pay it, the Officer pulls off his hat, intending to keep it for a
pawn; his hat being taken off, another malady appears in his bald head; now Sir
(says the Officer) I must have a double tribute of you. Nay (says the
Traveller) that you shall not, and begins to struggle with the Officer: who
being too strong for him, gave him a foyl, by means whereof there was a rupture
perceived under his coat. Now (says the Officer to him again) I must have a
treble tribute of you. Book p. 106. l. pen. etc.

Truth is so lovely and beautiful, that they who embrace falsehood, will needs
have it to be truth: and because they are unwilling to be deceived, they will
not be convinced that they have been deceived. ib. p. 108. l. 10.

Debasing me to the dunghill of doltisme. Pref. p. 1. l. 5.

(...). P^ut. Book p. 14. marg.

At whose name Mr. P. is wont to rise up in an * ecstasy, of ad^iration. ib. p.
27. l. 27.

Rhetoric dropped from his pen in the absence of judgment and conscience. ib. p.
3. l. 3.

He has always a flood of vilifying words at command, and if he meet with a
hard and stubborn argument, he ^oaks it in that liquor so long, etc. ib. p. 75.
l. 14.

Having with the Badger bitten till his teeth meet, he lets go. ib. p. 13. l.
4. a fin.

Was there ever a man ab ^nbe condito. ib. p. 13. l. pen.

The best crowers are not always the best fighters. ib. p. 90. l. ant^p.

Resolving -- never more to come so near him, until his breath be sweeter. ib.
p. 106. l. 24.

Mr. Goodwin.
Nonnulli intelligentes citius volunt exagitare quod non intelligunt quam
quaerere ut intelligant: and non fiunt humiles inquisitores, sed superbi
calumniatores. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 72.

Preface 8. p. 11. in marg.

Solent veritatis hosts suis jactantiis etiam de nihilo theatrum quaerere.
Calvin. Harm. in Mar. 9. 14. Book p. 211. so p. 194. marg.

He calls to my remembrance a story reported from Gilbertus Cognatus, of a man
with an Ulcer in his face, who passing over a bridge, where the passengers were
to pay a certain piece of money for every malady of body found upon him, was
required to pay the accustomed tribute for that Ulcer in his face; but he
refusing to pay it, the Officer pulls off his hat, intending to keep it for a
pawn; his hat being taken off, another malady appears in his bald head: now Sir
(says the Officer) I must have a double tribute of you. Nay (says the
traveller) that you shall not, and begins to struggle with the Officer; who
being too strong for him, gave him a foil, by mean^s whereof there was a
rupture perceived under his Coat: Now (says the Officer to him again) I must
have a treble tribute of you. ibid p. 225. l. 6.

Truth is loved, but upon such terms, that whosoever loves that which is
otherwise will needs have this to be truth: and because they are unwilling to
be deceived, they will not be convinced that they have been deceived.

Sic amatur veritas, ut quicunque ali^d amant, hoc quod amatur velint esse
veritatem: and quia falli nollent, nolunt convinci quod falsi sunt. Aug.
Confess. l. 10. c. 23. Pref. Sect. 64. p. 105. l. 10.

Abaseth me to the dunghill of doltism. Book p. 211. l. 3.

(...) -- (...). Plut. ib. p. 168. marg.

At the sound of whose names -- are wont to rise up in an * ecstasy of
veneration. ib. p. 95. l. 27.

Composed by the Rhetoric of -- in the absence of his judgment and conscience.
ib. p. 60. l. 7.

Compare this with Pref. p. 27. Sect. 16. l. 13. and 24. ending in these words
-- steeping it thoroughly in this liquor.

With the Badger he has bitten til his teeth meet, and now he lets go. Book p.
210. l. 21.

There was never such -- ab orb condito. ib. p. 210. l. 26

The greatest crowers are not always the best cocks of the game. Pref. p. 29.
Sect. 16. l. 5. a fin.

Resolution, not to come any more so near him, until his breath be sweeter.
Book p. 371.

Dr. Francis White. Way to the True Church, Edit. 1614.4^.
Mr. Hickman.
Who ( Memnon) hea^ing a mercenary soldier with many bold and impure reports
exclaim against King Alexander, lent him a blow with his Lance, saying, that
he had hired him to fight against Alexander, and not to rail. Book p. 17.

Dr. White.
Memnon, when a certain mercenary soldier did with many bold and impure
reproaches exclaim against Great Alexander, lent him a blow with his Lance,
saying, that he had hired him to fight against Alexander, and not to rail.
Epist. to Read. bot. of p.

The (reputed) Bishop of Lincoln. The Holy Table Name and Thing.
Mr. Hickman.
This poor fellow makes himself an adversary out of his own fancy, and driving
him before him from one end of the Book to the other, shoots all his arrows at
this man of ugly clouts of his own framing. Book. p. 21. bot.

Has so slipped and glided into all the several parts of his Book, that it is
almost impossible to refute them without committing as many tautologies, as he
himself, etc. ib. p. 89. l. 2, etc.

I must therefore fall a picking of them up like so many daisies in a bare
common, here and there one where I can find them. ib. l. 7.

Tumble in his ugly tropes, and roll himself in his railing eloquence. ib. p.
4. l. 9.

Mentis aureae verba bracteata. Pref (1. Edit.) p. 31. l. 10.

Bishop of Lincoln.
This poor fellow makes himself an adversary out of his own fantasy, and
driving him before him from one end of the Book to the other, shoots all his
arrows at this man of clouts of his own rearing. Chapter 1. p. 2. l. 9, etc.

Having slipped and glided -- into all the several parts of this Libell, so as it
is impossible to refute them without committing as many Tautologies as he uses
himself. ib. chapter 3. p. 60. l. 20.

I must therefore fall a picking of them up, like so many daisies in a bare
common, here and there one where I can find them. ib. p. 61. l. 4.

Tumble in your tropes, and roll in your Rhetoric. ib. p. 77. l. 19.

Mentis aureae verba bracteata. ib. chapter 2. p. 59. l. 11.

Philophilus Parrhesiales. Enthusiasmus Triumphatus.
Mr. Hickman.
Concerning the story out of Acosta touching the Peruvian Doctor of Divinity,
who would affirm, that he should be a King and a Pope: The Apostolical See
being translated to those parts; See Book p. 45. l. 17, etc.

Philophilus Parrhesiales.
This story we have at large in the abovementioned Treatise, p. 38, 39.
Wherein some of the words are -- that he would affirm that he should be a King,
yea and a Pope too, the Apostolical See being translated to those parts.

Now (Sir) however it may suffice for your vindication^ that Mr. Hickman is
thus evinced to have wrapped his own Talent (if he has any) in a Napkin, and
to have swagger'd for a time by spending freely on others men's; and though I
shall purposely omit, to send you the many and large passages, which you know
he has plundered from Mr. Prinn, even because they are so very many, and
withal so very large, that to recite them would make a Volume; yet to the end
you may be able to grasp them all at one view, and to find them with ease, if
need require; I shall briefly set down a Directory both to the pages and to the
lines.

Mr. Prinne. Canterburie's Doom.
Mr. Hickman.
Concerning the English Jesuite's Book inscribed a Direction to be observed by
N.N. See Epist. Ded. p. 6. l. 3, etc. along for 2. pages.

Concerning Bishop Montagues Visitation-Articles; See Pref. p. 3. l. 3, etc.
along for about 16. lines.

Concerning Bishop Lindsey. See ib. p. 10. l. 5, etc. along for about 11. lines.

Concerning the Church of England's (supposed) holding the Pope to be
Antichrist. See ib. p. 11. l. 4, etc. along for several lines.

Concerning Dr. Abbot's Sermon at St. Peter's. See Book. p. 65. l. 8. along for
34. lines.

Concerning the Jesuite's Letter to the Rector at Bruxells. See ib. p. 63. l.
20. along for about 11. lines.

Concerning the Historical Narration, etc. entitled to Cerberus, and
Champneys. See ib. p. 18. l. 14. along for 43. lines.

Concerning Dr. Holland's (pretended) turning Dr. Laud out of the Schools,
upon the score of Presbytery. See ib. p. 23. l. 19, etc.

Concerning Archbishop Laud's Letter to Bishop Hall about Presbytery, and the
foreign Churches. See ib. p. 24. l. 1. along for 10. lines.

Concerning Episcopacy being an Order, or degree, in Bishop of Exon's Letter.
See ib. l. 15.

Concerning Images (pretended to be) forbidden in our times by the Homilies See
Pref. p. 8. bot. The Image of God the Father, etc. along for 7. lines.

Concerning Mr. Sherfield's case. See ib.. For taking down a glass window,
etc. along for about 6. lines.

Concerning a Gentleman's telling Mr. Hickman of the Archbishop's justifying
the picturing of God the Father, etc. See ib. p. 9. along for about 5. lines.

Concerning Mr. Palmer of Lincolne-Colledge being coursely handled by the
Regius P. and called Appellator, etc. for citing Bishop Montague's Appeal, and,
Concerning Mr. Damport. See p. 45. l. 8, etc. along for about 14. lines.

Concerning Mr. Pym's Report to the Commons about Mr. Montague's appeal. See
ib. p. 24. l. 1, etc. That he had disturbed the peace of the Church. etc. along
for 10. lines.

Concerning the Commons Declaration about the sense of the English Articles of
Religion. See ib. l. 16, etc. along for 12. lines.

Concerning Mr. Montague's Appeal almost strangled in the womb, and such as
wrote against it. See ib. p. 23. l. 14, etc.

Concerning Dr. Bray's expunging a clause against worshipping of Images taken
out of one of the Homilies, out of Dr. Featlye's Sermons. See. ib. p. 10. l.
18, etc.

Concerning the calling-in of Dr. Downhams Book of perseverance. See p. 47. l.
pen. etc.

Concerning the censure of Mr. Ford, Thorn, Hodges. See ib.

Mr. Prinne.
Ibid p. 114. l. 1. so on to the end.

Ibid p. 177. l. 4. so on to the end.

Ibid p. 360. on to the end.

Ibid p. 542. l. 28. and 278. bott. and 276. l. 38. ib. l. 17. and p. 275. l.
24.

Ibid p. 155. l. 24. so on to end. See also p. 410, 411. ib.

Ibid p. 159. l. 39. so on to the end.

Ibid p. 167. l. 37. etc. and 168. l. 38, etc. and p. 169. l. 35. and 170. l.
17, etc. ib. l. 39. and p. 508. l. 7. a fin.

Ibid p. 389. l. 20, etc.

Ibid p. 274. l. 22. so on to the end.

Ibid p. 275. l. 25, etc.

Ibid p. 102. l. 7, etc. Who in this window had made no less then 7, etc. so
on to the end, and ib. l. 24, etc. The image of God the Father, etc. so on to
the end, and p. 103. l. 18, etc.

Ibid p. 103. l. 11, etc. so on to the end.

Ibid p. 157. l. 28, etc. From, An Renati, etc. on to the end.

Ibid. p. 158. l. 41, etc. 1 That he had disturbed, etc. so on to the end.

Ibid. p. 163. l. 18, etc. We the Commons, etc. so on to the end.

Ibid. p. 157. l. 15. etc. p. 159. l. 20, etc. ib. l. 7, etc.

Ibid. p. ^08. l. 25, etc.

Ibid. p. 171. l. 30, etc.

Ibid. p. 174, l. 175.

Mr. Prinne. Anti-Arminianism.
Mr. Hickman.
Concerning Dr. John Bridges's Book called a Defense of the Government, etc.
and about his opinion, that falling away is not grounded on our 16. Article.
See Pref. p. 45. l. antep.

Concerning Tyndall^s, Frith's, Barnes's works preserved, put forth by John
Day, and prefac'd by Mr. Fox. See ib. p. 13. l. 19, etc.

Concerning Bishop Ponet's Catechism imposed by K. Edw. 6. on all Schools. See
ib. p. 16. l. 13. etc.

Concerning Questions and Answers about Predestination at the end of the Old
Test. of Rob. Barkers Bible. See ib. p. 17. l. 16.

Concerning the English Articles agreed, confirmed, etc. in several Reigns. See
ib. p. 14.

Concerning Dr. Iackson's Questions in Vesper; and concerning Dr. Frewen^s
Questions. See ib. p. 28. l. 28. etc.

Concerning Bishop Carletons saying, That albeit the Puritans troubled the
Church about Discipline, yet they did not so about Doctrine. See Book p. 42. l.
7. etc.

Concerning the University of Cambridge s Letter to the Chancellor for
suppressing of Baro's Opinions. See p. 66. l. 18, etc.

Concerning our Articles being Anti-Arminian, because composed by such as were
disciples of Bucer and Martyr. See Pref. p. 18. l. 6. etc.

Concerning K. James's hard words of the Remonstrants. See Book p. 39. l. 5.
etc. ib. l. 11. etc.

Mr. Prinne.
Ib. p. 202. l. 8. etc. See also p. 6. l. 23. etc.

Ib. p. 79. l. 3, etc. ib. l. 18. and ib. l. 20.

Ib. p. 48. l. 31, etc. see just before two leaves of the said Catechism, from
f. 37. to f. 41. see ib. p. 48. l. 28, etc.

Ib. p. 51. l. 1, etc. and p. 54. l. 6, etc.

Ib. p. 4.

Ib. p. 249. l. 12. and p. 250. l. 11, etc.

Ib. p. 262. l. 18, and p. 263. l. 7. ib. l. 16.

Ib. p. 256. l. 18, etc. see p. 253. l. 27, etc. and p. 256. l. 18.

Ib. p. 12. l. 3, etc.

Ib. p. 214. and p. 205. l. 26, etc. and 206. l. 3, etc. see also p. 89. l. 13.

Having thus far discovered the greater Rapines, it will cost me no labor to
add the lesser; which yet I would not have done, but that they are put into my
hands by the Neighbour-Minister I spoke of, who thinks they may follow, though
they might not lead. One Lock of Wool does not merit a consideration, but many
of them put together will make a Todd; and you know who was slain for an
accumulative Treason.

Mr. Hickman.
Non partis, etc. Advertisemint fin.

Dr. Heylin.
Non partis, etc. Preface to Exam. Histor. fin.

Mr. Hickman.
Book p. 14. l. 4, etc.

Ibid. p. 36. l. penult. etc.

Ibid. p. 58. l. antep. etc.

Ibid. p. 105. l. 22.

Preface p. 39. l. 1.

Book p. 13. l. 19.

Ibid. p. 89. l. 5. a fi^.

Ibid. p. 2. l. 11, etc. outface their defeats.

Pref. p. 7. l. pen.

Book p. 60. l. 2.

Mr. Morice.
Book p. 218. l. 15, etc. s^e also Pref. p. 25. l. 28.

Ibid. p. 252. l. 10, etc.

Ibid. p. 35. l. 24, etc. and p. 42.7, etc.

Ibid. p. 333. l. 11. Pref. p. 1. l. 6. ib. p. 26. l. 27.

Ibid. p. 79. l. 37.

Ibid. p. 64. l. 11.

Ibid. p. 128. l. 4, a fin.

Ibid. p. 217. l. 29, etc. outfaced their defeat.

Ibid. p. 258. l. 6. sic alibi semel.

Ibid. p. 211. l. 29.

Mr. Hickman.
Preface p. 39. l. 1, etc.

Book p. 71. l. 8.

Ibid. p. 7. l. 14.

Ibid. p. 84. l. 5.

Pref. p. l. 5. a fin.

Mr. Goodwin.
Preface p. 24. l. 17.

Ibid. p. 94. Sect. 46. l. 15. so p. 98. Sect. 59. l. 21.

Ibid. p. 110. Sect. 66. l. 23. so Book p. 20. l. 27. p. 134. l. 4 a fin. p.
194.

Book p. 108. l. 10. p. 110. l. antep. p. 114. l. 7. p. 123. l. 19. p. 136. l.
32. p. 189. l. 25.

Ibid. p. 211. l. 11.

Mr. Hickman.
Pref. p. 4. l. 7.

Ibid. p. 46. l. pon.

Ibid. p. 47. l. 19.

Mr. Prinne's Doom.
Ibid. p. 106. l. ult, etc.

Ibid. p. 156. l. 22.

Ibid. p. 171.

Mr. Hickman.
Ibid. p. 16. l. 5.

Ibid. p. 16. l. 11.

Ibid p. 38. l. 19.

Ibid p. 18. l. 11.

Ibid p. 43. l. 16. and l. 25.

Ibid p. 33. l. 5, etc.

Ibid p. 31 top.

Ibid. p. 25. l. 13. and l. 16.

Ibid. p. 46. l. ult. and p. 47. l. 1.

Ibid. p. 22. l. 11.

Book p. 19. l. 12.

Ibid. p. 35. l. 7.

Pref. p. 43. l. 8* etc.

Anti-Arminianism.
P. 21, 22.

Ibid. p. 27, etc.

Ibid p. 93. l. 9, 11.13.

Ibid p. 86. l. 9, etc. and p. 96. l. 12, etc.

Ibid p. 97. l. 5.

Ibid p. 89. l. 22, etc. In Marg. Featlye's Pelag. Rediv. cited. See p. 98. l.
10, etc.

Ibid p. 204. l. 35. and p. 205. bot.

Ibid. p. 252. l. 6. and l. 11. and p. 271. bot.

Ibid. p. 246. l. 22. and p. 247. l. 16. and p. 250. bot.

Ibid. p. 271. bot. See also Epist. to Parl. p. 11. l. 12.

Ibid. p. 85. l. 24.

Ibid. p. 93. l. 16. and p. 100. l. 17.

Ibid. ^p. 90. l. 21. and p. 7. l. 12. and p. 9. l. 19, etc.

Now, Sir, if any of these figures shall come imperfectly into your hands, by
any oversight of the Printer, or ill correcting of the Press, be pleased to
remember what now I say, that every one of the Citations have been strictly
compared by several witnesses apart. And if any thing be amiss through
inadvertency in the conveyance, the Collector in an instant can set it right.
That some of these are Quotations either of Latin or Greek Authors, is well
considered by the Collector, who therefore has not accused Mr. Morice, or Mr.
Goodwin, for having fetched them from their several Fountains, (he rather gives
them his Commendation) but he accuses Mr. Hickman of h^ving filtch'd them out
of the Cisternes, (and you know who says, stolen waters are sweet,) without
acknowledging the Cisternes, to which they are evidently due, (as may appear by
his forms of Introduction, his way of rendering, and applying, besides his
Robberies ve^batim, before, and after,) and pretending vainly to have drank
from the Crystal Spring. Its true he varies from Mr. Goodwin in two
particulars of Remarke. For whereas Mr. Goodwin has truly written out of
Plutarch, (...), and (...), Book p. 14. in Marg. l. 2* and 7.
Mr. Hickman most grossly thought fit to write thus, (...), and (...). Of this
I should not have taken such public notice, had he committed the fault but
o^ce, or had he put it in the Errata, or had he mended the matter in his second
Edition. But since it has passed with him for current in both Editions of his
Farrago, I judge he meant to correct Mr. Goodwins Greek; and so I may better
say of him, then he of Postscript p. 1
you, he has but done like some Tinkers, who in stopping one hole, are wont to
make many. That Mr. Goodwin was his Plutarch, you may conjecture even from
hence, that amongst many other things of which I have given you an account, he
has illustriously stolen in one place no less than twenty good lines together,
word for word from Mr. Goodwin, although in case of no greater moment, then the
telling and applying a pretty tale. And therefore in that he says, [ he has
often read from Gilbertus Cognatus] his meaning infallibly must be this, that
he has often read in Mr. Goodwin's Triumviri, what Mr. Goodwin has related
from Gilbertus Cognatus; he having managed the story, not in the words of
Gilbertus Cognatus, but in the words and phrases of Mr. Goodwin. Instead of his
Thanks to Mr. Goodwin for that and many more Favors, (which Mr. G. has done
him without his knowledge) he brand's him with Va^ity, and Arrogance, and
Impudence hardly to b^ equaled, and Intitle's him the Ishmael in Colem in
street. And in a manner not much unlike, he has requited your self for the
credit he got by stealing from you, however he lost it by your Discovery; and
is now to lose more, through the very same means by which he gained it.

During the space of some months, he made a show in the world, and was thought
(by some of his party) to have had a good stock of Wit, and Learning. But full
well is it known to your self and others, how poor a writer ^e would be, if
every man had his own. It was not only unworthily, but cruelly done in Mr.
Hickman, (like the Tyrant Mezentius) to join the living with the Dead. For if
you take away the Lively and florid things which he has stolen, there will
nothing be found to be his own, except the putrid and noisome Carcass. I may
say of Mr. H. as our Reverend Doctor Walton has lately said of his
Considerator, applying the words of Apollodorus to Chrysippus his writings;
take away (...), whatsoever is not his own, (...), his paper will be empty and
void of matter. For words of Calumny and Railing must pass for wind.
Prometheus could make a man of Dirt, and that Minerva allowed him to call his
own; but even the Poets would not suffer him to wear the honor of a Creator,
because the Life of his workmanship was cunningly stolen from the Sun; and he
was punished for his impiety by all the Ills that brake forth of Pandora's Box.

Hesiod. (...).
(...),
(...).
And however Mr. Hickman may have laughed for a season, (as Prometheus (...);
Ib. ver. 55.
did until detected,) yet I am not sure that he will ever laugh more, unless
it be with a Sardonick Laughter; or at least has attained to that worst of
Faculties, which is to hug his own Misery, as well as Guilt.

-- (...)
(...).
Had he timely considered the Roman Non semper erunt Saturnalia.
Proverb, that the longest play-dayes will have an end, he would a little have
suspended his Mirth and Boasting, for fear of heaping up a Treasure of shame
and sorrow. Out of how many men's Gardens, how many Flowers has he
transplanted, to try how happily they would live amongst the weeds of his
Dunghill? When in his Tenpenny triflle (as you rightly term it) I observed
strange Mixtures of style and matter, methought I found my self assaulted (like
Bishop Hall by Smectymnuus) with a kind of polykephalous Lernaean Monster. But
little at first did I expect, that Dr. Heylin, and Mr. Morice, and Mr. Goodwin,
and Mr. Prinn, (much less that Bishop White, and the reputed Bishop of
Lin^ol^e should be conjured up out of their Graves,) and made to write against
me in the name of Hickman; much less yet could I imagine, that they should all
be compelled without their knowledge, (and some I am sure against their wills)
to fill up the Maxim, qui tanti mensuram nominis imples, etc. Ovid. Trist.
measure of Mr. Hickmans name, which you observe to betoken a man of scorn, or
one who sits down in the Scorners Chair, yet I observed diverse things, which
did alienam olere officinam, whilst yet I knew not from whence he had them. And
as there are who are examined how they come by their Estates, when they are
seen to spend freely, however of a late, and a low beginning; so I employed a
worthy Person (whose Love I knew would make him stoop to so mean an office) in
making a very short Search into some English storehouses; and so to try if my
suspicion were not very well grounded. That if his Drole^y was his own, I might
afford him the more of my affection and respect, for having so handsomely
abused me in diverse places. Or that if it were stolen (which I exceedingly
suspected) I might so far endeavor to make a Discovery for his good, as it
should happen to be for his humiliation. What account my Friend gave me, (the
Neighbour-Minister I spoke of) in how many str^nge instances, and in how very
few days, I hardly dare tell you, for fear it should seem a thing incredible.

Well fare Mr. Hickman for one good turn, I mean for putting me in mind of what
I might otherwise have forgotten, as having learnt it long ago in the Grammar
School. I mean the Apologue of the Crow, which had sliely impt his own wings
with many other Birds Feathers of various colors, and so had passed (for some
time) as one of the Beauties of the great Volary. But when his thievery was
discovered, and every Bird that had been defrauded began to challenge his own
Feathers, then the poor Crow would fain have flown out of himself (at least by
wishing it had been possible) to escape the contempt of the other Birds, which
now came purposely to behold him in his own Natural Deformity. And may I not
say of Mr. Hickman, (what his Sauciness Pref. p. 52^
adventured to say of the Reverend Dr. Heylin) that he is a Bird of the same
Feather? May I not liken him to the Crow in this one respect, as you your self
in another have fitly resembled him to the p. 132, 134.
Cuckoo? Sure if all above cited shall deplume and denudate this Bird of Prey,
by taking from him but as much as he took from them, he will remain as
unhandsom as Aesop's Crow. Methinks Mr. Hickman appears in prose as filtching
Celsus appeared in verse, when Horace spoke of him to Julius Florus.

Horat. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 3.
Quid mihi Celsus agit? monitus, multumque monendus,
Privatas ut quaerat opes, and tangere vitet
Scripta, Palati^us quaecunque recepit Ap^llo:
Ne si forte suas repetitum venerit olim
Grex Avium plumas, moveat Cornicula Risum
Furtivis nudata coloribus. --
Tiber. Donat. in vita Virgil. p. 9.10.
Bathyllus was to be shent, for taking upon him to be the Author of Virgils
Distich, though Virgil himself had never owned it. How much more is Mr.
Hickman, for taking upon him to be the Author of such Conceits, as your self
and many others had put your Names to? Sed nemo gratis malus est. Bathyllus,
for a time, got the favor of Augustus by Virgils Distich. But when Virgil
appea^'d against him with an Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit Alter Honorem,
Sic vos non vobis Vellera fertis Oves,


Nothing in Rome was so ridiculous as the late celebrated Bathyllus. Thus it
has fared with Mr. Hickman; who by his Praedatory Pen and by railing at the
Archbishop procured an ill gotten fame from the little people of his pitch, who
cannot distinguish a Linsy-wolsy from an entire piece of cloth. But the young
Serpent (as you call him by way of Simile) will now be a hissing even to them,
who applauded his hissing at his Superiou^s. And as his Partisans have boasted,
that he has laid the Arminians upon their backs; so they will grieve at least
as much, to see him creeping upon his belly.

It has been bruited far and wide by certain thorow-pac'd Presbyterians (as
the most moderate Dr. Sanderson has fitly termed them) that I am the Author of
a Book, which they were pleased to entitle [ A dark room for Mr. Hickman] and
they have labored to make it credible, as well by word, as by Epistle, from
Northamptonshire to London, and thence to Oxford. But whether the Copies were
brought up before I was able to hear of any, or whether (which I suspect) there
was never any such thing, (save in the fancies and mouths of the
Presbyterian^,) sure I am, I am as free from being the Author of any such
Title, much less of any such Book, as Mr. Hickman himself can be thought to be.
I cannot repro^h any man living with bodily distempers, or with infirmities of
the mind which he cannot help. No friend of Mr. Hickman's can wish him mo^e
then I shall do, me^tem sanam in corpore sa^o. It is my duty to convince him of
all his scandalous offenses, in as public a manner as he commit's them. But
with his guiltless frailties, or his misfortunes not to be helped, I have never
once meddled in any kind.

Had I not known that this invention was sent to London in a Letter, by one and
the same Presbyterian, who took some care to have it thought, that I had
published a Defense of women's painting, in a Book entitled [ Of Auxiliary
Beauty,] and from whom I have reason to believe I have suffered more, then from
the hastinesses and heates of my quondam-Enemy Mr. Barlee, whose credulity was
but abused by such underhand-dealers as this I speak of; I should have thought
that Mr. Bagshaw had been the Master of the Mint. Who, (how perfectly soever a
stranger to me, and a person upon whom I had never so much as bestowed a
thought, much less an unkind or unci^il word) has twice reviled me from the
Press in a^ barbarous a manner, as such a person may be supposed. When first he
nibbled at my name, and did but nibble at my writings, I can truly say that I
had never heard of him; it was beside my knowledge, that there had ever been
any such thing in nature as Edward Bagshaw M. A. and student of Christ-church.
Nor is it likely his printed Sermons would have come to my notice, as they did,
if it had not been for their Dedication. I knew my Books were none of the
first, whose outward leaves had been bitten with Rats and Mice. Nor did I think
that such vermin deserved mine Anger, for merely doing after their kind, I
should rather have rejoiced in that Diversion, could it have kept them from
nibling at better things. But it seems Mr. Bagshaw was so desperately bent to
be known for something, and took it so very much to heart, that I would not be
moved at his abuses, (as if I had done him a great injury by not returning him
evil for evil, and had not been to be endured for resolving to suffer in peace
and silence,) that he determined to use me worse, for having suffered so much
wrong, than he had formerly used me for doing none. But being des^itute of an
occasion to wreak his Malice upon a Man, who would not gratify him so far as
to yield him any, he resolved for once to lay aside modes^y, and manners, and
humanity it self, to deposite the consideration of God and conscience, and
judgment to come, and so to set forth a Narrative against his Master, Mr.
Busby, (whom he had injured too highly to be able to forgive,) that so in a
Preface to his Narrative he might give himself ease upon Mr. Pierce.

And here I am confident you are wondering, (before you read me quite through)
with what kind of color or pre^ense he could indite such a Preface to such a
Narrative. How he could ^nter into Scurrility on no occasion; and against a
person, with whom he had never any Commerce, and by whom he had never been
provoked, by word, or writing. Truly his color was no more plausible, then a
perfectly Occasionless and Groundless Falsehood. He tells his Reader with as
much confidence of Mr. Pierce his Reflections on his Discourse, as if he verily
believed there was great reason for it, whilst yet he does not attempt to give
his Reader the very least. It seems he has absolutely Decreed, that I shall
be taken to be the Author of the Calvinists Cabinet unlocked, lately published
in Defense of Tilenus Junior, against the medlings of Mr. Baxter. In the
Conclusion of which Book, I find indeed some Reflections on Mr. Bagshaw's two
Sermons, showing the shallowness and the danger both of the one, and the other.
I mean the danger of the Doctrine, and the shallowness of the reasoning with
which he has labored to defend it. In the beginn^ng of those Reflections, one
is made upon his Practice, to which the lewdness of his Principles might seem
to lead him. But what was this to Mr. Pierce, who was no more the Author of
Tilenus his Apology, then of his Examination before the Triers? The Author of
the Apology was doubtless the Author of the Refl^xions; and very confident I
am, that the Author of both was Tilenus Junior: who is meant by Tilenus, or
where he live's, or who was the Author of the Apology, or who of the
Reflections, Mr. Edward does either know or he does not. If he does, it is a
wonder he will not name the right Author, but rail it out against me, for his
having been gibbetted by another. If he does not, it is a wonder he will
resolve to rail at me at all advent^re, without the patience to consider what
will happen in the conclusion.

This has happened to him already, that the impiety of his Preface confute's
his Book. For after so palpable a falsity, upon which he begins with Mr.
Pierce, what honest man will ever heed him in what he add's of Mr. Busby? Nay
if his passion and his Pet can so transport him out of Reason, as to make him
inveigh in great measure against I know not what Calumnies, Incivilities, and
Slanders, committed against him by a person who never stood in his way, or
beheld his face, or contributed in the least to his ejection out of the School,
or ever printed any thing of him which he so sturdily pretends; what will he
not say of his Master Busby, who accidentally has hurt him, though he has
done him no wrong? Can he be careful of the Truth whilst he is in his
Paroxysme, who will not regard it in cooler Blood? When the Boy in Horace was
found a liar, truth it self became incredible whilst it proceeded out of his
mouth.

I am a stranger to Mr. Busby as much as to Grotius in his Grave; and if Mr.
Busby were in his Grave I would vindicate him further than now I shall. For
though I think it a thing below me to slatter the greatest man alive, yet I am
freest from the suspicion, when I am liberal to the Dead. I should not
otherwise have taken such pains for Grotius, but that I am sure he cannot thank
me, and have also (...). Heb. 11.26.
respect to a greater Recompense. But I have heard of Mr. Busby as well as
Grotius; and I cannot choose but resent what he has suffered, so far forth as
to rejoice in whatsoever aspersions are cast upon me, by which Mr. Busby shines
forth the clearer. I have been told of the depth and great variety of his
Learning, but that which gained him my reverence was the greater Sanctity of
his life; the effects of which had been told me long before Mr. Bagshaw
appeared against him. Some of his well-natur'd Scholars have long since been of
my acquaintance; and knowing our Teachers are to be honored next to our
Parents and our God, I have esteemed them so much the more, the more they have
given me the pleasure to hear them speak of his goodness and gracious living.
Light and Darkness are not more opposite than Mr. Busby and Mr. Busby, as
represented by Mr. Bagshaw and men of worth. The Narrat. p. 22. l. 3. from the
bottom.
malcontent Mr. Bagshaw has drawn him out in strange colors, painting him
covetous, and cruel, and void of Conscience, violent, dissembling, corrupt,
ambitious, tyrannnical, oppressive, and what he pleases; but all manner of
persons of worth and quality (that I can hitherto meet with) are ready to
censure this saucy Censor, as one of the sillyest in the kind they ever heard
of: He having written as precisely against the evidences of Truth, and the
daily experience of all about him, as if he had thought it a fine thing to be
found a Railer, and never more to be credited in what he utters. I still
profess I am acquainted with nothing else of Mr. Busby besides his Fame, and
from thence I can attestate, that for his mastery over his Pass^ons, and his
diffusiveness of his substance as well as of himself, (to all, at least who are
deserving as well as needy) I have heard few persons commended more. And in
relation to his Scholars, such I have heard has been the Wisdom, the Gravity,
and the Obligingness of his Carriage, that the ingenuous part of them had
rather suffer his Rod than his displeasure. What I have heard of his (...) --
Father like both care and kindness to his Disciples (I mean his care to
instruct them in Rules and Principles of (...). Homer (...).
Living, as well as in the Elements of Human Learning) has made me compare him
in my thoughts to Homer's Phoenix, whom Plutarch sets as an Exemplar for all
Educators of Youth, (...), Plutarch (...). How much was (...) due from Mr.
Bagshaw to so deserving a Master (to whose (...). school I know an (...), etc.
Herodian. lib. 2. mihi p. 37.
Emperor who would very gladly have sent his son, had he been living in these
days, or had there been a Mr. Busby at least in his.) I wish Mr. Bagshaw had
been instructed by what you have written to Mr. Davis, who was (it seems) your
own Master at Burford School, and to whom you dedicate (with your self) your
Ecclesia Vindicata, with all your seasonable labors therein contained.

That Mr. Busby had been his Master, Mr. Bagshaw has oftentimes confessed;
that Mr. Busby had been kind and friendly to him, yea zealous and earnest for
his preferment to the Vshers place in that School, Mr. Bagshaw also does
acknowledge in the first pages of his Narrative. Tam been apud memorem veteris
stat Gratia facti.
Mr. Busby's merit and discretion Mr. Bagshaw does not deny. That Mr. Busby was
at the charge of Repairing and Improveing the public School, and was careful
that his Scholars might not lose the least benefit, which they might gain by
his Assistant maintained also at his expense, Mr. B. himself has well informed
us; Why then does Mr. Bagshaw lay such loads of foul language (exceedingly much
worse then he lays on me) on so obliging a Master, and so venerable a man?
Narrat. p. 4. p. 28.
Why must so excellen^ a person be charged with Perjury, and Treachery, and
violation of Conscience, yea with abuses of such a vile and unmanly nature,
that Mr. Bagshaw himself, without blushing is not able to think of them? Truly
as far as I can guess by Mr. Bagshaws own Narrative, the Reason of it was
chiefly this, Mr. Busby desired an Assistant without the favor and consent of
his Quondam Scholar: nay he desired it of the Governors, although he had not
first asked his Scholar's pleasure. The Governors knowing that the Master was
growing apace into years, gave him the liberty of a Cru^ch at his own peculiar
cost and charges, without so much as asking the Usher's leave; all was
displeasing to Mr. Bagshaw the under-Teacher of the School. The affront was
such as he could not bear, (and yet upon the post-fact he Ibid.
blesses God for having endued him with patience in so extraordinary a
measure.) Hence his p. 14, 15.
Rebellion against his Master, and (by a consequence unavoidable) against the
Governors of the School. Mr. Busby (the Master) makes a Petition to the
Governors to defend their Order and his Right against the Ushers Insurrections;
the Articles of the Petition the Usher partly confesses and partly mollifies:
but all not sufficing to free the Usher from a suspension, he after p. 23. at
the bottom.
falls upon the Governors for resolving to gratify Mr. Busby by a removal of
Mr. Bagshaw, (right or wrong) notwithstanding the conviction which Mr* Bagshaws
speech had wrought upon them. And though he says they were p. 24.
many and honorable porsons who stood in favor of Mr. Busby, yet they Ibid.
l. 4, 5, 6.
concluded on the removal of (so innocent an Usher as) Mr. Bagshaw, even before
it could be resolved (says the Usher himself) upon what ground to bottom such
a proceeding. And so we see his main* charge does wholly lie against the
Governors, whose proceeding and sentence was their own proper act, although in
favor of Mr. Busby, whose fault it was not if he was favored, much less was
it the Governors to do him right.

Mr. Bagshaw p. 22, 23.
professes his great unwillingness to give his Enemies the pleasure of seeing
him troubled. And yet he professes that p. 22. at the bottom.
no man is more inwardly discontented. He also told the very Governors, p. 19.
he had not yet so much as modestly complained, as if his complaints before
going were too immodest to be denied. He has printed his Commendadation from
three of the p. 2.
nearest of his Acquaintance affirming his abilities to be great and
unquestionable in point of Learning, and his life, to their knowledge, is very
Godly. What his abilities are for Learning, I will not by any means determine,
no^ will I speak to his prejudice in any kind without ground. But had he
vindicated his Sermons from Tilenus his Reflections, I suppose Tilenus would
have appeared in vindication of the Text and his own Reflections. As for his
life and Conversation, I am fittest to judge of that as far as the guilt of his
Preface comes to. And Mr. Busby can best measure him by the Enormities of his
Book.

Whereas he says of Mr. Calvin, and three more of his Followers departing from
him, (as he does often from himself) that they lie under the same contempt and
obloquy; I must needs affirm, he is prodigiously mistaken. For never were they
taxt of showing ingratitude to their Masters; nor were their persons ever
contemned, in that their Arguments were confuted. If so, I am sure they were
much contemned by one another. To say that Mr. Calvin ascribes Sin to Gods
impulse, and that Dr. Twisse defends Zuinglius, affirming God to be the
Author of Adultery and Murder, and to cite their pages wherein their words are
to be seen, is to discover their Doctrines, and no farther to meddle with the
men. When the most learned Mr. Hales, (even whilst he was a Calvinist, not yet
converted by See Mr. Farindon's Account prefixed to Hales his Remains.
Episcopius,) told in one of his Letters t^ Sir Dudley Carleton, how Gomarus
pleaded for this po^ition, See Mr. Hales his Letter of December. 12.1618. p. 47.
that God did predestine men to Sin, we cannot say that Mr. Hales did load that
Synodist with obloq^y, by relating the story with his dislike, and saying he
mended the Question, as Tinkers mend Kettles, making it worse then it was
before.

But what can be possibly so absurd, which Mr. Bagshaw will not dare to put in
print when he is Angry? He says I seem to be enamored upon my numerous issue,
when yet his very Calumny implies his self-Contradiction. For he conclude^ me
the Father of the several Reflections o^ his Discourse, although he knows I
never owned them. And could he think it my Issue, upon which I was enamored
but would not own? Had I indeed been the Author of all those Books, of which
by enemies and friends I have been suspected, Mr. Bagshaw might have called it
a numerous issue. And of some of those many he might suppose me to be
enamored, could I have had but the madness to think them mine. I have
disowned so many Books, (since Oxford was visited with the Plague) not because
I conceived them unworthy of me, but because I would not be overvalued, nor
offend like the old, or the new Bathyllus. Perhaps indeed I am the Author of as
many things which shall be namelesse, as those to which I have put my name. But
does it follow I am the Author of those Reflections, for which Mr. Bagshaw
has railed against me, as if I had really been one of his Quondam-Masters? I
deny that sequel; and let him prove it if he is able. Or can I seem to be
enamored of a numerous issue, who would not be thought to be the parent of as
many as I may, but of as few, as I think I must?

But I am probably to be blamed, for taking notice (so much at large) of so
lewd a writer. Whose inhumanity toward me, without the least shadow or show of
reason, (I having never provoked him in any kind, unless it were by my
peaceable and passive silence) as it has antidoted the venom which he has
spit at Mr. Busby; so to be hated by such a person, with such a person as Mr.
Busby, will (I doubt not) procure me his Readers Love.

Having now done with Mr. Bagshaw, I bid him heartily Farewell. Nor do I say it
as a complement, or word of Course; but as wishing him Repentance and change of
Life. Of the other Oxonian I take no leave, as having given him no more then a
Salutation, and as supposing he may deserve a more elaborate entertainment. If
Sir I have tired you with too much length, I will not detain you any longer,
than whilst I may humbly desire your pardon, and very heartily commend you to
the special guidance of the Almighty, in whom I am and shall be ever,

Your sincerely affectionate and humble Servant, THOMAS PIERCE.
Brington. July. 7. 1659.
THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 36. for ^^ r. nor p. 12. l. 8. r. France p. 19. l. 29. after all r.
of p. 21. l. 32. for Mr. r. D^. p. 28. l. 28. for concluding r. unconcluding p.
37. in m^rg. l. 5. for missarum r. amissarum p. 41. l. 7. r. brains p. 42. l.
11. r. conceit p. 49. l. 34. for leisure r. pleasure p. 56. l. 26: for was r.
it was p. 57. l, 16. after agree r. not p. 93. l. 32. dele to p. 100. in marg. l.
5. r. p. 40.41.42. p. 108. l. 16. r. Dr. John Still p. 111. l. 8. r. zeal p.
117. in marg. l. 7 after R^sticano r. p. 209. H^nnoviae Edit. A. D. 1611. p.
120. l. 6. after were r. both p. 147. in ma^g. l. 6. for p. 123. r. ^22. p.
170. l. 20. for do r. not p. 217. l. 21. after Them begin the Thirty first
Section p. 219. l. 29. for and r. not p. 221. l. 15. for no. r. not p. ^^^. l.
17. for very r. every p. 228. l. 7. r. pullitiei.

Books Printed for, and sold by Richard Royston.
Books written by Dr. Hammond.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by H.
Hammond, D. D. in fol. the second Edition enlarged.

2. The Practical Catechism, with other English Treatises, in two volumes in 4.

3. Dissertationes quatuor quibus Episcopatus Iura ex S. Scripturis and
Primaeva Antiquitate adst^uuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum,
in 4.

4. A Letter of Resolution of six Queries in 12.

5. Of Schism. A defense of the Church of England against the exceptions of the
Romanists, in 12.

6. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, in 12.

7. Paraenesis, or a seasonable exhortation to all true sons of the Church of
England, in 12.

8. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications published of late, most of
them in defense of the Church of England, now put together in four Volumes.
Newly published, in 4.

9. The Dispatcher Dispatched, in Answer to a late Roman Catholic Book,
entitled Schism Dispatched in 4. new.

10. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books of the
New Testament, with some additions and alterations, in 8.

11. Some profita^le directions both for Priest and people, in two Sermons 8.
new.

Books and Sermons written by J. Tailor D. D.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol.

2. The history of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, third
Edition in fol.

3. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12.

4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12.

5. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers, fitted to the days of
the week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12.

6. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a
large 8. newly published.

7. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol.

8. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. new.

9. A Collection of Offices or forms of prayer fitted to the needs of all
Christians, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David after the Kings
Translations, in a large octavo newly published.

10. Ductor Dubitantium, or Cases of Conscience, fol. Now in the Press.

Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce Rector of Brington.
1. THe Sinner impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great
discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self, in
12. new printed.

2. The Badge and Cognizance of Ch^ists Disciples, preached at S. Paul's Church
before the Gentlemen of Wiltshire, 4.

3. The Christians Rescue from the grand error of the heathen, touching the
fatal necessity of all events, in 5. Books in 4. new.

The new Discoverer Discovered by way of Answer to Mr. Baxter, with a rejoinder
to his Key for Catholics and Disputations about Church Government.

(...), or the Church of England defended, in two Treatises against the
Fabulous and Scandalous imputations cast upon her in those two Points. Of
Succession of Bishops and Schism, wherein the fable of the N^gs-head-Ordination
is detected, and the accusation of Schism retorted By John Bramhall D. D.
Bishop of Derry.

The Law of Laws or the excellency of the Civil Law above all other humane Laws
whatsoever: showing of how great use and necessity the Civil Law is to this
Nation. By Robert Wisem^n. Dr. of the Civil Law. 4. new.

The Grand conspiracy, by Master I. Allington, in 12.

The History of the Church of Scotland by Dr. Spotswood Archbishop of S.
Andrews, in fol.

Etymologicum parvum, in 8. by Mr. Gregory Schoolmaster of Westminster.

The contemplation of heaven, in a descant on the prayer in the garden, in 12.

The Magistrates Authority, a Sermon by Master Lyford, in 4.

The Quakers wild questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel, by
Master R. Sherlock, in 4.

The Communicants Guide, by Master Grove, in 8.

The plain man's sense exercised, by Master William Lyford, in 4.

Anglicisms Latiniz'd by Mr. Willis, in 8.

The persecuted Minister, written by Mr. L^ngly, Minister of the Gospel, 4.

Lyfords Legacy in 12.

The Catechism of the Church of England paraphrased, by Richard Sherlock. 3.
Edition.

An Apology for the Ministry by William Lyford.

The Examination of Tilenus, before the Triers in Utopia, in 12. newly
published.

The Calvinists Cabinet, unlocked, in answer to Mr. Baxter, by Tilenus Junior.
New in 12.

Examen Historicum, or a discovery and Examination of the mistakes, falsities
and defects in some modern Histories, 8. by P. Heylin D. D. New.

Reliquiae Sacrae Carolinae, The works of that Great Monarch and Glorious
Martyr King Charles the first, both Sacred and Civil, together with a short view
of his Life and Reign.

Certain Considerations of present Concernment, touching this Reformed Church
of England by H. Fern. D. D. in 12.

A Compendious Discourse upon the Case, by Henry Fern, in 12.

(...). Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria. The Tears, Sighs, Complaints, and
Prayers of the Church of England: setting forth her former Constitution,
compared with her present condition; also, the visible Causes, and probable
Cures of her Distempers, in four Books, newly extant in fol. By John Gauden,
D.D. of Bocking in Essex.

Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference betwixt the late King Charles and the
late Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion.

Royalists defense printed at Oxon. 4.

Mercurius Rusticus or the Countrymans complaint against Lieutenant General
Cromwells plundering, and defacing Cathedrals printed at Oxf. 8.

The Regal apology printed at Oxon.

Bishop Bramhalls fair warning to take heed of the Scotch Discipline. 4.

Sacro-sancta Regum Majestas, written by the Archbishop of Tuam.

Doctor S^uards Answer to Fountains Letter.

Episcopacy and Presbytery Considered by Henry Fern, D.D.

A Sermon before his Majesty at the Isle of Wight by Henry Fern, D. D.

Iudicium Universit^tis Oxoniensis de Solenni lege and foedere, Iuramento
Negativo, etc.

Fifty Sermons preached by the Learned and Reverend John Done, D.D. Doctor
Cozens Devotions, etc.

The End of the Catalogue.

