THE DIVINE PURITY DEFENDED. OR A Vindication of some Notes concerning God's
Decrees, especially of Reprobation, from the Censure of D. Reynolds in his
Epistolary Praeface to Mr. Barlee's Correptory Correction.

By THOMAS PIERCE, Rector of Brington.

The Second Edition.

He that is First in his own cause seems Just; But another comes and finds
him out. Prove. 18. 17. LONDON, Printed by S. Grissin, for Richard Royston at
the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1659.

The Introduction.
IT having been wondered at by some, and expostulated by others, why having
finished these papers so many Months since, and fully prepared them for the
Press, I should have carried my self toward them with so much indifference and
neglect, as to have laid them quite aside like things forgotten and out of
mind, not vouchsafing them the Freedom to enjoy the End of their Conception, I
am moved now at last to pay my Reader that little Debt, which my voluntary
Promise has made his Due; To wit, a survey of that Epistle, which was
prefixed, by D. Reynolds, to Mr. Barlee's Satyr. And to the making of this
Survey, I was somewhat more Invited, by the remarkable Difference, which I
observed, betwixt that Adversary, and This. For in my former Defensative, I was
enforced to wipe off many Personal Aspersions, which was a very unpleasing and
irkesom Task; whereas now having to do with a Nobler Adversary, who is less apt
to lead me from the subject matter of our Debate, I cannot choose but think it
a happy change, and suppose that my Reader will think so too, as that which
affords us so much more both of ease, and pleasure.

But this is not all. For I cannot but hold my self obliged (that I may not say
Invited only) to plead as boldly and as publicly in the behalf of sound
Doctrines, as other men have adventured to plead against them. I say, I hold my
self obliged by these ensuing Consideratio^s.

First, the Merit of those Doctrines for which I plead; which seem to me to be
Doctrines of so great moment and importance, that according as the subjects
about which they are conversant, are either truly or falsely stated, they are
apt to shed either the best or the worst kind of Influence upon our Lives. The
sum of that which I contend for is briefly this. That the God of Heaven has
not appointed any Creature to do wickedly, but hates sin with an unfeigned and
perfect Hatred, and does not give a necessity to all Events, but to those alone
which are agreeable to his Holiness, and are the objects of his absolute
unconditional Decree; That God's Decree of Reprobatio^ was eternally
respective, and respective of sins as well actual, as original; That Gods
Decree of Election was eternally respective of our being in Christ, and of our
abiding in him unto the end; That God's Execution of his Decrees are in a just
Conformity to his Decrees; That Jesus Christ is a General, but a Conditional
Savior, a Savior to all who do the duties by him required, to none without
it; That they who stand may fall for ever, and must therefore very watchfully
John 15. 2, 6. Matthew. 24. 11. 1 Cor. 10. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
take heed lest they fall, ever giving all 2 Peter 1. 10 Heb. 12. 15.
diligence to make their Calling and Election sure; These, I say, are the
Doctrines that I contend for, and the most necessary Doctrines by which to
disabuse the Understanding, wheresoever we attempt to reform the Will. And I do
rather choose to hazard some loss of Time, as well as Labor, in the possible
fruitlesnesse of my Attempt, than to be guiltily sparing of my Endeavors, to
rescue the lives and Conversations of certain seduced and injured Men, whom the
Cum de Impietatibus arguuntur, non aliud se agere praetendunt quae^ quod a Deo
ordinati sunt, and suae Praedestinationi repugnare non posse dicunt. --
Christianorum Nomen sibi vindicantes reipsa a Christianismo alieniores sunt,
quam sint ulli Ethnici. Cutbert Tonstal Episc. Dunel-contra impios
Blaspematores Dei Praedestinationis, Cap. 1. p. 22, and 23.
contrary Doctrines and Opinions are wont to carry into Debauches. For though I
cannot but acknowledge with Joy and Comfort, that through the Grace and Mercy
of our God, many Men of ill Opinions have yet been men of good Lives, and have
been marvelously restrained from those Errors of Practice to which those Errors
of Judgment had else so naturally betrayed them; yet when I seriously
consider, of how great a number, how few they are, and what multitudes on the
contrary both of Stoics and Mahomedans, of Marcionites and Manichees, of
Gnostics and Ranters, and other visible Sectaries (who are (...). Justin. Mar.
(...), page 42.
professors of Christianity, and even Pretenders to Reformation,) have ascribed
their blackest and most frightful Deeds, not to the passive permission or
forbearance only, but to the active Providence and to the absolute Decrees of
God Almighty, (who is of Habak. 1. 13.
purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on Iniquity, says the Prophet
Habakkuk,) I think it the Duty of every Christian to be so zealously concerned
for the Glory and Reputation of his Creator, and so tenderly affected toward
the Interest of souls, as not only to shake off the venomous fruits, nor only
to lop off the cursed Branches, but to lay his Axe to the Root of this Tree of
Evil; and so to free his own Ezekiel. 33. 9.
soul, whatever Influence he may have upon other men's.

Secondly, It ought to be one of my Inducements, that He who publicly
assaulted the Truth, and Me, in his Elaborate Epistle to Mr. Barlee, is a
person of great Authority, as well as Fame, amongst the men of that way, which
it is my Duty to write against. Who by approving and abbetting the very worst
of those Doctrines, which were delivered by Mr. Barlee, and by his maste^s
before him, may possibly give them some Reputation with that sort of Readers,
with whom I am most of all desirous to bring those Errors into Disgrace. It is
not safe for the people to be entrusted with the Faylings of so eminent a
person as D. Reynolds. For what He dictates, they may swallow down whole,
neither examining the Ingredients whereof it is compounded, nor what kind of
nourishment it is apt to breed. And hence I think it extremely useful, to give
an account (...) of what it has pleased him to publish concerning the Points
under Debate, for the better undeceiving of Those especially, who are in danger
to be misled by so great a Name.

Thirdly, I do conceive it no less than Duty, to make one reflection upon my
self, when I find my self accused to all the world of having wrongfully charged
such men with Blasphemy, who were eminent Servants of Jesus Christ, and deeply
acquainted with the mind of God. A Heavy Crime without Question; of which, if
my Accuser is able to prove that I am guilty, whatever mercy I may have from
others, I will show but little upon my self. If I have wronged those Writers
whom he so zealously commends, or have spoken of them more severely than some
of their own dear Brotherhood are made appear to have done, I will be avenged
upon my self, as far as mine Adversary can wish me. But the willinger he is to
have it thought that I am guilty, it does concern me so much the more to make
it known that I am Innocent. Nor will it cost me any more Pains to do this
thoroughly and with effect, than by desiring my Readers Patience, and his
Impartiality. For first admit it were so, that none of those writers whom I
accused had ever written any such thing, as that God is the Author and Cause of
sin; Admit they had said it only in substance, or by way of Consecution, in
terms aequivalent, or tantamount, (as the speaking very falsely, is equipollent
to a Lie, althought it is expressed in cleaner phrase) yet, If the Holy Father
Irenaeus was deeply offended with Florinus for merely (...), etc. Iren. in
Epist. (...), etc. p. 510.
seeming to make God the Author of sin; If the blessed Martyr St. Polycarp (an
Apostolical Father) upon the hearing of any word which did but (...), etc.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20.
sound that way, would have started out of the place where he stood, and have
stopped his ears, and have broken out upon a sudden into a passionate
Ecphonesis, as if a Dart or Javelin had been shot into his Eye; sure my
Disorder and Indignation had been excusable, in case the Doctrines which I
accused had only seemed so much injurious to the Spirit of Holiness, and merely
sounded that way; If that Ancient Author (the very Contemporary of Austin) who
writ the Haeresis Praedestinatorum, did worthily reckon it a Silentium n^strum
Reatus docebitur, and Taciturnitas videbitur esse consensus. In Praefat. p. 12.
sin to be but silent in such a Case, such silence seeming to give Consent; If
the Famous Synod at Orange (which my Adversaries themselves pretend to
reverence) did pronounce an Council. Secund. Arausic. cap. 1. Can. 25.
Anathema against it, and that with great sharpness to its Abettors; If Bib.
Pat. Gr. Vol. 2: p. 286. l. 15, 16, 17, 18 Consule Nice^ae (de m^re qui nunc
observabitur cum quis a saracenismo ad nostram Fidem transfugerit) ex l. 2.
Thesauri Orthodoxiae fragmentum, In Bibl. Patr. Gr. excus. Parisiis. 1624.
Nicetas did account it the frightfull'st Blaspemy of Mahomet; If learned
Moulin was frighted by it into the Doctrine of Arminius touching the Business
of Reprobation, (which made him suffer so great a measure of Dr. Vin. Gra. l.
1. part. 1. Digr. 6. Sect. 4. c. 1. p. 92, etc.
Twisse his Correptory Correction;) If the pacifick Melancthon is often
provoked out of his Patience, and shows that one great Philip. Melancth. in
loc. de Causa Pec* p. 48.
end of our Saviors coming into the world, was to teach us that the Devil is
the Author of sin; If the most moderate Hemingius does express the Doctrine of
unconditional Praedestination) almost as often as he speaks of it) by such
disgraceful Nic. Hemmingius de Praedest c. 1. de via vitae c. 5. In Syntag.
Instit. Christ. loc. 28, etc.
phrases, as Parcarum Tabulae, and Fatum Stoicum, and affirms it mischievous to
the manners of men, as well as blasphemous against God; If Nulli Necessitatem
imposuerit ut malus esset, and aliud esse non posset. Hoc enim si fecisset,
(quod absit de ejus Bonitate sentire) Ipse utique esset Author Malorum, etc.
Remig. Ludg. Reg. 5 in Hist. Gotteschalci. cap. 11. p. 173.
Remigius Lugdunensis and the greatest Favorers of Gotteschalk, and Dr.
Whitaker himself, with our late most learned and Reverend Primate of Armagh,
did count it an evident and an horrible blaspeming against God, to say He
imposes upon his Creatures any Necessity of sinning; (yet by how many, and
noted Men, how often, and how publicly has that been said?) If S. (...). Chr.
Edit. Savil. ^. 4. p. 745.
Chrysostom thought it better to be ten thousand times buried, than that God
should hear any such word because of us; If Bish. Bancroft at Hampton Court,
with the good liking of King James, did call it Confer. at Hampt. Court. p. 29.
a Desperate Doctrine of Praedestination, from whence King James was of opinion
that a Ib. p. 30, 31.
desperate Presumption might be arreared, by inferring the necessary Certainty
of standing and persisting in Grace; If learned Deodate of Geneva did so much
abhor the ascribing unto God the least Causality of sin, as not to allow a
Iddio non e, ne puo essere Autore, ne cagione della malveget d della sua
Creatura Deodate in Prove. 16. 4.
possibility of his being so much as the occasion of it; In a word, If St. In
Praefat. ad Artic. falso sibi Impofitos.
Austin, and Adobject. Gall. Capit 7.
Prosper, and diverse others whom I shall mention [Chapter 4.. 5. and 6. and 7.]
were as deeply concerned as I have been, and much more pungent in their
Expressions; Then why should I have been charged, in so high a Degree as I have
been, for having been jealous of God's Honor as well as They, and equally
zealous for his Glory, who is my Redeemer, as well as Theirs? If I have met
with such writers who pretending to be godly, as well as learned, have sent
those Doctrines to be printed, and left for lessons to Posterity, which have
not only made God to be the Author of sin, even in those very words, but also
in all other words in which an Author can be expressed, and even in many more
words than can be used (with any Truth) of any Reprobates whatsoever, whether
Men, or Devils, whereby to charge them with the sins of such as are ensnared by
their Seducements, why should any Man condemn me for the natural effects of my
Resentment? If my Reverend Assailant may be allowed to be a public Defender of
those very Doctrines which are condemned by Holy Scripture, by the public
reason of the Church throughout all Ages, and by the private reason all the
world (excepting the Sectaries themselves who have been the Authors or Fautors
of them) as destructive to the purity and to the verity of the Godhead; with
how much a greater force of reason must I be allowed (if not commanded) to
assert the purity of his Goodness against the daringnesses of men, who carry
their life in their Nostrils, and whose Foundation is in the Dust? If They ran
in ^ among the people, crying out, and saying, sirs, why do ye these things?
Acts 13 14, 15.
Paul and Barnabas on such an occasion would have torn their hair from off
their heads; Nay, if a Jewish High Priest would have That was the high Priest's
Custom when real Blasphemy was spoken, as well as when he falsely supposed it
such. Matt. 26. 65.
rent his Garment upon the hearing of any sentence reproachfully spoken against
his God; Nay, if the Heathen man Plato in secundo Libro, (...).
Plato would not have any one to live in a well ordered City, who should say or
hear (with any patience) any such horrible affirmations, as that God does
Predestin or Decree the moral evils of his Creatures, why then should a
Christian be less Religious? Nay if Vedelius in Arcan. Arminianismi, Cap. 10.
Vedelius, and his Correp. Cor. p. 54, 55, 118;
Followers, have affirmed those Doctrines to be so perfectly essential to
Religion it self, that we cannot be Advocates for God but at the peril of being
Atheists, how can we choose but look upon them as on the worshippers of Hermes,
who thought that to hurl stones at him, was the godliest Instance of their
Devotion? Let my Reader carry in his mind from the beginning to the ending of
what I have or shall publish, as well for whom, as against what, my pleadings
are, And then I shall demand no other favor. If He that struck at the Father
did force the * Dumb Child to speak, (...). Herodot. l. 1. c. 85 p. 36
who but for that provocation had lived in silence, it must needs be difficult
for me, whose provocations were so much greater, to keep my self from an outcry
against the Persecutors of Heaven, and bold Invaders of Immortality, who, but
for that solicitation, had never once appeared upon these subjects.

Fourthly, I do consider I am in Duty both to God, and to my self, and perhaps
to some of my Brethren also, to lay to heart the Nature of true Repentance,
which does import an endeavor of Restitution, and (in some degree) of
satisfaction, as well as Grief. It is not enough to cry Peccavimus in our
Closets, or to shed some Tears behind the Door, as Peter did when he repented;
but we must imitate St. Peter in that better effect of his Contrition, his
peaching publicly for Christ, because he had privately denied him. I cannot
but think my self admonished by the words of Christ to St. Peter, [ Luke 22. 32.
when Thou art co^verted, strengthen thy Brethren.] Had I never been misled
into the contrary opinion, I had never been concerned so much for this. But
having found by sad experience, that the same Errors in Judgment which made me
strain sometimes at Gnats, Mat. 23. 24.
did also teach me to swallow Camels, I cannot choose but be desirous to do
some good with my Misfortunes. O felix Culpa quae talem ac ta^tum meruit habere
Redemptorem! Gregor.
Sure I am, I am the better for them my self; for had I not dangerously erred,
I had not valued my safety, as now I do. If Saint Gregorie's Exclamation may be
allowed of, (as intended only to celebrate the Depth of Gods Mercy, and not
the Dignity of Adams sin,) then perhaps I may say, It is good for me to have
Erred, because, I hope, it is good for others. There being nothing in this
world which I do covet with more sincerity, or more heartily contend for in all
my Prayers, then that the means of my cure may be to others for prevention;
that they who hate me the most may be profited the most by my Endeavors, and
that my Readers in general (which way soever they stand affected) may reap the
Benefit, and the fruit both of my Dangers, and my Escape.

There is yet a Fifth Reason of this my Enterprise, which being pertinently
rendered in the 1. Section of my Fourteenth Chapter by way of answer to one
passage in D. Reynolds his Conclusion (to which I think it sufficient that I at
once direct and refer the Reader,) I shall not take any occasion to lengthen a
tedious Introduction, but admit as many as are furnished with sufficient
Patience or Curiosity, to the immediate perusal of that which follows:

The General Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I.
D. R. His Thanks to the Correptory Corrector. His way of Civility to T. P. and
the truth.
CHAP. II.
King James his Censure of Bertius, and Arminius, and Presbyterianism it self,
which was Arminius his worst Qualification. The True Cause of the Distempers in
the Belgic Nation, not Arminius, but the other Presbyterians who were more
Heterodox than He.
CHAP. III.
A Vindication of Tit. 1. 13. from strange Misconstruction. No Necessity of ill
Language from one Minister to another. The Reviler is encouraged, but ought
not. The Advice for soft words, and hard Arguments, How observed by Him that
gives it.
CHAP. IIII.
Two sorts of Blaspemers. D. R. his Application to Mr. Calvin, and Doct.
Twisse. A survey of the Doctrines accused of Blasphemy. Proofs that they are
Blaspemous in the highest degree, as striking at the Purity, and Holiness of
God, and by consequence at his Essence, by affirming him to be the Author of
sin, not only in that very Term, but also in all other Terms in which an Author
can be expressed, and in Terms much worse. Evidences, that Doctrines less
heinous, have been always branched with the name of Blasphemies, as well by
the Ancient as Modern Writers of the Church, from Apostolical Timts to this
day. Catalogues of Examples. One from the Principal Patrons pretended to by
that Party. Dr. Reynolds his Partiality to one party, and his Injurious usage
of the other unavoidably inferred. The Marcionites, Manichees, and
Carporations, not so bad in their Assertions, as the modern Teachers of
irrespective Reprobation. The unequal Comparison made by Dr. Reynolds, betwixt
the Case of Christ, and of his Party.
CHAP. V.
Of Mr. Calvin and Dr. Twisse. How fairly treated by T. P. how sharply by
others. How sharply others were treated by them, Mr. Baxter's Censure of Mr.
Pemble, and Dr. Twisse, for their opinions.
CHAP. VI.
Dr. Reynolds his Fallacy of Ignoratio Elenchi. The disparity betwixt T. P. his
usage of his Friends, and the Massilians or Pelagians usage of Austin and
Prosper. These two Fathers calumniated by them that erred on the right hand,
just as T. P. by those that have worse erred on the left. The Author of [Gods
love to Mankind] vindicated. He formerly a Calvinist in the points now
controverted, but his judgment changed upon weighty Reasons. Prosper and
Remigius alleged quite besides the purpose.
CHAP. VII.
Dr. Reynolds his citing of diverse Writers, who however of his Party, are both
at Enmity amongst themselves, and destructive to the purpose for which he cites
them, Mr. Perkins, Bp. Abbot, Maccovius, Dr. Twisse. Dr. Twisse for Mr.
Perkins, Bp. Abbot against both. The Synod of Dort's thanks to Moulin for that
which Dr. Twisse censured [as Arminian, and Iesuitical.] The Calvinists
Doctrines suspected, and disowned, or owned only with Reluctance, by the more
discerning of their own party. The Remonstrants ill usage at Dort. D. Reyn, his
flying from plain words to secret Intentions. An Implicit charge upon Austin. A
Heavier on the Scriptures. The Scriptures vindicated from leading any into
Blasphemies. The first Instance of Joseph and his Brethren against the purpose
for which it is urged: All that follow quite besides it. That the verbs [To
harden, to blind, to deliver up, to send delusions, to deceive, etc,] are by an
ordinary Hebraism only permissive in signification, though active in sound.
Proof from the verdict of all the Fathers; the confession of the chief
Calvinists that all the Fathers do so expound them; the Judgment of Austin:
the Adversaies Confession of Austins Judgment; the Judgment of Melancthon, Du
Plessis, Bp. Andrews; and from other plain Scriptures. The Instance of Shimei
cleared. They who made God the Author of the first sin that ever was, cannot
pretend it to be the punishment of a Former sin. The only warrantable meaning
of that saying, That God does p^nish sin with sin, is Negative.
CHAP. VIII.
D. Reynolds his onset to the stating the Doctrine of Praedestination. The
Result, not what is, but what May-be without a Contradiction. His Fallacy
Plurium Interrogationum. His very May-be disproved, by the Contradiction which
it is proved to imply. God's workings on the will Hic and nunc ad unum, a
groundless Invention. Mr. Baxter for Free Will. D. Reyn. his confuting of no
Adversary. His supposing God to work on the will by his creative Omnipotency
implies a Contradiction. Of the will's determining it self. Fallacious arguing
from the Power to the Act. The Parable of the Talents in opposition to D. R.
his May-be. Other May-be's produced, to show how little is got by his. The
several ways of God's working with several Creatures.
CHAP. IX.
D. Reynolds his mistake from Romans 11. 33. Gods Will is revealed in his Word,
And plainly revealed against absolute praeterition in Adams Loins. This flatly
Injurious to the Death of Christ, to the extent of his Love, and to the
sincerity of his Intentions. D. Reynolds his tacit confession that the Doctrine
is unjustifiable which T. P. contended against, but the other most true which
He contended for.
CHAP. X.
D. Reynolds his 8. Propositions of no use to him, but the contrary. His best
amounts to a May-be. He disputes against himself, if all were granted which
he desires touching Man in Mass^ his being the Object of Predestination. His
Inconsistence with the greatest Pillars of his own Party, who differ from him,
and from each other. Beza, Iunius, Piscator, Dr. Twisse, Du Moulin, all at odds
with one another in stating the Object of the Decree. Nor is Mr. Calvin at
unity with himself. Dr. Twisse his Argument overthrows the Snblapsarian way
upon a principle which they grant him. His sharpness against the Doctrine of
the Synod at Dort. D. Reynolds his 7th. position is the destruction of his 5th.
as his 4th. was of his 3d. The worst effects of the worst Doctrine exemplified.
CHAP. XI.
D. Reynolds his last reserve of Forces least useful to him. The same matter in
several Dresses. Gratis dictum. His arguing a Potentia ad Actum. His mistake of
Free Election for irrespective. Election respective as well as Free. God's
mercy over all his works, particularly over Infants. Why of the all that are
called but few are chosen. D. Reyn. irreconcilable with his Friend Mr. Barlee,
whilst he plainly says what T. P. did, (but in terms less wary) and so by
consequence, a considerable part of Mr. Barlee's book is wholly spent against
the Doctrine of Dr. Reynolds, and against his very words too. He comes not home
to that which he had undertaken to excuse touching God's having to do in the
production of sin.
CHAP. XII.
D. R. his confession of the Grounds which were the Basis of T. P. his
Superstructure. His not pretending the least illegality in T. P. his Deductions
from either of those Grounds. And so his granting the whole cause. His wrong
Conjectures of Cassianus, and Bradwardine. Prosper's commendation of the
Semipelagians. S. Hillary told Austin, that the Massilians held no more
concerning Grace than they cited him for. Pelagius, and his Followers extremely
commended by S. Austin as most excellent Christians.
CHAP. XIII.
B. Andrews vindicated, and compared with S. Austin. His Censure of the Lambeth
Articles vindicated from the Negative Argument of D. Reynolds.
CHAP. XIIII
D. Reynolds his Confession, that his Assault made upon T. P. was more than was
desired of him by Mr. Barlee. The Necessity he imposed on T. P. to make him
this return. His great commendations of Mr. Barlees Book examined, and refuted,
by a short specimen of the Doctrines contained in it. Particularly his
Doctrine, that a child of God in acts of Murder and Adultery without repentance
cannot be in a state of Damnation; and that David at his worst had not lost the
Spirit of God. Melanctthon's detestation of that Doctrine more than of any. The
Conclusion
The Divine purity Defended.
CHAP. I.
E. R.
For his Reverend and worthy Friend, Mr. WILLIAM BARLEE, Minister of the word
at Brockhole in Northamptonshire.
Sir,
I Return you many thanks for communicating unto me, your Elaborate and learned
Answer to an Anonymous Book lately published concerning God's Decrees, reported
to be written by one, whom, for his polite parts of wit and learning, I have
and do respect; Arist: Eth. l. 1: c. 4.
but have been long since taught a very good Rule by Aristotle, (...).

T. P.
. 1. IF the Correptory Correptor is one of his Reverend and worthy Friends, it
is for my Honor and advantage, not to be of their Number. And if the
Correptory Correction (with such sad Greek, such ruful Latin, such
Incongruities even of English, such virulence and inventions as have been
publicly discovered) did pass with the Author of this Epistle for no less than
an Elaborate and learned Answer, It is matter to me of admiration, whether he
read what he commended before he commended it, or only spoke at a venture, but
read it not. For if he read it in good earnest (as he professes afterward to
have done) I admire his Patience very much, but very much more his Partiality;
in that he could see, (or oversee) so many fruits of the flesh, and so much
filthiness of the Spirit, so many weaknesses of Reasoning, with such profound
wants of Logic, and then be thankeful for the perusal of (what he calls) an
Elaborate and learned Piece. But if he did not read what he commended, my
admiration does still increase; for he should neither have told us that he did,
nor have commended what he did not. And therefore

. 2. Secondly, As it affords me matter of wonder, so does it also of
Humiliation, to find my self thus commended for I know not what Polite parts of
wit and learning, both in the very page, and by the very same Pen, by which the
Correptory Correptor is so much praised. Wit and Learning are two things, of
which I find I have less than a very ordinary proportion. The comfort is, I
find a full supply in my Cause for the utmost Defects which I have discerned in
my self. The very Nakedness of the Truth is that alone which enables me to
make it good. Wit and Learning are noxious weeds, till they are seasoned by
Grace, and (by the sanctifying influence of That) attended with singleness and
integrity. The highest glory and commendation (as I conceive) is to worship the
God of Heaven in the sincerity of obedience; to be a man without guil; not to
act, or design, or so much as imagine or wish mischief to any Enemy, much less
to undermine or invade a Neighbor, by secret fraud, or open violence; but
rather to suffer the greatest injury, than to offer the very least. A Heathen
may be learned, an Atheist witty, and a Devil may be both in great Abundance.
Mr. Barlee told me, more than once, that I had overgallant parts, by the same
Token that he told me, I was not a little proud of them. He (I say) would needs
commend me for Wit and Larning, even in that very Pasquil, wherein he called me
Dragon, and my innocent Book a Noon-day-Devil. So that my Reverend Aggressor,
had he been pleased, might with my free leave, have professed his Despising or
Accusing of me, if he found nothing better to respect me for, than what he
calls my Wit and Learning. When Apelles of Macedon commended Taurion to the
King, or rather (...).
traduced him with commendations (as the Historian words it) and that to no
other purpose than to destroy him the more securely, by turning him out of his
employment, Polybius tells us that he invented a (...). Polyb. l. 4. p. 348. A
B.
new way of callumniating; which was not by speaking ill, b^t by malignantly
commending whom he designed to hurt. Be it so, that Apelles was the Inventer of
this Knack, and that Polybius did think it New; yet since the death of Apelles,
it is (I suppose) two thousand years. And therefore now I may say, it is a very
old, and an easy art, by commending him a little, whom we do afterward intend
to revile a great deal, to gain some credit to our Revilings. How Polybius has
censured such commendations, I have only related in my Margin, and not
transmitted to the knowledge of English Readers, because his censure is so
Severe. For no provocation shall ever tempt me to say the most that I am able
against an Enemy. I wish it were a thing possible to defend my Self, and the
Truth, without reflecting upon them, who have set themselves against Both. I am
every where willing to put the fairest construction upon the words of my
Assailant, and not the worst that they can bear. But what he meant by his Oil
and Balsom in the beginning of his attempt, he has enforced me to feel by his
After-Blowes. To make profession of respect (not for Honesty, or Truth, or
Ingenuity of dealing) for profane polite parts of wit and learning, and
presently after to accuse me of injuriously fixing the Name of Blasphemy upon
the Doctrines of some men, whom he espouseth for their Opinions, when (as
himself will confess upon his serious perusal of my fourth chapter) I only
called that Blasphemy which has been ever so called, and is acknowledged to be
Blasphemy by the ablest men of that party from whose public writings it has
been ci^ed, This I cannot but pronounce to be a very corroding and wounding
Balsam. I would not for all the world be so unhappily polished with wit and
learning, as my Glycupcirous Assailant would make the world believe I am. It is
so far from being grateful, or pleasant to me, to have my head thus broken with
Commendations. But yet I will possess my soul in patience, I will Pythag.
(...).
(...), nay farther yet, I will endeavor to take some 2 Cor. 1^. 9, 10. Romans
5. 3. Heb. 11. 25, 26
pleasure in such afflictions, which I suffer for being sensible of dishonours
done unto my God. When mere mortal men are pleaded for against me, in revenge
of my having pleaded for God himself against men; when I am sullied as a
Bolsec, (who is presumed to be of a foul complexion) merely for proving that
God is Psalm. 145. 17.
Pure, and that he Hab. 1. 13.
cannot endure to behold Iniquity, that he cannot Isa. 1. 13.
away with it, that his soul does Verse 14.
hate it, that it is a Verse 14.
trouble unto him, that he is ibid. and Mal. 2. 17. Isa. 7. 13.
weary to bear it, that he will rather have Mat: 10. 28. Romans 3. 8.
us dye, or be temporally undone, than commit it in the least measure when we
are able to avoid it through him that Philip. 4. 13.
strengthens us, that he will punish it with Mark 9. 44.
infinite and endless pains, (so far is he from decreeing, that men shall
inevitably commit it, and suffer for it unavoidably through the necessitation
of such Decree;) when I am defamed, by no unplausible man, as very scandalously
erroneous, merely for saying in effect, what St. Paul said before me, Romans 3.
4.
Let God be true, and every man a liar, and every man a Blasphemous liar, who
shall say (in contradiction to the true word of God) that God is the Who they
are that say thus, and more than thus, has been sufficiently showed, and
farther shall be as occasion serves. See Correct Copy p. 9. 10. And Divine
Philanth. Defend. l. 3. Sect. 34. p. 132. to p. 141.
Willer, Ordainer, Predestiner, Decreer, Necessitator, Author, and Cause of
Sin; When I say, I am a sufferer, for not enduring or suffering such things as
these to seduce the People without control, by making them Libertines, and
Atheists, at least in practice, if not in judgment, and (as far as they have
power, or opportunity) subverters of Government, and razers out of the
distinction 'twixt Right and Wrong, which is the Foundation and the Cement of
all Civil society, I will endeavor to Mat. 5. 12. Coloss. 1. 24. 2 Cor. 11.
30. Hab. 10. 34.
rejoice in such my sufferings. And sure in this present case of my being thus
assaulted by Dr. Reynolds, I need not take any thought as to my personal
concernment. For

. 3. Thirdly, He has used me no otherwise than he has used the very Truth,
which he commends and persecutes in the very same breath. I say he commends her
in that Rule of Aristotle, That (...).
truth is preferrable to all other Friends. But then he persecutes her too, by
giving thanks and commendations even to that very Lictor, who gave to truth,
rather than me, such store of Correptory Correption; And by styling that signal
volume no less than an Elaborate and learned Answer, which was so full of the
most groundless and the most palpable See Divine Philanth. defended cap. 3 etc.
Inventions. It is not my Accusation, but the observation of the people, That
Mr. Barlee's papers are gone abroad with the concurrence and approbation of Dr.
Reynolds. And this partaking with the Erroneous must pass for friendship to the
Truth, because a Text out of Aristotle is misapplyed to make it good. The
youngest birds peradventure may be caught with such chaff, till they are warned
to consider, That never any man yet has so contended for an error, as not at
least to pretend a friendly praeference of the Truth. Truth has many great
flatterers; but few true friends. To give her very good words, is cheap, and
easy But whether it is truth, or specious error, which my Reverend Adversary
does here prefer, our Impartial Reader will best discover by the following
parts of his Epistle.

CHAP. II.
E. R.
I was sorry to see this controversy revived amongst which caused anciently so
much Trouble to the Church of God, King James his Declaration against Vorstius
in his works in English. p. 350. and 355.
and in our memory so much Danger and Distemper to the Belgic Nation: whereof
King James was so sensible, that in a letter to the States he calls Arminius
an Enemy of God, and charge Bertius with grossly living against the Church of
England, in avowing that the Heresies contained in his blasphemous Book of the
Apostasy of the Saints (they are the Kings own words.) were agreeable, with the
Religion and profession of this Church, and he did solemnly desire the
Ambassadors of that state to forwarn them from him to beware of the Disciples
of Arminius, of whom though himself lately dead, he had left too many behind
him.

T. P.
. 1. IT seems the Authority of King James is of great weight with him; And
(since it has made it his own choice to imbue his Reader in the first place
with the judgments and censures of that wise King) I am heartily glad to find
it is so. For although that King in his younger years had imbibed and sucked in,
even before he was aware, that Presbyterian opinion of the genevizing Scottish
Kirk (which no man living will think strange who knows the place of his Birth,
and his Education,) yet in his riper and wiser years he found so great reason
to retract and abjure his former error, that he readily accepted of Bishop
Mountagues appeal, and commanded it to be printed, and to be dedicated also to
his royal self, when even this was the Doctrine appealed for. [That the
children of God may fall away, according to the Tenor of our sixteenth
Article,] which says, that [After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may
depart from Grace given and fall into sin, and by the Grace of God we may rise
again, and amend our lives.] Which the King perceiving to be the words and mind
of the Compare the 16. Article of our Church with the first part of the Homily
touchin Falling away from God. p. 54. and 57. with the Form of Baptism, with
the Catechism, and all with the Conference at Hampton Court p. 29. 30, 31.
Church of England, and that Bertius had discerned it a great deal sooner than
himself, he did not think it below him to grow in Knowledge and Wisdom, as well
as years. To forsake an error, and repent, is an ingenuous and valiant, as well
as pious, nay farther, a glorious and Princely thing. Therefore Melancthon was
not ashamed to write against that opinion which he had formerly been of. And my
contemptible self, till I was Master of Arts of half a years standing, was as
fully, if not as fiercely, of Dr. Reynolds his opinion in these Controversies,
as Mr. Barlee himself appears to be. But when by reading better Books than I
had formerly done, and by conversing with better company, and by not-resisting
the Grace of God, I looked through the fallacies wherewith I had been blinded,
and observed the ugliness of their looks whilst now I beheld them without
their Visard, I was gladder to be recovered from those diseases of my Soul,
than from the painfullest maladies which have ever happened to my body. And if
my Reverend Antagonist is not afraid of a recovery, as that which implies him
to have been sick, He may change his judgment, as I have done, though not
because I have done it. At least King James, and Bishop Andrews, and good
Melancthon, and the late Primate of Armagh, Of his change I have witness beyond
exception.
and learned Dr. Potter, are sure most worthy his imitation. And therefore

. 2. In the second place, I offer him this short Dilemma. Is a man's later
opinion to be preferred before his former, or is it not? If he say, Yes, His
own example of King James does fly back into his Face. But if he say, No, His
only Father S. Austin must be neglectfully cast behind his Back. And by
necessary consequence, his worthy Friend Mr. Barlee (in the plausiblest part of
all his Plea) must be contemptibly trampled beneath his Feet. Let him escape
which way he pleases; there is a Praecipice before him, and behind him there
is a Wolf. But yet the greatest of his Dangers is still to come. For

. 3. In the third place I offer him another Dilemma with sharper Horns; (since
Logicians will needs callit Argumentum Cornutum.) Is K. James his judgment of
any Authority, or is it not? If he says, it is not, why is it urged so largely
against Arminius, and Bertius, and their followers, in the very Front of his
Epistle, which is intended for a strengthening to Mr. Barlees Book? And if he
says Yes, (as of necessity he must) his inconvenience is worse than if he
said, No, for then farewell to the Presbytery, both Head and Tail, (it is the
King's own Spotsw. Hist. Scot. l. 7.
word) which was never so much hated by any one of the Hierarchy, as by the
Orthodox King James (the very Epithet that is given him by the very Correptory
Correptor.) (...). l. 2 p. 38. and seq. to p. 44.
Witness his Excellent Basilicon Doron, and his remarkable Predictions what
the world was to look for from the Presbyterian sect, of which he gave so many
black and dismal characters; witness all his resentments of their incomparable
behaviors in the sixth and seventh Books of the History of Scotland, most
impartially composed by Archbishop Spotswood, with so much Wisdom, Temper, and
Moderation, as may well commend it to all men's Readings; witness his Answer to
Dr. Reynolds at Hampton Court, where that Doctor had seemed to plead for
something like a Presbytery. [ A Scottish Conference at Hampton Court, p. 81.
Edit. 1638.
Presbytery, said the King, as well agrees with Monarchy, as God and the
Devil. Then Jack, and Tom, and Will, and Dick, shall meet, and at their
pleasures censure me, and my Council, and all my proceedings, Then Will shall
stand up and say, it must be thus; then Dick shall reply, and say, nay marry,
but we will have it thus. And therefore here I must once reiterate my former
speeches, Le Roy s'avisera: stay I pray, you for one seven years before you
demand that of me, and if you then find me pursey and fat, and my windpipes
stuffed I will perhaps hearken to you: for let thae government be once up, I am
sure I shall be kept in breath, then shall we all of us have work enough, both
our hands full. But, Dr. Reynolds, till you find that I grow lazy, let that
alone.] And this puts me in mind of a remarkable passage in his Basilicon
Doron, where speaking of the (...)* l. 2. p. 39.
fiery spirited men in the ministry of the Kirk, who getting a guiding of the
people at the time of confusion, and finding the gust of Government sweet,
began to fancy to themselves a Democratick form and having (by the iniquity of
the time) being over well baited upon the wrack, first of his Grandmother, and
then of his own Mother, and after usurping the liberty of the time in his long
minority settled themselves so fast upon that imagined Democraty, as they fed
themselves with the hope to become Tribuni Plebis, and so in a popular
Government by leading the people by the nose, to bear the sway of all the Rule;
speaking I say of these Men, whom he calls (a little after) the Ibid. p. 40:
unruly spirits among the ministry, he advises his son to take p. 41.
heed of such, concluding in these words, -- I protest before the great God
(and since I am here as upon my Testament, it is no place for me to lie in,)
that ye shall never find with any Highland or border Thieves, greater
ingratitude, and more lies and vile perjuries, than with these phanatick
spirits* p. 42.
And suffer not the principles of them to brook your land, if ye like to sit
at rest: except ye would keep them for trying your patience, as Socrates did an
evil Wife.] The Reader cannot but observe that these expressions are very
sharp, and I hope he cannot but consider that they were spoken by King James,
and were publicly legible from the Press before they came to my knowledge, and
that I have quoted them no otherwise than in my Necessary Defense. My Reverend
Aggressor has drawn me to it by his Assault, and by the quality of his weapon
has forced me to use this very Helmet. I am no Bertian, or Arminian, yet he
proclaimed me to be such (if he will own having been pertinent in the second
Paragraph of his Epistle) by urging King James his sharpness against those
Persons, on that occasion. And if it was charitable or pertinent to set upon me
in such a manner, and in the beginning of such a Book, with King James his
declaration against Vorstius, Arminius, Bertius, and their Followers (including
me to be one) how much more has it been both, to defend my self, as I have
done, by the same Kings writings? From all which together,

. 4. It cannot but follow in the fourth place, That if King James his judgment
and authority is of any weight or moment against Arminius and Bertius (whom yet
I am not concerned to plead for any farther than my Assaylant has made me
mistaken for an Arminian) it is of much more weight against the Sect of
Presbyterians, of which Arminius himself was One. The Danger and Distemper
which this controversy caused to the Belgic Nation, (if it must be said to
have risen from the controversy in hand) arose from that very Party, and from
those very Doctrines which I oppose; as I could easily Remonstrate, were this a
place for so much Length; and which I shall do, if need require. And therefore
I seriously advise my Reverend Adversary, that in his next undertaking against
me, and my writings, he will be pleased to think twice, before he utters his
Conceptions; that he will look round about him, and grasp the whole matter of
which he treats; that he will not give me so many Advantages, as to occasion my
being tedious. For that opponent does please me most, in whom I find least
matter of Confutation.

CHAP. III.
E. R.
When you first acquainted me with your purpose to answer that Tract, (which
was before I had seen it, it being then manuscript, and had only heard from you
the Drift of it;) you well remember what my Judgment was, That in Polemical
writings, it was the best to forbear the persons of men, and to hold close to
the Argument. I learned it of Tertullian, a grave Writer, Viderit persona,
Tertul. adversus Hermog. cap. 1.
cum doctrina mihi quaestio est. And it was the speech of an aged holy Divine
of this Country, now with God, that in Disputes, Soft words and hard Arguments
were best. Yet I deny not but the Case may be so, that in writings of this
Nature, there may be a Necessity as well of sharp Rebukes, as of strong
refutations, Tit. 1. 13.

T. P.
. 1. THE first thing to be noted in this his third Paragraph, is, that in
writings of this Nature, that is, of one Inferior Presbyter against another
(who may be allowed to be his Equal) in the debate of this Question, whet^er
God's decrees are any of them conditionate or no, he allows a Necessity of
sharp Rebukes; and (which is more to be admired) he pretends a reason for it
from Tit. 1. 13. A passage written by St. Paul, first to Titus a Bishop at
least, and by this Commission superindow'd by the Divine Authority of that
Apostle, and so not pertinent to an Inferior Presbyter whose small Diocese of
Brockhole makes him yet less fit to be my Diocesan. Secondly; To Titus,
presiding over those under his charge at Creet, who were in Subordination, and
not Coordinate, as here we are, and therefore here is no ground for an (...).
Thirdly, That commission given to Titus was (...), not only precise, dure and
sine ambagibus, (as Beza in locum.
Beza speaks) but by way of Excision, or Excommunication, (as better See Dr.
Ham. Annota. upon 2 Cor. 13. chapter and in his Tract concerning the power of the
Keys.
Interpreters explain it) and so not pertinent to that strange railing and
calumniating, calling Pelagian, Socinian, Heretic, Devil, Dragon, and a world
of such stuff which in the Correptory Correptor is here commended, at least
excused. Fourthly, The Persons thus to be used by the Discipline of Titus were
those insufferable Heretics, the Jewish Gnostics, who abused the Grace of God
by Wantonness, denying Christ to be come in the Flesh, (...). Verse 14:
subverting the Truth, that is to say, the whole Gospel, (...). Ver. 15.
defiled and unbeleeving, (...). Verse. 16.
denying God in their works, being abominable, and disobdient, and unto every
good work reprobate. Upon which I ask, Did this writer consider the rational
scope and importance of that Text which he cited, or did he not? If he did not,
what commendation can be pretended to, for having so hastily taken so sharp a
sword into his hands without considering how to use it, and for the want of
which consideration, he has now received from it so great a Wound? But if he
did consider it, and compare it with the Context (as I have just now done,) how
much less is he commendable for having knowingly and wilfully so misapplyed it?
and how strange a specimen has he given his Reader of all his future
undertakings, when he holds forth Scripture to such an Author as Mr. Barlee,
whereby to justify his Railing, and to make him believe that there is a
necessity of his so doing? Nor is it ordinary Railing which is thus pleaded
for, but so extraordinary in all kinds, that Mr. Barlee himself in his first
Dedicatory Epistle, does offer even in Print to undergo a Correp. Cor. Epist.
Ded. p. 9.
public Penance, thereby confessing it a heinous Sin. He cries Peccavi, and to
Ibid.
peccavi, adds Ibid.
Fateor, (here is an open confession, and in a white sheet, tantamount to the
stool of Repentance,) after this he Peto veniam, si ^^quam post hac. Id. ibid
asks Forgiveness, and promises Peto veniam, si ^^quam post hac. Id. ibid
hereafter to mend his manners. Yet immediately he makes another Dedicatary
Epistle, and that on purpose to break his promise; on purpose to call me
Dragon, and Noon-day-Devil; nay, Demon meridianum, is such a Devil, as till
that time was never heard of, both Masculine and Neuter, yet neither He, nor
She. And if my offspring is such a monstrous Devil, what does he make me to
be, who avow my self the Father of those very harmless and well-meant Papers,
whose whole business it is to clear the God of all Purity from having any thing
to do with the stool of wickedness? Now upon whose Incitation and Authority I
was so vehemently railed at for my perfect zeal to God's honor and the
greatest interest of Souls, let Enemies and Friends and Strangers judge. For

. 2. Secondly, In the twelfth pa. of Mr. Barlee's Declaration, he pleads a
necessity of not being Toothlesse at his Tongues end, and that it was within
his Commission to be cutting, and he fetches his Commission from Tit. 1. 13.
Which how perfectly agreeable with the present passage under debate, I need
not show in many Words. They both pretend to a necessity, and both from Tit.
1* 13. And if we compare the Necessity pretended, with their known opinion
of God's Decrees, we may guess the meaning to be plainly this, That he who
rayles against his Neighbor has a necessity of railing, he being limited and
determined from all Eternity to every action of his life by a decree
antecedent. to the foreknowledge of his Will. And therefore Mr. Barlee does say
in plain Correp. Cor. p. 22.
terms, [That God will have it at this time to be so,] for which he cites that
of the Heathen Poet, [Deus, Deus nob is haec otia fecit.] Such principles, and
such practice have already frighted not a few, who are no Epist. Ded. p. 16,
17.
Beggars or mean Disciples (as Mr. B. has confessed in the close of his
Dedicatory Postscript) from ever being of his religion. This is the thing, for
which he ought to be deeply Id. ib* p. 16.
humbled, and to bewail (as he words^i^) in tears of blood, that after such
crying sins, as railing, and forging, and bearing false witness against an
inoffensive and patient Neighbor, he should pretend to a Commission from such
a Tit. 1. 13.
Text. Dr. Reynolds is far enough from being another Paul, and Mr. Barlee much
farther from being another Titus, (notwithstanding his Correp. Cor. p. 64.
Proclamation that he was beloved of Dr. Twisse, as another Timothy,) and I am
yet much farther from being one of those Gnostics, concerning whom that Text
is spoken. But this is not all. For

. 3. Thirdly, The Reverend Author of this Preface does contradict the Former
with the Latter part of this Paragraph. He does acknowledge, that in disputes,
soft words and hard Arguments are best; for which, besides his own judgment,
he cites Tertullian. (A Father as contrary to his opinions, as he is worthy to
be cited where he condemns them.) And yet he denies not but that the case may
be so, that in writings of this nature there may be a necessity, etc. But let
him now speak out, was the case so here, or was it not? If this was the Case,
and this a Writing of such a Nature, then what truth can there be in his own,
and Tertullian's, and the aged holy Divines judgment? And if this was not the
Case, we have here an Advocate of Contradiction, as well as of unconditional
Decrees, who pleads the necessity of that thing which he confesses to be an
evil. Whereby he patronizeth Mr. Barlees sin, and helps to make him Correp.
Cor. Epist. Ded. p. 14.
sorry for his Repentance.

. 4. Fourthly, He professes that his judgment is for soft words, and hard
Arguments; for omitting the Person, and keeping close to the Purpose. Very
good. How Mr. B. has practiced, I have largely showed from the Press. His
calling me Atheist, Dragon, Devil, and the like, was neither hard Argument, nor
soft word. And though when he said that I am Correp. Cor. Ep^st. Ded. p. 16, 17.
furnished with the Greatest Advantage of Wit, Art, Oratory and Applause, he
gave me indeed a soft word, yet it was no hard Argument whereby to prove me a
Id. p. 102.
Satanical Blasphemer, nor was it spoken in favor to me.

. 5. I am next to discover (my irreverend Adversary being dispatched) how my
Reverend Antagonist has observed his own Rule. I acknowledge he has given me
some very soft words by professing to respect me for Polite parts of Wit and
Learning (for which I will labor to requite him by very heartily acknowledging
his Learning, and Gravity, his happiness of Fancy, and Elocution, his very
civil Disposition, and comparative moderation,) But of the hardness of his
Arguments I shall hasten to make an easy Trial.

CHAP. IIII.
E. R.
Truly it was matter of much trouble to me, to find in that Treatise a
distinction of modest Blasphemers, and other who are for Ligonem, Ligonem: and
to find so eminent Servants of Christ, as Calvin, Dr. Twisse and others to be
ranged under one of those members, as men that tell the world (though such
words are no where found in thm, but the quite contrary) that the evil of sin
in man proceeds from God only as the Author, and from man only as the
Instrument; yea, to be worse than the Manichees and Marcionites of old, as to
this particular Blasphemy. For though the names of the Authors are not, as is
said, in civility cited, yet the References in the margin of the book (which
surely were not set there to bear no signification) make me think of Tacitus
his observation, Tacit. Anal. l 3. verb. ult.
touching the effigies of Brutus and Cassius in the funeral of Junia,
Praefulgebant Brutus and Cassius eo ipso quod effigies eorum non visebantur. It
had been much to be wished that imputations of such a strain had been left by
men professing Modesty and Ingenuity, unto Bolsec and others of his complexion.
But by whomsoever used they are but as the Confectioners beating of his spices,
which does not at all hinder, but strengthen the fragrancy of them* I do not
jurare in verba either of Calvin or any other man. But I cannot but with grief
be sensible of so high a charge as Blasphemy, to be laid upon persons so deeply
acquainted with the mind of God in his word, as they were. The vindicating of
them I leave to you, and shall only say, that their Lord and their Brethren
before them have met with the same measure, Mar. 2. 7. Mat. 26. 65. Acts 6. 13.

T. P.
. 1. HIS first hard Argument from King James his bitterness against Arminius, I
have already mollified and softened in my second Chapter. This is his second
hard Argument, the many soft parts of which I shall discover and demonstrate by
these degrees. First, That Distinction which I made was in my p. 23. where I
did not instance or exemplify in any man whatsoever, much less in Calvin and
Dr. Twisse, (as every Reader may see and witness;) but to render me
unacceptable to every lover of those two, he is fain to leap as far back as to
my p. 9. and 10. where yet I did not name them neither; but only set down their
own words, amounting in brief to this effect [That all things (and by
consequence all sins) do happen not only by God's prescience, but by his
positive decree. That men do sin by God's impulse; and execute as well as
contrive all mischief, not by God's permission only, but by his Command too.
That God makes Angels and Men Transgressors. That Adultery or Murder is the
work of God; that God is its Author, (and which is worse a Compeller. That
besides God's Administering the occasions of sinning, and his Pr^stitutions to
sin, he does so move and urge them, that they smite the sinners mind, and
really affect his Imagination, etc. and (what I had almost forgot to say) that
God's Decree is no less efficatious in the permision of evil, than in the
production of good. And that God's Will does pass, not only into the
permission of the sin, but into the sin it self which is permitted.] These were
the horrible affirmations, which I there inserted as a specimen of what is
taught by some Men, both to Forewarn my Readers of all such noxious and killing
Weeds, in what ground soever they found them growing, and to manifest a Duty
incumbent on me, to vindicate God from those Aspersions. The Author's Names I
very obligingly concealed, that no ordinary Reader might know who they were;
but yet I quoted their works where they were legible and in print, that
extraordinary Readers might find me Faithful in my Quotations, and that an
Enemy might not say, that I had only obtruded mine own Inventions. But so far
were my References from being like to the effigies of Cassius and Brutus, that
Mr. Barlee himself knew not what I meant by them; no, nor the Author of this
Epistle, when he perused that Declamation. For if he had, he would not have
suffered such an See Div. Philanthrop. Defended chapter 2. Sect. 32. p. 127, etc.
And chapter 4. Sect. 32. p. 36, 37.
enormity to have passed the Press without control.

. 2. Secondly, when I said that some were for Ligonem, Ligonem, (but did not
name any Creature) I meant such bold and barefaced Sinners, wh have spoken even
in print the very worst Blasphemies of God Almighty, that the malicious Wit of
Hell has ever been able to invent. As for Example, That God made Man on
purpose that he might Sin, and that he might have something to damn him for
justly. That the necessity of Sinning is cast upon Men by Gods own ordination
That God is the Author of all evil, as well of Sin as of Punishment; not only
of those Actions in and with which Sin is, but of the very Pravity, Ataxy,
Anomy, Irrigularity, and sinfulness it self which is in them; yea, that God
has more hand in Men's Silfulnesse than they themselves. That God does
Necessitate Men to Sin, Incite, Seduce, Impel, Compel, Pull, and Draw, and
Command Men to Sin, injects Deceptions, and Tempts Men unto Sin. With a
numberless company of like Expressions, a See Div. Philan. defend. chapter 3.
Sect: 34. p. 132. to p. 141.
small Catalogue of which I have collected in no more than 8. or 9. pages in my
Account of the Correptory Correction: If such of these are no Blasphemies, then
am not I to be excused for having avowed them to be such. But if they are
Blaspemies in grain, and published to the world by the Authors of them, and if
the Authors of these Blasphemies are led into them by those opinions which my
Reverend Adversary asserteth, and I resist, how will he make me a reparation
for having publicly done me so great a wrong, as to blame me for my
distinction? How can he answer to all good Men, to the Church of God, and to
God himself, that it was matter of trouble to him that I should make a
distinction of modest Blasphemers, and others who for Ligionem, Ligonem? Is it
not a Blasphemy to speak against God? Is it not the very blackest and most
insufferable-Blasphemy to speak against the very purity and holiness of God?
Is not his Purity himself? and therefore it is not worse to asperse his purity,
than to deny his being? And have not those Men, whom Dr. Reynolds pleads for,
aspersed the purity of God with all the Fowlest Affirmations that can be
thought on? Let him, or any Man living, sit down, and study, with what variety
of words and phrases, it is possible to express the Author of sin, and I will
publicly demonstrate that all that variety of words and phrases has been used
even in print (by the Men of that way which he asserteth, and I resist,) in
direct Affirmations of God himself. I am sufficiently prepared to show a very
large Catalogue, besides the several Catalogues already shown. And though I was
so courteous as not to name them at the first, yet I had reason to say, that
there were some in the world for Ligonem, Ligonem. And

. 3. Thirdly, when I said that some were modest Blasphemers, that is, bashful
and shamefaced, but did not name any Creature) I meant. Such Writers, as have
only made God to be the Author of sin, by way of necessary consequence, and
unavoidably deduction; but have not said with Borrh. Posit. 1. Impr. A. D. 1551.
Borrhaeus, that God is the Author of evil, whether of punishment or of sin;
nor with Zuing. de Pron. l. 6. abetted (...). Twisse Vin. Gra. l. 2. part. 1 p.
36.
Zuinglius, That Adultery or Murder is the work of God; nor with Piscat. in
Resp. ad Tauff. p. 65.
Piscator, That whatsoever sinners and flagitious men do, they do it by the
sorce of God's own will; nor with Sturmius de Praedest. These. 16.
Sturmius, That God effects those things which are sins; nor with Musculus l.
c. de desperatione.
Musculus, that Gods Reprobation is the cause of the incurable Despair; nor
with Trigland. Defens. fol. 180.
Triglandius, That both the Elect and Reprobates were preordained to sin
quatenus sin; nor with Beza Cont. Castle. p. 417.
Beza, That God predestined whom he pleased, not only to damnation, but to the
causes of damnation; nor yet with Peter, Peter Mart. Verm. Flor. in 1 Samuel 2.
Vermilius, That God seems to be the cause, not only of humane actions, but
of their very defects and privations; nor yet with Adrian. Smout. in
Heautontim. et in Concordiae sua, p. 107.
Smoutius, that Man ought to have sinned, and to have fallen from grace, that
God might have matter whereon to manifest his Justice. Now if I was so civil,
as not to name either the modest, or the immodest Blasphemers, I should rather
have been thanked by their Disciples and Followers, than have been reviled for
my civility. But

. 4. Fourthly, Let us descend in particular to those Things and Persons, of
which my Reverend Antagonist has undertaken a defense, I mean the Citations in
my Notes p. 9. and 10. I will begin with that of Zuinglius, because neither Mr.
B. nor his Friends have yet discovered it to be his, at least they have not
owned it under its Authors own Name. [ When Huldericus Zuing. in Ser. de Prove.
c. 5. and 6.
God makes an Angel or a Man a Transgressor, he himself does not transgress,
because he does not break a Law. The very same sin, viz. Adultery, or Murder,
in as much as it is the work of God, the Author, Mover, and Compellor, it is
Note, that when sin is said to be good as being the work of God, (...) himself
confesses it is the excuse of the Libertines, and unexcusable. Calv. Instruc.
adversus Libertim. The Scope of that Blasphemy
not a Crime; but in as much as it is of Man, it is a wickedness.] Is not the
scope of those words undeniably this, That although God is not a sinner, yet he
makes both Angels and Men to be so? That Adultery or Murder is the work of
God, although it is not evil in as much as it is his? that God is the Author of
sin, viz. Adultery or Murder, though sin is not sin in as much as He is the
Author of it? nay, that God is a Compeller of Men to sin, though it is only sin
as Men commit it, and not as God compels them to it? If this cannot be denied,
why then said the Prefacer, that such words are no where to be found in them,
but rather the contrary? That they are there to be found is apparent to all
eyes which shall examine the place by my quotation, and is abundantly Dr.
Twisse Vind. Gra. l. 2. part. 1. Digres. 2. c. i. Crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 37.
confessed by Dr. Twisse. Whom I observe in Dr. Twisse Vind. Gra. l. 2. part.
1. Digres. 2. c. i. Crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 37.
that place, not only approving, but commending Zuinglius for those
expressions, which being every whit as bad as if he had spoken the words
himself, is all that here needs to be said of him: besides that the sixth,
seventh, ninth, and tenth instance in my Notes, may here be noted to have been
his. My first Citation from Mr. Calvin, [That all things happen by God's
Decree, etc.] Without any the least exception of all ungodly and sinful things,
nay, purposely including as well the evil as the good, (as I shall prove by and
by) will soon appear to be a Blasphemy, to wit, a constituting God the Author
of sin, by the public confession of Mr. Calvin himself. For in a fit of Anger
against the Libertines, and in other fit of Forgetfulness (which Anger easily
produces) what himself had said at other times, he chanced to let fall these
expressions,] Whilst the Calvin Instruct. adversus Libertinos.
drunken Libertines do jabber that all things are made [or done] by God, they
constitnte him the Author of Sin. Yet Beza contra Castle. Aphor. 1. 6, 7.
Beza says plainly, more plainly than the Libertines,) That God efficaciously
acts or effects all things without any the least exception whatsoever. And
that Calvin means the same thing, when he says [that all things happen by
God's Decree,] is not only very evident by his agreement with Beza in these
affairs, but by his own positions in other parts of his works: as when he
says, for example [that God did Calvin Instit. l. 3. cap. 23. Sect. 7. p. 325.
therefore Foresee things, Calvin Instit. l. 3. cap. 23. Sect. 7. p. 325.
because he decreed them,] and again, [that no other Idem ibid. Sect. 4.
cause can be rendered for the Idem ibid. Sect. 4.
defection of Angels, then that God did Idem ibid. Sect. 4.
reject them.] Which is to say in effect, That God, by his rejection or
reprobation, was the only cause of the first and greatest sin that ever was, to
wit, the defection or rebellion, or Apostasy of Angels; and again he says,
[that Man does sin or do that which is not lawful for him to do (which we know
is all one) impulsu Dei by God's impulse, or compulsion, or inforcement (let
him translate impulsus, which way he pleases.) And this last as well as the
first being one of my instances p. 9. I admire the Author of this Preface would
seek to justify such horrid Things. What pretense of Reason he had for so
doing, (Besides his partiality and concernmen for one of the chiefest of his
Party) we shall see hereafter in his Reply.

. 5. Fifthly, That that is Blasphemy to which I gave that Name is more than
proved by that which follows,
whilst he blames me for giving the Title of modest or immodest Blasphemy to
such as make God to be the Author of Sin, sometimes in those very words,
sometimes in such as are equivalent, and sometimes worse, he quite forgets
how great a Contumely he has heaped upon them, who have spoken more broadly
than I have done, though not with a purer or more disinteressed zeal to the
honor of his Attributes for whom I pleaded. May he be pleased to consider
these following Instances.

1. When Florinus did but seem to make God the effecter or Cause of Sin,
Irenaeus told Florinus for merely seeming to make God the Author of sin, (that
is, for saying things which did but sound that way,) that it was worse than the
Heretics durst ever speak.
although he said it only by Consequence, and not in plain or downright terms,
yet Irenaeus (an Apostolical Father) thought it fit to confute him and chide
him too. And entitled his Epistle which he wrote to Florinus, [(...),
concerning God's not being the cause of Sin.] It may satisfy some Readers to
be told a few of the Fathers own words. [These Opinions, O Florinus, are not of
wholesome Doctrine, they are disagreeable to the Church, they carry them that
believe them into the greatest Impiety. These opinions the very Heretics
without the Church were never so daring as to affirm; the Elders before us, who
conversed with the Apostles delivered no such things unto us. (...). etc.
Irenaeus Edit. Colon. 1625. p. 510. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 19.
[To which he adds,] I am able to testify before God, that if Polycarp had
heard any such things, he would have stopped his Ears, and have cried out as he
was wont, O good God, unto what times has thou reserved me, that I should
endure such things! He would have fled from the place wherein he sat or stood,
when he had heard such expressions. And this might be manifested (says
Iranaeus) out of Polycarp's Epistles which were written to Neighbour-Churches,
or to some of the Brethren; the words follow thus, as a new Testimony;

2. (...). St. Polycare, that blessed and Apostolical Martyr, if he had heard
any expression which only seemed to have a Tendency to the making God the
Author of sin, he would have started out of the place, and stopped his Ears,
and Cried out, O my God, etc. Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 20. Iren. loco Citat^.


3. When St. Augustine was accused, by some of his Correptory Correctors, Saint
Austin reekon'd the Denial of universal Redemption for one of the foolishest
Blasphemies, and one of the ungodly profane opinions, though not so foolish or
so ungodly, as to impute unto God any Causalty of sin. His words are,
Ineptissimarum Blasphemiarum prodigiosa mendacia. Impiarum profanarumque
opinionum nullum cordibus nostris vestigium inhaesisse agnoscant, and
Blasphemias, quas perspex: rint nostra professione damnari, in earundem
repertoribus censeant debere puniri. Augustine. in Praesat. ad Artieulos quosdam
sibi impositos, p. 855, 856. Sed in operibus Prosp. p. 934, 935.
of having Denied universal Redemption, and other things of that nature, which
all my Adversaries do hold and teach, he was so angry and so impatient of such
slanderous Imputations, that he could not withold his pen from sharper
language than I have used, though more provoked than he could be. He did not
only say, that [those ungodly and profane opinions had not the very least
footstep in his Heart,] nor did he content himself to call them [Blasphemies]
but [prodigious lies of most foolish Blasphemies,] and no less than Diabolical.

4. When the same Austin was accused by some Pelagians of making God an
Accepter of Persons by asserting irrespective and unconditional degrees of
Reprobation and Election; he did not give them the lie only, but told them
besides, [they were Cum videamus, vos sic d' Diabolo esse fascinatos. August. l
6. Hypognostic. in praefat. p. 879, 880.
bewitched by the Devil to its invention,] what then are They who either
directly or indirectly do make God himself to be the Author of sin?

5. When the French Massilians objected it as the opinion of St. Austin, that
God denies perseverance to some of his Sons who are regenerate in Christ,
because they were not elected out of the Mass of perdition: Prosper calls it
an immoderate wickedness, and a calumniating of God, to impute any Man's Ruin
to God's not electing him to the final means of Salvation, though nothing near
such a wickedness or such a ^alumniating of God, as the many black speeches
which I have cited and condemned. -- Sed horum Lapsum Deo ascribere, immdodicae
Pravitatis est, quasi ideo Ruinae ipsorum Impulsor atque Author sit, quia illos
ruituros propria ipsorum voluntate praescivit, and ob hoc, a filiis Perditionis
nulla praedestinatione discrevit. Prosp. Aquit. ad ob. Gall. capit. 7. p. 320,
321.
Prosper makes answer in these expressions. [ That of those that are regenerate
in Jesus Christ, some forsaking their Faith and pious manners do apostatize, and
fall from God, and end their wicked life in that aversion, is proved too
plainly by many examples. But to ascribe their fall to God is an immoderate
wickedness, as if God were the Impulsor and Author of their ruin, because he
foresaw that they would wilfully fall away, and for that very reason did not
sever them from the sons of perdition; and therefore men ought not to
calumniate God.] How many ways this makes for me and my cause againg my
revereud Assailant, let who will judge.

6. The second Arausi can Council which was held in the time of Leo the first
against the Semiplegians (let that be marked) as it has much for my cause (who
have been publicly calumniated for more than Semipelagianism) so it has this
sharp passage against the very Man that has opposed me. The Arausican Council
pronounced a Curse and that with all Detestation upon such as should believe:
that God did praedestine any Man to evil. Secundum fidem Catholicam credimus,
quod accepta per baptismum gratia omnes baptizati, Christo auxiliante and
cooperante, quae ad salutem pertinent, possint and deteant, si fideliter
laborare vsluerint, adimplere. Aliquos vero ad malum divina potestate
praedestinatos esse, non solum non credimus, sed and seqq.
[ This we believe according to the Catholic Faith, that all who are baptized,
and have by Baptism received grace, are both able, and bound in duty, (by
Christ his help and cooperation) to fulfill those things which do belong unto
Salvation, if they will faithfully labor in order to it. But that any were
Predestined to Evil by the divine power we do not only not believe, but
withal, if there are any who will believe so great an evil, we do with all
detestation pronounce an Anathema against them.] If the indifferent Reader will
compare this definition of that Council with either my The Divine Philam.
Defen. chapter 3. Sect. 34. p. 132, etc.
greater or Correct Copy. etc. p. 9, 10.
lesser Catalogue of those horrible doctrines which I condemned, and for the
condemning of which I have been publicly condemned by that reverend Person
with whom I now deal, he will not fail to think it much more than strange. For
as all the great and holy Men of that so venerable a Council, who were deeply
acquainted with the mind of God in his word, have detested those Doctrines as
well as I, Sed etiam. si qui sunt qui tantum malum credere velint, cum omni
detestatione illis Anathema dicimus. Council. 2. Arausic. Cap. 1. 25. mihi p.
902*
so that unseasonable reproof (to say no worse) which was given to me by my
Antagonist, does reach as far as those Fathers of which that Council was
composed.

7. In Nicetas his Saracenica there is this solemn form of renouncing Mahomed
and his Religion. Nicetas shows it a Blasphemy to be anathematized as the very
worst thing in the wicked Religion of the Turks, to say in equivalence and
effect (though not in those very terms) that God is the Author of Sin: (...).
Vide B. B. Patr. Grac. Vol. 2. p. 286.
[I do Anathematize the Blasphemy of Mahomed, saying, that God deceives whom
he will, and whom he will he leads to what is good; for if God would, Men
would not war one with another, but he does what he will, and is himself the
cause of all good and of all evil; all things are governed by Fate and Destiny;
which infers a necessity of all events.] If the Authors whom I cited both in my
greater and lesser Catalogue have said the very same things with the Idolaters
of Mahomed, and every whit as much worse as worse may be, (and whether they
have not so done, I appeal to all who shall compare them) it will not be much
for my Adversaries credit, that the loss of my thanks should be the best reward
of my Devotion.

8. Melancthon says, Melancthon calls it a stoical opinion, and such as
supposes a stoical God; pernicious to practice; and such as was abhorred by
Heathen Plato; to aver a necessity of all events. Nequaquam stoicae opiniones
in Ecclesiam invehendae: quomodo enim invocabit Deum is qui omnia necessario
evenire statuit? deinde moribus perniciosum est, etc. Plato honestius loquitur,
cum, etc. adest Deus Creaturis, non ut stoicus Deus, etc. Melancthon in loc.
com. de Causa pec. p. 54, 55. Apparuit Filius Dei, ut victima fieret pro
peccato, and ostenderet, Diabolum esse Authorem Peccati. Id. ibid. p. 48.
[that no Stoical opinions are to be brought into the Church; for how can he
call upon God, who holds that all thengs do come to pass of necessity? Plato
[though a Heathen] does speak more honorably of God, and would have every one
banished from the Society of men who should say in a Poem or any other
narration, that God is the cause of any Man's evil. In the opinion of
Melancthon, they make a Stoical God, who feign him giving a necessity to all
events.] And is not that to blaspheme him, without saying in terminas, he is
the Author of Sin? Whilst Melancthon says plainly, that the Devil is the
Author of Sin, what does he make them to be who say the same of God Almighty?
Whether they do so or not, I again refer it to be judged by what I have showed
in my greater and lesser Catalogue, as well as by what I shall show anon.

9. Bishop Cutbert Tunstal of Durham, Bp. Tunstal says they are more
blasphemous than the Devils, who say that God does predestin men to sin. Domini
nostri majestatem blasphemant, creatori suo petulantiae suae ^asciviam imputare
non formidant, nihil verecundantes in Deum opificem sua scelera retorquere,
quia ab illo se praedestinatos ut sint flagitiosi, pro Apologia respondent.
Lib. contra Blasph. praedest. Dei in praes. p. 3.
who lived in the days of King Henry the eighth, and was one of those chief
Men who did cast the Papacy out of this Kingdom, (no Bolsoc therefore) a very
moderate Writer, a great opposer of Pelagianism, and very inclinable to the way
of Saint Austin, (as it does appear by his discourse from p. 35. to p. 40.
etc.) this learned Writer is very severe against the Men of his time, who did
blaspheme the Majesty of the Lord by imputing the lust of their Petulance to
their Creator, laying their sins to his charge, and alleging this for their
Apology, that they were predestined to be wicked by him that made them. These
he calls Monstra hominum long pejora Daemoniis quae Deum blaspemarc non
audent, ibidem p. 4.
monsters far worse than the Devils, because the Devils do not dare to
blaspheme God in this manner. And thereupon concludes with a Prayer to Christ
thae he would Vt ab his blasphemiis suam Ecclesiam purgans, muta reddat hujusmo
di labia dolosa. sub finem.
purge his Church from these Blasphemies by sealing up the lips of such as vent
them. Every Sceleratus quisque ipsum Deum scelerum suoru^ authorem esse impie
blasphemare non formidat: ego a Deo creatus sum, in quem finem ipse opifex
novit. Si ad interitum me praedestinavit, cum certa sit ejus sententia, and
quae ille futura decrevit mutari nequeunt, cur ego in vanum contra slimulum
calcitrem, and me defraudem Genio? Si autem praedestinatus sum ab eo ad vitam
aeternam, quantumcunqae hic deliquero, -- in fine tandem salvus ero; neque enim
ejus de me praesciencia falli quovis modo potest. Id. ib. cap. 1. p. 5, and 6.
wicked one (says the Bishop in his following pages) does not fear to affirm,
that God himself is the Author of his sins, (and thus blasphemeth within
himself) I^was created by God, to what end God knows. If he predestined me to
Destruction, by an immutable Decree, why do I kick against the prick, and
defraud my self of my voluptuousness? But if I was predestined to life
Eternal, how much soever I sin, I shall be saved in the conclusion, for his
Foreknowledge concerning me cannot be frustrated or deceived.

10. That worthy Disciple of Melancthon, Hemmingius his marks of Detestation of
the absolute way, which he could hardly think of without a holy kind of
Impatience.
Nicolaus Hemmingius, (whom for his Learning, Piety, and Moderation, perhaps I
may call Melancthon Junior,) does seldom or never make mention of snch as
propagate the Doctrine of unconditional Decrees, and the absolute necessity of
all events, without a token of his adhorrence and Indignation. He calls them
stoical De pastore. page 150.
imaginations, to which he opposes the Word of God; again, the stoical De
praedest: cap. 1. class. 3. page 408, 409, 410.
opinion of predestination, whereby the glory of God is injured, evil manners
confirmed, and Epicurism introduced. It Feigns an Inequality and partiality in
God; and makes Men careless to lay hold on that Grace which is offered unto
all? De via vitae. cap. 5. Benes. 2. page 550.
Again, This perverse opinion is not only blasphemous against God, but also
seduceth many Men either into despair of forgiveness, or into carnal security.
Again, In Syntag. Institur. Christ. loeo 28. de Praedest. p. 770 771.
by stoical Dreams, and fatal Books, and the Tables of the Destinies, which
they imagine and fancy to themselves, they do miserably entangle themselves, and
pernitiously pervert others. Again a little after, he obliquely compares them
to the Id. Ibid. p. 771. Theorem. 10.
Family of Zeno, and concludes with an Exhortation, not to value or esteem
those Id. Ibid. p. 776. Theor. 52.
stoical Decrees, though some great Men do patronize them. These are the
expressions of that Grave writer, who was public professor of Divinity to the
King of Denmark; and is Cum Theologis qui aliter sentiunt, agit D. Hemmingius
ut modestum and pium Christi Servum de^et. S. G. S. in observat Hemming.
praefixit.
acknowledged by a Dissenter to have spoken of Dissenters, as became a Servant
of Jesus Christ.

11. The Ingenuous Author of the preface before Castellio (as Mr. B. himself
did very happily call him) affirms [the necessity of all things future to be an
opinion invented by the Devil for the destruction of Christian people, Felix
Turpio his sharp censure of such as hold a necessity of all events. Mahumetanis
ac plane perditis hominibus reliquenda est ea, quam Diabelus ad Christiani
populi perniciem induxit, futurarum rerum Necessitas, ex cujus opinione, quin
maxima pars scelerum, quae in Ecclesis Christo initiatis regnare cornimus,
tanquam ex perenni quodam sonte deriventur, non dubito. Fell. Turp. in Praes. ad
Castle* p. 10.
and to be left wholly to the Mahumetans and men desperately wicked, as being
the Fountain of most enormities in Christendom,] which I observe the rather
because our Correptorie Correptor gave him in the Epithete of Ingenuous, and
because he speaks more sharply than I did, although his motive is not so great;
for the Men whom I accused had said much worse, and in words more silthy, than
that there is a necessity of all things Future.

12. Immortal Grotius in his Investigatio^ of Antichrist does devoutly breath
forth into this expostulation. Grotius, the Great, calls them the Enemies of
God, who make God the Author and cherisher of sin. though not in those very
words, yet in such as are equal to them. Cui magis competit nomen (...) [Deo
adve^santis] quam iis qui sum bonum faciunt omnium Scelerum Auctorem and
Fautorem? etc. Grot. in Appendice de Antichristo. p. 64, 65. vide etiam p. 85.
[To whom can the Name of Antichrist, or him that opposes himself against God,
be more agreeable, than to them who make the good God to be the Auctor and
Fautor of all Impieties? Thereupon he reckons up some of their prodigious
speeches who are wont to hide themselves with their pretended enmity to
Arminius, of which I intend to give account in my following Section. I will
only here observe, that he alludes to those very Men who were a part of my
Catalogue; and shows how contrary they are to the Protestant Confession at
Augusta, (and therein to Melancthon) which teaches Free Will in the Orthodox
Notion (Art 18.) and that the will of the wicked is the cause of their
wickedness, (Art. 19.) and that they who are not righteous who commit mortal
sins, because God requires that we resist our vile affections. (Art. 20.) and
which condemns them that say, That men being once justified can never lose the
Holy Ghost. Ib. editionis Grotianae 34.

13. It is no less than Rank Blasphemy to make God the Author of sin. Bishop
Hall, that pious and learned Prelate, and who was one of the Synod of Dort.
calls even them blasphemous Cavillers, who cast their condemnation (which is
not sin, but its effect only) upon the absolute will of an unrespective power.
Select Thoughts, Medit. 34. etc 35. from p. 102. to p. 107.
Psalm. 5. 4. Our sin is our own, and the wages of sin is Death. He that does
the work earns the wages; so then, the righteous God is cleared both of the
sin, and our death, only his Justice pays what we will needs deserve, we ought
to give the Devil his due, it is possible for us to wrong that Malignant
Spirit, in casting upon him those evils which are not properly His. There are
carnal Temptations that are raised out of our own corrupt Nnture, which needs
not Satan's immediate hand; being once depraved we can act evil of our selves,
and if Satan be the Father of sin our will is the Mother, and sin is the
cursed Issue of both -- The Devil could not take, unless we gave; our will
berayes us to his Tyranny, (and before p. 102.) how unjustly has the
presumption of Blasphemous Cavillers been wont to cast the envy of their
Condemnation merely upon the absolute will of an unrespective power, as if the
Damnation of the Creature were only a supreme will, not of a just merit, etc.
How very heavily this falls, in several respects, upon all my Accusers, any
Reader who is awake cannot choose but see without a Candle or a Comment.

These few examples (few I mean in comparison of what I am able to produce) are
enough to make it appear, how very mildly I spoke in the Correct Copy of my
Notes, and through how great an in advertency I have been blamed. I hope he
will not now say, that Imputations of such a strain as are found in the
vvritings of ancient Fathers, and Councels, and modern Divines of the
Protestant Church, might have been left by Men professing Modesty, unto Bolsec
and others of their complexiou. But what will he say, if I said no more against
the Teachers of such Doctrine, than themselves, by sits, have many times said
against themselves? I will show in one paragraph the great severity of their
Censures, and in another I will manifest how very patly those Censures do hit
themselves.

. 6. Sixthly therefore, Mr: Calvin's own censure exceeds mine, if not that of
Bellarmine and Bolsec too.
Is it not so that Mr. Calvin disputing against the Libertines is fain to say
in plain terms, [that Notandum ex hoc Alticulo, tria admodum qorrenda consequi,
1. nullum inter Deum and Diabolum discrimen fore, etc. Calvin contra libert. c.
23.
from this one Article God works all things, three things do follow extremely
frightful; of which the first is, that there will be no difference between God
and the Devil? etc. nay further, (in the Ipsum ^ se negari opertet, and in
Diabolum transmutari. Id. ib. c. 14.
next Chapter) that God must be renouuced by himself, and be transmuted into
the Ipsum ^ se negari opertet, and in Diabolum transmutari. Id. ib. c. 14.
Devil?] And does not Beza himself incur that censure, whilst he so interprets
that Text [God works all things, Ep. 1. 11.] As to say to that that unversal
particle [all] could not be Ac ne peccata quidem excipi possunt. Beza advers.
Castle. Aphor. 1. and 6.
restrained by any the least exception, and that Ac ne peccata quidem excipi
possunt. Beza advers. Castle. Aphor. 1. and 6.
sins themselves cannot be excepted? And does not Calvin say again the direct
contrary to Beza, that S. Paul there speaks only of the graces of the Holy
Ghost? and yet does not Beza cite Calvin's own judgment for his exposition
which is so contrary to Calvin's? as when he says, that in the judgment of
Calvin, those things which are wickedly done by Men are the righteous Ejusdem
Calvini judicio, quae perperam and injuste ab h^minibus fiunt, eadem justa and
recta sunt Dei opera. Id. ib.
works of God? And again, does not Calvin incur his own censure by what he
says in my greater and lesser To which add Instit. l. 3. c. 23 Sect. 6, 7, 8.
and Sect. 4.
Catalogue? (and in many other places, which I can name if challenged to it?)
or if he had not thus spoken against himself, yet is it sufficient for my plea
against my Assailant, that he has spoken such bitter things as have lighted so
heavily upon his own Party. He says expressly elsewhere, that it is a monstrous
Certe ut quidvis contra tam prodigiosam Blasphemiam dicatur, libenter patiar.
Calvin de occult. Dei Prove. p. 736.
prodigious Blasphemy to say that God is the Author of Sin, and consents that
Certe ut quidvis contra tam prodigiosam Blasphemiam dicatur, libenter patiar.
Calvin de occult. Dei Prove. p. 736.
any thing be said against it. Now it having been evidenced (as it shall be
also farther) that the chief men of his Party have affirmed that horrible
proposition, both in equivalent, and downright Terms, and in Terms of a more
fulsom and blacker strain, (it being worse to compel men to sin, than to be
simpliciter an Author of it,) I was permitted by his This Mr. B. confesses,
Correp^. Corr* page 64. Dr. Whitaker's severe Censure of his own party upon
supposition that they say what I have proved, and shall prove they have said
with a witness. Si Calvinus aut Martyr aut quisquam nostrum affirmet, Deum esse
autorem and Causam peccati, non repugno, quin simus omnes horrendae blasphemiae
scelerisque rei. Whitaker. lib. 8. contra Duraeum. Sect. 1:
leave to have spoken as sharply as any Bolsec of those expressions which I
mentioned, and I had thanks due to me for having been no sharper.

2. Doctor Whitaker himself has these words following. [If Calvin, or Martyr,
or any of our Men affirm God to be the Author and cause of sin, I do not deny
our being guilty, all of us, of detestable Blasphemy and wickedness.] Here the
Reader may observe a very remarkable Concession in 3. respects: First if any of
their Party shall so affirm, not only Calvin and Martyr. Secondly, if any shall
so affirm, they are all of them guilty without exception; of which the reason
must needs be this, because they do all without exception hold the very same
principles of irrespective Decrees of Reprobation, etc. and the absolute
necessity of all events, from whence any of them do draw such detestable
conclusions. Thirdly, that they are all of them guilty of horrible blasphemy
and wickedness, if there is any Truth in that supposition. From which three
things I do in charity conclude, that if Doctor Whitaker had observed such
affirmations of his party, as have been observed by Note, that Dr. Whitaker in
the place cited, seems not to have heard, at that time of Melancthon's change.
Melancthon, learned Moulin, my insignificant self, and many others without
number, he would have been frighted out of their Tenants of unconditional
reprobation, as Melancthon and Moulin are known to have been. For Huld. Zuing.
Sermon. de Pro. c. 5. and 6.
Zuinglius, Mart. Borth. in Isa. 28
Martin Borrhaeus, and others, have said (...), and in plain Terms, that God is
the Author of the evil of sin, and that sin is the work of God, and
particularized in Adultery, and Murder. Zanchy has said that Men were
prae-ordained by God to Ad peccatum qua peccatum. Zanch. de Not. Dei l. 5. These
4. de Repr. p. 555.
sin as sin. Piscator has assirmed, that Reprobates are predestined to the
very Piscator contra Tauf. p. 47.
Causes of Damnation; that is, to sins; and that Idem in Resp. ad Dupl. Vorst.
part 1. p. 10, 11.
Incredulity (by name) does depend upon God's Predestination, as the Cause upon
the effect, Triglandius says, God wills and Trigland Apolog. p. 172.
effectheth that ungodly Men do live in their concupiscences. Musculus avoweth,
that God's Reprobation is the hidden Musculus l. c. de Desperatione.
Cause of final despair, (no peccadillo.) These are some of that party, and of
the chief. Come now to those Men which he particularly names, viz. Calvin and
Martyr, Calvin says, That there is no other Calvin. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 4.
cause of the Angels Defection (which was the first and greatest sin that ever
was) but God's rejection or Reprobation. Nay farther, that Men do sin by God's
lllius impulsu agit quod sibi non licer. Id, Ib. l. 1. c. 18. Section 4.
Impulse. And Peter Martyr speaks as broadly as ever Man did; which though I
have The Div. Philan. c. 3. Sect. 34. p 139.
publicly showed already: yet because he is the Man whom Doctor Whitaker
thought fit to Name, I shall set down a passage which I have since observed in
reading his Comment upon the Book of Samuel. [The Vulgus existimat, cum Deus
excaecare, indurare, tradere, immittere, decipere discitur, nihil aliud
significari, quam ipsum permittere ut ista fiant; in quam sententiam permulti
ex Patribus eas locutiones interpretantur, ea procul dubio ratione adducti,
quod impium and blasphemum judicarent, si Deus Auctor Peccati haberetur:
nolentes, homines peccatorum suorum Causas in Deum ipsum rejicere -- Deus non
tantum permittit, sed and vult peccatum, Pet. Mart. Vermil. in 1 Samuel chap. 2.
p. 21.
vulgar sort (says he) are of opinion, that when God is said to blind, to
harden, to deliver up, to send delusions, and to deceive, nothing else is
signified, but that he permits that those things be done. And to that same
purpose very many of the Fathers (he should have said all) do interpret those
expressions. And doubtless they were induced so to do, because they thought it
impious and blasphemous that God should be accounted the Author of sin; and
because they were unwilling, that Men should lay the causes of their sins upon
God himself. (But he would have them all to know, that) God does not only
permit, but also Will Sin.] Here we have a Taste of this valiant Florentine,
who contemns the cowardice of the vulgar (such as Melancthon and Hemmingius)
and the squeamishness of the Primitive Fathers, because they were startled at
such Buggs, as God's being the Author or cause of sin. So again in his Comment
upon the Epistle to the Omnes sere Patres docent, Tradere perinde esse, ac si
diceretur, sinere, permittere, aut deserere; abhorrere videntur ut dicant, Deum
esse Causam peccati. -- Sed non videtur propter istas rations Idonea persuasio
adduci, ut interpretemur haec verba Tradere, obdurare, excaecare, persinere,
permittere, desere. Idem in Rom: 1. Edit. Basil. A. D. 1570. page 78, 79, 80
Romans, he confesses that all the Fathers (at least almost all) do teach,
that to deliver up to sin does signify no more, than to suffer, or permit, or
forsake, because they have an abhorence to the saying that God is the cause of
sin. But he rejects their opinion, and pretends to refel it by striving to
dissipate their Reasons, (p. 79 80.) and so he finally concludes against them,
and to confirm what he has done (without the least fear of the Fathers
Scar-Crowes) he makes Austin to be for him, whom he confesses to be against
him; and whose words against him he first of all cites, before those others
which he will have to make for him. From all which it follows, that I had the
favorable allowance of Mr. Calvin and Dr. Whitaker, to accuse those writers of
horrid Blasphemy and wickedness, who are commended by my Adversary for their
deep acquaintance with the mind of God. But I have not yet showed him the last
degree of his misfortune in that Assault which he made upon my Cause and
Reputation. For

. 7. Seventhly, That they are guilty of the Blasphemy who were by me accused,
is more than proved by that which follows.
I have the suffrage and Vote almost of all, (and of such, whom I am sure he
will not dare to contradict,) that the men of that party which he defends,
are guilty (of all, and) of more, than I have laid to their charge.

1. His own beloved Dr. Twisse whom he so vehemently commends, Doctor Twisse
his Censure and Confession. Negari non potest, Aquinatem jam olim docuisse
ipsum actum Peccati, esse a Deo: idem docent ho^ie Jesuitae, ex quibus quam
facile quaeso fuit viris istis indoctis, quales erant Libertini, colligere,
Deum auctorem ^uisse omnium Scelerum, quae ab hominibus perpetrantur? Addunt
Dominicani, Deum determinare voluntatem Creaturae ad omnem actum suum, etiam ad
actum peccati, nunquam tam diserte sententiam suam expressisse hactenus reperti
sunt Calviniani. Twiss. Vin. Gra. l. 2. part. 1. crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 52.
is more ways his Enemy than he is aware, for first he avoweth, that from the
sayings of Aquinas and of the Jesuits [That the act of sin is from God] the
unlearned Libertines might very easily collect, that God was the Author of all
the Lewdnesses which are committed by wicked men. And yet I think that no man
is so ridiculous as to say, that Aquinas and the Jesuits have spoken so
broadly, as the followers of Mr. Perkins and Mr. Calvin; and though the Doctor
says of the Dominicans, that they have expressed their opinion more distinctly
than the Calvinists, by saying that God does determine the will of the Creature
to every one of their acts, the act of sin not excepted, yet we know by sad
experience, that the Doctor either was deceived, or had an Intention to
deceive; besides, that himself See Correct Copy. p. 10.
elsewhere has blamed the Dominicans for mincing the matter, and not speaking
out so distinctly as he would have had them. He also palpably implies, that
the Calvinists opinion is just the same with the Dominicans, though he
supposes the Dominicans to have made it out in plainer terms. Secondly, Dr.
Twisse accuses the Vin. Gra. l. 1. par. 1. Sect. 4. c. 4. Dig. 4. p. 88.
Sublapsarians, (and our Reverend Epistoler is one of them) of having fallen
upon the Rock which they hoped to have escaped by their escape of the
Supralapsarian way, viz. their making God to be the Author of sin. And I
accused none of them of any more, than they all accuse one another, and this
shall be seen in an other example.

2. Gomarus, The Divided Members of that party who call themselves
Antipelagians and the Enemies of Arminius, are irreconcilable Enemies to each
other, and may be called Anti-autians, or Anti-Allelians. Deo nihil
insipientius nec stultius affingi potest. etc. Nihil injustius excogitari
potest, etc.
and Festus, and other Supralapsarians, do very bitterly contend against
Acronius and Dontelock and other Sublapsarians, [That nothing more foolish or
more sottish can be fictitiously fastened upon God, than that he should have
created Man without having constituted his end either of salvation or
damnation, or the making of his wrath and his Power known in the perdition of
the Reprobates.] Acronius on the contrary, and the rest of his way, exclaim as
much against the Supralapsarians [That no greater injustice can be imagined,
than that Man should be reprobated or created to destruction, without the least
intuition of his being polluted with any sin.] And whilst the Learned Si
utrique parti adversariis blasphemias atroces objicienti credam, utramque
Blasphemiae reamteneo; si neutricredam, neutram absolvere possum a Calumnia;
neque enim innocents esse possunt, qui aliis tam calumniose blasphemias
impingunt. N. Grev. contra Smoulium p. 52. see Act. Syn. Dord. sess. 107. p.
272.
Grevinchovius finds them playing thus at Tennis, bandying Blasphemy as a Ball
toward the faces of one another, and with such back-Blowes as always Hit, he
is so equal to both sides, as to clear them both from the guilt of Calumny. For
whilst they charge each other with fearful Blasphemy, they both speak Truth,
because they both are in an Error. They are the Conquerors and Captives of one
another; and both sides must acknowledge, that if there is Blasphemy but on one
side, there must be Hellish contumely on the other. Now with which of these
should I have sided to have freed my self from Correptory Correption? Not with
the Sublapsarians; for the Sublapsarians would have told me that I had fallen
into the Frying pan; nor with the Supralapsarians neither; for the
Supralapsarians would have told me that I had leaped into the Fire.

3. Doctor Abbot Bishop of Sarum, Bishop Abbot's censure of the absolute
Decree. Tristis illa, and omni modo abhorrenda, nuper certe nata, sententia de
Absoluto Decreto Reprobationis, quae ante ista tempora, opinor, nunquam in
Ecclesia audita est, quam nos quidem aliquando excusate tentavimus, nunquam
amplexi sumus, usu autem ipso didicimus, quam perniciosa, quam periculosa, quam
a salutari doctrina aliena sit. Rob. Sarisbur. de Gra. and persev. Sanct. in
praef. ad Lect. p. 11.
whom my Adversaries are so forward to allege in their behalf, is one of those
Reeds on which the harder they lean, the farther he runs through their Elbow.
For he calls their opinion of the Absolute Decree of Reprobation a very sour
opinion, and as much as may be to be abhorred, an upstart opinion, and before
those times never heard of in the Church, an opinion which he had sometimes
indeed endeavored to excuse, but never embraced it as his own; and had found
it by experience to be very dangerous, and pernicious, and far ramote from
salutary Doctrine.] If he abhored that doctrine for it self, how much more must
he have hated its sad effects? if he was ever heartily of that opinion which he
calls pernicious, it was but natural, that being a convert, he should detest
it so much the more.

4. In the judgment of Du Moulin, Du Moulin's censure of the same. Quicunque
Gloriae divinae amantes sunt, and conscientias turbare metuunt, etc. in Epist.
1. Junii edita Hagae. 1617.
(one of the learned Protestants the French Church has enjoyed) [they are
not Lovers of Gods glory, nor make any scruple to disquiet Consciences, who say
that God does destroy or reprobate his Creatures, merely because it is his
pleasure, and not because they do deserve it.] yet we know Gesselius in
speciminis c. 13. p. 52.
who they are, though it is not easy to know their number, who say that men are
reprobated, not for their sins, but merely because God will have it so. And how
angry Dr. Twisse was with learned Moulin, whom he called Arminian,
notwithstanding his Book against Arminius, and what other hard words he was
pleased to fling at him, as well as against his other Brethren, I have The Div.
Phil. Def. c. 3. Sect. 31. p. 124, 1 25.
already observed in my account of Mr. B.

5. Moulin also shows the odiousness of an antecedent irrespective Decree of
Reprobation, Quis non regem abominetur sic loquentem? Ego hunc hominem addico
sufpendio; sed ut just suspendeatur, volo paetret homicidium vel Peculatum.
Moulin in Anat. Arm. c. 12. p. 73.
by the similitude of a King, who secretly intending to hang a subject, should
contrive to make him a Malefactor, that he might justly send him to the
Gallows, that he might have something to hang him for. But who (says Moulin)
would not abominate such a King? and yet Piscator in Resp. ad Dupl. Vorst.
part. 1. p. 210.
Piscator says plainly, that God [did therefore predestine men to sin, that he
might justly punish them.] And thence perhaps Mr. B. calls him the Honest
Piscator.

6. It will be yet of greater moment to ascend a little higher, Prosper,
objicienti, quando servi Dominos occidunt, ideo fieri, qui^ ita Deus
Praedestinavit ut fieret,] respondet, si Diabolo objiceretur, quod talium
facinorum ipse Author, ipse esset Incentor, puto quod aliqua ratione exonerare
se hac posset Invidia, and talium scelerum patratorem de ipsorum voluntate
convinceret, -- probaret se non intulisse vim criminum. Qua ergo dementia
definitur ad Dei referendum esse consilium, quod nec Diabolo in totum ascribi
potest, qui in peccantium flagitiis illecebrarum Adjutor, non voluntatum
credendus est esse Generator? Nihil ergo talium negotiorum Deus predestinavit
ut fieret nec illam animam nequiter turpiterque victuram, ad hoc ut taliter
viveret, praeparavit; sed talem futuram non ignoravit, and de tali just se
judicaturum esse praescivit, atque ita ad praedestinationem ejus nihil allud
referri potest, nisi quod aut ad de bitam justitiae retributionem, aut ad
indebitam pertinet gratiae lusgitatem. Prosp. ad Objec. Vincent. 11. p. 341,
342.
and consider the testimony of Prosper, who thinks it so great an Injury to God
Almighty, to say that sins are committed because God predestined that they
should be committed, that he believes those words had been injuriously spoken,
had they been spoken of the Devil, because the Devil himself can but solicit,
and not compel us to do wickedly. And therefore God (says he) did not
predestin that any of those things should be done. -- He was not ignorant that
such a wicked soul would be, and for saw that he would judge it for such
commissions. Nor can any thing more be referred to Gods Predestination, than
that he does render Justice where it is due, and bestow mercy where it is not.]
This is the Sum of that famous Chapter. Which is as contrary to the Doctrine of
Mr. B. and his Masters, as any thing can be invented. The chief thing
observable I take to be this, that, though there was nothing in the objection,
but that, when Servants kill their Masters, or Parents vitiate their Daughters,
it is therefore done, because God Predestined that it should be done; yet
Prosper takes it for granted in the very beginning of his answer, That God is
inferred, by those words in the objection, to be the Author and Incentor of
such abominations. Of which if the Devil were accused, he might in part clear
himself, because he enforces no man to sin, but only helps and assists him in
it. Observe now the contrariety betwixt Prosper and those men whom I oppose.
Prosper says [It is a madness to refer that to Gods Counsel or Purpose which
cannot wholly be ascribed to the Devil himself.] yet (says Piscator) God made
men [hoc Johan. Piscator. These. 27. and 33.
consilio] with this counsel, or to this purpose, that they really might sin.]
Again Prosper says, that nothing of those affairs was predestined by God that
it should be done. Yet (says Mr. Barlee) God wills that sin should fall out,
p. 78. He is an absolute determiner in a sovereign way of the several acts of
obedience, and Disobedience in relation to Them, p. 88. He did voluntarily
decree that sin shall fall out, p. 73. (nor can Mr. B. mean a conditional, but
an absolute Decree, witness his principles, and what he says, p. 88.) He does
determine that sin shall be done, p. 79. and may be said to tempt men unto-sin,
ibid. and many the like, but also may much worse as has been showed.

7. The late Primate of Armagh has from the very Patrons of that Cause which I
oppose, Gotteschalk's Patronizers as severe as can be wished. Qui uecessitatem
peccandi Deum intulisse hominivel infer dicit, horribiliter in Deum
Blasphemat, quem Autorem peccatiesse confirmat. Hist. Gottes. Cap. 10. p. 138.
put this confession upon Record, [That he does evidently and horribly
blaspheme against God, who says that he imposes any necessity of sinning upon
his Creatures, because he thereby makes him to be the Author of sin, by
compelling men thereunto,] yet these men say, that God See the Catalogue of
Blasph. in the Divine Philan. Def: c. 3. p. 132. and seq.
necessitates sin; that it cannot possibly but come to pass, and that he
secretly thrusts men on to those sins which he forbid's, and when Mr. Barlee
justifies the like expression in Mr. Calvin, he adds his own wit to it, and
illustrates God's stirring up of sinners by a man's setting of Spurs to a Dull
Jade, p. 61. and whilst he says that God is not blamable in so doing, he skips
from the Question, which is not [whether God does sin,] but [whether he wills
the sins of his Creatures, and impels them to wicked acts,] so that he says in
effect the same with Piscator, who endeavors to blaspheme (...), and to be
civilly injurious against his maker, by saying, [that God does Piscator in
Praefat. Disp. de praedest. p. 8:
holily thrust men on unto wickedness, that he may punish sins with sins.] And
this perhaps may be the reason, why Mr. B. will not hear of any fall from Grace
either final, or Total, and why he is so Correp. Cor. p. 221, 222.
indulgent to David's Adultery and Murder, (how much soever aggravated by many
foul and black circumstances) as to say, they did not place him in a state of
damnation, but only robbed him of the joy of it; of which what reason can be
rendered except this one, that David was a better Adulterer, and committed a
wilful premeditated murder more holily and unblameably than other men? as if
his sins were the less damning by being committed against a clearer light, and
against greater obligations, and against more means of Grace, than what is
afforded to the Reprobates. But farther,

8. The famous Archbishop of Lions, Remigius Lugdunensis accounts it all one to
necessitate sin, and to be the Author of it. Hist. Gotteschal. c. 11. p. 173.
Reg. 5:
who is reckoned by them a Patron too, will be as much in their disfavour as I
have been whilst they shall reflect upon what he says on the same occasion,
viz. That if God had brought upon any man a necessity of doing wickedly, he had
been then the Author of sins.] how much for my opinion, and against them whom I
oppose, my opponents themselves may now Conjecture.

9. Bishop. Bp. Cutbert of Durheme does show the rise of that Blasphemy in his
book entitled [Against the impious Blasphemers of God's Predestination] viz. 1.
omnem Dei voluntatem esse decretum, and irrefragabilem. 2. Praedestinationem
Fati vicem habere. 3. praescienti^^ Dei necessitatem rei eventurae infer. cap.
1. p. 6. and seq.
Cutbert Tunstal, having pronounced it to be more than a hellish Blasphemy, to
say that God is the Author of sin, (as appears by the place already cited)
proceeds to discover the very Grounds of so great Impiety, and those he judges
to be Three; viz. the Doctrines or Tenants, 1. That every will of God is a
Decree, and unreversible. 2. That Predestination is instead of Fate. 3. That
the foreknowledge of God does imprint a necessity on what is future. Which he
therefore thinks needful to be confuted as the original of the evil, and
accordingly sets about it in three distinct Chapters.

These things being spoken of our Adversaries Doctrins, even by them who are
wont to be reckoned upon as Patrons, they may receive their confirmation from
other Protestant writers. But I will first mention one who is too old to be a
Protestant, although an Orthodox member of the very same Church.

10. The Anonymous Author of the book entitled [Praedestinatorum Haeresiis] one
of St. Austin's Contemporaries set out by learned Sirmondus, Arnobius Junior,
or Hyginus, or whosoever were the Author of [Praedestinatorum Haeresis]
Nonagesima Haeresis; quae asserit, Dei praedestinatione Pecca^a committi. l. 2.
p. 69. l. 3 p. 71.
does reckon the opinion of unconditional Degrees to be none of the least of
all those Heresies of which his Book is composed, and accordingly give's it
this solemn Title.

The ninetieth Heresy, which asserteth, that sins are committed by the
Predestination of God.

11. Certainly Grotius (if ever any man did) understood the Importance of words
and phrases; Grotius his^ Cento of Blasphemies, which he judges to be such, as
affirming God to be the Author of sin. Omnium Scelerum Auctorem faciunt, cum
docent, ad peccatum qua peccatum praeordinatos esse, etc. Reprobos ver^
praedestinatos esse ad hanc conditionem, ut non queant non varia scelera
admittere, eosque Necessitate peccati constringi, and quidem sine
resipiscentia. Deum operari Impium ^d peccatum, ne poen^m ei just in ^^igere
non possit Hoc consilio conditos homines, ut laberentur. Deum cum hominem ad
Necessitatem Pecc^ti necessitat, just agere, qui^ potentiam habet gubernandi,
ut vult. Deum operari omni^ etiam in Impiis. Deum esse, qui ad prav^s actiones
incitet, seducat, trahat, jubeat, induret, deceptiones immitt^t a Deo externe
ad salutem vocari, quibus immutab^^ decreto statuit (...) non confer, Grot.
de Antichristo p. 64, 65.
he knew when an Inference was right or wrong; and out of what things, what
things do follow. But he affirms [that those men do make God to be the Author
of all the Villainies in the world, who say that men are predestined to sin as
sin; that Reprobates are predestined to this condition, that they are
constrained with a necessity of sinning, and that without repentance; that God
does act the wicked to sin, that he may punish him justly; that men were made
to this purpose, that they might fall; that God does justly when he
necessitates men to sin, because he has the power to govern as he will; that
God works all things in all, yea even in the wicked; that it is God who
seduceth, draws, commands, hardens, inciteth to wicked actions; and that
they also are called outwardly to Salvation, upon whom God purposed not to
bestow it by an immutable Decree.] This is that that makes God to be the Author
of sin in the unparalleled judgment of that Great man, and although he does
not name the Authors of those several expressions, yet the Authors of them are
so obvious, that I am very well able to name the Books and pages where they are
written, and shall do it as readily as any Adversary will have me.

12. He adds another sort of the same men's Aphorisms, Grotius his Judgment of
those doctrines, which make God an Abettor and Incourager of sin. Omnium
scelerum Fautorem faciunt, cum doceant, Fideles in Adulteria, homicidium,
Proditiones prolabi posse, non tamen unquam e gratia excidere; manner enim
semper viros secund^^ Cor Dei; neque peccata illii ob^utura; quia peccata
praeterita and futura (...) remissa esse. Fideles per peccata ulla etiam
gravia, non posse a Dei Grati^ ad tempus excidere; opinionem vero contrariam
esse ^^ygiae Credulitatis, atqu^ a Diabolo profectam, Id. ib.
whereby they speak God to be the cherisher of sins; as when they teach, [that
the faithful can fall into Adulteries, Murders, Treasons, but yet they can
never fall from Grace, but do still remain men after Gods own heart; nor are
their sins any hinderance or disadvantage to them, because all their sins are
remitted both past and future. That the faithful cannot fall from the Grace of
God by any grievous sins, no not so much as for a time, and that the contrary
opinion savours of hellish Incredulity, and proceeds from the Devil, and many
more maxims of this kind may be collected (says Grotius) from this kind of
men. And because the Augustan confession which is unpassionately, purely, and
discreetly protestant, does condemn those Doctrins which are taught by those
men, who call themselves Protestants as well as we, and Reformers (forsooth) of
our very Reformation; I did therefore in my Notes prefer the Augustan
confession to any other of the Protestants except our own: and thence Mr. B.
was so unhappy as to tell the world, that out of pure love to the Augustan
confession I am extremely addicted to the M^sse of Ceremonies, with how
profound an Incongruity, English Scholars may now judge.

11. The most learned Bishop Mountague, Bp. Mountagues censure of irrespective
Decrees without relation to those worst effects of the Error of which I spoke.
Appel. Caesar. c. 7. p. 68, 69.
with whom, for knowledge of Antiquity perhaps there have not been many who
will compare, has left these words upon Record in his very Appeal to King
James, (whom my Assailant has quoted as an utter Enemy to Arminius) unless
from damned Heretics, or stoical Philosophers, I never yet read in Antiquity,
of any prime, previous determining Decree, by which men were irrespectively
denied grace, excluded from Glory, or enforced to Salvation.

Should I set down the censures of as many writers as I am able, wherewith my
Adversaries Doctrins have been condemned, I should hardly make an end before
the Greek Calends. I hope that these are sufficient to convince my Reverend
Antagonist, that I was not the first, much less the only Person, who has
spoken severely of those opinions, in opposition to which my Notes were
written; and that few have ever spoken of them with greater Patience and
moderation then I there did; and that He by consequence has misplaced his
reprehensions; and under pretense of beating me, has struck at those Authors
whose words I have alleged in this long Section, and (whether purposely, or
through Incogitancy, I cannot tell) he has scourged them all upon my Back. Not
only Grotius and such as he, but Irenaeus, nay Polycarp, St. Austin and
Prosper, nay, the Arausican Council, Bishop Abbot, and Bishop Hall, nay
Remigius himself, and the whole Church of Lions, Peter Moulin, and Melancthon,
nay Doctor Whitaker himself, His own Brethren of the upper, and lower way, nay
Doctor See also Mr. Baxters speeches of Dr. Twisse which shall be recited chapter
5. Sect. 3.
Twisse and Mr. Calvin have not escaped him. These are not all whom I have
cited in vindication of my severity against those Doctrines which are severe
against God. Amongst them all, there is not a Bellarmine, or a Bolsec, though
in such a point as this is, they are as fit to be heard as any others, because
the points debated are neither Protestant, nor Popish; or if they are either,
they are both. And when the que^tion is, whether black or white is the lighter
Color, or least fit for mourning, I suppose a Papists Judgment upon that
matter may be allowed; They having sense, and reason, and erudition, as well as
we. Besides, The Papists do cast no more upon Protestants, than upon those
other Papists, who jump with the Calvinists in these opinions. Nor do the
Protestants cast more upon the Papists, than upon those other Protestants, who
jump with the Papists in these opinions. Nor do the Papists say worse of the
Protestants, than some Protestants do of Papists. And if my Assailant knew this
before I told him, I wish he had considered as well as known it. But (not to
speak of their suffrages) if those unquestionable Authors, whom I have cited,
have only beaten the precious spices as so many Confectioners, merely to draw
out the fragrant sent, I do not envy their being beaten, but am very well
content that they smell as sweetly as they are able.

. 8. Eighthly, Now I have showed what it was upon which I fastened the charge of
Blasphemy, and that I could not in charity or in conscience, have spoken less
than I did; I cannot but mark in the next place the tran^cendent partiality of
D^. Reynolds, who having timely perused the whole Correptory Correption, before
it was sent unto the Press, whilst yet it was capable of some Amendment, was
yet so far from blotting out those vast excesses of Railing which his eyes
beheld in every page, (against my person, and my opinion, and against every
great Author who seemed to stand in his way,) that he rather endevour'd to
prove it lawful; nor only lawful, but even necessary in writings of this
nature, (they are his own words.) He farther prompted him to a Text to comfort
him up in his commissions. And so the Correptory Corrector being [an (...),] a
Favorite, or white Boy, may be allowed to frame a charge of Atheism both
[Major and Minor] against all that agree not to [God necessitating of sin;] His
Book may be commended as an elaborate and learned piece, for calling slanderous
Dragon, and nooneday Devil, Satanical Blasphemer, an exceeder of the Devil
himself in Blasphemy, worse than Diabolical, and a maker of God to be worse
than the Devil. Whereas when I did but distinguish of modest Blasphemers, and
such as were for Ligonem, Ligonem, (without the naming of any person,) that is,
of such as speak God to be the Author of sin in those very broad and downright
Terms, and of such as say the same thing in terms less Blunt, I was surprised
from the Press with a chiding Preface, and modestly accused of immodesty, and
implicitly affirmed to be of Bolsec's complexion, and all this by a Person
professing Friendship and Civility.

But now I hope he will confess, that I had great and weighty Reasons, to say
that the Ma^ichees and Marcio^ites were not so bad in their Assertions;) as
they who teach, with contention, that God is the Author or cause of sin: and
for this I have the judgment of (...). Iren. in Epist. ad Flo. p. 510: Edit
Colon.
Irenaeus, who says, that the Heretics never durst to entertain such an
opinion, as should but seem to make God the Author of sin. He speaks of
Heretics in general, of all that were without the Church; and no doubt but
Idem, l. 1. c. 24.
Carpocrates as well as Idem l. 1. c. 29.
Marcion, was in his memory and his mind, because he has written concerning
the Heresies of both. Was it not better, or less ill, to make two principles
coeternal, the one distinctly of good, the other distinctly of evil, than to
ascribe all evil to the God of all goodness? 'Bate but the word Coeternal, and
we shall find it good Doctrine, that of good and evil there are two distinct
principles; God of the first, and Lucifer of the second. Now those Heretics
not believing the liberty of the will, and thereupon not understanding, that
without the liberty of the will of the Creature, no imaginable wickedness could
ever have come into the world, they concluded that God must be its Author. But
then again considering, that the very same fountain cannot yield both killing
and healing water, and that the best as well as worst fruit does never grow
from one Tree, and that uncleanness as well as purity could not possibly issue
from the very same God, they found it safer to conclude, that there were two
distinct Gods to be the contrary principles of good and evil, than that the
very same God should be the Fountain and source of both; so that the Heresy of
Marcion may seem to be in this respect a degree of Reformation: for though he
ran into a mischief extremly great, yet it was with an intent to escape a
greater. And if it were not so as I have said, why was it said by Irenaeus,
that the Heretics themselves had never the boldness to affirm, that the God
of holiness and purity was the original Fountain or Cause of sin?

So far was Carpocrates from such a boldness, that being not able to discern,
how the will of men and Angels was able to choose the things forbidden and to
refuse the things commanded, and thereby to be the cause of sin; he rather
chose to say, that there is no sin at all, that good and evil are only words
and only differ in the fancies and opinions of men, than to say that one God is
the cause of both. For if all things are done by Gods will and decree, they
must all be good, because he willed and decreed them. But Carpocrates thought
then (what our Adversaries say now) that all things are done, without
exception, by Gods will and decree; upon which he conluded ^that all things are
good without exception; and that sin, as well as conscience, is nothing else
but a political or Ecclesiastical word. So that his foul Heresy of making no
sin at all, in comparison of the other which feigneth God to be its Author, may
also seem a pretender to some Degree of Reformation.

From both these cases it does appear, that the very worst of the worst
opinions, must be that which makes God to be the Author of sin, and when men
are frighted by such a Fiend to fly for sanctuary to any thing that lies next,
let every rational man judge how smooth a passage lay open for such as
Carpocrates and Marcion, to enter, and lie down, and nuzzle themselves in an
opinion that there is no God at all; and that Atheism it self is a comparative
Reformation; (that is) a flying out of the greatest into somewhat a lesser
evil. All which mischiefs would be avoided, if men were so humble as to
acknowledge, that they themselves are the Authors of sin and misery. 2 That
their Wills are Christ himself has made them free (Gal. 5. 1.) and so not left
them under any necessity to sin and perish.
free, and not necessitated to sin. 3 That being free, they can Through Christ
who strengthens them, as well by the preventions, as the further Assistances of
his grace, they can choose to avoid* sin whilst yet they are able to embrace it
also (Phil. 4. 13.
choose either to shun, or to embrace it. 4 That God's witholding of grace is
no man's guilt, but man's abusing of grace which God afforded. 5 That God
expects to receive after the measure that he has given 6 That no man living
can be condemned for never having had a Talent, but for having been an ill
servant in wilfully squandring it away, or in the wilful neglect of its
Improvement. And now I hope it is evident from all that has hitherto been
spoken, that there was reason and modesty in all I said concerning modest and
immodest Blasphemers, who say directly, or indirectly, That God is the Author
and cause of sin. And therefore

9. Ninthly, My Reverend Assailant is least of all to be excused, for that
which he adds in the last part of this Paragraph. viz. [that their Lord and
Brethren before them have met with the same measure. Mar. 2. 7. Mat. 26. 65.
Act. 6. 13.] But here I ask him, and let him answer if he is able, (and if he
is not, let him confess his error) Did Christ ever let fall such expressions
as those, which I have proved to be blasphemous? Did our Lord and Master ever
say, that men do break God's Law by God's own Impulse or Compulsion, or by his
precept and command? That God can will that man shall not fall by his revealed
will, and in the mean while ordain by his se^ret will, that the same man shall
infallibly and efficaciously fall? Did our Savior ever say so much as in
appearance, That God does make men Transgressors, That Adultery is the work of
him the Author, mover, and Impeller? That God's Decree is no less efficacious
in the permission of evil, than in the production of good? That God does not
only prostitute men to sins and administer the occasions of sinning, but does
also so move and urge them, that they may smite the sinners mind, and really
affect his imagination?] Was He called Blasphemer for such things as these? and
were not These the very things, upon which in My Notes I laid my charge? Things
confessed to be Blasphemy by the very Authors and Patrons of them, when in
their sober fits or lucid Intervals, they look upon them as spoken by other
men? See the matchless absurdity of the comparison, by consulting those Texts
to which my Adversary refers us. [Iesus said to the sick of the palsy, Son,
thy sins be forgiven thee; upon which said the Scribes within their hearts, why
does this man thus speak blasphemies? Mark 2. 7.] Jesus professed to ^ilate,
that he was the Christ the son of God, whereupon the High Priest rent his
clothes, saying, He has spoken blasphemy, what farther need have we of
witnesses? Behold now ye have heard his Blasphemy. Mat. 26. 65.] St. Stephen
did miracles among the people, and disputed against the Jews; and therefore
they suborned men to say, that they heard him speak blasphemous words. Acts 6.
11, 13.] Let these sayings of Christ and of St. Stephen be well compared with
the sayings of Mr. Calvin and his Disciples, and we shall find the difference
to be as great, as betwixt Christ and Calvin, betwixt the followers of Christ,
and the followers of Calvin, betwixt St. Stephen, and Dr. Twisse, or betwixt
me, and those Jews in our several Churches. And here I challenge his answer to
this Dilemma, Did our Lord and St. Stephen meet with the very same measure from
the Jews, which the men whom I cited received from me, or did they not? If he
shall answer that they did, then must he prove that the sayings of those men
whom I cited were as far from blasphemy as the saying of Christ and St.
Stephen; or that the sayings of Christ and St. Stephen had as much of
blasphemy in them, as those which I cited for making God to be the Author of
sin. But if he shall answer that they did not, he must not only eat his words
in a Corner* but make public satisfaction; not only to me, but to every one of
those Authors whom I have quoted in this chapter* speaking much more sharply,
than I have done. He alone is to be blamed, that this Dilemma does fall so very
heavily upon him. It was no fault of mine, that he would needs utter that,
which reflecteth upon him with so much sharpness, but on the contrary I wish,
and I wish it heartily, that he had either brought me an harder argument, or at
least that he had given me a softer word.

CHAP. V.
E. R.
There have been men of great Learning, and not wholly devoted to the Judgment
of Calvin, who have taught even Dissenters thus to say of him, B. Andrews,
opusc. p. 115.
Calvino, illustri viro, nec unquam sine summi honoris praefatione nominando,
non assentior.

T. P.
1. BEhold the utmost that I can gather from this third way of arguing. Men of
great learning have spoken honorably of Calvin, therefore I have done ill to
call that blasphemy whereby God is concluded to be the Author of sin. It might
suffice me to say, that I deny his Sequel, but I have something to say besides;
for first there is not a Page in all my Notes, wherein I give Mr. Calvin the
least dishonorable Term. I fairly name him and cite his words, and consider
the matter of which he speaks, and show the reason of my dislike, and so I am
sure did Bishop Andrews; and therefore this paragraph is nothing at all to the
purpose, unless it would intimate to the Reader that I had said of Mr. Calvin,
what its Author knows I never did, if I have forgot, and he remembers, let him
do me the justice to name the time, or the place.

2. He confesses that Bishop Andrews had his dislikes to Calvin, and that
himself does not jurare in verba, either of Calvin, or any other, amongst whom
Dr. Twisse must needs be one, and why might not I dissent from either? And
offer my arguments or reasons against their Doctrine, whilst (he knows) I
meddl'd with nothing else? I spoke indeed of Blasphemers without applying the
word to any person in particular; yet I meant it of all in general, who have
any way affirmed God to be the Author of sin. But my Adversary applied it to
Mr. Calvin and Dr. Twisse, which why should he have done, unless he thought he
had reason for it, by verily believing that they were guilty? Yet he compares
me to the Jews imputing Blasphemy to Christ. How much better had he applied it
unto the Correptory Correptor who suborned false witness (a Rev^rend Minister
he called him, but no man living can tell where he dwells) to make me a Ranter,
and a what-not? Fictions, as remote from all probability, as well as truth, as
the wit of Calumny could have removed them, whereas I spoke not a word of Mr.
Calvin or Dr. Twisse, which was so much as uncivil, much less untrue. I had no
such word, as Calvino-Turcismus; nor did I call him an Enemy to the three
persons in the Trinity for calling them Grot. iu Voto pro Pace p. 15.
Tres proprietates; nor did I call him an enemy to the Nicene Creed, for not
approving of Christ's being Grot. iu Voto pro Pace p. 15.
God of God; nor did I say (with Hunnius,) Calvinus Iudaizans; or that the
fault of Hunnius apud Grot: Discuss. Rive^. Apol. p. 115, 186.
Impertinence and falsehood was laid by Calvin to the charge of three
Evangelists, St. Matthew, Mark, and John; nor did I call Mr. Calvin, as Mr.
Calvin called others, viz. Serpent, Pest, Fool, Hangman, Knave, Devil, Impudent
Impostor, and filthy Dog.] These and others without number, are Mr. Calvin's own
Terms, which he frequently heapeth upon great and good Men; yet every Reader is
my witness, that I did not fasten on Mr. Calvin any one uncomely or unfriendly
Epithete, though Bucer himself had called him Fratricide: so I can say of Dr.
Twisse, that I did not call him Antinomian, as he is said to have been called
in the Assembly of Divines but whether truly or falsely, I cannot tell. I can
name a worthy person who professes to have read it in Mr. Baxter. Nor did I
use him as others use me; nor as he himself was wont to use others. I had to do
with his Doctrine but not with his person.

3. To conclude. If my Assailant is so zealous of other Men's good Names, as to
complain of me in public for merely seeming to be injurious, In how tragical a
manner must he needs protest against that great number of Ministers (all, I
think, of his party) who have reckoned the Reverend Doctor Hammond, (a person
never to be mentioned without a preface of Honor and Veneration) amongst the A
Testimony to the Truth of l. C. in Praes. p. 2.
Cursed Blasphemers, the Ibid. p 4.
abominable erroneous, and the Ibid. p 4.
Damnable Heretics of the Times, alleging no better reason than this which
follows, That in his practical Catechism he had used these words [ Ibid. p. 9.
Christ was given to undergo a shameful Death, voluntarily upon the Cross, to
satisfy for the sin of Adam, and for all the sins of Mankind.] Whosoever shall
compare these few plain words both with the Art. Eccl. Angl. 2. 7, 15. 31.
Articles of the Church of England, and with the whole Tenor of the 1 John 2.
2. Heb. 2. 9. John 4. 42. 1 Timothy 4. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Act. 17. 30.
Scriptures, he will think it somewhat more than wonderful, that Men should be
so unlucky in their Devices, as to rank the greatest Maxim of Christian
Religion amongst the greatest Abominations that they were able to describe. And
which if it had been a Blasphemy, they themselves had been guilty of the thing
which they condemned, by having said it in effect in the very same Book. p. 32.
line 14, 15, 16, 17. Or if he will not be severely sensible of this irreverence
to Dr. H. yet what damnatory sentence will he pronounce on Mr. Baxter, who has
laid to the charge of Mr. Pemble and Dr. Twisse, Aphorisms of Iustif. These. 36.
p. 173.
That their own mistake of Iustification's being an immanent Act of God did
lead them to that error and Pillar of Antinomianism, viz. Justification from
Eternity? adding further in the same Book] Id ib. Append. p. 163, 164.
That they sought against Jesuits and Arminians with the Antimonian Weapons,
and so they ran into the far worse Extreme; and immediately after undertakes to
demonstrate, that [The Doctrine of Christ's immediate actual Delivering us from
guilt, wrath, and condemnation, is the very Pillar and Foundation of the whole
Frame and Fabric of Antinomianism.] And what his Thoughts are of the
Antinomian Faith, he has expressed Saints everlast. Rest. part. 3. c. 3. sect.
2. in marg. p. 40, 41.
elsewhere by [A believing the Devil the Father of Lies, and not God, yea
against God; A resting on the deceivng Promise of the Devil for justification;
(and are not such like to be well justified by their Accuser?) nay, it is a
making the Devil their God, etc.] Not many Pages before this, He had laid it to
the charge of the same Dr. Twisse, that [ Id ib. part. 3. c. 2. sect. 15. p.
38. in ma^g.
The physical active Determination of Man's Will to sin, or the act which is
sinful, by Gods effectual Influx, is asserted by him.] professing also just
before, that [He detested their Doctrine and way of preaching, who teach Men to
lay the chief cause of their sin and Damnation from themselves on God, and
would have wicked men believe that none but the Elect do sin against the Price
that was paid for them, and so would quiet their Consciences in Hell, as if
they were not guilty of any such sin.] Now if Dr. Twisse was so eminent a
servant of Christ and so deeply acquainted with the mind of God, as my
Assailant is pleased to dictate, his next Assault (I suppose) ought to be made
on Mr. Baxter. of whom it has also been elsewhere showed, that he has spoken
not a little to the Discredit of Saints everlast. Rest. part. 1. c. 8. sect. 2.
p. 154.
Mr. Calvin.

CHAP. VI.
E. R.
But it is no new thing to draw invidious consequences from such opinions as we
have a mind to render odious unto the world. A Fate which has ever followed
these controversies from the beginning of them* Nine or ten Pelagian Calumnies,
Austin, that renowned Champion of Grace, Vide etiam contra Julian. l. 2. c. 1.
and l. 3. c. 24. and l. 4. c. 3.
is put to remove in his second and third Books, contra duas Episto las
Pelagianorum. In the Epistles of Prosper and Hilary unto him, we find many
heavy consequents charged by the Massilians, upon his Doctrine, de vocatione
secundum propositu^ and de Praedestinatione, that it gives occasion of
sinning, makes men careless of standing, careless after lapses of rising again,
takes away all industry and regard of virtue, induces a Fatal Necessity,
weakneth vigor of preaching, is contrary to the edification of hearers,
renders fruitless all Christian Correption, and drives men into Despair. In
resp. ad Artic. falso sibi impositos in Edit. Bas. Prosper ad Capit. object.
Vincent. Histor. Gotsch. c. 2, 3. Amica Collatio p. 294.
Yea that holy man, or Prosper his Follower (for the work goes under both Names
(was fain to conflict with these very objections of Gods making men to destroy
them, and of his being the Author of sin. And after that, the same objections
were made against the same Doctrine of Austin under the odious name of Haeresis
Praedestinatiana, as the renowned Bishop Usher, and learned Camero have
observed. And the same we find revived in handling the same Controversies in
our days, rendering those opinions odious which please us not, as sore
Impediments unto true Piety, by the Author of the Book, called God's love to
Mankind, and others. From which charge they have been sufficiently vindicated,
Prosp. ad Cap. Gal. Hist. Go^teschalc. c. 5.
as of old by Prosper, Aquitanicus, Remigius, Lugdunensis, and others, so of
late by those learned men, who have answered the forenamed Book. But this being
a taking Medium, I find also used by the Socinians. Jonas Schlitingius has
written a disputation against Meisner a Lutheran Divine, in defense of Socinus
to this very effect.

T. P.
1. It is impossible to conceive wherein the hardness of this fourth argument
does lie. Here are many premises to one purpose very plainly expressed, from
which the conclusion is very bashfully implied Observe Reader how it stands.
Austin was put to remove 9. or 10. Pelagian Calumnies, the Massilians charged
many heavy consequents on his Doctrine, his Doctrine was objected against under
the name of Haeresis Praedestinatiana, etc. Ergo, what? The Conclusion (if any)
must needs be this, that Mr. T. P. has done like the Pelagians and Massilians,
(and like the Socinians against Meisner) in setting down the express words of
some modern Writers whom he did not name neither. And so here is the Fallacy of
Ignoratio Elenchi, which the unconsidering Reader may chance to swallow, if the
palate of his judgment is so thickly paved, as not to feel it or taste it in
gliding down. But every Reader who is awake will find a strange Incongruity
betwixt the Premises and the C^nclusion; for first, those in the premises did
name St. Austin. Secondly, they did not set down his own very words. Thi^^ly,
they drew s^^h consequents from Austins words, which were disavo^^d by him and
Prosper but never justified by either of the^ whereas my case (which must be
hi^ conclusion, if he own any pertinence of all here spoken) does differ from
that [(...)] as much as may be: for first, I Correct. Copy of Notes. p. 9. and
10.
named not the (...) whom I accused. Secondly, I set down their very (...).
Thirdly, The Correptory Correptor was so far from disavowing those frightful
speeches, that he See the 10. last sections of the Divine Philan. defended.
^ndeavoured to justif^^, and make them good. And as my irreveren^, so also my
Reverend Adversary does not (...) to cloak them with pretensions even of
Scripture. (...) Correptory Correptor was not satisfied with that he said, that
the expressions of holy Scripture do go Corrept. Cor. p. 56.
beyon^ the very highest of either moderate or bold Blasphemers, (though some
of them affirmed God to be the Author of Adultery, and not only the Author but
the Impeller too,) accusing all Men of Id. ib. p. 143. 118 56. and 68.
Atheism who will not give him their suffrage.

2. It Is true that Austin and Prosper did vindicate themselves from the
Pelagian Calumnies, as I have vindicated my self from the more groundless
Calumnies of the worse extreme; and it is a most pleasing observation, that they
did so vindicate themselves, as to declare their Detestation of all those
Doctrins which I condemned, and their express Approbation of those very
Doctrins which I asserted. He that shall read St. Austins answers ad Articulos
sibi falso impositos, Prospers answers ad Capitula objectionum Gallorum, and
his other answers to the objections of Vincentius, will say, that my Reverend
Assailant could not possibly have done me a greater favor, than to produce
those things to my prejudice (as he thought it) which I have often See The Div.
Philanth. chapter 1. sect. 5. p. 29.
urged to my advantage.

. 3. His mention of the Book called Gods love to Mankind, has proved also a
favor to me. For having sent for that Book on this occasion, I find the Author
of it a Convert from the Sect which he there opposes. He professes in the
entrance to give the reasons, by which he was moved to p. 1.
change his opinion in some controversies debated between the Remonstrants and
their opposites. And (not to speak of his other reasons) the second reason of
his change he p. 24. to p. 37.
professes to be this, that the opinion which he forsook (to wit, the opinion
of the Calvinists which I have also forsaken upon the very same grounds)
charge God with Men's sins ^n Earth, and makes him the Author, not of the
first sin only that entered by Adam into the World, but of all other sins that
have been, are, or shall be committed to the Worlds end, no Murders,
Robberies, Rapes, Adulteries, Insurrections, Treasons, Blasphemies, Heresies,
Persecutions, or any other Abominations whatsoever fall out at any time, or in
any place, but they are the necessary productions of Gods Almighty Decree.
Behold the liberal and ingenuous Confession of that Conscientious and learned
Calvinist. First I say Conscientious, because he was not ashamed to retract his
errors, nor to publish his Retractation; nor did he fear what might follow, by
his contracting the displeasures of a revengeful party; next I say learned,
because he Confuteth his former judgment in an unanswerable manner; which is
the likelier to be so, because an answer has been attempted by the learned
Men of that party, who could arrive no higher than to attempt it,) neither of
them avowing the very same Doctrins which he opposed (and betray a
dissatisfaction in each others performances, why else was it attempted by more
than one? Last of all I say Calvinist, as presupposed in his Conversion. He
could not first cease to be a Calvinist, and then discover the reasons why, the
motives to his Repentance must needs precede his change of life. He disliked
that Sect, before he left it, however his leaving of it might tread upon the
heels of his dislike.

. 4. Prosper, Aquitanicus, Remigius, L^gdunensis, are thus distinguished with
Comma's in that Edition of his Epistle unto the Correptory Correptor. As if
four of the Ancients had been instanced in, whereas Prosper of Aquitanea was
but one Man, and Remigius of Lions was bnt another, nor he a very old one
neither. But I suppose those Comma's the error only of the Printhouse; all that
I charge on my Assailant is his unreasonable mention of those two Men, very
much to his prejudice, but not to his purpose in any kind, they having not
vindicated the speeches of Mr. Calvin, Zuinglius, and Dr. Twisse, (they were
neither so young, nor yet so giddy) but vindicated themselves from being
thought to be Patrons of those opinions, which by the three Men mentioned were
since espoused, and (as I have partly already showed, Chap. 4.. 6, 7.) they did
vindicate themselves, as well from those foul Doctrins which I discover and
oppose, as from those very calumnies then framed against them.

CHAP. VII.
E. R.
But how ill it beseems Sons of the Reformed Church of England, to take up
that charge, which Bolsec, Bellarmine, Becanus, Kellison, Fit^simon, Stapleton,
Fevardentius, and others of that party, have unjustly cast upon the worthy
Instruments of God in the Reformation of the Church, and which have been so
expressly disavowed, and so fully wiped off by a whole cloud of learned writers,
(some 31. Are named in his Margin, and being there but named, this Margin is
not concerned in them, because not a syllable is produced of words, or matte^
few of whom I have e mea tenui supellectile in the Margin pointed unto,) I
leave unto you to show.

Sure we are, that upon a Candid examination, it will appear, that in this
Argument, Protestant Divines have intended no more than Austin before them did
say, whom none will by name accuse, for making God the Author of sin, though
some, as Baronius observes, dum in Novatores (so he calls our Divines)
insurgunt, a sancti Augustini sententia de praedestinatione recedunt. Nor h^ve
they intended any more than by multitudes of places of 38. Texts are referred
to in the Margin, but the words not mentioned, much less explained, or applied
to any one sentence which they are pretended to excuse.
Scripture they were led unto, which places as we read with Adoration and
trembling, at the unsearchable judgments of God, so we cannot but with all
submission acknowledge the holiness and Authority of them.

T. P.
. 1. ALL these Propositions thus put together do look as if they would be glad
to have the force of a fifth argument, and though they have not the luck they
have the willingness to infer, that I have done very ill in setting down that
Correct. Copy of Notes. p. 9, and 10.
Catalogue of Dr. Twisse his expression^, and two besides, Calvin and
Zuinglius. But here he miscarries in as many respects as it was possible. For
first, I did civilly conceal their names. Secondly, I cited their naked words,
and therefore could not charge them falsely; if the words did blush to be seen
in English, the fault was theirs who first divulged them in Latin. Thirdly,
they were not all Instruments in the Reformation of the Church; for Dr. Twisse
and Mr. Calvin, were far from being Contemporaries, and (as to the matters in
debate) as far from being of one opinion; and that wherein Dr. Twisse had his
part, and presided, was far from being a Reformation. Fourthly, they never
expressly disavowed what I transcribed out of their works; or if they had done
it, their crimes had been but so much the greater; nor am I to be Blamed, if
other Men will say foul things in print, and then disavow the having said them.
Fifthly, Doctor Twisse his speeches made up half my Catalogue; and so far have
they been from being fully wiped off by a whole Cloud of learned Writers, that
of the 31. Writers whom my Reverend Assailant is pleased to name for that
purpose, there is not one that has attempted to do him that Favor, much less*
they who were dead before he came into the world. Sixthly, so far is Dr. Twisse
from excusing the Sublapsarians, that he accuses them rather, like some Bolsec
or Bellarmine, as I would here show, if I had not done it enough The Div.
Philan. Defen. chapter 3. sect. 31. p. 123, 124. and seq.
already. Seventhly, another whom he names is Bishop Abbot, who yet is as
bitter an enemy to the absolute decree of Reprobation, as either Bellarmine or
Bolsec. He calls it [a Robert Sarisb. de Gratia and Perser. sanct. in Prae^at.
ad lector. p: 13.
cruel opinion, contrary to Scripture, and to the Fathers of the Church, a
wicked opinion, a p. 12.
Rock of mischief to be avoided] he speaks most severely of all the
Supralapsarians, of Mr. Idem in Thomsoni Diatribam. cap. 1. p. 83, 84.
Perkins by Name, and by inevitable Idem in Thomsoni Diatribam. cap. 1. p. 83,
84.
Consequence of Dr. Twisse, he holds them as bad as the Pelagians; and
professes that their Doctrins do make men fly unto Arminianisme by way of
Refuge: of whom I add no more, because I speak of him above, (viz. chap. 4. 7.)
Whosoever shall compare the places cited in Bishop Abbot, with Mr. Perkins and
Dr. Twisse, will say that my Assailant should have thought a second time,
before he put them into his Catalogue. Eighthly, nor was he less unfortunate in
his pitching upon Maccovius, who in the Synod at Dort did very publicly
contend, [ That This the Reverent Assailant might have found in the Book by him
mentioned called God's love to mankind. p. 3. And he alone is to be thanked for
this Citation.
God does will sins, ordain men to sin, as sin, and wills not by any means that
all men should be saved, (as directly contrary to the Apostle as he could
possibly have spoken) and as if this were not enough, he farther declared in
the Synod, [that except these things were held and maintained by them, they
must come over to the Remonstrants.] The Reader may now judge what is meant by
my Assailant when he says, that the charge which is brought against his party,
is so fully wiped off by blunt Maccovius, aad such as He. But what was done to
Maccovius for those expressions? He was pronounced in the Synod to be pure and
Orthodox, and only admonished as a Brother, to take heed hereafter of such
words, as might give offense to tender Ears, and could not well down with
those, who are yet incapable of such Mysteries.

2. By these three or four men, it will be easy to judge of all the rest in
his Inventory, to whom notwithstanding I should have spoken in particular, if
He had ventured to set down any one of their words: and had he seen any thing
in them to his Advantage, I make no doubt but I should soon have heard of it,
at least the Correptory Correptor would have found it out, whom it concerned so
nearly, and for whose assistance this Catalogue was so professedly intended.
But I have made it appear, that he has wiped them fouler (if fouler may be)
than they seemed to be before he wiped them, (as I have seen some Houses, which
however unclean in other respects, yet the uncleanest thing of all has been
the Beesome.) So that the utmost which I learn from the long Catalogue of
writers, is this; that my Reverend Antagonist is the possessor of many Books,
whose Authors being of his party do write in favor of his opinions, that is,
of their own; and being naturally willing to be well enough thought on, they
have done their brotherly-endeavours to make the best of a bad matter, that the
Enormities of the party may be abhorred so much the less. It is one thing to
excuse, or alleviate a Fact, but quite another to plead its Innocence. Bishop
Abbot did his endeavor to excuse the Doctrine of Mr. Perkins, although he
called it the Non satis* consuluit nomini suo, qui tanquam equum quendam
Trojanum Contentionis tam dirae seminarium intra Fidei Muros invexit. Robert:
S^risb. in Praes. ad. lect. de Persev. Sanct. p. 11.
seminary of dire contention, which like some Trojan Horse was brought within
the walls of Faith; and also Perkinsius -- erravit errorem non le^em, cujus ^
doctis quibusdam vir is inita jamdudum, and suscepta. defensio turbas Ecclesiis
non necessarias dedit, quas etiamnum non sine Scandalo and periculo haerere
videmus, dum, and Idem in Toms. Diatr. p. 1, 2. mihi 83, 84.
blamed those men (of whom Dr. Twisse must be the chief) who undertook the
defense of so great an Error, as that which was not only troublesome, but
dangerous and scandalous to the Church of God. In like manner Dr. Twisse does
sometimes labor to excuse the Synod at Dort, although he labors to confute it
with all his might; and again does bitterly inveigh against learned Moulin for
his opinion of Reprobation, for which the Synod at Dort thought fit to Act.
Synod. Dord. part 1. p. 348. Sess. 144.
thank him. I say they thanked him for all his Letter without exception of any
period, although they could not but know, that he was perfectly Act. Syn. Dord.
part 1. Sess. 143. p. 339, 340.
Arminian in what he said of Reprobation. It seems Du-Moulin was a Favorite,
and (for his other opinions sake) to be commended even for that, for which a
Remonstrant had had their Correptory Correption.

3. How inexcusable the Doctrins of many Calvinists have been, and how little
to be owned by the more ingenuous of their own party, the Reader may easily
pass a judgment by these following observations: First the Remonstrants were
Submonuit Praeses, ut poti^s quoestionibus illis inhaererent, quae circ^ suavem
de electione doctrinam versarentur, quam ut odiose doctrinam de Reprobatione
exagitarent. Act. Synod. Dord. part. 1. Sess. 32. p. 12^.
submonished by the President of the Synod (who must be remembered to be
Bogerman) not to exagitate the p^int of Reprobation, but rather to insist on
the pleasant Doctrine of election; thereby discovering, where his shoes did
most pinch him. Secondly, the Remonstrants repeating that submonition, affirm
it to have been, that they should rather meddle with Election, than with the A.
R. D. Praeside moniti sumus, ut a negativis abstineremus, and de Electione
potius, quam odiosa Reprobationis materia ageremus. Ib. Sess. 34. p. 133.
odious matter of Reprobation. And had they added the word odious, or put it i^
stead of odiose, they had been certainly reprehended by them that had them in
subjection. Thirdly, from the beginning to the ending of that affair, the Synod
would not endure to Ibid. a Sess. 32. usque ad Sess. 65.
hear what the Remonstrants could object against the Calvinists Doctrins of
Reprobation, but commanded them to answer to all such Questions, as Mr.
Bogerman should please to ask them. Fourthly, there were Ibid. Sess. 132. pa.
1. p. 277.
some in the Synod of more moderate dispositions, and fearing God, who did
plead for a Rejection of such expressions, as appeared to make God the Author
of sin; which is a Token of their dislike, although they could not prevail
against the Number of their Opponents; nor indeed is it a wonder, when such men
as Ibid. Sess. 128. p. 276.
Triglandius must have the composing of their Canons. Fifthly, when they find
such expressions in the Correp. Corr. p. 57. Twis. vin. Gra. l. ^. p. 1 crim.
3. Sect. 1. p. 52.
Dominicans writings, or the Correp. Corr. p. 57. Twis. vin. Gra. l. ^. p. 1.
crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 52.
Jesuits, they are forward enough to fling a stone at them, although they
cannot look inward, and see themselves; sure he that spies a Mote in his
Adversaries Eye, commends not the Beam that is in his own. If Ocham and Gabriel
are confessed by Medina to have said that God is the Cause of sin, and that in
the rigor, or propriety of speech Correp. Corr. p. 57. Twis. vin. Gra. l. 2.
p. 1 crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 52.
Mr. B. will tell us, that we shall not find that expression in any Calvinist
of Note; as if the men in my larger Catalogue had been obscure, if it is added
by the Dominicans, that God determins the will of the Creature to every act of
sin it self, loco jam citat^.
Dr. Twisse will say that the Calvinists have not discovered their judgment in
terms so plain, as if peccatum qua peccatum, and adultery in particular, had
been concealments of their opinion. Sixthly, Let them say what it is to be the
Author of sin, and how many ways an Agent is said to be an Author, and by how
many expressions it may be spoken, or made out, and I will parallel it all from
some or other of their writers.

4. If there were any possibility of excusing the words and expressions of my
Assailant's Party, why should he make it his last refuge to judge of their
words by their Intentions, when all that are Mortals have thought it fitter, to
judge of men's Intentions by the signification of their words? God alone, (we
all grant) is the searcher of the heart and the infallible discerner of men's
Intentions. Yet as my Correptory Correptor did make it his ordinary practice;
to confute my heart, and report my thoughts, and quarrel with my Intentions,
when he found my words were true, and candid, and so cross to his ends, as not
to be liable in the least to his exceptions; so here my Reverend Antagonist on
the contrary extreme (which is indeed much the better) will needs be sure that
his Brethren intended no more than Austin before them did say. And again, that
they intended no more than by multitudes of places of Scripture they were led
unto. Suppose it were possible, that he being but a man should know their
Intentions however different from their words, yet he cannot but remember, that
I accused their words, not their Intentions. And I judged of their words by
what they signified, not by what they did conceal. If we may judge of their
Intentions by such Interpreters as Maccovius, Piscator, Zuinglius, Peter
Martyr, and the like, and if such men may be allowed to judge of intentions by
words, (such as I have mentioned Chap. 4. 6. and 7.) then I have made it
appear, that I have hit their intentions too.

5. But let us look a little more nearly into his words [sure we are, -- that
protestant Divines have intended no more than Austin before them did say, etc.)
1. Protestant Divines is very equiuocally spoken. For those that are of the
Remonstrant's opinions are known to be Protestants as well as others, of whom
notwithstanding he will not aver, that they intend no more than Austin said. 2.
The Papists, (as he confesses of Baronius, and must confess of many more)
dislike receding from S. Austin, as much as any of their kinsmen, the
Prebyterians; which proves the notreceding from Austin to be not the least
character of a Protestant Divine. 3. Has Austin any where said what I cited
out of those men? If my Opponent will produce either the same expressions or
others equal to them, then will He (not I) be the accuser of S. Austin. But as
he has not done it, so I have reasons to believe he is not able. 4. Suppose
there had been such profaneness in any part of Austins writings, this would
only have inferred he was not then Saint Austin. Nor would falsehood have been
the better for having proceeded out of his mouth. He that shall say the child
is damned that is not baptized before he dies, or that has not received the
other Sacrament of Eucharist, may say he means no more than Austin said, but
yet he must be taught to mend his meaning and his words too. The truth 'ont is,
Austin was not only a Learned, but a well-natur'd man; and desired nothing
more, than that he might not be followed in any one of his Infirmities. [For
neither ought I to deny (they are Neque ^nim negare deb^o sicut in ipsis
moribus, it^ multa csse in tam multis opusculis meis, quae possint justo
judicio. and nulla temeritate culpari. Aug. l. 4. de Anima and ejus origin, ad
Vincent. Vict.
Austins own words) that there are many things, as in my very manners, so in my
works also, which may not only without rashness, but very justly and
judiciously be blamed.] Thus we see that Father had more humility than his
Admirers, and took a care not to be able to authorize their Errors. Nor will I
here conceal the public confession of Haec quoque non gravatim agnosco, si
quando iterum recudantur nostra opera, -- in quibus ^ffensionis periculum
veremur, moderari etiam and mitiga^e, etc. Calvin de lib. arb. con^ra Pighium.
Mr. Calvin, because confession is one step to Repentance, and to be thought to
have repented is the greatest Honor in the world. His confession was this,
[That of at any time his works should be reprinted. he would moderate and
mitigate those things, wherein he feared the danger of scandal, or offense.]
Indeed these words do help to wipe off the stains, which his unwary Admirers
are wont to fasten upon his Name; whilst instead of contending that he was
sorry for his failings, and intended to publish his Recantation, they endeavor
to justify what he condemned; and so the Calvinists in effect do write the
most against Calvin. So vast a difference there is, betwixt them that are but
the Followers of that Learned man, and us who are his real Friends. Who do not
follow him where he erred, through thick and thin, but just as far as he
followed Truth, and as far as, we hope, he did intend his Retractations.

6. Whereas my Assailant is pleased to add, that they intended no more than by
multitudes of places of Scripture they were led unto, (referring by figures to
many Texts, but in words at length not naming One,) I have several things in
answer to him. First who told him, that they intended no more? or that places
of Scripture did lead them to the speaking of what they speak? 2. What Errors
or Heresies have there been within Christendom, which have not pretended the
very same thing, that multitudes of Scripture did lead them to their
assertions? 3. Why did he not compare one of the frightfullest speeches which I
accused with any one Text of Scripture by him producible? 4. Let him name for
the future one place of Scripture, whereby Zuinglius was led to say, [That God
makes a man Transgressor, that Adultery or Murder is the work of God the
Author, Mover, and Impeller.] what places of Scripture led Smoutius, Vermilius,
Beza, Triglondius, Musculus, Sturmius Piscator, Borrhaeus (not to mention the
Doctrines of Mr. Calvin, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Hobs, and a multitude the like,) to
say that Note that the several Quotations of these are already premised chapter 4.
Sect. 3.
God is the Author of evil, whether of punishment or of sin? that wicked men
sin by the force of Gods will? that God effects those things that are sins?
that his Reprobation is the cause of incurable despair? that both the Elect and
the Reprobates were ordained to sin Quatenns Sin: that he is the cause, not
only of the actions but of the very defects and privations? that is, of the
obliquities, irregularities, and sinfulnesses themselves? Thus we see who they
are whose Doctrines of irrespective and unconditional Reprobation (not places
of Scripture) have led them to charge God with sinful actions, sins,
sinfulness, metaphysically abstracted, beyond which no language, no tongue can
speak; above which no fancy, no wit can reach 5. Though the wonder already is
very great, yet will it still be much greater, if we compare one of the Texts
by which they are said to be led to their Intentions of speaking thus. The
first Text he refers to is, Genesis 45. 5, 6, 7, 8. from which place it is
evident, that God is affirmed by Joseph to be the Author of much good, which
his guilty Brethren never thought of, but not at all of the evil which they
thought against him. And it will seem to me somewhat more than strange, if Dr.
Reynolds cannot distinguish betwixt God's Note here the Confession of Peter
Vermilius himself, that almost all the Fathers, and particularly Austin (which
is more than almost all) do interpret Tradere ad peccandum by sinere,
permittere deserere. Pet. Merl. in Romans 1. p. 78, 79, 80.
permitting or suffering evil to fall out by the wills of wicked men, which are
free to evil, and by which they are said (not to be unavoidably, fatally, or
necessarily wicked, but) to be voluntarily, and wilfully wicked, I say it is
somewhat more than strange, if he cannot distinguish betwixt Gods permitting
that evil, that he might draw good out of it, and his being the Author or Cause
of that Evil* upon occasion of which the good is wrought. Before he had
resolved to give an instance from that Text, he should have compared it with
what went before chap. 37. where because Jacob loved Joseph more than all his
Brethren, (v. 4.) and therefore made him a finer Coat (v. 3. they hated Joseph,
and could not speak peaceably unto him (v. 4.) but they did not hate him by the
Impulse of God (as Mr. Calvin) at first spoke) nor did God urge them or smite
their minds (as Dr. Twisse.) For the Devil, and their own Flesh, (one or both)
did entice, and tempt, though they could not force them to hate their Brother.
Well, Joseph dreamed a Dream, which was also a Prophecy, that his Brethrens
sheaves should make obeisance to his: (v. 6, 7.) which dream was from God, and
accordingly both good, and true. But his brethren hated him the more (v. 8.)
which greater hatred was from the Flesh, and the Devil. Joseph, kind to his
brethren, as well as obedient to his Father, went to seek out his brethren from
the vale of Hebron to Sichem, and thence to Dothan (v. 14, 17.) This was from
God. But before he came to them, they conspired against him to slay him (v.
18.) This from the flesh, and the Devil. Reuben said, let us not kill him, shed
no blood, and would fain have rid him out of their hands to deliver him again
unto his Father (v. 21, 22.) This was from God, the wise and holy disposer, of
all that happens, to his Glory. But they plundered Joseph of his Coat, and sold
his Body to the Ishmalites, for 20. pieces of silver (v. 23, 28.) This was
merely from the flesh and the Devil, being not hindered, but permitted by the
long-suffering God to execute their wills against his own. And this he suffered
the rather, that he might order and dispose their wicked Fact of cruelty to
their innocent Brother (which was also their Rebellion against the commandment
and will of their patient God) to many great and good ends, which never could
enter into their thoughts. For by the wise, and holy providence of God, (whose
excellency it is to draw good out of evil, not evil out of Good) Joseph was
sold by the Midianites into Egypt (v. 36.) and advanced in Potiphar's House.
(c. 39. 5.) and by his Interpreting of Dreams (which was a gift from God and
not from Satan) he was so advanced from one degree to another, that he was made
a Father to King Pharaoh, Lord of his House, and Ruler over his land (chapter 45.
8.) This was Gods doing, but no sin sure for injured Joseph to be advanced.
There was a Famine in all lands, over the face of the Earth, (chapter 41. 54, 56.)
But that was no sin, Joseph's brethren went up to Egypt for a supply (c. 42. and
43.) still no sin. Joseph supplyeth them (c. 45.) which was charitably done,
and so without sin. What said Joseph of Gods economy, to comfort his brethren
when they wept aloud, and were troubled at his presence? (v. 2, 3.) He said no
worse things of God, than that he sent him before to preserve Genesis 45. 5
life, (and that I hope is no sin) to Verse. 7.
preserve his brethren a posterity in the Earth, and to save their lives by a
great deliverance, who had delivered him up to be destroyed with vassalage. Nor
was it his si^ to requite them, with so much love, for their hatred, with so
much good, for their Evil. Joseph goes on, [it verse 8.
was not you that sent me hither, but God.] For they sent him no whither, but
sold him to arrant strangers for nothing but money, and sweet Revenge; neither
knowing, nor caring, nor at all considering, what the Buyers would do with him;
nay, they had killed him outright, but that Judah put them in mind, there was
chapter 37. 26:
no profit in his blood, but the sole pleasure of Revenge; whereas if they sold
him, there was revenge, and profit too, and so it is plain, they did not send
him into Egypt. But God did work such a kindness within the hearts of them that
bought him, as brought Joseph into Egypt; I mean not only that place, but pitch
of Dignity: so that what God did, was transcendently good; good and wise to
admiration, tending to his Glory, and all men's good; to good temporal, and
spiritual; to all of that age, and all of this; more particularly to the good
of Joseph, and his Brethren; crowning the former with successes in exchange for
his afflictions, as well as leading the latter to a sight and sense of their
sins.

7. I have already said more than was due, or needful, by way of vindication
of that passage of Scripture from being apt to lead any into such horrible
affirmations, as it was brought to authorize by my Assailant. But I have done
it the rather, that the common Reader, by this one, may partly judge of all the
rest, which he will find to be Instances of sinful men, whom God by his wise
and righteous judgment delivered up to the wickedness of their own Inventions;
that is, he did not restrain them having refused and resisted the sufficient
workings of his grace, but left them graceless to themselves as desperate
patients, because they had Prove. 1. 29, 32.
hated, and despised the means of health and Reformation. To this, and that
which I have spoken in my The divine Philan. chapter 1. Sect. 5. p. 23. 24, 25. and
chapter 4. from p. 37. to the end.
Account of Mr. Barlee, and to that which I shall speak in my following
Section, I refer my Assailant for an answer to those Texts, to which he does
nakedly refer the Reader, withal I add this promise, that if he will descend to
every Text in particular, setting down the words, (and not the figures only,
which not one Reader of Ten thousand will take the pains to examine) and
arguing from the rational Importance of them, as much to his advantage as he is
able, I will return him a full, and (God giving health) a speedy account of his
Endeavors.

8. In the mean time it is observable, how very willing and careful my Rd.
Adversary was, to decline the Question which was in hand, and to lead the
thoughts of his Readers to another thing. Else why should he allege so many
Texts of Scripture (not in words, but in figures) which were so wholly
impertinent to the subject matter of my charge? I had charged some men (whose
words I produced without their names) as guilty of charging God with all the
sins of the Reprobates, for the effecting of his Decree of irrespective
Reprobation. Wherein were comprehended (and by those Authors expressed) not
only subsequent sins, to which the wicked are given up by God's Desertion, and
are Peccata subsequentia sunt praecedentium Poenoe. Lomb.
called the punishments of other antecedent provoking sins, but also the very
first sins, which were committed by Adam even in Paradise, and by Lucifer even
in Heaven. Now the Texts which are referred to by my Assailant, in excuse of
those Blasphemies which I accused, do only show the punishment of sin with sin,
they being spoken of such sinners, and of such subsequent sins, as those
sinners were permitted to fail into, by the just judgment of God upon them,
whom they had provoked to forsake them, and leave them to themselves, in
revenge of their having forsaken him first, and rebelled against him by their
former wickedness. So that as his first Text was no less than against his
purpose, the rest which follow are quite besides it. And that no poor soul may
be betrayed, by the false application of all those Scriptures, to think
reverently of his sins, and irreverently of his God, I will denudate the
falsness of it by these following steps.

First, when God is said to harden men's hearts, to deliver them up to a
reprobate mind, to send them strong Delusions that they shall believe a lie,
and the like, it is infinitely Augustine. ad Simpl. l. 5 c. 2.
far from being meant of an efficacious Impulse in God Almighty. God never
hardens any man's heart, as the Sun hardens clay by shining on it, but as the
Sun hardens wax by not shining on it; by not softning it any longer, and so
leaving it to harden it self. And that all those verbs, [to harden, to blind,
to deliver up, to send delusions, to deceive, and the like,] are by an ordinary
Hebraism only permissive in signification, though active in sound, is placed
without all controversy. First, by the verdict of all the Pet. Mart. Virmil.
Florent. in Epist. ad Romans 1. edit. Basil. 1570.
Fathers both of the Eastern and Western Church. Secondly, by the Pet. Mart.
Virmil. Florent. in Epist. ad Romans 1. edit. Basil. 1570.
confession of the chief Calvinists themselves, that is the judgment of the
Fathers. Thirdly, by Indurare nihil aliud est quam nolle emollire; excaecare,
non illuminare; repellere, non vocare. August. in lib. de praedest. and Gra.
cap. 4.
Austins judgment in particular, whom our Adversaries prefer before all the
rest. Fourthly, by the Adversaries Pet Mart loco praedicto. Habet (inquit) hanc
interpretationem sinendi, and permittendi, Augustinus:
confession, that that is Austins own way of Interpreting such Texts. Fifthly,
by the peremptory assertion of Melancthon, Melancthon in loc. com. de Causa
pecc. p. 49.
from whom my Adversaries cannot comfortably recede. Sixthly, by the grant of
Dieu est dit ramener du Sepulcher, quand il impesched'y descendre; y mener,
quand il y laisse tomber, facon de parler commune a^ Psalmiste, and aux
Prophets, etc. Philippes de Mornay Seig du Plessis Marli. en medit. sur le
ver. 4. du chapter 16. des Proverbes.
Du-Plessis, that in the usual style of the Scripture, he who does not restrain
when he can, is said to give up; he who does not take away when he can, is said
to give; and He who does not give, is said in that case to take away. God is
said to raise out of the Grave, when he only hinders from going thither; and to
lead a man thither, when he only suffers him to fall, or does not hinder him
from falling. The same Seigneur du Plessis does farther exemplify his Doctrine,
not only by that petition, lead us not into temptation, of which the meaning he
says is this, Do not suffer us to be vanquished by the Temptations of the
World and of the Devil; but by that common Idiotisme of the French tongue,
which is as common also in the English. Vous me donnerezla vie, c'esta dire,
vous ne la m'osterez point; you shall give me my life, that is to say, you
shall not take it from me. So when Jos. 2. 13.
Rahab did capitulate with the Spies of Jericho, that when they took the City,
they should save her life, or permit her to live, the French Translation does
read, vous me vivifierez, ye shall make me to live. Now if this figure of
speech is admitted to be a figure, where if it were not admitted, it would not
be of much moment, how dares any man exclude it from those passages of
Scripture, where to exclude it, is to blaspheme? And if the learned Du Plessis
does acknowledge that figure, who is of irrefragable Authority with many
Followers of Mr. Calvin, why should any man deny it, at the hazard of making
God to be the Author of sin? But seventhly, this matter is farther evident, and
that by the preachings of Bishop Andrews, from whom his Adversaries in this
case, will hardly publicly dissent; because they are loath to have it visible
to common Readers, that he he was frighted out of Calvinism (which first
bespake him) by the horrible Conclusions to which it led, upon those words of
our Savior in the Imperative mood, Destroy this Temple, meaning the Temple of
his Body, that Holy man has these words. Bp. Andrews. Sermon 10. of the
Resur. upon Joh. 2. 19. p. 486, 487.
That it should enter into any man's heart, to think, that Christ would open
his mouth to command or to counsel his own making away, (that is, the
committing the most horrible foul murder that ever was) God forbid, give me
any Religion rather than that, that draws God, into the Society of sin; makes
him, and makes Christ, either Author, or Adviser, Commander, or Counselor, of
ought that is Evil. Any (I say) rather than that. First, how then? if no
command, what is it? all that can be made of it (say the ancient Fathers) is,
but either a prediction (in the style of the Prophets) come down Babel, Isa.
47. 1.
that is, Babel shall be brought down; so solvite, ye shall destroy; to vvarn
them, what he savv they were now casting about, and vvhither their malice
would carry them in the end. even to be the Destroyers and Murderers of the
son of God. Act. 7. 52.
Secondly, either this; or (at most) but a Permission, which in all Tongues is
ever made in this mood (in the Imperative,) so we use to say, go to, do and ye
will; or do what ye will with my body, when we mean but sufferance, and no
command at all. This solvite was to them, as Fac cito to Judas after; Quod
facis, that which thou art resolved to do, and have taken earnest upon it, John
13. 17.
fac, do it; fac cito do it out of the way; which yet (it is well known) was
nothing but a permission, and not a jot more. 3. But should so foul an evil, as
that, be permitted though? No, nor that neither, simply; it is not a bare
permission, but one qualified; and that with two limitations, will ye mark
them? For first, he would not suffer any evil at all, (least of all that) but
that out of the evil he was able (able and willing both) to draw a far greater
good. Greater for good (I say) than, that was, for evil. And that was
solutionem peccati ex solutione Templi. ^2. But neither was this enough yet:
Neither would he for all this, have at any hand let it go down, but that with
all he meant to have it up again presently. -- The world with us, has seen a
solvite, without any Excitabo, Down with this, but nothing raised in the stead.
But this is none of His. Solvite, without excitabo, is none of Christ's. -- With
these two limitations, under these two conditions; one of a greater good by it;
the other, of another as good or better, in lieu of it; may solvite be said
permissive: and otherwise not, by any warrant from Christ, or from his Example.
8. This figurative use of the Imperative mood, which is also fitly called the
permissive mood, may be demonstrated by such Scriptures, as cannot be otherwise
understood, though not one of those Authors by me alleged had declared their
judgments on this occasion. God said unto Satan concerning that Job. 1. 1. 8.
perfect and upright man, verse. 12.
All that he has is in thy power, and chapter 2 ver. 6.
behold he is in thine hand. Our blessed Savior said unto the Devils, Mat. 8.
32.
Go, but he commanded them not to go away into the herd of swine, only gave
them permission, for which they verse 31.
petitioned, and yet he said [goe] in the Imperative mood. But the Devils also
petitioned him in the Imperative mood, when they said, verse 31.
suffer us to go, who yet cannot be thought to have commanded him whom they
petitioned, and whom they verse. 29.
acknowledged the Son of God, who had an ability to Torment them. And the (...)
in the concession must bear proportion to the (...) in the Petition. For
Petitioners they were in that they verse. 31.
besought him however they besought him in the Imperative mood. In the Case of
Job, Satan entreated God in the Imperative mood, Job 1. 11. and chapter 2. v. 5.
Put forth thy hand, and Touch all that he has. Who yet cannot be thought to
have commanded his Master, because his Master cannot be thought to have obeyed
him. For when God said, behold, he is in thine hand, he clearly spoke of a
permission: where by the way it is observable, (and may it be usefully
observed by them, who take a delight to do mischief, and seek to justify
their Cruelties by God's permitting them to do what they desire, and possibly
pray that they may do it) that when we beg of God, (as Satan did) that we
may prosper in doing wickedly to any man in the world, as Satan to Job) and
when God shall grant our petition (as he did Satan's) by permitting us to do,
or not-hindring us from doing all the evil which we desire, we must
conclude that God's grant of such petitions is only an Argument of his wrath,
(as it was to Satan, Job 1. 11, 12. Mat. 8. 31, 32.) and not at all of his
kindness, or approbation. Isreal's 1 Sa. 12. 17.
wickedness was great in asking a King (as Samuel told them,) yet God gave them
their own asking, and God himself Hos. 13. 11.
tells us, that He gave in his anger the thing they asked. Having a King, they
would have none, and God took him away; but the same Text tells us that he did
it in his Ibid.
wrath. 'Tvvas ill to live with a King, in one Case; but 'tvvas worse in an
other, to live without him. Now from these 8 things which I have spoken, and
especially from the last, it does appear to all without Dispute, That when
God said to the lying spirit, Go, and prevail, 1 King. 22. 22, 23. (which is
one of the chief instances alleged by my Assailant) he said no more than our
Savior said to the Devils Matthew. 8. 32. which amounted to no more than a
permitting them to do, what they would choose to do, if they were not
hindered. God said go, that is, he gave him leave or sufferance, which he
expressed in the Imperative mood, in which mood also petitions may be
expressed, (as has been showed) which are as opposite to commands as we can
wish them.

But to this my Assailant may object his other chief Instance 2 Samuel 16. 10,
11. where David says of cursing Shimei, Let him alone, for the Lord has
bidden him, which though urged by Mr. Barlee, and sufficiently answered by me
The Divine Philan Defen. chapter 4. Sect. 35. p. 47, 48, 49.
already, yet I will add in this place, to what I said in that other; For we
who are fishers of men, must strive to catch them to the Truth, by several
Baits. Thus then I reason within my self; (1) What God does command us we ought
to do, and not to do it, is (...) or breach of Law. Thence it was not the
mercy, but sin of Saul, to save the life of wicked Agag. Whom if he had killed,
it had not been murder, but obedience. Nor had it been parricide, but
sacrifice, if Abraham had slain Isaac with his hand, as he had done already in
the obedient purpose of his Heart; which that Friend of God purposed, not by
Cruelty, but Faith. Heb 11. 7. Hereupon it follows (2) that if God had bidden
Shimei to curse David in that literal sense wherein we commonly use the word,
Shimei (like Nathan 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. etc.) had done his Duty. Nay, he had been
a Rebel against God, if he had not done like a Rebel against David. He had
cursed his Sovereign, as Balaam's Ass reproved his Rider, and had been every
whit as innocent, if God had literally bid him, it being as great a Truth in
Ecclesiasticus, as if it had been in Ecclesiastes, Eccl. 15. 12.
that God has commanded no man to do wickedly. Here then I ask, did Shimei
sin, or did he not; If he did sin, God did not literally command him, but
permit him only. If he did not sin, nothing is gotten by my Assailant, in case
he had been commanded. But granting Shimei to have sinned, (as indeed he did)
and by consequence to have acted, not according to Gods command, but
point blank against it, (for every sin qua tale, is the transgression of some
precept, 1 John 3. 4.) one of these two things must inevitably follow; either
that David was in an Error, when he hastily said, [The Lord has bidden him,]
and was betrayed into that error by making reflection upon his sins, especially
his being a man of blood (as Shimei called him very truly, verse 7, and 8:) or
else, that David meant no more, than that God permitted him: if the first is
granted, then the error of David's judgment (which was very fallible) does put
an end to the objection; if the second is granted, (but not the first,) than
God was only signified, not to hinder, but to permit that sin of cursing, and
so it cease to have the force of an objection; nor is it any the least
excuse, much less yet a justification, of those horrible things which I accused
in my p. 9. and 10.
Notes; for there it is said by those Writers, whom my Reverend Assailant does
do his utmost to excuse, that God does (not only permit, but also) command, yea
compel. His bare permission of sin is called a fiction, and against it, is set
up his will, and Decree, and that Decree is called efficacious, and that will,
transient into the sinful act; nor only his transient will, and efficacious
decree, but his Impulse also, and that in particular to Adultery and Murder, of
which God is also there said to be the Author. And to vindicate the purity of
the Almighty from such aspersions, which are perversely laid upon him by the
literal exposition of some Texts which are figuratively expressed by the sacred
Penmen. I have, and shall eternally, put the people in mind, to understand
such Scriptures according to the figure, which they find to be contrary to the
plainest Tenor of other Scriptures, and as contrary to the nature of a good and
holy God, so far forth as they are taken according to the letter. For as when
St. Paul says, the weakness of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. Yea, and the foolishness of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 25. He does and must mean according to the figure, because the
literal meaning is both false and Blasphemous; so when God is Jer. 4. 10.
said to have deceived the people or the like, it is and must be meant
according to the figure, that he has suffered, or permitted, or left them to
themselves, and to their temptations to be deceived. And as it is a less sin,
to say that Saint Paul was a weak and a foolish speaker, then that God is
capable either of weakness or foolishness; so is it also a lesser sin, to say,
that Jeremiah was a deceitful prophet, than that God is a Deceiver. which as
it prompts me to conjecture what kind of principles they are, by which so many
are made Atheists, and Scoffers at the Scriptures, so it puts me in mind of
what was said by King James at A. D. 16. 18.
Falkland, [that taking all things to the strait Tenor of the written letter,
is the matter of jar betwixt Puritans, and us.] To do it in many other cases,
(as in that alleged out of St. ^ Cor. 1: 18, 25.
Paul) is unpardonable sottishness, but to take such places according to the
letter, which are literally opposite to the purity of God, I want a word
whereby to express how ill it is, for I must ever say with the Stupendous
Bishop Andrews, Bishop Andrews in the place before cited.
Give me any Religion, (any Expositor, any Exposition,) rather than that, that
draws Ged into the Society of sin; making him either the Author, or Adviser,
Commander, or Counselor of ought that is evil, I say any, rather than That. I
have said much more, than I intended, to show the ill use that has been made
of that congeries of Scriptures, referred to by my Assailant in his defense of
his party, and having been thus long in my first general step, I will truly
endeavor to be the shorter in my second.

Secondly, though all should be granted which my Assailant can desire, touching
the Texts by him alleged, (which God forbid I should grant) yet they would not
be able to come home to the purpose, (as I said before) because Pharaoh, and
the rest who are said to be hardened by God, Elies sons, they who did not like
to retain God in their hearts, they who regarded not the love of the truth that
they might be saved, Absolon, Judas, and the like, are no where said in the
Scripture to have been predestined to those sins which were antecedent to their
being hardened; their not hearing the voice of the Father, their being given up
to a reprobate mind, and to strong delusions, and to all those sins which they
were permitted to commit by the just judgment of God for their former
wickedness, wheren he is not, he cannot, he must not be said to have any
efficiency, or Approbation. But the writers, whose writings were accused by me
of Blasphemy, do teach, that God did fore ordain, and fore-determin, all the
sins in the World, all things, and events, without exception; and that he did
not foresee them any otherwise, than because before ordained them. Mr. Calvin
is less unwary than others are, and yet the same Mr. Calvin who says in
Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect: 6. p. 324. sub finem.
one place, that all things happen by Gods ordination, will and Decree, and not
only by his foresight; also says in an Idem ib. Sect. 7. p. 325.
another, that God did therefore foresee them, because by his Decree he had so
ordained them; nay, he says in the same place where he said the former, (and
that with commendations bestowed on Valla, for having said it as well as he,)
that God id ib. Sect. 6. p. 324.
foreseeth things future by no other means, or reason, or way, than because he
decreed that they should be so done. And to assure us that he places the
Decree of God before the foresight, he puts the foresight in the Non alia
ratione quae futura sunt praevideat, nisi quia ita ut fierent decrevit
Present tense with the Decree in the Preterperfect; and again the foresight
in the Ideo praesciverit, quia decreto suo sic ordinarat.
Preterperfect tense with the Decree in the Preterpluperfect. As if he thought
that Gods Decree were before his prescience or foresight even in order of
time, and that the portions of that Creature could have place in Eternity: if
he did not think so, he might have satisfied himself with a [non alia ratione,
quam] and not have added an [ideo, quia, therefore, because] in the very next
Section. But let his ablest Followers construe his words, how they will, or
can, they must grant his Doctrine to be this,
That whatsoever comes to pass which God foresaw from all Eternity, he did also
decree from all Eternity; But it was also his Doctrine, that God foresaw from
Eternity all the sins in the world without exception; therefore it was his
Doctrine, that God did also decree all the sins in the world withot Exception.
Nor can they possibly pretend, that all sins are the punishments of former
sins, because then they would incur one of these absurdities either that no
sins are the first, or that there are sins before the first, and so that the
first are the second, and the antecedent the consequent, which would imply an
unexcusable contradiction. They are avowedly of this judgment that there is a
necessity of all events, and that God does necessitate the very first obliquity
of his creatures, and for that very first does also damn them, as appears by
what they say of the Damnation of Infants, which though sufficient of it self,
to show the false application of the 38. Texts; yet is it not all I am to say
of my Assailant's misfortune in that Attempt. For,

Thirdly, If those places by him alleged were not figupatively spoken, (that
is) according to the Hebraisme already mentioned, but did intentionally import
Gods efficiency of sin in any kind or any thing else which imports him to will
it only, then would they be so contradictory to all the other places of
Scripture wherein no figure can be pretended that we should find it impossible
to reconcile them. For when God in Habak: 1. 13. Psalm. 5. 4 and 81, 13. Psalm.
45. 7. Iam. 1. 13, 14 Eccles. 7: 29. Dan* 9. 7. Eccles. 15. 12, 13. Job 34. 13.
Ezekiel. 18. 29. Isa. 5. 3, 4. Acts 17. 30. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Heb. 7. 26.
Scripture expresses his hatred of sin in the highest terms of Detestation,
and forbids it by a Law, and provides against it by Threats, as well as by many
other means, and clears himself from all aspersions which Carnal Fancies have
imagined to his dishonor; his words are so plain, and their literal importance
is so rational, that every man as he is man, does as naturally believe it, as
he naturally believes there is a God. And such as have learned to disbelieve
it, have not learned that lesson, as they are men, but they have learned it so
far only as they have learned to be inhuman. And I appeal to all the world,
whether, when two places of Scripture do seem to clash, and contradict, we are
not obliged to interpret the hard, by the easy, the euivocal by the nnivocal;
the harsh, by the agreeable; and that which according to the letter has
materiam odiosam, by that, which according to the letter has materiam
favorabilem.

It follows from all which I have said, that those 38. Texts are nothing at all
to the purpose, for which they were alleged by my Assailant, for they amount
at the most to no more than this, that God does Fatente D. D Hen. Altingio, in
Synod. Dord. sess 69. p. 237.
punish men's sins by not restraining them from sinning farther; which is
expressed in Scripture by giving up, or hardening, or some other word, which
(according to the Hebraism so often mentioned) is active only in sound, but
permissive in signification. For when God is said to punish sin with sin, it is
meant negative. As for example, Ezekiel. 24. 13.
because God had purged Israel, and Israel was not purged, therefore he would
not purge them from their filthiness any more; that is, he would permit them to
be filthy still; he would not cleanse them against their wills; and so we see
it is explained by God himself, what is meant by his punishing of sin with sin.
He that Rev. 22. 11.
will be filthy, and is resolved on'c, and rejects the means of his
purification, is left by God or given Romans 1. 26. 28,
up, or given Romans 1. 26. 28,
over to be filthy still; so that the writers whom I charged with making God
the Author or cause of sin, were not led into those mischiefs by multitudes of
Texts of holy Scripture, (as my Assailant has very dogmatically, but very
groundlesly pretended, (but rather they led those Texts of Scripture which way
they pleased to serve their Turns. The word of God has been ever used as a
Lesbian Rule, by all sorts of Heretics, who have been first preengaged [(...)]
to be humble servants to their opinion. And when the Scripture is led by them
(or rather dragged and tortured) to the maintaining of those Errors which they
espouse, they pretend to say no more than what they are led unto by Scripture.
And some of the people are so shallow, so credulous, so unexercised in
reasonings or so unwilling to take the pains to consider, and examine what they
are taught, as to swallow so dangerous and so thick a Fallacy. But so far is
the Scripture from leading any, to say, that God is the Author or Cause of sin,
(as some,) much less the Necessitator, and Compellor to it, (as others,) that
it even compels us (if we are sober) to say the contrary. There are indeed some
Isa. 63. 17: Ezekiel. 20. 25, 26. Ezekiel. 24. 21. Job 2. 3. 2 Samuel 12. 11.
figurative expressions which carnal men have profanely ler. 7. 9,. 10. Et
ejusdem farinae alii, atque alii.
used; but the figure in those expressions is so visible a figure, that they
who cannot endure to see it are fain to wink very hard. There being nothing in
Scripture so plain as this, that as the Mat. 2. 22. which compare with Acts 9.
34. and that again with Acts 14. 9.
woman's faith is said to have made her whole, not because it did heal her but
because without it she had not been healed; so God is said to have done many
things, not because he did, or could do them, but because without him they had
not been done, for nothing can be, or be done, with his Acts 14. 16.
sufferance.

CHAP. VIII.
E. R.
For my part I thus J^dge, That if men would heartily carry this Controversy
to its Native and proper Issue, it would amount to this. 1. Whether the Graces
of Faith, Perseverance, and the glory following, be not God's own? 2 Whether
being so, he may not do what he will with his own? 3. If so, whether he might
not, ab aeterno, absolutely purpose in himself, on whom to bestow them, from
whom to withold them, without any Injury unto any?

T. P.
1. NOW Reader observe, how he displayes his strength. He consideringly begins
to handle the matter of main Debate. Some weighty thing may here be looked for
from one whose Parts and Abilities are so acknowledgedly great. He now
undertakes to state the Question and that by amassing together some
Propositions, which are not at all to the Question in hand, and which being
granted will not do him the least good office; for it would never be thence
conclusible, that I have erred in any one period, or that the Correptory
Correptor has justly charged any the least error on me. He does but grant what
I would have him, That Faith as well as Perseverance are God's own free Graces,
not imputable to us before he gives them, (and when he has so given them he
calls them ours.) He is farther of my Judgment, that God might purpose ab
aeterno without Injury to any, on whom to bestow, and from whom to withold
them. But here it is to be observed, that his two or three Propositions (for we
may call them either) which he premiseth as the ground of his state, do clearly
belong to nothing else but to the giving or withholding of Grace and Glory, not
at all to the Decreeing eternal Torments without the consideration of their
Transgressions on whom those Torments are presupposed to be decreed. And this
he knows was the Question he should have stated, as that to which my Notes did
more especially belong, and which alone had been pertinent to his Paragraph
going before. But let us see how he proceeds.

E. R.
4. Whether it imply a Contradiction, for God by his power so to determine the
will of the Creature, hic and nunc ad unum, as that it shall retain its own
Nature, and yet shall not de facto, fully and victoriously resist Divine Grace,
but shall Let the Reader compare this with his following Section, which shall
be the Theme of my fifth Section of this 8th. chap. for there he speaks of Gods
omnipotency in determining the will, and from thence we m^st fetch his true
meaning in this place.
invincibly and most certainly, as to God's Let the Reader compare this with
his following Section, which shall be the Theme of my fifth Section of this
8th. chap. for there he speaks of Gods omnipotency in determining the will, and
from thence we m^st fetch his true meaning in this place.
Determination, and yet most sweetly and willingly, as to its own manner of
working, make choice of that Good, in the choice whereof, it is demonstratively
convinced, that its felicity does stand?

T. P.
2. FIRST it is not our Question, what may be without a Contradiction, butwhat
is. Many millions of things may be, which are not; and particularly in this
very case, many things I might do, and yet retain my own Nature, which yet I do
not. And if I, much more may God. But what Logic is it to argue, a potentia ad
Actum? or what would be thought of that Disputant, who should prove that God
does commonly make New Suns, and many times create new worlds, because it
implies not a contradiction for God to do it? This is a visible unhappiness,
that from the ability to do, unto the Act of doing, should be the utmost force
of this Argument. But 2. Here is the Fallacy called ^plurium Interrogationum,
for one Question is, whether it imply a contradiction for God by his Note
Reader, that by Power, in this place, he means omnipotent, controuling,
necessitating power, as he explains himself in his next Section; where he ranks
and Illustrates God's working man's will to conversion, with his saying in the
creation, omnipotently, Let there be light, and there was light. Whereas had he
spoken of such a power as depriveth the will of its Servitude, without
depriving it of its Liberty, and by consequence of its Nature, we had been then
at agreement. But as it is, I am forced to show his Failing.
power to determin^ the will of the Creature hic and nunc ad unum, and yet it
still retain its own Nature? A Second is, whether it imply a contradiction, for
God so to determine it ad unum, as that it shall not de facto fully and
victoriously resist Divine Grace? A Third is, whether it imply a contradiction,
for God so to determine, as that it shall invincibly and most certainly, as to
Gods determination, make choice of that Good, in the choice of which it is
demonstratively convinced that its felicity does consist. These are three
distinct Questions not to be stated the same way. And if any, yet at least the
two last are not the Questions that are controverted betwixt me, and my
Adversary, in case my Adversary is Christian, and if he is not a Christian, let
him but say the word, and I will dispute with him upon it. But having severed
his 3 Questions which he fallaciously conjoined, (as if they were all three
equal in respect of what he demanded) I shall speak to each of them, how little
soever I am concerned. And since his fashion is to ask, I will prepare for my
Answer to his first Question, by a^king him also this other Question; whither
Liberty of will be of the Nature of the Creature, that is* of man here in via*
If it be said that it is not, I oppose two things; first man's state before the
Fall, of whom it is acknowledged by my Adversaries themselves* that He then had
a Liberty to stand or fall. But fall he did, who had [a posse non peccare]
sufficient Grace to have Natura, cum potestatem habue^ it non delinquendi
sponte deliquit; and deceptori suo propria volu^tate se subdidit. Augustine. ad
Artic. falso sibi Impos. 5. p. 864. He does not say, that men by nature but
that nature had a power of abstaining from sin, which had I said, as Austin
did, I had been called a Pelagian.
not fallen. And of him in his Innocence I demand, as of a Creature; Could God
by his power determine him hic and nunc ad unum, and yet he retain his own
Nature, and Liberty? could God absolutely decree his eating the fruit that was
forbidden, and yet he retain his Liberty not to eat? what would this be, but to
determine, and not determine? and what are they, but the two parts of a
Contradiction? But here I suppose my Assailant will say, that he is least of
all concerned to differ from me, because he is not a Supralapsarian. And
therefore in the second place I oppose Man after his Fall; of whom whatever is
apprehended of his Liberty to Good, it is universally granted that he has
free will to evil, unless when God does determine him to the contrary. But
(excepting that one Case) He has a free will to evil, even then when God gives
him to will and to do, and when by Christ he does free him from the slavery of
sin. For my Assailant will not say, that man is so much advanced upon this
Earth above the first state of Adam, as to have arrived to [a non posse
peccare] an Impeccability, or inability of sinning. Upon which it follows, that
the posse peccare, or ability to sin, is of the Nature of Man as Man. And
therefore, for God by his power to determine him hic and nunc ad Hoc, scilicet
ad non peccandum, what is it but contradictory (in that very particular of his
being so determined) to the retaining of his Nature? for when he is determined
hic and nunc, to a not ssnning, then hic and n^nc, he cannot sin; because if he
can, he is not determined, else where were the difference betwixt being
determined and undetermined? but if he cannot sin, so far, as he is determined
by God not to sin; and if by Nature he can sin, (which is as undeniable) then
to be determined by God's power, and yet to retain his humane Nature (as to the
liberty of his will) must needs imply a contradiction. Now that the most
unlearned Reader may not fail to comprehend, how the project of my Assailant
is plucked up by the Root by what I have spoken unto his first Question, I
will desire him to consider, before I go any farther, That I have not
disparaged, but vindicated and cleared the Almightiness of God, from an
implicit Calumny which must of necessity be cast upon him, when his
Almightiness ^s extended to the doing of those Things which do imply a
Contradiction. The Infinity of his power is seen and celebrated in this, that
he can do all things which are not evil, or unworthy, or unbeseeming his
Godhead. He who out of Nothing created All, can again (if he please) turn all
to Nothing. But he cannot so make things out of nothing, as that they shall be
nothing still. Nor can he so turn his Creatures into nothing, as that they
shall retain their own Nature of Creatures. He cannot so deprive his Creatures
of any thing, that they as shall keep and retain the things of which they are
deprived; it being impossible, (as implying a Contradiction) to have what we
have not, even whilst we have it not. It was of the Nature of that Fire in
Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, to scorch and burn, and God by his omnipotence did
determine that Fire [illic and tunc ad hoc unum] not to burn the three
Children. But will Doctor Reynolds say, that the Fire at that instant and in
that Case, did retain its own Nature? and that it had the power to burn them,
even whilst it had not the power to burn them? these are the opposite parts of
a Contradiction, which God cannot verify, because he is of necessity what he
is, true, and Almighty; which he could not be, if he could verify
Contradictions. But the most immediate Reason, does seem to be this, why God
cannot verify Contradictions; even because they have not a passive power of
being verified. For the affirming of the one is the denial of the other. And
they cannot be both true, because they should not be contradictions, if the
truth of the one did not make the other false. But this is a thing, which all
the world, I suppose, does unanimously grant. So that as often as we say, God
cannot do that which does imply a Contradiction, we do say in effect, He cannot
cease to be God; He cannot do evil; He cannot do that, which is therefore
impossible, because unworthy for him to do. He can draw good out of evil by
dispesing of evil to good ends, but he cannot so make evil good as that the
evil shall still retain its own Nature. He can destroy his Creature either in
part, or in the whole, much more can he alter or change his Creature, but not
so as that it shall remain unaltered under that alteration. God can determine
the will of man hic and nunc ad unum, and so deprive the will of that part of
its Nature, but not so as that the will shall continue undeprived, or retain
its Nature, of which it is deprived, even whilst it is deprived of it. When God
determines a Man to one thing, it is certain he cannot do another, for if he
can, he can resist, not Gods will only, but his Power. And then to say he
retains that very part of his corrrupt Nature, his being able to sin, whilst he
is determined by God's power to a disability of sinning, what does it but imply
a contradiction? I could be heartily sorry to find my Opponent in this method,
of raising and supporting the whole Fabric of his Errors, upon that which is
not only the greatest Falsehood, but the greatest Impossibility in all the
world, but that by giving me opportunity (as well as provocation) to treat with
him hereupon, and to show him the Fallacy or Quick-sand on which he builds, I
make no doubt but he has opened a speedy way to his being undeceived; And that
he will resolve, upon a review of his first Question, That when God gives
sufficient, yea and effectual Grace, both to will and to do any thing that is
good, he does not always by his power (which is not resistible) determine his
Creature ad hoc unum, but permits him to retain so much of his own Nature, as
the liberty of sinning, of resisting, or of grieving his Spirit comes to,
(which Scripture, and Reason, and daily experience does make apparent.) And
that when he does otherwise, either in some one act here in via, or else in all
acts in statu comprehensorum, by confining and determining the will ad hoc
unum, he takes away that Liberty or power to sin, which was Natural to the Will
before its said determination.

. 3. This being said thus largely in Answer to his first Question, does put his
second out of all possible dispute. For it being once supposed and taken for
granted by the Adversary, that God by his power does determine the will ad hoc;
the Creature shall not have the least liberty to resist, because the Creature
is not stronger than God. But withal it is as certain, that though God does
only efficaciously move the will by his Grace, (without interposing his
irresistible power, by which he determins the will ad hoc,) yet there are some
who, de facto, do not victeriously resist; and therefore grace irresistible,
where ^fficacious and congruous will serve the turn, is not only a groundless,
but a needless Invention. And if he uses the word [victoriously] as if he
thought it a disparagement for the Grace of God to be so resisted, St. Paul
will tell him of a quenching, as well as a grieving, and resisting the Spirit
of God. Saints Ever^-Rest. part 3. Sect. 15. c. 2. p. 36, 37.
Mr. Baxter also will tell him (whom he will own as a Brother) that the
Reprobates in Hell had the means of escaping their going thither. And that they
had not been there, but that they forsook God, and took pains to be damned,
resisted Grace, * conquered the Spirit, did * overcome the * Power of Mercies,
Judgment, the Word it self, did silence Consci^nce, seek diligently for their
own Perdition, and would not suffer themselves to be saved. He farther adds,
that even they who are in Hell had Heaven purchased for them, but they rather
made choice to buy the Flames of Hell so dearly, then to have Heaven on free
cost. Thus we see, there are some Presbyterians, who are sufficiently convinced
of such opinions and Doctrins, which by other Presbyterians are called Arminian.

. 4. His third Question, like his second, is without all Question, and that
which no Man can be concerned in, for it being supposed (as by him it is) that
the will of the Creature is determined hic and nunc ad unum; it will presently
follow that it is not undetermined; which is the upshot of my Assailants
in^erence. And it is as certain, as well as more to the purpose, and better
sense, that God is able by his grace, without interposing his determining
power, to work in the Creature a will to good [faciendo ex nole nte volentem]
and when the Creature is confirmedly willing, he will then most certainly, in
respect of that change which is now wrought in him, and yet most willingly, as
to its own manner of working, make choice of that good, etc. So that no kind of
strength is in this part of his process, what was before matter of Question,
remains so still, viz. whither in every Man's conversion God does determine his
will ad hoc, so as the Man shall not possibly be able to resist it, and what
never was questioned, being granted, is the refuting of a Chimera, or the
industrious doing of nothing. But what means the addition of these words to the
former. [In the choice whereof, it is demonstratively convinced, that its
felicity does stand?] First, we know it is an assent of Faith, and not of
knowledge, that our felicity does stand in the choice of good; and
Demonstration is scientifical, produces knowledge, and assurance; but absolute
knowledge and assurance are those perfections of the Saints, by which their
Faith and their Hope are done 1 Cor. 13. 8. 9, 10, 12. ^ Cor. 3. 18.
away. Scientia and Fides non possunt esse de eodem secundum idem. That of
which the Saints in Heaven are much too perfect to have a Faith, is that of
which the Saints on Earth are too imperfect to have a knowledge. Secondly,
False Felicities many times are so far preferred before the true, that he who
is strongly persuaded, and believes without doubting, that eternal felicity
does ^^nsist in due obedience to the Law of Christ, as directly leading to the
joys of Heaven, does yet frequently pursue his false Felioities on earth, and
Video meliora proboque. Deteri^ra seq^or. --
Medea-like, does follow the things which he disalloweth. How else comes it to
pass, that Men will preach against stealing, whilst they themselves commit
Sacrilege? or commend the suffering and receiving of wrong, Romans 2. 21, 22.
whilst they 1 Cor. 6. 8.
do wrong and defraud, and that their Brethren? Now upon all this it follows,
that nothing is gotten by my Assailant toward his proof of the Certainty and
Invincibleness of making that choice, from the Man's being convinced that his
felicity consists in it. I might here examine, what he means by the word
[Invincibly] and exagitate his use of the word [choise] whilst he is speaking
of a will which he supposes to be determined hi^ and nunc ad unum. But I will
not insist upon each Infirmity which I espy. It is enough that I observe them,
and can then speak of them at large, when he shall attempt me by his Reply.
Having observed the laying of his Grounds, I will now consider what he is
pleased to lay on them.

E. R.
If this imply not a contradiction, (as I believe it will be difficult for him
to prove, who shall undertake it, for why may not God determine the will, as
easily as the will can determine it self?) then sure I am, that that Compare
these words of Dr. Reynolds with what he said in his Section going before,
which was the Theme of my second Section of this Chapter*
Omnipotency which could say, let there be light, and there was light, can say,
let there be a will unto conversion, and there shall be such a will; That
Omnipotency w^h could give a Creature a Being out of nothing, can by an
Invincible persuasion or traction (the radical indifferency of the will
remaining still the same) suspend the actual praevalent reluctance thereof, and
work it determinately unto such an action, as is rationally most convenient and
'behoofeful for a rational Appetite, as the will is, viz. to choose its own
Blessedness: for that is it which every Convert in his effectual vocation, by
the power of Grace really does.

T. P.
. 5. IN this short passage there are two of his strong Arguments. One in the
Parenthesis, and another out of it, I will hasten to try the force of both.
First he says in the Parenthesis, that 'twill be difficult to prove that that
Implies a contradiction which was the subject of his first Question. To which I
answer three things. 1. That which is but difficult may yet be done; and
therefore it does not advantage, but rather prejudice his Cause, for seeming
difficult to him, unless he could have made it seem more then difficult to me
also. I fear not that which my Assailants call difficult, so long as I am not
to encounter with Impossibilities. For if they are difficult indeed, it is but
studying the harder to overcome them, and if they be but called Difficult, (as
certainly this is) they are then too weak for any elaborate Resistance. But 2.
What is difficult to one Man, is many times easy to another, and though I am
but a Mr. Whitfields observation before the Correp. Correction.
Novitius in these controversies, (as old Mr. Whitfield did very valiantly call
me* when he gave an example to Mr. Barlee in what kind of Logic he was to
deal) yet I have proved that to be easy, which is here believed to be
difficult. For thirdly, I have showed, (and I hope with perspicuity,) that to
be determined by Gods power ad bonum hoc, does imply and infer a disability to
sin, in respect of this good to which the will is determined; and this does
grossly contradict the wills retaining [in hoc] that liberity of Nature, which
does confessedly consist in its ability to sin; and cannot possibly be denied
in this state of Imperfection, unless it be by the Ranters, who corrupt
themselves with the opinion that there is equal Necessity of all Events, as
equally issuing from Gods absolute Decree. My Assailant speaks of Gods
Omnipotency, which could and did say, let there be light, etc. to show what he
means by Gods power determining the will, which is in effect by making it no
will, and then to call it a will is a contradiction. But for this I refer to
what I have spoken so much at large in my second Section of this Chapter. I
proceed to the reason which he alleges [why may not God determine the will, as
well as the will determine it self?] to which I answer that he may when he
pleases; but what of that? Does it follow that he does, because he can? God
may, if he will, create more worlds; and I will ask my Assailant [why may he
not?] But I will not argue from thence, that he therefore does, because he may;
yet let it be granted that he does too (as well in earth sometimes, as in
Heaven always,) that will be found to be gratis dictum, and will not bring the
least advantage unto my Adversaries pretensions. For the Question is not,
whether or no he may, or does, but whether when he does determine the will hic
and nunc; to this one good, he does leave it in that act unto the liberty of
its own Nature, that is, hic and nunc free to evil. This (I call him to
witness) is the very Question to be resumed, if he desires not to pass over ab
Hypothesi ad Thesin, and of this he speaks not a word. But this is the point to
which our Attentions are to be held, whilst I give his Question in the
Parenthesis (or his second Argument proposed by way of Question) a full and
satisfactory Answer. For first it is evident, that man's determining his own
will is very reconcilable with the retaining of its Nature; for it is an act of
his liberty to choose the object of his option, and by actually choosing to
determine his will, which as soon as he has chosen, then as to that which he
has chosen he is not free; for freedom supposes him yet to choose; and when
he has determined his will ad hoc, he cannot in sensu composito, not have
determined it, although in sensu diviso he could have not done it, before 'twas
done. Thus we see in reason how Man may do it, and in every-dayes experience we
find how he does. But (secondly) when God determins him by his power,
irresistibly ad hoc, that is no more reconcilable with the leaving of him free
or undetermined, then the Man's having actually determined himself is
reconcilable with the leaving himself free. He can no more do otherwise when
Gods power has determined him, then he can have chosen otherwise when he has
actually determined his will ad hoc. Behold this, Reader, in one example, or
Illu^tration. A weak Man by his choice may move himself from one place to
another; and a stronger Man than he is, may by his power do the same. He that
moves himself by choice does not impeach his own liberty, because he choos^th
to do it freely. But if the other Man move him by his greater strength and
power to do it, he is so far forth the strong Man's Prisoner, and so receives
some impeachment to his liberty, though he may possibly be pleased with his
confinement, as being tied up in Golden bands. This I say not to argue, but to
illustrate my former meaning, that the slowest Reader may apprehend it with
greater ease, and expedition. Again, A Man determining himself to any one of
two competitors, is thereby cleared to be free to choose the one, and refuse
the other; and till he has chosen one, does not determine that freedom, which
by actual choosing (we know) he does. But when God by his power does determine
the will of Man to this or that very object, there is no resisting that power,
and so no freedom to the Contrary. So far is the will from retaining any
imaginable indifferency, as to that very Case of which we speak, though my
Assailant is so Note, That Dr. Reyn. does acknowledge the radical indifferency
of the will, its being a rational appetite; and its making choice of Good. And
all his party do grant free will. Yet in his printed Sermon on Psalm 122^6, 7,
8, 9 p. 31. He says, that those Doctrines which affirm free will have a secret
aspect and Tendency to Rome.
forgetful as to drop such words.

. 6. Having showed thus far, that this implies a contradiction, which he says
does not, and withal uncovered his reason why, it is not needful to examine
what he is pleased to conclude, upon his Hopes that it implies not a
contradiction. I may well be allowed not to value the conclusion, when I have
so largely disproved the premises. And yet, to show what the Importance of a
strong argument is, he concludes no more from what* I have disproved, than that
when all comes to all he is fain to subscribe to my Opinion; viz. [That God may
by the power of his Grace, suspend the actual praevalent reluctance of the
will, and work it determinately to such an action, as is rationally most
behoofeful for the will.] This is the opinion of all the world who do believe
there is a God, and that he is Almighty, and may do what he will. This was my
affirmation in my return to the third of his plures Interrogationes. Nor was it
ever a Question betwixt any two Men, much less was it ours [whither God may by
his power do what he pleases?] So that here is plainly Ignoratio Ele^chi once
more committed. I say therefore again, That God may by his power (if he please)
determine any man's Will unto Conversion, so as ^e^sl all not only infallibly*
but also of necessity and irres^stibly be converted But the Question is,
whether what he can do he always does, whenever he gives suff^cient grace;
and whether multitudes of men do not res^st that Grace, which was on God's part
sufficiently and sincerely by him intended for their convers^on. Here I
professedly maintain that man has a power to resist that Grace, which was
sufficient in it self, and designed by God to work upon him for conversion. But
in this ^ desire that none will purposely mistake me; for in saying what I have
said, I do not either explicitly or implici^ely deny, that God may (if he
will) interpose his power, and actually and infallibly, and irresistibly
convert him. Yet I find no Ground or Cause of thinking, that God ever did, or
ever will thus convert any one single Person; and therefore I must not only
think it, but proclaim it most unsafe and most unchristian to teach men to
depend upon this work of his absolute power, and thereupon let slip those
blessed and gracious opportunities which by the grace of God may be embraced
and made use of, and may c^st us dear, if they are not. ^or as God may do what
he will with his own, and therefore give, when he will, irresistible Grace, or
Grace (not irresistibly but yet) infallibly converting, and whenever he does
so, no man has reason to complain of his superlative mercy; so it must also be
granted by my Assailant, that God may also, if he will, proceed no farther with
his Creature, then to give them sufficient Grace, to every man a Talent to
negotiate with, and to him more Talents who uses that Talent as he ought, and
from him who uses it not, or costs it away, or refuses to receive it, or most
unprofitably lays it up in a Napkin, God may justly take away his Talent of
Grace which he has given, or withhold what he had offered and was refused; my
very Adversaries must grant, that thus God may most justly do, and not
interpose his irresistible power to determine the will of man, to make use of
his Grace, or to convert him infallibly without those steps. So that if matters
in dispute were to be carried by several May-Bees, I have gained what is
sufficient by my opponents endeavors to make me loose.

7. But I have very much more then a naked May-Be in the behalf of my Cause,
although my Assailant has no more for his, (nor does so much as pretend to any
more then a may be.) And He himself in time will clearly see it, if he will
duly consider the famous Matthew. 25.
Parable of the Talents wherein this matter is clearly handled, as well as the
Ninth to the Romans, where it is not clear, and where the context does
manifest, that the Apostle there speaks of another thing. Verse. 15. 16, 17. 18.
19. 29.
Talents are there given to every man according to his several Ability (Mat.
25. 15. some improved their Talents, (v. 16, 17.) But an idle servant hid his
Talent in the Earth, (v. 18.) They were all called to a reckoning (v. 19.) And
the conclusion is express, that unto every one that has, (that is, makes use
of the Talent of Grace, which was freely given him to trade withal, which
cannot belong unto the acts of Gods power determining the will hic and nunc ad
unum) to him more shall be given, and He shall have abundance: but from him who
does not thus husband his Talent, shall be taken away even that which he has.
He shall no longer have what he abuses (v. 29.) From which way of
dispensation, we learn what is, not only may be, nay what certainly must be
when God has absolutely decreed that so it shall be; not only what might be
(abstracted from God's Decree of the contrary) without implying a
contradiction. There are several Courses and oeconomies which to God are all
possible; but here our Savior does teach us, which of all those courses God is
pleased to choose in his proceedings and dealings with us. All that my
Adversary alleges amounts only to this, that it is barely possible, or that
it implies not a contradiction, for God's power to interpose in the conversion
of a sinner (meaning his absolutes determining, irresistible power,) but
hitherto he pretends not that thus it is, that God has bound himself to this
constant method, or indeed that he ever uses it at all. Whereas I have showed
on the other side, both that the other method is possible. and, farther, that
God is pleased to use it; and has chosen to make it a principal part of the
message, for which his Son was sent unto the world, even to publish that
method, that men might know it, comply with it, depend upon it, and not deceive
and destroy themselves by giddily fancying any other. And for this I have
produced a very evident passage of Scripture, and shall produce many more as
occasion serves. I will not run out into greater length by insisting on his
acknowledgment of a natural indifferency in the will of man (for which I had
Correptory Correption though I never spoke of it.) Nor will I prosecute his use
of the word Invincible, by asking whether he means irresistible, or not, of
which Act. Synod. Dord. part* 1. Sess. 98. p. 236. and Sess. 99. p. 256.
Paraeus did seem to be ashamed, in those papers which he sent unto the Synod
at Dort, when he was threescore and ten years old. I will only leave one thing
to my opponents consideration, to be compared by him with the present manner of
his reasoning. God may give us the ability to fast, without eating, as many
days and nights, as Moses, or Elias. He may also, if he is pleased, make our
victuals to increase in the very eating, by such a power as he showed in the
Widow's Cruse (1 King. 17. 14, 16.) He may feed us and cloth us, like the
Birds and the Lillies, by the same omnipotency by which he said, Let there be
light and there was light. He may convert us, as he did Paul, with equal power
and expedition; or as the Thief upon the Cross when we have only time left to
cry peccavi, to think a good thought, and to make a short Ejaculation, (though
that either of these two was irresistibly converted, we have no reason to
imagine) For God to do those greater things does not imply a contradiction, and
therefore he may do them by that omnipotency, which could give the Creature a
Being out of Nothing. but what of this? We cannot prove from hence, that these
are the Courses which God does ordinarily use, or that he uses them once in a
thousand years; and if we should thus argue, we should but teach men to tempt
their Maker, and to ruin themselves by their Security. It will be much more
profitable to admonish the Reader in this place (I speak of the unlearned and
unconsidering Reader) of the several ways of Gods working with his several
Creatures in proportion to the Natures which he has given them. He works one
way with Natural Agents, (as we proverbially call the irrational Creatures) but
with voluntary Agents he uses another way of working. We have an example of
the former in that necessitating Omnipotence, whereby he said unto the Sun,
stand still in Gibeon; we have examples of the later, in those compassionate
wishings revealed to us in his word, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep all
my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their
Children for ever! Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end! These, and all other ways, whereby God works upon the wills
of Men, are such as are congruous and agreeable to the nature of a will, or
rational Appetite; as by enlightening the Understanding, and by persuading the
will, and by inclining the affections, by strengthening the hopes, and the
fears of the voluntary Agent, by the proposing of promises, and denouncing of
Threats, by Exhortations, and Dehortations, and all other such means as are
congruous to the nature of rational Creatures; and for that very reason they
cannot be irresistible, like those other operations whereby God does
necessitate his natural Agents. The whole may easily be discerned by all that
shall read and consider, Ier. 5. 22. 23. Where God Jer. 5. 22.
complains of his Israel for not fearing Him; and for not trembling at his
presence, who had placed the sand for the Bound of the Sea by a perpetual
decree that it cannot pass it. To which absolute will of the Omnipotent, the
Sea is obedient of necessity; but his People (said God) has a Verse 23.
revolting and a rebellious heart, they are revolted and gone. Which passage of
Scripture does plainly teach us, that the consideration of that power which God
had showed in his ruling the Sea, was sufficient to move his People Israel to
fear and tremble at his presence; but it teaches us also as plainly, that it
is not the same way of working by which he rules the Sea, and by which he
rules the wills of Men. He rules the Sea as the Sea, but Men as Men, and the
wills of Men as the wills of Men. It was therefore a strong Adventure in my
Reverend Assailant, to infer and argue from Gods Omnipotency, that he does
those things which are incongruous both to the Nature of his Creature, and to
the rules of his working, which it pleased his Wisdom to set himself. And
having said thus much by way of admonition to the more unskilful, unwary
Reader: I now proceed from the fourth Question of my Assailant (which
consisting fallaciously of three, has occasioned this length,) unto the fifth
general Question by him proposed.

CHAP. IX.
E. R.
Whether the Lord has not been pleased so to reveal in the Scripture the
doctrine of his Decrees touching his purpose, of glorifying himself in a way of
mercy and justice, as that there shall be an (...) for the Creature to stop at
and to adore, that he will not have his councels fathomable by the shallow line
of humane reason, but when he does with his Creature as the Potter with his
Clay, of the same common and equal Lump, choose one part unto honor, and leave
another unto dishonor, his purpose be not, that we should acknowledge and
adore his Sovereignty, and lay our hands on our mouth, as amazed at the
unsearchablenes of his Judgments? now certainly in all this there is no
blasphemy. God does permit sin, and what ever he does, he does by the council
of his own will, therefore he did ab aeterno decree to permit it. For otherwise
he could by co^firming grace have hindered and prevented the committing of it,
as well in all Angels, as in some; as well in Adam, as in Angels, and that
without any violence offered to their nature at all. Genesis 20. 5. Genesis 31. 7. 1
Cor. 10. 13. Neither can there be given any Cause out of God himself, and the
Council of his own will, leading and inducing him rather to permit then hinder
it. He did decree to permit it in order to his own Glory, which is the supreme
end, and therefore by him absolutely willed, because the being thereof by his
unsearchable wisdom and power was ordainable thereunto, He may out of that
common and equal Mass, wherein he did decree to permit it, decree in some in
whom he did permit it, to pardon it, and on them to show free mercy, in others
to punish it, and in them to show due and deserved justice; the one having
nothing to boast of, because the Grace which saves them, was God's, the other
nothing to complain of, because the sin which ruins them is their own. He may
by his huge discrimination of persons, who were in their lump and mass equal,
and in themselves indiscriminated, show the absolute sovereignty which he has
over them, as the Potter over his clay. He may by his most sweet, and yet most
powerful efficacy, work the graces of faith, repentance, new obedience and
persevera^ce in the wills and hearts of those, on whom he will show mercy,
giving them efficaciously both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, and
leave others to their own Pride, and stubbornness, his Grace being his own to
do what he will withal. And I say once again, in all this there is neither
modest nor immodest blasphemy.

T. P.
1. TO what he says in the beginning of this long Question concrning God's
Councels being secret and unfathomable, I have these things to return him.
First, That the (...) which is once mentioned Romans 11. 33. does not belong to
this matter of election of persons absolute, or conditional; but to the depth
of God's goodness, in patiently bearing the contumacy, both of the Gentiles,
and of the Jews; to the depth of his wisdom, in making the desertion of the
Jews a means of calling in the Gentiles; to the depth of his knowledge, which
found a way to work upon the obstinate Jews, by those Jews very Envy and
Emulation toward the Gentiles, etc. He would have found that these things had
been alluded to in the Text, had he compared it with the Context, or consulted
the Paraphrase of the most Reverend Doctor Hammond; whose Volume of Annotations
if he does not admire and profit by, it is only because he does not read them.
Besides, it is to be wondered, how he could be so unmindful of the words
immediately going before, [God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all, v. 32.] and In consideration of that rich mercy, the
Apostle cries out [O the Depth, etc. v. 33.] So that the purpose is very
different for which the (...) is used by S. Paul, and Dr. Reynolds. S. Paul
alleging, that God may have mercy upon all, and D. Reynolds the contrary, that
God may not have mercy upon upon all. But 2. If the (...) in the Apostle did
belong to that business for which he brings it, why does he himself search into
those very mysteries, which he confesses to be insearchable? God's secret
purposes were not secret, much less insearchable; if a Mortal (such as my
Assailant) could find it out^ If I may not affirm that Gods decrees are
conditional, and respective of (...) being either in Christ by Faith, or out of
Christ by infidelity; then my Assailant may not affirm that Gods Decrees are
unconditional, and without respect of men's being, or not being in Christ. For
if insearchable to me, it is insearchable to him, and if revealed in the
Scriptures, it is not revealed to him alone. Nay, thirdly, rather less, then
more, to the men of his Dr. Twisse Vind. Grae. l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 10. c. 1.
Sect. 12 p. 140.
party, who deny the Scriptures to be the revealed will of God, and say it is
but called the will of God, and that improperly too, whereby they virtually
confess, (...) nothing of the will of God; but only what men Dr. Twisse Vind.
Grae. l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 10. c. 1. Sect. 12 p. 140.
ought or ought not to do, which they so distinguish from the signification of
Gods will, as to say, that what men ought to do is often contrary to the will
of God; and what they ought not to do is many times according to Gods own will.
This is such strange dogmatizng, that the Reader will be in danger to think I
charge them falsely, if I do not carefully refer him to what I The Divine Phil.
Defend. chapter 4. p. 57, 58. 59. compared with the Correct Copy of Notes p. 10.
have cited and proved against the Correptory Correptor. If my Reverend
Assailant will endeavor to disclaim or disprove what I have urged, I am able,
and ready, to make good my Accusation; but I have really a better opinion of
him, then to believe he will vindicate those ugly Doctrines. Fourthly, what
ever is secret in the point of Election, wherein God may do what he will with
his own, yet he has clearly revealed himself in his word, as to the point of
Reprobation or damnation or preterition (as they call it.) As for Reprobation
or damnation, he has sufficiently revealed, that he will never deal with man
by rules of mere sovereignty, but of righteousness and Justice; such as man
himself is permitted to judge of, and is Isa. 5 3, 4. Jer. 2. 5, 11, 12, 13,
14, etc. Isa. 43. 26. Mich. 6. 1, 2, 3. Ezekiel. 18. 23, 29, 30. Genesis 18. 23, 25
appealed to by God, whether or no it is not thus Then for the later, viz.
Preterition, God has revealed himself as plainly, that the Son shall Ezekiel. 18.
not die for the iniquity of the Father; and that with the precious blood of
Christ, he has 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 2 John 1. 2. Romans 5. 15. to 21.
bought every one who was lost in Adam. And not to insist in this place on the
universality of Christ's death with his sincere Intentions of extending the
benefit of it to all who were included in Adams Loyn^, which does utterly
overthrow the dream of absolute preterition, I refer to what I have spoken in
(...)( f) defense of Gods Philanthropie. Chap. 1. 2. p. 4, ^, 6 besides the
other places pointed out in the Chap. 1 Sect: 5. p. 21, 22, 23. and chapter 3:
Sect. 23. p. 85. to p 97. and chapter 4. Sect. 26. p. 28, 26.
Margin. That which is added by my Assailant concerning the Potter and his
clay, does prove nothing in the world, but that he misunderstands the ninth
Chapter to the Romans; for the better interpreting of which I refer him to
Castle lio and to Grotius, and more especially to Dr. Hammond his Annotati^ns.
Or if either of those three takes him not off from the ordinary Presbyterian
mistake, I shall be ready to deal with him when he shall think that fit to be
the Apple of Contention.

2. What he says of Gods permitting sin, and his decreeing to permit it is
only siding with my Doctrine, and saying the same which I said Correct Copy of
Notes. chapter 1. Sect. 12. p. 15, 19.
before him; and so against me, neither strong nor weak^ argument can be
deducible from thence; but against himself and his party in two respects for
first his party are wont to say, that God does tempt men unto sin (as Mr.
Barlee) that he makes men Transgressors, (as Zuinglius that men do sin by Gods
Impulse (as Mr. Calvin) that the will of God does pass into the sin which is
permitted as Dr. Twisse,) that God ordains men to sin quatenus sin (as
Maccovius and Smoutius;) that he is the Cause of sin (as Piscator) the Author
of sin (as Borrhaeus,) and six hundred things of this kind which I will not
weary my Reader with. All which though my Assailant has done his endeavor to
excuse in the former part of his Preface, yet here he tacitly condemns them
all, and very orthodoxly casts Anchor at Gods permission. Secondly, whilst he
proves that God decreed ab aeterno to permit it, from his actual permitting it
in time, he justifies me, and condemns the Correptory Correptor as well as Mr.
Whitfield, in as high a manner as can be wished; for when I argued in my Notes
from the executions of Gods decrees, as from the very best Topic whereby to
demonstrate a posteriori the nature of the Decrees. of which they were the
executions, the Vetulus Novitius in these controversies (to use his own words)
being not able to distinguish betwixt my Topic, and my Argument, supposed that
I had not distinguished betwixt Gods Decree, and the execution of it, and
thence complained from the Press, that I had jumbled these both together; and
thereupon Mr. B. gave me his Correptorie Correption; as if I were to be
punished for their defects of Apprehension. But my Rd. Antagonist, who is
exceedingly above those two Adventurers, does here well argue from the
execution to the decree, Thus, [God does permit sin, and what ever he does, he
does by the Council of his own will, therefore he did ab aeterno decree to
permit it.] Now if this way of arguing is sound and rational, (as certainly it
is, and may be demonstrated to be) then my Reverend Antagonist must cease to be
my Antagonist, from this time forwards, upon his own ground. And this I hope to
evince by the following chain of propositions, whereof the one will be firmly
linked within the other.

1 What God has willed shall come to pass, shall come to pass as he has
willed it, and no otherwise than as he he has willed it, (for his will of the
circumstance is as truly His, as his will of the substance from whence it
fallows, That
2. What does come to pass absolutely (as the Creation of the world, the
mutability of man, the tending of heavy bodies downwards, and the like) he did
eternally will should come to pass absolutely, and what does come to pass
conditionally he did eternally will should conditionally come to pass. But all
men confess and God's word tells us that 3. Man's eternal Reward or punishment
does come to pass upon condition of his obedience, or by reason of his
Rebellion. Therefore
4. Man's eternal reward or punishment were eternally willed or decreed to come
to pass in the very same manner in which they do come to pass, to wit, on
condition or in respect of his obedience, or Rebellion.
If he will now assent to these propositions, we shall for ever shake hands;
but if he thinks there is a fallacy or falsehood in them, I am desirous to know
wherein: nay, I do humbly exact it as a deed of charity, that he will
communicate his discoveries, and s^ew where my Fallacies (if I have any) do lie
concealed. I thus explain my propositions, Go'ds decrees are adequate to their
events, and the effects of his decrees are exactly answerable to his decrees
(as Face answers Face when a man looks into a glass.) For whatsoever and
howsoever he decreed to do before time, that thing and in that manner he does
in time. Again, The Major is granted by n^y opponent, and confirmed from Ephesians.
1. 11.
whatsoever and howsoever he does in time, that thing and in that manner he
decreed to do before time; The minor is granted by all sides, and is confirmed
from all the Scriptures, as Romans 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
but God in time does cast men into Hell in regard of all their sins as well
actual as original. The conclusion is granted in the premises.
Therefore he did decree, before time, to cast men into Hell in regard of all
their sins as well actual as original These three last propositions are a plain
and perfect Categorical Syllogism. To which I hope I shall receive either a
generous Concession, or a perspicuous answer. And to preven all cavils which
may arise from the distinction of Reprobation positive, and negative, or
Preterition and Damnation, I think it fit to give notice, that in stead of
[cast into Hell] I might have said as well, and as truly, and as convincingly
to my purpose, [reject, or reprobate, or forsake,] for none will deny, that God
does reject, and leave men, and cast them off, for their personal Infidelities,
Apostacies, Rebellions, Murders, or whatever abominations they do actually
commit without repentance and change of life; and what he does do in time, he
decreed that he would do from all Eternity, which is just as much, as I desire
to have granted.

3. Should I now give strength to my Assailant's main Argument to which himself
has given None, by supposing or granting, that God might justly have
reprobated his Creatures merely as lying in Massa, or Adams Loins, by not
affording them an interest in the Death of Christ, without any respect to
actual sins, yet this would do him no more service then if it were not granted
him at all. Because when Christ is given for all that Mass, (as has been
proved in the first Section of this Chapter,) It is impossible that God should
frustrate and null the end of Christ's deaths by punishing any man eternally,
under this second covenant of grace, merely for the sin of Adam, without
incurring that punishment by his rejection of Christ, or by actually sinning
some other way. I have the charity to hope, that my Assailant retains not that
unreasonable opinion of God's casting into Hell those new born babes; whose
souls he will acknowledge to be much whiter than his own. And yet his opinion
of preterition, as an Act of mere sovereignty; and a respecting of persons,
(which God Romans 2. 11.
disclaims) does naturally lead to the opinion of the Damnation of Infants; so
as I wonder how any man can detest the one, and at the very same Instant
embrace the other. Now though God does disclaim that wicked proverb, of the
childrens teeth being set on edge, Ezekiel. 18. 2.
upon the Fathers eating sour Grapes, though God does Ezekiel. 33. 14.
swear that he wills not the death of a sinner, (much less of the babe which
never actually sinned) though he declares himself to have a 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet.
2. 9. etc.
willingness that all men should be saved, (who are as willing as he is and do
not stand in their own light,) though there is no ground in Scripture for such
an absolute preterition for which my adversary alleges his three remarkable
Maybees, yet I never did say that there is Blasphemy in them. The propositions
which I charged with so much guilt, were of a blacker complexion. Here then the
Reader may observe, a very strange Tergiversation in my Assailant; who wilfully
lies under the blemish of Ignoratio Elenchi, rather then he will manage his
undertaking. He undertook to prove it to be no blasphemy, to say that men do
sin by the Impulse of God,
that God does make men Transgressors, and that Adultery is the work of God the
Author, mover and Impeller, and the like: in stead of which he here says, that
God does permit sin, and may do what he will with his own gifts, and is
insearchable in his Councels, and the like: and when to these things he has
added three may be's, he concludes that in all this, there is no blasphemy. So
that here his Fancy is his opponent, and he only fights, as one that (...). 1
Cor 9. 26.
beats the Air. Yet there is one period in this paragraph, wherein if his
meaning is, as his words do seem to import, I am unwilling to say how ill it
is. His words are these [ He did decree to permit The particle [it] relates to
sin, and not possibly to any thing else.
it in order to his own glory, which is the supreme end, and therefore by him
absolutely willed, because the being Thereof by his unsearchable wisdom and
power was ordainable thereunto.] if these words are sense, and proper English,
without a parenthesis, or an hyperbaton, then the word [Thereof] must needs
relate to Sin, which was said truly to be permitted, and not to Gods glory;
because it is nonsense to say, That the Being of his glory is ordainable to his
glory. Again [thereof] relates to [absolute willed] as [because] to
[Therefore.] And if so, then [absolutely willed] relates to Sin. And if that is
his meaning, that when God decrees to permit sin, sin is absolutely willed by
God, because in order to his glory (as God forbid it should be his meaning)
then I say it is a Blasphemy against the nature and word of God. For he is
[Deus non volens Iniquitatem] a God that wills not Iniquity Psalm. 5. 4. And
when he decrees to permit sin, it is only ex hypothesi and in foresight that
men will voluntarily commit sin if they be not hindered by main force, or if the
liberty of their wills to sin be not taken away, by their being determined, and
confined* and necessitated to good. But because God decreed that man should be
a free Agent, and therein differ, from a Beast, and that he should not be
determined to good alone, in his state of mutability. and therein differ from
those in heaven who are in a state of confirmation, he did therein decree not
to hinder men from sinning by uncreating their natures; and not to hinder sin,
is to permit or suffer it. I hope my Adversaries meaning is better then his
expression of it, for it cannot be ordainable to God's gl^ry absolutely to will
the being of sin, although it may be ordainable to his glory to permit or
suffer the being of sin. But I hope he intended that the two middle clauses of
this period should only stand as a parenthesis, which is the only way of
reconcilement that I am able to imagine. Yet from hence there arises a great
Advantage to the Truth, however the Author of that period shall explain his
meaning. For if he avow's it as his opinion, that sin is absolutely willed by
God Almighty; He shall be forced to confess, that he himself makes God to be
the Author of sin; and if he disavowes it, he must forsake his present judgment
concerning absolute Decrees, as I and others have done before him.

CHAP. X.
E. R.
1. Gods glory is dearer to him than all the things in the world besides are,
or can be. 2. Every Attribute of God is infinitely and absolutely glorious, and
the glory of every one of them, infinitely dear unto him. 3. Whatever is
infinitely and absolutely glorious in God, he may by an absolute will and
purpose decree to show forth the glory thereof in his works, without fetching
an Antecedent reason ab extra, from without himself, leading and inducing him
to make such a Decree. 4. The subject on which God is absolutely pleased to
manifest the glory of his mercy and justice as to mankind, is Massa perdita. 5.
Out of this Mass of lost or lapsed mankind, he has ex mero beneplacito,
chosen some unto Glory and salvation, for the manifestation of his free and
undeserved mercy, and passed by others, leaving them under deserved wrath for
the manifestation of his justice, 6. That such and such particular persons out
of the same equally corrupted mass are chosen, and others are rejected,
belongs unto the deep and hidden counsel of God, whose judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, to whose sovereignty it
appertains to form out of the same Lump, one vessel unto Honor, and another
unto dishonor, to show mercy on whom he will show mercy, and to pass by whom
he will pass by. 7. God does so absolutely will and decree ab aeterno, the
manifestation of the glory of his Attributes, in his works, as that withal he
purposes that the temporary execution of those eternal and absolute Decrees
shall finally be in materia apta and disposita for such a manifestation. 8. All
those intermediate dispositions between the decree and the execution thereof,
whereby the subject is fitted for such manifestation of God's glory, if they be
gracious, they are by God's eternal will, decreed to be wrought, and
accordingly are in time effectually wrought by himself, and his grace, in and
with the will of the Creature. If they be evil and sinful, they are in his
eternal purpose permitted to be wrought, and are in time actually wrought by
the deficient and corrupt will of the Creature, and being so wrought, are
powerfully ordered by the wise and holy will of the Creator to his Glory.

T. P.
1. STILL I find it is worse and worse with him. For having got nothing at all
by his chain of Questions, he now tries what he can get by 8 propositions,
which are in effect the same stuff, but dressed up in another fashion of
Apparel, to see if the Reader will like it better in this Garb, His three
first propositions may very easily be granted by all the world, but yet his
Cause never the luck yer. The third and highest of the three being again but a
May-be, how can it do him any pleasure; whilst the contrary may-be, as well as
That? Himself will grant, that God may decree to fetch a reason [ab extra] from
without him, viz. from men's actual provocations, the sins most freely committed
by them, in the punishment of which he may glorify his justice, as well as by
passing them by in the Loins of Adam. I demand of him and all his party. Is it
not at least as just a thing, to decree the misery of the far greatest part of
mankind for those personal Impieties which they do wilfully commit, as for the
m^er sin of Adam, which was committed by Adam before his posterity had a Being,
much less a Will, and a Personality? Here then are at least two equal Maybe's
and I do him a favor, in supposing, my May-be no more then equal. But when we
say what may be, we do not prove what is. That can only be defined by the
revealed will of God, which tells us that Christ is the propitiation, not for
our sins only (who hope we are of the Elect) but for the sins of the 1 John 2.
2.
whole world, and so unavoidably for the whole massa corrupta, for all that
were lapsed or lost in Adam. So as no man can be damned for Adam's sin only,
without his own, but for adding his own to Adam's sin whereby he forfeiteth his
Interest in Christ. But my Assailants unhappiness in his third Question is not
yet at an end. For granting him his Doctrine of Man in Massa being the object
of God's Decree without any regard to his actual sins, we shall find him
disputing against Himself. For does not he by that doctrine, suppose God to
fetch a Reason of his Decrees ab extra, from without himself, whereby to
glorify his justice in the punishing of man? I say, was not Adam's sin, and
the corrupted mass in his Loins, every whit as extrinsecal to the Essence of
God, as the actual corruptions of Cain or Judas? how then does he dash one part
of his arguings against another? If my Assailant is willing that God's Decrees
of Predestination should have no motive from without himself, he must destroy
his fourth Thesis, and all that lean's on it; and in Reverence to his Third (if
he desires to have it any more then a may be) he must presently set up for a
Supralapsarian, and send a farewell to the Synod of Dort.

. 2. His fourth position does declare, that he is for the Sublapsarian way,
notwithstanding what he had said but 2 lines going before. And here he shows
his Inconsistence with the greatest Pillars of his own Party, in his stating
the object of Predestination, and affirming it to be Massa Perdita. For first,
herein he sets himself against Beza, and all his followers, who are for Massa
nondum condita. Next he disobligeth Franciscus Iunius, as able a Card as most
are in the Pack, who is for Massa condita nec dum corrupta, Thirdly, He is at
variance with honest Piscator (as Mr. B. calls him) who is for no less then a
Threefold Mass, 1 nondum condita, 2 condita duntaxat, 3 condita and corrupta.
Fourthly, he affronteth his own Dr. Twisse, whom he commended for his
Acquaintance with the mind of God, and who although he prefers Piscators
opinion before the rest, yet he condemns Piscators too; and sets up, in the
room, who-can-tell-what? Fifthly, He opposes the famous Moulin of Sedan, who
slits the Truth in the midst, and (as to this particular) has one foot in the
Consistory, but another in the Church. Touching the object of Election, he
holds indeed with the Calvinists; but touching the object of Reprobation, he
runs full speed with the R^monstrants. Sixthly, He differs from Mr. Calvin, as
Mr. Calvin differs from himself, who although in the general for Massa
Corrupta, yet he is sometimes also for nondum condita. Seventhly, he despises
his Reverend Friend Mr. Barlee, who professes to be a good friend to both the
upper and lower way, though Dr. Twisse has Twiss. vind. Gra. l. 1. par. 1.
Digr. 4. Sect. 4. c. 2. p. 84.
discovered a very great Gulf fixed betwixt the one, and the other; and says
that they of the lower way, whilst they try to escape the darts of their
Enemies, are compelled to fight under their Banner. Well therefore said Mr.
Barlee, that he is for both, that is, for neither, because indeed he is for
nothing unless for Correptory Correction. To satisfy my Reader for my being
thus long, I ought to be a little longer, that I may tell him the pretty Jest
of Dr. Twisse his arguing, against all his Friends and Admirers without
exception; and though he builds upon a Fallacy, yet his Friends are so far from
having seen where it lies, that they have swallowed it down as a postulatum;
and because they use it as a medium against the doctrine of the Remonstrants,
Dr. Twisse his argument against my Assailant's Opinion of Massa perdita etc.
and against the Correptory* Correptor, his Beloved Timothy.
Doctor Twisse has ruined their Cause for ever.

If Reprobation presupposes a Mass Corrupted, it must needs presuppose
mankind created. But if the Creation was sooner in God's intention then
Damnation, then Damnation shall be sooner in Execution, then Creation. In the
same manner; If God did sooner intend to permit Original sin then to damn, it
would follow that man should be damned before Original sin is permitted to
enter into the world (for what is first in Intention must be last in execution)
all which things are so foolish, Si Reprobatio praesupponat massam corruptam,
etiam genus humanum conditum prae supponat necesse est: at si creatio in
Intention divina prior sit quam Damnatio, in executione prior erit Damnatio
quam Creatio. Ad eundem modum. Si prius intenderet Deus peccatum Originale
permittere quam damnare, sequeretur prius hominem oportuisse damnari, quam
peccati originalis ingressum permitti. (Nam quod in Intention est posterius
est prius in executione.) Quae omnia tam delira sunt, ut in hominem sana
sentientem cadere non possint. Vind. Great. l. 1. par. 1. Digr. 4. c. 3. p. 87.
as not to enter into a man who is in his wits.

Here we see it is evident, that Dr. Twisse does heap the greatest disgraces
upon the Calvinistical opinion in the Synod at Dort, that can be possibly
imagined. For he affirms it to infer the grossest absurdities in the world,
as that men are damned in Hell before the world is created, and actually
punished for sin before the entrance of sin into the world; things implying
contradictions, and such as none but mad men can entertain, says Dr. Twisse.
Yet old Mr. Whitfield is so thankful, for having his Doctrine and his Person so
implicitly reproached by Dr. Twisse, that he swallows his axiom as a wholesome
Bit, and upon the strength of its nourishment, he fights (in his first
animadversion) against the man in the Moon.

. 3. In the fifth position of my Rd. Assailant, I am glad to find him saying
what God has done ex mero beneplacito, no longer now what he may only. Only I
wish he had given some show of reason and offered at least at some kind of
proof, that I might have had an opportunity to answer. But since he has
crudely affirmed, what he supposes to be true, I will patiently expect, until
his leisure will permit him to prove 3. things. 1. That God has absolutely
(not now that he may, but that he has) without any foresight or consideration
how his talents will be used, chosen some to glory, and left the rest to
inherit a Lake of Fire, which is unquenchable. 2. That his undeserved and free
mercy cannot as well be manifested another way, to wit, in giving his free
grace, and rewarding with infinite unproportionable Joys; very weak and
imperfect, very light and short obedience. 3ly, and especially, that he has
passed by others, and left them under deserved wrath, merely considered in that
state which the First man brought upon them, (when yet on the contrary Christ
was given a propitiation for that whole Mass, as the Scripture very expressly,
and very frequently affirms.) And 'till these three things are proved, his
sixth proposition will weigh as lightly as his fifth. Because it matters not to
inquire, to what purposes and counsels the electing or rejecting men in Massa
does belong, until it is proved that there is any such thing, as that in Massa
they are elected or rejected. Nor is the Question of his sovereignty, what he
may, but of his decree, what he will; and what is revealed in his word
concerning what he will do, which, if it is not there revealed, we cannot know.
Just as little material are his seventh and eighth propositions, which do
wholly stand and subsist upon the Credit of the fifth; nor must the fifth be
granted until it is proved. Yet if care must be taken in the seventh, that
this matter spoken of be finally apt and disposed for the manifestation of Gods
Glory, and if it is confessed in the eighth, that this is actually wrought by
the corrupt will of the Creature, then it seems the Creature as it lies in
Massa, without any acts of its own corrupt will, is not fit to be punished, or
to manifest Gods Glory in being punished; and if so, then how could that be the
subject (in the fourth proposition) on which God is absolutely pleased to
manifest the glory of his Justice? In plainer words, If until the Creature
has actually sinned, it is not [materia apta and disposita] matter fitly
disposed for the eternal vengeance of the Almighty, or for the manifesting his
Glory in their eternal punishment, then even my Adversary must acknowledge
(upon his own grounds) that there cannot in massa be any absolute Preterition.
Thus his seventh proposition is the destruction of his fifth, and brings him
over to my opinion, by irresistible consequence, even before he is aware; for
he confesses that the matter of Reprobation must be fitly disposed, and that
it must be by the corrupt will of the Creature, but he knows that the
Reprobates had no such thing as a will when they were in massa, some thousands
of years before they were born; and therefore they must be born, and have wills
of their own, before their wills can be corrupted, or make them matter adapted
for condemnation, and as they are in time, just so they were considered from
all Eternity. But to conclude this Chapter. If all were granted which is
desired in these eight propositions, yet would it not come home to Mr. Barlee's
pretensions, Correp. Cor. p. 88. lin. 8, 9, 11, 12.
who says that God is not a mere legislator of conditional Decrees, Laws, and
Statutes, but An absolute Determiner in a sovereign way of the several acts of
Disobedience in relation to them; and though he says also, that God himself is
without sin, and determins the several acts of obedience also, yet that does
not lessen, but rather aggravate his Blasphemy; because he makes no difference
betwixt Gods determining the Acts of obedience and Disobedience, whilst he
says he is an Absolute [unconditional Determiner, of both the one, and the
other. Whither James Nayler has said any thing like it, I have not hitherto
been informed; but They who adored him as a Christ did give the Magistrate this
reason, The Grand Impostor. p. 25.
That they were forced thereunto by the power of the Lord; and p. 28. and 31.
commanded so of the Lord; and thereunto p. 30.
moved of the Lord; and p. 32.
directed by the spirit of the Lord. And when the Presbyterian Ministers of the
Kirk of Scotland sent a Letter to the Lord Hamilton inviting Him to head their
Forces (which without the least pretense of Authority of Parliament, the
Preachers and They only had made to rise,) they told his Lordship in their
Letter, Spotswood Hist. Scot. l. 6. p. 330, 331.
that the people were animated by the word and motion of Gods Spirit to take up
Arms; that is, to Rebel. Now by what principles and opinions they were betrayed
to these things, I leave it to be Judged by other men. It is in perfect hatred
to blasphemous speeches against God, but not for want of perfect charity to any
man's person in the world, that I am forced to name the Authors of such Impiety,
which if I should not do, I might be suspcted by a few to have born
falsewitness. For the peace, and safety, of Church, and State, as well as for
the Interest, and good of Souls, I am Lev. 19. 17. Ezekiel. 33. 7. 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel.
34. 2, 4, 8, 10. Amos 5. 10.
obliged and concerned to deliver mine own soul by giving fair Lev. 19. 17.
Ezekiel. 33. 7. 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 34. 2, 4, 8, 10. Amos 5. 10.
warnings to other men's. And may it for ever be remembered by such as are of a
party, which they are kind to, and extremely willing to excuse, That he who
Prove. 17. 15.
justifies the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord, as well as He who
condemns the just. To show my Psalm. 19 13.
Innocence from so great a Transgression as the latter, I have not whisperd my
Accusations in a Corner, but spoken them out unto the world; nor have I urged
them from giddy Rumors and Reports, (as one sort of men are wont to do) but
from the published writings which I accuse; as may be seen in the Catalogues
which I have heretofore made.

CHAP. XI.
E. R.
So then, 1. God did, ab aeterno, most absolutely will and decree his own
Glory, as the supreme end of all* consulting therein the counsel of his own
will, and not the wills of any of his Creatures. 2. In order unto that supreme
end, he did freely elect some Angels, and some lapsed men unto blessedness; for
he might do with his own gifts what he would himself. 3. In order to the same
supreme end, he did leave some Angels, and some lapsed men to themselves, to
their own mutability and corruption, not being a debtor unto any of them. 4.
But he did not ordain any Creature to absolute Damnation, but to damnation for
sin, into which they fall (as they themselves know) by their own wills, and
whereof they are themselves the alone Causes and Authors. Gods work about sin
being only a willing permission, and a wise, powerful, and holy Gubernation,
but no actual efficiency unto the formal being and obliquity thereof. I am
sorry I am led on by mine own thoughts thus far into your proper work. But here
I stop.

T. P.
. 1. ONce more he begins with four Positions, trying whether this course will
be more prosperous then the former. So Judge. 16. 8, 12, 14.
Dalilah cast about which way to bind Sampson, that his strength might depart
from him. So when Number. 22. 41. chapter 23. 13, 14.
Balak was succesless upon the high places of Baal, he brought Balaam (to do
his work) into the field of Zophim on the top of Pisgah; Verse. 27, 28.
and when that also was in vain, He would try another mountain, and therefore
brought him to the Top of Peor; for peradventure (said he) it will please God
that thou may curse me them from thence. But 'twas strange that Balak should
imagine any virtue in the mere change of places, when the Cause of his war was
still the same. And I cannot but wonder, that my Assailant should attaque me by
several sets of Questions and Propositions, when he knows the matter is still
the same. Mine Host in Livie did not amiss when he made such variety of
unexpected Dishes, all of one and the same Porket, in entertainment of the
Ambassadors who came from Rome. But in the management of a controversy it
cannot be so graceful, to say the same thing often in several shapes; yet as a
token of my respect, I will proceed to say something to this last Quaternio of
Propositions.

. 2. The first is granted by all the world, for no man living can be so mad, as
to say, or think, that God consulted the will of the Creature in decreeing his
own Glory. The second is backed with a show of Reason; and it runs in this
Form, [He did, for he might;] but a potentia ad Actum non valet argumentum. God
might have made us all, as he did Adam, out of the Earth, without the methods
of generation, and Birth, but hence it follows not that he did. Nor was there
need of any proof, (much less of that which was worse then none) for the
confirming of an assertion. which Nothing in Christendom ever denied, for all
unanimously agree, that God did freely elect some Angels, and some men. If any
quarrel with him for his first position, they must be a Sect of his own party
(which I showed before to be multisariously subdivided) to wit the
supralapsarians, who perhaps will require him to blot out the word Lapsed,
although they need not to be so nice. For that the men who are elected, as sons
of Adam, are lapsed too, Dr. Twisse himself could not deny. And the
Remonstrants do all allow, that actual sins suppose a Lapse. Only my Assailant
must here be minded, that by the word [freely] he must not mean [necessarily or
unconditionally;] for if he does, there is not a Dictionary in the world will
bear him out. Our Faith and Obedience do merit nothing, nor indeed are they
ours but by God's free gift, nor do they bear any proportion with an eternal
weight of Bliss and Glory; so that the mercy of God is free though it exacts
somewhat of us to make us capable of it. Which he that ventures to deny, must
either deny that God exacts any Duties from his Elect, or that the Graces of
God are free. If the former, he opens a Door unto the Libertines; and if the
latter, he ruins the Cause which he asserteth. He needed not here have
mentioned Angels; as not belonging to the matter of which he treats (for they
were never in Adams Loins) And of them he must be told, (since he has put them
into his Thesis) that God eternally foresaw that some of them would persevere,
and not follow Lucifer in his voluntary defection, and that for their voluntary
Obedience he would reward them with Confirmation. (So we know he does men, when
he takes them up into their Masters Mat. 25. 21.
Joy.) which if my Assailant will deny, I know not what should scare him from
Embracing the way of the Supralapsarians. But come we from Angels to men, of
whom in relation to this matter, the plain truth is briefly this. God was in
Christ 2 Cor. 5. 19.
reconciling the world unto himself, who from all eternity elected, in Christ,
those that he saw would persevere in the Faith of Christ (which Faith is not
salvisick, unless it Gal. 5. 6.
works by Love, all manner of duty which God requires, in whomsoever he does
require it.) And all this he did freely, and justly might do; yet he did it not
therefore, because he might, but because he chose it as most for his Glory to
be done. And we know he did so, (not because we know he might, but) because he
has been pleased to assure us of it in his word.

. 2. His third position, or proposition, he could not but know, would be
denied, and yet his offer of proof is very feeble. He know's it is denied that
God did leave some lapsed men to unavoidable Damnation, merely as lying in
Adams Loins; which he cannot possibly be thought to have done, if he gave his
own Son to be a Ransom and Sacrifice for Adam's sin, and a propitiation for
all that were in his Loins. Which this Reverend Author does not once offer to
deny throughout his whole Preface. And for his proof of the supposed
Preterition, if it is any at all, it is but this, That God was not a debtor to
any of them, who were thus left to Damnation in Adams Loins. Which at its
utmost Improvement has but the force of another may-be. And is this a strong
Argument [God did leave some lapsed men in massa, because he might, without
doing them any wrong?] How much more rationally may it be argued even the same
irrational way (I mean by a may-be, a potentia ad actum,) God did not leave any
by an absolute preterition in massa, because he might give Christ for all that
Mass, and might show mercy to all then lying in Adams Loins, without doing
wrong to any vessel of Election, whose Eye, ought not to be Mat. 20. 15.
evil because God is good? Besides, it is a cold commendation of any tolerable
Christian, to say he does no wrong, and that the rule of his Actions is mere
legality. God forbid that we should do whatsoever is barely and merely lawful,
(for many things that are lawful, are not 1 Cor. 6. 12. and chapter 10. 23.
expedient) or content our selves with doing no more. A good man is desirous,
not only to do no wrong to his Neighbor, but all the good that he is able.
From whence we may argue a fortiori, That he who is kind to the Luke 6. 36.
unthankful and to the Luke 6. 36.
evil, and commands us to be merciful as Verse 37.
He is merciful, by loving Luke 6. 36.
our Enemies, as he did his, was more likely to show mercy upon all that were
in massa, because he is kind to his Creatures, and delights to forgive, and
in the midst of James 2. 13.
judgment remembers mercy, then to leave them in Adams loins under a
desperate impossibility of being saved, or of having any Interest in the
Savior of the John 4. 42.
world, and all because he is no man's Debtor. The Psalmid says plainly, That
the Psa. 145. 9. The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all
his works.
mercy of God is over Psa. 145. 9. The Lord is good to all; and his tender
mercies are over all his works.
all his works. He says not Justice, but Mercy, which imports much more then
the doing no wrong. Nor does He say that God's Mercy is over some of his works,
but over all without exception. Which how could David affirm with Truth, if the
far greatest part of mankind, (the very noblest of all his works under the
Canopy of Heaven) had been decreed to infinite and endless Torments, without
the least respect or consideration, of any one the least sin committed actually
by any one of them? Suppose it were Justice to damn an Infant of a day old to
all eternity merely as descending from him, who descended from him, who
descended from him, who (after a succession of numberless Generations)
descended from him, who desceuded from Adam, yet where were the Mercy to that
poor Infant? My Assailant in this place must either contradict David, by
denying that Gods Mercy is over all his works, or say with Dr. Twisse, that it
is better to be miserable for ever, than not to be; and so a comparative Mercy
to that Infant, not to annihilate him, but to allow him the Dignity of a
Creature, and an Immortality in Hell, where is weeping, and wailing, and
guashing of Teeth, where the worm dies not, and where the fire is not
quenched. But I will sum up my Answeh to his third position, in these few
words. That God is merciful above Ephesians. 3. 20.
all that we can to ask or think, and may give, as well as not give, what he
owes us not. Otherwise I am sure it could not be free grace. And that he really
does, what he thus may, He tells us as often as he says, that he gives Christ
to dye for all; in giving whom, he gives Romans 8. 32.
all things, which are sufficient, and necessary to man's salvation. And though
of the all that are called and called seriously) but Mat. 20. 16.
few are chosen, yet it is not for want of a serious call on God's part, but
because all that are called do not Isa. 50. 2. and 66. 4.
answer; or if they answer, they do not Luk: 14. 20.
come; or if they come, they do not Mar. 10. 12.
stay with him; they wilfully (...) Luke 7. 30.
reject the counsel of God against themselves. And so have received the grace
of God 2 Cor. 6. 1.
in vain.

. 3. The Fourth proposition in this Section being wholly the same with the
seventh and eighth of the former Section may be sent thither for its Answer, as
having there sufficiently been spoken to, yet here my Assailant is to be
thank't for saying so plainly, and expressly, [That men do fall into Damnation,
as they themselves know, by their own wills, and whereof themselves are the
alone Causes and Authors] For if this is heartily acknowledged (as here it is
very plainly) Then 1. Farewell to Austin's rigid sentence pronounced upon un
baptized Infants; for the Infants fall not by their own wills, or against the
light of their understandings, they having no use of either faculty. 2.
Farewell all consideration of Adams: sin in the Damnation of any Creature; for
they that are damned (says my Assailant) are the alone Causes and Authors of
their Damnation; and if so, then was Adam no part of the Cause or Author. If I
had said thus much, how many times had I been called a Semipelagian? and of
what Correptory Correction had I been thought worthy? But now 3. Farewell to
all that is said by Mr. Barlee against the second Chapter of my Notes. For I
had said only that man is the sole efficient Cause, and explained my self
sufficiently by saying that Satan and the Protoplast were Promoters of my Guilt
(p. 6.) But my Assailant says farther, that man's own will is the alone Cause,
and the alone Author of his Sin and Damnation. Which gives me occasion to
admire, how M. Barlee could read this passage in his worthiest Friend, and
rail so vehemently against it, as to say it Corrept. Correct. p. 94. to 100.
especially p. 96, 97.
fights against God, against Scripture, against all Authority, ancient, and
later?] Again I admire, how D. Reynolds could read all that bitterness of his
Friend against this part of his own Epistle, and yet retain this proposition
which is there so rai'ld at; yea and how he could commend his Reviler's work
for an Elaborate and learned Thing. Nor is the wonder lessened, in that the ill
language of all those pages is directed to me by name, and not to D. Reynolds,
since the Doctrine against which the ill language is levelled, is delivered by
D. Reynolds, as well as by me, nay, by D. Reynolds after me, nay, by D.
Reynolds in defense of me even in that Epistle* which was intended against me
in partiality to Mr. Barlee, nay, by D. Reynolds more obnoxiously and more
unwarily then by me, nay, more like Massilian and Pelagian by D. Reynolds then
by me. Let both our words be considered, and I do seriously believe, that he
himself will say as much.

. 4. What is added in the position concerning God's Permission and gubernation
etc. is gratis dictum, as to me, and cannot with any the least color be fitly
aimed against my words, who said as much in my Notes (. 12.) But only against
his and my Correptory Corrector, who besides permission and Gubernation,
disposing, and ordering, is for Determination, and stirring up, as a Man puts
spurs to a Dull Jade, (it is his own simile.) So that if my Rd. Assailant does
here mean no more then he speaks, not conceiving that God's will of permitting
sin is efficacious, nor that he does impel men to any thing that is unlawful,
nor that he did Decree Adam to contract a Nam and decrevit Adamum, ex lapsu
suo, vitiositatem natura immobilem contracturum. Twiss. Vind. Gra l. 1. par. 2.
Digr. 8. Sect. 4. p. 115.
vitiosity by his Fall, (as Dr. Twisse speaks.) then the things which I accused
as blasphemous may still be blasphemous by his free leave; and I shall once
more thank him for having thus joined with me against the Correptory Corrector.
And since he professes to be sorry for having been led so far in another man's
proper work, I will have so fair an opinion of him as to believe, that from
this time forward, he will express his sorrow by his Amendment.

CHAP. XII.
E. R.
I was glad to see two orthodox and sound Axioms, stand before the book of your
Author as the Basis of his Superstructure. Two men of quite different judgments
in these very Arguments I find to have done so before. The one Cassianus the
Collator, Prosper cont. Collat. c. 14.
of whom Prosper has these words, Catholicarum tibi aurium judicia conciliare
voluisti, quibus de praemissae Professionis front securis, facile sequentia
irreperent, si prima placuissent. Which words of his bring into my mind a
saying of the Historian, Live. decad. 3. l. 8.
Fraus fidem in parvis sibi praestruit, ut cum operae pretium sit, cum magna
mercede fallat; and the censure of Austin upon Pelagius, Gratiae vocabulo
frangit Invidiam, and offensionem declinat. Aug. de Great. Christi. cap. 39.
The other the famous Archbishop Bradwardine (whom learned and good men will
honor, notwithstanding the hard censure passed by Hugo Grotius upon him) who
premiseth two Hypotheses as the ground of that profound work of his, De Causa
Dei. I will have so fair and just an opinion of your Author, as to believe that
he did this in Candor and Integrity, following therein rather the learned
example of Bradwardin, then (if Prosper's Censure may be taken) the Artifice
and cunning of Cassianus; yet because this is a course, which may by the Credit
of true Principles, draw the less cautelous and circumspect Readers, to consent
to deductions not naturally consequent upon them; it is requisite, as for
writers, as Pliny advises, Saepius respicere Titulum, so for Readers to follow
the Apostles Counsel, to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

T. P.
. 1. THis is somewhat a strange Paragraph in several respects. For first it is
apparently unkind, because although he professes that I had two great
patterns for what I did, whereof one was most excellent in his own opinion;
nay, though he professes to have so just an opinion of me, as to believe I
followed Bradwardin rather then Cassianus, and that I did what I did in Candor
and integrity, he did yet make choice to begin his Descants upon the other; not
insisting on the good mea^ing of Archbishop Bradwardin, but on the fraud and
cunning of the Presbyter Cassianus. Yet secondly, he makes me some part of
requital by confessing my two principles to be a couple of orthodox and sound
Axioms, and that they were the Basis of my superstructure. Now he cannot but
confess, that where the deductions are duly made, nothing but truth can be
inferred from truth: such good Luke 6. 43.
Trees, as two orthodox and sound Axioms, cannot bring forth such corrupt
fruit, as my Notes were accused of by the Correptorie Corrector. Had not my
Deductions been naturally consequent upon my grounds, (as here it is hinted,
and merely hinted, but no where held forth, that I can find,) no doubt but some
of the grieved party would have endeavored at least to find it out. And had
they found any such thing, no doubt but I should have heard on it with both my
Ears. They cannot say that they were not at leisure; for the ilness of a
deduction might have been showed in few lines, and they had leisure in
abundance to amuse the Reader with other things, which (in their own
confession) must needs have been wholly impertinent, if my deductions were
legal from such unquestionable grounds. And they tacitly confess that my
Deductions were legal, by not attempting to show me their illegality.

. 2. My Reverend Assailant thinks I followed the example of learned Bradwardin,
in my choice of those grounds: but Mr. B. is peremptory, that Dr. Iackson was
my Example. Why could they not have thought, that the Reverend Bishop Davenant
might be the man, who has the Sentent. D. Davenantii. p. 20.
substance of my two grounds in his Epistle to Duraeus? Why not St. James?
Chap. 1. 13, 14, 15, 17. Rather why not every man, or no man at all? For is
there any thing more obvious in the very writings of the Heathen, or in the
Hearts and Mouths of all who are not quite inhumane, then that all our good
things are from the Fountain of goodness, that is, from God, and all our evils
from their Fountain too, that is, our own corrupt wills consenting to the
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the Devil? These are such known and
vulgar Truths, that they might have been expected from any A. B. C. darian, who
is but a little catechized in the Elements of Religion, without recourse to a
Bradwardin, and then perhaps much less to a Dr. Iackson. That Cassianus did use
that Method, as well as Bradwardin, is as much to Bradwardin's prejudice, as it
can be to mine; although it ought not to be to either. For Cassianus was a
learned and pious man; and so commended even by Prosper who writ against him,
and who calls him somewhere Virum divinum; though I can now as little find out
the place where, as I can find out that speech in his 14th. Chapter, to which
by the Margin of my Assailant I am directed. The worst that can be said of
Cassianus, is, that being a Semipelagian he erred on the right hand; which
however to be misliked, is yet exceedingly preferrable to Semimanicheisme,
which will easily be proved to be an Error on the left. Prosper Prosper in
Epist. ad Aug. de relig. Pelag. Her. p. 884.
confesses of the Semipelagians, that they were eminent, and godly, and
learned men, and such with whom he was not able to compare, either for strength
of Argument, or unblamableness of life. He farther Illud etiam qualiter
diluatur, quaesumus patienter Insipientiam nostram ferendo demonstres, etc. Id.
Ibid. p. 886.
confessed to the same Austin, to whom he confessed all the rest, that their
Reasonings were such, as he was not able to answer, upon which he desired that
Fathers help. -- Et hoc non solum aliorum Catholiorum Testimoniis, sed etiam
sanctitatis tua disputatione antiquiore se probare testantur, ut and illud
q^od, etc. Hilar. Arcl. in Epist. ad Aug. mihi p. 1199.
St. Hilarie also told Austin, that the Massilians in France did hold no more
concerning grace, then they quoted Him for, as well as other Catholic Fathers;
and Him they quoted for what he had written in his dispute against Porphyrie;
wherein he spoke as if he had spoken out of the Semipelagian's mouth, when
indeed the Semipelagians did speak expressly out of his. And because my Reverend
Assailant has noted Austins censure upon Pelagius, I will also note how much
Pelagius was reverenced by the very same Austin at other times; not because I
am concerned in the credit of Pelagius or Cassianus, any more then any man who
loves to give his very enemies their due, but because I would show how little
of argument there is in the censures of Prosper and of Austin, produced here by
my Assailant in this part of his Epistle. First, for Haec ego and alia quae
hunc sequuntur errorem, credo quod vir ille tam egregie Christianus omnino non
sentiet. Aug. de Peccat. merit and Remiss. l. 3. c. 3. Nos non oportet
advertere istum^ honum and praedicandum virum. Ibid. Pelagii quaedam Scripta
legi, viri, ut audio, Sancti and non parvo profectu Christiani. Ib. c. 1.
Pelagius himself, we have Austin speaking so highly of him, that he professes
not to believe, that so excellent a christian as Pelagius should assent to
those Errors of which he was reported to have been guilty. And then for the
Sect of the unde and isti qui contra haec disputant, cum sint casta vita,
moribusque laudabiles, nec dubitant facere quod illi diviti pro consequenda
vita aeterna consilium requirenti, cum se respondisset jam omnia legis
implevisse mandata, praecepit Dominus, si vellet esse perfectus, venderet omnia
quae haberet, and daret pauperibus, thesaurumque transferret in Caelum. August.
de pec. mer. and Remiss. contra Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Pelagians in general, St. Austin has liberally declared, that though they
disputed against that which he asserted, yet he could not but acknowledge that
they were men of good life, and laudable for their manners, and such as did not
scruple to obey the very strictest of Christ's commands, even by selling all
they had and giving it to the poor; such were the Pelagians, and such was
Pelagius, if we believe that Austin who was the greatest Enemy to him, and
Them, and sure an Enemie's commendation is not likely to be untrue. If the
greatest haters of the Pelagians Doctrins had not been the greatest Haters of
their example, [selling all, and giving to the poor,] it had been better then
now it is, with the men who are at Enmi^y with each extreme.

CHAP. XIII.
E. R.
I observe in your Author, much credit given to a Paper published under the
name of Bishop Andrews: If Controversies were to borrow their credit from the
Names of men, you could easily oppose the great Bishop of Hippo, and a cloud of
many other learned men, unto that great Name. But I know not whether the Ipse
dixit of an Anonymous publisher, be attestation enough to prove the
Authenticalness of that Paper. Dr. Sanderson, a learned writer, who once drew
the diverse opinions touching these controversies into Tables, speaks of Dr.
Overal's judgment, but makes no mention of this. And the two Prelates, unto
whom the publication of his Opuscula, was by special order referred, do not
give any account of this paper to the world, but (that which seems to induce
the contrary) they diligently satisfy the Reader, Cur haec and non alia
(speaking of the things by them published) sibi ad scribendum delegerit.
Therefore it is probable, that either they owned not this as his, or willingly
suppressed it; for something they did suppress, as they intimate in these
words, illud quidem nobis curae huit, ne quicquam prodiret, cujus occasion
sancti manes queri jure possent famae suae apud Posteros male consultum a nobis
esse. Therefore till I come to have a better assurance of it, then the
Testimony of the two letters, F. G. and the company of Fur praedestinatus. I
shall take the liberty of an (...) this particular.

T. P.
. 1. I Do willingly profess to be a great Admirer of Bishop Andrews, not only
as Master of 15. Languages, an irresistible Disputant against our Churches
Enemies of each extreme, a most unimitable Preacher, a Bar to sacrilege and
schism, a very See what Austin said of the Pelagians charity, in the place
above cited.
Pelagian in point of charity, (though not of Doctrine) a Conservator of
Discipline, a Patron to public peace, (and a good friend to Grotius,) but as a
vindicator of God's Essence, and Attributes, from all that tends to his
dishonor. And were there no one man, besides the renowned Bishop Andrews, to
be alleged against the fancy of irrespective decrees, and the other fictions
which issue thence, he would exceedingly outweigh whatsoever stands in the
contrary scale. To whom it was not fairly done to oppose the Bishop of Hippo,
because the Bishop of Hippo does speak as much for the Doctrines of Bishop
Andrews as he can be pretended to speak against them. And if he is found to
speak both, that is, For and against, it is his own Neque quorumlibet
Disputationes quamvis Catholicorum and laudatorum hominum, velut Scripturas
Canonicas habere debemus, ut nobis non liceat Salva honorificentia, quae illis
deberur hominibus, aliquid in eorum Scriptis improbare atque respuere, si forte
invenerimus, quod aliter senseri^^, quam veritas habet, divino adjutorio, vel
ab aliis intellecta, vela nobis. Talis ego sum in Scriptis aliorum, Tales volo
esse Intellectores meorum. August. Epist. 3. ad Fortunat.
desire that he may not be heeded: for having found by sad experience that he
was subject to great mistakes, he desired the Readers of his works to use their
liberty of rejecting what they should find to be amiss, and also professed not
to take it as any dishonor or disrespect to either his quality, or his
learning; of which as I have given sufficient proofs in other places, so now in
my margin, I add another. I have two Reasons to allege why the judgment of
Bishop Andrews, the great Bishop of Winchester, is (in this particular at least
which lies before us, not only as much, but perhaps) much more to be esteemed,
then the judgment of Austin the great Bishop of Hippo. 1. Austin was actually
betrayed into greater Errors, then can be pretended to the prejudice of the
other. For not to speak of his praying to Saints, and his praying for the dead,
of which he is accused by Mr. Rivet, the Presbyterian, not only as of an Error,
but as of a very great crime; nor to speak of his many Massilian Doctrines
which St. Hilarie himself alleged to him very frankly out of several of his
writings; what Si ergo tot and tanta divina testimonia concinunt, nec salus nec
vita aeterna sine Baptismo and corpore and sanguine Domini cuiquam speranda
est, frustra sine his promittitur Parvulis. August. de Peccat. Merit. and
Remiss. contra Pelagianos. lib. 1. c. 23. p. 670.
grosser mistake could there be, then even that which he discovered in his
Dispute against the Pelagians, when it most concerned him to have been wary? I
mean his Error of belief, that no Infant could be saved without the receiving
of the Communion, as well as the Sacrament of Baptism, and his wresting of
that Text John 6. 53. to authorize so great an Error, and (which is most to be
admired) his great Audiamus dominum de sacramento Sanctae mensae suae dicentem,
quo nemo rite nisi baptizatus accedit, [nisi manducaveritis earnem meam, and
biberitis sanguinem, non habebitis vitam aeternam,] Quid ultra quaerimus? Quid
ad hoc respondere poterunt? An vero quisquam etiam hoc dicere audebit, quod ad
parvulos h^c sententia non pertineat possintque sine participatione Corporis
hujus and sanguinis in se habere vitam? Id. ib. c. 20. p. 666.
Triumphs thereupon, as if his argument from thence were not possibly to be
answered. 2. Where Austin differed from Bishop Andrews touching the points now
controverted (if yet he must be said sometimes to differ) he also differed from
all his own Teachers, the Fathers of the Church who went before him, for four
Centuries after Christ; who did unanimously hold, that the Decree of Election
(much more of Reprobation) is respective and conditional, and that not only of
Faith, but of perseverance unto the end too; which is confessed Prosper in
Epist. ad Aug. p. 886.
by Prosper, and by Aug. de bono pers. c. 19 and 20.
Austin himself approved of.

. 2. To the Arguments which he uses against the Anthenticalness of that Piece
which I delighted to make use of in my Notes on God's Decrees, I have several
things to return him by way of Answer. 1. Dr. Sandersons making no mention of
it is but a negative Argument, and therefore signifies very little to an
intelligent Reader. 2. Nor can he possibly be ignorant, that Dr. Sanderson's
Tables were quite finished before this piece of B. Andrews was sent forth into
the light. But how can any man expect, that he should mention a writing, which
he had not then the opportunity of seeing? Or if he had, could he be thought to
mention All he ever saw? He had reason to mention the famous Opinion of Bp.
Overal, because it had something peculiar which made it famous; and if he
thought he had not the same reasons to mention that of Bp. Andrews, how can He
or I help it? 3. There was something else which the two Prelates did very
willingly suppress, as his pattern of Catechistical Doctrine, which yet my Rd.
Assailant will not deny to have been his, because it was not published by
special order. But 4. There was some reason for the suppression of this, as
well as that. Not because this was the issue of his Youth, as well as that,
(for this he did in his riper years) but because they published his Opuscula
much about that Time, when the public Discussion of these Points were
interdicted by special order, and because this Piece was not so polished by its
Author, as the other things in that Volume, which they committed to the Press.
5. Nor ought it more to be censured for being found in the Company of Fur
Praedestinatus, then Fur Predestinatus ought to be censured for being the Title
of a Book, or for being found in the company of the Articuli Lambethani. They
say that Fur Praedestinatus is an ingenious Dialogue, which has nothing of ill
in it, except the Doctrines of those Men who helped the Thief to presumption,
in lieu of Faith. And those are there mentioned for righteous ends; viz. by way
of prevention to one sort of Readers, and by way of Remedy to another: that
some may be afraid of entertaining such Doctrines, and that others may be
ashamed of having taught them. 6. As it has hitherto appeared, that there is
not any force in any one of those reasons, which would not have men believe
that that small piece is Bp. Andrews's, so there are reasons for the contrary
of force sufficient. For 1. The language and the frame, and the inward spirit
of the thing, do partly tell us that it is His, who may be guest at by his
finger, as well as Hercules by his Foot. 2. Part of it is discernable even in
some of those Sermons, whose publication was referred to the Bishops of London,
and of Ely, except that the one has it in Latin, as the other in English. 3.
The Publisher of it, F. G. (if I rightly guess at him) is both a learned and
pious man, whose Integrity would not suffer him to put a deceit upon the
Reader, especially in a matter where there could not accrue to him the least
advantage or convenience. For 7. That that inestimable Bp. was, (in his most
mature and ripest years) very severe to those Doctrines which are commonly
called Calvinistical, is a thing so known, that I cannot think it will be
denied. Nulli nota magis domus est sua. -- His solemn Sermons at the Court do
often declare him to be that, which the Ignorant and the Passionate will call
Arminian Of which I do not torment my Reader with Examples, because I imagine,
there cannot be the least need. But if my Rd. Assailant will have me, I will do
it as soon as I know his Pleasure. At present I hasten to his Conclusion.

CHAP. XIIII.
E. R.
I now conclude with answering your desire, which was, that upon reading your
Book, I would give you my opinion of it. I have read it so well as I could, a
Copy not in all places alike plainly transcribed. And truly, so far as my
weakness is able to judge, for the Theological and Argumentative parts of it,
it is so solid and substantial, as that I assure my self, it will be very
acceptable to many learned men, and very useful to the Church of God. You have
therein given a good account to the world, that you did converse with that
second Bradwardine, D. Twisse unto very good purpose. I heartily wish, that
there may be no further reciprocation of the Law of contention between you, but
that Truth may so prevail, as that you may become both one, both in opinion and
Affection. It will be a happy time with the Church of God, when swords shall be
beaten into Plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks, when the earth shall be
so filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as that all polemical writing shall
be out of Date; when the Lord shall be one, and his name one, and we shall all
serve him with one shoulder: Unto this let all our writings tend, for this let
all our prayers contend. I commend your person and labors unto God's Blessing,
and remain,

Your most loving Friend and Fellow Laborer, ED: REYNOLDS.

T. P.
. 1. HERE is a palpable confession, that the only thing which was desired, is
the last and least thing by him performed. Mr. Barlee courted his opinion
concerning his Correptory Correction, and in the room of that, he has told him
his opinion of other things. I did never desire him to give me his opinion upon
the reading of my Notes, nor did I expect that he should read them, much less
did I desire him to declare his opinion to all the world, much less to declare
it as much as might be to my discredit, much less to the discredit of Bp.
Andrews, and the Doctrines by Him espoused; yet he has turned over his Books,
and made a muster of Citations, and spent almost his whole Preface in that
which did not belong unto him, nor was at all desired of him, either by me, or
my angry Neighbor. Which why should he do, if he had not a willingnefs to own
his Cause, to gratify his Party, to abett his Fellow Labourer, to show his
strength, and to challenge me to an Encounter? I have answered his Challenge so
much the rather, because I think him one of the ablest of those that err on
that side, and in the conversion or confutation of whom, the greatest good is
to be done to them that read us; I had also more respect for a person of his
Fame, then to affront him with a contemptuous silence; and a greater care of
his Orthodoxie, ^^en to suffer him to live in such a dangerous mistake, as to
believe his Epistle unanswerable in case it were unanswered. For as soon as he
had wished, and wished heartily, that there might be no further reciprocation
of the law of contention, he immediately added, [but that truth might so
prevail etc.] Upon which I considered within my self, that if I had not made
him some return to his Assault, he might have imagined, that Truth had been on
his side, and have ascribed both the patience, and the modesty of my silence,
unto the prevalence of that which he is pleased to call Truth. Let this suffice
for his confessed (...).

. 2. Secondly, He next goes on to encourage his Fellow Laborer with some
applause and commendation, which his Fellow Laborer had earned of him by
quoting a passage of his Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, Correp. Cor. p.
35.
taking that occasion to call him the Eminent and sweet Dr. (...). First, he
commends the Theological and argumentative parts of his Book, (which he did
well to distinguish from the scurrilous and Invective,) as very acceptable to
many learned men, and very useful to the Church of God. How directly contrary
this is to the real merit of the thing, I have partly showed already, and can
do in greater abundance when my Rd. Assailant shall call me to it. If to teach
a wicked world, that God does tempt men unto sin, that he praedestins, and
stirrs them up to that which is unlawful, that his will and Decree of men's sins
is efficacious and absolute, if not a few, but a multitude of such like
Doctrines, (which have made so many Ranters and Libertines in Christendom, to
the great scandal of the heathen and the dishonor of Christianity) is
acceptable to the learned, or useful to the Church, then the Correptory
Corrector has highly deserved his commendations. And let that suffice for a
specimen of his Theological performances, which if I listed to pursue in all
the particulars that I have noted, they would make a new Volume with too much
ease. Of his argumentative faculty (which is the second thing commended) I will
also give no more then one or two Tastes. It being a part of his Theology, that
though a Saint may be guilty both of ^urder and Adultery, with a complication
of other sins, and continue in them for some time without repentance, yet that
Saint cannot be possibly (no, not at that very time) in a state of Damnation,
he seeks an argument to prove it from the Case of Correp. Corr. p. 221. 222.
David, who though 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3, 4.
deliberately guilty of Adultery, and with the wife of Vriah. one of the
loyallest of all his subjects, and added verse. 13.
drunkenness to thirst, and though when that would not take, he endeavored to
conceal it by verse. 15.
wilful murder, and by the murder of most excellent Vriah, to whom he was very
much obliged, and whom he had wronged too much already, though he continued in
these sins without remorse, adding a deep verse. 25.
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, and instead of repenting, took possession verse.
27.
of Bathshebah, (as Ahab did of Naboths Vineyard,) never crying peccavi till
chap. 1^, 13.
after the message of Nathan, yet he was not all this while in a state of
Damnation, says Note, that Mr. Simson's Doctrine; which was in substance the
same with this, was condemned as a Blasphemy by Mr. Cawdrey, and above 50
Ministers besides of the same way, in their book entitled, A Testimony to the
truth of Jesus Christ. p. 16. Nor was D. Crisp's much unlike it in the same
page.
Mr. Barlee; who farther tells us, that David was not fallen from the state of
salvation, but from the joy of it; and that he had not, even then, lost the
holy Spirit of God. But because all this is but the begging of his Question, he
endeavors to prove it by several Arguments; first from the suffrage of
Bertius, that very same Bertius whom he calls Apostate, and who was called a
Blasphemer by learned King James (as my Assailant says.) And though he does
not He only refer's to the whole book de Apostasia Sanctorum.
name the place where Bertius is of his judgment in this particular, yet that
is his first proof, the Concession of Bertius. Secondly, he adds his
misapprehension and strange abuse of that Text of Scripture Psalm. 51. 11,
which, every child knows, was penned by David after the time of his
Repentance. Thirdly, he adds, that if this had not been true (which was said by
him and Bertius) David after his fall must have been circumcised again, and (to
give the Anabaptists as much advantage as he is able) he adds to that also,
that all Christians at any time falling into enormous sins, must be baptized
again. Fourthly, he argues, that So he reviles that extraordinary Person, (now
with God, as we ought in charity not to question)? whom Bp. Abbot himself
commended, if not admired, as a very great and learned man, even in that very
book which he writ against him. Who if he was possibly overtaken, with Lot, and
Noah, in drinking wine, yet he repented with Lot, and Noah; Nor was he ever
known, in all his life, to play the Correptory Corrector.
Drunken Dick Tompson did also maintain a falling damnably from Grace, meaning
a Total, though not a final Fall, whereas he and his party do not believe
either of them; but only they say (putting it off with that Trick) that
whenever any man falls into any sin, he falls damnably, that is, so as to
deserve Damnation, which is the same that he says of all the whole Mass in
Adam's Loins. Now from the Doctrine of Mr. B. thus argued, they that are so
shallow may make a very sad use. For having first swallowed it down, as an
unquestionable thing, that they are vessels of a most absolute unconditional
Election, and that they cannot fall totally, much less finally from Grace, in
so much that although they commit Adultery or Murder, or whatsoever sins
besides, and live indulgently in them for no small time, as David did, without
Repentance, yet they have not See how this dangerous Error is detested by good
Melancthon loc. Com. de bon. oper. 169. 179. 180. De discrim. pec. mort. et
ven. p. 228. manifestus error, and necessario reprehendendus -- nec confirmemus
in stultis securitatem and caecitatem. -- nec fingamus Deum saxeum and stoicum
-- st oicae illae disputationes execrada sunt, Electos semper retinere spiritum
sanctum. De pecc. Actualibus. p. 83, 84.
lost the Holy Ghost, nor can be possibly in a state of Damnation, they will
immediately conclude, that all the sins they can commit are not able to do them
any considerable discourtesie; they may make them the sadder, but not the
worse; somewhat less cheerful, but not less safe; they can fall no otherwise
then David did, that is (says their Teacher Mr. Barlee) Correp. Corr. p. 221.
lin. 22, 23, 24, 25.
not from the state of salvation, but only from the joy of it, and therefore
they need not be Correp. Corr. p. 221. lin. 22, 23, 24, 25.
rebaptized. And if they can but sin merrily, as not discerning the guilt, or
not fearing the danger, they shall not fall so much as from the Joy of their
salvation, Now, Reader, judge by this Taste, of this writers Theological,
argumentative parts, and how See how mischievous that Doctrine is in the
opinion of King James and Dr. ^^verael at the Conference at Hampton Court. p.
30, 31. especially p. 42, 43.
useful they are to the Church of God. I will give another Taste of him whilst
it is now under my eye. Because I said in my Notes, that none were Elected unto
Bliss under any other notion then that of being foreseen from all eternity to
be found to be in Christ, and persevering in Christ unto the end, Mr. Barlee
affirms me to have said, That no man is elected Correp Corr. p. 222. lin. 11,
12, 13.
until he has persevered in faith and repentance, which cannot be till he is
dead. As if when I spoke of God's Decree, which I there proved to be
respective, and expressly distinguished it from its execution, I could have
placed the Decree after the time of its execution. But He having had so little
Grace as to invent such a Calumny, had withal so little wit as to cite my 69
page, as the place where he pretends that I had spoken those words; that so
every Reader who will but consult the place cited, might stand amazed at the
strangeness of that invention. Nor can he and Mr. Whitfield pretend to an
Ignorance in their excuse, unless by confessing that they could not apprehend,
how God should eternally foresee as well the means, as the end; as well the
Sin, as the Damnation; as well the Faith and Perseverance, as the life after
death. And this may suffice for a second Taste of Mr. B's Argumentations, and
of their usefulness to the Church of God.

3. He is next commended by his Encomiast, for having conversed with Dr.
Twisse, that second Bradwardine, unto very good purpose. Which is as much as to
say, that he has showed himself able to write and read. For all the use he
has made of Dr. Twisse, is to transcribe a great deal of him, sometimes
nothing to his purpose, sometimes against it. Indeed Dr. Twisse was as great an
enemy to their way, and difputed against it as earnestly, as either of them can
dispute against me. And the more they commend him as a second Bradwardine, an
eminent servant of Christ, and the like, the more they do implicitly condemn
themselves. Mr. B. has done him the dishonor to speak well of him, to talk
much of his Friendship, and to pretend that he loved him as another Timothy. No
doubt he may have seen the Doctors face, which he describes to have been stern,
p. 64.) but sure I am, he knows but little of his meaning, more then what I
have showed him, upon occasion of his mistakes.

My Reverend Adversary concludes with a hearty wish, that contention may cease,
and Polemical writings be out of Date, that the Lord may be one and his name
one (as the Scotsmen concluded the second Article of the Covenant.) But how
heartily he wished it, and how much he has contributed to the accomplishment
of his wish, the Reader may easily pass a judgment, 1. by his meddling in this
matter of his own accord, confessedly beyond what was desired by Mr. Barlee; 2.
by his assaulting of me who never gave him the least degree of provocation; 3.
by telling a Correptory Corrector (who needed a bridle and not a spur) that
though soft words and hard Arguments are best, yet in writings of this Nature
there may be a necessity of sharp Rebukes; 4. by forcing a Text of Scripture
(qua si obtorto collo) to help to excuse the sharpness of a book, of which the
common voice is, that it is perfectly unexcusable.

4. I will also conclude with a hearty wish, (and which I verily believe is
sincerely such) That we who are diverse at present, may after some short time
be One in Judgment; Or if our Heads cannot be brought to an agreement, yet at
least that God's Grace may be so prevalent in our Hearts, that whilst we are
diverse in Judgment, we may be One in Love. That all the Hottest of our
Contentions may be in order to conviction; and to the conviction of the
Gainsayer, not by the ruin of his Person, but of his Argument and his Cause.
Yet because there is an usual and easy passage, from breach of judgment, to
breach of Charity, And because Agreement in Error is the sinew of Faction, but
not of Peace; it concern's us to pray that we may endeavor, and to endeavor
sincerely whilst we pray, That Truth as well as Unity, and Unity in the Truth,
may be the only scope first, and then the only conclusion of our Debates. Were
this obtained in Disputations, we should not finally change weapons, and pass
a calamo ad gladium. We should persecute the Syllogism, but not the Man;
destroy his Error, but not his Family, or his Fortune. In the mean time it were
well, if we would not think it a noble Constancy to persevere in that Opinion
which first be speak's us, nor blush at the Glory of confessing our former
Errors, as soon as we see, and dislike them for having hurt us. For (to use the
words of Mr. Quorsum enim viveremus, si nihil aetas, nihil usus, nihil assi^ua
exercitatio, nihil lectio, nihil meditatio conferret? Calvin. de lib. arbit.
contra Pigh ium.
Calvin concerning himself, and his public works, which he professed an
Intention to have reformed) wherein lye's the benefit of growing older and
older, if Age, and experience, and assiduous Exercising our selves added to
Reading, and Meditation, did not conferr something on us, whereby to set us
above the pitch of our younger selves? I am resolved, for my part, not to be
longer of an Opinion, then I am able to see good reason for it. And do so
desire to try all things, as to hold fast nothing but what is 1 These. 5. 21.
good.

The End.

