St. Stephen's- Green OR THE Generous LOVERS. A COMEDY, As it is Acted at The
Theater Royal, IN DUBLIN.

Written by WILL. PHILIPS, Esquire

DUBLIN, Printed by John Brocas in School-House-Lane And are to be Sold by the
Booksellers, 1700

TO THE Right Honorable THE Earl of INCHIQUIN.
My Lord,
THis Play has a double Reason for seeking Shelter under Your Lordship; I Writ
it, and for our Irish Stage, and You are the chief Friend which either has: But
I should be Cautious in Declaring what it is probable the World may Condemn in
you; since in the Humor the present Age is, for a Man to own that he thinks
Plays even lawful, it is almost enough to bring his Principles of Morality and
Religion into Question. But, My Lord, the Firmness of yours is so well known,
that I shall have no Reason to for bear saying, you have an Esteem for Plays;
and I may, with Safety to your Reputation, Applaud you for it, since I am
Confident the greatest Zealot would slacken his Fury against the Stage, and
join with you in Supporting it, did he know how earnestly you Wish it Reformed
from the Corruption of Manners, to the Encouraging Virtue, and Exposing Vice;
and with what Decency, Modesty, and Good Breeding, you would have it Regulated.
You may remember you Cautioned me to observe these Things, when I first
acquainted you that I had a Design to Write this Comedy, and I have attempted
to Obey you. I wish Your Lordship had given me farther Instructions; then, this
would have appeared more Perfect and Correct to the World, and an Offering more
Worthy you. As it is, I present it to you with Courage, because I know, the
Errors your Judgment discerns, your Goodness will Excuse, and what you cannot
Excuse you will at least Forgive. I only Wish there may be something in it
which may prevent your Blushing while you Protect it, and shall very readily
own the Faults the Critics find in it; I have not yet heard them, but without
doubt there are many, and therefore I think my self the more obliged to those
who have been so particularly kind to this Play. They have sufficiently
evidenced how Inclinable they are to Encourage Wit and Poetry, by being so
Favorable and so Generous to my weak Attempts on both, who have so little of
the one, and so unskilled in the other. I should be extremely pleased, if my
Success would move any other who has a happier Genius, to divert this Town with
some Performance of this kind. But it is my Satisfaction and Pride, that though
he should Write better, he cannot meet with more Encouragement than I have
done. And since I own my Weakness, and yet boast of Success, you may be
assured, that as I think my self Answerable for the former, so I know the
latter is owing to your Lordship; another Proof of your accustomed Goodness,
and a fresh Obligation to me. But this is a Subject I must not pursue, for though
the acknowledgment of Obligations is but a small Return, yet I know you the
(...); and therefore though Silence is a Pain to the Grateful, yet I choose to be
uneasy to my self, rather than offensive to your Modesty, which I know will not
Pardon my Publishing, what you will not allow me even to mention when we are
together. Give me leave only, My Lord, to assure you that I have a just Sense
of your Favors, and that though I had never received one, yet I should ever have
been

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Faithful and most Humble Servant. Will. Philips.

PROLOGUE.
HOw hard's the Fate which Poetry attends,
When every Man to be its Judge Pretends.
Not so in other Arts, Painters best tell
Which Color, Shade, or Posture does excel.
Doctor's a Right to Kill or Save obtain;
And Lawyers only do the Law Explain.
But every Fool fancies induigent Heaven
And equal Share of Wit to him has given.
And talks of Time, Place, Action, and the Plot,
Words, like a Parrot, he by rote has got.
Hither such come to Censure, not to Hear,
And whisper dull Remarks in's Neighbor's Ear.
Chat the whole Play, then, Judgment give at Guess,
And damn the Poet for the Actor's dress.
Strut in the Pit, Survey the Gallery,
In hopes to be lured up by some kind She.
Humors still opposite to ours they have,
Laugh when we weep; and when we laugh look grave.
Our Author hopes none such are here to Day,
For they will never relish this Dull, Sober Play.
Where there is not one Immodest Word to move
In the Box Blushes, or a Laugh above.
But for their Comfort, tho the Scene be here,
The Characters of Vice he takes elsewhere.
If any to themselves Reflections take,
They are to Blame who Applications make.
EPILOGUE.
Spoke by Lady Volant. WHo to a Monarch humbly sues for Grace,
Should not Consult the Merits of his Case,
So much, as those who offer his Address,
It Is by their Interest he must hope success,
Our Author thus, who can no Merit Plead,
But the harsh Censures he deserve does dread,
Orders that I for Mercy Intercede.
He Judges right, but in his Choice he is out,
As he his Merit, I my Interest doubt.
And well I may, since it is by different Arts,
I must please Men, and gain the Ladies Hearts.
The Beaus I would Oblige, but that you know,
Is more than one poor Woman has Power to do.
Besides they are all so Mercenary grown,
They Will grant no Favor, unless I grant one.
Their Answer is, when we a Boon demand,
Meet me at Chappellizard, or the Strand.
And that is a Bribe I think too dear to give,
To let this Play their dreadful Rage survive.
And from the Fair, what Mercy can be had!
I fear they will hate me for but seeming Bad.
In hopes to please, now we have done the Play,
I Will throw the Nausceous Mask of Vice away.
And strive those Paths of Virtue to pursue,
So strictly kept, so eminent in you.
Dramatis Personae.
Freelove, A Gentleman of England Bellmine, A Gentleman of Ireland
Friends. Sir Francis Feiguyouth, Old and Amorous. Wormwood, Snarling and
Ill-natured. Vainly, A Pert Conceited Fop. Trickwell, Servant to Freelove.
Timothy Tellpenny, Steward to Lady Volant.
Aemilia, Niece to Sir Francis Feignyouth. Marina, His Daughter. Lady Volant,
Affected and Mercinary.
St. Stephen's- Green OR, The Generous Lovers.
ACT I. SCENE St. Stephen's-Green.
Enter Aemilia and Marina. Mar. WELL, well, Aemilia, You may pretend what you
please; But I am sure, You go to Church thus constantly, only to Pray for an
Easterly Wind.


Aemi. Truly Marina, if my Love has made me Devout, yours has made you very
Lazy; for ever since you saw Bellmine, you are grown as fond of your Bed, as a
young Poet is of his first Works.


Mar. And is not that a properer place to think of one's Lover, than the
Church? I am as much teased with your Devotion, as a Rake is with Dunns, or as
a Mask in the Playhouse is, with that Rake.


Aemi. Love that sweetens all Tempers, has sowr'd thine.


Mar. Pray let me hear no more of it then.


Aemi. And yet if I should Talk of any thing else, you would no more mind me,
than our Gallery does the Parson. What! Last Packet brought you no Letters?
Why, he is Coming


Mar. So is Freelove; That makes you so Gay. But Dear Aemilia, now I have
mentioned him, inform me better of his Character, and tell me how you came
acquainted with him, for he must be an Extraordinary Person that could please
you.


Aemi. While I waited for a Wind at Chester, he chanced to come thither. He saw
me, and it seems I displeased him not. He quickly found an opportunity to be
acquainted, since I did not shun it; for I own at first view I liked him.


Mar. How, at first View! What! You that such Numbers have sighed for, and have
been insensible to all; Like at sight!


Aemi. 'Twere a Wrong to Friendship, and Beneath me, to dissemble with you. His
Person pleased me; but when he talked, his Discourse appeared so Soft, so
Natural; his Wit so Lively and so Unconstrained; That, though I ever Dreaded the
Inconveniences of Love, I struggled harder to conceal my Flame, than to
restrain my Heart; for having Seen and Heard, 'twas mine no more.


Mar. Mere Rapture! But what Reputation has he in the World? For I regard that
more than his Person or Wit.


Aemi. As I, so he, was to most a Stranger. All agreed he had no Estate, but a
Fine Gentleman.


Mar. How Is that! No Estate, and a Fine Gentleman! Advise him to keep where he
is, if he would preserve that Character. I assure you, it is as Difficult to be
thought so here, without an Estate; as it is to be thought Honest and Get one.


Aemi. All are not of that Opinion, for if Bellmine had no Fortune, I suppose
you would think him a Fine Gentleman.


Mar. I thank Heaven he has a very good one, and really Cousin, I find it much
for his Interest in my Heart, that I never Considered him without One.


Aemi. You are Mercenary.


Mar. Not wholly so; perhaps I should not esteem an acquaintance the worse; But
I think a Good Estate is one of the prettiest Qualifications a Husband can
have; my Love may decay, but an Estate is a certain Good. Oh, it is such a
Comfort! When my Husband is in a Dogged Humor, to call for my Glass Chariot,
take the Air on the Strand, and make half a score pleasant Visits, and as many
Conquests.


Aemi. Conquests! I hope you would not receive Addresses if you were Married?


Mar. Not Barefaced Love, not Plain so; but certainly nothing pleases us more,
than to be Admired; pleases us! pleases every Thing; What thing is not pleased
to be Liked? Then it is a certain Cure for the Spleen. Can any thing be more
Diverting than to have a Man who has ten times more Wit than I have, fall at my
Feet, and Adore mine.


Aemi. Can you think so, and not conclude it Flattery?


Mar. Flattery! What then? Is not my Power still the Greater, to force him to
say, what he does not think? Then I make my Husband Jealous by it.


Aemi. Is that an Advantage?


Mar. Oh a Great One! I have known it sharpen many a Stomach that was Cloyed
before. At Least, if Jealousy will not make him Kind, 'twill make him Civil,
out of fear of what I may do; Nay, I think it should make him Proud too.


Aemi. There is indeed a secret pleasure in having our Choice approved of; and
I never knew a Man fond of his Wife, when she was slighted by others. He will
no more boast of his Choice then, than she with Reason will boast of her
Virtue. And it seems then, you do not doubt being Admired.


Mar. Truly Aemilia, I fancy this Face, Bad as it is, with the advantage of Gay
Clothes, Coach and Equipage, will draw Admirers, when there are so many Stait
Fellows in Red out of Employment.


Aemi. Fie, fie, You begin to talk madly; come, let us haste to Church, and drive
away these Thoughts; I believe they have almost done.


Mar. Well, Thou art the strangest Creature; You are always interrupting my
Mirth with Church, and at Church I am sure you are thinking of something else.
-- Come prithee, Let us take the other Turn -- What you will go -- Well I follow.
[Exeunt.


Enter Freelove, Bellmine and Trickwell, as newly Arrived. Free. We have had a
pleasant Quick Passage. Would there were no more Shelves, nor Quicksands, no
more Difficulties in my Voyage of Love, and that it might be as soon finished.


Bell. I am sure I have been aboard long enough to smell like one of the Cabin
Boys; I fancy I totter still; the Ground seems to rise in Waves before me, and
when I walk, I lift my Feet and Paw like a Horse who has just lost his sight.


Free. (Looking about) A pleasant place this! The Name of it?


Bell. St. Stephen's-Green.


Free. I like the Air. -- I am glad your House has the benefit of it. Here
Sirrah -- what, you are Surveying where you shall get Drunk to Night; this
Rogue looks out for a Brandy Shop with more Earnestness and Joy, than a
Privateer for a Merchant Man. I wonder Bellmine you dare trust this Drunken
Rogue with so many weighty Affairs.


Trick. Alas Sir, Your Worship knows, I am the soberest Man alive: But if ever
I do drink, it is always after I have dispatched my Business, I divide my time
well.


Free. Oh yes! Exceeding well! Between Drinking for your Diversion, and Pimping
for his. But while you are Sober, and before he has any New Honorable
Employment for you, go see that our Things are brought from Shipboard. We
shall walk here till you return. [Exit Trick.


Bell. If all my Old Friends have not forgot me, I hope to employ him.


Free. I thought this last Amor would have made a Convert of thee, and Cured
thee of all Extravagancies.


Bell. This last Amor has Quite spoiled thee; thou were once one of the
prettiest Fellows about the Town; thy Advice assisted me in Love, thy Wit
promoted Drinking, thy Example Encouraged both; But now thou art Grown a
Downright Damned, Sober, Dull, Virtuous Fellow.


Free. Well, You are upon the Brink of Matrimony; if it does not Cure thee,
'twill at least tame thee.


Bell. Oh for Heaven's sake Name it not! I dread it as much as our Farmers do
the Wool-Bill.


Free. If you have such terrible apprehensions of it; How came you to think
on it?


Bell. Think on it! Why I don't think on it; norever will think on it. If I
Repent, which it is a thousand to one but I shall, I am Resolved to have that
Excuse, that I Married inconsiderately.


Free. It Is as extravagant and unaccountable for a Man of your Sentiments, and
loose Life, to Marry, as for a Coward with a good Estate to turn Soldier; Yet
I have seen both; and as in an Engagement, they VVink and Dye, so you will VVink
and Marry.


Bell. I beseech you, no more of it. I hate the word, Marriage, as much as a
Mariner does whistling at Sea; and for the same Reason, I fancy it will raise
Stormy VVeather. It Is a hard Case that we must submit to the thing we Hate,
before we can have the Woman we Love.


Free. The Ladies have a much harder Case with Men of your Extravagant
Principles: You are always Teazing 'em with Love; if they Return it, you
Insult; if they Refuse it, you Rail; if they Marry you, you grow weary of them;
if they Comply without it, you Contemn them.


Bell. Aemilia has made you a Rare Advocate for the Sex; I have known the time,
when you would no more allow Virtue in VVomankind, than Honesty in a Jesuit, or
Sincerity in a Courtier.


Free. VVhenever you hear any Man talk so, take it for Granted, that he has
lately met with some Disappointment; or that he is more Conversant with the
Bottle than with them; and it is then we chiefly deny them to be Virtuous, when
we find they are so: For some of you prudent Sparks, never Commend a Woman,
but to Conceal an Intrigue with her; and the readiest way to ruin their
Reputation, is for such to give her a good Character.


Bell. I confess I have more Charity for them since I knew Marqia, than
formerly; and you are giving a sufficient Proof of your good Opinion of the
Sex, and of the Violence of your Love, that have come from London hither, to
Marry a Lady without a Fortune.


Free. And would think my Travel round the Earth Rewarded with a Look.


Bell. I know I please you, by daily asking her Character.


Free. My Heart is never Easy, while my Tongue is employed about any other
Subject. She has Goodness without Folly or Easiness; Wit and Virtue without ill
Nature or Vanity; Beauty without Art or Affectation: She is so Excellent, that
even her own Sex Admires her, for those very Charms which Create their Envy.


Bell. Young, I don't doubt.


Free. She is so Young, she would not take it Ill, to be called Old.


Bell. But has she such an entire Possession of your Heart, that you can make
Love to no other?


Free. I could not even Affect it.


Bell I can, as you shall see immediately; for I perceive some Ladies coming
this way Masked.


Free. Well, I Will give you an Opportunity and Leave you.


Bell. No, to give me an Opportunity, you must stay; Engage one, while I talk
to the other.


Free. You must Excuse me.


Bell. Away; Thou art Grown as Surly, as if thou were already Married; Come, no
Denial, walk on a little, well take a short Turn and Meet them. [Exeunt.


Enter Aemilia and Marina. Mar. Now as I live Cousin our Prayers are heard;
Yonder is certainly my Spark Bellmine.


Aemi. And with him Freelove! How my Heart beats and labors in my Breast! And
now my Blood has taken the Alarm, flies to its Spring to be Assistant there,
forsakes its Channels, and leaves each distant part Pale and Faint.


Mar. Pale and Faint! That is pleasant! Now am I ten times more Lively than I
was; my Heart is a little Unruly too; But that is only, because it is weary of
this Old Dull Prison, and has a mind to exchange Quarters with that
Gentleman's. Prithee don't stand Trembling here, but let us walk toward 'em.


Aemi. Marina, Hold! I must be recovered a little before I own my self: But
what say you, if we should keep on our Masks, and see if they will Attack us;
we shall try their Constancy by it.


Mar. Nay, as for Constancy, I am not so Unreasonableas to expect that yet.
'Twill be very well, if my Spark leaves Rambling to a half Crown Ordinary
abroad, when he has a plentiful Feast provided for him at home. However, I like
the Proposal, I shall try his Wit, and Rally him by it: And Nothing pleases me
more than making an Ass of a Man of Wit; and a Mask is a Rare Opportunity, it
Conceals who we are, and Encourages us to be Bold, while our Sex Protects us.


Re-enter Freelove and Bellmine. Bell. Ladies your Servant! We think our selves
very Fortunate, That the first we see have so fine a Mien and Shape, and I am
confident your Faces are answerable: Will not you have the good Nature as to
Unmask, and prove me in the Right?


Mar. A good reasonable Request truly in your first Speech: Are the Ladies of
your Acquaintance so very Coming? But you are as much Strangers to us in
Expecting it, as you are to the place by Demanding it.


Bell. You like us the worse it may be for being so?


Mar. That supposition shows you are Strangers, or you would know, that to be
so, is a recommendation here.


Bell. Does that humor reign here? I hope it does in you too; then I may
succeed; for I assure you I am but this moment arrived; and to make me still
the more acceptable to thee, my Pretty Dear Creature; know, that I have brought
over some New Fashions, New Tunes, and New Plays; I can tell you which House
has the best Audience, which Player is most Applauded; who the Celebrated
Beauty of the Town, who keeps the best Equipage; I can tell you who Loves who,
and who does worse; what Duels have been lately Fought; who Killed, who Hanged,
who Jilted, who Married, who --


Mar. And so Convince me, you go abroad for the same wise Intent, most of our
young Sparks do. But you may as soon Borrow Money of a grave Citizen, by this
Character of your self, as expect any Favor from me by it.


Bell. Will not this please you? why then I can give you an account of the
Court; I can tell you which Lord has the greatest Levy; I can tell you of great
Favorites, who scarce could Breathe for Crowds of servile Sycophants, and in a
days time as lonely as if it had been Writ over their Doors, This House is
Infected with the Plague I can tell you of the Advancement of Fools and Knaves,
and the Disgrace of Men of Se^^e Worth, I can --


Mar. Hold, hold, you will only persuade me you have met with some
Disappointment there, for few rail at the Court for any other Reason.


Bell. Let me but have one stroke at Rogues in Power --;


Mar. Not a Syllable, or I shall believe you are vexed, because you cannot be
one in your turn.


Bell. Will not this do? why then have at the Parliament --


Mar. Worse and worse.


Bell. Nay then, I find no subject will please you but Love, and the tender soft
Things I have to say on that, must be whispered.


Free. A pretty New Way your Ladyship has of Rallying truly. You think
Flattery too great a Good to be enjoyed by Men only, and I Will lay my Life if
once you aim at it, you will be too hard for us, it is said we cannot keep pace
with you in Virtue, I am sure you outstrip us in Vice, when once you set your
selves to it.


Aem. 'Twere very unhappy a Man of your Wit and Judgment should have a mean
Opinion of us.


Free. My Wit and Judgment! very pretty. Take my Advice, never Admire a Man
for those Qualifications, which I assure you are the greatest Enemies
imaginable to your Sex. Wit and Judgment! why a Man must prove he has neither,
before you will allow him to be in Love.


Aem. You harbor severe Thoughts of us, and Love.


Free. I seldom speak my Thoughts to a Mask; But for once, to Convince you I
have Charitable Thoughts of both; I Will venture to tell you I am in Love.


Aem. I fancy then your Mistress treats you with severity, or requires
unreasonable things of you.


Free. There is nothing she requires I can think so.


Aem. If she be unkind, try another; I am confident so fine a Gentleman must
succeed.


Free. You are so very lavish in your Praises, that I know you expect I should
proffer you a Bottle of Wine and a cold Chicken.


Aem. My Praises at least deserve a civiller Reply.


Free. Nay if you knew with what indifference I proffer it; you would have more
reason to affect an angry Tone; for if you should comply, I assure you my usage
should be much Civiller than possibly you expect.


Aem. Come, this ill Nature is mere affectation in you; you have so good an
Appearance, I am resolved to esteem you, spite of your indifference.


Free. I am sorry, Madam, my indifference has not the same effect on you, that
your forwardness has on me. Here Belmine, prithee relieve me; I am the dullest
Fellow at this Commonplace Chat.


Mar. You have done very Charitably, Sir, to call to your Friend; Poor
Gentleman! he has ran himself clear out of Breath by Protesting his Passion for
me.


Bell. Who I, Madam? alas, I have said nothing yet; why Madam, if I do not
admire your Wit, your Shape, your Mien, the color of your Hair, your Fancy in
your Dress, more than --


Mar. Have a Care what you say, Sir; pray let your Simile be short, for I fancy
you are so very Fickle, that before you have made an end of it, your mind may
change.


Aem. Well, we will give the Gentleman leisure to reflect till Evening, and
perhaps by that time his Friend may be in a better Humor.


Bell. Dear, Kind, Obliging Creature, we will certainly attend ye. (Exeunt
Women.)

Why, what a damned unlucky Rogue was I now? that I did not attack her: she
seems to be half won already, and I Will engage you did not say one kind
passionate thing to her.


Free. Not a Syllable truly.


Bell. And she was very Compliant?


Free. So she seemed.


Bell. Why there is it now. Oh Fortune, Fortune! how do thou shower Wealth
upon the Rich?


Free. You have great reason to complain of Fortune indeed, because you have
not succeeded with such as these.


Bell. Such as these! why, who do you take 'em for, pray?


Free. For Women of the Town.


Bell. Women of the Town! why, thou do not know where thou art. Women of the
Town! why, there are no such things in this Town.


Free. No! then I have found the Reason you spend so little time in your own,
Country.


Bell. Freelove, not a word more of my Extravagancies as you tender my
Pleasures; I am not so much Reformed yet, but I have a Mind to enjoy them a
little farther, and I cannot do that here, but under the Disguise of a Sober,
Discreet Person.


Free. And so you would be thought Virtuous, that you may be the more
Conveniently Wicked.


Bell. Even so Faith.


Free. A very pious Design truly! yet I have known you affect a quite contrary
Reputation, and were industrious to be thought a very Lewd Fellow; Nay, and I
have known such a Character do a Man effectual Service with Women.


Bell. Ay, where Opportunities were easily met with; Women's Inclinations are
alike in all places, but all Places are not alike. In London, it is difficult to
be known; here, impossible to be concealed. Such a Character may do one Service
with the Woman, but not with her Relations. There, you may make a thousand
Cuckolds, yet they never hear of your, Name: Here, you cannot make one without
being Intimate with him; and I Will undertake you shall not be three days in
Town, but every Body in Town will know you; nay, and know, whence you came, how
long you stay, what is your Business, and if you have none, they will feign
enough for you; for I could name you such a Set, so Inquisitive, such
Detractors -- But hold, yonder comes one will spare my pains.


Free. Who, that Old Fellow?


Bell. He Is their President: One who never spoke Commendably of any Mortal.
There are no Degrees of Good with him, only some are less Bad than others; and
indeed he has reason to talk, for he has been a Bubble to Man and Woman from
his Infancy.


Free. Methinks his ill Nature should prevent him from that.


Bell. His ill Nature prevents him from designing to oblige any one, but he has
so good an Opinion of his own Wisdom, that any one may make an Ass of him.
Scurrility with him, is giving an Impartial Character, and that you may think
he speaks Truth, he rails most at those of his own temper.


Free. Enough of him; Pray let me avoid being known to him.


Bell. Impossible; I Will undertake, though we have not been Landed these two hours,
he has had an account of it already; and comes to Congratulate our Arrival, for
he will be tolerably civil to the present Company, either out of fear, or
design to gather something he may rail at.


Enter Wormwood. Worm. Mr. Bellmine, Your humble Servant.


Bell. Your Servant, Mr. Wormwood.


Worm. I am glad to see you in your own Country again; I heard you were come.


Bell. Freelove, do you hear?


Worm. I was told too there is an English Gentleman, your Friend, accompanied
you hither: I suppose that may be he. Prithee what may be his Business? they
say he is come to --


Bell. What, know his Business already! Come, I Will present you to him, and you
may know it from himself Mr. Freelove be pleased to know this Gentleman, he is
a plain Impartial Historian of the Times, and a very proper Acquaintance for a
Stranger; for he knows the whole Town, and gives every one their just Character.


Worm. Why truly, Sir, as this Gentleman says, I do speak my Mind; I think no
Body can tax me with Flattery.


Free. You should bid him have a care of Detraction too.


Bell. You Will spoil all, if he hears you (Apart) you will terrify him into good
Nature. No, he hates Detraction too; for it is not Detraction to speak ill of
those who deserve it.


Worm. You are in the right, Sir, and that I would do, tho it were of a Judge,
and I had a Suit depending. I would sooner loose my Cause, than my honest way
of Speaking.


Free. I believe you will be more Entertaining to this Gentleman, if you will
tell him who are the Beauties of the Town.


Worm. If you will rely on the Ladies Characters of one another, there are
none: For they are so Envious here (for which you must know I hate 'em) that
each thinks the Commendation of another is a wrong done to her self, and that
you deprive her of that Beauty you approve of in another.


Free. I have heard there were many fine Women in this Town.


Worm. It may be so; But you who are a young Gentleman, and I suppose would be
acceptable to them, must have a care of saying so.


Free. Why so?


Worm. Because you must make your Court to the present, by railing at the
absent.


Free. That is a New Way indeed.


Worm. An infallible Way to succeed. It Is what they practice to one another. I
can name you some Women who visit and are visited by half the Town, are
civilly treated, and have no Merit but Impudence and Scurrility. As for Example
--


Bell. Have a care of Names.


Worm. I Will venture at hers. My Lady Volant. --


Bell. How, my Lady Volant! I never saw her, but have heard abundance of her.
And is she in Being still: why what a bottomless sink of Malice is her Breast,
that is not yet exhausted?


Worm. It Is a Corrupted one, and taints every thing comes within it. She hates
every Body, yet is the civilest Person in the whole World, when she would dive
into your Affairs.


Bell. Or would borrow a Guinea. However she is a good Manager; for her Lodging
and Diet cost her Nothing; she Bilks one, and Spunges for the other.


Worm. I see you can Rail too.


Bell. Oh she is a public Pest. She has done more harm to deserving young Ladies
Reputations, than the Small Pox has to their Faces.


Free. No more of her, I beseech you. But is there no Body Merits a Good
Character?


Worm. You that are a Stranger may think there is. But those who deserve to be
Laughed at next, are that young, Pert, Conceited Fool Vainly, who construes
every Abuse a Complement, and that old Lewd, Fat, Doting Feignyouth, who are
both bewitched by her Ladyship.


Bell. How, Sir Francis Feignyouth.


Worm. The same. He fancies her Virtuous and Rich, though she has so very little
of either, she would renounce her Virtue to borrow a Crown. And because she is
reserved to him, he concludes she is is so every Body else.


Bell. This is Incredible. Is it possible he can be ignorant of her Character?
he has Friends enough to inform him.


Worm. If you went about to inform him, you would find it a hard Matter to
convince him of your Friendship; For he believes whoever speaks against her,
has some design on her himself. As for Vainly, I think no Body values him
enough to advise him.


Bell. What if I should advise Sir Francis; he cannot believe I have a design
on her.


Worm. But he knows you have one on his Daughter Marina, and he will imagine you
advise out of Interest.


Bell. Well, Sir, I thank you for your Information, it may be of use to me.
Will you please to Dine with us at the Globe: and let us know more of the
Affairs of the Town. Come Freelove, I see your Man yonder, I suppose he has
taken care of our Things; we'll Dine and change our Clothes, and then take
another Turn here.


Free. I suppose your Design is to meet your Masks again;
But have a care, this unknown Face may prove
Of Force, to overcome your former Love.
You wear a brittle and an easy Chain,
Who can to other Objects Passion Feign.

Bell. No, I can Feign, and yet my Heart defend.


Free. You're lost if on your own Strength you depend.
The Straragems and Force of VVomens Eyes
Subdue the Strong, Ensnare, and Fool the Wise.

[Exeunt. ACT II. Scene Continues.
Enter Wormwood. Worm. POx on this troublesome Coxcomb, he follows me again,
there is no getting from him. If I abuse him, he thinks it is either Raillery,
or like a Friend to tell him of his Faults.


Enter Vainly. Vain. I ask your Pardon, Sir, for staying behind you, but I
could not help it. You saw the Occasion.


Worm. Not I, Sir, I did not mind it.


Vain. No! why some Ladies stopped their Coach, and desired to speak with me.


Worm. It may be so.


Vain. Well, certainly there is not so true a Friend, nor one so fit for a
Confident as you are. You Will never seem to know any thing of your Friend's
secrets. I do not believe if you saw me in bed with one of those Ladies, you
would take any Notice of it; at least, I am sure you would not speak of it.


Worm. I am sure if I did, I should not be believed.


Vain. What! -- You think I soar higher. No Faith, a Man in this Town must
sometimes stoop below Title.


Worm. I Will say that for thee Vainly, thou have Assurance and Pride enough to
aim at an Empress.


Vain. I vow your Complements make me blush, it is true, though I have just Pride
enough to keep the Best Company, and Assurance to make use of an Opportunity.


Worm. Mistake me not, you have however Humility to dispense with a Kitchen
Wench.


Vain. Thou art the most agreeable Man upon Earth; you say as obliging things
to me, as I could to my Mistress. But dear Wormwood, do thou really think
that I can Suit my self so handsomely to my Company? am I so very obliging, so
wondrous Civil?


Worm. The Civilest Person alive, for you never contradicted any Man, though he
abused thee, nor ever made any Return to it but Thanks.


Vain. Why could any thing but so good a Friend, put the Construction of
Civility upon such things, if I were Guilty of them.


Worm. There is no freeing my self from him, but by beating him. (Aside) Look
ye, Sir, I shall not be so wondrous Civil as you are, therefore in short,
neither trouble me with your Company, nor with your professions of Friendship.


Vain. Why, as you say, a professing Friend is to be suspected; we that are so
Intimate, need not tell each other that we are so.


Worm. We Intimate! Leave abusing me. Do think I would be Intimate with
thee? for what? for that abundance of Powder in thy Perrewig? or for neatly
Twisting that great Slabbering Bib? or for the nice Roll of your Stockings? or
for your Muff-String and the Buckle?


Vain. Better and better. Why then you do think I dress well; I confess all the
Ladies in Town are of that Opinion.


Worm. Abominable Rogue! (Apart) I tell thee thou do nothing well; thou art
as dull in thy Conversation, as thou art pert in thy Behavior. You set up for
Dressing, as if you were newly returned from Paris, but do it as awkwardly as
one of our Attorneys Clerks, or a young Collegian, who has just thrown off his
Gown. Thou would be thought Brave by that Long Sword, but would fly the
sight of a Bodkin. In short, thou art in nothing what thou would be thought,
but art in every thing what thou seem.


Vain. Well, such a Friend is an inestimable Jewel. I now pronounce my self a
happy Man in having so sincere a Friend, so plain dealing an Acquaintance.


Worm. Again Friend; abuse me so again, and I Will spit thee with thy own Sword.


Vain. Why thou have as much Modesty as good Nature.


Worm. Death, I have neither.


Vain. Who can deal thus honestly by me; and cannot hear your self commended
with the Title of my Friend.


Worm. The Title of thy Friend a Commendation: why this is past all Sufferance.
Look ye, Sir, since I cannot persuade you to understand me by Words, I Will try
to make you understand me by my Sword. Come, Draw Sir. (Drawing)


Vain. Draw Sir!


Worm. Ay, draw Sir, so I say, no Repetition.


Vain. What a Plague will you Fight a Man, because he calls you his Friend?


Worm. Friend again! that word has winged thy Destiny, as the Poets have it. I
see the Rogue dare not Fight, I may push this matter home.


Vain. But Good Mr. Wormwood. --


Worm. Death, Sir, Draw I say, I shall make you Dance to a New Tune.


Vain. Oh Lard, Sir, is that all! how dull was I that I did not understand you!
I protest, dear Sir, you had reason to take it ill, that I should be so tedious
in Gratifying you. I learned a New Minuet yesterday; and though the place be not
so proper, yet to show how earnest I am to oblige you. La, La, La, La. (Sings
and Dances.)


Worm. Nay, then I think I may venture to put up my Sword, and beat Time with
my Feet on your Buttocks thus and thus --


Enter Freelove and Bellmine. Free. What, Quarrelling Gentlemen! hold, hold.


Vain. Oh no, Sir, by no means; you do not know Mr. Wormwood, he is a facetious
Person, and had a Mind we should practice a New Dance.


Bell. An Antic, I suppose.


Vain. Right, Sir, it is even so: if we can but get a Set, you shall see what
Sport we'll make at the next Ball.


Free. That, I hope, will be difficult.


Worm. Gentlemen, a word -- I would not have you seen in that little thing's
Company; you see he has no Sense nor Courage, and it may make the Wise and
Brave reflect on you.


Free. We thank you for your Caution, Sir.


Vain. Mr. Bellmine, you know I always had a value for you; your Friend too
seems a fine Gentleman, and I suppose is of your temper; would be acceptable to
the Ladies; but nothing can be so destructive to that, as being seen with that
old snarling ill bred Fellow; hang him, despise him, leave him.


Bell. Indeed to leave him to himself, is the surest way to Plague him, for ill
Nature is its own Greatest Torment.


Vain. You are most Ingenious. Dear Mr. Bellmine, you and I will be wondrous
great. Call your Friend away, and come with me. By your absence for some time,
you may be out of Acquaintance. Come, I Will show you every Body. I Will make you
acquainted with the whole Town this Afternoon. I have access every where. You
know the Ladies were always Fond of me.


Bell. I desire not to intermeddle between such Ladies and you; therefore pray
Excuse me.


Vain. Extremely obliging, kind to the last Degree; to deny your self so great
a Pleasure, for fear of Rivaling me. But I will not suffer that so much
Goodness should prejudice you. Come, we are hard by Sir Francis Feignyouth's,
I Will carry you thither.


Bell. Are you acquainted there?


Vain. Goodness that you should not know that! most intimately, Sir. Truth is,
they would be much fonder of me, but I Am often troubled with the Spleen,
exceedingly troubled with the Spleen, Mr. Bellmine, and they poor Creatures do
so Sympathize with me, that I never go there but I give it to them.


Bell. Faith thou art enough to give any one the Spleen.


Vain. Oh Good Sir, be not concerned; I would not for the world infect you;
it is too much to be so nearly concerned for me: Besides there is no Danger of
having it in your Ingenious Company; and that is the reason I go there so often
to divert it, for Sir Francis's Daughter Mrs. Marina has a world of Wit, and
her Cousin Aemilia is nothing short of her, they have both vast Sense, vast
Sense they have indeed; and you know you may depend on my Judgment. Then they
Write so Charmingly.


Bell. Have you any of their Letters?


Vain. Oh Goodness, Sir, what a Question is there?


Bell. A Question! why do thou dare to say it?


Vain. Not a word you say, but gives me a proof how infinitely you value me. No
it is base to boast of a Ladies Favor, that is the truth on it. I take your
Caution extreme kindly Mr. Bellmine.


Bell. Death and Hell dare not to think it, not to hope it, nay, not to wish it.


Vain. Oh Enough, enough, a Word to the Wise; I will be more discreet for the
future.


Bell. Discreet! Insolent Wretch -- Death, thou deservest to be beaten.


Free. Bellmine so loud! Do thou not know that next to the Disgrace of being
Beaten, is that, of Beating those we know will bear it.


Bell. For thee even to name the Woman I admire, is almost enough to lessen my
Good Opinion of her, did I not know you both.


Free. Away, mind him not.


Vain. Od's my Life, is one of them his Mistress? I thought there was something
extraordinary it makes him so Choleric; he is Jealous and takes me for his
Rival; nothing less could make him angry with me; But we that are admired by
the Women, must expect to be envied by the Men. Pox take 'em, I could bear
their Envy, but I don't relish this Quarrelling and Striking, and Hurting and
Fighting, and Wounding and Dying, and the Devil and all. Where is the sense of
it? I am sure every Body is so fond of me, that if they did but know how little
I care for such things, there is not one would offer it to me, not one, I Am
confident: Least these Strangers should mistake my humor, I Will march off; and
there is a rare Opportunity, a Hackney Coach coming this way with two Masks;
I Will pretend they called me. Heigh! you Rascal! Coachman, don't you hear the
Ladies cry hold? Dear Gentlemen, you see the Reason of my leaving you, there
are some Ladies in the Coach call me; therefore I hope you will pardon the
abrupt Departure of your most obedient faithful Servant. [Exit.


Worm. There Is a Dog now, there is a Rogue. Why, would you prevent my Drubbing
him? I would have kick't him into Jelly.


Free. If you had persever'd, you had quickly made his feeling as dull as his
understanding.


Worm. I attacked his most sensible part.


Free. And yet I have known some as Contemptible as he, boast of their success
in Intreagues; nay, and boast with truth too, though one should imagine that Vice
alone should destroy their future Success; since it is as imprudent in Women to
put it in such Men's power to boast, as it is in the Men base to be Guilty of it.


Bell. There is none so Despicable, but have some Quality to recommend them to
some Body. Nay, it often happens that a Man is admired by some, for that very
Quality, for which others despise him: And Vainly has one Qualification will
make many Men, and most Women value him.


Free. What is that?


Bell. A Good Estate.


Free. Those who want one, and imagine it to be a much greater Blessing than it
is found to be by you, or any who possess it.


Worm. For my Part, I cannot help fretting that such dull Rogues as that,
should have one. It Is a Gift of Fortune, as much missapply'd, as to confer
swiftness on the Blind; for he can make no use of it; and that is all my
Comfort. He Squanders it all away in Sword, Knots, Perrewigs, Essence, Powder,
and such material Things.


Free. Oh Sir, Let every Man dispose of his Money as he pleases, so he is
inoffensive to others. We have all different Appetites; his satisfaction lies
in Gay Clothes, your pleasure lies in not being pleased. One Man loves
Drinking, another Intreagueing, Bellmine both; being a Man of an universal
Genius.


Bell. Your Servant, Good Sir, you needed not have Traveled so far for an
Example. But yonder, I think, comes my old Dad that must be, who will exceed
both you and I in those.


Worm. Yes, yes, it is all about the Town already that you are to marry his
Daughter. But let me advise you one thing; Break off the Match between Sir
Francis and my Lady Volant, or you will have but a slender Fortune with your
Spouse.


Bell. But can it be possible that thou should give this Advice, purely out
of good Nature?


Worm. No, I do not; mind it not; 'twill Gratify my ill Nature, that thou
should not follow good Counsel. Forward the Match, and then Marry the
Daughter for pure Love. But if I were you, I would choose to Marry his Niece
Aemilia, that I might be sure not to have a Groat with her.


Free. And is not she a Fortune without Money?


Worm. Ha! ha! ha! the Man's mad. Why, what the Devil is Fortune but Money, or
what is Woman or Honor or any thing else without it?


Free. Has she not Virtue, Sense, and Beauty?


Worm. The Woman is not ugly, that is the Truth on it. But where have thou been
Educated? where have thou spent thy time? what have thou convers't with?
Nothing but old Fables and Romances, with your Lucretia's and Sempronia's, with
your Cassandra's and Clelia's, and such stuff. In this Age talk of Virtue and
Sense! why I tell thee --


Bell. Wormwood have a care, he is the Sex's Knight Errant.


Worm. Is he? why then let him suffer as much as any of those fancied ones to
get his Mistress, (and she prove to be a Whore) (Aside) but if you will not
give me leave to vent plain truths, I Will go think 'em. [Exit.


Free. I am much mistaken if this Fellow would not stand Kick and Cuff as
heroically as the other.


Bell. Altogether as rank a Poltroon; they only differ in the manner, not in
the thing. But here is one will please us better,


Enter Sir Francis Feignyouth. Sir Fr. Mr. Bellmine, how I rejoice to see you
again in Ireland! Well, and what price bear Wine and Women now in London? hah!
does the Mall swarm with Masks, and is French Wine admitted yet?


Bell. Before we talk of such weighty Affairs, let me desire you would know my
Friend here. (Salute.)


Sir Fr. Mr. Bellmine, Sir, has given you a Character will introduce you into
the good opinion of all this Town.


Free. If it can purchase me yours, 'twill be the greatest Service it can ever
do me.


Sir Fr. Oh Sir, your own Merit will always give you an absolute sway over,
Sir, your most faithful humble Servant.


Free. My Merit, Sir, will make but a slender Figure in the presence of so
accomplished a Person as Sir Francis Feignyouth.


Sir Fr. I protest, Sir, you make me blush -- Nay no more I beseech you, my
modesty will not suffer you to proceed. (an exceeding well-bred ingenious
Person!) (Apart)


Bell. So, he has won his heart already. (Apart)


Sir Fr. Mr. Bellmine, no one has a better taste of Man than you. You have done
your Country Service by bringing so fine a Gentleman to it. May I crave your
Name, Sir?


Free. Freelove, at your Service, Sir.


Sir Fr. I have known several of that Name in England, fine Gentlemen all.
Well, Sir, for your comfort, you will find Women here that are not
Despicable; I know it is the greatest Commendation of any place to you young
Gentlemen; But then Opportunities are scarce, there is no getting at 'em.


Bell. I hope that is no Fault to you who have a Family, Sir Francis?


Sir Fr. No, no, I speak in reference to you Gentlemen; I am past such things
my self.


Free. Past it, Sir! a Man of your Make, your Health and Sanguine Constitution,
past it! no Sir, you are as Vigorous as ever.


Sir Fr. Think you so, Mr. Freelove? Do I seem very Strong, very Sanguine, very
Vigorous? hah!


Free. As Five and Twenty, Sir.


Sir Fr. You Flatter me; I should find it hard to persuade the Women to that
Belief.


Free. No Woman that has Eyes in her Head will doubt it; if she does, you can
convince her another way.


Sir Fr. Ods me, I Will go see my Mistress incontinently: I am not so decayed as
I thought. Well, Mr. Freelove, I am much obliged to you for your Complements;
if you will meet me at the Coffee-House this Evening, I Will carry you to see my
Mistress, to receive your Sentiments of her. I have a great Relyance on your
Judgment; so much, that since you think me fit for it, I am resolved to be
Married to Morrow.


Bell. How Sir! to be Married.


Sir Fr. Ay, to be Married, Sir, what have you to say against that Holy State?
you will not declaim against Marriage before me, I hope?


Bell By no means, Sir, since I admire your Daughter, you may be sure it is
that I covet.


Sir Fr. Do you so, then why do you not Marry, if you like one another?


Bell. I can promise for my self, and I hope there is no Aversion on her side.
But there is something else to be Considered.


Sir Fr. What than Love! Do you pretend to Love, and Consider any thing else
but Love? Consider! pish, that word agrees as ill with Love, as with one of thy
age. Why, when I was a young Fellow, I never considered any thing but how to
get a Mistress, and then how to get rid of her.


Bell. But you know, Sir Francis, in Matrimonial Cases, we are to consider how
to maintain Children, and Housekeeping, and a Wife will expect a Coach, and a
fine Equipage, and Gay Clothes, and --


Sir Fr. And the Devil and all, I know it Sir, I know it.


Bell. Now Sir, though I have a tolerable Estate, yet the better to support your
Daughter's Grandeur --


Sir Fr. You would have me starve my self.


Bell. No, no, I shall be very Moderate.


Sir Fr. Phoo, trust to my Fatherly Love Boy, trust to that. If not, yonder she
goes, look upon her, and Consider if you can.


Bell. Is that she Sir? Freelove, the very Two we have been talking with this
Morning! what a couple of Dull Rogues were we? (Aside.)


Sir Fr. Is that she? you a Lover, and cannot distinguish your Mistress in a
Mask! Yes, it is she, and my fine Niece Aemilia. Talk of Portions! Look on 'em I
say; there is a Motion, there is an Air, there is an Air: See, see, how firm they
tread, hah? and then see their Hips, how they jut, how they roll. Go, get ye
gone, ye lazy Fellows, get ye gone. Ods me, don't stand staring after them, but
follow them, and try how our Ladies can talk. Go, get ye gone. [Exit Bell.


Free. Well Sir, I Will meet you at the Coffee-House. [Exit. Free.


Sir Fr. Very well, away, away.

These young Fellows now adays are perfectly of the VVomens temper, must be
forced to do what they Languish for, or they keep themselves so low, they must
take time to be mis'd; I believe I am brisker than any of them -- How the Jades
have fired me. Would I could meet with any thing that were not my own Flesh
and Blood now -- Any thing though she were in a Stuff Riding-hood.

We that have Vigor, and our Stomachs keen,

Can eat of any Dish, that is sound and clean. [Exit.


Enter Marina followed by Bellmine. Bell. Now am I resolved, for once, to give
her a small proof of my unshaken Fidelity.


Mar. Now cannot I find in my heart to discover my self, though I long he should
know me. I see, to Deceive is a greater Pleasure to our Sex, than to Love.


Bell. I perceive you are a Woman of Honor, by being so punctual to your
assignation; but I am sorry so much Kindness as well as Justice, is thrown away
on a Man, who is not inclinable to make use of either.


Mar. So indifferent, Sir! you talked in another strain this Morning.


Bell. Then I had some Reasons.


Mar. Why do you not still?


Bell. The Cause is removed.


Mar. What was that?


Bell. To give my Friend an Opportunity to talk to yours.


Mar. Why do you follow me now?


Bell. To contradict what I then said.


Mar. Truly, Sir, it is a very needless Trouble you give your self, for be
assured, I as little valued, as I credited what you said.


Bell. You see however, I am a Man of Conscience, and could not rest satisfied,
till I endeavored to convince you --


Mar. How little you value me.


Bell. That I value you -- as much as a prudent Man ought to do a Mask. But
that the Fates have otherwise disposed of my Heart.


Mar. Oh Ridiculous: is the Creature in Love!


Bell. Ridiculous:


Mar. Do not you know that every particular Woman despises a Man for Loving
any thing but her dear Self? and will you be contemned by the whole Sex, to be
esteemed by one?


Bell. I very well know, Madam, Love is a Passion despised by all over whom it
has not a present Sway; not only by those who never yet Loved, but even by
those who have Loved. But I never make other Men's sentiments a standard for my
Pleasures.


Mar. And will you be laughed at by your own Sex, and despised by ours? and all
perhaps for one who Loves some body else; Nay, it is very likely for one of so
little Wit, that you will be laughed at more for your choice than passion.


Bell. Nothing can justify the Excess of my Passion, but the Excellence of the
Object.


Mar. I have known some dote even on Deformity, and say the same thing; have
fancied Beauties where there was nothing but Faults. But for my part, I should
think it a scurvy Complement to have my Lover say, his Passion and my Beauties,
were owing to his Fancy.


Bell. And yet the most perfect owe their Conquests to that, or we should all
Love the same Person.


Mar. I doubt not but your Fancy is unrivaled. Some Nauceous thing.


Bell. I tell thee perverse Woman, she is the most excellent of her kind; she
is beyond my description; not only beyond your belief, but imagination.


Mar. Fulsom.


Bell. Thou do almost provoke me to treat thee roughly; but that I perceive
something in thy Air and Shape, not much different from hers, and for which I
honor you.


Mar. Alas poor Dissembler! I thought I should Discover whence this uncommon
Fidelity of yours proceeded. You very well knew to whom you professed it, and
to whom you addressed these Commendations. I do not doubt but the old Gentleman
I saw you talk to, discovered to you, who your humble Servant was. (Unmasks.)


Bell. Bless me, Madam, is it you!

How could you have the Conscience to tempt Humane Frailty thus? and would you
have blamed me, if I had been false to you, when tempted by you?


Mar. As if you did not know me!


Bell. Know you^ impossible. Come, indeed I should chide you, as well for trying
my Faith, as for concealing your self so long, when you know the Business of my
coming here was to see you, and the Business of my Life to serve you. When I am
sensible of no pleasure without you, and have no wish beyound you.


Mar. Hold, hold, or I shall believe you imagine I have my Mask on still; when
nothing will pass for good Sense that is not strained beyond it; nor for a
Complement under Profaneness; nor for Love that is not ridiculously affected.


Bell. You must allow a little heat at first sight, after so tedious an Absence.


Mar. That shall not excuse you, if I find you knew me, for I cannot endure to
be undermined.


Bell. What will convince you that I did not? shall I have recourse to
Swearing? and --


Mar. And Dissembling. No, those are too often practiced to gain Credit with me.
But come, I Will refer it to your Friend that is walking before us; I hear he is a
Man of Sincerity: And if you have fooled me, by talking thus, when you all the
time knew me, expect nothing but Frowns from me these three Days. [Exeunt.


Enter Aemilia followed by Freelove. Free. I will still pretend I know her not,
that I may see how she will resent my Passion for another. (Speaks entering
Aside)

Believe me, Madam, when I protest it was an affected, and own it was a brutal
Entertainment you received from me this Morning. But I come now full of
Repentance, and full of Hopes you entertain the same favorable Thoughts of me,
you then seemed to have.


Aem. There has no alteration happened in my Mind since, but there seems to be
in yours.


Free. A Reflection on your Goodness, Wit, Shape, and Air, was able to soften a
heart more hard than mine; But a second View and farther Proofs, have confirmed
it to you.


Aem. Should he say this and not know me? I Am lost. (Aside) A bad Face (as
perhaps mine is) will soon lose my Conquest.


Free. It must be bad indeed, if so many other Charms cannot atone for it. Be
what it will, I admire it.


Aem. You prove your Generosity in giving your heart to a Stranger; but that
makes me doubt your Constancy; a Virtue in a Lover, which every Woman has the
Vanity to expect, though so few deserve it.


Free. You want no assurances of my future Constancy, if you believe I now Love
you; for no one ever Loved, who did not conclude he should always Love the same.


Aem. I must conclude you very Rash and Imprudent, to profess such Love to you
know not whom.


Free. The more I show my Imprudence, the fiercer I prove my flame; trust me,
it is a Dull and Languid Passion, which can be checked by any Consideration.
Shall I, to be thought prudent by a World, where some will hate me for being
so, and the rest do me no good, debar my self of real Pleasures? No, no,
Prudence must submit to pleasure, with me.


Aem. What! have you no regard to Reputation?


Free. As much as any Man. But whatever we pretend it is pleasure rules us. We
do not this, nor forbear that, for the real good of the thing, but that it
pleases us. The Woman that is Chaste, is not so for the sake of that Virtue,
but the Fame of being so, delights her more, than the Joys she receives by
being otherwise. When any Woman refuses what I request, and Love prompts; I
conclude, it is because she values something more than Love and me; and she who
suffers any thing to come in Competition with her Love, Loves not.


Aem. You have given me great Advantage over you; for since I have not
professed a Passion for you, I am not obliged to any of these Extravagancies,
but you are.


Free. I own it. There is nothing I will refuse, that Love and you require.


Aem. And you profess this mighty Passion to me only?


Free. Witness it Heaven and Earth, to you only.


Aem. Ungrateful Fickle Mah! Look here, behold this Face, and be as much
confounded to behold who it is, as grieved it is not a Stranger to your Baseness.
-- Oh that Submission well becomes thee now, but do thou think I am that tame
forgiving Fool, a Bow can Reconcile me to thee, make me forget thy
inconsiderate Rash Temper? when e're I do, I shall forget thee too; remembering
one, I shall remember both, and both despise.


Free. It Is as I wished.


Aem. What Is as you wished? that I have found thee false; art thou come here
only to publish it? it is well thou can not publish too, that I ever made thee
a Return to thy feigned Passion; that would indeed increase thy Pride.


Free. You never have till now.


Aem. Till now! unheard of Impudence! what! when I tell how I disdain a Vice,
must you misconstrue it for Love?


Free. Yet, am I pleased, o'rejoy'd at all this Wrath, which shows your
Jealousy; the greatest sign I e're could yet receive, that I am not indifferent
to you; to have this proof it was, that I disguised my knowledge who you were.


Aem. Oh Hypocrite! Artful Dissembler! how quick to catch at an Excuse! this
shows thy Cunning, not thy Innocence, while I supposed thee Honest, 'twas easy
to delude me, and gain a Credit in every thing. Now thou art known, I doubt
each word, Even known Truths uttered by thee, would be suspected.


Free. Do not Persist in this; why will you dash my rising Joy, my first and
only hour of Bliss? I sought to know if you valued me enough to be Jealous, and
would be happy in the search, could I now remove your Doubts -- for I Love --


Aem. No doubt, you Love; Love every thing you meet; and therefore it is I Will
none of it. Therefore I Will leave you to gratify your Roving Humor. Run, Fawn,
Caress each Common Thing you meet; give them thy heart, a present only fit for
such; try which can affect a Passion most, and which can first Deceive. While
such as I, look with disdain on thee, and pity upon them. [Exit.


Free. Oh Confusion! what have I done? searching to discover her Love, my only
Happiness, I have forfeited it. Curse on my impertinent Curiosity. (Enter
Bellmine.)

Curse on my dull Designs! my Concern too hindered my telling her, her Uncle
could witness I knew her. Before she is undeceived, she may take some resolution
for ever Fatal to my Love and Quiet. Nay, I have given her a Moments disquiet;
were I an Age upon a Rack, 'twere but a poor Atonement. Oh, I could tear this
prating Tongue out by the Roots, beat out these stupid Brains; and only spare
my heart, because it is hers.


Bell. What Is the meaning of all this? here is some Mischief toward. I met your
Mistress frowning, and find you ranting. What Quarrel already! this Matrimony
runs so in, your head, it has quite spoiled your Humor; stay till the
Comfortable indissolvable Knot is tied, and then I shall not wonder. You Jarr like
Man and Wife already.


Free. Oh Bellmine! I have done the most imprudent thing -- You need not wonder
at my Rage, since you beheld her frowns. I am the Ridiculous Cause of Both. I
must be making Experiments.


Bell. Why, I have been about some such matter too, which had like to have
happened ill. But thanks to a little decent Assurance, and some few necessary
Oaths, all is well again. My fair Lady having no great reason to think me the
most constant of Lovers, I was resolved to let her see, I was not to be
tempted, and pretended not to know her.


Free. Did you leave her in that Opinion?


Bell. Or I would never have left her. I were a hopeful Fellow indeed; and had
improved my Time well in the world, if I could not persuade and swear my
Mistress to any Opinion.


Free. You swore it too, you did not know her?


Bell. Swore it! ay lustily: what do think I would scruple an Oath to put a
Lady in a good Humor?


Free. What unlucky Stars were they which brought us together, and what an
unnatural Conjunction; that ever I should enter into strict Friedship with one
who is my perfect Reverse!


Bell. What art thou mad?


Free. I Dreaded I had ruined my self, and you have Conscientiously by your
Genteel Qualities of Lying and Swearing confirmed it. I am undone, if Aemilia
believes I did not know her, and Marina will confirm her in that belief, thanks
to your Industry and Conscience.


Bell. Pish is that all? why, I Will forswear it again, Man, to do you Service.


Free. If you could but prevail with your self to speak truth, there would be
no occasion for this Complaisance.


Bell. Speak truth to a Woman! why you see what comes of it. I tell thee the
Sex bear such a Detestation to it, that no man ever succeeded with them that
practiced it. But come, Sir Francis Feignyouth expects us by this time to carry
us a visiting; I have a mind to see whither her Ladyship be improved in
Scandal; what new Reputations she has sacrificed to her Malice.


Free. I am in no humor to be delighted with such things.


Bell. I never knew any Man so easily dejected in Love Affairs. I have already
advised you always to dissemble in Relation to Women. I will give you one
Caution more, in relation to all matters as well as to that.

Never let your mind be with Despair o'recast;

But always hope, you will Succeed at last.

It Is better far to hope, although those hopes deceive,

Than to despair of Bliss, and yet the Bliss receive.


[Exeunt. ACT III. Scene Lady Volant's.
Enter Timothy and Lady Volant. Tim. DOn't you think, Madam, that I Will bear
this Life any longer, I will not endure to be used thus; nor must you think to
talk to me at this Rate.


Lady Vol. Not suffer me to talk! you saucy Fellow; do you know who I am?


Tim. A very needless Question to be put to me by my Lady Volant, considering
the Familiarities that have past between us; your Pride, your Malice, your
Inquisitiveness, your Detraction, are known to all the Town; and your Ladyships
Chastity and Wealth in a more particular manner to your pretended Steward,
Timothy Tellpenny.


Lady Vol. And do you upbraid me for having these Qualities so agreeable to
your self; and for the want of those you have ruined? Did I take you up half
Starved, and in Rags, Fed you like an Epicure, and Clothed you like a
Gentleman, till you are as overgrown in Bulk, as with Pride? maintained you so
well, made you live in so much Plenty and Ease, that there is as great an
alteration in your Person as Circumstances; so great, that you neither are
known by others nor by you self: And is this the Reward I have?


Tim. No, you have been rewarded to the full, my Good Lady. That you nourished
my Person, was for your own sake; if I had not been of more than Herculean
strength, you had reduced me to a Shadow e're this, to ashes. And has not the
Credit of my being your Steward gained you so much? Have not I managed and
spared prudently, and borrowed for you profusely? Have not I by my Art imposed
you on the Town for a great Fortune, when you know you were never able to give
me a Guinea, that I did not first borrow for you?


Lady Vol. But who must pay those Debts?


Tim. Who? my Wit must; your Jointure never will. Have not I wrought Sir
Francis Feignyouth to Love you? Have not I persuaded him to a Belief, that your
ill Nature is Wit, and that your Pride is Virtue; that the decay of your Person
proceeds from a neglect of your self, and not from Age; though you know you are
equally industrious to be thought handsome your self, as that no body else may
be thought so. And have not I made your Poverty pass upon him for good
Management? and least we should be disappointed of him, have I not used the
same Arts to Vainly?


Lady Vol. You have taken Pains to get me a Husband, that I must own.


Tim. As much as ever a young sanguine Wife did, to get an Heir to a Rich
feeble Husband; gone to as many places, and tried as many Men.


Lady Vol. But to what purpose have you succeeded yet?


Tim. Ay, to be sure it is the Man is always blameable. I had succeeded long
since, if you would be pleased to govern that unruly Member, your Tongue; which
is ever employed in Flattering the present, and Railing at the absent; so
disoblige both, for so you do but rail, you no more consider to whom, than of
whom you speak.


Lady Vol. Nay, Good Tim, I relent, thy words pierce my heart.


Tim. You will exclaim against a standing Army before a broken Officer, and
praise one before a politic Senator; you are never of the same Religion with
those you are in Company with, but change it with every Visitor: A Fanatic
before Papists, and with Fanatics for Jure divino; you commend Ireland when
out of it, and abominate it now you are here; you condemn Plays before Poets,
and adore Sermons before Atheists; you rail at Ladies before their Lovers; and
at Husbands before their Wives; but that I think is not much minded, you have
not got many Enemies by that.


Lady Vol. I beseech you, do not treat me thus.


Tim. Is there one Person in Town you have not vilified? and to make the
Scandal bring more certain Ruin with it, have you not aspersed other people
with your own actions? Do I not know all your Faults, and have not I carefully
concealed all for above these three years, that I have known you?


Lady Vol. Thou have, I own it, I was to blame to deny thee.


Tim. And after all I have done, and all I expect to do, refuse me a Guinea,
and when I carried the Plate to pawn too.


Lady Vol. There, there is a couple for you, though you know dear Tim, how very
few more I have left.


Tim. Pretty Rogues! Comfortable Rogues! how they mollify me! how they smile on
me! you know Madam, is to entry on your Projects, alas, what occasion should I
have for Money, but to do you Service! what have I almost forgot! Mr. Bellmine,
who they say is to Marry Sir Francis's Daughter, is Landed this Morning; now
you must use all your Art to delay this Marriage, till your own be perfected,
and till you have got the Knights Money in your own hands; for Mr. Bellmine,
having a good Estate, will require a great Portion, which will disable Sir
Francis from paying your Debts, and spoil our Projects on him, for his Estate
being Entailed, he cannot raise much, and the moment he is Married, I will
arrest him for Four or Five thousand Pounds you must pretend to owe me.


Lady Vol. Four or Five thousand! Ten or Twelve.


Tim. Ever insariable. No, no, such a Debt and the Bondage of Matrimony
together, will break his heart.


Lady Vol. Well, I leave all to your Management.


Tim. Is not that a Coach stopped? it is some visitor, I will usher them up.
(Exit.)


Lady Vol. How insolent the Rogue is grown! Thus we are ever used by such
Fellows, when we put our selves in their Power; and we never treat them better
than they deserve, but they treat us as we deserve; I am glad however he knows
not my Grand Secret; that would make him Ten times more saucy. I have concealed
it above these five years, not only from him, but from the whole Town, and with
much ado, heaven knows, considering how much depends on it, the place, and my
Female Frailties, for I have observed that Secrets of the greatest Consequence,
are preserved with the greatest pain. That we could but keep a Secret with as
much ease, as we can dissemble! but the Reason's plain, the one gives us
trouble, the other pleasure, as for Example. (Enter Vainly.)

Mr. Vainly, your most humble Servant.


Vain. Your most Obedient Vassal, Dear Madam.


Lady Vol. Your Company, Mr. Vainly, is so coveted by every one, that it is
impossible you should make any particular person happy with it, often or long.
You are grown a Stranger here.


Vain. I protest Madam, ever since I was here last night, I have been so
tormented with the Spleen.


Lady Vol. Alas Sir, that is a cruel Distemper truly. But it is a Fine you must
pay for Wit. You Wits are all subject to that.


Vain. We are so indeed, Madam; and really I believe I have it to a more
violent degree than anyone. I swear Madam, it has such an effect on me
sometimes, that I do not put above half a pound of Powder in my Perriwig for a
whole day, and Discomposes my Face so violently, that I cannot bear even the
sight of a Looking-Glass, and I hurry abroad without the Garniture of a Patch,
or a Sword-knot.


Lady Vol. Is It possible! nay, if it makes you neglect your self, your Friends
must expect to be served so too.


Vain. Every thing is disagreeable to me then, but your Ladyship. That I think
was Nice. (Aside.)


Lady Vol. Oh Lard, Sir!


Vain. Nay, I swear it is truth. Alas Madam, it is scarce a Complement in this
dull Town.


Lady Vol. Do you think it so too, Mr. Vainly?


Vain. Oh Madam, I cannot bear it.


Lady Vol. Nay solemnly, Sir, it was a great while before I could; it agreed as
ill with my Constitution, as it does with my Inclinations; but, thank my Stars,
I have done tolerably well, since my being Naturalized. How fortunate am I to
have my Opinion strengthened by one of your Judgment! it is a horrid place, and
I vow. (as you say Mr. Vainly) I do not see a pretty Woman in it.


Vain. Not one but your Ladyship; nor is there an agreeable Man here.


Lady Vol. Only Mr. Vainly. The Women are so affected.


Vain. And the Men so Proud.


Lady Vol. So Censorious --


Vain. And so selfish -- and when a parcel of 'em are met together, so
talkative.


Lady Vol. They make as much Noise as a Crowd of Apprentices at a Bonfire.


Vain. But now we talk of such People; Mr. Bellmine is Landed this Morning, who
is to Marry Mrs. Marina; and with him there is come a Gentleman who has the
same design on Aemilia.


Lady Vol. No doubt they will succeed; since one is as little admired for her Wit
and Beauty, as the other is for her Fortune.


Vain. Ha, ha, ha, Your Ladyship has the neatest Way of Railery, I have had
some Encouragements there; and I do nor doubt but Mr. Freelove (for that is his
Name) will desist as I did, when she hears he is a Beggar, and when he has seen
your Ladyship.


Lady Vol. You are so obliging -- But pray what sort of a Man is he? he must
needs be an extraordinary Person who has so particular a Fancy.


Vain. He was very fond of me, till he began to suspect me for his Rival, so
was Bellmine too. The best I know of him is, he is just come from dear England,
and has been lately in much dearer France The worst I know of him, or indeed
can know is, that tho he wears fine Clothes, he has no more Money than his
Mistress.


Lady Vol. Oh hideous!


Vain. The best Jest is (for all the Town know it already) though they are
acquainted with each other's Condition, they are in Love with each other, and
are resolved to Marry.


Lady Vol. And Starve. Oh Matrimony and Poverty joined, are Comfortable Things!
Sure his Head is as empty as his Pocket.


Vain. That I suppose, you will soon be convinced of; for I saw him with Sir
Francis Feiguyouth, who I do not Question will bring him here this Evening.


Lady Vol. Alas, Mr. Vainly, you know I cannot be so rude to refuse a Visit, or
I would never suffer that Ridiculous Fellow to come within my Doors; but
Civility often constrains us to do what we hate. -- I think I hear some Body
coming -- You Will pardon me if I retire, it would not bear the appearance of
Decency to be found Entertaining you alone; I assure you my Woman would not
behave her self thus, were any other here but you. You Will Excuse me Sir --


Vain. Oh Dear Madam, this Confidence in me, is the greatest Honor that can be
conferred on, Madam, your most Obedient Servant. [Exit Lady Volant.

She is fond of me to a violent Degree, that is plain; the next time I come, I
will propose Marriage to her; I fear no Rival, especially that Old Fopp.


Enter Sir Fra. Feignyouth, Freelove and Bellmine. Sir Fr. Come Gentlemen,
come, you shall see now, if I have not made a Good Choice, you shall. -- Ha! how!
what! Vainly here! Pray Sir, if I may be so bold, what is your Business here?


Vain. My Business, Sir!


Sir Fr. Ay Sir, your Business, Sir; I think I speak very plain, Sir?


Vain. Oh Dear Sir Francis! Plain Dealing is a Jewel, you cannot oblige me
more, than to deal plainly and freely by me. I take it for a signal proof of
your Kindness.


Sir Fr. Here Is a shifting young Rogue; who would have thought it had so much
Cunning. But answer me to the purpose, or I shall try how you can evade a Pass
of this. What is your Business here?


Vain. The Business of all the World, Sir; to wait on my Lady Volant.


Sir Fr. Is it so? And have you seen her?


Vain. Have I seen her! Oh Goodness, what a Question there is? Pray Sir, do my
Visits use to be refused, Sir?


Sir Fr. There are indeed some Ladies, who treat all Men alike, the Impertinent
with the same Regard they do the Man of Sense, the Little, Fidling, Prating Fop
like the Man of Honor and Discretion; But my Lady Volant is no such, she can
distinguish, she can Sir --


Vain. Ay, I know it Sir, I know it; and you will find so in a little time.


Sir Fr. Why ye Little, Young Pert, Prating, Fidling Boaster, do you hope to
Succeed, where I have Pretensions? Don't you know that I can Fight? ha --


Free. Not with this Gentleman I hope, Sir Francis. Methinks you mistake the
right use of him; he is properer for your Diversion than your Anger.


Vain. Ay Sir, it is very true. I have fought, Sir, several times, but in my
Opinion, Laughing and Talking is better Sport by the half.


Bell. Especially to one whom it becomes so well as you.


Vain. Your most humble Servant, Sir: I am glad we have Gentlemen come to us
now that understand Breeding and Conversation; It Is not to be had here. I
protest, Sir, I am forced to go to England once a year, to refine my
understanding.


Bell. What need you put your self to that Trouble? Cannot you keep a
Correspondence with your Tailor?


Vain. With my Tailor, Sir!


Bell. Yes; For all you Learn by your Journey, is a New Fashion; and all you
understand is, whither your Clothes be well made.


Vain. You are so obliging, Sir. Truly I think this Coat is very well Cut, sits
with a Good Air. I had it sent me by an Express from London; for I cannot bear
any thing but what comes from thence. Oh it is a happy Place! and in a blessed
Country, where there are all things necessary, where there are such pleasures,
and such Conveniences to enjoy them!


Free. I have been told you have all those here.


Vain. Oh not one, Sir, not one.


Free. You have good Wine?


Vain. Yes, yes, that is true, I had forgot that.


Free. Plenty of all sorts of Fish and Flesh.


Vain. Phoo, they are perfect Drugs. Plenty of Meat and Drink; but nothing else.


Free. The People are Civil and Obliging.


Vain. Especially to Strangers.


Free. And Hospitable.


Vain. To a Fault, Sir.


Free. The Air is Good, a temperate Climate.


Vain. Much the same as in England.


Free. The Soil is Rich.


Vain. Oh it is too Rank.


Free. What necessaries then, or what pleasures do you want? You have fine
Women.


Vain. They are kind I am sure.


Free. To you chiefly I suppose.


Vain. Shall I make a Confession then among my Friends? I do not believe ever
any Man has been so successful. I do not know that ever I asked in vain.


Sir Fr. I can hold no longer. Why thou little worthless Contemptible Wretch!
Do you entertain Strangers with your aversion for your Country, without being
able to give one Reason for it; and can you give but one Reason for liking it,
which if it were true, would make all others abhor it. The Women fond of thee!
Why the Common Hackneys who live by thee, Contemn thee. But such as he think if
he is not affronted, he is beloved.


Vain. You must know, Sir, (to Freelove) he is Jealous of me, that makes him so
peevish, he used to be very fond of me. Therefore I Will tell you more of this
some other time, and in the mean time study all Opportunities of showing how
much I am, Sir, Your most Obedient humble Servant.

[Exit Vainly.
Free. Your Servant Sir. This Spark takes leave, I perceive, always alike, I
suppose too of every Body alike, and in the same Style as he concludes his dull
Insipid Billet-doux.


Sir Fr. Ay, hang him, hang him, he is always dully Brisk and Impertinent. But
here she comes who is all perfection.

Enter Lady Volant. Madam, Your Ladyships Slave. Be pleased to know these Two
Gentlemen; this is Mr. Freelove, and this is Mr. Bellmine. You see, Madam, how
Communicative I am to you of every thing that is Good; you shall share all my
Goods.


Lady Vol. This is a signal Proof indeed.


Sir Fr. This Gentleman is in Love with my Niece, and this with my Daughter.
What say you, Madam, shall we be Married all together? keep time, odd, I
believe I could -- make it a day of Revelling, and a night of Loving, Feast all
day and Kiss all night.


Lady Vol. Sir Francis, I have all the Respect and Friendship for you, that a
Man of your Excellent Parts can require with Modesty, but I must desire you not
to talk so loosly before me. Marriage is a sacred thing, Sir Francis, a very
sacred thing; yet it is a thing, Sir Francis, that may be abused, and may be
perverted to raise indecent and unruly Cogitations.


Sir Fr. I told you how reserved she was. (To Free. and Bell.)


Lady Vol. I presume you found Mr. Vainly here. I assure you, Sir Francis, I
left the Room because he tacitly implied the thing Marriage, though on his knees,
and with all the Chastity and Modesty imaginable.


Bell. There she has given the Reason. (To Freelove)


Free. Can he mistake this for Virtue? I would as soon take a Bully's Rant for
true Courage, or a Cringing Designing Courtiers low bow for true Humility. This
Ridiculous Cant, this affected Squeamishness is as nauseous to me, as open
Lewdness, and I am sure as certain a sign, and a greater Crime, for she adds
Hypocrisy.


Bell. I am so far of your Opinion, that if you will take him aside, I am
resolved to make Love to her.


Free. What at first! and to what end?


Bell. I have just now a Project conceived in my head, but I have not time now
to impart it.


Sir Fr. Son Bellmine, you must try to prevail with my Lady here, and as you
succeed with her for me, so you must expect to succeed with me for my Daughter.


Lady Vol. Oh for some Art to Charm him from Marina; or at least delay the
Match; for I must dally no longer with my old Gentleman. (Aside)


Bell. This is a severe Task, Madam, that Sir Francis has imposed upon me: To
require me to make Love to you, and not for my self.


Lady Vol. He is very sensible, Sir, that his Daughter has Charms to secure you
from one much more engaging.


Bell. Fathers are as Blind as Lovers. And give me leave to think he is a much
more indulgent Father, than passionate Lover, or he would dread your greater
Power would make me false both to my Love and Friendship: And should Marina
make the same Trial of my Constancy, she would convince me she exceeds you as
much in Vanity, as she is inferior to you in every Charm.


Lady Vol. Truly, Sir, if Sir Francis had such a Talent of Elocution, I believe
he might have succeeded long since. And for his Daughter, I conjecture I am not
much inferior to her in the superlative Charm, Fortune.


Bell. That never was a Charm to me; though I could wish it were one to you,
since I can at least equal Sir Francis's.


Lady Vol. Sure, Sir, you can have no other design in this, but to try with
what temper I can support such Complements.


Bell. That is not my design, I assure you.


Lady Vol. Is it not indeed, Sir? on your Veracity.


Bell. No, on my Honor, Madam; nor can you suppose it is. Methinks a Lady of
your piercing Wit, should in a Moment read ones thoughts, as in a Moment so
much Beauty Conquers.


Lady Vol. It Is as dangerous to believe one of you young Gentlemen, as it is
difficult to deny so fine a Person.


Bell. Convince me, you think me the latter, by allowing me a Moments Free
Conversation.


Lady Vol. Alas Sir, even to talk thus is a Liberty I never permitted to any
before; and I am sure you cannot in reason ask more.


Bell. Lovers are always thought Extravagant in their Demands, by the
indifferent. Therefore I fear to ask what I would give the World for, that you
would let me see you this Evening in St. Stephen's- Green.


Lady Vol. Oh me Sir, what would the World say! or what I value more, what
would you think?


Bell. The World shall never know it, and for me --


Sir Fr. What say you Sir, have you no Estate?


Free. Not an Acre, Sir.


Sir Fr. Nor Money?


Free. Not a Penny.


Sir Fr. A strange dull Fellow this! (Aside) And have you really now the
Conscience to make Love to my Niece. Can you imagine that she will throw her
self away upon you in the Bloom of her Youth; one of her Wit and Beauty. But
perhaps you think she has an Equal Stock of Money, and so hope to make your
Fortune by her: But I can assure you, she is in the same Circumstances as you
are, not worth a Penny.


Free. I knew it when first I saw her, yet my Love received not the least Check
by that; I hope she will prove as Generous.


Sir Fr. Generous do you call it? Death! you make me mad. What a Pox is there
no way to be thought Generous, but by becoming Mad and Begging. And pray Sir,
if I may ask you a Civil Question, if she were Generous enough, as you call it,
and mad enough, as I call it, to Marry you, how would you Maintain her, Sir?


Free. Oh, trust to our Stars for that.


Sir Fr. I hope she will have more Grace. Trust to your Stars for that! I would
as soon trust you for ten Thousand Pounds. I have not heard a Fellow talk so
Sillily in all my life. (Aside)


Free. And I assure you Sir, were our Circumstances changed, you should command
that Sum from me. I have so great an Honor for you, and so high an Opinion of
your Worth and Integrity.


Sir Fr. Strangely Impertinent! (Aside) I beseech you good Romantic Sir, put
not your self to the trouble of making these professions to me, for to be free
with you, I no more regard your Complements than I want your assistance. A
perfect Fool! Methinks too a very ugly, ungentile Man, as ever I saw! (Aside.)


Free. I hope, Sir, I shall not find you my Enemy in this matter however.


Sir Fr. No, no Sir, you need no other Enemy than your self, and those Stars
you were talking of. Your Servant Sir, I must mind my own Affairs now. What a
confounded Friend has Bellmine chosen out? no doubt a Sharper, and lives upon
him. But I Will quickly part 'em, when he is Married to my Daughter. (Aside.)


Free. It Is well my Breach with Aemilia is repaired; by his owning he told me
who she was, or he would never do me that Justice now; for I perceive by this
Declaration of mine, I have forfeited his good Opinion. He cannot relish even
Flattery from the mouth of a Man he thinks is in want. (Aside)


Sir Fr. And she has listened to your Arguments, you say, and seems Compliant?


Bell. Yes Sir, she has promised to comply with what I desired. (Enter Servant.)

Madam, here are some Ladies come to wait on you.


Lady Vol. Oh me! I would not for a Kingdom be found alone Entertaining Men.
This is a Censorious Town, and I would not give them an Advantage over my
Bright Reputation.


Sir Fr. I believe it may be my Niece and Daughter, I ordered them to attend
your Ladyship this Evening. Ay, it is so, it is so. Observe now, Sir, if she has
not too much Wit, to be so Generous as to Marry you for Love only, and to trust
to your Stars.


Enter Aemilia and Marina. Free. I am sure if she Marrys for any other Reason,
it shall not be me.


Lady Vol. I protest Ladies, were it any but you, who surpised me in this
indecent Criminal Converse, I should never have the assurance to obtrude my
self upon Company again.


Aemi. I assure your Ladyship, we have not perceived any thing Criminal; and if
you please to keep your own Council, we are not at all Curious.


Lady Vol. Ay, but Madam, to be entertaining men alone, that is the thing
grieves me.


Mar. No, it is because that you have not a Man alone, that is the thing Grieves
you. (Aside.)


Lady Vol. For they are so Censorious here, that really I do not in all the
Sphere of my Memory recollect one Woman whose Reputation is not Contaminated.


Mar. I am sorry to hear that.


Lady Vol. Your Ladyships excepted. Truth on it is, they make themselves
obnoxious to such Calumnies by their Imprudent Behavior. For was not my Lady
Courtly seen twice in one week at the Play? and was not my Lady Blameless in a
Mask in the Gallery? and was not Mrs. Wellbred heard most Impiously and
Obscenely to wish it were the Custom in this Town, for Women to sit in the Pit?
and is not Mrs. Winlove seen to walk often in St. Stephen's- Green.


Mar. I beseech you, Madam, do not Censure Ladies for this, for I have been
Guilty of all these things several times.


Lady Vol. What! and do you own it?


Aem. Certainly own it; for if there be a Fault in it, it is only when it is
made a secret.


Lady Vol. Sir Francis, I protest you must pardon me, if I Conjecture these
Ladies have strange Crude Notions of Honor.

Well Ladies, you may do what you please, but I would no more be Guilty of
these things, than I would sit at a Play in the second Row, which I think very
improper for one of my Quality.


Bell. And Beauty, Madam.


Lady Vol. Oh Sir! why really I think it a Disgrace to both. But I hope you do
not approve the Behavior of some, who are remarked for daily admitting the
visits of Men.


Aem. I must Confess, Madam, I seldom refuse their visits whose Conversation I
like.


Lady Vol. Oh hideous! what can you regard in Men's Conversation, that is
Divertive? they are all Insidious, you may believe me. They are always pestring
a Woman with their Love, then they beg Liberty to repeat their Visits, and
implore a reciprocal Passion; and not contented with that, they desire to wait
on her abroad, nay, to meet 'em abroad alone, and Masked, and when they have
procured our Consent so far, then they imprudently proceed to --


Mar. Good Madam, do not you proceed farther at this time.


Lady Vol. I was only going to Caution you of the Danger, and warn you to keep
them at a distance, a vast distance, for some of 'em are so forward, that if we
permit 'em to squeeze our Hand, they will incontinently Write to us, and the
first Opportunity that offers, will force a Kiss, and they have no sooner
ravished that, but --


Aem. Indeed, Madam, we want no Caution to avoid all this, nor should I think
any Man Impudent, who attempted all these things, if I granted him any one of
them.


Lady Vol. It Is my great Concern for you, that is all; for I would have every
ones Reputation as unsullied as my own.


Free. What a damned Malicious Jade it is? (Apart)


Sir Fr. No Niece, you want no Caution in this matter; but you do in another as
Material as your Reputation; your Fortune, I mean. For indeed who can preserve
a Reputation without Money, or if one should, who regards it?


Free. So, now for a Lash at me.


Sir Fr. Look here, Niece, here is a Gentleman has given himself the trouble to
come hither to make Love to you, without having Money enough to pay for a
License, or the Wedding Dinner.


Free. Madam, I own. --


Sir Fr. Ay, ay, he owns it, what would you have more; a very honest
undesigning Gentleman as ever I saw.


Free. I have no hopes you should ever have a favorable thought for me, if it
is to be purchased with Wealth. But if the sincerest Passion, the humblest
Adoration, a Heart immov'd by any thing but you, can atone for the want of
Wealth --


Sir Fr. Satisfy your self, Sir, they will not. Nor your fine Person, nor your
Wit, nor your Courage, nor your Stars, nor a thousand things more. To convince
you how small I think their Power, I will leave you in my Mistress's Lodgings.
Come Girls, come away. Madam, as soon as I have disposed of my Daughter, I will
beg to be made happy.


Aem. and Mari. Your Ladyships Servant.


Lady Vol. Your most humble Servant. Nay, I will wait on you down. Do you think
I would be left alone with Men?

[Exeunt omnes praeter Free. and Bell.
Bell. So you have very industriously ruined your self with the old Gentleman.
But let us be gone before her Ladyship returns.


Free. Yes, he will avoid me as carefully as we would an old cast Mistress.


Bell. But where is the necessity of persuading him you have no Estate?


Free. That Aemilia may be the more convinced it is so.


Bell. Would you have her Love a Man because he is poor?


Free. No, but I would not have her for bear it for that Reason.


Bell. He will make use of all his Power to oppose you.


Free. The better still; I shall make the stronger trial of her Love.
When Love's sincere, no Enterprise is hard;
And Wealth and Titles then bear no Regard.

[Exeunt. ACT IV. Scene St. Stephen's-Green.
Trickwell and Timothy Meet. Trick. SUre I should know that Face. My old
Acquaintance Timothy in Being!


Tim. What, my dear Rakehell alive still!


Trick. Nor Time nor thy Disguise can hide thee from me.


Tim. I think indeed it is five years since we have seen each other; but what
Disguife prithee?


Trick. Why that bloated Belly, and those bladder Cheeks, that Crimson Hue, and
those huge Pillars which support thee. Thou were as Won and Thin when last I
saw thee, as if you were just escaped from the Galleys.


Tim. Ease and Plenty have made this Alteration, Eating well, and Lying soft.
Thank my Stars, I thrive very well in this Coutry.


Trick. Then I suppose you Despise it.


Tim. That Is but an odd Reason.


Trick. A very common one, for I have observed that none Despise Ireland so
much as those who thrive best in it. And none are so severe in their
Reflections upon it, as those who owe their Birth and Fortune to it; I have
known many of 'em, when they come first to London, think there is no way so
ready to purchase the Title of a Wit, as to Ridicule their own Country.

But tell me, have thou thrust thy self into any Business? Have thou got any
Employment?


Tim. Yes, a very pleasant one, I am in keeping.


Trick. In keeping!


Tim. Ay, I am kept.


Trick. Kept!


Tim. Kept! ay kept; so I say, don't you hear.


Trick. But not understand. Kept! for what in the name of Venus? to roll on
some Body's Bowling Green?


Tim. Well, Sir, you may be as merry as you please with my Shape, but I have
other secret Charms, Sir, I have. For know that I have been in keeping these
three years, and by a fine Lady; A VVitty Lady.


Trick. And a Rich one?


Tim. Not altogether so Rich, as when I knew her first, but she has somewhat
left still.


Trick. Then I suppose as her Fortune declines, so does your Passion. And so
you are now about quitting her.


Tim. But like a Man of Honor, not till I have first provided for her; I am
about Marrying her to a considerable Man.


Trick. O Rare Tim! now her Name?


Tim. I know thou art a Trusty Dog, or I had not told you so much; but in a
little time you shall know all. And now pray give me an account of your
Affairs, for I think you seem to be much in the same Circumstances as formerly.


Trick. I do but seem to be so. You must know I Am Married.


Tim. See the difference of our Cases, how I thrive upon one, more than you on
the other. But pray let me know farther.


Trick. You remember about five years ago, I waited on Colonel Worthy; I
attended him to Flanders, where he was killed, but before he died, for some
secret services, he gave me all his Clothes and Linning and Fifty Guineas.


Tim. Lucky Rogue! sure you fancied your self a Colonel then?


Trick. No, I had the humility to dispense with the Title of Captain, which I
assumed immediately after my Arrival in London; it is true I pretended to an
Estate too, and so went a Fortune hunting.


Tim, Very prudently done.


Trick. In short, I met with a Lady who was on the same scent; and we Believed,
Cheated, and Married each other.


Tim. The common Fate of Fortune-hunters. But what is become of your Spouse?


Trick. I can no more give you a particular account of her, than how I spent my
fifty Guineas. She first apprehended the Cheat, and taking the opportunity of
my being Drunk one Night, marched off, and I never heard of her since. In a
little time after having lost my Wife, pawned my Clothes, and spent all my
Money; I returned to my old way of Living, and have got into a good Service
again.


Tim. So it is but the Right about as you were.


Trick. I wish I could find her out tho, not out of the least Passion for her
Person, but for her Fortune, for she has some. Here comes the Getleman I now
serve, an Admirable Man.


Tim. I saw him to day. But they say he is poor.


Enter Freelove and Bellmine. Trick. You must know that --


Bell. Come hither, Good Sir.


Trick. We Will talk another time.


Tim. Well, well, Adieu. [Exit Timothy.


Bell. With your Master's Leave, I have an Affair, which I can only trust a
Man of your Diligence and Art with.


Trick. Your most humble Servant, Sir, I will discharge it accordingly.


Bell. You see that Gentleman that comes this way.


Trick. Him with the Two Ladies?


Bell. The same. That is Sir Francis Feignyouth; go to him directly, he does
not know you, and with all the Cunning you have persuade him there is a Lady
desperately in Love with him.


Trick. With an old Man, Sir!


Bell. Have a little patience. First fire him with a description of her, and
when you find him eager; seem to have taken him for me all the while, that will
vex him. Then advise him to come disguised, and pass for me, and assure him she
shall meet him here this Evening, and let him know he may be very free with her.


Trick. It shall be done, Sir.


Bell. Well, walk on a little, that you may not be seen talking to us. [Exit
Trickwell


Free. And so you design he shall meet my Lady Volant in your place. What will
be the effect of that?


Bell. He will discover that she had an Appointment with me, and if he is not
stark mad, it will Convince him what a Creature she is.


Free. But is this very Honorable in you to deceive a poor Lady thus?


Bell. It would be much less Honorable to suffer him to Marry her; for he will
not be persuaded but she is very Rich.


Free. He mistakes her for a Woman of Wit too; But I fancy except Virtue, that
is the greatest want she has.


Bell. She has some Wit when she talks to Inferior People; but when in
Conversation with those of Fashion and of Sense, she endeavors to elevate her
Thoughts, (as she calls it) and refine her Language, and makes both
unintelligible, so is affectedly Ridiculous, To be Witty she spoils her
Language, and her Language confounds even what is Wit.


Free. It Is strange he should be blind to so many Faults, but you are in the
right to prevent his Ruin, since you hope to Marry his Daughter. Do you start
at the Word.


Bell. The nearer the Precipice, the more it dazles my sight and understanding.
Why you used to dislike the thing as much as I, till you saw this Aemilia; and
remember if e're I am weary of the Bondage, 'twas by your Example I submitted
to it. Though I expect to be thought the more prudent Person, who have my fancy
for the Lady backed with a good Fortune.


Free. You deserved to be ill used for your suspicions; and may be no greater a
Gainer than I am; for (as the World goes) whatever Fortune the Lover gains by
his Mistress, it is ten to one but the Husband will repay with Interest, to get
rid of his Wife. I hope we shall succeed, and shall have no reason to Repent. I
am impatient to know my Fate; Let us lose no time; your Emissary's Discourse
with Sir Francis may give us an Opportunity to speak to the Ladies; I see them
coming, let us walk on. [Exeunt.


Enter Sir Francis Feignyouth, Aemilia and Marina, followed by Trickwell.
Trick. Sir, will you be pleased to favor me with a Minuits Audience?


Sir Fr. What Is thy Business?


Trick. I would wish you were alone, Sir. I have something to deliver to you
from a fair Lady.


Sir Fr. Em -- walk on, I Will overtake you, this is my Lawyers Servant about an
Extraordinary Affair. And what Commands pray has this same fair Lady for me?


Trick. Commands! alack, alack, poor Soul she has no Commands, no Sir, her
Empire's at an end, and conferred on you. Don Cupid has taken stand on your
shoulders, and with all his might has shot her through and through.


Sir Fr. Hark ye Friend, if you would have me believe you are in earnest,
speak sense, speak sense do you see, and don't prate to me of Empires, and Don
Cupids, and Darts, and such stuff, but tell me plainly, and in short, what it
is you would be at.


Trick. Well then, Sir, since you will have it without any Decoration or
Preamble, you shall; and truly Sir, I do not wonder you are impatient to know,
that the prettiest Woman, the sweetest Woman, the wittiest Woman, and till she
saw you, the modestest Woman even in her heart, should slight all the Men in
Town, and fall desperately in Love with you, only upon seeing you.


Sir Fr. Do not you banter now my Friend? hah! do not you banter.


Trick. To Convince you I do not, Sir, I will tell you where you shall see her,
and I will not take one Penny for my pains.


Sir Fr. Two of the best Proofs a Man would desire. But to raise my Spirits a
little, pray tell me what sort of a Woman is she?


Trick. Why Sir, in the first place then, she is of a considerable Family.


Sir Fr. Phoo, Pox of her Family.


Trick. And of a most accomplished Education --


Sir Fr. A Pox of her Education too; that may render all her other Beauties
useless.


Trick. I mean, Sir, she Sings, Dances, Plays on several Instruments, speaks
French, and the like, Sir.


Sir Fr. Ay, now thou say something. But her Person, let me hear somewhat of
that. She is not little?


Trick. Of middle Stature.


Sir Fr. That Is well; I hate a Dwarf and a Maypole. A little Frisking, Jumping,
tumbling Ball; and a Long, Thin, Scraggy, ungainly Lath. Her Complexion next.


Trick. Like her Stature, between Extremes; Neither White nor Brown; Sanguine,
but no fixed Red, except upon her Lips, a faint Blush seems always rising in
her Face, but clearest on her Cheoks.


Sir Fr. Admirable, admirable! not Lean you say.


Trick. No Grape that is kindly Ripe, can be
So Round, so Plump, so Soft as she.
You know the Song.


Sir Fr. I am all on Fire. Deiicate Creature! I have done with my Lady Volant,
that is certain. I do not want Money, why then should I be a Slave for it? Now
her Eyes, her Eyes, if they prove right!


Trick. Of a sprightly Blew.


Sir Fr. That Is not so well. I could wish 'em Languishing, and of a Glossy
Black.


Trick. See them, see them, Sir, and dislike 'em if you can. But her Temper is
so Gentle, so Meek --


Sir Fr. Oh I abhor a Termagant; I hate a Mistress that a Man must go to Cuffs
with. I would have her just such a Woman as you Describe her, Soft, and
Compliant; only her Eyes, I could wish her Eyes were Black.


Trick. Never mind the Color, Sir, it is not the Color makes the Eye
beautiful, it is the shape of it, the Luster.


Sir Fr. Well, well, go on with her Description.


Trick. Her Teeth are small, even, white and clean; smooth, and look as if just
polished.


Sir Fr. If she answers this Description, I will make thy Fortune, thou have
made me already fancy my self Happy, I am in Raptures. But go on, go on, be
never silent in her praise. I am sorry her Eyes a'n't. Black though.


Trick. 'Twere endless, to recount all her Perfections; but to conclude, Sir,
to prove how large a share she has of Wit and Judgment, this delicate
Creature, with thousand other Charms, all in their Bloom, offers her Heart to
you.


Sir Fr. Patience, Patience! I am Five and twenty again, Eighteen, and shall I
have the riffling of all these Charms say thou?


Trick. For my part, I believe she will deny you nothing No one that Loves so
much can. In sleep she dreams of you, and all her waking hours are spent in
sighs and wishes for her admired Charming Bellmine.


Sir Fr. The Devil! for whom?


Trick. For her dear Lovely Bellmine.


Sir Fr. For the Devil.


Trick. What mean you, Sir?


Sir Fr. For Bellmine! ah Plague is all this meant to him!


Trick. Meant to him! why are not you Mr. Bellmine? did she not point you to me
this very day as you walked here with three or four more?


Sir Fr. No Sir, I am not Mr. Bellmine, nor have I been like him these Twenty
years. A Curse on your mistake! that has kindled all this Fuel within me for
nothing. I am struck cold already. I fancy my self Fourscore. But Sirrah, I Will
be revenged on you for giving me these hopes to no purpose. I would not have
been balk'd thus for a Thousand Pound.


Trick. I am sure Sir, if it be not you, that she Loves, I could wish it were
you. I have a greater Inclination for your Service than for his.


Sir Fr. What good, will your Inclinations or VVishes do me?


Trick. Why, a great deal Sir; since I have committed this mistake, I will
persevere in it.


Sir Fr. How, how!


Trick. I have already betrayed the poor Lady's Secrets, and to make you amends
for this Disturbance, I will order matters so, that you shall be the happy Man.


Sir Fr. I burn again. Let me Embrace thee. But the Way, the Way, the Method,
my dear Rogue!


Trick. You shall meet her, and act like him.


Sir Fr. That will be somewhat difficult, I fear me, for an old Man.


Trick. For once, Sir, you may do well enough. I will persuade her to meet you
here this Evening as soon as it is growing dark; she shall come in a Mask, and
do you come muffl'd in a Cloak; she is so excessively Fond of Mr. Bellmine,
that I am sure, she will comply with my Proposal, and with his Desires;
therefore you may be very Free with her, hurry her immediately into a Coach;
and Fear will make her yield to you, as Love would to him.


Sir Fr. Excellent, Excellent! I shall not contain my self till the happy hour.
But will not you play the Rogue, and deceive me?


Trick. Upon my Honor, Sir, it shall be as I say.


Sir Fr. Enough. The Honor of a Pimp is sacred. The next thing dear to him is
Gold; here are five Guineas for you before hand, that thy Honor may be more
sacred; (and pray consider how Guineas are raised) and if I find every thing
answerable to what you have said, I will Love her, and Reward thee
immoderately. I will go and prepare my self, and be sure you be punctual. [Exit.


Trick. How sweet the Profit, how deserved the Gain,
Which we as a Reward to our Wit obtain.
Now to give an account of my Negotiation.

Enter Free. and Aemilia; Bellm. and Marina. Bell. At least Madam, you must
acknowledge I am industrious for the good of your Family.


Mar. And I suppose, I must be Claimed as a Reward for your good Service to my
Father.


Aem. For my part, I doubt the success of your Design; for I have so good an
Opinion of my Uncle, that I do not think he will be persuaded to meet a Mask. I
am sure he rails against such People more than any Man.


Free. Railing is no more a sign of Virtue, than of Wit. In this age People are
seldom what they seem; there are some go to Church without Devotion. We have
Critics without Wit or Judgment; and some Fight without Courage; and there are
Women very precise without Virtue. And I equally suspect the Woman who Boasts
her Virtue, and the Man who Boasts his Valor; and it generally has the same
effect, we are picked at it, and provoked to destroy their Reputation.


Bell. To Convince you, Madam, we make a right Judgment of Sir Francis; Come
hither Trickwell, and give an Account how you have succeeded.


Trick. I have succeeded as much to your Desires, Sir, as for my own Profit.
VVitness this Gold, Sir. Thus has he Rewarded me for Obeying you.


Bell. What do you think now, Madam? You behaved your self very Cunningly to
get Money from him. Yet I have often known Men Starve their Family, and Feast
their Mistress.


Trick. I remember, Sir, I heard you give a Description of one of your
Mistresses, and I entertained him with that, which agreed almost perfectly with
what he Admires. He is gone in Raptures, to prepare himself for the wished for
hour.


Mar. And you depend on my Lady Volant's coming.


Bell. I have Enticed her by the hopes both of Love and Profit; which will make
her as punctual to me, as a Sharper would be to a young Rich Cully he had Set.
She will no more fail meeting me, than Mrs. Flippant, with her new Equipage,
would miss the Strand on a Sunday.


Aem. If she be such a Woman, 'twill be Charity to prevent the Match. But I
fancy, Mr. Bellmine, you have some self Interest in this Matter: You expect my
Cousin's Fortune should be increased by this, to make you digest Matrimony the
better, for I hear you have dreadful apprehensions of it, and are resolved to
have a great Fortune.


Bell. Both Reports of me have been truth, I must confess, Madam; but the more
I see this Lady, the more my Aversion for the one, and my Regard for the other,
are lessened.


Aem. If you Marry for Money, you must expect to be severely Censured by one
who has none.


Free. But Madam, you will not have favorable Thoughts for one who knows that,
and yet dies for you. Who would sacrifice his Life to be in that state which he
there dreads.


Aem. But have you Considered all the Inconveniences of Marrying a Woman
without a Fortune?


Free. All, all Madam; and would undergo a thousand more for you.


Aem. And how you will be laughed at by the World.


Free. I Will pity their Ignorance. I have Considered all Madam, all the
Hazards, all the Inconveniences; how difficult to have a Man's Behavior
approved by all, that it is impossible to be thought a Kind Husband by the
Women, and a prudent one by the Men. But you shall ever Rule your Conduct and
my Heart. I give my Heart without Reserve, had I the World, I would bestow it
so. I will be still your Slave, still gaze upon those Eyes, and every look
shall make me more your Slave. Oh I want words to tell how truly I adore you!
or had I words that were Expressive, my Passion is too fierce to utter them.


Aem. If you declare your real Thoughts, your Passion cannot be greater than
your Generosity; and may be easier Feigned. You see I listen to your Love,
because I believe it disinterested; if I thought it were not, not all your Art
should gain a Moments Audience. I hear you talk of Love, though I were silent, to
hear, gives hopes.


Free. Let me for ever talk, and only talk of Love. To Love be all the Business
of my Life; it were abuse of Life to Live to any other End, be every Moment so
employed; I talk, but it is Faint and Mean; my Heart now swells, and seems to
heave and rage, that I no better can describe its Passion. It bids me say,
amongst a thousand things that crowd upon my Tongue, I cannot Love you more, I
never will Love you less.


Bell. It would be a damned unconscionable thing now in her, to remember all
this after Marriage; for it is as unreasonable for Women to expect Love after
enjoyment, as for a Man who had spent his Fortune, to expect as much Credit as
when he had it in possession. (Aside.)


Mar. What is that you mutter of unconscionable?


Bell. Why, I say it is an unconscionable thing of you both, to keep us in
pain thus, when you may so easily remove it. And to seem to doubt our Passion,
when we offer so fair to prove it.


Mar. And what is that, Good Sir?


Bell. What I could never bear the sound of, till those bewitching Eyes of
yours sweetened it; Marriage.


Mar. Why do you expect that I should disobey my Father?


Bell. Why do you suppose that I expect you will be obedient to him?


Aem. Nay Cousin, you need not fear he will oppose you; but I owe some
Obedience to an Uncle too, and I am very sure, I never shall have his Consent.
But we'll talk no farther of this Matter, till we see what becomes of his
Intrigue.


Mar. I think the Hour of the Lovers Meeting is almost come. I suppose you will
hover hereabout, to see what will be the Issue of it.


Bell. It may be some diversion to you Ladies to be VVitness to it.


Aem. No, that will not be so proper; we shall be satisfied to receive an
account of it from you. Till when your Servant.


Free. Though grieved to part, I ought not to Complain, since you have bid me
hope. [Exeunt Free. and Bell.


Mar. Prithee Aemilia, why would you put this Constraint upon your
Inclinations? I am sure you had rather he had stayed, I read it in your looks;
I found your Eyes had almost betrayed your Heart.


Aem. I found so too. That made me more desirous he should be gone. I have
Confessed enough for this time.


Mar. Yes truly, so you have, since you design to Marry him. For Men's
Importunity and our Shyness have the same end.

Their subtle Sex is violent to Gain,

And we Deny, more surely to Obtain.


[Exeunt. ACT V. Scene Continues.
Enter Sir Francis Feignyouth in a Cloak. Sir Fr. YOnder she comes; now if I
can Disguise my self till I get her to a Coach, she is my own. Would it were a
little darker however.


Enter Lady Volant Masked. Lady Vol. Who is there? Mr. Bellmine.


Sir Fr. The same.


Lady Vol. You see, Dear Sir, what an excessive Sovereignty you have over me,
to compel me to meet you. But you have an irresistible way with you; and all
the World extols you for a Man of Honor, and I hope you will behave your self
like one to me.


Sir Fr. Methinks I should know that Voice. (Apart.)

I, I, my Dear, I will; I Will make your Fortune.


Lady Vol. Your obedient Servant, Dear Sir; indeed it is as uncommon to meet
with a Generous Lover in this profligate Age, as with a Secret or a Constant
one. But I Conjecture you to have all these Virtues, or I had not consented to
meet you at first Request.


Sir Fr. First Request! What a Pox does she mean? I Am certain I know her voice.
(Apart.)


Lady Vol. Pray Heaven, I be not mistaken in my Man. (Aside) But now I have met
you, sure you can desire no more.


Sir Fr. By all that is Virtuous, my Lady Volant! Is she the amorous Lady! This
was a lucky Discovery; I Will try her farther. (Aside.)

Come my dear, I am impatient till we are more private, I have a Coach waiting
at the end of the Green.


Lady Vol. I Will wait on you immediately. Oh Heavens! how near was I to be
ruined! This is Sir Francis! what can this mean? ha! I have it now. A Trick of
that Villain Bellmine's to prevent our Marriage; but I Will be even with him.
(Aside.)


Sir Fr. Come, are you ready?


Lady Vol. Ungrateful Worthless Fellow! (Unmasking)

Not only base thy self, but would have me too, share thy Guilt: how can thou
be that Mercenary Wretch, to Abuse thy Noble Friend Sir Francis Feignyouth, to
deceive his Virtuous Beautiful Daughter, forsake and leave her when the Match
is concluded on, and Marry me, because I am Wealthier? But though thou would be
so Base, think you I am so? Do you imagine I would be unjust to him, a Man of
that Worth, that Honor, so fine a Gentleman, because you proffered me a larger
Settlement? No, coud'st thou give me this Island, I would refuse it, and rather
starve with him.


Sir Fr. Now, let me never drink Claret more, if I can tell what it is you mean
by all this.


Lady Vol. Who do I see? Sir Francis! It seems then you came with a Design to
meet some Lewd Woman; oh me unfortunate! is there nothing but Treachery and
Inconstancy in the Sex? Have I refused so many great Matches, and at last
Consented to be yours, and is this my Reward?


Sir Fr. Why, as I take it, my Good Lady, you came with a Design to meet some
Body too.


Lady Vol. If my Trouble would give me leave to speak! That Traitor Bellmine,
whom you entrusted to plead for you, offered to forsake your Daughter, and
Marry me himself --


Sir Fr. And so you met him to that purpose.


Lady Vol. Have NOT I already told you how I resented his Baseness, when I thought
you were he. It Is true I consented to meet him, in hopes to persuade him to a
more Virtuous and Just Proceeding. I would have concealed his Crime from you,
being always inclined to do Good!


Sir Fr. Oh the damned young Rogue, I Will be so Revenged on him --


Lady Vol. And thus while I endeavored to do your Family Service, even at the
hazard of my Reputation; you suspect me. This is a plain Conspiracy between you
both to ruin me; is this like a Man of Honor? this the Behavior I hoped for
from the worthy Sir Francis! I am ruined, undone, betrayed; what will become of
me?


Sir Fr. Nay hear me, Good Lady, do but hear me.


Lady Vol. No, I will never hearken to Man more. I will retire from the World,
and leave my Wealth to erect Hospitals to maintain Mad men and Fools; rather
than enrich the iniust


Sir Fr. Hear me but speak.


Lady Vol. That Sir Francis Feignyouth should suspect me! the only Person in
the World I ever gave the least Encouragement to; I easily could revenge my
self, by marrying Bellmine, and deprive you both of my Fortune, and of your
Son-in-Law; had I not still a zeal for your interests, and an Abhorrence for
his Treachery.


Sir Fr. Come, I Will tell you how we shall be both revenged on this Insinuating,
VVheedling, Deceitful young Dog. I Will Marry you instantly, and will not give
him the value of a Rapparce Farthing with my Daughter.


Lady Vol. Why verily Sir Francis, you speak like a Man of Honor; indeed to
Marry an injured Woman, is the only way to do her Right. But I can hardly
Reinstate you in my good Opinion, sufficiently to Consent to that yet.


Sir Fr. Nay, I will not delay it a moment; I have a Chaplain ready at my
House, and we will spend the Night in Embraces, and Laughing at this Impudent
Cozening Knave. -- See where he comes, if I were not about taking a surer and
sweeter Revenge, I would cut his Throat directly.


Lady Vol. For Virtues sake, let us be gone, I have that Detestation for a
Cheat, that I cannot brook his appearance.


Enter Bellmine and Freelove. Bell. We may venture to approach them now; we
shall confound her more, though I suppose he is already sufficiently convinced
what a Virtuous Lady she is. (To Free. Entering.)


Sir Fr. Your Servant, your Servant, Sir, my Honest, Faithful, Plotting,
Undermining, Dear, Half witted Rival and Son-in-Law! This was a rare Design of
yours, an admirable Design.


Bell. Sir!


Sir Fr. A curious Design, a deep Design! Oh these young Fellows are subtle
Dogs at a Plot!


Bell. What would you be at, Sir?


Sir Fr. What would you be at, Sir, this Lady, Sir. But I shall prevent you,
Sir, for I am going to be Married to her instantly, Sir.


Bell. You are not serious sure? why Sir, I Will convince you that --


Lady Vol. Oh I cannot bear that Traitors sight, let us be gone, I shall faint,
if I stay a moment longer. He will have the impudence to deny he made Love to
me, and desired a Meeting.


Bell. I own I did, Sir, but --


Sir Fr. Oh! Did you so? truth will out.


Bell. And I designed --


Sir Fr. To Marry her your self -- Not a word more, Sir, nor a step farther --
In half an hours time, I Will admit you to wish me Joy. And so your Servant.


Lady Vol. Your Servant Good Mr. Little-plot. Ha, ha.

[Exeunt Sir Fra. and Lady Vol.
Bell. What is the meaning of all this? I cannot understand it.


Free. To me the matter is very plain. She has outwitted you; and made him
believe you would have Married her; this you see has enraged him against you;
and being Mad enough to think her Rich, and to be Revenged on you, he is gone
to Marry her.


Bell. He will be Ruined, Undone, Beggard.


Free. And Marina the less Fortune. That Consideration is of no small moment to
you.


Bell. Your Example is of so much greater weight with me, that it has not only
reconciled me to Marriage, but I think in my Conscience, I could Marry Marina
without a Fortune. But it mads me that she should have such a Mother in Law.


Free. She will not be much improved by her Example.


Bell. As much as a Man may improve himself in Conversation, by Drinking with
the silent Club here.


Free. It Is such an improvement as Expert Musicians receive by hearing
Bunglers, she may learn what to avoid.


Bell. But is there no way to prevent it.


Free. None, that I know of, unless you had some fresh Matter to urge against
her. And here comes the likeliest Man to assist you, to furnish you with
Scandal.


Bell. This will be Joyful News to him. Oh he is so facetious when any one has
been Guilty of an indiscretion, and has so many smart Jokes upon the
Unfortunate?


Enter Wormwood. Worm. Your Servant Gentlemen. My Spleen has been so tickled
just now, at the most diverting sight. Ha, ha.


Bell. What, has any one broke his Neck? or has some young Lady run away with
her Brothers Footman? or is the hopeful Son expelled the College? or has there
been a Fire lately in Town? or any Merchants broke?


Worm. Almost as Comical as any of these. I just now met Sir Francis Feignyouth
handing my Lady Volant into his House, he told me he was that Moment going to
be Married, and bid me come to you to be Confirmed of the Truth. Ha, ha.


Bell. And is this so great a Jest?


Worm. Ay, is it not? to have an old Fellow, who is so fond of Whoring and
Freedom and Money, make himself a Slave to Marry a Beggar; that she is one I am
now convinced Come, will you along with me, I have a Cordial for him that will
spoil the effects of Sack-Posset. I suppose the Business is finished by this
time, he shall not know it before. It Is such a Jest!


Bell. No, no, I am Melancholy enough already, and thy Jests always give me
the Spleen.


Worm. Well, I Will go alone then, for I long to plague him.

[Exit Wormwood.
Free. That a Fellows whole Delight should be the Torment of others. Enter
Trickwell.


Trick. Sir, Sir, I have rare News for you. I have found out that will break
off Sir Francis's Match.


Bell. Be quick in telling it.


Trick. Hearing you in great concern to day for his Design to Marry my Lady
Volant, I went immediately to her pretended Steward, who you must know, Sir, is
my old Acquaintance.


Bell. The properest Person to detect her.


Trick. And wheedled him into a Confession that she has kept him two or three
years.


Bell. Kept him! To what End?


Trick. Why, faith Sir, I believe to much the same End, that you kept the Fine
Lady that Lodged in Convent-Garden.


Bell. This indeed may do, if the Intelligence comes not too late; but can you
produce him that we may Confront her with him.


Trick. He is waiting for me at the end of the Walk.


Bell. Have to him then, and pretend his Lady wants him; send him to us at Sir
Francis Feignyouth's, and wait you below till I call.


Trick. It shall be done, Sir.


Bell. Excellent Fellow! For thy Reward, if thy hopeful Spouse be in this
Country, I Will find her out for you; But away. [Exit Trickwell.

Come Freelove, you will go with me, you may have an opportunity to see your
Aemilia.


Free. That Consideration will carry me any where.

[Exit Free. and Bell.
The Scene Changes to Sir Francis Feignyouth's House.
Enter Sir Francis Feignyouth and Lady Volant. Sir Fr. COme, Lady, now you are
mine in spite of all my Rivals. I Will have them all to Supper, to Triumph over
them. We will have nothing but Revelling, Feasting and Kissing, for our first
Month at least. But we'll go to Bed soon, because the Drums and Trumpets will
Disturb us early.


Lady Vol. You will find some Duns in the Morning will disturb your Rest much
more than they. (Aside.)


Sir Fr. What says Your Ladyship?


Lady Vol. Only contemplating on my Good Fortune.


Sir Fr. I Will give you no leisure to contemplate; you shall be busied with
Action. I have sent to invite my Rivals from Bellmine down to Vainly; I Would not
give a Farthing for a Jewel I must always keep locked up in my Cabinet. I Love
to publish my Happiness. But where are these Girls run? -- This Marriage has
set them a Madding now to be at it too -- Here Niece, Daughter, where are you?

Enter Aemilia and Marina. I am sorry, Niece, your Admirer has no Estate, that
you might not lie alone to Night.


Aem. If I like his other Qualifications well enough to Marry him, that shall
be no Objection.


Sir Fr. She is stark Mad; I must Marry my Daughter as soon as I can, or she
may Debauch her to the same Design. (Aside)

But I am resolved nothing shall Discompose me to Night. I have sent for some
Music to Entertain you; Desire them to walk in, and show their Art.


A Dialogue.
Set by Mr. LEVERIDGE.
He, YOU Bellamira we Admire,
Which pleases you, though ill you use us;
You would taste Joys, which we desire,
And Punish both, when you refuse us.

She, Those Joys I Would keep as well as taste,
But both by yielding are destroyed;
For Men are ever in such haste,
E're we have tasted, they are cloyed.

He, All Humane Things their Crisis have,
To which arrived, they fade away;
So long for Love you make us crave,
E're you Consent, our flames decay.

She, On what strange Diet Lovers Live;
On hopes the Fair may be enjoyed;
Love even can Despair survive,
But is by nourishment destroyed.

He, Insatiate! I Would my Love repeat,
Only to breathing time agree;
Because I cannot always Eat,
Will you both Starve your self and me.

She, I grieve Philander to deny,
And yet I loose you if I grant;
Not I alone can Satisfy,
Without Variety you want.

He, Each Part Variety affords,
Your Hand, your Eyes, your Lips, your Breast;
Believe this Kiss, if not my Words,
For Love by Action's best expressed.

Chorus. He, Believe this Kiss, if not my Words,
For Love by Action's best expressed.

She, That I Will believe, though not your Words,
For Love by Action's best expressed.



Enter Vainly and Wormwood. Vain. Why, it is impossible, Mr. Wormwood, that she
could be false to me; I will not believe she is Married.


Worm. No, if thou were Married to her, you would not believe your self a
Cuckold, though you saw her a Bed with another Man.


Sir Fr. You are welcome, Gentlemen. Mr. Vainly, our Quarrels are at an end now.


Worm. Then you are Married. Ha, ha, ha --


Sir Fr. Why, that is kind to rejoice at your Friends good Fortune.


Vain. But, Madam, is it your way to receive Presents from one Man, and Marry
another?


Sir Fr. How Presents!


La. Vol. If one should give attention to what every Fop says --


Worm. Nay, Sir Francis, be not angry at that. 'Twere happy for you, if she had
received Presents enough to pay her Debts.


Sir Fr. Oh are you there! That Is well. Hark ye Slave have you not often swore
to me, that my Lady Volant here was worth --


Tim. Not one shilling, Sir, that I know of.


Sir Fr. Andam I Cheated, Choused, Fooled, Abused, Ruined, Confounded, hah?


Tim. Somewhat like it, truly Sir.


Sir Fr. I Will have her burnt for a Witch, and I Will have you flayed you Dog.
I Will do it my self.


Vain. Ay, it is plain her tenderness of me, would not let her Ruin me.


Bell. Hold, hold Sir, you have not yet heard the worst.


Sir Fr. Can any thing be worse? what! Can any thing be worse than Poverty?


Bell. You shall hear. Come Sirrah, make me a full Confession of all the
Familiarities that have passed between you two.


Tim. Alas Sir, would you have me so ungenerous to Betray a Lady's Secrets?


Worm. Why this is Admirable, this is better sport than I expected.


Bell. No delay, or I Will saw you Windpipe this moment; Be quick, and let me not
wast Breath on thee.


Sir Fr. And before mine is gone.


Tim. Why then, Sir, if I must tell -- But really it is not like a Man of Honor
in Me.


Lady Vol. It Is no matter, Timothy; your Confession comes too late now to save
him: 'Twill signify no more than a Pardon after Execution. The more he knows
the more he will give to be freed from me, and then I Will leave this hideous
Country for ever. (Aside.)


Bell. What, are you already Married? Have you made such have to be undone.


Sir Fr. Ay, ay, the Knot is tied; But come, go on, go on with your Confession.


Tim. Then Sir, since I may speak, I have for about these three years lived
with my Honored Lady there, as her Steward in Public, and as her Husband in
Private.


Sir Fr. Oh I faint! I dye, I dye! I Am a dead Man, I Am stone dead! (Sits down.)


Tim. I think I had best sneak off before he comes to himself, least I should
be made to verify the Proverb, Confess and be Hanged. [Exit.


Mar. Good Sir, be pacified.


Sir Fr. Be pacified! Be damned; I Am in a fairer way for that. But I Will do one
Meritorious Act first, I Will pluck her Heart out -- Let me at her.


Lady Vol. At your Peril touch me; here are Witnesses enough, should you offer
me any Violence.


Vain. Yes, yes Madam, I am bound in Conscience to be a Witness for you,
because you Loved me too well to Marry me.


Worm. Fear him not, Madam; we will stand by you: Faith I Love thee better
then ever, for the mischief thou have done.


Sir Fr. Do thou so, Tormentor? I Will have you two swing'd before I dye, that
you may be Laughed at too. Here, where are my Servants?


Worm. Come Vainly, we'll spare him the Trouble; let us to the Coffee-House, I
burst till I publish this.


Vain. Ay, pray let us go. Give ye Joy, Sir, Give ye Joy.

[Exeunt Vain. and Worm.
Sir Fr. What had I to do with a Wife, what had I to do with a Wife! Had I not
Ease enough, had I not Freedom enough, had I not Wealth enough! I had every
thing but Wit enough. -- Oh! I am a Jest to the World, a Scandal to my Name,
a Curse to my Family, and a Hell to my self.


Bell. You afflict your self too much.


Sir Fr. Impossible! Had she Virtue, that were some atonement for her Poverty.
Or had she been a Miss to some Favorite, and begged an Estate of Forfeited
Lands, that had been some Comfort. But to be a Strumpet, and a poor Strumpet!
--


Bell. It Is but giving her separate Maintenance at worst.


Sir Fr. No, no, I am resolved on it, I Will separate my self from the World. I
am just going, just expiring, Mr. Bellmine, I am wondrous faint on the sudden;
all in a cold sweat. But before I dye, let me dispose of my Family; here Mr.
Bellmine, take my Daughter, and all I have; you deserve it for the Good you
designed me. But be sure to Plague that Viper with Law, before she gets any
thing.


Lady Vol. I despise your Malice, I Will have a share of your Fortune spite of
you all.


Bell. I hope, Madam, you will not oppose Sir Francis's. Design to make me the
happiest of Men.


Mar. Since my Father has disposed of me, I own it is according to my
Inclinations.


Enter Trickwell hastily to Bellmine. Trick. Sir, Sir, have you no more to do
with Timothy, I saw him steal away.


Bell. Nothing more. He has Confessed all he told you concerning that Lady.


Trick. Hah! What do I see?


La Vol. Trickwell there! Oh I am lost for ever. (seems to faint)


Sir Fr. A Judgment, a Judgment from Heaven! she dies and I live. (Starting up.)


Trick. Let her alone, I Will bring her to herself again.


Sir Fr. What, are you another of her Lovers?


Trick. No, no, Sir, I am none of her Lovers, for I am her Husband.

Omnes, How her Husband!


Lady Vol. Unlucky Wretch! What Devil sent thee here to my Undoing.


Sir Fr. I think thou were the Spark that banter'd me this Evening so smartly.
But no more fooling; I am in no Jesting humor.


Trick. Really Sir, I am so well acquainted with her Ladyship, that it is an
Honor I should not assume to my self, if it were not Truth.


Lady Vol. Fool, Thoughtless Sot! It were for thy Interest, as well as mine, to
conceal this now; till I had got a Sum of Money to quit him. For know prating
Brute, I have just Married him.


Trick. Oh. Wonderful!


Sir Fr. Oh wonderful Deliverance! Oh Blessing unthought of* I find my
strength return; I shall live for ever. I am light as Air. I am in as much
danger now of running Mad for Joy, as before for Grief. But take her to thee,
go take her, and much good may she do ye.


Trick. Oh by no means Ssr, after you is good manners, Sir, she is at your
Service with all my heart and soul. Indeed Sir, she is.


Lady Vol. Be dumb for ever. Or talk his equal now, thou can do me no farther
Mischief, nor can I longer bear thy sight. Farewell, and may each of you find
his Wife, what you have taken such pains to prove me. [Exit.


Trick. Truly, I needed not have taken such pains to have known Timothy's
secrets.


Free. We need not wonder at her Rage. But Trickwell, is this the very Lady you
Married in London for a Fortune.


Trick. The very Numerical she, Sir; only she has changed her Name.


Sir Fr. Thou have made such a happy Change in my Fortune, that I will make
thine; I will reward thee most profusely for this.


Free. Shall I be the only Man, who shall complain of Fortune. (To Aemilia.)

Shall Love so pure as mine meet no Reward?


Aem. Disinterested, Faithful Love, deserves a higher Reward than I can give.


Free. You are Reward above Man's Merit. Heaven can give no greater upon Earth.


Aem. And will you Marry a Woman that has nothing.


Free. Do not torture me with such Questions. I would, I would, it is all I ask
of Heaven.


Aem. Remember I have told you all the Inconveniences.


Free) None, none, there can be none. 'Twere Luxury to starve with you.
Pleasure and Freedom in a Goal.


Aem. Then take this earnest of a Heart, (Giving her Hand) as full of
Generosity, as full of Love as yours.


Free. You give me endless, endless Joys.


Sir Fr. How, how, Niece, will you throw your self away thus? Marry a Man
without a Fortune!


Aem. Even so, Sir. Nor shall I think my self thrown away on him. Remember how
lately you had been almost Ruined by Marrying for one.


Sir Fr. Well, do what you please. I shall never be angry again. A pretty
Present this, Sir, she has made you. A fine Woman, and to my knowledge Twenty
thousand Pounds ready Money.


Free. Had you the Indies, I could not Love you more, but this is very
surprising.


Aem. It was an Uncle's Gift I had in England; and I have industriously thus
long concealed it, that I might not be pestered by Forutne-hunters, and might
be assured that he who Married me, had no other Motive but Love. And I am happy
that he proved so Generous, I Liked so well.


Bell. Nay then, Madam, I think I may Discover his secret now. Fate designed
you for each other. He too has had the same Design, you are not more alike in
Tempers than in Fortune. For I can assure you this Gentleman, who has given
himself the Repute of being worth Nothing, has an Estate in England of Three
thousand Pounds a Year.


Sir Fr. Admirable! Excellent! Nay; I always thought he deserved one. A most
complete Gentleman.


Free. Let Misers be Enslaved, and Drudge for Gain,
Their Joys are False, though they their Wish Obtain.
While no base Interest, Generous Souls regard,
And Love and Peaceful Minds be their Reward.

[Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

