Mordecai Abbot Esquire.
Receiver Gent. of his Maties. Customs. Obijt 29 Feb. 1699* Aetat. 43.

portrait of Mordecai Abbot

A Funeral Sermon Upon the sad Occasion of the DEATH OF Mordecai Abbott Esquire
Preached the 17th of March, 1699/1700.

By JOHN PIGGOTT.

Psalm. 89. 48. What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death? Shall he
deliver his Soul from the hand of the Grave? Selah. London, Printed for Dan.
Brown without Temple Bar, A. Bell in Cornhil, E. Tracy on London-Bridg, and M.
Fabian at Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside. 1700.

To the Mournful Relict of Mordecai Abbott Esquire
MADAM;
THE following Sermon, which was composed in a little time, and when a great
many other things of importance lay on my hands, had never been exposed to
public view, had not You more than once pressed it upon me, from the Affection
I bore to your deceased Husband, my very worthy and most agreeable Friend;
whose Name will be ever dear to me. But tho I am conscious it has many defects,
yet being designed to celebrate his Memory, I thought my self bound by the Laws
of Friendship, as well as the Obligations of Duty, to inscribe it to Your Name,
from whom I have received the most liberal and undeserved Favors. And tho it
may in some sort renew your Sorrows, yet I hope, with the Blessing of God, it
will tend to restrain 'em from excess.

Madam, You have all the assurance that you can have in this World of your late
Consort's Happiness in the next; he having only changed your pleasing, but
temporary Society, for the endless Felicities of Abraham's Bosom.

He has run his Christian Race, and received his unfading Crown: he has passed
through an ill-natured World with an unspotted Name; for Envy it self could not
stain his Character.

May his Virtues live in his Childrens Memory, and his Example in their Lives:
May all the tender Branches of your hopeful Family become Plants of Renown; may
they tread in their Father's steps, and serve their Father's God: And that You,
dear Madam, may long continue with 'em, to awe and guide their Youth, and to
shed the Influences of your Virtues among 'em, is the unfeigned desire of,

Madam, Your very humble and obliged Servant, JOHN PIGGOTT.

1 Thessalonians. iv. 13, 14. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope.

For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.


THE melancholy Air that sits on every Countenance, and the sad Solemnities
that attend our meeting at this time, give sufficient intimation of what I am
come about: I need not tell you that it is to preach a Funeral Sermon, and whose
Death has given me the sorrowful occasion; for the deceased Gentleman's Worth
was so well known, and the want of him is so much felt, that the Court, the
City, and the Church of God are not a little sensible who it is that is ravished
from 'em.

This sudden and surprising Providence represents the frailty of Human Nature,
and the necessity of an early and constant Preparation ^ Cor. 7. 31.
for the other World: For this World and the fashion of it passes away. Its
Glory and Inhabitants vanish in the twinkling of an eye. Lord, how vain a thing
is Man! how little is he to be accounted of, seeing his Breath is in his
Nostrils, and may be stopped by a thousand Accidents, and his Soul let out at the
least pore of his Body.

Yet so great is the Stupidity that has seized on the World, that most People
are for putting the evil day far from 'em, as only fit to be thought on by the
sick and the aged; tho they know not what a day may bring forth, and tho they
cannot but be informed by the Records of the Grave that there are more drop
into it in their full strength, while their Bones are Job 21. 24.
moistened with Marrow, than there are that arrive to a good old Age before they
make their Bed in darkness.

Indeed there are none so wretchedly skeptical as to deny, or disbelieve that
they are mortal, or that seriously think they shall never go to the House
appointed for all living: yet the generality of the World live as if they were
never to die; and I confess of the two, it seems to me a greater instance of
Madness and Folly to think we shall die and not prepare for it, than to imagine
we are immortal, and so incapable of dying. So that upon the whole a Man cannot
give a better Evidence of true Wisdom than by making his Preparation for Death
the great business of his Life; for Death we are sure will come, but at what
time we know not, therefore it is the most reasonable thing in the World that we
should be always ready.

I little thought that he who was worshipping of God in this place this day
month, would so soon have sunk down to the Dust of Death; and indeed God only
knows which of us shall take the next turn to the Sepulcher. I know it is
impossible to mention this, but there will be a very strong Emotion in most
Minds; to calm which a recourse to my Text is the most proper Remedy that I
know of.

For I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, etc.

It Is not improbable but that the Death of some Persons in the Thessalonian
Church might occasion St. Paul to address himself to the Survivors (as in the
words of the Text) that he might arm 'em against the fears of Death, and
moderate their excessive mourning for the Dead. In the words I observe these
three Parts.

I. The Apostle's extraordinary care to inform the Thessalonian Christians
concerning the state of their dead Friends: But I would not have you to be
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them that are asleep.

II. A Disswasive from immoderate Sorrow upon the Death of those that are
pious; That ye sorrow not even as others that have no hope.

III. The Arguments the Apostle uses to prevent excessive mourning for the dead
in Christ. The first is taken from the nature of their Death, it is described
under the soft Character of a Sleep. The second is fetched from what shall
follow this Sleep, they shall be awakened in the morning of the Resurrection,
those that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him; which the Apostle not only
asserts, but proves: For, says he, if we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, q. d. If there be any solid reason for our believing the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, then we have an infallible assurance of the revival of
all that die united to him: Those that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

I shall briefly treat of these three General Heads, and then make some
Application suitable to my Text, and the solemn and sad occasion of discoursing
from it.

1. The Apostle's extraordinary care to inform the Thessalonian Christians
concerning the state of their deceased Friends. But I would not have you to be
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep. These words seem to
import, that the Apostle apprehended diverse of these Christians to be under
some mistakes with respect to their dead Friends: And it is thought that their
Persecutors had shocked 'em in their Faith about the Resurrection of the Body.
For we know that the Greek Philosophers, as well as the Sadduces among the
Jews, did explode and ridicule this great Doctrine, which they performed with
so much art and subtilty, that some Members of the Primitive Church doubted,
whilst others affirmed there was no Resurrection. And this seems to be the
occasion of their excessive Sorrow, they looking upon their dead Friends not
only as removed out of the World, but as lost for ever (as to their Bodies at
least.) And their Persecutors, that they might increase their Infidelity and
their Sorrow at the same time, when they put the Christians to death for the
Cause of Christ, did it in such ways as might have the appearance at least of
destroying and annihilating the Matter that composed their Bodies: Sometimes
committing 'em to the Flames, and scattering their Ashes in the Air and in
Rivers, that their surviving Friends might conclude it was impossible they
should ever rise again: At other times they were devoured by wild Beasts, or
else thrown as a Prey to the Fish of the Sea; and all this to suppress the
belief of the Resurrection.

Now whether these Enemies to the Christian Doctrine did imagine by these
methods to annihilate the Matter of the Human Body, or so to scatter or
confound these Particles of Dust, as to render it impossible for God to
recollect and range 'em in their due place and order, so as to compose the same
Human Body, it is equally absurd. The former is very unphilosophical, for it is
impossible by any method in the World to annihilate Matter: indeed its form may
be destroyed, and it may receive a variety of new Figures, it may be
differently modified ten thousand times, but cannot be annihilated by the Arts
of any Creature under Heaven. With respect to the latter, it is impious and
atheistical, for it supposes a defect either in the Knowledge or Power of God,
or both; which is as vain as to say, there is no God: for we cannot frame a
becoming Idea of a Deity, without conceiving him clothed with every Perfection,
and as possessing of 'em infinitely. So that allowing there is such a Being as
God, that is Omniscient and Almighty, it is as rational to believe he can
recollect these dispersed Atoms again, as unite 'em in their first Production:
for all things are possible to God, who can, if he please, impress a kind of
natural force upon the disunited Parts, and cause 'em to move to one another,
as readily as the filings of Iron to a Loadstone, tho mingled with millions of
Particles of Sand.

The infinite Knowledge, together with the irresistible Power of God, answers
all Objections against the Resurrection of the Body; the same Being having
plighted his Faithfulness for this Event, promising that the Dead shall be
raised. And this is one great Doctrine which St. Paul in the Text aims to set
in a clear and certain light, that the Thessalonians who seemed to be shaken,
might be confirmed in their belief of this important Article of the Christian
Creed: Brethren, I would not have you to be ignorant concerning them that are
asleep -- for them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him: q. d. it is
true, your Friends are fallen asleep, but it is not an eternal one, for they
shall be awakened from it; they are dead, but they shall revive and rise again;
for God our Savior shall bring them with him, when he comes in the Clouds of
Heaven. Here I might make several very profitable Remarks upon the Apostle's
care to correct and remove the Mistakes those Christians had imbibed to whom he
wrote, but my time will not suffer me to stay upon this Head. I proceed
therefore to the

II. General, which is a disswasive from immoderate Sorrow upon the death of
those that are pious. I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others that have no hope. The
design of these words is very obvious, viz. to temper our Grief, to regulate
and bound our Sorrows for those religious Friends that are snatched from us by
Death. St. Paul does not dissuade from all kind of mourning, but from that
which is excessive; a moderate Sorrow is due to the Memory of our deceased
Friends.

And we find some, whose Characters shine brightest in the Scripture-History,
under a Cloud of Sorrow, when their Relations have been removed by Death; yet
it is no where that I know of charged upon 'em as a Crime that they wept for the
Dead. Abraham, who has an honorable mention among the Old Testament-Worthies
for his great Self-denial, as well as the strength of his Faith, in being ready
to offer up his only Son at the Divine Command, yet gave a vent to his Grief,
and poured out a flood of Tears when Sarah the delight of his Eyes was taken
away with a Genesis 23. 2.
stroke: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and wept for her.

Job 1. 7.
And Job, that mirror of Patience and Probity, that had none like him in the
Earth, as God himself testifies to Satan, yet, as Ver. 20.
we read, rent his Mantle, shaved his Head, fell upon his face to the ground,
when he heard of the death of his Children; these were the Ceremonies then in
use as the signs of a deep mourning: yet we are Ver. 21.
told, that in all this he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.

But that Instance which is best suited to my purpose, and free even from the
suspicion of a Crime, is that of our blessed Savior, who tho never guilty of
the least Excess, yet joins with the Jews in their Sorrow for Lazarus; for when
he saw Mary, and those that attended her, weeping for her dead Brother, the
Text says, he groaned in the Joh. 11. 33.
Spirit, and was troubled; but when he came nearer to the Grave, his Grief
flowed out at his Eyes, for the blessed Jesus is said to have Ver. 34.
wept. Now whatever might be the occasion of his Grief, whether his love to
Lazarus, or the Jews Infidelity, or any other reason, it is plain that those
that stood about the Grave took it in the first sense, therefore they presently
cry out, Behold how he loved him Ver. 36.
.

Thus you see from the brightest Examples in Scripture, that a moderate Sorrow
for the dead is allowable. Moreover, let me remark, that the contrary Carriage
under the loss of our Friends would look like a Contempt of the Divine Hand;
for as we are not to faint under the Rebukes, so we are not to despise the
Chastening of the Lord. The Eccles. 3. 4.
wise Man tells us that there is a time to mourn and a time to weep, as well as
for other things; certainly it cannot be an unfit season to weep, when God
takes away our pious Friends, that have been eminently useful, and public
Blessings to a Nation. And it is observable how the Prophet complains of the
gross Stupidity of the Jews, who were insensible under the signs of the Divine
Displeasure; Isa. 57. 1.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart. And we find also that
it is threatened as a Jer. 22. 18.
Judgment when any die without being lamented; yea, it is said to Job 27. 13,
14, 15.
be the Portion of the wicked from God, and the Heritage of the Oppressor, that
they are cut off, and their Widows shall not weep. So that upon the whole it is
very evident that St. Paul in my Text has no design, in his Disswasive from
immoderate Sorrow, to recommend the Stoical Apathy; for the Rules of the
Christian Institution have no tendency to eradicate our Passions, but to
correct and govern 'em.

And here I cannot but remark, that what has been said casts no favorable
Aspect on the Doctrine of the Stoic Philosophers, which teaches that Men are
to stifle all natural Affections both of Joy and Sorrow; that no outward
Emoluments should move the Affection of Joy; and that a Person should be as
easy and as free from the passion of Grief in a violent Paroxism of the Gout or
Stone, as if he were in perfect health in the midst of the most ravishing
Delights. It Is reported of Possidonius a Stoic Philosopher, who passed a great
part of his Life under very acute Diseases, that being visited by Pompey at
Rhodes, he entertained him with a Philosophical Discourse; and when his Pains
were the most sharp and violent, he chid 'em in such Language as this: Nil
agis, dolor; quanquam sis molestus, nunquam te esse confitebor malum.
In vain do thou assault me, Pain; tho thou art troublesome, thou shall never
force me to confess thou art evil. Indeed could the pomp of words abate our
painful Sensations, there would be some show of reason in this Philosopher's
method; but since the contrary is evident by universal Experience, 'twas an
instance of great Pride, and the most ridiculous Folly. And it is worth
remarking, that the greatest Masters in this Philosophy, when they fell into
sharp Adversity, suddenly sunk into such deep Despair and Impatience, that they
laid violent hands upon themselves. I need only name Cato and Brutus, the most
eminent among 'em, who (as one observes) professing themselves to be wise in
their Speculations, became Fools in Practice, and were confounded with all
their Philosophy, when they should have made use of it. Which brings to my mind
a Passage I have read of Seneca, who was not a little inclined to the Stoic
Philosophy; who tells us that at the death of his dear Friend Annaeus Serenus,
he Epist. 63. Inter exempla eorum fui quos dolor vicit.
was found of the number of those whom Grief overcame. Upon which one remarks;
That Nature was too strong for his Philosophy, tho at other times none
outbraves the Misfortunes of Life, or the Terrors of Death at a higher rate, as
if they had not the least power to move his wise Man. So that upon the whole we
see the insufficiency of Philosophic Axioms to support a Mind overwhelmed with
Sorrow; but that which Philosophy has vainly attempted, Divine Revelation has
fully completed and finished, as will be evident when I consider the Arguments
St. Paul uses in the Text to dissuade from mourning as those that have no hope.

But before I touch upon them, I must be a little more particular in this other
matter. I have already told you what kind of Sorrow for the dead the Scripture
indulges; but that which is without hope, you see our Text condemns. Now our
mourning may fall under this Character;

First, When it is excessive in the measure and degree.

Secondly, In the length and continuance.

First, When it is excessive in the measure and degree, as it may be deemed,

1. When our Sorrows are vented in impatient Murmurs and indecent Reflections
upon the Conduct of Divine Providence; as if when our Friends are taken from
our Society, God had done an unjust, an unmerciful, or an unwise Act. This is
very criminal, for hereby we affront him in his moral Perfections, and seem to
dispute with him about the Rights of his Godhead, forgetting that he is our
absolute Sovereign, and has an original and unalienable Right in us and ours.
For as it was merely an Act of his choice to give us a Being, all his
subsequent Bounties can have no other Original than his own good pleasure. And
since he bestows his Favors upon us without our merit, he may justly when he
pleases recall 'em without our leave; for his fundamental right in us and our
Friends, skreens him from the least shadow of Injustice, when by Death he
removes them from us. So that if while we are mourning for our deceased
Friends, we permit our Passions to mutiny so as to utter any unbecoming
Reflections on the Skilfulness of the Divine Hand, it is a strong evidence that
our Sorrows are too excessive.

And this kind of Excess and Impatience seems to have overcome David, when in
the most mournful Accents, and in an uncommon strain, he laments the tragical
end of his rebellious Son Absalom, as the Text informs us: The King was much
moved, and went 2 Samuel 18. 33.
up to the Chamber over the Gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my
Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom,
my Son, my Son! But,

2. We sorrow like those without hope, when our Grief does so ruffle our Minds
and enfeeble our Bodies, as to render us incapable to discharge the special
Duties of our Relation and Place, and to exercise those Graces which are
eminently useful, and very necessary to be called forth into act in a time of
solemn mourning and deep sadness. If the Mind be greatly pensive, and thrown
into a convulsive Agony, and do long continue so, sadness and disorder will
appear in the Countenance; for the Laws of Union betwixt Body and Soul are so
strict, that it is impossible for the Faculties of the Mind to be indisposed,
but the Organs of the Body will be sensible of it, and suffer by it. For as any
injury done to the Body occasions painful Sensations in the Mind, so a violent
hurry of the Powers and Passions of the Soul will soon abate the strength of
the Body, which while it declines and languishes, increases the disorder of the
Spirit, so that by an unaccountable Sympathy they become partners in each
others Sorrows, and mutually hinder the performance of holy Duties, and the
exercise of Faith, Hope, and Patience: for the mutiny of our Passions sends up
such Vapors as thicken into a Cloud, which sitting on the Understanding, do so
confound the Apprehension, both with regard to the actings of these Graces, and
the Objects upon which they are to terminate, that they are like a musical
Instrument that is unstrung, and so unfit for use. Indeed there is no time more
proper for the acting our suffering Graces than a day of gloom and thick
darkness. But alas! this cannot be performed while the Mind is under Confusion
and Horror, and the animal Spirits exhausted by continual sighing: Therefore
when we give so large a vent to our Sorrows, as to impair the health of our
Bodies, and impede the exercise of our Graces, we sorrow like those that have
no hope.

3. When our Grief for our deceased Friends is greater than for those Sins
which might be the occasion of God's removing 'em so suddenly from us. There is
hardly any afflictive Providence but is properly a Reproof and Correction for
Sin. Now if the smart of our Afflictions gives a deeper accent to our Sorrow
than the guilt of our Sins; if we are more grieved for the loss of our Friend
than for the visible tokens of the Divine Anger, then our mourning is criminal.
Indeed that Person must be very Stoical that can bear the loss of an agreeable
Friend, without dropping a few Tears, and sending some Sighs after him; but he
is no less to blame, that can conceive a greater Sorrow in his Soul for the
loss of an outward Comfort, than for Sin the sad cause of God's snatching it
from him. Moreover, it is a certain sign that God was not valued by such a one
as the supreme, all-comprehending Good, if any temporal loss does more afflict
his Soul than the Sins that occasioned it.

4. We sorrow as those without hope for our departed Friends, when our Grief is
more pungent and afflictive for the loss of them, than for God's withdrawing
his gracious and quickening Presence, and hiding his Face from us in an angry
Cloud. The Smiles of God are better, and more to be valued than the best Life
of any Creature; therefore to be less concerned when he frowns upon our Souls,
than when he removes from us the Comforts of Life, does not only discover the
disorderly excess of our Grief, but the defect of our Judgment, in setting a
higher value on a dying Creature than an everliving God. But I hasten to the
second Head.

Secondly, They may be said to sorrow as those without hope, that exceed in the
continuance of their Sorrows, rejecting all solid grounds of Comfort, as did
several whose Names are inrol'd in sacred Story; I Will instance in a few. Good
old Genesis 37. 34, 35.
Jacob, upon the apprehension of Joseph's death, rends his Clothes, puts
Sackcloth upon his Loins, and mourned for his Son many days: his Passion so got
the start of his Reason, that he refused to be comforted, and resolved to mourn
till he died, abandoning himself to Jer. 31. 15.
the most desperate Sorrow. And thus Rachel is described by the Prophet, as
weeping for her Children, and refusing to be comforted, because they were not.
And Rizpah continued 2 Samuel 21. 10.
by the dead Bodies of her Sons, and would not willingly be removed from 'em.
And there are not a few Christians who are too apt to slide into these Excesses
upon the death of their near Relations, as if all their Happiness was vanished
and gone, when the delight of their Eyes is sunk into a Grave out of their
sight: which immoderate Sorrow is a continued Reflection on the Divine
Attributes, as if a God of infinite Wisdom and immense Goodness were incapable
of making up the loss of a mutable mortal Creature.

Moreover, let me remark that the invincible Patience, and profound Submission
of some Heathens under the most afflicting Providence, condemn the Practice of
those Christians who incessantly mourn for their departed Friends, and refuse
to be comforted. I Will mention but one in the room of several, and it is that of
Stilpon the Philosopher, who when the City where he lived was reduced to Ashes,
and his Wife and Children buried in the common Ruins, himself escaping alone
from the Fire, being asked whether he had lost any thing? replied, Senec.
Epist. 9. Omnia bona mea mecum sunt, Justitia, Virtus, Temperantia, Prudentia,
hoc ipsum nihil boni putare quod eripi possit.
All my Treasure's with me, Justice, Virtue, Temperance, Prudence, and this
inviolable Principle, not to esteem any thing as my proper Good that can be
ravished from me. An Instance that very much upbraids those Christians that are
intemperate either in the degree or duration of their Grief. Some time is
necessary and decent for our funeral Sorrows; but to walk softly all our days
in deep mourning and anguish of Spirit, because our Friends are taken from us,
and made more happy than ever they were with us, is to grieve like stupid Jews,
or hopeless Heathens, both which disbelieve the Resurrection of Christ, which
is the Foundation, Model, and Pledge of ours.

Therefore that this Disswasive of the Apostle may make a suitable Impression
upon our Minds, let us now consider the Arguments he uses to enforce it, which
is the

III. General Head; and here are two things to be insisted upon.

First, The nature of their Death who die united to Christ, it is represented
under the soft Character of a Sleep.

Secondly, The great advantage that follows their Death; such as sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him.

First, The nature of their Death who are united to Christ, it is called a
Sleep; Those that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. An excellent Dr.
Bates.
Author on this Text observes how the Apostle varies the Expression: Jesus
died, but the Saints sleep in him; for he sustained Death in all its Terrors,
that it might be a calm Sleep to his People.

Under the Old Testament we find the Death of the Saints frequently set forth
by this soft and gentle Character. David and Solomon, Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah
are represented at their Death to be fallen asleep.

And under the New Testament our Lord uses this Phrase upon the death of one
whom he loved, Our Friend Lazarus sleeps. Joh. 11. 11.
And 'twas St. Paul's usual Idiom to call Death a Sleep, as appears from the
Scriptures in the Margin 1 Cor. 15. 6, 18, 20, 51.
. Some indeed have been so weak as to imagine that this Sleep did equally seize
Soul and Body, and have asserted, that at death the Soul passes into a state of
Inactivity, and sleeps with the Body till the Resurrection; an Opinion so
repugnant to the true Principles of Philosophy and Divine Revelation, that it is
seldom espoused by any but Atheists, Socinians, and very ignorant Pretenders to
Religion.

Our Souls are of an immortal nature, they neither die nor sleep, but
immediately upon the death Eccles. 12. 7.
of our Bodies return to God that gave 'em, and are fixed in a state of
Happiness or Misery. Had not the Apostle believed this, we cannot imagine that
he would have esteemed Death to be gain to him; or that he would have been in
any strait to determine and fix his choice, for present Death or longer Life:
for the latter would have been much more eligible, if he had believed that his
Soul at death would have been as insensible and unactive as his Body; and no
doubt but he would rather have desired to continue in this World, where he had
enjoyed Communion with Christ, and often seen him by a steady eye of Faith,
than to be hurried out of it by Death, and rendered utterly incapable of any
enjoyment of his Redeemer till the Resurrection. But it is yet more evident from
another Expression of our Apostle, that he was very far from the Opinion, or
rather Dream of the Soul's sleeping with the Body till the Resurrection: His
words are these. We 2 Cor. 5. 8.
are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be
present with the Lord. q. d. We have good courage, and are well armed against
the fears of Death, being well assured that we shall have upon our Dissolution
an immediate admittance into the Presence of our glorified Lord; for the
Apostle supposes not only that the Soul is capable of existing while separated
from the Body, and of exercising her Faculties and Powers in such a state, but
that so soon as she leaves the Body she shall enter into the presence of
Christ, and behold his Glory.

But I pass on, and shall briefly represent the force of the Apostle's
Arguments against immoderate Sorrow for the dead.

The first of which is taken from the nature of their Death who die in the
Lord, it is described by the soft Character of a Sleep; which, as you have
heard, refers only to the Body. Now the death of the Righteous may be thus set
forth on the following accounts.

1. Because the Body is then eased of all its Pains, and freed from all Fatigue
and Toil to which it was exposed while animated with the Soul: And therefore as
Death is compared to Sleep, so the Grave is compared Isa. 57. 2.
to a Bed, where the righteous are said to rest. In this Life the best of Men
are frequently made uneasy by acute Distempers and corroding Pains; and Death
is frequently sought for, because Life is a burden. You that have frequently
visited the Chambers of the sick, cannot surely have forgotten the sighs of
those Prisoners who have groaned upon Beds of Down, as if every part of their
Bodies had been violently extended on a Rack. It would be endless to reckon up
the vast number of Diseases that affect the Children of God in this World: for
being tainted with original Sin, as well as the vilest of the People, they may
expect the same Distempers; and tho they tarry here but a few days, they are
ordinarily full of trouble, and if their Bodies are not often indisposed, yet
through the Malice of Enemies, and the Miseries and Unkindnesses of their Friends,
they are frequently made to bow toward the Grave before they drop into it. For
indeed the best of our earthly Comforts have their hidden stings, but they
shall give us no more pain and uneasiness after we are fallen asleep in Job 3.
17, 18.
Jesus. For in the Grave the wicked cease from troubling; there the weary be at
rest: there the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor.

2. In Sleep no labor is expected from the Body; so when Believers are
overtaken with a mortal slumber, Christ expects no Service from their Bodies.
While the Soul continues united to the Body, we are obliged to yield the
Members of the one as well as the Faculties of the other Romans 6. 13.
as Instruments of Righteousness unto God* but in a state of separation there
is expected neither Service nor Suffering from the Body. So that while we
continue on the Stage of this World, the Advice of the wise Man is very proper:
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do Eccles. 9. 10.
it with thy might; for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom
in the Grave whither thou go. All our vital and animal Operations shall
cease when our Spirits return to God, and our Bodies are reduced to Dust. The
one is fixed in an unalterable state of Happiness or Misery, and the other put
into an incapacity for Action.

A middle place betwixt Heaven and Hell for departed Spirits is a groundless
Imagination; for it could not be said with truth, that such as die in the Lord
rest from Rev. 14. 13.
their Labors, if they were to pass into a refining Fire, equally tormenting
in degree, but not in duration with that of Hell, as those of the Roman Faction
assert. Therefore let us rather attend to the words of our Lord, and follow
Joh. 9. 4.
his Example; I must work the Works of him that sent me, while it is day; the
night comes when no Man can work.

3. Death to the Righteous is disarmed of its sting, and being altered in its
nature it may sutably be set forth by the notion of Sleep. St. Paul tells us,
that 1 Cor. 15. 56.
the sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. Death receives
its destroying Power from Sin, and Sin from the Law; Sin being a Transgression
of the Law, which discovers its odious nature, and denounces Damnation for it.
But Death approaches Believers without its sting, Christ having yielded an
indefective Obedience to the Law, and suffered the penalty of it in the room
and stead of Believers. Hence says the Apostle; There is therefore now no
condemnation Romans 8. 1.
to them which are in Christ Jesus. Christ has redeemed 'em from the Curse
Gal. 3. 13.
of the Law, being made a Curse for 'em. And the Apostle represents Believers
as triumphing over Death in such terms as these; O Death, where is thy Sting? O
Grave, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 57.
where is thy Victory? -- Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ has removed the scandal of Death by dying, and
perfumed the Grave by lying in it, and passing through it.

4. The Death of the Righteous is compared to a Sleep, on the account of what
shall follow thereupon: for as men do awake after Sleep, so they shall revive
after Death, as we are assured by a very remarkable Prophecy Hos. 13. 14.
and Promise; I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave, I will redeem
them from Death: O Death, I will be thy Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy
Destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes. In which words we must
consider the Prophet as personating of Christ, and uttering the Triumphs of a
mighty Conqueror: which contain a glorious Promise to all the Elect of a
Victory over Death, which shall be partially accomplished at the time of their
Dissolution, but finally consummated in the day of the Resurrection: for Death
has not such a power over the living, nor the Grave over the dead, as Christ
has over both, to destroy the one, and swallow up the other in victory.

These several things laid together, compose a very solid Argument to dissuade
from immoderate sorrow for those that sleep in Jesus. But this leads to the

Second Argument which the Apostle urges upon the same account, which is drawn
from the great advantage that shall follow the death of the Righteous: such as
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

Which either supposes or implys these several things.

First, That Jesus Christ, who is God-man, will make his second appearance or
coming at the end of the world. I understand God in my Text personally for the
Son. To them that look for him (says the Heb. 9. 28.
Author to the Hebrews) shall he appear the second time without Sin unto
Salvation. There is a double coming of Christ mentioned in Scripture; the first
in the Form of a Servant, the second with all the Glory of an Incarnate God; at
his first coming he was despised and rejected of Men, but at his Phil. 2. 9,
10, 11.
second every knee shall bow to him, of things in Heaven, of things on Earth,
and things under the Earth; and every Tongue confess that he is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father. At his first coming he concealed his Glory by the Veil
of his Flesh; but at his second he designs to manifest and display it in the
most bright and majestic manner. At his first coming into this World he was
entertained in a Stable, and when he went out of it he expired upon an infamous
Tree; but when he comes again, he will appear in the Clouds seated on a great
white Throne, the Emblem of his unspotted Holiness and regal Authority. At his
first coming he was reproached and despised of the People, but when he comes a
second time, his Enemies shall be struck with a defenseless silence. And tho
some may be ready to say, our Lord delays his coming, because he has been
concealed from their sight for several Ages by the Curtains of Heaven, yet know
it will not be long e're he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; the
Curtains shall shortly be drawn, and the Scenes of Glory shall open; it is as
certain that he will come as if the Event was past, or as if we now saw the
Heavens open, and he moving toward us in the Chariot of a bright Cloud. But,
Lord, what will his Enemies do in the great Day of his Wrath! how will they
bear the lightning of his Eyes, the smoke of his Breath, the thunder of his
Voice, the weight of his Arm, and the terrors of his Wrath, who have despised
his Grace, blasphemed his Person, and spurned at the sounding Bowels of his
Love?

Secondly, It implies the Resurrection of their Bodies who sleep in Jesus.
Christ cannot bring them with him in the Clouds of Heaven, unless he first
fetch 'em from the bowels of the Earth, and the bottom of the Sea; for at the
sound of the last Trump, all the Elements shall give up their Dead. Believers
shall not always continue under the power of Death, but shall be revived
incorruptible and immortal. Indeed to Reason, not improved by the supernatural
Light of Divine Revelation, it seems an Acts 26. 8.
incredible thing that God should raise the Dead. Pliny reciting those things
which he thought not to be in the Power of God, mentions these two, Mortales
aeternitate donare, aut revocare defunctos, Lib. 2. cap. 7. And tho there are
various things in Nature which are shadows of the Resurrection, yet I am
inclined to think they would never have convinced us of it, had not the
Scripture revealed it to us. The Earth has been represented as a kind of Grave
or Sepulcher to the vegetable World; where (as one Mr. Beconsal.
observes) the vital Powers are sealed up and stifled all the Winter, and yet
at Spring are actuated, expand and send forth a lively Verdure. So a grain of
Corn is not quickened except it rot and die: Our sleep every night is the Image
of Death, and our awaking in the morning a shadow of the Resurrection. Now
although from these circular Revolutions of Nature, a probable Argument for the
Resurrection may be drawn; yet those that are certain and concluding, are only
to be fetched from the Fountain of Truth, The sure Word of Prophecy. And if it
should be said, that several Heathens believed the Resurrection of the Body;
that may be accounted for two ways, either Tradition might hand it down from
Noah, or they might gain light in this Doctrine by conversing with the Writings
of the Old Testament: for I think nothing is more evident, than that a great
many Heathen Authors have borrowed the brighter Notions that adorn their Books,
from the inspired Writings of Moses and the Prophets, as several Learned Men
have abundantly proved. So that I say, the only infallible assurance we have of
the Resurrection of the Body, is founded on Divine Revelation.

It will therefore be necessary that I recite a few passages of Scripture
before I proceed. The first I shall mention is the words of Job: I know that my
Redeemer Job 19. 25, 26.
lives; and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And tho
after my skin worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I
shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another, tho my reins
be consumed within me. Which Text, tho by some understood of a providential
Resurrection, yet I think not without some force upon it: for I cannot see any
necessity of taking it in a figurative and improper sense. I am sure that St.
Clement, who was not only contemporary with St. Paul the Apostle, but his
Companion and Fellow Laborer, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, cites
this Text to prove the Resurrection of the Body, and understands it in a
literal proper sense. But that passage which is yet more plain and full, is the
words of our Blessed Savior: John 5. 28, 29.
Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good,
unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, to the
Resurrection of Damnation. Which Text is so expressive of the Resurrection of
the Body, that it needs no Comment. It also proves that the very same Body that
fell by Death, shall arise again; for if it be not the very same Body which was
laid in the Grave that is called forth by Christ's powerful Voice, it is not
properly a Resurrection, but a new Production of the same specific Being. But
when I speak of the Resurrection of the Body, I assert that there shall not
only be raised the same specifical, but the same numerical Body; not only the
same Body for kind, but for substance: not that I affirm that every individual
Particle that composed the Body when it died, shall be raised up again, but so
much of the Matter that made up the necessary constituent parts of it. Now of
what is necessary, I think an ingenious Modern gives a very probable account;
his words are these: By necessary Dr. Hody.
Parts, says he, I mean those which remain after the utmost degree of
Maceration, without which the Body would not be integral, but imperfect. And
these are chiefly the Bones, the Skin, the Nerves, the Tendons, the Ligaments,
and the substance of the several Vessels. As long as these and all that are
necessary to Life remain, the Body is truly whole, tho never so much macerated.

But before I go off from this Head, I would make a remark upon one Phrase,
which is within the compass of my Text, and I think proves the Identity of the
dying and rising Body; and that is Death's being set forth by Sleep, which
would be very improper, if the very Bodies that sleep in Jesus and are dead,
should not be awakened and revived in the morning of the Resurrection.

There is but one thing more I shall stay to mention, farther to support this
important Article, and it is the instance given by the Apostle of those that
shall be alive at Christ's second coming: 1 Cor. 15. 51.
he tells us, they shall not all sleep, but they shall all be changed. Now this
Change must refer to the qualities of their Bodies, not to the substance of
'em: we cannot imagine that by being changed, he means that the whole substance
of their Bodies should be annihilated, and that they shall have quite new
Bodies formed out of other matter. Moreover let me observe, that should those
very Bodies be destroyed, and new ones united to those Souls, the destruction
of the Body and the breach of the union would be Death; whereas the Apostle
asserts all shall not die. So that upon the whole I argue thus: That if those
Persons that are found alive at Christ's second coming shall retain their old
Bodies only with new Qualities, then those that are raised from the Dead shall
have the same Bodies which were formerly joined to their Souls, only with the
addition of new Qualities. For what reason can any man assign, that the Saints
that shall be alive when Christ shall come to judge the World, should be caught
up into the Air with their old Bodies only ennobled and refined, and those that
died should have Bodies entirely new, and such as were never united to their
Souls before, such as never were the Instruments either of sinning, or serving
of God?

Now the Apostle does not barely tell us of the Saints being brought with God
our Savior at his appearing and Kingdom, which implys their Resurrection, but
he shows that their Resurrection depends upon the Death and Resurrection of our
Blessed Savior: for says he, If we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

Heb. 2. 14.
First, Upon his death: for through death Christ has destroyed him that had the
power of Death, that is the Devil. When men were doomed to death for the breach
of the Law, Christ changed conditions with 'em, and offered up his precious 1
Pet. 1. 19.
Blood as a Ransom to God for 'em; so that our Savior was victorious in dying,
and conquered as he expired on the infamous Tree. He bruised the head of the
old Serpent, and silenced the Anathema's of a broken Law, when in the sharpest
Agony, and amidst a thousand torments, he bowed his head and gave up the Ghost.
I confess that his own Exaltation and Triumphs began with his Resurrection; but
if there had not been an infinite satisfying Merit in his Death, he had been so
fast fettered with the bonds of Death, that he could never have burst 'em: but
having offered a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, which was of
infinite worth and consideration, the pains of death Acts 2. 24.
were loosed, for 'twas impossible he should be held by 'em: naturally
impossible* because of his irresistible Power as God; legally impossible,
because he had paid the full Demands of the Law and Justice.

Secondly, Our Resurrection from the Grave depends on the Resurrection of
Christ. Christ's Resurrection from the dead proves that ours is not only
possible, but infallibly certain. And this St. Paul reasons upon in a very
convincing manner: Now if 1 Cor. 15. 12.
Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that
there is no Resurrection of the dead? q. d. How can any deny either the
possibility or certainty of the Resurrection of the Body, since Christ has
evidenced both by his own Resurrection from the Dead? Christ has removed both
the moral and natural impossibility of our revival after death, the one by his
abundant Merit, and the other by his own triumphant Resurrection: for having
taken away the guilt of our Sins which is the cause of Death, Death which is
the consequent of Sin shall be destroyed and swallowed up in victory. And our
Lord declares, That he is the Resurrection and the Joh. 11. 25.
Life; he that believes in me (says he) tho he were dead, yet shall he live:
q. d. I am, and shall be the principal cause of the Resurrection, my voice
shall break the silence of the Grave, and cause those that sleep in the dust to
awake and live again. He is also said to be the first fruits of them that
sleep. 1 Cor* 15* 20* ^^ 22.
And says the same Apostle, For since by man came death, by man came also the
Resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive.

From all which we may collect, that our Savior's Resurrection is the Pledge
and Assurance of ours. Romans 8. 11.
For if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
his Spirit that dwells in you. In a word, Christ rose from the dead as a
public Person, as the Surety and Head of his Church; and because he lives, we
shall live also. And being called the firstborn among the dead, he owns all
that have died in the Faith as his Brethren, who shall be restored to Life
according to his excellent Pattern; for his Resurrection is not only the Pledge,
but the Model of ours. Therefore we are expressly told, That he shall change
Phil. 3. 21.
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according
to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. How
glorious our Lord is in his exalted humane Nature, cannot fully be represented
by the most graceful turns of Language, and lofty figures of Speech: therefore
we must be content with very imperfect Idea's of his Glory, till we have the
happiness to see him as he is. Yet we have enough revealed concerning it, to
invigorate our desires, and raise our wonder: His eyes are represented Rev. 1.
15.
like a flame of fire; his voice as the sound of many waters; his feet like to
fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; his countenance as the Sun shining
in its full strength. Now after this bright Pattern shall the Bodies of the
Saints be formed in the Resurrection. O what proportion of Parts! what
agreeableness of Color! how radiant an Air shall sit upon their Countenance!
Mark 1^. 43* (...).
for they shall shine with a luster exceeding the brightness of all the Lamps
of Heaven. The Apostle also assures us, that tho they are sown natural, they
shall be raised spiritual Bodies; i. e. the Matter of 'em shall be exalted and
improved to an extraordinary degree of fineness: for Matter is properly enough
said to be spiritual when it is much refined. And how great a difference may we
observe in material things; for instance, betwixt the animal Spirits in the
Brain, and the grosser parts of the Body; betwixt a lump of Clay, and the
refined matter of the Air; betwixt the Earth and the Sun that shines upon it,
yet all material Substances: from which we may collect what Christ can do to
exalt and refine our bodies in the Resurrection. But farther, they may be
called Spiritual, in that they will be much better fitted to serve our Spirits
than they are now. Here our Bodies are oftentimes a clog and a hindrance to us;
but in the Resurrection they shall be like Wings to our Souls, or to use the
Phrase of the Ancients, They shall be as a Celestial Chariot to the Soul; they
shall neither be the cause of our ignorance, nor of our sinning, as they are
now; they shall not hinder, but rather help forward our Devotions. In a word,
they shall never suffer nor die more, for they shall be raised immortal and
incorruptible; the one respects a deliverance from Death, the other a freedom
from Diseases: so that Incorruptibility is an addition to the happiness of
immortal Creatures; for if Persons should never die, yet if they were often
diseased, their happiness would be incomplete: but the raised Bodies of the
Saints shall never know any more sorrow, sickness, or death; it shall not be in
the power of any Creature to disorder the curious Contexture of the raised
Bodies. Mortality then will be swallowed up of Life; This corruptible shall 1
Cor. 4* 15, 53.
put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality.

Thirdly, The Saints being brought with Christ at his second coming, does not
only suppose their Resurrection, but that with their raised Bodies they shall
ascend up into the Air. And so much the Apostle asserts a little 1 Thessalonians. 15,
17.
after my Text; For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which
are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which
are asleep. -- For we shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to
meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Whether those
that are raised from the dead, and those that shall be changed who never died,
shall be caught up into the Air by the immediate attractive Power of Christ, or
by the ministry of Angels, I will not determine; but that they shall ascend in
order to their coming with him, is beyond all dispute: and probably their
Bodies may be so refined, that they may be capable of treading Air, and
mounting upwards as easily as they now move upon the Earth.

Fourthly, Being brought with Christ at his second coming, shall be to
illustrate the Glory of our incarnate God, and to advance the happiness of his
redeemed ones. They shall attend their Lord's Triumph, and make up a part of
his magnificent Retinue: for as he shall come to be admired 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
in all those that believe, so they shall all share in his Glory; they will
then know by experience, what riches of Glory is comprehended in that Promise
and Privilege, of being Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ. O what
a glorious Procession will this be through the Air! when he that suffered upon
the infamous Tree, shall appear at the head of so long and bright a Train! when
all that the Father gave to him shall appear with glittering Crowns and
spreading Palms, the Rewards of Grace, and the Tokens of Victory!

I proceed now to make some improvement of what I have said. And,

First, This Doctrine that I have delivered, discovers to us the excellency of
the Christian Institution: Life and Immortality is brought to light by the
Gospel. All that has been said by Heathen Poets and Philosophers concerning a
Future State, was but obscure Conjecture to the shining Revelation of the
Gospel. They understood not that the sting of Death was removed by the
sufferings of the Redeemer, or that the Body should be raised with a
transcendent Luster and Dignity, to receive a Reward with the Soul. Yea, under
the Mosaic Economy, a future State was but obscurely revealed; but under the
Dispensation of the Gospel, we have a most charming Landscape of Heaven, and the
way to obtain it is set in the most clear and certain light.

Secondly, This Doctrine may be improved to guard good men against the slavish
fears of Death. Why should the Righteous be afraid to repose upon a bed of
dust? Death is but a sleep, from which we shall be awakened in the morning of
the Resurrection; and Christ, as you have heard, has disarmed Death of its
Sting, and altered it in its very nature to the Righteous. I confess, I do not
wonder that the wicked and profane are afraid of Death, for they know it puts a
period to their Pleasures, and begins their Torments; it snatches them from the
joys of Life, and fixes 'em under the agonies of the second Death. So that some
not only fear Death it self, but the very name of it is terrible: which
occasioned a Prince that I have read of, to forbid the mention of it in all his
Court. Yea so enslaved are some by the fear of Death, that they conceive an
abhorrence at the sight of a Coffin, the dress of Mourners, and the solemnities
of a Funeral; which (as one says) are only the Outguards that make up the
Retinue of the King of Terrors.

It Is reported of Alexander, who had often encountered the numerous Armies of
the Asian Monarchs, and despised the terror of Battles, yet when he was seized
with a mortal Disease in Babylon, he was so afraid of Death, that his Court was
filled with Diviners and Victims, and all the little arts of Superstition were
us*d to preserve his Life. And indeed all men have just reason to fear Death,
who have nothing but a gloomy prospect beyond it, the terrible apprehensions of
an angry God, and a tormenting Tophet. But such whose guilt is removed by the
Blood of Christ, and their Souls renewed and cleans'd by the Spirit of Christ,
have no reason to fear Death, for it approaches 'em without a sting.

Thirdly, From the Doctrine I have established, we learn of what necessity it
is to be united to Christ; for it is only such that shall have part in the first
Resurrection, over whom the second Death shall have no power; it is only such as
die in the Lord, i. e. united to Christ by the Spirit and Faith, that are said
to sleep in Jesus, and that God our Savior will bring with him. I know that
some men think themselves very witty, when they ridicule the Doctrine of Union
with Christ; but I am sure they are very miserable, if we may take the word of
an Apostle for it, who says, that if any Romans 8. 9.
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Now none but such as
belong to Christ shall attend his Triumph at the last day, and reign with him
in his immovable Kingdom.

Fourthly, How great are our Obligations to our Redeemer, who has altered the
very nature of Death by dying in our stead, and given us assurance of our
Resurrection by his own rising from the dead. O the heights, the depths, the
lengths, the breadths of the Love of God in Christ Jesus! O, shall not our
Hearts burn with a grateful flame! and shall not his unexampled Love render him
exceeding precious to our Souls, and cause us to strike up with the Church
Triumphant, Rev. 5. 12,
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, for ever and ever!

Fifthly, How little reason have those that are united to Christ, to desire any
long tarry in this World, which is a sink of Sin and Sorrow, a place of
gloominess and darkness; where we constantly suffer, and are always in danger
of sinning. Moreover, while here, we are kept from our Inheritance and our
Father's House: Therefore it better becomes a true Member of Christ's Mystical
Body, to desire rather to depart, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Sixthly, How great is the difference betwixt the death of a Believer and that
of an Infidel. Mr. Cruso.
They may both fall by the same diseases, and their Dust be mingled in the same
Pit; but their immortal part will be everlastingly divided: There is a great
Gulf fixed between the Spirits in Prison, and the Souls in Paradise. We read
that when the rich Man died, in Hell be lift up his Eyes, being in Torments;
Luke 16. 22, 23.
but when the religious Beggar left this World, he was carried by Angels into
Abraham 's Bosom. An impenitent Sinner at death loses the very Shadows that he
courted for Happiness; but the Saint heightens his Felicity into Perfection.
Mark the perfect Man, and behold Psalm. 37. 37.
the upright; for the end of that Man is peace.

Lastly, If such as sleep in Jesus God will bring with him, then let us not
sorrow like those without hope when God removes our Relations and Friends by
death, especially such whom we have good ground to believe are fallen asleep in
Jesus, as blessed be God we have of that excellent and worthy Gentleman Mr.
ABBOTT, whose Death has given the sad occasion to this Discourse: And is he
dead? Well, but his Name lives, and will be fresh and fragrant to Posterity.
And I cannot do Justice to his Memory, without taking notice of those Graces
and Virtues that eminently shined in his Conversation and Conduct; for the
Memory of the just shall be blessed, and the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance.

I am not now to give the Character of one that dwelt in a shade, but of one
whose public Imploys exposed him to a continual view, so that I doubt not of a
crowd of Witnesses to attest the truth of what I shall say. I confess, to
collect all that was excellent and imitable in the deceased Gentleman, is too
big a task for so unskilful a Person as I am, who can but lay the dead Colors
of his Character, and must leave the finishing strokes to more artful Hands, to
Men of better Judgment, of greater compass of Thought, and exactness of Style.
I must own I am at a loss where to begin, and what part of his excellent
Character I shall insist upon; but I think his Piety toward God may properly
enough be spoken of in the first place.

He began very early to be religious, devoted to Heaven the flourishing bloom
of his Youth, the first and best of his time; he had well studied and digested
the great Articles of the Christian Faith, and had right Notions of the Person
and Mediatory Work of Christ, which had a mighty influence into his whole
Conversation; for tho he lived in a crowd and hurry of business, yet he lost
not his Religion in the midst of it, but kept close to the private and public
Duties of Divine Worship.

With what seriousness and diligence did he attend on Sermons, and what Pains
did he take in the writing and repeating of 'em? which was the more
extraordinary, because his public Imploys engaged him in writing even to toil
and fatigue.

He was not a Gentleman that affected Singularity, or pretended to more Purity
than other Christians; but there was a native gracefulness that attended his
acts of Piety and Devotion, which he managed without Pomp or Noise: this was an
evidence of his great Humility, a Grace very conspicuous in him, as some of the
poorest in this place cannot but have observed, to whom he carried it as if
they had been his Equals, which added a mighty luster to the rest of his
Virtues.

His Zeal for spreading the great Truths of the Gospel was strong and regular,
bright and flaming; for notwithstanding his many necessary Avocations, he would
redeem time to advise and assist in the promotion of substantial Godliness.

His Sincerity was very extraordinary and visible, for he appeared always with
great freedom, simplicity and plainness in Conversation; he detested all
Reserves and Disguises, 'twas too mean for him to appear in Masquerade, tho
Alamode: Integrity preserved him from the meanness of Flattery, and he
preserved his Integrity amidst a thousand Temptations.

He was a true Nathanael, who by the Grace of God (abating the common frailtys
of human Life) might be said to keep himself unspotted from the World; for he
acted like Joseph in the Court of Pharaoh, only with this difference, that he
had not learned to swear by his Life.

In his Family he was very exemplary, gave great encouragement to the
beginnings of Piety, but deeply resented the negligence of Servants or Children
that should absent themselves from Family Worship.

The Company he most delighted in, was such where he might either do good, or
receive it; and indeed I may say, that (like the Master he served) he went
about doing good; for as he sought out Objects to exercise his Charity upon, so
he would thank his particular Friends when they told him of any that were
deserving of his Alms, and would as cheerfully relieve 'em in the most generous
and noble manner. He was never deaf to the Complaints of the Poor and
Miserable, nor blind to the Marks of their Poverty; neither did he shut his
Heart, his Purse, or his Door against 'em: he did not only wish 'em well, and
give them soft language, but afforded 'em solid Supplys. He was truly that
liberal Man whom Solomon speaks of, that devises liberal things: For as he was
created in Christ Jesus to good Works, so he did abound in all the Fruits of
Righteousness and Charity, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise and Glory of
God the Father. And tho he was thus rich in good Works, yet his charitable
Distributions were never attended with the sound of a Trumpet, but dispersed to
multitudes in the most silent and secret way. He delivered the Poor that cried,
and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him; the blessing of him that
was ready to perish came upon him, and he caused the Widow's heart to sing for
joy. Yet in all this he observed the Rule of our Savior as near as possible,
not letting his right hand know what his left hand did.

He gave very liberally, tho very privately, to encourage the bringing up of a
Pious and Learned Ministry in Ireland; and understanding that such a Design was
forming in London, he offered most generously to encourage it, but before it
could be accomplished, cruel Death fettered those hands that were always active
in dispensing the most noble Charities.

And I think it no contemptible Branch of his Character, that he paid a
deference and respect to all that were of the Sacred Order of the Ministry,
under what denomination soever they passed: Tho his Ears were not servilely
boar'd to any, for he did not look on 'em as Lords of his Faith, but Helpers of
his Joy. Yet, I say, he was not wanting to afford 'em the Testimonies of his
Respect. He gave liberally to support several Lectures; particularly he
encouraged that which is carried on in this Place: for he was a Gentleman of
universal Charity to all that bore the Image of Christ.

He was very tender of the Reputation of all Men; and as he could not endure to
hear the Follies of Men made a matter of Diversion, so he always deeply
resented the Reproaches and Calumnies that are too commonly the Sauce of
Conversation, and looked upon a Man's good Name as too valuable to lie at the
mercy of every Jester: so that I may say he was as free from rash Censures, as
he was from deserving 'em.

He was always ready to compose any difference betwixt contending Parties,
which he did with that dexterity and impartiality, that that Man was suspected
to have a very bad Cause that declined his Arbitration.

As to his acquitting himself in his public Employ, it was with that Honor
that few Men in an Age do; he was so little charmed with the glitter of Wealth,
and his Mind was so imbued with the Principles of the Christian Religion, that
he thought it below him to raise his Estate by the mean practices of Craft or
Violence, Bribery or Oppression.

He feared God and honored the King, and did not meddle with those that are
given to change: His Loyalty to his present Majesty William the King of Great
Britain and Ireland, and the remarkable Services he has done* in contributing
toward supporting the Credit of the Nation at a time when it run very low, are
too well known to need reciting here.

Should I speak of him as a Husband, a Parent, a Master, or a Friend, I may say
without an Hyperbole, he had few Equals under Heaven; for never did I see a
more affectionate Husband, tender Father, pleasant and faithful Friend. Yet all
these things that I have mentioned, and a great many more I have not time to
name, that are lovely and of good report, could not prevent his being seized
with a mortal Sickness; Psalm. 89. 48.
For what Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death? Shall be deliver his
Soul from the hand of the Grave? Selah.

His Illness was more violent and dangerous than was generally apprehended,
till within a day or two before his Death: he then being asked concerning his
hopes of eternal Life, declared, They were fixed on the Satisfaction and
Obedience of Christ, and that upon the Righteousness of the Redeemer alone he
rested for the pardon of his Sins and everlasting Happiness. But immediately
after this he grew delirious, and so was rendered incapable of discoursing
distinctly concerning Divine things; yet even while he was thus indisposed, he
desired me to pray with him, and told me that he heartily joined. Indeed a few
hours before he died he lay a little composed, and we imagined that some
revival would have ensued; so apt are we to flatter our selves with the belief
of that which is the matter of our earnest Wishes. But alas! one hour sunk all
expectation of Life, and the next put a Period to it.

Thus lived and died that admirable Person whose Decease has occasioned this
Discourse; and tho he be dead, yet he speaks, and his Works praise him more
in the Gate, than I have done from the Pulpit. Is he dead? he is not gone out
of the World, but removed to a better part of it; he has only changed his
Place, his Company, and Work. Therefore you his sorrowful surviving Half, and
the rest of his mourning Friends should not think on him as lost, but as set at
liberty; not as decaying among the Clods of the Valley, but as shining on an
illustrious Throne. Stop your Tears, for were he sensible of your Grief, and
capable of making a pause in the midst of his Hallelujahs, he would say to you
that survive, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. Therefore let us all
think what Improvement to make of this sudden and surprising Providence: And
those things that it is proper to instruct us in, I shall but just name, and
conclude: Let this Providence put us on the most serious Consideration; In the
day of adversity consider, says the wise Man. Let us consider and reflect upon
the vanity and uncertainty of human Life; surely when so bright and vigorous a
Flame is so suddenly extinguished, that Scripture is eminently fulfilled that
says, Verily Man in his best Estate is altogether Vanity. Let us learn a holy
Indifferency to the things of this World; let us be convinced how ineffectual
are all kind of means to preserve Life when the Decree is gone forth. If the
Skill of Physicians, if the melting Affection of a Wife, and the fervent
Prayers of Ministers could have prevented the Death of our Friend, we had not
been mourning here at this time: Therefore let us adore the Sovereignty of God,
who acts as he pleases, and gives no account of his Matters to the Children of
Men. Let us trust in the Lord, who changes not, and submit to his disposing
Will, which is directed by Wisdom and Love. Finally, prepare to follow; Be ye
also ready: walk with God while you tarry here, that when he calls you out of
this lower World, he may take you into his blissful Presence, and say Mat. 25.
21.
unto each of you, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant; thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: enter thou
into the Joy of thy Lord.

FINIS.

