CAROLI Tou achartou PALIGGENESA.

Printed Ann. Dom. 1649.

CAROLI (...).
I Come, but come with trembling, lest I prove
The unequal Greece of Semele and Jove.
As She was too obscure, and He too bright,
My Theam's too heavy, and my Pen too light.
And whilst, like Midas, I presume to sit
In wise Apollo's Chair, without HIS wit,
Is it not just t'expect, that He, who dares
Higher then Midas, should wear longer Ears?
May I not fear Patroclus Fate, and feel
The dangerous honor of Achilles Steel?
Just like that busy Elf, whose venurous Pride
Found none but Titan Titan's Coach could guide?
Why; He Will not stand in Verse. Can I enclose De Catone ve^us dict^m, Ultimus
Romanorum, Primus Hominum.

Him, whom the greatest Liberty of Prose
Wants room to hold? And whose unweildy Name,
Is big enough to fill the Trump of Fame?
An Individual species? like the Sun,
At once a Multitude, and yet but One?
One of such vast Importance, that He fell
The Festival of Heaven, and England's Hell?
One, who for Eminence was these two things,
The last of Christians, and the first of Kings?
One so diffusive, that he lived to all,
And One that died the whole world's Funeral?
For Charles being thus dismounted, and the Swain
High shooed Boots leapt into the Wain,
Is not old Beldame Nature truly said
To Advance her Heels, and stand upon her Head?
Does not the Judge, and Law too for a need,
The Stirrup hold, whilst Treason mounts the Steed*
Is not Gods Word, and's Providence besides
Used as a Laquy, whilst the white Devil rides!
Sure all things thus into Confusion hurld
Make, though an universe, yet not a World.
And so our Sovereign's, like our Saviors Passion,
Becomes a kind of Doomsday to the Nation.
If Deadmen did not walk, 'twould be admired
(The Breath of all our Nostrils thus expired)
What 't is that gives us motion. And can I,
Who want my self, write Him an Elegy?
Though Virgil turned Evangelist, and wrote,
Not from his Tripod, but Gods Altar taught;
Though all the Poets of the Age should sit
In Inquest of Invention, and club wit,
To make words Epigrams; should they combine
To crowd whole stock of Fancy in each line;
Sell the Fee-simple to advance one sum,
(As Eglis spoke but once, and then lived dumb)
'I were all as inarticulate, and weak,
As when those men make signs, that cannot speak.
But where the Theme confounds us, (...). Longin.
it is a sort
Of glorious Merit, proudly to fall short.
Despair sometimes gives courage; any one
May lisp him out, who can be spoke by none;
None but a King; No King, unless He be
As Wise, as Just, as Good, as Great as He.
When Late Posterity shall run t'advise
With Times impartial Register, how Wise
This Great-one was, they will find it there enrolled
That He was never in's Nonage. but born old.
View him whilst Prince of Wales, and it appears
His wisdom did so antedate his years,
That He was Full in the Bud, and's Soul divine,
Nestor, might be Great-Grandfather to thine.
View him again, where he so ripe was grown,
As not to rise, but drop into a Throne.
How did those rays of Majesty, which were
Scattered in other Kings, concenter here?
As if h'ad got King Sapors sphere, and proved
How each Intelligence his Orb had moved*
Wise Charles, like them, sat steering at two Helmes,
King of himself, but Father of his Realms:
And just as if old Trismegistus Cup
Had by his thirsty Soul been all drunk up,
His understanding did begirt this All,
As to were Ecliptic or Meridionall.
^uppose a Diet of all Christian Kings
And Bishops too, convened to weigh the things
Of Church and State: Nay add Inferior men,
Those of the Sword, the pensil, and the pen.
From the Scepter to the Sheep-hook, Charles in all
Must have been Vmpire Oecumenicall.
He lived a Perpendicular; The Thread
His Wisdom was; Humility the Lead,
By which he measured Men and Things; took aim
At actions crooked, and at actions plain.
He and all from him into Cubes did fall,
And yet as perfect as the Circle, all,
'Twas He took Natures Breadth, and Depth, and Hight,
Knew the just difference 'twixt Wrong, and Right.
He saw the points of things, could justly hit,
What must be done, what may; what is just, what sit.
As if, like Moses he had had resort
Unto Gods Council, ere he was of's Court.
Hence his Religion was his choice, not Fate,
Ruled by Gods Word, not Interest of State.
Others may thank their stars. He his inquest,
Who, sounding all sides, anchored in the best.
His Crown contained a Miter; He did twist
Moses and Aaron, King and Casuist.
When the Mahumetan or Pope shall look
On his Soul's best Interpreter, his Book;
His Book, his Life, his Death, will henceforth be
The Church of England's best Apology.
Thus Dove and Serpent kissed, as if they meant
To render him as wise, so innocent.
His own good Genius knew not, whether were
His Heart more single, or his Head more clear.
Virtue was his Prerogative; and thus
Charles ruled the King, before the King ruled Us.
He knew that to command, his only way
Was first to teach his Passions to obey.
And his incessant waiting on God's Throne
Gave him such meek reflections on his own,
That, being forc^^ to censure, he expressed
A Judges Office with a Mothers breast.
And when some sturdie violence began
T'unsheath his sword, unwilling to be drawn
He but destroyed (and so soft mercy can)
The malefactor, to preserve the Man.
Even Hell's blind Iourney-men, those Sons of Night
Who look on scarlet murder, and think it white,
Unwillingly confessed, The only thing
Which made him guilty was, That He was King.
He was Incarnate Justice, and it is said
Astraea lived in him, yet died a Maid.
We want an Emblem for him: Phoebus must
Stand still in Libra, to speak Charles the Just.
And yet though he were such, that nothing less
Then Virtue's mean stretched to a just Excess
Flew from his Soul; He, like the Sun, was known
To see all excellence, except his own.
His Modesty was such, that All which He
'Ere spoke or thought of's self, was Calumny;
But yet so mixed with state, that one might see
It made him not less Kingly, but more free.
He was not like those Princes, who to express
A learned surfeit, a sublime excess,
Send to dispeople all the Sea of Fish,
Depopulate the Air to make one dish,
(Such skillful luxuries, as only serve
To make their minds more plentifully sterve)
Whatever Dainties filled his Board by chance,
His only constant Dish was Evagr. l. 1. c. 21. de Monachis quisusdam, (...).
Temperance.
His Virtue did so limit him, his Court
Implied his Cloister; and his very sport
Was Self-denial. Nay, though he were seen
So roab'd in purple, and so matched to a Queen,
As made him glitter like a Noon day Sun,
Yet still his Soul wore sackcloth, and lived Nun.
Evagr. l. 1. c. 13. (...).
Simeon the Stylite in his Pillar pent
Might live more strict, but not more innocent.
So wise, so just, so good, so great and all,
What is it could set him higher, but his fall?
When he caught up by a Celestial Train
Began his second, and more solid Reign.
How to that Haven did this Pilot steer
Twixt the Independent, and the Presbyter,
Placed in the confines of two shipwracks? thus
The Greeks are seated 'twixt the Turks and Us.
Whom did Byzantium fre^, Rome would condemn;
And freed from Rome, they are enslaved by them.
So placed betwixt a Precipice and Wolf,
There the Aegaean, here the Venice-gulf,
What with the rising and the setting Sun,
By these they are hated, and by those undon.
Thus virtues hemmed with vices, and though either
Solicites her consent, she yields to neither.
Nay thus our Savior, to enhance his grief,
Was hung betwixt a Murderer, and a Thief.
Now Charles as King, and as a good King too
Being Christ's adopted self, was both to do
And suffer like him; both to live and die
So much more humble, as he was more high
Then his own Subjects. He was thus to tread
In the same footsteps, and submit his Head
To the same thorns: when spit upon, and beat,
To make his Conscience serve for his retreat,
And overcome by suffering: To take up
His Saviors Cross, and pledge him in his Cup.
Since then our Sovereign, by just account,
Lived over our Saviors Sermon in the Mount,
And did all Christian Precepts so reduce,
That Is Life the Doctrine was, his Death the Use;
Posterity will say, he should have died
No other Death, then by being Crucified.
And their renownedst Epoch will be
Great Charles his Death, next Christ's Nativity.
Thus Treason's grown most Orthodox; who since
They said they would [ make him the most glorious Prince
In all the Christian World] it is plain, this way
They only promised, what they meant to pay.
For now (besides that beatifick Vision
Where all desire is lost into fruition)
The stones, they hurled at him, with intent
To crush his fame, have proved his monument.
Their Libels his best Obeliske; To have
A fit Mausole, were to want a Grave;
His Scaffold, like mount Tabor, will in story
Become the proudest Theater of Glory,
Next to the blessed Cross: and thus it is sense,
T'affirm him murdered in his own Defense.
For though all Hells Artillery and skill
Combined together to besiege his Will;
And when their malice could not bring't about
To hurt God's Image, they razed Adam's out,
(Like men repulsed, whose Choler think's it witty
To burn the Suburbs, when they cannot the City)
However they stormed his walls, and draind his blood,
Which moted round his Soul; yet still he stood
Defender of the Faith, (and that which He
Found sweeter then revenge) his Charity.
This then the utmost was their rage could do,
[ It showed him King of his afflictions too.]
Vntempted Virtue is but coldly good,
(As she is scarce chaste, that is so but in cold blood)
To scorn base Quarter is the best escape,
(As Lucrece died the chaster for her rape)
These two did Charles his Virtue most befriend,
His glorious hardships first, and then his end.
Death we forgive thee, and thy Bourreaux too,
Since what did seem thy rape, proves but his due.
For how could he be said to fall too soon,
Whose green was mellow, and whose dawn was noon?
Since Charles was only by thy courteous knife
Redeemd from this great injury of life
To one so lasting, that it is truly said
Not He, but his mortality is dead --
To weep his Death's the treason of our eyes;
Our Sun did only set, that he might rise.
But we do mock, not cheat our grief, and sit
Only at best to upbraid our selves in wit,
And want him learnedly: such colors do
Disguise disasters, not delude them too.
For though, I must confess, a Poet can
Fancy things better then another man,
He can but fancy'um; and all his pains
Is but to fill his belly with his brains.
He may both Petrified and famisht sit,
That wears his thoughts, and only dine's on wit.
Were I a Polypus, and could go on
To be those very things I think upon,
I would not then complain: but since I know
To call things thus, is not to make them so,
Great Charles is slain: and say we what we will,
Yet we shall find, judgments are judgments still.
For though it is true, that his now-immense Soul
Does hold commensuration with each Pole;
Though he does shine a Star more fixed and bright
Then where the year makes but one day and night;
And, least he fill the Zodiac, does appear
Not in the Eighth, but Empyraean Sphere;
Yet we his Rise may our Descension call,
As Libra's mounting is poor Aries fall.
He was the only Moses that could stand
Betwixt the sins and judgments of the Land.
And what can we expect, our Lot being gone,
But that a Hell from Heaven should tumble down
On our more sinful Sodom? unless we
Are damned yet worse, to an impunity.)
Kings are Gods once removed. It hence appears
No Court but Heavens can try them by their Peer.
So that for* Charles the Good to have been tried
And cast by mortal Votes, was Deicide.
No Sin, except the first, has ever past
So black as this; no Judgment, but the last.
How does our Del^s, which so lately stood
Unmoved, lie floating in her Pilots blood?
And can we hope to Anchor, who discern
Naught but the tempest ruling at the stern;
Whilst Pluto's Rival, with his Saints by's side,
Drawn by the Spirit of avarice and pride,
Being fairly placed in the Chair of scorn
Sits brewing Tears for Infants yet unborn?
Vast stocks of misery, which his Guardian-rage
Does husband for them till they come to age?
When future times shall look what Plagues befe
Egypt and Us, by'vvay of Parallel,
They Will find at once presented to their view
The Frogs and Lice, and Independents too.
Only this signal difference will be known
Tvvixt those Egyptian judgments and our own,
Those were Gods Armies; but the effect does tell
That these our Vermin are the Host of Hell.
Pausanias and Herostratus will look
Like Pygmy-Sinners writ in Times black-book.
The Spanish Fleet, and Powder Plot will lack
Their usual mentions in our Almanac.
-- Nay, which is more, Socrat. l. 7. c. 10. hoc Alarichiresponsum recitat.
(...) [(...).]
Alaricus his name
Will scarce be legible in the leaves of fame,
When Cromwell shall be read. Nature was never
So blessedly reformed, since Lucifer.
O for a Jeremy to lamemt our woe!
From whom such tragic Rhetoric might flow,
As would become our misery, and dress
Our sorrows with a dreadful gaudinesse!
For next those hovering judgments, which the fall
Of One so great, so good, makes Vertical.
(And rushing down, may only be withstood
If Charles his prayers cry louder than his blood)
I say next that, It is our second Cross
We cannot grieve worthy of so great a Loss.
To vveep upon this subject, and weep sense,
Requires we should be born ten Ages hence.
The greater are the hights an Artist's hand
Designs to take, the farther he must stand.
And as when Sol's in's Zenith, He imply's
His dazzling glory best, that shuts his eyes,
So, where the Theme's ineffable, the way
To speak it is, Herodot. l. 3. Psammetichus ad Cambysem, cum Amicorum vicem
lacrymis lugeret, suam vero silentio, (...) etc.
Not to know what to say.
THE END.

