

A SERMON PREACHED At St. MARGARETS in WESTMINSTER before the Honorable the
House OF COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT Assembled, Upon the 29th Day of MAY, being the
Anniversary Day of the KING'S and Kingdoms Restoration.

BY THOMAS PIERCE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait, at the Little North-door
of St. Paul's Church, 1661.

DEUTERONOMY. 6. 12. Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, who brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt.
WHen I look back upon the Church in all her motions out of the East, observing
how Monarchy and Learning have been at once the two Shoulders to bear her up,
and withal the two Legs to bring her hither; And when again I do reflect upon
our twenty years sins, which were the complicated Cause of our twelve years
sufferings; I mean our drunkenness and luxury, which were deservedly prescribed
so long a Fast; the rashness and vanity of our oaths, which gave us a
miserable option betwixt a perjury, and an undoing; our profanation of the
Quire, which turned us out of the Cathedral, our gross neglect of Gods Service,
which helped to vote down our public Liturgy; our general idleness and sloth,
which often cast us out of our Houses, and as it were set us to eat our Bread
in the sweat of our brows, or of our brains; our unprofitable walking under all
God's methods and means of Grace, which left us nothing but his Judgments (for
many sad years) to work upon us; And yet again when I consider, That God has
turned Psalm. 126. 4.
our Captivity as the Rivers of the South, and cast the Locusts out of our
Vineyards, that we may sit under our Vines; enjoying our Judges as at the
first, and Isa. 1. 26.
our Counselors as at the Beginning; And that the use we are to make of so
miraculous a Recovery, is to be sedulous in providing against the Danger of a
Relapse; To sin no more after pardon, for fear a worse thing happen unto us; I
Joh. 5. 14.
think I cannot be transported with a more innocent Ambition, because I cannot
be ambitious of a more profitable attempt, then that of bringing down the Heads
of certain Hearers into their Hearts; that what is now no more than Light, may
by that means become Fire; That we may All (in this sense) be like the Baptist,
not only shining, but burning Joh. 5. 35.
Lamps; not only beautified with the knowledge of Christian duties, but zealous
too in the discharge; as unaffectedly punctual in all our carriage, as the
greatest Enemies of Godliness are hypocritically precise. And though Heresies
are to be hated, as things which lead unto destruction, yet that Vice may be
reckoned the worst of Heresies, by how much the error of a man's practice is
worse then that of his bare opinion.

Last of all, when I consider, That though Peace is a blessing, and the
greatest in its kind, yet many consequences of Peace are but glittering Snares,
and that the things which are given us as helps to memory, are apt to make us
Isa. 5. 12. Hab. 1. 13, 16. Amos 6. 1, 3. Hos. 13. 6.
forgetful of Him that gave them, I cannot think of a fitter Text for the
giving advantage to my Design, then This Remarkable Caveat to the People of
God, against forgetfulness and ingratitude amidst the pleasant Effects of a
Restoration.

When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give thee
great and goodly Cities, and Houses full of all good things, when thou shall
have eaten, and art Full; THEN beware that thou forget not the Lord, who
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt.

AT the very first view of which holy Caveat, there are five particulars of
Remarque which presently meet my observation. As first, the Downfall of a
Nation, 2ly the Deliverance, 3ly the Author of that Deliverance, 4ly the Duty
by him enjoined, and lastly the Iuncture of affairs wherein this Duty is most
in season.

And of all these Particulars each is the greatest in its kind too. For

First behold the greatest Curse that any I.
poor Nation can struggle under. A yoke of Bondage and Captivity, imposed by
the hardest and worst of men. A yoke so insupportable to some men's Necks, that
I remember Hegesistratus (a captive Soldier in Herodotus) would rather
Herodot. in Calliope.
cut off his legs, then endure his Fetters; that by the loss of his Feet, he
might be enabled to run away. So insufferable a thing is the state of
Thraldom, very significantly implied in the Land of Egypt, and exegetically
expressed by the House of Bondage.

But yet the Curse is so set, (like Shadows II.
in a Picture, or Foyles with Diamonds,) as to commend and illustrate the
greatest Blessing. A Deliverance brought about by such a miraculous
complication, that nothing but the experience that so it is, can extenuate the
wonder that so it should be. A People groaning under the pressures of several
Centuries of years, and so accustomed unto the yoke, as to have made it a kind
of acquired Nature ((...), as Galen speaks) de Terra AEgypti eductus est, is
now at last brought out of the land of Egypt. -- And yet the wonder begins to
cease, Because

The Author of this Deliverance is so III.
much the greatest to be imagined, that he is Dominus, the Lord; the Lord that
stretches out the heavens; the Lord that Isa. 40 22.
lays the foundations of the earth; the Psalm. 104. 5.
Lord that forms the spirit of man within Zech. 12. 1.
him. The Lord in whose Hand are the hearts of all men; who turns man Psalm.
90. 3.
to Destruction, and again who says, Come again ye children of men. In a word,
It is the Lord, to whom Miracles are natural, and by whom impossibilities are
done with ease. It Is He that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And
therefore,

The Duty in proportion must be superlatively IV.
great too, however hid in this place by a little Meiosis of expression. Beware
that thou forget not the Lord thy God; that is, Remember what he has done, and
thank him for it by thy obedience; Let thy gratitude be seen in thy
conversation. Be sure to Deuteronomy. 10. 12
love him and to serve him, with all thy heart and with all thy soul. Forget
him if thou can, unless thou can forget thou were Deuteronomy. 6. 20, 21.
Pharaoh's Bondsman. Nay forget him if thou dare, unless thou art so stout
that thou dare be damned. And yet beware lest thou forget him, whilst thou
art swimming in prosperity, the stream of which may either drown thee, or make
thee drunk, if thou art not forearm'd with circumspection. And therefore beware
that thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt. And that thou
may not forget him, write the Favors which he has done thee upon the posts
of thine House, and Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8, 9.
place them as Frontlets between thine eyes; tell them out unto thy children,
as thou walk by the way, at thy lying down, and thy rising up; Let them be
as a Signet upon thine Arm, and as a Seal upon thine Heart. That the pleasures
of thy Deliverance may not make thee forgetful of thy Deliverer, (forgetful of
the Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 18.
Rock out of which thou were hewn, and kicking (like Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 18.
Iesurun) at him that made thee,) keep an Exodus 13. 3, 4, 10, etc.
Anniversary Feast, (a standing Passover in May,) whereby to fix him in thy
Remembrance.

Lastly a Duty so indispensable should V.
be enforced upon the soul by the present season. A season of peace and
prosperity, succeeding a season of Persecution. The greatest incitement to the
Duty should be the manifold enjoyment of this Deliverance. For so it is obvious
to infer from the particle THEN, (so strongly implied in the Hebrew, that in
the English it is well expressed,) upon which there seems to lie the chiefest
emphasis of the Text, if we observe how it stands in a double Relation to the
Context. [When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give
thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things; when thou
shall have eaten and be full, THEN beware that thou forget not the Lord that
brought thee out of Egypt.]

The Text is so fruitful of particulars, and each particular is so apt to
administer matter of Discourse, that it has really been my hardest Question,
whereabouts I should begin, and how I should end my meditations. And after too
much time lost in stating the Question within my self, I have thought it at
once the fittest and the most useful to be resolved, as most immediately
complying with the solemnity of the time, not to yield to the temptation of
comparing our Land with the land of Egypt, for fear of seeming to have a pique
at the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion; (otherwise 'twere easy to make a
Parallel, because however our native Country, yet for twelve years together it
was a very strange Land;) But not advancing one step beyond the Threshold, I
shall bestow my whole time upon the little word THEN; as being a particle of
connection betwixt our Duty and our Deliverance, betwixt the business of the
Time and the time it self; betwixt the occasion and the end of our present
meeting: looking like Homer's wise man, (...), with a visible prospect on all
that follows, and with as visible a retrospect upon the words going before.

When Prosperity breaks in like a mighty stream, (in so much that I may say
Amos 5. 24.
with our blessed Savior, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears,)
Then beware Luke 4. 21.
that you forget not the Lord that brought you out of Egypt. Beware you forget
him not at any time, but especially at this. For the particle Then is an
important Monosyllable; and that especially in three respects.

First because of the difficulty of having God in our Remembrance, much more
Then, than at other times. Next for the dignity of the Duty, rather Then, than
before or after. Lastly by reason of the danger of not performing the Duty
Then, when it becomes incumbent on us by many unspeakable obligations.

These especially are the Reasons of the particle Then in this place, on which
alone I shall insist in this morning's Service. For should I adventure upon the
rest, not only the hour, but (for ought I can conjecture) the day would fail me.

ANd first of all let us beware amidst I.
the pleasant effects of our Deliverance, that we forget not the Author of it;
because it is difficulter THEN, than at other times. For the Flattery and
Dalliance of the world has perpetually been the mother of so much wantonness,
or so much pride, that Adam found it dangerous to be in Paradise, yea and
Lucifer to be in Heaven. Do but look upon Solomon in the Book of Kings, and
again look upon him in Ecclesiastes, how was he there lifted up by his
prosperity? and how does he here preach it down? I know not whether as a Prince
he more enjoyed his pleasures, or as a Prophet more condemned them: whether the
luxury of his Table made him a wanton, or whether the vastness of his wisdom
made him a Fool; 'Twas that betrayed him to his Concubines, and this permitted
him to his Idols. Since then a prosperous condition has such a secret poison
in it, as against which no medicine has been sufficiently Alexipharmacal; and
from the force of whose contagion there is no sort of men that has been
priviledg'd, no not Adam the Innocent, nor Solomon the wise, nor even Lucifer
the beatified; who were so hugely swelled up with this venom, and so quickly
burst; (not the first in a state of sinlesness, nor the next in a state of
grace, nor yet the third in a state of glory;) since there is no other man then
the man Christ Jesus, that has been ever temptation-proof: Lord, how wretched
a thing is happiness on this side Heaven! and how dangerously treacherous are
our enjoyments! I suppose we are taught by our late experience, how easy it is
to be overjoyed, and how equally hard to be truly thankful, for all those
wonders of salvation which God has wrought, and is working for us, the
grateful commemorating of which, is religiously the end of our present meeting.
Sweetmeats indeed are pleasant, but then they commonly turn to choler. It Is
sure the state of humiliation, which though we can worst feed upon, we are
notwithstanding best nourisht with: we are such barren pieces of clay, that our
fruits will be withered with too much laughter, if Grace does not water them
sometimes with tears. It should be matter of gladness to a considering
Christian, that in the midst of his prosperity he can see himself sorrowful;
that as he was destitute, with comfort, so he abounds, with moderation; and
that he does not live rejoycingly, is many times a chief reason for which he
ought. It was David's resolution (at such a time as this is) to serve the Lord
with fear, and (by a pious Oxymoron) to Psalm. 2. 11.
rejoice unto him with trembling. And if we reflect on the abuses which many
have made of a Restoration, we may charitably pray, that Psalm. 102. 9. 80. 5.
God will give them some tears to drink; and having given them some tears that
he will put them into his Psalm. 56. 8.
Bottle, that they may serve for this end, to blot their merriments out of his
Ibid. which compare with *Mal. 3. 16.
Book.

That the pleasant effects of a Delive rance (which are peace, and plenty,
living securely, and at ease,) are apt to make us turn Atheists, provoking the
Author of our Deliverance to correct us once more in the house of Bondage;
appears, as by many other reasons, so particularly by this; that it is hard for
us to prosper, and not to lie snoring in our prosperities. For it is the natural
language of a prosperous man, (as our Savior implies by way of Parable,) Soul
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou have much goods laid up for
many years, (Luke 12. 19.) And therefore Agur's wisdom was never more seen,
then in his prayer; Give me not Riches, lest I be full, and deny thee, lest I
say, who is the Lord? (Prove. 30. 8, 9.) He knew by manifold experience, that
Jam. 4. 4.
the friendship of the world is perfect enmity with God, and tends immediately
to practical, if not to speculative Atheism. He did not therefore pray thus,
Give me not Riches, lest I be liberal to my Coffers; or, Give me not Riches,
lest I be bountiful to my Lusts; but (for fear of a greater mischief) Give me
not Riches, lest I be full and deny thee, lest I say in my heart, who is the
Lord? that is, for fear I turn Atheist, and only sacrifice to my flesh. So also
Solomon, when he was wisest, that is to say, when he repented, and of a very
vicious Prince became a Preacher of Repentance, concluded all under the Sun to
be but vanity of vanities; as having found by all his trials (who sure had made
more trials then ever any man did,) that peace and plenty with their two
daughters, which are idleness, and ease, are exceedingly great, though glorious
dangers.

But we need not go further for an instance, then to the people in my Text,
whom though God might have called a very wild Tamarisk, he was pleased to style
his Beloved Vine. Lord! how carefully it was manured with Rain and Sunshine?
with Quails, and Manna, and water squeezed out of a Rock? with the Dew of
heaven, and with the Fatness of the earth? and yet when all was done that could
be, they either brought forth no Grapes; or if they did, they were commonly
wild ones. And when sometimes they yielded good, 'twas rather for fear of
cutting down, then for the fertility of their soil, or for the manifold helps
of their cultivation. 'Twas their frequently being pruned, which more
especially made them fruitful. It Is true, that God did not evermore punish,
although that people was still offending. For as he owned his being as well
their Father, as their God; so he was pleased to make use of either Method for
their Amendment; I mean encouragement, as well as terror. God dealt with them,
as with us of this Nation. As he prescribed them a Law, so he promised them a
Canaan. As he led them into Egypt, so he delivered them out of Egypt. As he
thundered from on a cloud, so he whispered out of a Bush. As he pincht them with
scarceness, so he feasted them with plenty. And if the one was even to famine,
the other was even to satiety. But if we compare them with our selves in
another instance, by considering how ungrateful and how unmalleable they were;
how repining under their yoke, and how mutinous in their Liberty; How (like
some amongst us in this very day of our Deliverance,) they fell a hungring
after the Garlic and the Fleshpots of Egypt, quite forgetting the Bondage,
and tale of Brick; how they murmured at their Moses, as if he were worse then a
Pharaoh to them; like some repining at their King, as if he were worse then a
Protector, (For that you know was the Euphemismus whereby to express the most
bloody Tyrant;) How like so many untamed heighfers, they were exceedingly hard
to be brought to hand; or like a stable of unbackt and unbridled Colts, how apt
to kick at their Rider who gave them Food; How God Almighty was forced to
discipline this stiff-neckt Rabble, first of all by committing them to the
hardships of Egypt, and then by sending them to wrestle with the difficulties
of the wilderness; And how when all this was done, they were fain to miss of
their Canaan, whilst they were taking it into possession; (for of so great a
multitude to whom the Promise of it was made, no more then a Number. 13. 30. Hab.
3.
Caleb, and a Joshua had a Capacity to inherit it,) we must conclude they were
a People who deserved to be whipped with a Rod of Iron, not so easily reducible
by the Deuteronomy. chap. 27. and 28. 17, 18, 19.
allurements of Mount Gerizzim, as by the curses and the threats to be thundered
out from Mount Ebal. So far were they from considering, what they suffered a
while ago in the house of Bondage, that they forgot this very Caveat, (as many
will do this very Sermon,) which was meant to bring it to their Remembrance,
when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land, to give thee great
and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things, (etc.) THEN beware that
thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt.

Pass we now (if you please) out of the Vineyard into the Fold; from the
People under the Law, to Us who live under the Gospel; whom though our Lord
(out of goodness) was pleased to call his Flock of Sheep, he might have styled
(out of Justice) his Herd of Swine. For if He, the great Shepherd, withhold his
Crook Lord how quickly we go astray. And for here and there one who will be led
into the Fold, how many are there that must be driven? like the Prodigal in the
Gospel, (who would not return unto his Father until he was brought to feed on
Husks,) we seldom care for our Physician, until the time that we are sick; and
then as soon as recovered, are very glad, rather then thankful. And this may
point us out a Reason, why for so many years together, (before this last,) our
heavenly Father made use of his sharpest Methods for our amendment; even
placing us as Israelites amongst Egyptians, like so many flowers amongst
thorns; of which the principal design was not to torture but to defend us. To
defend us from the danger of carnal security, and presumption; of pride, and
wantonness; of forgetfulness, and ingratitude. And since the way to be
thankful for our twelve months liberty, is very soberly to reflect on our
twelve years thraldom, Let Us so transcribe a fair Copy of God's Economy on
the Jews, as (with a grateful commemoration,) to consider it also in our
selves.

We who flourish at this day like a goodly Tree, not only planted by the river
of God's rich Mercies, but surrounded (like our Land) with an Ocean of them; we
who stretch forth our branches, not only for our own, but for foreign birds
also to build their nests; and whose Spring (blessed be God) does promise at
last to be as lasting, as once our Autumn was like to prove; we who flourish
like a Myrtle, how like a Willow did we droop? How was our verdure almost
exhausted; and our boughs, how deflowered? How did we fall after the measure our
sins had risen? First God blasted our noblest Fruits; then he despoyled us of
our leaves; next he hewed down our branches. Nay how strangely were we fed on
by those very vermin which we did feed? how greedily eaten up by all those
Caterpillars and Locusts, which though ingender'd perhaps by a Northern wind, I
am sure were bred out of our Body? It is not easy to recapitulate how many
Mercies we now enjoy, which our iniquities had withheld for so many years, and
how many good things our sins had Jer. 5. 25.
turned away from us. And now if after our Restitution, we shall be found to be
a barren unfruitful tree, or fruitful only in our impieties; so as that which
was intended to make us better, shall render us worse then we were before; what
better usage can we expect, then (after a little tract of years) to be grubbed
up by the Root? to have that sentence sent out against us, which once went out
against the Fig Tree, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Luke 13. 7. Then
give me leave to repeat the Caveat; And in the meekness of a Remembrancer, 2
Pet. 1. 12.
to put you in mind of these things, although ye know them already, and are
established in the Truth. To put you in mind of being wary, not so much for
your selves, as for the people you represent, by contributing to a Law for the
putting of Laws in execution; that they may not intoxicate their souls with too
many and great draughts of their peace and plenty, for fear a Curse should
break forth from our this days Blessing, by unthankfully forgetting the God
that gave it. And let this suffice for the first importance of the word Then;
as it is a particle of connection, betwixt the occasion and the end of our
present meeting.

SEcondly let us beware amidst the II.
pleasant effects our Deliverance, (such as liberty and plenty, living in
idleness and at ease,) that we forget not the Author of it; because of the
dignity of the Duty, rather Then, than before, or after. For, as it is the mark
of a most servile and base-born spirit, to be the worse for the good that is
done unto us; so it is the noblest generosity, to mend our lives with our
condition. The deep and serious consideration of which great Truth, as it
should lift up our Hearts to a thankful use of our prosperity, so it should
also pluck them down to an humble sense of our obligations. For that indeed is
the proper season, wherein humility is a noble, because a difficult virtue.
Humiliation in a Captive is not a grace, but a necessity. Nor has temperance
any place in the house of scarceness. These two must have a Theater wherein to
set themselves forth; cannot easily be seen in a little Room. The proper time
of seeming base in our own modest eyes, is when we are matter of admiration in
other men's. The time to show our selfdenial, (that is, our victory over our
selves,) is when we are brought out of an Egypt, into a Land overflowing with
Milk and Honey; when our houses are full of all good things, and our Tables
stooping under the weight of their sumptuous load. As our Afflictions a year
ago did make up God's opportunity, whereby to show us his mercy and loving
kindness; so prosperity ever since should make up ours, whereby to show him our
meekness and moderation. The very Atheist will cry [ o God!] in a fit of the
Strangury or the Stone; but let us be Religious in time of health. The
profanest Mariner will be devout in a tempest; but let us be so in a calm: when
the tide of our enjoyments is at the full, Then in a more especial manner let
our ambition ebb lowest: when we are mounted aloft on the wings of Fame, Then
let us retire into the Desert of our most humble contemplations; and be so meek
amidst our eminencies, as to become most eminent for that our meekness.

There are some of whom I may say, they have been armed with infirmities
against the Devil: some, whose Ignorance has kept them safe; some, whose
coldness has passed for continence; who have been phlegmatic, and therefore
meek; or kept under Hatches, and therefore lowly. But then it being their
necessity, and not their choice; rather their luckiness, then their valor;
they having kept their ground, not by virtue of any conquest, but merely
because they never fought; (...), we Aristot. eth. Nich^^ l. 1.
do not properly commend them, but call them happy; they are but sancti
Planetarii, (as a Father of the Church made bold to word it;) All their armor,
if they have any, is but defensive; And for their not being worsted, they may
thank their Bucklers, but not their Swords. Alas it should not be a wonder, to
see simplicity in the village; or to keep one's integrity, where it is a hard
thing to lose it. We cannot call that man abstemious, who Quis abstinens
diceiur, sublato eo a quo abstinendum est? Quae Temperantia gulae in fame? quae
Ambitionis repudiatio in egestate; quae libidinis infrenatio in Castratione?
Tertul. advers. Marcion. l. 1. cap. 29.
only rises with an appetite, because he has not enough to appease his
hunger; nor is He to be commended for not being drunk, who either has not
sufficient to quench his thirst, or has an able Brain to carry it, or else
loves his purse a great deal more then his intemperance, and so is beholding to
his baseness for his sobriety. We do not say that he is strong, who does not
fall when no man thrusts him. Nor that he is cautelous and wary, who does not
stumble when the way is plain. No it is he is the brave and the gallant
Christian, who can hold out his Castle however besieged with temptations; who
can be chaste even in Italy, or mild in Scythia; who can be a Spaniard, and
yet not proud; an English man born, yet not inconstant; who can be loyal amidst
the triumphs of the most prosperous Rebellion; and humbly thankful in his
advancement. He is generously a Christian, who can keep his Vow in Baptism,
where it is ridiculous not to break it; who can at once live at Court, and
forsake the world; who can be witty, yet not profane; strong, and mettlesome,
yet not presumptuous; conspicuously handsome, and yet not vain; a Mathematician
and a Chimist, yet not Atheistical; who will not be covetous in the midst of
Treasure; nor reconcilable to a vice, although it offer him all advantages; who
has all his five senses (those Avenues of the heart) at once attaque't by
Hell's Artillery, and yet is able to prevent, or maintain a Breach; and though
they batter down the walls, does not suffer them notwithstanding to take the
City. This I say is the generous, because the self-denying Christian. And
agreeable to the figure by which our vicious affections are called our members,
(Colos. 3. 5.) we know in our Captain's Interpretation, ( Mat. 5. 29.) that to
part with an Avarice, is to pluck out an eye; and to cast away a lust, is to
cut off a hand. That as in our military Oath, we swore to fight under his
Banner; so as often as we part with a sinful passion, we are reputed (in his
account) to lose a Limb in his battle. Self-denial it seems being one kind of
martyrdom; a dying daily for his sake, who, as the Captain of Heb. 2. 10.
our salvation, was made perfect through sufferings. It Is very true in this
sense, that the valiantest Soldier is the very best Man. For no man living is
truly valiant, but he who dares be good, when the Times are evil; and dares not
be evil, when Times are good; who stands the shock of temptations, not only in
the worst but the best of days; bravely holding out his Fort against the
batteries and assaults, not of poverty only and pain, and other effects of
persecution; but against plenty also, and pleasure, and other Fruits of a
Restoration.

To sum up all in a word, and to carry on my Metaphor the most I can to their
advantage, who will not be carried to any duty which is not honorable, and
brave: The Battles of Leuctra and Mantinea were not half so full of glory to
that immortal Theban Epaminondas, as the two victories of a Christian over his
(...) and (...). That unruly Element of double fire, his anger and his lust,
which his greatest felicities do most enkindle. And this I hope may be enough
for the second importance of the word Then; as it is a particle of connection
betwixt the business of the Time, and the time it self.

LAst of all let us beware, that the manifold III.
enjoyments of our Deliverance do not make us forgetful of our Deliverer,
because of the greatness of the danger of not performing the Duty THEN, when it
becomes incumbent on us by many unspeakable obligations. For let a man's sin be
never so great in point of nature, or degree, ingratitude will give it an
aggravation. And ingratitude taking its stature from precedent obligations, so
as the sins we commit run higher or lower, as the graces we receive have been
more or less: there are not any so very capable of provoking Gods Fury, as the
men whom he has pleased to take most into his favor. The reason of it may be
taken from the Athenians in Thucydides, (...). Thucyd. l. 1. p. 52.
The least unkindness from a Friend is of greater smart, then the hardest usage
from an enemy. The very sight of Brutus more wounded Caesar to the heart, then
all the rest of his Assassinates had done with Daggers. David indeed was
somewhat troubled, that they who hated him did whisper together against him,
(Psalm. 41. 7.) but 'twas his greatest cross of all, that they who had eaten of
his Bread should ingratefully lift up the heel against him. And in that he
said, he could have born it from an Psalm. 55. 12, 13.
enemy, he did significantly imply, he could not bear it from a friend. And as
it was David's Cordolium, the Type of Christ; so also was it Christ's, the Son
of David: who did not weep over other Cities, from which he met with an ill
Reception; but he wept over Jerusalem, the Royal City, which he had so much
obliged, yet found so cruel. And no doubt but our Savior is so much more
keenly and nearly touched, that the most obliged Christians should break his
precepts, then that the ignorant Jews should offer violence to his Person,
that we may rationally suppose him thus speaking to us. Had the Jews or
Heathens spit upon me by their impurities, and buffeted me by their
blasphemies, and stripped me by their sacrilege, and murdered me by their rage;
from such as these I could have born it. But that you should war against me,
and in the behalf of that base Triumvirate, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, having sworn to me in Baptism that you would fight under my Banner
against all Three: That you who have the privilege to be called by my Name, to
be admitted into my House, to have a place at my Table, to hear my Word, and to
partake of my Supper, to be miraculously brought from the house of Bondage,
enjoying your Kings as at the first, and your National Councils as at the
beginning, and sitting your selves as so many Princes under your Vines and
Fig Trees, enjoying the liberty of your persons, the propriety of your estates,
the important benefit of your Laws, and the glory to be subjected by a most
honorable obedience; that such as you should despise me, and cast my Law
behind your back, this is that I can least endure. My greatest favor thus
abused will be converted into fury.

And indeed if we consider, that as God (on the one side) accepts according 2
Cor. 8. 12.
to what a man has, so withal (on the other side) of them who have Luke 12.
48.
received much, much in proportion shall be required; we may with good Logic
infer, and strongly argue within our selves, that an honest Heathen is far
better than a Christian Knave. And if an Heathen shall be extirpate for being
barren, much more the Christian, if he is fruitless, shall be cast into the
fire. A fruitless Tree which should by nature bear fruit, being fit to make
fuel, and nothing else. According to that of our Blessed Savior, (which is at
once of universal and endless verity) Mat. 7. 19.
Every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire. And we who are grafted into the vine, must not only bear fruit, but such
fruit too, as Christ expects to reap from us. A Bramble cannot be censured for
not bearing fruit; because it is in its nature to bring forth none. It was
therefore the Fig Tree, and not the Bramble, on which our Savior bestowed a
curse, Mat. 21. 19. Nor was it the Bramble, but the Fig Tree, which he
commanded to be cut down, Luke 13. 7. we must one day be called to dreadful
Mat. 25. 19.
reckoning, for all the uses we have made of our this days talent. God's
injured Justice must needs be satisfied, (and sure much more his injured Mercy)
either sooner or later; either in this, or another world. And if in stead of
being thankful for all the blessings we now enjoy, more especially for that
which we this day celebrate, we shall but turn them into wantonness, and grow
the worse for the effects of so great a goodness; what can we reasonably
expect, but that the powers of Hell, should once again be let loose upon us and
ours? For since to continue in our impieties, is the greatest dishonouring of
God that can be; a filling up the measure of our iniquities, and so the vials
of his wrath; He must de stroy us se defendendo; if for nothing but to defend,
and secure his Glory.

What then remains, but that we take up the words of the Royal Prophet, and
together with them, his resolution? We Ps. 116. 13.
will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. The Cup of
Salvation, that is to say, the Cup of Thanks for that salvation which he has
wrought; as Iunius and Tremellius do rightly explicate the Trope. And mark the
force of the Copulative, by which these Duties are tied together. Without the
Cup of Salvation, (that is) the Cup of Thanks giving unto the Author of our
salvation, all our calling upon his Name will be quite in vain: For when we
spreadout our hands, he will hide his eyes, and when we make many prayers he
will not hear (Isa. 1. 15.) And then to thank him as he requires, is not only
to entertain him with Eucharistical words, with the mere Calves of our lips, or
a Doxologie from the teeth outward; but to imitate, and obey him, and to love
him after the rate of his favor toward us; that we may not forfeit all our
interest in the temporal salvation we this day celebrate, nor bring a reproach
on the Author of it for saving a people so ill deserving; we must add to our
verbal, our vital Prayers; nor only keep an annual Day, but even an age of
thanksgiving for our Deliverance.

And then with a greater force of Reason, we must beware that we forget not the
Lord our God, who if he brought us not out of the land of Egypt, did yet
deliver us this day from the house of Bondage. We must not any of us forget
him, in whatever represents, or presents him to us. But You especially must not
forget him presented to you in his Vicegerent; whom the more you do enable to
be indeed what he is styled, Defensor Fidei, by so much the greater will be
your Glory, and the better you will provide for your childrens safety. The more
you strengthen that Hand, which under God is to brandish the Sword of Justice,
(which cease to be a Sword of Justice, when wrested out of that Hand by the
Hand of man) the better protected your Peace will be from the ungainable
enemies of each extreme; nor can you rationally hope to keep your Peace any
longer, then whilst the evil-ey'd Factions want power to break it. Again
beware that you forget not the Sovereign Author of your Deliverance,
wheresoever you shall find him presented to you in his Messengers; (and what I
mean by that word, I need not explain in so wise an Audience;) by whose
continuing unrestor'd to their Ancient Privilege and Right, your own
Restoration remains imperfect. Again beware you do not forget him presented to
you in his Members, who are not only your fellow members, but were your old
fellow sufferers in the very same Cause; to which they ever have adhered with
the very same constancy; and for which they have been Actors with the very same
courage; and do rejoice in the greatness at least of your Restoration, how
much soever they are mourners for the scandalous littleness of their own.
Prosperity I have showed is a dangerous weapon; such as none but the merciful
should dare to use. And if ever there were a Parliament, in which both Mercy
and Justice met, this has the honor to be reputed so very exemplary for both;
that they who stand in need of both, are very confident to obtain them, now, or
never. A Parliament so prepared by the special Providence of God, for the
perpetuating of Peace in our British world, that nothing less then the presence
of all perfections in a Prince, can make us patiently think of its Dissolution.

Will you hear the Conclusion of the Eccles. 12. 13.
whole matter? I shall deliver it to you briefly in this Petition. That so far
forth as you regard the Righteous Judge of all the world, and are seasoned by
Him with the manifold gifts of the blessed Comforter, with the Spirit of
wisdom Isa. 11. 2.
and understanding, with the Spirit of counsel and ghostly strength, with the
Spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and lastly with the Spirit of his holy
fear, you will consider what I have said by your own Authority, because in
absolute obedience to your own Order and Command.

ANd now the God of Peace and Power, who brought you forth on this Day from the
House of Bondage, both defend and direct you, from this day forward, in all
your ways. That every one of your Persons, and the 1 These. 5. 23.
whole of every one, both Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father in the unity
of the Spirit, who is abundantly able to keep us from falling, and to raise us
when we are down, and to preserve us being raised, and to present us so
preserved, before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only
wise God our Savior, be ascribed by us and by all the world, Blessing, and
Glory, and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this day
forwards and for evermore,

Amen.
FINIS.

