THe Author of these ensuing Sermons, Mr. THOMAS PIERSON, was so famous in his
generation, such a burning and shining light, and so isntrumental to the good
of the Church, both by his own indefatigable labors in the Ministry of the
Gospel, as also by the publishing of diverse Treatises of Mr. Perkins and Mr.
Brightman; that I could not but do him this right, not only to give an
Imprimatur to this Comentary of his upon some Psalms, but also to signify to
the Reader, the Piety, Learning, and Worth of the Author, and to commend
these his Sermons to every good Christian, as holding out many Orthodox and
savoury Truths, and by obedience to which Truths, many souls went to Heaven,
without entangling themselves in the many un-edifying janglings of these sad
divided times.

July, the 6th. 1647. ED: CALAMY.

EXCELLENT Encouragements AGAINST AFFLICTIONS; OR, Expositions of four select
Psalms: the XXVII, LXXXIV, LXXXV, and LXXXVII.

Containing, 1 David's triumph over distress. 2 David's hearts desire. 3 The
Churches exercise under afstiction. 4 The great Charter of the Church.


By the learned and laborious, faithful and prudent Minister of Gods Word, Mr.
THOMAS PIERSON, late Pastor of Brompton-Brian in the County of Hereford.

ROMANS 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for Philemon Stephens; at the gilded Lion in
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVII.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE Sir ROBERT HARLEY, Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Bath, the comforts of grace here, and a crown of glory hereafter.
SIR,
AMongst other disadvantages, to which the posthume publication of deceased
men's works is subject, one is, that the publishers are commonly suspected to
have dealt injuriously either with the Authors themselves, in ascribing that
to them which is not theirs, or with others in usurping that interest unto
which they might pretend a better title.

That no such suspicion may take hold on me by occasion of these ensuing
Expositions, I presume to present them unto you, who best know how I may be
justified by the reverend Authors own-hand written copies, and last will and
testament. Nor am I willing that any thing of his should pass into the public
through my hand, until I have made an open acknowledgement of the special
interest you had in him whilst he lived as his Patron, and still have in all
his paper posterity as the principal guardian to whom he commended the tuition
thereof. For these I dare not attempt to say any thing concerning the subject
matter of them as in way of commendation, because it is no other but the sacred
Word of God which he himself has magnified above all his name. Psalm. 138.3.
and therefore if I should go about to speak to that purpose at all, it must be
with such a promonition as that in the Satyr quicquid dixero minus erit: and
such commendations do commonly incur as justly they may, the censure of
disparagements. But for the Method observed in the handling thereof (how meanly
soever esteemed of by many who peradventure never took the pains to look into
it) I dare be bold to say, that no true Artist can upon serious consideration
except against it, but that he must secretly condemn himself of too too
wilful prejudice and partiality. For change but the terms, and instead of
Doctrine or Observation write Theoreme or Proposition, instead of Explication,
Construction, instead of Reason, Demonstration, and instead of Use and
Application, Corolarie or Conclusion, and you will presently think that you see
so many Divinity Problemes Mathematically handled, and i^ may be conceive as I
do, that he who chose to use his method first in the course of his Ministry
was a far greater Artist, and knew better why he should do so then many of
those that either effect an ignorant imitation of him, or carelessly cast a
causeless scorn upon the method it self, for some men's inconsiderate
misusage of it. The Author of these ensning Expositions was none of them as
you, and many more well able to judge, can witness with me, and these amongst
others of his writings may testify, which through your hand, and under your
name I consecrate unto the common treasure of the Church and public benefit of
all that love to look into the inside of the holy Scrip^ures, not curiously
minced and mangled, or carelessly torn in pieces howsoever, but artificially
dissected and laid open to the view of all, even indifferent capacities: to
whom to speak so plainly, that they may be edifyed, is the best use of art, and
an harder matter in St. Hierom's opinion (Epistola ad Nepotianum) then to
astonish and amaze them with a multitude of words the easiest thing of a
thousand, and that which it may be they strive most to do, that can or will do
nothing well. Verba volvere and celeritate dicendi apud imperitune vulgus
admirationem sui facere indoctorum hominum est, says the learned father. And a
little after, Nihil tam facile quam vilem plebeculam and indoctam concionem
linguae volubilitate decipere quae quicquid non intelligit plus miratur. But of
this convincing preacher (as one that you know was used to call him) it would
be hard to say, whether his own understanding in the sacred Oracles of God. or
his diligence and dexterity in making them obvious unto the understanding of
others were more remarkable. Once I am sure that these amongst other excellent
endowments wherewith he was eminently qualified, both made his life so dear
unto you, and still preserve his memory so precious in your esteem, that I
make account you would impute it unto me as an impertinent presumption if I
should pretend mine own engagements, or any other inducements whatsoever to
excuse my boldness in seeking to honor any of his papers with your public
patronage, you having professed your self honored in that he left you the
private owner of them, as he did him to be your servant in the publication of
that which should be thought fit for the press, who acknowledges himself in
many respects obliged to be

Your Worships in all observant duty unfeignedly devoted CHRISTOPHER HARVEY.

David's Triumph OVER DISTRESS. OR, AN EXPOSITION OF THE XXVII Psalm.

By Mr. THOMAS PIERSON, late Rectour of Brompton-Brian, in the County of
Hereford.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

DAVID'S TRIUMPH OVER DISTRESS. OR, An EXPOSITION of the XXVII Psalm.
PSALM. 27. VERSE. 1. A Psalm of David. The Lord is my light and my salvation,
whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom stall I be
afraid?


THis Psalm (as the title-shewes) was penned by David that kingly Prophet, the
sweet Psalmist of Israel: for the spirit of the Lord spoke by him, and his word
was in his tongue, 2 Samuel 23. 1, 2. which circumstance, well observed, will
give strength to the application of every good duty, pressed upon us by his
example, in the particular branches of the Psalm.

The time when this Psalm was penned, may probably be guessed, by the matter of
it, to have been, when he was persecuted by the hand of Saul and his followers,
of whose cruelty he complains, verse. 2. and prays against them, verse. 12.

The scope
The chief matter of it is, a notable expression of affiance, and confidence in
God, in his greatest dangers, commending the same, by the notable fruits and
effects thereof.

and general division of the whole Psalm.
His godly affiance he testifies three ways. First, by plain and express
profession thereof, in sweet variety of phrase, and gracious application, by
sundry remarkable fruits and effects thereof, to be seen in his godly
behavior, in the six first verses.

Secondly, by humble prayer, and supplication for audience, mercy, favor,
instruction and preservation, verse. 7, etc. to 13.

Thirdly, by a godly provocation of his own soul, upon good ground, still to
wait upon God, verse. 13, 14.

For the first: Verse. 1.
David's affiance, and confidence in God, is very elegantly, in sweet variety of
phrase, plainly testified in the first verse, when he calls the Lord his
light, and his salvation, and the strength of his life: and there also is
amplified, by a notable effect of godly security, in freedom from servile
fear, propounded by way of interrogation, and also twice repeated, for better
assurance.

The meaning of the words. Metonymia effecti.
In all the three titles, which he gives to God, there is a sacred trope, the
effect is put for the efficient. For, to speak properly, God was the author
and fountain of light, salvation, and of strength, and not the things
themselves. Likewise, in the first word, there is another trope, a Metaphor:
Metaphorae.
for light is taken in a translate and borrowed sense, for joy and gladness:
as Esther 8.16. which is to the heart a pleasant thing; as light is to the eye.
Eccles. 11.7. So as his meaning is, to encourage his heart against the reproach
of his enemies, that would bid him be packing, to hide himself in mountains and
deserts, as Psalm. 11.1. seeing the King himself did seek his life. Why (says
David) I have Jehovah the true God, for the author of joy and gladness to my
heart, the giver of safety to my person, and of strength unto my life, whom
should I fear? Should I be afraid of Saul, or any other man, when as the Lord
is my comfort, by undertaking my safety, and girding me with strength, as Psalm.
18.32.

In the words thus understood, note two things: First, what God was to David:
secondly, what benefit David reaped thereby. For the first;

The first Observation.
The true God is unto David the fountain of gladness to his heart, the Author
of safety to his person, and the giver of strength and might, for the
preservation of his life.

For light of comfort, see, Psalm. 18.28. Thou will light my candle, that is,
increase my small comfort: the Lord my God will lighten my darkness, that is,
give me comfort and joy, instead of misery and sorrow. Hence he calls God his
exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.4. And that he was the Author of his safety, see Psalm.
3.3. Thou Lord art a shield for me: and Psalm. 4.8. Thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety. For giving him strength and might, see, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord
is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my strength. Verse. 32.
It is God that girdeth me with strength. Verse. 39. Thou have girded me with
strength unto the battle.

The Reason.
The reason or ground of this happiness, is David's being in covenant with God:
as God himself testifies of David; calling him his servant, whom he anointed
with his holy oil: and promising, that his faithfulness and mercy shall be
with him: yea, his mercy will he keep for him for ever: and his covenant shall
stand fast with him. He shall cry unto me, thou art my father, my God, and the
rock of my salvation. Psalm. 89.20, 21, 24, 26, 28. And David himself lays
claim to this covenant with God, Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me: and Psalm.
23.1. The Lord is my shepherd: and, in very many Psalms, he calls the Lord
his God; as Psalm. 7.1. O Lord, my God, in thee will I put my trust: and Verse.
3. O Lord my God.

The first Use for instruction.
This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

For instruction two ways: First, touching Gods all sufficiency in himself,
for all his children, for whatsoever they want, or need, else David would never
have said with assurance, that God became so many great blessings unto him, as
here he does, and in many other places: as Psalm. 18.2, and Psalm. 144.1, 2. My
strength, my goodness, my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my
shield, etc. This point the Lord taught Abraham plainly, Genesis 17.1. I am God
All-sufficient, or Almighty.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, this shows plainly the happy estate of those, that stand rightly in
covenant with God, as David says; Blessed is the nation, whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 133.12. For God being in himself all-sufficient, becomes all in all
to those, that be his people by covenant. Psalm. 103.17, 18. The mercy of the
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness unto childrens children, to such as keep his covenant. His eyes
run to and fro, throughou^ the whole earth, to show himfelf strong in the
behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. He will make
all his goodness pass before them. Exodus 33.19. He will bless them, in their
basket, in their dough, within the house, and in the field, De^t. 28.1, 2, etc.
to 15. Hereupon David says, he shall not lack, Psalm. 23.1. and the Church
says, she will not fear, having God for her refuge and strength. Psalm. 46.1,
2, 5. with Is. 33.21.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves three ways. First, seeing this was David's great
happiness in his troubles, that he could say, The Lord is my light and my
salvation, etc. That we should search and try, whether God be that to us, which
he was to David. And this may be known, of every child of God at this day. How
we may know that God is our light.
For first, if God be the light of grace and comfort to thy soul in Christ
Jesus, he will be the light of joy and gladness, in his providence to thy
heart: and if he be spiritual salvation in Christ Jesus, he will not deny thee
temporal preservation: and if he be the strength of thy soul in grace, he will
become the strength of thy life in nature. In this case thou may reason, as
David did, Ps. 56.13. Thou have delivered my soul from death, will thou not
deliver my feet from falling?

Now the evidence of these heavenly and spiritual blessings from God is this.
First, that he becomes the light of grace unto our souls appears three ways.
First, by our true repentance, whereby we awake from the sleep, and stand up
from the death of sin. Ephesians. 5.14. For such as walk in darkness, and yet lay
claim to fellowship with God, who is pure light, do but lie in their
profession. 1 John 1.6.

Secondly, by a constant and conscionable practice of new obedience, according
to the rule of Gods word, which is doing the truth, Joh. 3.21. For such have
fellowship with Christ, and with the true members of his Church, 1 John 1.7.

Thirdly, if we suffer for the Gospel, and for righteousness sake, when we are
called thereunto. Heb. 10.32. After ye were enlightened, ye endured a great
fight, through afflictions. For, to believers it is given, not only to
believe, but to suffer, Phil. 1.29.

How we may know that God is our salvation.
Secondly, that God becomes our spiritual and eternal salvation is thus known.
First, if he have saved us from sin, in regard of dominion, so as corruption
does not reign. See, Matthew. 1.21. with Luke 1.71, 74, 75. and 1 Pet. 1.18.

Secondly, if he have wrought in our hearts the grace of true faith, whereby we
rest and rely on the merits of Jesus Christ for justification and salvation.
See John 5.24. with 1 John 5.10, 14.

Thirdly, if he have drawn our hearts to love the brethren. 1 John 3.14. We
know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren.

How we may know that he is our strength.
Thirdly, the Lord does manifest himself to become our spiritual strength, when
he has enabled us by grace to know, and use that spiritual armor mentioned,
Ephesians. 6.10, etc. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might: put on the whole armor of God: the girdle of truth: the
breast plate of righteousness: shoes of peace (which be Christian patience):
the shield of faith: the helmet of salvation: the sword of the spirit: and
prayer for strength, skill and blessing, in the use of all the former.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, if we find defect in the forenamed blessings, we must give all
diligence thereunto: as 2 Pet. 1.5, etc. to the 10. verse. And the way is, to
get rightly into covenant with God through Christ Jesus, in whom God becomes
all things unto u, that be needful, especially for our spiritual welfare. How
to get into covenant with God.
And to get into covenant, we must both repent of our sins, for so John
prepared the way before Christ, Matthew. 3.3. and made ready a people for him,
Luke 1.17. Also labor to get the grace of faith, for that is engrafting grace.
Romans 11.17, 20. Now the means of both these is the word and prayer. The law
prepares the heart for grace, by the sight of sin, and by working humiliation
for sin: as, Romans 7.11. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. The Gospel is the word of his grace,
Acts 20.32. and by the blessing of the spirit is immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1.23,
25. it is the word of faith, Romans 10.8, 17. and prayer obtains the spirit, Luke
11.13. which is the spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. therefore the Disciples by
prayer sought faith of Christ. Luke 17.5.

The third Use for admonition.
Thirdly, in the fruition of any of these blessings, see whether to return the
honor and praise, namely, to him, that became all these to David. And indeed,
thus have the godly, for some one or more of these, continual cause of praise,
and thanks to God. Therefore we must in all things give thanks. 1 These. 5.18.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the godly, who make conscience of their
ways, and endeavor to keep covenant with God. For, God will become all these
unto them, as he was to David: whereupon they may rejoice, as, Psalm. 21.1. and
say they shall not lack, as Psalm. 23.1. for their God is all sufficient for
them, as Genesis 17.1.

We have seen what God became to David: now we come to see the second thing,
to be noted in the verse, the benefit which David reaped, by having the Lord
for his light, and salvation, and for the strength of his life, namely, hereby
he was freed from humane slavish fear and terror. This he confidently
expresses to be certain, as well by the manner of propounding it, by way of
question, which here implies a more vehement negation; as also, by the
repetition of his freedom, which shows that his heart herein was resolute: as
Genesis 41.32. the dream is doubled to give certainty.

The second Observation.
Mark then David's confidence and courage: having the Lord for his God, he is
armed against all fear of men, or other creatures. Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on
my side, I will not fear: what can man do unto me? Psalm. 23.1, 4. The Lord is
my shepherd, etc. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear none evil. Psalm. 3.3, 6. Thou Lord art a buckler for me, I will not
be afraid of ten thousand of the people, that shall beset me round about.

The Reason.
The reason is, because having the Lord for his God by covenant, he had title to
Gods power, which is Almighty, for his defense and safety: and that upon Gods
sure word and promise. See Psalm. 91, 1, etc. He that dwells in the secret
place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will
say of the Lord, he is my refuge, and my fortress: my God, in him will I
trust: Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, etc.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction, two ways. First, see here, that there is great gain in true
godliness: as 1 Timothy 6.6. and much fruit in religion, to those that attain to
true righteousness: as Psalm. 58.11. For such, as be truly godly, be in sure
covenant with God, and thereby have right and title to the great comforts and
blessings, which Gods own divine properties afford, unto the sons of men: as
here, for instance, to be freed from humane servile fear, by their right and
interest to Gods power and might; for what needs he to fear, that has Gods
power for his defense? The three children did hereby encourage themselves in
great present danger. Dan. 3.16, 17. We are not careful to answer thee in this
matter. Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thi^^ hand.

And for assurance hereof, mark all Gods gracious promises of protection and
preservation to the godly: as Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, etc. Isa.
43.1, 2, 3. Now says the Lord, that created thee, O Israel, fear not, for I
have redeemed thee, and called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou
passest through the water I will be with thee, etc. Isa. 51.11, 12, 13. The
redeemed of the Lord shall obtain joy and gladness: and sorrow and mourning
shall flee away. I, even I, am he that comfort thee: who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of a man, that shall dye, and of the son of man, that
shall be made as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy maker, etc. Add hereto,
Jerem. 46.27, 28. Fear thou not, oh thou my servant Jacob -- for I will save
thee -- I am with thee.

Obj. But we shall find, that the most godly do fear, as David himself. Psalm.
116.11. I said in my haste, all men are liars: And 1 Samuel 27.1. I shall now
perish one day by the hand of Saul.

Answ. This comes from the weakness of their faith, as Matthew. 14.30, 31. Peter
feared, though he had Christ's word for his warrant, through the weakness of
his faith: which may also be increased by present guilt in some sin.

Obj. But the g^dly sometimes fly, and fall before their enemies, and so
cannot but fear.

Answ. All promises of temporal blessings, such as freedom from humane fear
is, are to be understood with exception of the cross, that is, must give way
to Gods correction for sin; as in David, 2 Samuel 12.14. and to Gods making
trial of grace, as in Job, Chap. 2, 3.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see the true ground of that difference, which is between the
wicked and the godly, about slavish fead and godly boldness; plainly testified
by Solomon. Prove. 28.1. The wicked flee, when no man pursues: but the
righteous is bold as a Lion. This comes hence, The godly have the Lord with
them, and for them, and that makes them bold: but the wicked have the Lord
against them, and that strikes their hearts with fear and dread. See the truth
of this in instance. Moses leads all the people of Israel boldly through the
red sea: Pharaoh follows boldly for a while, but at length he and all his
host are afraid; and fly away, and are drowned. Heb. 11.29. with Exodus 14,
25. And at Christ's resurrection, the keepers are as dead men for fear, but the
women, that sought Jesus, are bid not to be afraid. Matthew. 28.4, 5.

The 1. Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways: First, to take notice, that the true
grounds of courage and boldness is this, that a man has the true God for his
God: that so, whosoever would be comfortable and courageous in the evil day,
do labor for this estate, to have the true God for his God. It is not only
true, that affliction follows sinners, so as evil shall hunt the wicked
person to destruction, Psalm. 140.11. but even the godly themselves are subject
to many miseries: as Psalm. 34.19. Through manifold tribulations we must enter
into the kingdom of God. Acts 14, 22. Now, unless God be for us, the heart
will fail, when evils come, as Nabals did, 1 Samuel 25.37. And none indeed have
the Lord for them, but those that stand rightly in covenant with God: which be
such, as repent of their sins, believe in the Lord Jesus, and walk in new
obedience. This is wholesome doctrine; for soldiers in war, Mariners on the
sea, and for every one in evil times.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, those that have true courage and comfort in evil times, must learn
hence to give God all the glory. For this is the Lords gift, as David
confesses, Psalm. 18.29, etc.

Verse. 2. When the wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes, came upon me, to eat
up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.


The meaning of the words.
HEre David gives instance from his own experience, of Gods powerful
preservation of him in extreme danger: which no doubt he propounds, as the
ground of that great confidence professed in the former Verse: as in like case,
he encouraged himself to encounter in fight with great Goliath, because God had
formerly strengthened him against a Lion and a Bear, 1 Samuel 17.33, 34, 35.

In the instance here made, we have three things to note. First, the state and
condition of David enemies, they are wicked men. Secondly, their purpose and
attempt against David, they came upon him to eat up his flesh; that is, utterly
to destroy him, as the roaring lion devoureth a little sheep. Thirdly, the
issue and success of their attempt; they stumbled and fell.

The first Observation.
For the first note. David's enemies and foes are wicked men, Psalm. 3.7. Thou
have smitten all mine enemies on the check bone, thou have broken the teeth of
the ungodly. Ps. 5.8, 9, David praying for safety, because of his enemies
says, There is no faithfulness in their mouths, their inward parts are very
wickedness, etc. ^sal 6.8. He calls his enemies workers of iniquity. Psalm.
17.9. The wicked that oppress him are his enemies: and Verse 13. Deliver my
soul from the wicked.

The Reason.
The reason whereof, is the enmity put by God himself, between the seed of the
serpent and the seed of the woman, Genesis 3.15. which David found, Psalm. 38.19,
20. They that render evil for good are mine adversaries, because I follow the
thing that good is: and our Savior Christ, Joh. 7.7. The world hates me,
because I testify of it, that the deeds thereof are evil. Who also foretold
his Disciples hereof, Joh. 15.15. If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own: but, because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you: and John 16.33. In the world ye shall
have tribulation.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows plainly, what the godly must expect, and look for in
this world, at the hands of wicked men, namely, all bitter opposition and
enmity that may be: as Christ Jesus told his Disciples, ye shall be hated of
all nations for my names sake: and therefore tells them, that he sent them forth
as sheep into the midst of Wolves. Mat. 10.16. Which thing David had found long
before, and thereupon complains; My soul is among lions, and I lie amongst the
children of men, that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and
their tongue a sharp sword, Psalm. 57.4. And mine enemies -- workers of
iniquity -- lie in wait for my soul. Psalm. 59.1, 2, 3. My soul has long dwelt
with him that hates peace. I am for peace, but when I speak they are for
war. Psalm. 120.6, 7. This Paul likewise felt, Acts 20.23. The holy Ghost
witnesses in every City, that bonds and afflictions abide me. See 2 Cor.
11.23. In stripes above measure, in prison more frequent, in death often. Yea, it
was the case of the rest of the Apostles, as well as his. I think (says he)
that God has set us forth, the last Apostles, as it were appointed to death:
For we are made a spectacle unto the world, unto Angels, and to men. 1 Cor. 4.9.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways: First, to the wicked, that they consider
their estate in Gods sight, when they are so spightfully bent against the
godly: surely, this is that venomous corruption, which they receive from the
old serpent the devil. This Paul accounted the madness of his natural
estate: Acts 26.11. And being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them
unto strange cities.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to the godly, to be both wise as serpents, and harmless as doves:
and to beware of men. Matthew. 10.16, 17. So did David, Psalm. 39.1, 2. I will
keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. I was dumb with
silence, I held my pence even from good.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the godly, that their adversaries are wicked
men, for they may hereon rest assured, that God will not join with their
enemies, unless it be for trial of grace, as in Job, or for the sins of the
godly, in forsaking him: for then the Lord may justly use the wicked; as rods
and scourges for their correction: as, Isaiah 10.5, 6. O Assyrian, the rod of
mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. So Job 8.20.
Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil
doers. Indeed, if we forsake him, he will forsake us. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Rejoice
therefore, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto
his land, and to his people. Deuteronomy. 32.43. Consider the Lords wish. Psalm. 81.13,
14, 15. Oh that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had walked in my
ways! I should soon have subdued their enemies, etc. Add Isaiah 50.10. and
54.8, 14, 15.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be noted here is, the purpose and attempt of David's enemies
against him: they came upon him, to eat up his flesh; that is, utterly to
destroy him. Mark then, David's enemies did fully purpose, and endeavor his
utter ruin and destruction. Psalm. 18.4. The sorrows of death compassed me,
and the floods of the ungodly made me afraid: Psalm. 56.2. Mine enemies would
daily swallow me up, they be many that fight against me: Verse. 6. They gather
themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps, when they wait
for my soul. Psalm. 57.4. My soul is among lions: I lie among them that are set
on fire: even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongue a sharp sword. Psalm. 69.4. They that hate me without a cause, are more
then the hairs of mine head: they that would destroy me, being mine enemies
wrongfully, are mighty.

The Reason.
The reason hereof was, their spiteful wrath and hatred against David; as he
confesses in the behalf of the Church with himself, Psalm. 124.^, 3. If it had
not been the Lord, who was on our side, when men lose up against us. Then they
had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. And this
spiteful wrath, Why spiteful wrath was kindled in David's enemies against him.
was kindled in them against David, on two occasions: first, because of his
religion and piety, with which their corruption could admit no accord; as the
Apostle does intimate, 2 Cor. 6.14. and David confesses, Psalm. 38.20. They,
that render evil for good, are mine adversaries; because I follow the thing
that good is: as Cain slew his brother, because his own works were evil and
his brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12. and herein the devil set them a work, to
hinder religion: as Revel. 2.10. Secondly, because of the honor and dignity
whereto God had advanced him. Psalm. 4.2. O ye sons of men, how long will ye
turn my glory into shame? Psalm. 62.4. How long will ye imagine mischief against
a man? They only consult to cast him down from his excellency. This Saul
himself confesses in his fury to Jonathan his son. 1 Samuel 20.31. As long as
the son of Jesse (that is David) lives upon the ground, thou shall not be
established, nor thy kingdom: wherefore now fetch him unto me, for he shall
surely dye.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction, it serves two ways. First, to discover the exceeding measure
of corruption, that is in natural men, and thereupon their fearful estate in
soul to Godward. Their spiteful hearts, and raging wrath: against the godly,
whereby nothing will satisfy them, but their utter ruin and destruction,
shows the great measure of their corruption. When they will eat up Gods people,
as they eat bread; that is, devour them with delight, this shows they are
corrupt: as Psalm. 53.1, 3, 4. And that they are so spiteful minded is plain by
instance, Psalm. 83.4. They have said, come, and let us cut them off from being
a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. Ten nations
were confederate against Israel with this resolution. The like we may see in
the carnal Israelites against Paul, Acts 22.22. They lift up their voices, and
said, away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should
live: yea in Paul himself, before he was converted: for he persecuted
Christianity unto the death: Acts 22.4. and was mad this way, Chap. 26.11. Now
this malice, and hatred against the godly, show them to be the children of the
devil: as 1 John 3.12. and Joh. 8.40, 44.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, to manifest, that there is a special providence of God, over his
Church and children, that preserves and keeps them, notwithstanding all the
spite, and rage of the wicked against them: as Psalm. 105.12, 13, 14. When they
were but a few men in number, yea very few, and strangers in the land: when
they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people. He
suffered no man to do them wrong.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First, to the wicked, to consider of their
corrupt affection, in spite and hatred against the godly, and whence it comes;
that so they may discern their fearful state in soul, and labor to alter it:
How they stand affected, their own hearts can tell them: even as Ahab was to
Michaiah, 1 King. 22.8. I hate him. But whence is it? See Jam. 3.14, 15. even
from the devil: as Acts 13.10. if enemy of righteousness, then child of the
devil: as John 8.40.44. Now the way of change from that estate, is by
rengeneration: which indeed is Gods work, yet in the use of means ordained by
himself, even the word and prayer: for the word is the seed of our new birth, 1
Pet. 1.23. and prayer obtains the spirit, which puts life thereto: See, Luke
11.13. and John 6.63.

The 2. Use for admonition.
Secondly, to the godly, often to bethink themselves, what their religion may
bring upon them from the wicked, even all their wrath and hatred, fury and
rage; that so they may get the sure shelter against it, which is only this, to
have God for them: as Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear:
what can man do unto me? For he is the safe keeper Psalm. 121.4, 5. whereon
David assures himself of safety. Psalm. 3.3, 6. and Jeremiah, Jer. 20.15. Now he
is ours by covenant, and continues for us, while we keep fast to him in
uprightness of heart: See 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye be
with him: and Chap. 16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro, throughout the
whole earth, to show himself strong, in the behalf of them, whose heart is
perfect toward him. Now a perfect heart is discerned, by an obedient life:
Isa. 38.3. I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight: with Job 1.1. That man was perfect,
and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.

The third Observation.
The third thing to be noted here is, the issue and success of the cruel
attempt of David's enemies against him. They did not only fail of their purpose
against David; but even themselves stumbled and fell. See this plainly, both in
his particular combat with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.44, 49. who said, he would give
David's flesh to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field: but it
fell out otherwise. Also in manifold battles, that he fought against the
Philistims: whereof he says in general, Psalm. 118.10, 12. All nations
compassed me about -- They compassed me about like Bees: they are quenched as
the fire of thorns. The truth thereof, see 1 Chronicles. 14.8, etc. when the
Philistims came up against him, two several times, in great abundance, and
brought their Gods with them, which he burnt with fire at Baal-Perazim, Verse.
12, etc. See also, Psalm. 37.14, 15. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and
have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be
of upright conversation. Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and
their bows shall be broken.

The first Reason.
The reason, or cause hereof, was in God: who for just causes stood for David,
and set himself against David's enemies. God stood with David for these causes.
First, he found him out, and chose him to do him service, in that place and
state, wherein he was so mightily opposed by his enemies. See Psalm. 89.20, 21.
I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. With whom
my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him, etc. as Acts
13.22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart.
Psalm. 78.70. He chose David his servant, and took him from the sheepfold.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David trusted in God, and so was helped. Ps. 62, 1, 2, 3. Truly my
soul waits upon God: from him comes my salvation. He only is my rack and my
salvation: he is my defense, I shall not greatly be moved. How long will ye
imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall
shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. Psalm. 21.7, 8. The King trusts in the
Lord, and through the mercy of the most high he shall not be moved, etc. Psalm.
91.1, 2, 9. He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty, etc.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, David prayed unto the Lord, and so was preserved. Psalm. 56.9. When I
cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for God is for
me. Ps. 34.4. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my
fears. Verse. 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out
of all his troubles. This duty has Gods promise. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, David made conscience of sin, and walked in in obedience. Psalm.
18.21, 24. For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
from my God. Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my
righteousness.

The fifth Reason.
Now for his enemies, God would not be with them, for these causes. First, they
were not called of God, nor sent by him against David: Psalm. 10.2. pride,
malice, and covetousness stir up the wicked.

The sixth Reason.
Secondly, they were wicked men, workers of iniquity: as Verse. 1. with whom God
will not join for help and assistance. Job. 8.28. God will not cast away a
perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers. Psalm. 94.20. Shall the
throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by a Law?
Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. Thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness: neither
shall evil dwell with thee, etc. Psalm. 56.7. Shall they escape by iniquity?

The seventh Reason.
Thirdly, David's enemies did neither regard Gods word, nor Gods works, and so
could not prosprr. For neglect of Gods word, see Psalm. 119.126. It is time for
thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy law. Psalm. 50.16, 17. Unto the
wicked, God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes? etc. seeing
thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? And for his works,
Psalm. 28.5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation
of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

The eight Reason.
Fourthly, David's enemies trusted in their own might, and outward means, Psalm.
3.2. Many say of my soul, there is no help for him in God. 2. Sam. 17.12.
Therefore I counsel, etc. We will light upon him, as the dew falls on the
ground: and of him, and of all the men that are with him, there shall not be
left so much as one. Psalm. 21.7, 8. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses,
but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. They are brought down, and
fallen, but we are risen, and stand upright.

Object. Yet sometimes this is otherwise, as the Psalmist complains, Psalm.
89.38, 39, 43. But thou have cast off, and abhorred: thou have been wrath with
thine anointed: Thou have made void the covenant of thy servant: thou have
profaned his crown, by casting it to the ground. Thou have also turned the
edge of his sword: and have not made him to stand in the battle. The like
complaint, see Psalm. 44.9, 10, etc. But thou have cast off and put us to shame,
and go not forth with our armies. Thou make us to turn back from the
enemy, and they which hate us spoil for themselves.

Answ. Here we must consider the nature of Gods promises: for though such as
concern redemption, and salvation in Christ, be most sure and certain, yea and
Amen. 2 Cor. 1.10. Yet the promises of temporal blessings are conditional,
and must be understood, with the exception of the cross, that is, so as God,
either for trial of grace, or correction for sin, may deal otherwise: as we
may see in good King Josiah, who for the sins of the land, that hastened Gods
judgments, fell by the hand of Pharaoh Nechoh.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction: see what a great blessing and privilege it is, to stand
rightly in convenant with God; whereby he becomes light or salvation to a
man, or to a people, and the strength of their life: for so shall they find
extraordinary preservation in time of danger, and strange deliverance beyond
humane expectation: as here David confesses, and the people of Israel found
many a time: as when they were pursued by Pharaoh, at the red sea, Exodus 14.10,
^3. so also, when Joshuah won Jericho, Josh. 6.21. Ai, Josh. 8.28. and slew
the five Kings of the Amorites, who fought against Gibeon, Josh. 10.15, etc. in
which fight, the Sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go
down about a whole day, verse. 13. And afterward, when diverse other Kings, with
all their power, came to fight against Joshuah, with much people, as the sand
upon the sea shore for multitude, with horses and chariots very many, Joshuah
discomfited them all, Josh. 11.1, 2, 5, 6. And the Anakims, against whom
formerly none could stand, Deuteronomy. 9.2. Yet Joshuah drove them out, and destroyed
them utterly and their cities. Josh. 11.21, 22. The like we may see in the
strange victories, in the book of the Judges, by Deborah and Barak against
Sisera. Judge. 4.15, etc. By Gideon against the Midianites, Judge. 7.22, etc. By
Jephtah against the Ammonites, Judge. 11.32, 33. By Sampson against the
Philistims, Judge. 15, and 16. chapters: and so by Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer, against a garrison of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 14.15. By David's
many victories over them before mentioned: by Asa against the Ethiopians, 2 Chronicles, 14.9, etc. Jehoshaphat against Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir, 2 Chronicles.
20.12, etc. and Hezekiah against Sennacherib, Is. 37.36.

The second Use for instruction.
Also here see the misery of those, that be out of covenant with God: for the
Lords power is ever against them (unless when he will use them, as a rod and
scourge to punish the rebellious: as Is. 10.5, 6.) and therefore woe unto them:
as Hos. 9.12. with Deuteronomy. 32.30.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to give all diligence to be truly in covenant with God, that so
it may be with us, as it was with David. For which end, in the profession of
the true faith, we must imitate the godly practice of David, having a calling
for that we do, trust in God, pray unto him, and walk in obedience.

Also, as we desire to escape the Lords hand in our overthrow, let us beware of
the state and properties of David's enemies.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort to the godly, fighting the Lords battles, and yet overmatched. If
they be in covenant with God, and follow David, in the warrant of a good
calling, in affiance, prayer, and holy obedience; they may say, where is the
God of David, of Joshuah, of Jehoshaphat, etc. as Elisha said, where is the
Lord God of Elijah? 2 Kings 2.14. for he is without shadow of change, Jam. 1.17.

Verse. 3. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear:
though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.


The meaning of the words.
HEre the Prophet returns, to make mention of his courage and confidence
against his enemies, more fully expressing the same, then he had formerly done;
by making supposall, that with all their force, and in their greatest fury,
they should set upon him; saying, though an host should encampe against me,
there is the supposall of their force, and yet he would not fear: and though
war should rise against me, there is the supposall of their rage and fury;
yet in this will I be confident. But what means he by, in this? The most take
it demonstratively, with reference to that he had said, the Lord is my light:
yet it may be taken for a relative, and referred to the war made against him,
wherein he would be confident, upon his having God for his light, etc.

The first observation.
Here then we have two things to note; the one implied, or taken for granted;
The other expressed. The thing implied is this, that to be in fear, and to be
confident, are here opposed as contrary affections of the heart. David here
professes his heart was free from fear, and that he was confident. And to
clear the proposition, it contains two things. First, that fear and
confidence are contrary affections: this is acknowledged by the very heathen,
as a principle in natural philosophy, which none can deny, that know the
nature of these affections, What fear is.
or feel the force of them. For fear is the fainting or falling down of the
heart, upon the apprehension of evil, either present or imminent: as Luke
21.26. Men's hearts failing them for fear. What confidence is.
But confidence is the trust, or persuasion of the heart, to escape evil, and
to enjoy good: as Psalm. 37.3.5. Secondly, that these affections are seated in
the heart, is likewise acknowledged by natural men, and plain also in
Scripture: for fear, see Luke 21.26. as before: and for confidence, Psalm. 28.7.
The Lord is my strength, and my shield, my heart trusted in him.

The Reason.
The reason hereof, is the will of God Almighty, the maker of man's heart: as
Psalm. 33.15. He fashioneth their hearts alike, and he made this contrary to
that. Eccles. 7.14.

The use for instruction.
The application is twofold. First, for instruction: see here that one of these
two must needs possess every one of our hearts: for these affections are
natural, and who will exempt himself from that, which is man's natural estate?
Elias was a man subject to natural passions, James 5.17. and said of himself,
I am no better then my fathers, 1 Kings 19.4.

Whether Adam by creation were endued with fear?
Quest. Was Adam endued with fear by creation?

Answ. Adams fear by creation was filial, of God: but servile fear was not in
him, till he sinned against God: Of this we may say, as of shame. Genesis 2.25.
They were both naked, the man and the woman, and were not ashamed: with Genesis
3.9, 10. The Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him. where art thou? And
he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was
reaked, and I hid my self.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that every one of us do consider, the causes of these
affections, and as we desire to be freed from fear, and endued with confidence,
so to give all diligence, to be freed from the cause of fear, and to be
possessed with the causes of true affiance and confidence. Now fear arises
from the apprehension, and conceit of that, which is evil and hurtful to us:
which, whatsoever it is, comes from sin: that is indeed (...): (...)
see Prove. 1.33. Genesis 3.10.

The cause of confidence and affiance is, sure title to that which is good:
which none have but the righteous. As Ps. 37.17. The Lord upholdeth the
righteous. Verse. 39. The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord. Hence
Solomon says, The righteous is bold as a lion, Prove. 28.1. Now the way to be
freed from sin is, by true repentance: as Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. And the way to become truly
righteous is, to believe in God through Christ: who is the end of the law for
righteousness, Romans 10.4. which is never severed from righteousness renewed
in sanctification: as 1 Cor. 1.30. After these two graces, must we give all
diligence, in the use of means, the word and prayer: in and by which the Holy
Ghost works these, and all other needful graces, in the hearts of Gods
elect: And for motives, consider the present evil times, in the common
troubles of the Church abroad: which if they befall as, without repentance and
faith, we shall shrink under them. Add hereto the meditation of the terror of
death, to them that want repentance and faith. But most of all the horror and
terror of the day of judgment.

The second Observation.
The thing expressed is this, That David's heart was confident, and free from
slavish fear of hurt, from the strongest opposition, and malice of all his
enemies. See Psalm. 3.6. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that
have set themselves against me round about.

The Reason.
The reason hereof was, his being truly in covenant with God: whereby he had
title to Gods power, and providence; for his preservation. See Psalm. 91.9, 10,
11. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge; even the most high,
thy habitation. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc. So Psalm.
3.3. and Psalm. 118.6.

Obj. David wanted this confidence before Achish, 1 Samuel 21.12, 13.

Answ. He had then the habit of faith in God in his heart, but failed somewhat
in that particular act; as Peter did more, when he denied his master, Luke
22.60. with 32. Which we must observe, to restrain rash judgment, against our
selves or others, for particular falls: For, as we have sanctification in part,
and not perfectly, so we may fail in many particular acts. Which yet must not
encourage any, to go on in a course of sin, seeing reigning sin, and saving
grace, cannot stand together. See Romans 6.1. to 15.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see the great fruit of godliness, in giving courage and
boldness in his greatest distress: as is said in general, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things. Psalm. 58.11. Verily, there is a
reward for the righteous.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to labor to be such as David was, if we desire to have the
like courage. Now David stood rightly in covenant with God, and kept covenant,
testifying the same by new obedience. See, Psalm. 18.21, 22, 23. I have kept the
ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God, etc. And say
not, this sampler is too high: see Jam. 5.10. Take my brethren the Prophets,
who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an ensample of suffering
affliction, and of patience. Nay, Matthew. 11.29. our Savior himself says,
learn of me. And St. Paul Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you, which was also
in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye followers of God, as dear children.

Verse. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.


The meaning of the words.
HAving, in the former verses, plainly expressed the singular benefits, he
received by having the true God for his God: as namely, that he himself was
encouraged in the greatest assaults of his enemies. Verse. 1, 3. and on the
other side, his enemies were daunted and dismayed, Verse. 2. Here in this verse,
he shows his ardent affection toward the place of Gods worship, being indeed
the only way for his soul to enjoy society with God, who was his light, and
salvation, and the strength of his life.

This affection of David, toward the place of Gods worship, is here notably
expressed, three ways. First, by this, that he makes it the only matter of his
special suit unto God; which both formerly he had desired, and would yet also
still seek after: one thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after,
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord. Secondly, by the length of time, for
which he would enjoy that benefit, namely, all the days of his life. Thirdly,
by the comfortable ends, for which he desires it, which here are these two:
first, to behold the beauty of the Lord: secondly, to enquire in his temple.

For the first: the Lords house, in David's time, was the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, to which he had appropriated the ordinances of divine service;
for the performance whereof, his people did thither assemble themselves, while
it stood, and to the Temple built by Solomon afterward, whereto God made the
promise of his presence, 1 Kings 9.3. whither the Tribes went up. Psalm. 122.4.
unto which place David's heart was truly addicted: as Psalm. 26.8. Lord I have
loved the habitation of thy house, and the the place where thine honor
dwells. 1 Chronicles. 29.3. I have set my affection to the house of my God. But
now, in the new testament, difference of place, in respect of holiness, is
taken away, Joh. 4.21. and Gods house is his Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. that is, such
companies, and assemblies of people, as be in covenant with God, and meet
together in Christ's name, to perform worship and service unto God: as Mat.
18.20. For the godly are Gods temple, and Gods house. 1. Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor.
6.16. 1 Pet. 2.5. Now to dwell in Gods house is, to continue a true member of
Gods Church, a true believer, enjoying the liberty and comfort of Gods holy
worship and service: wherein, though the Priests and Levites had a special
privilege, whose calling was to do service in the sanctuary, as Psalm. 134.1.
yet it was not peculiar to them alone, as appears by Psalm. 15.1. and last,
compared with Luke 2.36.37. where men, and women, that are truly godly, are
said to dwell in Gods house.

The first Observation.
Here then, in this first expression of David's affection, toward the house of
God, note two things. First, that David's heart was set upon the house of God
above all other things: he was more in prayer, and endeavor after this
blessing, to dwell in Gods house, then after any worldly thing. This he often
testifies, as 1 Chronicles. 29.3. I have set mine affection to the house of my God.
Psalm. 26.8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place
where thine honor dwells. Psalm. 122.1. I was glad, when they said unto me,
let us go to the house of the Lord. So Psalm. 84.1, 2, 10. and Psalm. 42.1, 2, 4.

This affection is the more to be marked in David, because the world wonders at
it in Gods children: as Cant. 5.8, 9. and derides them for it, as 2 Samuel 6.20.
therefore consider the reasons, that moved him thereunto: which are indeed the
wonderful, rare, heavenly blessings, which are certainly enjoyed in Gods
house, The first Reason.
and no where else. Whereof the first and principal (from which all the rest
do flow) is the sure fruition of society and fellowship with the true God; who
is one in essence, three in persons, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
Who, though the whole world be his, yet only shows his special grace and
favor, to the true members of his Church: as Psalm. 147.19, 28. He shows his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt
so with any nation, etc. with Exodus 19.5. Ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me, above all people. And therefore they, that are out of the Church, are said
to be without Christ, and without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12. and cannot
receive the holy Ghost, who is the true sanctifier and comforter, Joh. 14.17.

What the privilege of the Church is.
Behold then the privilege of the Church, and of the true members thereof: the
true God, who is one in essence, three in persons, as God, is their Lord and
King, which is a great ground of their true happiness. The Queen of Sheba
accounted Solomon's servants happy, in having a King so eminent for wisdom, 1
Kings 10.8. But behold, a greater then Solomon is here, Matthew. 12.42. a King
and Master in his Church, who can give deliverance by command, Psalm. 44.4. and
will honor all his faithful servants. Joh. 12.26. Where I am, there also
shall my servant be. If any man serve me, him will my father honor: so Luke
12.37, 43, 44. More particularly, God the father is in Christ their father, 2
Cor. 6.18. John 20.17. even the father of mercies: 2 Cor. 1.3. who will take
notice of the wants of his children, and make supply upon their sober, and
sanctified use of lawful means, if first and chiefly they seek heavenly
blessings. Matthew. 6.32, 33. and what is wanting in their temporal estate, he
will fully make out in their eternal. Luke 12.32. Also God the son is, in
and to his Church, a blessed savior and redeemer: he is the head unto his
Church, which is his body. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and the savior of his body. Ephesians,
5.23. See Luke. 2.10, 11. Isa. 49.6.8. Yea he is an husband unto their souls.
Isa. 54.5. Thy maker is thine husband. Isa. 62.4, 5. Thy land shall be married.
As a young man marries a virgin -- and as the bridegroom rejoices over the
bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. And God the holy Ghost is, to his
Church, a blessed sanctifier and comforter, the spirit of grace and
supplications. Zech. 12.10. And because ye are sons. God has sent forth the
spirit of his son into your hearts. Gal. 4.6.

Secondly, the true God, in Christ Jesus, gives to all the true members of the
Church freedom, and deliverance from all hurtful evils. By imputing his
righteousness unto them, he does acquit them from the whole guilt, and curse
of sin, both original corruptions, and actual transgressions: whereupon all
the evils thereof, in temporal and corporal miseries, as they are curses, are
removed. See Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us: whereupon, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus: and more generally, Luke 1.68, etc. Acts 13.39.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, here God affords to his children, the full and sure fruition of all
needful blessings, heavenly and earthly. See Ephesians. 1.3. for heavenly: and for
earthly, see Math. 6.32, 33. The blessings of his house are great, as Psalm.
65.4. Here is no lack. Psalm. 34.10. See some particulars.

The first blessing in Gods house.
First, here God gives direction in every good way. Psalm. 32.8. I will instruct
thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I will guide thee with
mine eye. Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel. A type hereof he
showed to his people in the wilderness, Exodus 13.21, 22. in the pillar of
cloud by day, and fire by night.

The second blessing in Gods house.
Secondly, here is plentiful provision, both for soul and body. Psalm. 34.10.
For the soul see, John 6.27, 33, 35, 55, 63. 1 Cor. 10.16. Here is the tree of
life, and the well of life. Rev. 22.1, 2. Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the fountain
of life. Psalm. 87.7. All my springs are in thee: that is, in the true Church.
For the body, see, Isaiah 65.13. Psalm. 37.3, 4.

The third blessing in Gods house.
Thirdly, here is safe protection, and preservation, by special providence.
Psalm. 91.1, etc. implied, and assured to all the faithful. Matthew. 10.29, 30,
31. It is said the Kings servants in ordinary cannot be arrested, but by
warrant from the Lord Chamberlain, and ordinary attendants on Parliament Men,
have great freedoms; but the servants of God have more: see John 19.11. Job
1.10. Acts 18.10. Psalm. 89.22.

The fourth blessing in Gods house.
Fourthly, here is most admirable remuneration, even in this life, with the
honor of grace, and favor to be his friends, Joh. 15.14, 15. to be his
children, 1 John 3.1. and to have the attendance of the heavenly Angels, Psalm
34.7. Psalm. 91.11. Heb. 1.13. but most abundantly in the life to come: Matthew.
19.28, 29. Matthew. 25.21, 23. Luke 12.32.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, see here a plain evidence, of the great
ignorance, and unbelief of natural men, in the things of God: for not one of a
thousand has David's affection to Gods house: and the true cause thereof is,
their ignorance and unbelief; touching the good things of Gods house: As in the
like, see, John 4.10. and Cant. 5.9. Here it is true, that the light that is in
natural men, is but mere darkness, Matthew. 6.23.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, that undoubtedly it is a wonderful privilege, and prerogative, to
be a true member of Gods Church, and to live in his house; else David would
never have so much desired it.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, two ways. First, to try our affection toward the house of God,
by David's: for sure it is, if God be our light, and our salvation, and the
strength of our life, we cannot but desire to enjoy that place, where we may
have society with him.

The evidence of good affection to Gods house.
Now the evidence of this good affection is. First, sorrow for want of liberty
to Gods service: as Psalm. 42.1, 2, 4. When I remember these things, I power out
my soul in me, etc. And for want of Gods saving and sacred ordinances: as Psalm.
74.9. We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, etc. as Phinebas
wife in travel. 1 Samuel 4.19, 20, 21, 22. The glory is departed from Israel,
for the Ark of God is taken, etc.

Secondly joy, in the means and liberty thereto: as Psalm. 121.1. I was glad,
when they said unto me: let us go into the house of the Lord. As, when the Ark
came to Bethshemesh, from among the Philistims, they of Bethshemesh rejoiced to
see it, 1 Samuel 6.13. and sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord. Verse. 15. And
David danced before the Ark for joy, when it was brought to the City of David.
2 Samuel 6.15, 16. and so Nehem. 8.12. all the people made great mirth, for
understanding the word; and Verse. 17. in keeping the Lords feast, there was
great gladness.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to get David's affection to Gods house: which will be had, by knowing
their misery that are out of it; as the world drowned out of Noah's Ark: and as
is expressed, Rev. 22.15. with 21.8. also by their happiness that be the
living members of it: see Rev. 21.7. add 22.14. for then they have God for
their God, and right to all the blessings of the covenant, in freedom from the
miseries of nature (as they are curses) and fruition of all needful good, in
direction, provision, protection, and remuneration, as before is showed.

For the sanctifying of these things considered to our hearts, we must pray for
the spirit, which quickens the dead, and gives light, and sight to the
blind eyes of the understanding: and with all endeavor to leave sin, and to
live godly, that so we may be more capable of the blessings of the spirit. For
the spirit of God is an holy spirit, and will not dwell in an unclean and
filthy heart: as, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Mark the place, where Christ eats the
Passover with his Disciples. Mark 14.15. It is a large upper room, furnished
and prepared: so it should be with our hearts, if we would have the father and
Christ to come unto us, and make their abode with us: John 14.23. yea to s^p
with us, Revel. 3.20.

The second Observation.
Secondly, in his first expressing of David's affection toward the house of God,
note also the means he used, and the course he took, to obtain this blessing:
namely, with earnest desire, and prayer to God, he joyneth other endeavor, and
seeks after it, by doing what he can otherwise to get this estate.

Here are two words used declaring David's behavior to obtain this blessing,
that he might dwell in the house of the Lord.

The first does plainly point out the duty of prayer to God, (...)
and that of earnest prayer, such as Beggars use, who are usually importunate:
as Prove. 20.4. The sluggard shall beg in harvest. The second word, though
sometime it express seeking in prayer, (...) See Pagnin. in this word M.
yet often betokens the use of other means, beside prayer, whereby the thing
desired may be gotten, as labor and pains, in travail and otherwise: as Psalm.
37.32. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him: and
therefore it is sometime expounded by pursue: as Psalm. 34, 14. Seek peace, and
pursue it.

Whereby it seems plain, that David did with prayer, join other endeavor to
get this blessing, to dwell in the house of the Lord.

The first Reason.
The reason of this behavior is twofold. First, obedience to Gods ordinance,
who required of those, that would dwell in his house, three things. First,
repentance from dead works, whereby they break off the course of all sin,
wherein they had formerly lived: see, 1 John 1.6. If we say we have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie. Has the throne of wickedness
fellowship with thee? Psalm. 94.20. What fellowship has light with darkness,
etc. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. David would not suffer an evil person to dwell in his
house, Psalm. 101.4.7. and shall we think that God will have his house defiled
with such? For reigning sin is spiritual leprosy: and, though he were a
temporal King, yet bodily leprosy will cause him to be cast out of the Lords
Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 26.20.

Secondly, to be beautified in soul with inward graces, through regeneration,
as faith, virtue, godliness etc. 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 11.6. He that
comes unto God must believe.

Thirdly, to be adorned in life with new obedience. Psalm. 15.2, 3, etc. Psalm.
24.3, 4. And these things David must seek after, if he would dwell in Gods
house: and so no doubt he did.

The second Reason.
Secondly, desire to enjoy the blessings of Godshouse, wherein he knew that man's
true happiness did stand: as Psalm. 65.4. Psalm. 84.4. As Paul did, Phil. 3.13,
14. Now in nature, every thing desires the happiness of its kind; so far
forth, as the enlightening of the understanding can direct, which being most
perfect in Gods children, they desire the fruition of the true God, who is the
fountain of the best happiness.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows us plainly, whence it is, that the greatest number in
the world, do fail of true spiritual grace, and so indeed of salvation it
self: sure it is not for want of desire; for wicked Balaam would have his soul
to dye the death of the righteous. Number. 23.10. But it is because, with desire
in prayer, they do not join seeking after, and holy endeavor, in the diligent
use of other means, ordained of God for the attaining hereof: For it fares
with men, that live in the Church, for the blessings of grace and salvation, as
it does with men in the world, for temporal blessings: of whom Solomon says,
Prove. 13.4. The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing: why so?
Because he is a sluggard, and severeth diligence from desire, as the opposition
shows, in the end of the verse: but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.
But the idle soul shall suffer hunger, Prove. 19.15. And so it is for spiritual
graces, which are the treasures of wisdom, heavenly riches: as Christ
implies, John 5.40. You will not come unto me, that you might have life:
compared with Matthew. 11.28, 29. Come unto me, all ye that labor, etc. And St.
Paul shows it, Acts 13 46, 47. Seeing you put it from you, etc. and Luke 10.10,
11, 12. Into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways
out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city,
which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against you, etc. And it may be seen in
the foolish Virgins. Matthew. 25.3, 11, 12. and in the idle servant, Matthew.
25.25, etc.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition: all that desire to have grace and glory, must here learn of
David, with desire in prayer to join diligence, in the use of further means,
ordained of God for the obtaining of those blessings. See Prove. 2.3, 4. If thou
criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding: If thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasures: Then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, etc. There we see seeking goes with
crying: so Mat. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find,
etc. The very heathen would say, that fortune resisted sluggish prayers. And
see, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss: not joining
endeavor with prayer. Consider 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Give all diligence,
add to your faith virtue, etc. Add 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 14. and see, answerable
hereunto, the endeavor of the godly: of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. Phil. 3.10,
11, 12, 13. and of the Church of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, and of
Ephesus, Rev. 2.2. and of Thyatira, Revel. 2.19.

The third Observation.
The second thing, here expressing David's sincere affection to the house of God,
is the length of time, for which he desires to dwell therein: namely, all the
days of his life. No shorter time will satisfy David's soul, while he lives in
the world he would dwell in the house of the Lord: and therefore in the thought
and assurance thereof, does he so much encourage himself. Psalm. 23.6. Surely
goodness and mercy shall follow me, all the days of my life: and I will dwell
in the house of the Lord for ever.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is threefold. First, for the fruition of the good things of
Gods house, mentioned before, viz. spiritual society with God, and from him
deliverance from all hurtful evils, and partaking of all needful blessings,
in direction, provision, protection, and remuneration: to which these mentioned
in this verse do belong, to behold the beauty of the Lord, etc. whereupon, he
esteemed a day in Gods courts, better then a thousand elsewhere. Psalm. 84.10.

The second Reason.
Secondly, for his better opportunity to glorify God, which thing his soul
desired to do, so long as he lived: as see Psalm. 63.4. Thus will I bless thee,
while I live. Psalm. 146.2. While I live, will I praise the Lord: I will sing
praises to my God, while I have any being. Now the house of God was the
chiefest place for this duty. Psalm. 29.9. In his temple does every one speak of
his glory, Psalm. 84.4. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they will be
still praising thee.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, he knew, that to be out of Gods house was, to be out of Gods favor:
as Cains complaint does plainly import. Genesis 4.14. and the Lords severe dealing
against Israel, for their sins, does plainly show, 2 Kings 17, 18, 20.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction. What it is at this day to dwell in Gods house.
For instruction, see plainly in David, that the hearts of the godly do
sincerely desire, and in their loves they do faithfully strive, for
perseverance in the state of grace: for that thing at this day, is dwelling in
Gods house, as the phrase imports, 1 John 2 19. They went out from us, but they
were not of us* for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued
with us; that is, in the profession and obedience of the word of faith. Which
is a thing worthy of our observation, for our better satisfaction, touching the
the truth of our doctrine, of the perseverance of the Saints in grace: thereof
we need to have the less doubt, seeing in th^em all is wrought a true desire
after this estate, which they show by prayer, and other godly endeavor. Now
the Lord hears the desires of those that fear him. Psalm. 145.19. and Matthew.
7.7. Ask and it shall be given you.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to those that are weary of Gods house, and the exercises of
religion, snuffing at them, and saying it is a weariness, Man. 1.13. saying,
when will the Sabbath be gone? Amos 8.5. How many have we, that love the
alehouse and whore-house, better then Gods house, as Jer. 5.7. They assembled
themselves by troops in the harlots house^. But, Lam. 1.4. The ways of Zion do
mourn, because none come unto the solemn feasts.

Quest. How should they alter their estate and do better?

Answ. The way, of man is not in himself, Jer. 10.23. yet the means, ordained
of God, must be used of every one, that would become like unto David: which is
diligence in the word and prayer, and making conscience to live according to
the word.

The third thing here to be noted, in David's expressing the fervent affection
of his heart toward Gods house; are the blessed ends, for which David desires
that favor: namely, first to behold the beauty of the Lord: secondly to
enquire in his Temple.

For the first, the Lords beauty, to be seen in his house, is not the beauty of
his essence, for so no man can see God and live, Exodus 33.18, 20. Before this
glorious beauty, the Angels cover their faces with their wings, Is. 6.1, 2. But
it is the beauty of his ordinances, wherein God does reveal to the eyes of men's
minds, enlightened by his spirit, the pleasant beauty of his goodness,
justice, love, and mercy in Jesus Christ. Mark here then;

The fourth Observation.
That in Gods house, the godly do behold the pleasant beauty of the Lord, in his
gracious properties, of goodness, justice, love, and mercy in Jesus Christ.
Psalm. 63.1, 2. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee -- To see
thy power, and thy glory: so, as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. See 2 Cor.
3.18. and 4.6.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is, the good pleasure of God, thus to manifest his gracious
properties, in his own ordinances. Look as, in the works of the creation, he
showed the eternal power, and wisdom of the Godhead; Romans 1.19, 20. so, in
the ordinances of his service, he does make known his justice, goodness, love,
and mercy in Jesus Christ. This is most clear in the Gospel preached, and in
the Evangelicall sacraments rightly administered; wherein with open face, we
behold the glory of the Lord, and are transformed into the same image. 2 Cor.
3.18. The world by wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of God: that is, how
God will show himself wise in man's salvation. 1 Cor. 1.21. Now, Christ
crucified in the Gospel preached is, this power of God, and this wisdom of
God. Verse, 24. Herein is made known the unsearchable riches of Christ. Ephesians.
3.8. and the manifold wisdom of God. Verse. 10. For it pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness dwell. Col. 1.19. in him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. and are all opened unto us in
the Evangelicall ministry. Now the legal service had the shadow of all these
good things to come. Colos. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. for the sacrifices did lead to
Christ, as 1 Cor. 5.7. and the purifying water shadowed out the sanctification
of the spirit. Joh. 3.5. These and the rest of the legal ordinances* were
figures for the time of the Law, Heb. 9.9. and the words of the Prophets, with
them, were lights, that shined in a dark place, till the day of the Gospel did
dawn, and the day star; that is, the clearer light of knowledge, arise in
men's hearts: 2 Pet. 1.19. Now, David had the spirit in prophet call wisdom, 2 Samuel 23.2. and thereby saw, even in these legal ordinances, the pleasant
beauty of the Lord his God in Christ Jesus.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see a reason of the different affections, to be seen in men
toward the house of God; and the sacred ordinances therein used: some are
exceeding zealous thereof, as Psalm. 69.9. longing and fainting for the Courts
of the Lord, Psalm. 84.2. Psalm. 63.1, 2. Psalm. 42.1, 2. Others count it a
weariness, and wonder that any should take delight therein. Now, the reason
is, that some see the beauty of the Lord in his house, and others are blind,
and ignorant, and see nothing at all: as Cant. 5.9. being like the Prophets
servant, that saw the horses and chariots of the enemy, but saw not the
chariots of fire from the Lord, till the Prophet had prayed for him, 2 Kings
6.15, 16, 17. They are like the woman of Sichar, that asked not the water of
life of Christ, because she knew him no^, nor the gift of God, John 4.10.

For admonition, it serves two ways. First, to natural men, to give all
diligence after spiritual illumination, that they may attain to this estate;
to see the Lords pleasing beauty in his sacred ordinances. The way is to get
the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. for which end, we must use Gods means, the word
preached: Acts 10.44. Gal. 3.2. and prayer, Luke 11.13. in an holy manner, that
is, first repenting of sin, Prove. 1.23. Acts 2.38. Secondly, hungring and
thirsting after grace, Isaiah 44.3. Thirdly, walking in new obedience, Acts
5.32.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to Gods children, to be careful of their behavior, that the beauty
of the Lord may be still shining upon them. The way is: First, to watch against
temptation to sin, which is a cloud, to hide Gods face from his people: as
Lam. 3.44. Isaiah 59.2. Secondly, to be frequent and diligent in those sacred
ordinances, and religious services, wherein God begets, and increases grace in
their hearts: which now are, the solemn parts of the Evangelicall ministry, in
the word preached; sacraments reverently administered; and prayer with
thankesgiving. Thirdly, to strive to show the power of godliness in
conscionable obedience. John 14 21, 23. He that has my Commandments, and
keeps them, he it is, that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved
of my father: and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him. If a man
love me, he will keep my words: and my father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him: and Psalm. 50.23. To him, that orders
his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

The second end, for which David's desires to dwell in Gods house, is, that he
may enquire in his temple, that is, diligently seek direction of God, in all
cases of doubt, Hebr. early.
or difficulty, that may any way concern him. Mark here then,

The fifth Observation.
That in Gods house, the godly did enquire and seek of God, for direction and
satisfaction, in all material cases of doubt, and difficulty, that did concern
them. See, for David himself, 1 Samuel 22.10. Doeg tells Saul, that Ahimelech
enquired of the Lord for David: and Verse. 15. Ahimelechs speech seems to imply,
that he had done it often. Did I then begin no enquire of God for him? as if he
should have said, that is a thing I have formerly done oftentimes for him. So
Chapter 23.2. David enquired of the Lord, about his going to fight against the
Philistims, that came against Keilah: verse. 4. Again he enquired of the Lord.
This enquiry was thought to have been by the Prophet Gad, who was with David, 1 Samuel 22.5. and 1 Samuel 23.9, 10. he enquired by Abiathar the Priest, that was
fled to him with the Ephod, as verse. 6. And 1 Samuel 30.7, 8. he enquired of the
Lord, about the pursuit of the Amalakites, that had burnt Ziklag. So before
this time, Judge. 1.1. the people asked the Lord, who shall go up against the
Canaanites: and Judges 20.18. they ask counsel of the Lord, about going up
against the Benjamites, and verse. 23. the second time, and verse. 27, 28. the
third time, where the manner is showed: Add Genesis 25.22.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold: First, Gods own ordinance; which is plainly set
down, directing his people to this duty: See the promise of Gods presence to
give direction, Exodus 25.21, 22. whence the most holy place is thought to be
called (...), because thence God spoke, and gave answer, when he was rightly
sought unto, 1 Kings 6.19, etc. And hereupon, Number. 27.21. Joshuah must be
before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him before the Lord. Add
Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9.

The second Reason.
Secondly, for the fruition of the benefits, and comforts of this privilege,
which are exceeding great. First, freedom from manifold evils, The benefits
that come by enquiring of God.
that do accompany men's miscarriages, that walk in their own counsels, and
after their own conceits: as we may see in the Israelites, making league with
the Gibeonites, that were inhabitants in the land of Canaan, Josh 9.14, etc.
Secondly, assurance to be acceptable to God, and bleffed of him in the things
they take in hand, even of this world. See, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If ye seek him he
will be found of you: and Verse 15. they sought him with their whole desire,
and he was found of them. Thirdly, undoubted fruition of glory in the life to
come. See Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory. See also, Psalm. 24.3, 4, 5, 6. Who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord, etc. This is the generation of them that seek him: that seek
thy face, O Jacob.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see plainly, that the true members of Gods Church, are
advanced in privilege, dignity and honor, above all other people: for with
whom does the Lord so deal, in grace and favor, as with the true members of
the Church? What nation is great, who has God so nigh unto them, as our God
is, in all things that we call upon him for? Deuteronomy. 4.7. he bids, Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
Psalm. 50.15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their cry. Psalm. 34.15. The Lord is nigh unto them, that are of a
broken heart: and saves such, as be of a contrite spirit. Verse. 18.

Obj. If any one say, this indeed was the prerogative of the Jews, that they
were Gods peculiar people, and chief treasure, and the Lord would be enquired
of by them, above all other people: but is it so with the Church of the new
testament?

Answ. Though there may be some difference, in the manner of Gods giving
answer: yet for substance and real performance, the Church of the new
Testament is preferred before the Jews, as we shall see in taking particular
view of their means of inquiry of God, in cases of difficulty, which were
especially four.

How the Jews enquired of God.
First, by Prophets: as 2 Kings 3.11. Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord,
that we may enquire of the Lord by him? and 1 Kings 22.7. Secondly, by the high
Priest: as Number. 27.1. Thirdly, by the ordinary teachers of the Law, Mal. 2.7.
Fourthly, in prayer: Psalm. 50.15. wherewith was joined fasting, when they
sought of God blessings of importance this way: as Ezra 8.21, 23. Now, the
Church of the new Testament, at this day, is not inferior to the Church of the
Jews: for they sometime wanted extraordinary Prophets: as Psalm. 74.9. And we do
ever enjoy the spiritual presence of Christ Jesus, the great Prophet of the
Church. Math. 28.20. For John Baptist was more then a Prophet, Matthew. 11.9. and
yet not worthy to unloose Christ's shooe-latchet, John 1.27. He is likewise the
great High Priest of our profession, who by his word and spirit, in all
needful truth, reveals his fathers will, more plainly and fully, then the
High Priest did by Vrim and Thummim: See Heb. 1.2. with 4.14. We have a great
high Priest over the house of God, Heb. 8.2. a Minister of the Sanctuary and of
the true Tabernacle: And for the written word, wherein Gods will is to be
found, the great increase of the sacred Canon, by all the books of the new
Testament, shows our prerogative, that way above the Jews. And for access and
obtaining by prayer, with fasting, direction from the Lord, see the promise,
Luke 11.9, 10, 11, 13. with John 16.24, 36. and behold the success by instance
in Cornelius, Acts 10.2, 3, 30, etc.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually to move every one, that lives in the
Church, to look unto their state and carriage; that it be such, as may give
them some good assurance, that they have right to this privilege, to enquire
in the Temple. To this end, we must look to two things: First, that we be in
covenant with God, else we have no right to this prerogative: as Ephesians. 2.12.
the promise of audience is made to Gods people, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Secondly, that
we keep covenant, living in conscio^able obedience, as Psalm. 25.9, 10. else we
forfeit our right, as we may see by Gods dealing with Saul, 1 Samuel 28.6, 16.
and Ezekiel. 2, 3, 30, 31. But, if we keep covenant, we may claim our due of God,
as David does in this 27. Psalm, verse. 7.9. always remembering, that we walk in
the Lords highway, to consult with him in his word: as Psalm. 73.17. for
therein God teaches his children: as Psalm. 94.10, 12. and Psalm. 119.98, 99.
And to call upon him by prayer adding thereto the humiliation of our souls by
fasting, as Ezra. 8.21, 23. with Acts 10, 2, 3, 30. etc.

Verse. 5. For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock.


The meaning of the words.
A Reason of David's earnest desire to dwell in Gods house for ever, drawn from
the benefit of safety, and security, there to be found in time of trouble.
Which benefit is here expressed, under a double action of God: First, hiding in
his pavilion, and secret of his tabernacle: Secondly, setting up upon a rock.
For the better conceiving whereof we must know, that by Gods pavilion David
means the Lords Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. And the secret of
his Tabernacle was the most Holy place, where the Cherubims spread their wings,
over the mercy seat, the cover of the Ark of the covenant, whither indeed David
might not go personally, as we may see by Heb 9.8. and Levit. 16.2. but aims
at that, which those things did shadow out, namely, special providence, and
protection for safety: as Psalm. 91.1, 4. and 61.3, 4. Those places indeed were
generally taken for places of safety, as may appear by the fact of Adonijah, 1
Kings 1.50, 51. and of Joab, 1 Kings 2.28. and by the charge of Jehoiadah the
high Priest, 2 Kings 11.15. The ground whereof is thought to be (besides
reverence of Gods presence) Gods ordinance in the Wilderness, that the
Tabernacle of the congregation should be a sanctuary, for that time, as the
cities of refuge were afterward: as is gathered by Exodus 21.13, 14. So that
here David assures himself, that being a true member of Gods Church, his grace
and favor, power and providence should be, as the Lords pavilion, and as the
secret place of his tabernacle; even a sure and safe place of safety, and
security to him. And likewise as a rock, that is high and strong, does give
safety and security to him that is set thereon, from the violent assault of all
malicious enemies: so the Lords power, and favor, would become the means of
safety unto David: who thereupon does usually call the Lord his rock and his
salvation: as Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 42.9.

In this reason thus conceived, note two things: the first implied, touching
his state; liable and subject to manifold evils and troubles: the second
expressed and intended, touching the means of his preservation, and safety from
the foresaid evils.

The first Observation.
For the first, mark here, that David makes account, that while he lives here on
earth, he is liable, and subject to manifold evils, to sore and great troubles.
Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me. Psalm. 88.3 My soul is full of
trou^les.

The first Reason.
The reason or ground hereof is fourfold. First, Gods divine sovereignty,
whereby he may do with his own what he will, and dispose of his dearest
children, to endure both sorrow and great affliction: as he dealt with Job, Job
2.3, etc. wherein our Savior instructs Peter, John 21.18, 22. which it seems
David had learned concerning himself, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth, because thou did it.

The second Reason. (...).
Secondly, because of iniquity: for sin is truly that Ate, which brings all
evil: affliction follows sinners. And here first, David's own sins make him
liable to evils of affliction: he complains, that his iniquities took hold of
him: and so he felt 2 Samuel 12.10. Likewise, the sins of the wicked in his
time, might make it to go far worse with him: as Eliah told Ahab, thou and
thy fathers house trouble Israel: 1 Kings 18.18. and so we may think it was in
the time of the Churches complaint. Psalm. 44.9, 10, 17, 18, 19.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, Satan's malice; who cast out floods against the woman, Revel. 12.15.
and prevails with God, for leave to afflict holy Job, with grievous plagues,
Job 1.10, 11. and 2.5. and let not David escape, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Being indeed
that roaring lion, going about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, the malice of the wicked, who are the seed of the serpent: who hated
and persecuted David; not for his offense or sin: as, Psalm. 59.3, 4. but
because he followed goodness: as Psalm. 38.19, 20. Like to Cain, who slew his
brother Abel, because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, 1
John 3.12. whereof Christ forewarned his disciples, John 15.19, 20.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see from David's resolution, what is the case and condition of
all the godly: namely, to be subject to evils and troubles, which David made
account of: for all the forenamed reasons fasten themselves upon the godly,
now living, as they did upon David. And for plain testimony, see Psalm. 34.19.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous. 2 Timothy 3.12. All, that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. For instance, see Jacobs
confession of himself, Genesis 47.9. Few and evil have the days of my life been:
and the state of Job, Chap. 1. and 2. And that of Moses. Psalm. 90.15. Also Heb.
11.37, 38. they whom the world was not worthy of, were most miserable for
outward things: as Paul confesses for all the godly, 1 Cor. 15.19.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways: First, to the wicked of the world, to beware of
self-deceit, in promising to themselves continued happiness, and freedom from
evils, because for the present they enjoy peace and prosperity. That this is
their thought and course, see Psalm. 10.6. He has said in his heart, I shall
not be moved: for I shall never be in adversity: also, Isaiah 28.15. they say,
We have made a Covenant with death, and with hell we are with agreement, when
the overflowing scourge shall pass thorough, it shall not come unto us. But
consider what God says, Verse 18. Your covenant with death shall be
disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand, etc. Be not therefore
deceived in a matter of such importance. Judgments unlooked for will light,
and lie the more heavy. Consider how the Holy Ghost reasons, 1 Pet. 4.17,
18. Judgment must begin at the house of God: and, if it first begin at us,
what shall the end be of them, that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? So,
Jer. 25.29. Lo I begin to bring evil on the City, that is called by my name,
and should ye be utterly unpunished? Luke 23.31. If they do these things in a
green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Matthew. 10.24, 25. The Disciple is
not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord -- If they have called the
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household?

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to the godly to bethink themselves with David, that troubles may
come, the days, in which they live, may be full of evils; and thereupon to
prepare for it, and to glorify God under afflictions, if it please God to send
them. For the satisfying of the heart, of every man's subjection to troubles,
consider the forenamed reasons, from Gods sovereignty, from sin, from the
devil, and the wicked of the world, that are the instruments of Satan:
whereto, if none can answer otherwise, then by acknowledgement of subjection,
then will true wisdom say, it is best to prepare for it, that we may glorify
God under the cross. The way of preparation is this:

How to be prepared for afflictions.
First, to make sure we be rightly in covenant with God: which is undoubted to
the true professors of Gods holy religion, maintained amongst us, wherein we
avouch the true God for our God, and he avoucheth us for his people: as Deuteronomy.
26.17, 18. with Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. whereof Baptism is a true Sacramental
sign and seal, as circumcision was to the Jews, Romans 4.11. But he, that would
be assured thereof, must make conscience to perform the vow of moral
obedience, made in Baptism, of forsaking sin, believing in God, and walking
in new obedience.

Secondly, to get the grace of faith in Christ, whereby we rest, and rely upon
him, for all the blessings of the covenant: This grace enables the just to live
even in affliction, as Heb. 1.38. whereupon Paul said, he was able to do all
things, through Christ, that strengthened him: as to want, and to abound, to be
full, and to be empty. Philip. 4.11, 12.

Thirdly, to redeem the time, by laboring to profit, according to the means of
grace, afforded unto us. Ephesians. 5.16.

Fourthly, to become merciful to those, that be in misery: so shall we lay up
in store a good foundation, for mercy to our selves, Psalm. 41.1, etc. Matthew.
5.7. Jam. 2.13.

Then, when affliction is come, we must set faith a work, by looking at Gods
hand therein, as Christ teaches Mat. 10.28, 29. which is the only ground of
true patience: as Psalm. 39.9. Also consider, what good it pleases God to to
raise to his children by afflictions: as Psalm. 94.12. Psalm. 119.67, 71. add 2
Cor. 4.17, 18.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be noted here, is purposely intended That when God shall
grant to David to dwell in his house, he does assure himself of special
safety, and protection in times of trouble: for that he means by hiding in his
pavilion, and in the secret of his tabernacle, and setting up upon a rock, as
we heard before: See, Psalm. 61.3, 4, 6, 7. Thou have been a shelter for me, and
a strong tower from the enemy. I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever: I will
trust in the covert of thy wings -- Thou will prolong the Kings life: and his
years as many generations. He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy
and truth which may preserve him.

The Reason.
The ground of this assurance was Gods own testimony, for the continuance of his
presence in his Sanctuary, and for the exercise of his power and providence;
for their safety, that be true members of his Church: See Psalm. 46.5, 6, 7. God
is in the midst of her, (i. e. his Church) she shall not be moved: God shall
help her, and that right early. The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he
uttered his voice, the earth melted. The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of
Jacob is our refuge. Psalm. 48.3, 8, 12, 13, 14. God is known in her palaces for
a refuge: As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts,
in the City of our God, God will establish it for ever. Walk about Sion, and go
round about her, tell the towers thereof -- For this God is our God for ever
and ever: he will be our guide even unto death. See Isa. 33.20, 21, 22. Look
upon Sion the City of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet
habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes
thereof shall ever be removed; neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken. But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and
streams -- For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, he will save us. Isa. 37.35. I will defend this City to save it, for
mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake: that is, for my promise sake to
David in Christ: as Psalm. 132.11, 13, 14, 17. The Lord has sworn in truth unto
David, he will not turn from it: of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy
throne, etc. There will I make the horn of David to bud -- Now David he
continued a true member of Gods house, being careful to keep in covenant with
God, as he both professed in word, and testified by godly behavior, upon which
he grounds his assurance of Gods especial protection. His profession of being
in covenant, see Psalm. 116.16. O Lord truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant.
Psalm. 23.1.4. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want -- Though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil. His godly
behavior whereon he grounds his assurance of Gods special protection, is
threefold.

First, he puts his trust and hope in God: as Psalm. 21.7. For the King trusts
in the Lord: and through the mercy of the most high, he shall not be moved. Psalm
11.1. In thee, O Lord, put I my trust: how say ye to my soul fly as a Bird to
your mountain? Psalm. 16.1. Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I put my trust.
Psalm. 86.2. O thou my God, save thy servant, that trusts in thee.

Secondly, he testified his trust in God by prayer. Psalm. 7.1. O Lord my God,
in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them, that persecute me, and
deliver me. Psalm. 116.3, 4. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains
of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble, and sorrow. Then called I upon the
name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul.

Thirdly, he made conscience of a godly and upright life, and thereon grounds
his assurance of special protection: Psalm 4.3. Know that the Lord has set
apart him that is godly, for himself: the Lord will hear, when I call upon him.
Psalm. 18.17, 20. He delivered me from my strong enemy -- The Lord rewarded me
according to my righteousness, etc, Verse. 21, 22, 23. For I have kept the
ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God. For all his
judgments were before me: and I did not put away his statutes from me. I was
also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity, etc. Psalm.
41.2. Thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and set me before thy face for
ever.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition, and for comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see here with David the true and right way of safery in time
of trouble. Get to dwell in Gods house, and then Gods special providence shall
be over us: as the former testimonies do plentifully testify.

But here a doubt a rises, where we shall find this house, and how to get a
place therein?

Where to find Gods house, and how to get a place therein.
Answ. In the days of grace, and times of the new Testament, the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he dwells with them, they are his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God. Rev. 21.3.

But is this common to all, as they are men, or is there some special work of
God required in them, and among them, that be his house?

Answ. John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the father, which has sent me,
draw him, that is, give him grace so to do from above. Verse. 65. It is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Romans
9.16. Those, that believe on his name, are born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. John 1.13. For it is God, which
works in you both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13.

But what has man then to do, since our conversion and regeneration is Gods
work?

Answ. It is indeed Gods work, yet in the use of outward means, which he gives
to reasonable creatures, that therein they may wait for, and receive Gods work
of grace, in an holy calling: which, both amongst Jews and Gentiles, does
distinguish the elect from the reprobate: as Acts 2.39. Now this calling is in
the Gospel preached, sanctified by prayer, 2. These. 13.14. and therein are men
made Gods house: Heb. 3.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 3.16.

But may every man in the use of the Gospel preached, attain to this calling?

Answ. For ought that either Minister or people do know to the contrary, every
one may be called that lives under the Gospel; the fault is their own if they
be not: as Christ says, Light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil. 1 John 3.19. For men
undoubtedly do first rebel against the word, and refuse Gods mercy offered in
the means of grace, before that God withdraw his grace, or take away from
them the use of the means. In regard whereof, Christ complains of the Jews,
that, when he would have gathered them, they would not. Matthew. 23.37. For,
though the best employment and improvement of nature, be insufficient to get
the true habit of grace, without the work of the spirit; as Romans 9.16. yet sure
it is, men are first wanting to themselves, in the use of means, before the
blessing of the spirit be denied unto them. Their own hearts can tell them,
they have failed in turning from sin, as Prove. 1.23. in hungring after grace,
Isaiah 44.3. and in doing the good they know, Acts 5.32.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition: as we desire safety and shelter in time of trouble, so we must
with David strive and endeavor after, a sure place in Gods house, become true
members of Gods Church.

The way is; First, to leave, and break off the course of all known sin; for
that prevents society with God: as 2 Cor. 14.15, 16. and thereupon the
exhortation is unto repentance, Chap. 7.1. Secondly, to labor for true faith
in Christ, for that joins us unto Christ, to make us living stones, to be built
up a spiritual house: as 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. for, Ephesians. 3.17. Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith. Thirdly, to walk in new obedience, performing
every good duty, which the Lord requires: as Isaiah 56.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Let not
the son of the stranger, that has joined himself to the Lord, speak saying,
the Lord has utterly separated me from his people: neither let the Eunuch say,
behold, I am a dry tree. For thus says the Lord, unto the Eunuchs, that keep
my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant:
Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within my walls, a place and a
name, better then of sons and daughters, etc.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to all true believers, in times of trouble: for
certainly, they have right and title to this immunity of Gods house. Indeed,
outward peace, ease and plenty are but temporal blessings, and the promise
thereof must be understood with the exception of the cross, so as God, for
trial of grace, and correction for sin, may exercise them in afflictions: as
he did Job, and David: yet this is their comfort therein. First, How the godly
may comfort themselves in afflictions.
that God will not fail them, nor forsake them, Heb. 13.5, 6. and therefore
they may boldly say, The Lord is mine helper, I will not fear, what man shall
do unto me: as Psalm. 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I
will deliver him in trouble, I will be with him, and honor him. Secondly, that
God will cause their troubles to work for their good, as Romans 8.28. Heb. 12.10.
Thirdly, God will give an issue with the trial, that they may be able to bear
it. 1 Cor. 10.13.

Verse. 6. And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about
me: therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing,
yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord.


The meaning of the words.
IN the beginning of this Verse, the Prophet adds another reason, of his
earnest desire to dwell in Gods house, expressed, verse. 4. drawn from the
benefit of honor and dignity, whereto God would now shortly advance him, and
lift up his head, above his enemies round about him: whereupon he solemnly
professes, that he would glorify God, with the sacrifices of joy, and sing
praises unto God. Here then we have two things to handle: First, David's
prediction of his dignity and honor: secondly, his solemn profession of his
thankful behavior. The prediction of his honor is, in the first part of the
verse, set out metaphorically, and comparatively, and amplified by the
circumstance of time, when it shall be. Metaphorically thus, my head shall be
lifted up: that is, I shall be advanced in dignity and honor, and so to
cheerful and comfortable estate: for men dejected and humbled hang down the
head, when therefore they are advanced and cheered, then are they said to have
their head lifted up: as Genesis 40.17. Pharaoh shall lift up thine head, and
restore thee to thy place. Jer. 52.31, 32. Evilmerodach the King of Babylon
lifted up the head of Jehojakin King of Judah, and brought him forth out of
prison, and kindly spoke unto him, and set his throne above the throne the
Kings, that were with him in Babylon. Comparatively, he says, his head shall
be lifted up above his enemies round about him. And the time when it shall be
is now, the time present, which makes it the more comfortable. As if he should
have said, though I have been long and much dejected, yet now shall I be
advanced and cheered, above mine enemies round about me.

The first Observation.
In this prediction of his honor and comfort, note these things. First, implied
and taken for granted, respecting David's dangerous estate, He had enemies round
about him. Psalm. 3.1, 2. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? many are
they that rise up against me. Many there be, which say of my soul, there is no
help for him in God. Psalm. 69.4. They that hate me without a cause, are more
then the hairs of mine head: they, that would destroy me, being mine enemies
wrongfully are mighty. Psalm. 118.10, 11, 12. All nations compassed me about --
they compassed me about -- like Bees -- and Psalm. 56.2. Mine enemies would
daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against me.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is fourfold. First, in God disposing of David to be a type of
Christ, even in his troubles and opposition in the world, For Chr. see Is.
53.10.
wherewith God was pleased to have them exercised: as is plain, Psalm. 2.1, etc.
and Psalm. 22.12, 16. Many Bulls have compassed me -- dogs have compassed me: the
assembly of the wicked have enclosed me: and Psalm. 71.20. Thou have showed me
great and sore troubles.

The second Reason.
Secondly, in Gods favor advancing him to dignity and honor. Psalm. 4.2. Psalm.
62.4. which was fully verified in Daniel, Dan. 6.3, 4.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, in David sometime provoking the Lord by his sin: as, 2 Samuel 12.9,
10, 11. wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord -- therefore
the sword shall never depart from thine house -- I will raise up evil against
thee out of thine house. See Psalm. 3.1, 2. with 2 Samuel 15.13, etc.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, in David's enemies, that were the seed of the serpent, and hated him
for his goodness. Psalm. 37.19, 20. They that hate me wrongfully are
multiplied. They also, that render evil for good, are mine adversaries,
because I follow the thing that good is.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see in David the state of the godly; they are liable to be
compassed about with enemies: for that which befell David, as the type, and
Christ Jesus himself the truth, typified by David, may befall any servant of
God in this world: as Christ reasoned. Luke 23.31. If they do these things in a
green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Matthew. 10.25. If they have called
the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, to beware of rash judgment, as well against others, when they
are compassed about with adversaries, as also against our selves, when that
evil does befall us. Corrupt nature measures Gods love by outward things: and
therefore thinks with the wicked, that when troubles increase, God forsakes.
Psalm. 71.12. But Gods ways are not as man's ways, Isa. 55.8. As many as he
loves, he rebukes and chastens, Rev. 3.19. whom the Lord loves he chasteneth,
and scourges every son whom he receives. And he uses the rods of men to
correct his children: as, 2 Samuel 7.14. Psalm. 89.31, 32.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly in opposition by many and mighty in the world:
for in David we may see, that no strange thing befalls us, but such as
appertains to man, and God will give the issue: as 1 Cor. 10.13. Let us say,
the servant is not above his Lord. Matthew, 10.24, 25. Consider, that if their
opposition be for a good cause, we have great cause to rejoice: for we are
made conformable to Christ; and have fellowship with him in afflictions. See 1
Pet. 4.12, 13. 2 Cor. 1.7.

The thing here expressed by David is this, that God will now restore him to
comfort, and advance him to honor. Where we may note two things. The second
Observation.
First, that David knew, that the time of comfort and honor was at hand: for
he says, Now shall my head be lifted up.

The Reason.
This he might do by special instinct, being a Prophet, for the spirit of God
spoke in him, and by him. 2 Samuel 23.1, 2.

It serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see what God is able to do for his children, he can not only
bestow joy and honor, but acquaint them with the particular time, when they
shall receive it. So God revealed to Moses the delivery of Israel out of the
bondage of Egypt, Exodus 3.7, 8. and chap. 11.1.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to labor to be followers of David, for upright hearts and
obedient lives; as Psalm. 18. in the title, he is styled the servant of the
Lord; and verse 21. he says, I have kept the ways of the Lord, I was upright
also before him: and unto such it is that God reveals his secrets, Psalm.
25.14. Prove. 3.32.

The third observation.
Secondly, here note the phrase in which David expresses his assurance of
honor and comfort: my head shall be lifted up, wherein he plainly makes
himself a patient, ascribing both honor and comfort unto God, Psalm. 23.1. etc.
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not lack -- He makes me lie down in green
pastures -- he restores my soul, etc. to the end, Psalm. 18.48. Thou liftest
me up above those that rise up against me, verse 35. thy right hand has holden
me up, and thy gentleness has made me great. See Psalm. 121.1, 2. with 1 Samuel
18.23.

The Reason.
He knew Gods calling would be the best shelter, against envy and opposition,
from which high places are seldom free: as Jeremie in his calling does comfort
himself, Jer. 17.16. As for me, I have not hasted from being a pastor to
follow thee. And so David comforts himself against Eliabs reproach, for making
offer to encounter with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.29.

The Use for reproof.
This serves first, for the reproof of the ambitious, that by any sinister
means will seek advancement: a common sin in all ages, and a great evil in
our times, moving many to oppression, bribery, and sundry other ungodly courses.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to be followers of David, in receiving honor and dignity: walk
uprightly in our places, till God advance us; be sure of his calling, before we
stir, lest in time of trouble our consciences say unto us, How came thou
hither? See the danger of usurpation in the Jewish exorcists, Acts 19.13, 16.

Therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle, sacrifices of joy: I will sing, yea,
I will sing praises unto the Lord.

Here David professes his thankful behavior toward God, for the honor and
comfort, which God would shortly vouchsafe unto him: and it stands in the
cheerful performance, of such religious service, for thankesgiving, as God
required at the hands of his people, when he bestowed his blessings upon them.
Hereof he mentions these two: First, real sacrifices of joy, whereby he
means sacrifices of thankesgiving, over which the Priests sounded an alarm
with their silver trumpets, Number. 10.10. called the joyful sound, Psalm. 89.15.
And this duty he amplifieth, by the circumstance of the place, where he would
perform it, namely, in Gods Tabernacle, the place appointed for that solemn
part of Gods service. Deuteronomy. 12.11, 12.13, 14. There shall be a place which the
Lord your God shall choose, to cause his name to dwell there: thither shall ye
bring all that I command you, your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, etc.
Secondly, singing praises unto God: which duty he promises with repetition or
gemination, to testify his more certain resolution for the performance of it,
saying, I will sing, yea, I will sing praises.

In this profession of thankful behavior, note two things: First, the duty he
will perform: secondly, the place where.

The fourth Observation.
For the first, note. When David receives from God honor and comfort, then
will he offer unto God sacrifices of thankesgiving, with joy and rejoicing: his
sacrifices shall be sacrifices of joy, and when he offers them, he will sing
praises unto God.

The like he showed, at the fetching home of the Ark of the covenant toward
the city of David, 1 Chronicles. 13.8. and 15.16. David spoke to the chief of the
Levites, to appoint their brethren to be singers, with instruments of Music,
Psalteries, and Harps, and Cymbals, sounding by lifting up the voice with joy.
And upon his deliverance from the hand of Saul, and other enemies. Ps. 18.1,
etc. Ps. 116.12, 13.

The first Reason.
The reasons hereof are great, as well in regard of God, and of himself, as also
his brethren. In regard of God. First, because he commands it, Psalm. 100.1. and
obedience is acceptable, 1 Samuel 15.22. Psalm. 69.30, 31. Secondly, it is for his
glory. Psalm. 50.23. who so offers praise, glorifieth me.

The second Reason.
In respect of himself. First, it is pleasant and comely. Psalm. 33.1. Psalm.
147.1. Secondly, it is good and profitable: for them that honor God, will he
honor: 1 Samuel 2.30. Hence the Samaritan Leper, returning to praise Christ for
his cleansing, received an assurance of an heavenly and spiritual cleansing.
Luke 17.15, 19.

Thirdly, the omitting of it is dangerous, to provoke Gods wrath, being at
least a shameful neglect of Gods mercy. See 2 Chr. 32.25, 26.

The third Reason.
In respect of others, to whom David desired to do good: Psel. 34.11. Psalm.
51.13. His zeal for Gods glory would provoke many: as, Psalm. 34.2, 3. My soul
shall make her boast in the Lord, the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad:
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. And, if his
example could not move them, yet it would leave them without excuse, under the
censure and punishment of ingratitude: as Jobs friends were, Job 42.7. For it
is a dangeeous thing to neglect good example: as Jer. 22.15, 16, 17. Did not
thy father eat and drink and do judgment and justice, and then it was well
with him? But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness --
Therefore thus says the Lord, etc.

This serves for instruction, reprehension, and admonition.

The use for instruction.
The instruction is, from David's example, to all Gods people, to show them
fitting behavior toward God, when they receive blessings and benefits from
him; namely, to be thankful unto God, in praises and songs and that with
joyfulnesse and gladness.

The Use for reproof.
For reproof, it makes justly against all those, that are unthankful for Gods
blessings, and likewise dull and heavy hearted in Gods praises. See Deuteronomy.
28.47, 48. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God, with joyfulnesse and
with gladness of hear, for the abundance of all things. Therefore shall thou
serve thine enemies, etc. with Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise?

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that every child of God be a follower of David, both for the
duty it self, and for the manner of performing it, with cheerfulness and
gladness. Consider, that David studied the art of thankfulness, Psalm. 116.12,
13. and that upon weighty grounds, respecting God, respecting himself and his
brethren: all which we should meditate on, to stir us up to the cheerful
performance of this duty of thankfulness.

The fifth Observation.
The second point to be observed in Davias profession of thankful behavior is,
the circumstance of place, where he will offer his sacrifices: namely, in Gods
Tabernacle.

David will offer his sacrifices in Gods Tabernacle: so 2 Samuel 6.17. David set
the Ark in his place, in the midst of the Tabernacle, that David had pitched
for it: and David offered burnt offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord:
meaning by the hands of the Priests, as, 1 Chronicles. 16.1.

The first Reason.
This he observed. First, that he might have acceptance before the Lord in this
service: for, in observing this circumstance of place, he obeyed Gods
ordinance: Deuteronomy. 12.11, 12, 13, 14. and so had title to the favor of
acceptance, as Is. 56.7.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David knew there was danger in transgressing Gods ordinance: as 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him
not after the due order: Therefore does he observe the place appointed by God.

The Use for admonition.
This should teach us to be followers of David, in respecting and observing Gods
ordinance for the place of his service. It is true, difference of place in
respect of holiness, is now in the New Testament taken away; as, John 4.21,
23. and therefore Paul wills, that men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands unto God, without wrath or doubting. 1 Timothy 2.8. Yet, where Christ has
said, where two or three meet together in ny name, that is, by warrant from me,
I am in the middle. Mat. 18.20. and go teach -- I am with you to the end of the
world. Matthew. 28.20. therefore must we frequent diligently, and reverently use
Church assemblies. Consider, 1 Cor. 11.22. despise ye the Church of God? That
is, the place where Gods people come together for his service.

Verse. 7. Hear me, O Lord, when I cry with my voice, have mercy also upon me,
and answer me.


The meaning of the words.
HEre David begins the second testification of his true affiance in God, by
humble and earnest prayer, and supplication for sundry blessings: whereof the
first is for mercy in audience, and answer to his earnest prayers, in this
verse. Wherein (the words being plain) we may observe three things. First, what
David prayed for: Secondly, in what manner: thirdly, his esteem of Gods
audience to his prayers.

The first Observation.
For the first, David prays for audience and answer to his prayers. Hear, O
Lord, when I cry, and answer me. So Psalm. 4.1. Hear me, when I call. Psalm. 5.1,
2. Give ear to my words -- hearken to the voice of my cry. Psalm. 28.1. Unto
thee will I cry, O Lord, my rock, be not silent to me: lest, if thou be silent
to me, I become like them that go down into the pit. Hear the voice of my
supplications, when I cry unto thee. Psalm. 61.1. Hear my cry, O God, attend
unto my prayer: and Psalm. 141.1.

Qu. What needs this prayer for audience, seeing God hears every word that is
spoken? Psalm. 139.4. and it is his property to hear prayer. Psalm. 65.2. whereto
he has bound himself by promise. Psalm. 50.15. Matthew. 7.7.

Answ. The audience which David prays for, is not the bare art of hearing, in
taking notice of that he said in prayer, for he knew well that would never be
wanting in God toward man. But by hearing, he means Gods favorable act of
audience, testified by gracious answers, as he says, in thy faithfulness
answer me. Psalm. 143.1.

The Reason.
The reason, why David here prays for this gracious audience, is, because he
knew, God did many times, for just causes, Why God does sometimes deny to give
gracious answers to the prayers of his servants.
deny to give such gracious answers, even to the prayers of his servants. As
first, when he would humble them, and correct them for their sins. Psalm. 66.18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. John. 9.31. God
hears not sinners: For sin separates between God and us. Is. 59.2. makes
God say, Though ye make many prayers, I will not hear. Isa. 1.15. So as his
people complain, that God seems angry against their prayers, Ps. 80.4.

Secondly, when he would stir them up to more zeal, and fervency in prayer,
then yet they have showed: See his dealing with the woman of Canaan, coming to
him for her daughter. Matthew. 15.22, 23, etc. and with the father of the child
possessed with a dumb and deaf devil. Mark 9.18.

Thirdly, when he will exercise them under some affliction, either for
recreation for sin, or for trial of grace, as, Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou
hear not, and in the night, and am not silent. That was true, both in David
the type, and in Jesus Christ the truth: yet herein that is verified, which
Christ said to Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee. 2 Cor. 12.9. being as
good, as direct audience in particular answer: for it makes them willing and
able to bear the cross, which is a gracious hearing to the prayer of the
afflicted. Heb. 5.7.

This serves for instruction, and admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see, that the best of Gods children may be denied audience,
for a time, to their prayers: for that which befell David in the type, and
Jesus Christ himself, as the truth may befall any other child of God: for the
servant is not above the master. Matthew 10.24, 25.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, two ways. First, to beware of rash judgment, either against
our selves, or others, under this dealing of God, denying audience to our
prayers. That it is a great trouble to Gods children, see, Psalm. 80.4. Psalm.
22.1, 2. Isa. 49.14. That it opens the mouth of the wicked, see Psalm. 71.1^,
11. Matthew. 27.42, 43.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, in this case, to consider the causes of this course of Gods dealing,
and take them in their order: begin with sin, to find it out, return into
thine own heart, and turn unto the Lord: as 2 Chronicles. 6.37. be humble, and
earnest in prayer to God, and then, though God, for his glory, may deny thee
audience, in particular things, yet will he be sure to give thee something as
good, that is, the strength of patience to bear the cross, and in the end a
blessed issue.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be noted here is, the manner of David's praying: He cried
with his voice: which notes great servencie, great zeal, and earnestness.
David was fervent and zealous in prayer unto God: he cried unto God with his
voice, Psalm. 5.2. Hearken to the voice of my cry. Psalm. 17.1. Attend unto my
cry. Psalm. 22.1, 2. Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words
of my roaring. I cry in the day time. Psalm. 142.1, 5. I cried unto the Lord
with my voice, with my voice unto the LORD did I make my supplication. I cried
unto thee, O Lord.

The first Reason.
The reasons hereof are great. First, prayer is a good thing; and zealous
affection in a good thing is always good and commendable. Gal. 4.18.

The second Reason.
Secondly, zeal and fervency in prayer is very moving. St. James says, the
effectual fervent prayer of a rightous man avails much. Jam. 5.16. And our
Savior Christ shows it by two resemblances: one of the man, that came to
borrow bread of his neighbor by night. Luke 11.8. though he will not rise and
give him, because he is his friend: yet because of his importunity, he will
rise and give him as many as he needs. The other of the poor widow, that
prevailed with the unrighteous Judge. Luke 18.1, 5.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, Gods mercies, testified by gracious promises, and answerable
performances, did notably encourage him to be zealous and earnest in prayer.
For his promises, see Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Exodus
22, 23. If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I mill
surely hear their cry. See for his observing Gods dealing, with those that cry,
Psalm. 22.4, 5. Psalm. 107.6, 13, 19. Psalm. 6, 8, 9.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, David's own necessities and distresses did urge and enforce him to be
earnest in prayer. Psalm. 18.4, 5, 6. The sorrows of death compassed me, and
the floods of ungodly men made me afraid. The sorrows of hell compassed me
about: the snares of death prevented me. In my distress, I called upon the
Lord, and cried unto my God.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, it acquaints us with a property in prayer, both profitable and
commendable, which few regard, viz. to be zealous, and fervent, and earnest
therein. They, that think the service of God stands in the work done; as
Papists, and ignorant people do, who therefore tie themselves to a set number
of prayers, so many times said over, cannot much regard this property. But we
must know, that the true God, who cannot endure lukewarm professors of his
true religion, threatening to spew such out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. cannot like
of cold or lukewarm prayers. Is not prayer a good work? Now Christ Jesus has
redeemed us to be zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. therefore we must not be
cold in prayer.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves to move every child of God to labor for this
property of zeal and fervencie in prayer. For which end, How to get zeal and
fervency in prayer.
we must first consider Gods commandment requiring it. Romans 12.11, 12. Fervent
in spirit, continuing instant in prayer. Luke 11.5, 6, 7, 8. Christ bids ask,
seek, and knock, upon the resemblance of a man's importunity, prevailing with
his friend, to rise out of bed, to lend him provision for a friend come unto
him.

Secondly, we must labor to get the spirit of God, which is the spirit of
grace and supplication, and that will stir up mourning, with bitterness for
sin: as Zech. 12.10. and most earnest desires of grace and mercy. Romans 8.26.
prayer is as incense, Psalm. 141.2. the spirit is the fire, Job 32.18, 19. Jer.
20.9. Now this spirit is given in Gods means, used in an holy manner, often
showed, that is, in the word and prayer, used by those, that turn from sin,
and desire grace, and walk in obedience to the word. Hereto we shall be well
furthered, by the former reasons considered: whereto we may add, that natural
and heathen men have sped well with God, when they have showed zeal in prayer:
as Jonah 1.14. the mariners, and chap. 3.8. the Ninevites.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to those, whose wants and miseries cause them
to cry in prayer: for, though Gods delay may cause them to fear Gods forsaking,
yet if they cry unto God, they are in no worse a case, then David was, nay then
Christ Jesus was, Heb. 5.7. and shall the servant think it strange to be
afflicted as his Master was? Consider, that he heard the rebellious Jews when
they cried. Psalm. 106.44. with Judge. 10.10, 16.

The third Observation.
Thirdly, here observe David's esteem of this work of God, when he gives
audience, and answers to his prayers. David accounts it a great mercy of God to
have hearing and audience to his prayers. Psalm. 4.1. Have mercy upon me, and
hear my prayer. Psalm. 30.10. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me. Psalm. 86.3.
Be merciful unto me, O God, for I cry unto thee daily: Psalm. 116.1, 4, 5. I
love the Lord, because he has heard my voice: I called upon the name of the
Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul: Gracious is the Lord, and
righteous, yea our God is merciful. Psalm. 119.58. I entreated thy favor with
my whole heart. Be merciful unto me, according to thy word.

The Reason.
The reason is, because he, as every other man, stood gnilty of sin, which
separates between God and us. Ps. 59.2.

The use for instruction.
This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

For instruction: see, that David was not acquainted with the opinion of:
Papists, that hold prayer a meritorious work: for then audience should be due,
not of mercy, but of debt.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition: First, to every one to get good title to Gods mercy, that would
have assurance of audience to their prayers. Now the way is to get into
covenant with God, and to walk worthy of the Lord: Now we enter covenant by
believing in Christ; for that is the condition that gives us title to audience,
1 Jer. 4.22, 23. And we walk worthy of the Lord, and of the favor of
audience, when we eschew evil, and make conscience of sin: for see John
9.31. Psalm. 66.18, 19. sin separates and hinders audience, Prove. 1.24, 28.
Is. 1.15. Is. 59.1. whereto also we must adjoyn conscience of well-doing; for,
if we do well, we shall be accepted, Genesis 4.7. which though it extend not unto
God, for the bettering of his estate, Psalm. 16.3. yet it makes greatly for Gods
glory, John 15.8. and is good and profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8. For God does
promise audience to those, that set their love on God, and know him, that when
they call he will answer, Psalm 91.14, 15.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, those, that profess themselves to be in covenant with God, must
observe Gods mercy in audience to their prayers, as Psalm. 85.7, 8. Show us thy
mercy O Lord, and grant us thy salvation: I will hearken what God the Lord will
say. So did David, Psalm. 66.17, 19. and Psalm. 116.1, 2. This we must do, that,
if we find want of audience, we may appeal unto his mercy, and seek good title
thereto: for gracious audience is of mercy. And if we find, that God has heard
us, that then we may retu^n praise and thanks for Gods mercy, and labor to
walk worthy of it. We have received many deliverances in this and, upon our
humiliation. in 88. from the invincible navy, in 605. from the devilish
Powder treason, in 625. from the fearful plague of pestilence, besides out
comfortable freedom from wars, in the common trouble of other nations;
unthankfulness brings wrath, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. we must therefore remember David's
practice, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. And seeing, when we come to the Lords table, we
pray for part in Christ's redemption, let us endeavor to walk worthy of it, and
show the power of it, in leaving sin, and living godly; else we trust in
lying words, if we think we are redeemed to do wickedly; as Jer. 7.8, 9, 10 and
indeed are like the dog, and so returning to vomit and filth, 2 Pet. 2.22, 23.

Verse 8. My heart said unto thee, when thou saidest, seek ye my face: thy
face, O Lord, will I seek.

9. Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: Thou
have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.


HEre David goes on in the matter of prayer, begun in the former verse; The
meaning of the words.
and first does testify the truth and readiness of his heart, to answer and
obey Gods command, for the seeking of his face, verse 8. which being chiefly
done in the duty and exercise of prayer, he does verse 9. put up humble and
earnest suit unto God, for favor and mercy in sundry petitions; and to move
the Lord to grant them, he makes mention of Gods former favor in this kind,
saying, thou have been my help, and shuts up these requests, with notable
testimony of true affiance in God, calling him the God of his salvation.

Here then, in these two verses, we have in general three things to handle:
First, David's sincerity, in readiness to answer Gods command unto his people,
that they should seek his face, verse 8. Secondly, David's humble and earnest
requests, for favor and mercy, answerable to his former profession. Thirdly,
David's motives propounded to God, to move him to grant his requests verse 9.

For the first: David's sincerity, and readiness to answer Gods command, for
the seeking of his face, is this: when thou say, seek ye my face, my heart
said unto thee, thy face O Lord, will I seek. For the right understanding
whereof we must know, that the speech, of sentence in the original to make it
plain, requires the supply of some words, which are fitly added in our bibles:
when thou saidest: as the like is elsewhere, 1 Kings 20.34. And I (said Ahab)
will send thee away with this covenant.

This defect of a word, to be supplied for plainness sake, has caused great
variety amongst translatours. The most ancient of them, as the Septuagint,
Aquila, Simmachus, the vulgar latin, and Jerome (whom most of the Popish
expositors, and the Doway bible do follow) translate the words to this effect:
My face has sought out, or sought thee out, making the word face the
nominative case to the verb sought, whereas our translations make the word face
the accusative case following the verb seek: and, though the words in the
original will bear either of the former, yet seeing both were not intended by
the holy ghost, for this reason do I prefer our own translations before the
ancients, because in the bible, the words in the orginall are ordinarily
translated by the foresaid ancients, as ours have done; as 2 Chronicles. 7.14. and
not once, I take it, in all the bible, can their translation be warranted, by
showing the like disposing of the words, where face is the nominative case to
the verb seek.

Now then, taking the words in that sense, which our translation gives, we have
two things to note in them: first, Gods commandment unto his people for the
seeking of his face: Secondly, David's readiness to yield obedience thereto.
For the first, the words translated, seek ye my face, are in the original, not
a question, but a command; for the verb is of the imparative mood, which
b^ddeth or commands to seek. The thing to besought is Gods face, which here
notes, not simply God himself, as Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have none other Gods
before my face, that is, before me: but Gods grace and favor in his Sanctuary,
where God did manifest his presence, between the Cherubims, above the mercy
seat, there communing with the high priest, of all things given in charge
concerning the children of Israel, Exodus 25.22. toward which the people were
to look, when they sought Gods grace and favor: Mark then, The first
Observation.
God enjoined his people the Jews to seek his face, that is, his grace and
favor in the sanctuary, looking toward the mercy seat, which is sometime
called the face of God, because it was a testimony of his presence among his
people, Psalm. 105.4. Seek ye the Lord, and his strength (that is the ark of the
covenant, Psalm. 132.8.) seek his face continually (that is, the mercy seat, a
blessed testimony of his gracious favor, and presence amongst his people), so
2 Chronicles. 7.14.

The first Reason.
The reason, or ground hereof is threefold: First and principally, by their
seeking to the mercy seat the type he would lead them unto Christ, that was
the truth and substance: for the material tabernacle and temple, was a part of
the worldly sanctuary, and belonged to the ceremonial law, which led them unto
Christ, Gal. 3.24. For the law had but the shadow of good things to come, Heb.
10.1. but the body is Christ, Col. 2.17. And that he was prefigured by the
mercy seat is plain, Romans 3.25. (...)
God set forth Christ Jesus to be a propitiary, through faith in his blood:
giving the same name to Christ Jesus, which the 72. give to the legal mercy
seat: to which also St. John alludeth plainly, (...)
1. John 2.2, 3. saying, Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our sins.

The second Reason.
Secondly, God herein had respect to his own glory: For this seeking of Gods
face, by frequenting the sanctuary, was not only an obedience to his ordinance,
which was very pleasing unto him, 1 Samuel 15.22. but a singular testimony of
affiance in God through Christ, which is the honor of the heart: whereupon he
accounts the neglect of this duty by his people, when they go to false Gods, a
forsaking of him, a thing whereat the very heavens should be astonished, Jer.
2.12, 13. nay more, he accounts in their very denial, that they have any such
God amongst them, 2 Kings 1.6.

Thirdly, God herein had special regard to his peoples goods: for this is the
right way to the fr^i^ion of his favors, which is better then life, Psalm.
63.3. this makes the Church to say; cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved. Psalm. 80.3.7.19. Thus they were on^i^led to three great blessings:
First, to s^^re direction in all important difficulties: as 2 Samuel 21.1.
Secondly, to assured deliverances from all hurtful evils: as 2 Chronicles. 15.2.4.
If you seek him, he will be found of you: and he that finds him finds life,
Prove. 8.33. Thus Ezra found of God a good way, Ezra 8.21, 23.

This serves for instruction, adnonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction; this charge and command of God unto his people to seek his
face shows plainly, that the service of God is not a matter: arbitrary to Gods
people; that is, such a thing as they may at pleasure use, or refuse without
danger of Gods displeasure, and of his heavy judgments thereupon. Under the
law, the Jews were straightly enjoined to seek to the place, which the Lord
their God should chufe, to put his name there, and thither to come, and bring
their burnt offerings, sacrifices, vows, free will offerings, etc. and there
eat, and rejoice before the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 7, 12, 17, 18, 26,
27, 28. and the Lords solemn feasts must every male observe, and appear before
the Lord with his gift or offering, Deutr. 16.16, 17. yea mark a severe
threatening of judgment, for the neglect of Gods worship, profitically
delivered in legal terms, Zech. 14.17. It shall be, that who will not go up,
of all the families of the earth, unto Jerusalem, to worship the King, the Lord
of hoastes, even upon them, shall be no more rain. And in plain ^ormes, the
Apostle says to all Christians, we rese^ving a Kingdom, which cannot be
moved, let us have grace, whereby we way serve God acceptably, with reverence
and godly s^an, Heb. 12.28.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition: First, to inform our selves rightly in the will of God to
to^ching his worship for as under the law, so now we may not do what seems good
in our own eyes (...) 12.8. but what the Lord appoints; ^ls^ God may say to
us, as Christ did to the Jews, ye worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men, Mark 7.7. The true worshippers must worship the
Father in spirit and truth, John 4.23. and that in and through the mediation of
Christ, John 14.6.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, when we know how God will be sought in holy worship, then we must be
careful, that we be such, as shall find him gracious, and favorable unto us:
which estate requires two things of us: First, true repentance in regard of
sins past; for, if we go on in a course of any known sin, we cannot have
society with God; see Psalm. 66.18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, God
will not hear my Prayer. John 9.31. We know that God hears not sinners. The
throne of wickedness has no fellowship with God, Psalm. 94.20. 2 Cor. 6.14,
16. 1 John 1.6. therefore God denies favor to such, Ezekiel. 20.3, 4, Is. 1.15.
Secondly, we must believe in God through Christ, according to the word of the
Gospel, which is the word of the covenant of grace, which being received by
faith, brings us truly into fellowship with God, 1 John 1.3, 4. See Heb. 11.6.

The second Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to Gods people, that make conscience of their
ways in any distress: for God bids them seek his face, wherein he calls them
to him, which is sufficient ground of comfort: as the people said to the blind
man, whom Christ called, Mark 10.49. Be of good comfort, he calls thee. For
so David assures his son Solomon, a little before his death, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If
thou seek him, he would be found of thee. And the true God is the chiefest
good: so as, happy are the people that be so, yea blessed are the people, that
have the Lord for their God. Psalm. 144.15. These people have played the good
Merchants, and found the pearl of price, better then all the world beside,
Mat. 13.45, 46. They may therefore, on far better grounds then Jacob did,
say, I have enough, my son Joseph is yet alive, Genesis 45.28. for Joseph dyed
afterward; but the true God, whom the faithful have for their God, is the
living God, and in Jesus Christ their loving father, who will provide for them,
not an earthly Goshen, as Joseph did for his father and his brethren, but an
heavenly Canaan, even the Kingdom of heaven, as Christ said to his Disciples,
Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom, Luke 12.32. and Luke 22.29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my
Father has appointed unto me. Worldly troubles may hasten us sooner to this
happy estate, but they cannot deprive us of it, Romans 8.35. Therefore, though
the outward man perish, yet look up toward this Kingdom, and lift up thy
heart to the living God, thy loving father in Christ, and the inner man shall
be renewed daily, 2 Cor. 4.14, 15, 16.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be observed, is David's readiness, to yield sincere
obedience to this condition of God, to seek his face: hereto David's heart
answered, thy face O Lord will I seek. Mark here then, that David's heart was
sincerely set on Gods command to seek his face: that is, his grace and favor
in the way he had ordained in his Sanctuary. Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the heart pants
after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O Lord. My soul
thirsts for God, even for the living God, when shall I come and appear
before God. Psalm. 119.20.58. with my whole heart have I sought thee, I
entreated thy favor with my whole heart. The word translated favor, is face
in the original: (...)
and the entreaty here meant is most earnest and importunate: for the word in
the original signifies to make sick or sorry.

The reasons hereof are many and great. First, before this time, the Lord God
had begun a good work in David's heart by his holy spirit, and revealed himself
so far forth to David, that David's heart was inamoured with the Lord, as he
notably expresses, Psalm. 84.1, 2. O how amiable are thy tabernacles -- My
soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God; as Psalm. 42, 1, 2. and Psalm. 143.6, 7. I
stretch forth my hands unto thee, etc. Hear me speedily, my spirit fails;
hide not thy face from me. And that this was the cause of David's seeking Gods
face and favor, see by the like, Cant, 5.4. My beloved put in his hand by the
hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him. The Churches beloved is
Christ the Lord, his hand is his power, showed by the work of his spirit with
the word, as Acts 11.19, 20, 21. when this comes, the bowels earne, as Peter's
did upon the view of Christ's glory. Matthew. 17.2, 4.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David knew, that God had special regard unto the heart, above all
the parts of man, as 1 Samuel 16.7. and therefore calls for the heart of every
one, that is his child. Prove. 23.26. and would have this part begin all the
actions of his service. See for hearing the word Deuteronomy. 32.46. Prove. 4.20, 21.
and for prayer, Hos. 7.14. which when it is wanting, he rejects the service.
Mat. 15.8, 9.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, the excellency of the blessing drew his heart unto it: for Gods face
is Gods favor and loving kindness, wherein is life, Psalm. 20.5. nay, it is
better then life. Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3. Thereupon, Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift up the
light of thy countenance upon us: and Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19. cause the face to
shine, and we shall be saved.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, he knew the seeking of the heart was true and sincere seeking, such
as God required, Ps. 51.6. and such as he will speed, for this and all other
blessings. Jer. 29.13. Ps. 24.3, etc. the way to joy, Ps. 106.3, 4. to
blessedness, Ps. 119.2.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it lets us plainly see the right ground and
foundation of acceptable obedience unto God, in every duty which he requires,
namely, a good heart, an heart set for Gods glory therein: for the heart is the
fountain of the actions good or evil, as Christ teaches, Mat. 12.34, 35. Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. A good man, out of the good
treasure of his heart, brings forth good things; and an evil man, out of the
evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things: which we are the
rather to note, because wicked men, though they cannot justify their actions,
yet they will plead for the goodness of their heart, they have as good an
heart to Godward as the best: which if it were true, Christ was deceived in the
place aforenamed, either make the tree good and his fruit good; or the tree
evil, and his fruit evil, as also Psalm. 78.8, 36, 37. the old Jews were a
stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart
aright -- they scattered him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their
tongue: for their heart was not right with him.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see in David a double property of the godly: First, to make
particular application to himself of general commands, given to all Gods
people: as Psalm. 4^.7. So did Joseph, Genesis 39.9. Secondly, that the heart of
the godly is set to seek the face of God to be made partaker of his grace and
favor in Christ. See David's speech to Zadok when he brought out the ark, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. But most plain it is in that of Paul, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. what
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ, etc.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to get such an heart, as does mind the
commandments of God; and does undertake for obedience thereto: so did David's.
This indeed none has by nature: for every imagination of the thoughts of man's
heart, is evil continually. Genesis 6.5. meaning so long as the heart remains
natural unsa^^ctified. Therefore they, that would have a good heart like
David, must wait upon God in the use of means, ordained by him for the
bettering of man's heart. That it is Gods work is plain, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. I will
take away your stony heart, and give you an heart of flesh: and therefore is
regeneration called a new creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. which is a work proper to God.
Yet God is pleased to do it in the use of means, enjoined to men; which when we
use in obedience to God, we have title to his blessing. Now the means to get a
good heart is, to be exercised much in the word and prayer: for in these
ordinances in the spirit given, which renewes the soul: as for the word is
plain, Acts 10.44. Gal. 3.2. and for prayer, Luke 11.13. Now the obedien^^
manner of using the foresaid means is, first, to break of the course of sin,
Prove. 1.23. for reigning sin and saving grace never dwell together, 1 John 5.6:
Secondly, hunger and thirst after grace and mercy, Is. 55.1 and Is. 44.3.
Revel. 21.6. Thirdly, in the way of obedience unto that we know, Acts 5.32.
wait upon God in the foresaid means, as the impotent people did at the poole of
Bethesda, John 5.2; 3, 4. for they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength, Is. 40.31.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, learn of David to set the heart on work on every action we perform
to God, yea let it begin the work.

This was David's care, as Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed (or prepared) O God, my
hedrt is fixed. Consider the reasons before named.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the upright hearted, when they are not able
to express in words, what they conceive, or to perform for Gods glory, what
they desire. Let them here observe, that there is sweet intercourse between the
Lord and an upright heart, he knows the meaning of the sighs and groans
thereof, Romans 8.26. The heart can speak to God effectually without the help of
the tongue, as, Psalm. 25.1. Nehem. 2.4. and the heart can answer Gods command,
as in this place.

Verse 9. Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger:
thou have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, and God of my
salvation.


The meaning of the words.
HEre David, according to his holy profession in the former verse, makes humble
and earnest suit unto God, that he may not be denied, nor deprived of the
comfort of Gods favor, and the light of his countenance. This suit he puts up
in variety of phrase; for the greater evidence of unfaigned desire, and that
also by couples, as Christ sent forth his Disciples for their mutual
strengthening, and further barketh each couple with a strong ^cuson. The first
doubled suit is this, Hide not thy face far from me, put not away thy servant
in anger. The reasons propounded to strengthen them are two: the first employed
in the title servant: the second expressed, drawn from former experience of
Gods goodness, thou have been mine helper. The second couple or doubled
request is this, leave me not, neither forsake me: and the reason backing them,
is drawn from David's title to God by covenant: thus plainly expressed, O God of
my salvation.

The things then, which we have here to handle, are David's requests, and David's
reasons to enforce the same. His requests are deprecatory against evils he
feared, and in part felt: as the hiding of Gods face, putting away in anger,
Gods leaving and forsaking, which all aiming at one thing, even David's feeling
and fruition of Gods favor, we may in them all well observe; The first
Observation.
That David prayed earnestly, that he might not be deprived of Gods grace and
favor, nor want the light of Gods countenance to shine upon him. Psalm. 13.1.
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy
face from me?

The first Reason.
The reasons hereof are weighty: First, the surpassing worth and excellency of
Gods special favor, whereof he would not be deprived: in it is life. Psalm.
30.5. it is better then life. Psalm. 63.3. now all that a man has, will he give
for his life. Job 2.4.

The second Reason.
Secondly, he knew the displeasure of God was a most heavy and grievous thing,
which no creature is able to bear. Psalm. 76.7. Thou, even thou, art to be
feared: and who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art angry? See Deuteronomy.
32.41, 42. If I whet my glittering sword, etc. Vengeance is his, and he will
recompense. Solomon says, the wrath of a King is as messengers of death. Prove.
16.14. what then is the anger of God?

The third Reason.
Thirdly, David knew his own guilt of sin: both original, Psalm. 51.5. and
actual, Psalm. 51.3, 4. and so must needs conceive that God in justice might
hide his face from him, be angry with him, leave him, and forsake him: as he
says, Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand?

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, he was not ignorant of Gods sovereignty over all, whereby he may,
even for trial of grace, hide his face, and seem angry with his dearest
servants. For who was better then Job? None in his time was like him in all the
earth, an upright man, fearing God, and eschewing evil, Job. 1.8. yet who
endured sorer afflictions? so as he complains, that God hid his face, and
held him for his enemy, that he writ bitter things against him, and made him to
possess the sins of his youth. Job 13.24, 26. yea God himself confesses, that
Satan moved him to destroy Job without a cause, Job 2.3.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction 3. ways. First, see in David, what the godly do think of the
want of Gods favor, surely, that it is a most grievous and bitter thing; as if
a father should put away his child in anger, leave him and forsake him. This
David manifested in his speech to Zadok, when he brought out the ark of God to
carry with them: Carry back (says he) the ark of God into the city, if I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both
it and his habitation. But if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I
am, let him do to me, as seems good unto him. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. This is the
rather to be marked, because the hearts of natural men are not affected with
the least sorrow, for the hiding of Gods face: if they may enjoy temporal
blessings, wherein their natural hearts do take delight, they desire no more,
being of Saul's mind, who when Samuel had told him God had cast him away, yet
desired to be honored before the people, 1 Samuel 15.23.30. he fought for
popular honor, but makes no entreaty for Gods favor. And indeed, how should
natural men do otherwise? The favor of God in Christ is a spiritual
blessing, and the want thereof (expressed by the hiding of Gods face) a
spiritual judgment. These are things unknown, without the work of the spirit:
as 1 Cor. 21.14. and so no marvel if the judgment be not feared, where the
contrary blessing is not discerned, nor desired.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here, that the true child of God may, for a time, want the
feeling of Gods special favor, and remain under the sense of Gods
displeasure, as left and forsaken of God. See it plain in David, Psalm. 38.1, 2,
etc. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10, in the complaint of the Church. Psalm. 44.23, 24.
Arise, cast us not off for ever, wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest
our affliction and oppression: and Lament. 3.1. to 19. I am the man that has
seen affliction, by the rod of his wrath: He has led me, and brought me into
darkness, etc. and verse. 43, 44. Thou have covered with anger, and persecuted
us: thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers should not pass
through. And Jobs complaint of this estate, is as plain as any, Job 13.24, 26.
Nay more, did not our blessed Savior, in the sense of his manhood, complain
hereof? Matthew. 7.46. Now if God do so with the green tree, what shall be done
in the dry? Luke 23.31. yet remember, this distress is but for a time, Psalm.
30.5. Isa. 54.7, 8.

The third Use for instruction.
Thirdly, here see, that prayer is a blessed and sanctified means, wherein the
child of God may comfortably wait for the blessing of Gods favor, in the want
thereof, and for the removing of his anger under the signs thereof. See the
promise of God himself in this case, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. If
I shut heaven, that there be no rain, etc. -- If my people do humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, I will hear from heaven, and will
forgive their sins, and will heal their land.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two way: First, that we examine our selves, how our
hearts esteem of the want of feeling Gods special love, and favor in Christ.
If we judge it as David did, a grievous thing and b^tter, we then have
undoubtedly some work of the spirit, a^ least in legal compunction, breaking
up the fallow ground of the heart, and so preparing it for the seed of grace as
Acts 2.37, 38. But if we slight it over without trouble or sorrow, as the
joviall fellows of the world do, who delight in doing evil, and sport
themselves in the frowardness of the wicked: as, Prove. 2.14. then certainly
our case is woeful, we are not so near the state of grace, as were Cain and
Judas, who were touched with legal remorse, upon the conscience of their
heinous sins: as we may see, Genesis 4.13, 14. Mat. 27.3.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, Gods children may hence learn not to be dismayed, for the temporary
hiding of Gods face, or sustaining of his anger: for nothing herein befalls
them, but that which appertains to man, even to Gods dear children, 1 Cor.
10.13. As we may see in Jod, David, Ethan the Ezrahite, Ps. 88.1, 2, etc. How
Gods children must behave themselves, when he hides his face from them.
Herein let us follow their godly practice, which was this: First, to consider
their ways: Psalm. 119.59. that so they might find out their sins, that
bring the foresaid evils. Secondly, with sorrow and grief of heart, to confess
against themselves: Psalm. 32.4, 5. Job 42.6. Thirdly, to cry earnestly for
mercy, as for life and death, Psalm. 51.1, 2. Psalm. 143.1, 2. Fourthly, walk in
new obedience: Psalm. 119.8, 16. I will keep thy statutes, O forsake me not
utterly. I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. Lastly, in the use of Gods ordinances, the word and prayer, to wait
for comfort: as, Psalm. 42.5.11. Psalm. 43.5. Read, hear, and meditate on Gods
word: as, Psalm. 119.13, etc. yea also watch, and wait in prayer, Col. 4.2. and
if the fear be great, humble thy soul with fasting: as, Psalm. 35.13. Limit not
the holy one of Israel, for time or measure of any blessing, as the carnal
Israelites did, Psalm. 78.41. but with Job wait all our life long, Job 14.14.
Say with the Church, Mich. 7.7, 8, 9. I will look unto the Lord, I will wait
for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me -- When I fall, I shall rise,
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute judgment for me: He will bring me forth to the light, and
I shall behold his righteousness.

The reasons propounded by David, to move God to vouchsafe his favor, and not
hide his face, etc. are three? The first is implied in the title servant,
wherewith David styles himself in the second branch of this petition: put not
thy servant away in anger. Where, in David's judgment this is plain, The second
Observation.
That to be Gods servant, is a good ground, and step toward the attainment of
Gods favor: it is that which gives title to mercy, in time of trouble inward
or outward: Psalm. 31.15, 16. Deliver me from the hand of mine enemies -- make
thy face to shine upon thy servant, save me for thy mercies sake. Psalm. 69.17.
Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble. Psalm. 86.4. Rejoice
the soul of thy servant. Isa. 65.13, 14. Thus says the Lord God. Behold my
servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: Behold, my servants shall drink,
but ye shall be thirsty: Behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed: Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart.

The Reason.
The reason is plain: Every true servant of God is certainly in covenant with
God, by an holy calling, 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is called in the Lord, being a
servant, is the Lords freeman: likewise also he, that is called being free, is
Christ's servant: so that whether he be bond or free, by his holy calling he
belongs to God. Now being thus in covenant with God, he is entitled to all
Gods blessings in Christ, and so to the fruition of Gods favor. Psalm. 89.4,
20, 21, 24. I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servent -- I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him
-- with whom my hand also shall be established -- my faithfulness and my mercy
shall be with him -- my mercy will I keep with him for ever, and my covenant
shall stand fast with him.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction
For instruction, two ways. First, that it is a blessed, and happy thing, to be
Gods true servant. Consider what the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's servants,
1 Kings 10.8. Happy are these thy servants, etc. Now Christ Jesus is greater
then Solomon. Matthew. 12.42. and so a better Master. Good earthly Masters, will
honor good servants: as Pro. 27.18. He that waits on his Master shall be
honored. Prove. 17.2. A wise servant shall have a portion, or inheritance,
among the brethren. But how ever some earthly Masters may be Nabals, and
Labans, yet God will not be so. John 12, 26 Where I am, there shall also my
servant be. If any man serve me, him will my father honor. See Luke 12.37. The
watchful servants are blessed, their Master will make them to sit down to
meat, and will come forth and serve them: as, Matthew. 25.21, 23. Well done good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a few things, I will make
thee ruler over many things, enter into the joy of the Lord.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see the great error of natural men, that judge it a vain thing
to serve God: as Mal. 3.14. Job 21.15. which, to be the common thought of most
men, their behavior does plainly bewray: for mark their carriage, for diligence
in Gods service on the Lords day, compared with the pains, and pleasure also,
they take about worldly commodities in the week day: their behavior says
aloud, that their heart thinks Gods service is a vain thing, else they would
take more pains and pleasure therein: undoubtedly they do not conceive of, nor
believe the testimony of God, touching the prosperity of his servants: for God
takes pleasure therein, Ps. 35.27. else he would never undertake for their
direction, in the way they ought to walk, for their provision, for all needful
blessings, for their protection, from all hurtful evils, and for their
remuneration, both here and for ever, as the Scripture says he does.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves first, to the wicked, to beware of wronging Gods
servants, and to refrain from that course: See Acts 5.38, 39. Gamaliels
counsel to the rulers of the Jews, about the Apostles, and his reason, lest
they be found even to fight against God: as Christ said to Saul, Act. 9.4, 5.
why persecutest thou me, etc. see Numb. 12.8. wherefore then were ye not afraid
to speak against my servant Moses? and Ps. 105.14, 15. Zech. 2.8. And if ever
they desire the privileges of Gods servants, they must labor to get into
covenant with God, doing as Saul did. Acts 9.5, 6. First, desire to know
Christ, then subject themselves to his holy will, and wait in prayer for grace
and mercy. See Acts 9.9, 11.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, Gods children, that have entered covenant with God, must be careful
to show themselves Gods servants: for profession without practice is nothing
but hypocrisy, making us like the Church of Sardis, who had a name to be
alive, The properties of good servants.
but was dead, Rev. 3.1. Therefore we must get the certain and infallible
properties of good servants, which are partly inward, and partly outward. The
inward are good affections, which are specially three. First, fear and
reverence, Mal. 1.6. Psalm. 2.11. Secordly, conscionable obedience to his
revealed will. Reason from Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. and from the Centurions confession
Matthew. 8.9. as from the less to the greater. Without this, none are
acknowledged for servants, Luke 6.46. This must be seen, both in eschewing
evil, and doing good: as God says of his servant Job, Job. 1.8, 9. yea, we
must show our well-doing, in improving our Masters talents, Matthew. 25.23, 25.
in fighting for him and for the faith, John 18.36. Jude 3. in waiting for his
coming, Luke 12.36. And in all these, we must be servants in ordinary, not
only retainers that serve God by fits. Thirdly, we must patiently suffer his
corrections, Heb. 12.9, 10. Reason from 1 Pet. 2.18, etc. as from the less to
the greater. Fourthly, we must praise God for his mercy, Psalm. 134.1. Psalm.
50.23. Psalm. 119.175.

The second reason, which David uses to move the Lord not to hide his face,
etc. is plainly expressed, drawn from his own experience of Gods former
mercies, in times of trouble, saying: Thou have been my help, that is, when as
heretofore I have been in distress and danger, thou have helped me, and
therein showed thy favor toward me. Now hereupon, says David: knowing thee
to be unchangeable, I appeal unto thee, for like mercy, that I have formerly
felt.

In this reason we have two things to note. First, the thing confessed by
David, simply considered by it self: Secondly, with reference to the end, for
which David here propounds it. For the first, the thing confessed by David,
simply considered, is this.

The third observation.
That God was David's helper, and so had been, Psalm. 54.4. Behold, God is mine
helper. Psalm. 3.3. Thou Lord art a shield for me: my glory, and the lifter up
of my head: Psalm. 30.10. Hear Lord, and have mercy upon me, Lord be thou mine
helper.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is threefold. First, Gods free grace and mercy, receiving
David into covenant, and therein undertaking to become his helper and
deliverer. Psalm. 89.3.21, 22. I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have
sworn unto David my servant -- with whom my hand shall be established -- the
enemy shall not exact upon him, etc. And this is answerable to that, which God
says to his people in general, Psalm. 50.5.15.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David put his trust in God, whereby he was entitled to Gods help in
trouble. Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength, and my shield, mine heart trusted
in him, and I am helped: for indeed to such God becomes an helper. Psalm. 37.39,
40. Psalm. 33.18, 19.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, David walked before God in conscionable obedience, which gave him
title to this blessing, to have the Lord to be his helper. Psalm. 18.16, 17, 18.
He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters. He delivered me
from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me -- they prevented me in the
day of my calamity: but the Lord was my stay, etc. -- ^ers. 21. For I have kept
the ways of the Lord, etc. which was answerable to Gods general promise,
Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 7 and Psalm. 81.13, 14, 15, 16.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, in that, which David professes, we may see a notable
privilege of the godly, who be in covenant with God, do love and fear God, and
trust in him, and testify the same by conscionable obedience, these have this
prerogative, that the true God, is their helper: which, to be a great blessing,
is plainly affirmed, with very significant illustration. Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5. for
Princes are potent earthly helpers, but vain is their help without the Lord:
for their breath is in their nostrils, but the God of Jacob is the living God,
who does neither slumber nor sleep, Ps. 121.1, 2, 3, etc. and so is the best
helper, as we may see at large, Psalm. 91. thoroughout, especially, verse. 9.14,
15. whence he is by way of excellence, styled the deliverer, Romans 11.26.
because, as Nebuchadnezzar said, none can deliver as he does, Dan. 3.28, 29.
which is plain also by Daniels delivery from the Lions den, Dan. 6. which made
Paul to say, though we be compassed about on every side, yet we are not in a
strait, etc. 2 Cor. 4.8. for the way of help is never shut to the prayer of
faith, Psalm. 50.15. Nay, man's extremity is Gods opportunity; and therefore
has. God lessened outward means, for the plainer evidence of his own power,
Judge. 7.4.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First, to labor diligently, to get into
our selves the grounds of this prerogative, in having the true God for our
helper, as David had. The way hereto we may see in David: First, get truly and
rightly into covenant with God, and rest not in the outward title of
profession, having only the outward seals thereof: for so far went the foolish
Virgins, Matthew. 25.2, 3. and Judas, and Simon Magus: but as Paul said of the
Jews, Romans 2.28, 29. their outward circumcision did not make them such, no more
does our outward baptism, as 1 Pet. 3.21. Therefore we must get the ingrafting
grace of true faith, which purifies the heart, Acts 15.7. wherein stands true
inward baptism: for where God establishes the covenant of grace, he writes
the law in the inward parts, Heb. 8.10, 12. Then professing this estate, of
being in covenant with God, get the inward saving graces of love and fear, and
from them bring forth the fruits of new obedience, as David did, and the
prerogative of having God for our helper, shall be assured unto us, for he has
said, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.5.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to watch carefully and constantly against that thing, which will
deprive us of this privilege, and that is sin: for it is a work of
darkness, wherewith God will have no society. Psalm. 94.20. 1 John 1.6. It
separates between God and us. Isa. 59.2. Whereupon the Lord said to his own
people the Jews, he would deliver them no more out of the hands of their
enemies. Judge. 10.13, 14. Therefore with David, we must hide Gods sayings in
our hearts, that we may not sin against him, Psalm. 119.11. and so strive to
keep our selves from our iniquity. Ps. 18.23.

Secondly, consider this prerogative professed by David, in having God for his
helper, with reference to the end, for which he does here mention it, which is,
to move the Lord not to hide his face from him, etc. because formerly he has
showed himself gracious and favorable toward him: and therein this is plain.

The fourth Observation.
That David makes his own experience of Gods help, in former evils, a ground of
prayer, for present favor, in his renewed troubles. When David was in the
wilderness of Judah, flying from Saul's persecution, Psalm. 63. the title; in
the 7. verse he pleads thus for mercy; Because thou have been my help,
therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. Psalm. 77.2, 5. In the
day of my trouble I sought the Lord -- I considered the days of old. Psalm
89.49. Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses. Psalm. 71.4, 5, 6. Deliver
me, O Lord, out of the hand of the wicked -- for thou art my hope, O Lord God,
thou art my trust, even from my youth: by thee I have been holden up from the
womb. Verse. 17, 18. O God, thou have taught me from my youth. Now also, when I
am old, and gray headed, O God, forsake me not.

The reason hereof is plain: David knew, the true God was unchangeable, and
immutable, The Reason.
not only in his essence, but also in his love, favor, and mercy toward his
elect, who are his redeemed, in and by Christ Jesus, with whom his covenant of
grace is everlasting, so as he will never turn away from them to do them good.
Jer. 32.40. Whereupon he says, I am the Lord, and I change not, and ye sons
of Jacob are not confounded. Mal. 3.6. For as much as he loved his own which
were in the world, to the end he loved them. John 13.1. For though he repent of
temporal gifts and blessings, as of making of Saul King; 1 Samuel 15.11. yet his
gifts and calling (which concern salvation in Christ) are without repentance.
Now David's holy calling, entituling him to this covenant, he might plead, for
the renewing of Gods favor in present troubles, upon the sense and feeling
thereof in former times.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: learn here in David one notable way of comfort in time of
trouble: to wit, search and try, whether God has been thine helper, from under
former evils, for then thou may with David, plead for present help and
comfort: so does the Church in their renewed troubles, after their return from
the captivity of Babylon. Psalm. 85.1, etc. Lord, thou have been favorable to
thy land, thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob, thou have forgiven
the iniquity of thy people -- will thou not revive us again -- show us thy
mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation. So Ps. 44.1, 9, 23. We have heard
with our ears, our fathers have declared unto us, what work thou did in their
days, in the times of old -- But thou have cast us off, and put us to
shame -- Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord, arise, cast us not off for ever,
etc. Isa. 51.9, 10, 11. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord -- Art
thou not it, which has dried the Sea, the waters of the great deep --
Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, etc. -- and Isa. 63.11, 12,
13, 14.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves notably for every child of God, in time of
trouble: become a follower of David, in observing Gods former mercy in helping
us, and so we shall be encouraged, in renewed evils. Did not David thus animate
himself to fight with Goliath? 1 Samuel 17.34. and St. Paul did so encourage
himself against troubles, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18. At my first answer no man stood
with me; but all men forsook me -- notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me -- and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. And the
Lord shall deliver me from every evil work -- Now no true child of God can
want experience of former help, when he may strongly reason for his comfort,
from the greater to the less, as David did. Psalm. 56.13. Thou have delivered
my soul from death: will thou not deliver my feet from falling? So may the true
child of God say, thou, by thy holy calling to the faith, have delivered me
from the power of darkness, in the bondage of sin and Satan, as Col. 1.13. and
will thou not deliver me from this or that carnal evil? If God spared not his
own son, but gave him for us, how shall he not with him him give us all
things? Romans 8.32. Indeed the signs of Gods favor may be hid sometimes from
Gods dearest servants, as Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever,
etc. But we must then consider the cause, which is either correction for sin,
or trial of grace, in which the way to comfort, is to repent of sin, and to
labor for patience, remembering that God does help, not only when he gives
deliverance out of evil, but even when he gives strength of grace to bear it:
as 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Heb. 5.7.

The third thing propounded by David, to move the Lord, not to hide his face
from him, nor forsake him, is David's title to the blessing of salvation from
God, by virtue of the covenant, wherein he stood with God, even for this
blessing, which he thus expresses. O God of my salvation: where by salvation
he means the great salvation, which is eternal life by Jesus Christ, Heb.
2.3. and with it temporal preservation in this world, therefore do not hide
thy face, do not forsake me.

The fifth Observation.
In this reason we have two things to note. First, the thing professed by David:
secondly, the end for which he mentions it. For the first, the thing
professed by David is his particular and personal claim, unto salvation from
God for himself, O God of my salvation: thou art unto me the God of salvation,
upon thee I rely, both for life eternal in heaven, and temporal preservation
here on earth. Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my
deliverer -- the horn, that is, the strength of my salvation. Psalm. 25.5. Thou
art the bed of my salvation. Psalm. 51.14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O
God, thou God of my salvation. Psalm. 62.6, 7. He only is my rock, and my
salvation -- In God is my salvation, and my glory.

The first Reason.
The true reason hereof is. First, Gods mere grace and favor in Christ, freely
accepting of David into covenant with himself, whereby he becomes the God of
salvations unto him, as the Church calls God. Psalm. 68.20. See Psalm. 89.3,
21, 36. I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant -- with whom my hand shall be established -- He shall cry unto me, thou
art my father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. And hereupon David says,
I am thine, save me. Psalm. 1^9.94.

The second Reason.
Secondly, with the favor of acceptance into covenant, God vouchsafed to work
in David's heart such inward graces, as did maintain and continue unto David
sure title to Gods salvation: as first, trust and affiance in God. Psalm. 86.2.
Save thy servant, that trusts in thee. Psalm. 25.2. O my God, I trust in thee.
Secondly, love unfeigned, whereby his heart did cleave to God. Psalm. 18.1, 2. I
will love thee, O Lord my strength. The Lord is my rock. Thirdly, David did
fear God, and reverence him in his heart, Psalm. 119.12^. My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, I am afraid of thy judgments. Now he will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him: he will hear their cry, and save them.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition, and for comfort.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction, see that it is a right and privilege of them, that be truly
Godly, by particular and special faith. to apply Gods blessings of the
covenant to themselves: so David did ordinarily, and Paul, Gal. ^.20. I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that, which I have
committed unto him against that day. Now herein he is a pattern to believers, 1 Timothy 1.16. Which is the rather to be marked, because Papists deny there is any
such special faith, for particular and personal assurance, of the great
blessings of the covenant, but only a general applying of them, as they
belong to Gods Church. But so the truly godly, should go no further, then
wicked men, nay then the very devils do: for they know that there is a God, and
believe his goodness in Christ belongs to his Church. Neither is it true, that
particular assurance, of the many blessings of the covenant, is only a fruit
of special and extraordinary revelation: for the Scriptures testify it comes
from true particular ordinary saving graces: as faith, 1 John 5.13, and love, 1
John 3.14.

The use for admonition.
For admonition: every one, that desires the comfort of this estate, must labor
to testify the truth of being in covenant with God, by those graces, that did
entitle David to the great blessings of the covenant, even true faith in God,
through Christ, true love, and true fear of God. The getting of faith is in the
reverend exercise of the Word, Romans 10.17. to pray humbly, and earnestly, for
the work of the spirit, which is the worker of this grace, 2 Cor. 4.13. The
grace of love to God in our hearts, is a fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5.22. and so
gotten, in and by the reverend use of the same means, the word and prayer,
whereby the spirit is given, with which we must also join endeavor, to feel the
love of God in Christ toward us, in justification and sanctification, and then
shall we out of doubt love him, as 1 John 4.19. And the grace of reverence and
fear is a fruit of the same spirit, Isa. 11.2. and so gotten as the other, when
by the word we are taught rightly to conceive of God, and of our selves.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to those, that, being in covenant with God, do
testify the truth of their faith in Christ, of their love and fear of God:
which is rightly done by the fruits of these graces, according to Christ's rule,
The tree is known by his fruits. Matthew. 12.33. Now the sure fruit of true faith
is the saving work of the word. 1 These. 2.13. The fruit of love is obedience,
in doing good for Gods glory. 1 John 5.3. The fruit of fear is obedience to
God, in eschewing evil. Exodus 20.20. Prove. 8.13. Prove. 14.27.

Secondly, consider David's claim to have God for the God of his salvation, with
the end, for which he does here make it: which is to move God, not to hide his
face from him, nor to leave him, nor forsake him, and then this is plain, The
sixth Observation.
That they, that have God for the God of their salvation, have a good ground of
assurance, that he will not forever hide his face from them, nor leave them,
nor forsake them. I say forever, because, for a long time, God may hide his
face, and seem to leave and forsake: as, Psalm. 13.1, 2. How long will thou
forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face, etc. And, Psalm.
77.7, 8. Will the Lord cast off for ever? Is his mercy clean gone? But, if they
be his by covenant, he will certainly return, and show mercy, see, Psalm. 30.5.
His anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life: weeping may endure for
a night, but joy comes in the morning. See, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. Zion says,
the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Can a woman forget
her sucking child, etc. Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but in great mercies will I gather thee, etc.

The reason is from Gods faithfulness, The reason.
in the covenant of grace in Christ, which is established in the very heavens.
Psalm. 89.2. Faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it 1 These. 5.24.
If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy
2.13. If we mark well, the causes of Gods forsaking those, that be truly in
covenant, are ever temporary, answerable whereunto m^st the forsaking it self
be, to wit, correction for sin, and trial of grace: for they, that are
effectually called, are born of God, and so cannot sin unto death, 1 John
3.9. and 5.18. unto whom Gods corrections are, with instruction, the way of
life: for thereby God humbles them for their sins, and so brings them to
repentance, as, Jer. 31.18, 19. And the end, which God made with Job, shows
that Gods trials of grace make them come forth as gold. Job 23.10.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see here a plain evidence of great gain in true godliness:
as, 1 Timothy 4.8. and 6.6. for their piety gives evidence of their being in
covenant, and then their troubles, though they may be many and grievous, yet
certainly they are but temporary: as, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all. Psl. 37.7. Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace: so
that a man shall say, verily, there is fruit for the righteous. Psalm. 58.11.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to every one, that lives in the Church, to give diligence to
get this estate, to have the true God for the God of our salvation: then we may
be sure, Gods leaving and forsaking will not be overlong. Psalm. 119.8. Now
this requires, first, true repentance in forsaking all sin in respect of
dominion: for, Psalm. 119.155. Salvation is far from the wicked. 1 John 1.6.
Then get the fore named graces of faith, love, and fear, and certainly the
covenant of grace in Christ shall be stable unto us.

Verse. 10. When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
up.


The meaning of the words.
IN the former Verse, the Prophet David prayed, that the Lord would not leave
him, nor forsake him, moving God thereto by this, that God was the God of his
salvation: and here, prosecuting the same matter, he testifies his affiance and
confidence in God, for the enjoying of the blessing there prayed for: which
testimony he sets forth, by way of comparison, preferring Gods tender care
over him, for his preservation, before the care of his own parents, both father
and mother, whom common nature bound to be dearly and tenderly careful over
him: saying, when (or although) my father and my mother forsake me, yet the
Lord will gather, or take me up.

Which words being plain, we have in them two points to note, the first
implied, the second expressed. The thing implied is this:

The first Observation.
That David's father and mother, and so his dearest and nearest friends, might
leave him and forsake him, in times of distress. Psalm. 38.11. My lovers and my
friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off. Psalm.
88.8.18. Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: thou have made me
an abomination unto them -- Lover and friend have thou put far from me, and
mine acquaintance into darkness: as if he should have said, now I am in
misery, I cannot see them, they will not see me.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, their fear of Saul their King, who was a
furious bloody-minded man, as may appear (beside his inhumane carriage to
David, whose works toward Saul were very good, as 1 Samuel 19.4, 5, 10, 11.) by
his barbarous dealing with the Lords Priests, whom he put to the sword, both
men, and women, children, and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep,
without any just cause. 1 Samuel 22.18, 19. Yea further, by his unnatural
dealing with his own son, whom he did not only shamefully revile, but must
unnaturally seek to slay, for his love and kindness unto David. 1 Samuel 20.30,
31, 33. Hereupon David's friends might justly fear his cruel hands: for they
might say, if he would not spare his own son for David's sake, what will he do
to us, if we show David any kindness? And hence no doubt it was, that David's
father and mother, and all their house, went down to David, when he was in the
cave of Adullam, that they might be out of danger from Saul's fury, 1 Samuel
22.1, 3.

The second Reason.
Secondly, this might befall David by divine disposition, for the trial of
David's faith and patience, as in like case it befell Job, Job 19.13, 14, 19. He
has put my brethren far from me, and my acquaintance are verily estranged
from me. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me --
All my friends abhorred me, and they whom I loved, are turned against me.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it shows most plainly, how vain and uncertain
the help of man is, in time of need. Psalm. 60.11. Give us help from trouble,
for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 62.9. Surely, men of low degree are vanity,
and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are
altogether lighter then vanity.

A double ground of man's uncertainty.
The vanity and uncertainty of man's help, stands upon a double ground in man:
first, the mutability of his affection, whose greatest favor may soon be
changed into sore displeasure: as Ahashuerus was toward Haman, whom he highly
honored for a while, Hest. 3.1, 2. but soon after, caused him to be hanged
upon a gallows, which Haman had prepared for Mordecai, of 50. cubits high.
Hest. 7.9, 10. and in Ammon toward Tamar, whose future hatred of her, after he
had ravished her, exceeded his former love, wherewith he had loved her. 2 Sa.
13.15. Secondly, upon the instability of his condition, whereby in his best
estate he is altogether vanity, walking in a vain show. Ps. 39.5, 6. For what
man lives, and shall not see death? Ps. 89.48. Now when death comes, he
returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish, Ps. 146.4. the^
can he do nothing for himself, less for others.

Secondly, see in David, what may be the case of Gods own dear children, The
second Use for instruction.
even to be forsaken of their nearest and dearest earthly friends, in time of
distress. Ps. 68 9, 20. I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien
unto my mothers children -- I looked for some to take pity, but there was none,
and for comforters, but I found none. So Paul complains 2 Timothy 4.16. At my
first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: Holy Job says, To
him that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend: but he forsakes
the fear of the almighty. My brethren have dealt deceitfully, as a brook, and
as stream of brooks, they pass away. Job. 6.14, 15. Yea, this was the lot and
portion of our blessed Savior, at his apprehension, Matthew 26.56. then all the
Disciples forsook him, and fled.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First, that seeing father and mother may
forsake us, we put not our trust in men, be they never so near or dear unto us,
in nature. This is David's counsel, Psalm. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes,
nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help: remember his mortality,
there mentioned, Verse. 4. His breath goes forth, be returns to his earth: in
that very day his thoughts perish. And add thereto the consideration of his
mutability in affection before mentioned, with the Lords threatening of a curse
to him, that trusts in man. Jer. 17.5.6. Indeed, we may trust to men, as the
means, but not as the foundation of our help.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, that we be not dismayed, when our friends do fail us: we see, by Job,
David, and our Savior Christ, that it is no strange thing. Reason as Christ
does, Matthew. 10.24, 25. The disciple is not above his master, etc. and Luke
23.31. If they have done these things in a green tree, what shall be done in
the dry?

The second observation.
The second thing, to be here observed, is purposely intended, that when David's
nearest and dearest friends forsook him, then the Lord would gather him up.
Psalm. 142.4, 5, 7. I looked on my right hand, and behold: but there was no man
that would know me: refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul. I cried unto
the Lord, thou art my refuge -- thou will deal bountifully with me. Psalm. 4.8.
Thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. Psalm. 62.6, 9. He only is my rock,
and my salvation: he is my defense -- surely men of low degree are vanity, and
men of high degree are a lie.

The first Reason.
The reason of this special favor from God to David was threefold. First,
David stood rightly and truly in covenant with God: he was one of Gods people,
and had the Lord for his God, and so was interested in Gods special
providence, for protection and preservation. See Psalm. 89.3, 20, 21, 22, 28,
35. I have made a covenant with my chosen, etc.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David trusted in God. Psalm. 7.1. O Lord my God, in thee do I put my
trust. Now they that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, that stands
fast forever. Psalm. 125, 1. The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed: a
refuge in times of trouble. And they, that know thy name, will put their trust
in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee. Psalm. 9.9, 10.
God is he that saves by his right hand, them that put their trust in him, from
those that rise up against them, Psalm. 17.7. See, Psalm. 91. 1, etc. He, that
dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty, etc.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, David was holy in life and conversation, which gave him good assurance
of special preservation. See Psalm. 18.17, 23. He delivered me from my strong
enemies -- For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God. The Lord forsakes not his Saints. Psalm. 37.28.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, see here, in that which David professes, the
stability of Gods love toward those that be truly his, as David was, for when
their nearest and dearest friends do forsake them, yet God will not. Hebr.
13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. John 13.1.
Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. John
6.39. This is the fathers will, which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing. This we should observe and mark, to strengthen
our souls against the Popish and Arminian error, of final and total falling
from true grace. But blessed be God, it is as false, as uncomfortable, crossing
the will of the father, and the fidelity of Christ Jesus, before named, as also
the work of the spirit, which is permanent, as John 4.14. with John 7.37, 38,
39. If any that profess true religion, and give good hopes for a time, do fall
away, they show by their apostaste, that they began in hypocrisy, or at the
best, were but like the stony ground, who believed for a time, Luke 8.13.
having only an humane acquired faith, not that precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.
which is infused by the spirit, Gal. 5.22. who is therefore called the spirit
of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. and the spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.7. greater then the
evil spirit which is in the world, 1 John 4.4. abiding in Gods children, 1
John 2.27. even for ever, John 14.16, 17. being, in the operation of saving
grace, a fountain of living water, springing up unto eternal life, whereof
whosoever drinks, shall never be more a thirst. John 4.14. This is that free
spirit, which does establish the godly, in the state of grace, and is Gods seal
and earnest in their hearts. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

Obj. But the godly may commit mortal sins, as David did, in adultery and
murder: now an adulterer is the member of an harlot, 1 Cor. 6.13. and a
murderer is the child of the devil, John 8.44. 1 John 3.12. was he not then
fallen from grace?

Answ. It cannot be denied, but for these heinous sins, David was justly under
the wrath of God, till by the renewing of his repentance, and faith in the
Messiah, he obtained atonement. But yet, under the guilt of these sins, he
differed much from the impenitent and unregenerate, not only in regard of Gods
certain purpose to renew him by repentance, and restore him into favor but
even in present state of soul, two ways: First, that the seed of grace did
then remain, 1 John 3.9.

Secondly, that he sinned not with full consent, Romans 7.17, 19, 20. and so
could not be so totally under the curse, as the unregenerate are. For the
better conceiving whereof, we must know, that every regenerate man, whilst he
is in this world, has in him both flesh and spirit, inbred corruption, and
renewed grace, and so consists (as it were) of a double person, the old man,
which is corrupt through deceivable lusts, and the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.22, 24. Now when the
child of God commits sin, even grievous sins, as David did, to speak as
Paul does of himself, it is not he that does it, so far forth as he is
regenerate, but he, so far forth as he is corrupt, which Paul calls sin
that dwells in him, Romans 7.20. His service of sin is with and from the
flesh, but in his mind renewed, he serves the law of Christ, Verse. 25. which
shows, that grace in the habit, and seed, and root does then remain, when and
while corruption, in sundry particular actions, does prevail. Which to be true,
is plain also by St. Peter, who denied his Master with cursing and swearing
(which in it self was a fearful mortal sin) Matthew. 26.72, 74. even after that
comfortable speech of Christ unto him; Simon, behold. Satan has desired to
have you, that he may sift you, as wheat, But I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not. Luke 22.31, 32. Shall we say he now, by denying his Master lost
all grace; when as Christ had prayed for the continuance of his faith? nay
rather acknowledge, that this failing was in this particular act, not in the
habit and seed of grace.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here the happiness of the godly, who indeed alone have the Lord
for their God: for he is the strong and stable helper, who will safely keep
those that be his, when all other helps do fail, Ps. 37.28, 33. He forsakes
not his Saints -- The Lord will not leave him in the hand of the wicked. Verse.
24. Though he fall, yet he shall not be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand: Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers them out of all. See Job 8.20. God will not cast away an
upright man. Job 5.13, 14. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and in seven
there shall no evil touch thee. Happy therefore is the man, that has the God
of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. Psalm. 146.5. Happy is
that people, that is in such a case, yea happy is that people, whose God is the
Lord. Psalm. 144.15.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually to move every one, that desires this
comfortable state, that when dearest and nearest friends do forsake him, yet
then the Lord may take him up to give all diligence, both to get and preserve
those graces in his soul, and also to testify, that behavior in life, which
did entitle David to this happy estate: as namely, to get truly into covenant
with God, to trust in the Lord, and to show the truth hereof by new and true
obedience. Men in the world will serve hard Prentiships, for temporal and
worldly freedoms, in corporations, and privileged places: how much more
should we take pains, for this great privilege of the citizens of Sion, to
have the Lord for our God.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the godly, in times of distress they must
call to mind this property in God, to be more firm and faithful, to those
that be his, then natural parents are to their dearest children. For which,
besides this text, see, Isa, 49.14, 15. Sion said, the Lord has forken me,
etc. with Luke 11.13. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
your children: how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit to
them that ask him? Let us make sure that we be rightly in covenant with God,
and then we may say with David, The Lord is on my side, I will not fear, what
can man do unto me? Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want --
Yea though I walk thorovgh the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil, for thou art with me. Psalm. 23.1, 4.

Verse. 11. Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a plain path: because of
mine enemies.


Verse. 12. Deliver me not over to the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses
are risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.


The meaning of the words.
IN these two Verses, the Prophet David returns again unto prayer, and begs of
God both instruction and direction in regard of his enemies, Verse. 11. and also
preservation out of their hands, in regard of their unconscionable dealing, and
cruel minds toward him, Verse. 12.

For instruction and direction thus he prays; Teach me thy way, O Lord, and
lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies. For the meaning, Gods way in
Scripture is taken diversely: sometime for his own administrrtion and doing or
working. as Job 26.14. Lo these are part of his ways: having spoken of many of
his mavelous works in the former verses, 7, 8, etc. as afterward, Behemoth
is called the chief of the ways of God, that is, of his works. Job 40.19.
Psalm. 77.19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, thy
footsteps are not known: which has reference to Verse. 14, 15. Thou art the God
that do wonders, etc. Psalm. 103.7. He made known his ways unto Moses, his
acts unto the children of Israel. Otherwhile, and most commonly, Gods way is
that, wherein he would have man to walk: that is, the course of life and
dealing, which he would have men to take: as Jethro says to Moses, Exodus
18.20. Thou shall teach them ordinances and laws, and shall show them the way,
wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. See Jer. 42.3. Herein
David desires to be instructed of God. Yea further, he would have God, not
only to teach him the way, but to lead him in a plain path; that is, such a
path as is right and strait without any crookedness: and such is the way of
Gods word, the course and behavior, which God there prescribes them: as Pro.
8.6. The opening of my mouth shall be right things: (...)
the same word, which is here used, further expounded, Verse. 8, 9. All the
words of my mouth, are in righteousness, etc. And this favor he desires,
because of his enemies, that is, of such as did observe and watch him, for
advantage to do him hurt.

The first Observation.
In the words thus understood, note two things. First, his double request made
to God: secondly, the reason of them both. For his requests, the first is this;
David beseeches God to teach him that way of his, wherein he would have him to
walk. So Psalm. 5.8. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness -- make thy way
plain before my face. Psalm. 25.4. Show me thy ways, O Lord, Psalm. 143.8. Cause
me to know the way, wherein I should walk. Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O
Lord.

The reasons hereof are three. First, in regard of God, The 1. reason.
to glorisie him, by seeking unto him for this blessing: for God undertakes to
teach the godly that be in covenant with him, as it is written in the Prophets,
and they shall be all taught of God, John 6.45. Psalm. 32.8. I will instruct
thee, and teach thee in the way, which thou shall go. Prove. 4.11. I have taught
thee in the way of wisdom.

The second Reason.
Secondly, in regard of himself sundry ways. First, because of his own
inability of himself to know them, without Gods teaching: for the light of
nature is but darkness in the ways of God. Matthew. 6.23. For the natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God: they are foolishness unto him:
he cannot know them (meaning of himself) because they are spiritually
discerned. This is manifest by the Eunuch, Acts 8.30, 31. Understand thou
what thou read, says Philip to him; he answers by denial, How can I,
except some man should guide me. Secondly, for his better enabling to
obedience; for knowledge goes before doing. John 13.17. If ye know these
things, happy are ye, if ye do them. Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that
thou may observe to do, according to all that is written therein.

Thirdly, for his spiritual joy and comfort: for knowledge is a spiritual
light, 2 Cor. 4.6. and so very pleasing and comfortable to those, that without
it are in darkness: as Eccles. 11.7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing is it for the eyes to behold the Sun. Hence we read, that many have
greatly rejoiced, when they have been taught the knowledge of Gods ways.
Nehem. 8.12. All the people went their way, to eat and to drink, and to make
great mirth, because they had understood the words, that were declared unto
them. So the Eunuch went his way rejoicing, after he had been instructed, and
baptized by Philip, Acts 8.39. and there was great joy in Samaria, after they
were converted to the faith by Philip, Acts 8.6, 8.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, because of his enemies, as here he says in plain words: for in Gods
ways there is safety: here Gods Angels have charge to keep the godly, Psalm.
91.11. When thou go in this way thy steps shall not be straightned, and when
thou runnest, thou shall not stumble, Prove. 4.12. These ways of God are ways
of pleasure, and all the paths thereof are paths of peace, Prove. 3.17. Here
nothing offends the godly, Psalm. 119.165. Nay, here is singing of heart;
Psalm. 138.5. with Psalm. 65.14. This safety from enemies in the ways of God,
the Lord assured his people, Deuteronomy. 28.17. If thou shall hearken diligently unto
the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his Commandments, the
Lord shall cause thine enemies, that rise up against thee, to be smitten before
thy face, etc. Psalm. 81.13, 14. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned mine hand against their adversaries. This David found true in his own
person, Psalm. 18.16, 17, 21. He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of
many waters. He delivered me from my strong enemies. For I have kept the ways
of the Lord, etc.

This serves for instruction and admonition.

The Use for instruction
For instruction; see plainly by David's prayer, that there is more good to be
had in the ways of God, then natural men imagine, else David would never have
begged of God so earnestly to be taught therein. Consider but some of the
aforesaid reasons, that moved us so to pray, as his direction unto acceptable
obedience, wherein men are instiled unto all Gods blessings, as Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2,
3. etc. Psalm. 119.1. His inward joy and consolation, which is an inseparable
fruit of Gods instruction, Psalm. 119.162. I rejoice at thy word, as one that
finds great spoil, Ier. 15.16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and
thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Lastly, his safety and
protection herein from the head of his enemies: when God says to his Church,
all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, headdeth withal, and great shall
be the peace of thy children. In righteousness shall thou be established, thou
shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear, etc. Are not these
great blessings? what shall we say then of natural men, that say unto God,
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? Job 21.14. Surely,
the God of this world has blinded their eyes: they are under that curse,
whereby they become like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
comes, Ier. 17.5, 6.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves notably, that our behavior like David's, in praying
unto God to teach us his ways. They are not undoubtedly contained in
Scripture, which is the perfect register of Gods revealed will, showing our
duty perfectly, for all things needful to be believed and done unto eternal
life. In it we have express particular rules, for all the duties of our
general calling of Christianity, which requires piety toward God, justice,
love, and mercy toward our brethren, with sobriety, and temperance toward our
bodies, and care, and diligence for the gain, and growth of grace in our
souls: as Tit. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. In it also we have general rules, for
the well ordering and managing of our particular callings, which respect the
Church, Commonwealth, or family. For Magistrates see, Ex. 18.21, 22. with
Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9 etc. 2 Chr. 19.9, 10, 11. For Ministers, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3. etc. and
2 Timothy 4.1, 2. For husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and
servants, their godly behavior in general is plainly propounded, Ephesians. 5.22,
23. etc. Ephesians. 6.1. etc. to the 10. Col. 3.18. etc. Tit. 2.1. etc, 1 Pet. 2.13.
etc.

And that our prayers this way may be availeable, we must also labor in life
to be such as God will teach, Who they are whom God will teach.
that is, first, penitent persons breaking off the course of sin, Prove. 1.23.
Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will
make known my words unto you, Hos. 6.1, 3. Come, and let us return unto the
Lord -- Then shall we know -- But the wicked and impenitent shall not be taught
of God, he will not be enquired of by them, Ezekiel. 14.1. etc. Those, that are
laden with sin, are ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the
truth, 2 Timothy 3, 6, 7. Secondly, diligent in using Gods ordinances man holy
manner. Gods ordinances for knowledge are the word and prayer. The word must be
reverently heard, read and meditated, Psalm. 119.99. I have more understanding
then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation: and prayer gets
wisdom, Jam. 1.5. The holy manner of using these ordinances is, in humility,
and yielding obedience to that they do know, John 7.17. for such have a promise
of the spirit, which God has given to them that obey him, Acts 5.32. which is
that anointing, that teaches all needful things, 1 John 2.20, 27.

The second observation.
The second petition, which David here puts up unto God is, that God would lead
him in a plain path, that is, in a path that is right and straight, wherein is
no erring nor straying out of Gods way, even in a path of righteousness, as
some translate it. In which petition note two things: the first employed, that
the paths of Gods way are plain paths, such as are straight, and right, without
crooked turnings, Prove. 4.11. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom: I have
led thee in right paths, Prove. 8.6, 8. The opening of my lips shall be right
things -- All the words of my mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing
froward, or perverse in them. Therefore St. Paul calls them the straight ways
of God Acts 13.10.

The Reason.
The reason is plain; these paths are of Gods own tracting out, being indeed
nothing else, but plain evidences of his will, which in every thing is right
and equal: for Gods willing of a thing makes it good, though otherwise it were
most ^^hominable, if he should not require it: as is most plain in the fact of
Abraham, when he offered up his son Isaac* for which Abraham's faith is
renowned. Hebr. 11.17. and his ^ear of God approved, Genesis 22.12. And on the
same ground David said, Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all
things, to be right. Psalm. 119.128.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction it does plainly discover the great measure of our natural
corruption, who judge many of Gods ways unequal, Ezekiel. 18.25. Ye say, the way
of the Lord is not equal. And indeed, in one thing or other, wherein every
carnal heart desires liberty to sin, we are like the evil servant, who in
our thoughts charge the Lord to be an hard master requiring more exact
obedience then he should, Mat. 25.24. does not every black mouthed swearer,
and curser, say in his heart, our tongues are our own, we ought to speak, who
is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. and all profaneness of the Lords day say the
like of the solemn sanctification of it, viz. it is a weariness, and they
snuff at it, Mal. 1.13. And so they deal about the rest of Gods holy
Commandments, in the transgression whereof their natural hearts desire
carnal liberty, verifying the Apostles saying, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is
enmity against God: it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to take special notice of the straightness of Gods paths, as
well to beat down our corruption, when we find in our selves any untowardnesse,
and unwillingnesse to walk therein: and if we be wise for our souls, to know
our own estate, we shall find the flesh fighting against the spirit, even
strong corruption, called a law in our members, warring against the law of our
minds, which is renewed grace, and leading us captive to the law of sin, as
Paul complains, Romans 7.23. And had we not need to fight against it, by the
sword of the spirit, the word of God, laying it to our souls, by the hand of
faith: and by humble earnest prayer, for the participation of Gods power, to
keep us in this straight ways of God, wherein is liberty, Psalm. 119.45. For
when the world and the flesh, by cor^^ption, draw us out of these paths, we are
taken captives, as Paul confesses, and so loose our liberty. See also 2. Tim.
2.26. As also, to give all diligence, to know the straight paths of the Lord,
and to walk therein. This is the Lords commandment, with comfortable
encouragement so to do, Jer. 6.15. Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: and walk in
the strait way, that leads unto life. Mat. 7.13, 14. This was David's
behavior, as we may see by his prayer, in this place, and many other before
quoted. Consider the benefit of rest to the soul, and of pleasantness, and
peace to be found in these ways, Prove. 3.17. And withal think ou their
fearful state and end, that leave these straight ways of God: see Asts
13.10. they are enemies of righteousness, children of the devil, and are
taken captive by him at his will, till they repent, 2 Timothy 2.26. and if they
hold on in their crooked paths, they shall never know peace, Is. 59.8. The Lord
will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5. even to the
damnation of hell, Psalm. 9.7. Mat. 7.23. For the man, that wandereth out of the
way of understanding, shall remain in the congregation of the dead, Prove. 21.16.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort greatly to those, that walk in Gods ways, for they are ways of
peace with God, and lead to glory eternal, Psalm. 119.1. and Psalm. 128.1. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

The third Observation.
Secondly, here observe the thing intended and expressed, David begs of God to
lead him in a plain path, Psalm. 5.8. Lead me O Lord in thy righteousness,
Psalm. 25.5. lead me in thy truth, Psalm. 139.24. Lead me in the way everlasting.

This he does upon the like grounds, that he prayed to be taught the ways of
God. As first, The 1. reason.
upon the consideration of the inability of nature to walk at all in the
straight paths of God: for we are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. and
of no strength, Romans 5.6. and how can such walk? And though Gods holy calling,
to the state of grace gave him spiritual life, yet he had experience, and so
conscience of his own weakness in grace, unless the Lord were still with him
to uphold and lead him. See Psalm. 30.6, 7, 8. I said in my prosperity I shall
never be moved -- Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 6.2. Have
mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak, Psalm. 38.17.21. I am ready to halt --
forsake me not, O Lord.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David had knowledge of Gods gracious property, in becoming a guide
unto his children: as, Psalm. 77.20. Thou leadest thy people like a flock, Psalm.
80.1. Give ear, thou shepherd of Israel, that leadest Joseph like a flock: He
led them with a cloudy day, and a pillar of fire by night, Ex. 13.21. Psalm.
78.14. Now being in covenant, he lays claim to his favor, and begs it by
prayer.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, David prays to be led by God, for his safety and security against
his enemies: this reason is here rendered; lead me in a plain path, because of
mine enemies: for when God is for him, he will not fear: what can man do unto
him. Psalm. 118.6. when God leads him, he will not fear, though he walk
through the very valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.2, 4.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways: First, it lets us see the true ground, of the
perseverance of the godly, in the state of grace, it is not in themselves, but
in and from the Lord, who is with them, and leads them in the way everlasting:
he by his spirit ministers daily supply of grace, and so keeps them from
falling away. See 1 John 2.20.27. John 14.16, 17. 1 John 4.4, 13. This spirit
gives sap and juice to the seed of grace, so as they cannot sin unto death, 1
John 3.9. Ier. 32.40. Psalm. 125.1, 2. These things we should mark, to arm our
selves against the uncomfortable doctrine of Papists and Arminians, that say,
the true child of God may fall away from saving grace; but John 4.14. The
water, that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up
into everlasting life, and, John 10.27, 28.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, David's practice shows the meekness of wisdom, that is in those,
that be truly godly, not to trust in themselves, but humbly craving the Lords
conduct, and guiding in this world, to put all their trust in the Lord.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves notably to move every one to labor to be such, as
God will lead, and guide in the paths of life; for so shall they be sure to
find rest for their souls: as Ier. 6.16.

What we must do that we may be such as God will lead.
Now that we may be such, we must be careful of four things. First, that we
stand rightly in covenant with God; being indeed his people, and having him for
our God, Deuteronomy. 32.9, 10, 11, 12. The Lords portion is his people -- he found
him in a desert land -- he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye -- so the Lord alone did lead him. When David has the Lord
for his shepherd, he assures himself he will lead him by the still waters,
Psalm. 23.1, 2, 3. Secondly, we must be penitent persons, breaking off the
course of sin: for God will not take the wicked by the hand, Job 8.20. they
that walk in darkness cannot have fellowship with God, 1 John 1.6. Thirdly, we
must give diligent heed to the word of God: for that is Gods counsel, whereby
he guides his people unto glory, Psalm. 73.24.

Fourthly, we must daily beg this blessing of God, as David here does, and in
many other places, as is showed before.

Because of mine enemies] David's reason of his two former petitions: therefore
does he desire of God to be taught his ways, and to be led in straight paths,
because he had such enemies, as continually sough his ruin and destruction: so
that, if he were out of Gods protection, they would soon work his destruction.

This reason may be considered two ways: First, simply by it self, for the
matter which it contains: Secondly, with reference to the petitions, which it
does enforce. In the reason simply considered this is here plainly taken for
granted, That David had enemies, The fourth Observation.
who both wished and sought his overthrow. This is plain in this Psalm, verse
2. His enemies, and his foes came upon him, to eat up his flesh: and verse 12.
they falsely accused him, and breathed our cruelty against him. Whereto we may
add, for fuller and plainer evidence. Psalm. 3.1. Lord how are they increased,
that trouble me? Many are they, that rise up against me. Psalm. 69.4. They, that
hate me without a cause, are more then the hairs of mine head: they, that would
destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are many.

The reasons hereof, with the application in uses, are set down before, Verse
6. Observation 1. briefly to this effect.

The first Reason.
First, the good will and pleasure of God, thus to make David a type of Christ,
of whom it is said, Isa. 53.16. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, with Act.
4.25. etc. alleging the second Psalm true also of David the type.

The second Reason.
Secondly, David's sins sometimes occasioned this evil, 2 Samuel 12 9.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, corruptions in the wicked, who had to do with David, stirred them up
against him two ways. First, in hatred of his goodness, Psalm 38.19, 20.
therein verifying, Genesis 3, 17. whereupon our Savior calls the Scribes and
Pharisees Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers, Mat. 23.33. Secondly, in envy
of his honor, Psalm. 4.2. Psalm. 62.4. as Dan. 6.3, 4.

By way of use it serves for instruction, and admonition.

For instruction, see in David the state of the Godly in this world, The use
for instruction.
liable to the trouble and danger of many and cruel enemies: reason, as Luke
23.31. and as Ier. 25.9.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to beware of rash judgment, either against others, that they
are naught, because they are by so many oppressed; for so we might condemn the
Godly, as Psalm. 73.15. see Ier. 15.10. or against our selves, that we are
forsaken of God, because men persecute us, as Psalm. 22.1. Indeed we must
consider the cause, and make use of persecution accordingly. Now the cause is
either correction for sin, or trial of grace. If we find our finnes have
brought enemies upon us, then we must humble our selves under Gods hand, who
uses the rage of enemies, as rods to whip his children, Isa. 10.5, 6. In this
case he must smell the savor of a sacrifice, as 1 Samuel 26.19. bring unto God a
contrite and broken heart, that he will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. If we find
that God would make trial of grace in us, by the enemies he does raise up
against us, then we must strive to give evidence of our faith in God, by
patient bearing the trial, which his providence lays on us, whereto we
shall be enabled: First, by considering Gods hand herein: for a sparrow
lights not on the ground without his will, Mat. 10.28, 29, 31. Thus David
patiently bore Shemei his cursing, 2 Samuel 16.11, 12. with Psalm. 39.9. yea thus
Christ endured the cross, and condemnation by Pilate, John 19.10, 11.
Secondly, by remembering the good end; for we shall come forth as the gold,
Job. 23.10. Many are the afflictions of the godly, but the Lord delivers them
out of all, Psalm. 34.19. Nay hereby our glory shall be increased, Romans 8.18.
The sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the glory, which
shall be revealed in us: nay 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory: for, if we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12.

Thus Moses encouraged himself under the cross, with respect to the recompense
of reward, Heb. 11.25, 26. yea our Savior Christ, Heb. 12.2. Who for the hope
that was set before him, endured the cross, despised the shame, and is set at
the right hand of the throne of God. For he himself hereupon encouraged his
Disciples, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they, who are persecuted for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye,
when men revile you -- Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward
in heaven.

The fifth Observation.
Secondly, consider this reason with reference to the two former petitions,
which it enforces, and this is plain, That the exposition of David's enemies
moves him to be more humble and earnest in prayer and supplication unto God.
Their insurrection against him becomes his provocation to fly to God, Psalm.
77.2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, Psalm. 5.8. Lead me, O Lord in
thy righteousness. because of mine enemies, Psalm 69.12, 13, 14. They that
sat in the gate (that is Judges and Magistrates) spoke against me. But as for
me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord -- Let me be delivered from them that hate
me, Psalm. 109.2, 3, 4. The mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the
deceitful, are opened against me -- They compassed me about with words of
hatred, and fought against me without a cause. For my love they are mine
adversaries, but I give my self unto prayer.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is threefold. First, the consideration of Gods hand in the
opposition of his enemies, which ever has an overruling power in all men's
actions, Is. 45.7. Amos 3.6.

The second Reason.
Secondly, conscience of obedience to God, who requires to be sought in times of
trouble, Psalm. 50.15.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, confidence in Gods help, grounded both on Gods property and promise:
for his property, he is the true God, that hears prayer, Psalm. 65 2. He is
our refuge and strength: a present help in trouble. Psalm. 46.1. For his promise
it is plain, Psalm. 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will
be with him in trouble, I will deliver him.

This serves for instruction, reprehension, and admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, we may see in David a notable property of the godly, which is,
to seek help and safety from the Lord, when the wicked do eagerly labor for
their destruction in the world.

Unto David's practice in this place join the behavior of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles.
20.2, 3, 4. who sought the Lord in solemn prayer and fasting, when Moab, Ammon,
and mount Seir came against him in hostile manner. The like did Hezekiah, upon
the bloody railing of Sennacherib, both by Rabshakeh and by writing, Is. 37.1.
etc. Thus also did Mordecai and Esther, when Haman sought their utter rume,
Est. 4.16. So did Christ's Apostles for themselves, Acts 4.21, 30, 31. and the
Church did so for Peter, Acts 12.5.

The Use for reproof.
For reproof, it makes justly to all natural wicked men, who in opposition
against them by enemies do little regard this duty, as Joram said in the strait
siedge of Samaria, This evil comes of the Lord, wherefore should I wait on
the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 5.33. looking altogether to worldly and humane
help: as the wicked Jews sometimes did, who asked not at Gods mouth, but
would, strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and trust in the
shadow of Egypt, Is. 30.2. yea though they had been told, the Lord would not
have them to go down thither, saying, the strength of Pharaoh shall be your
shame, and the shadow of Egypt your confusion: yet, against the Lords express
revealed will, they would needs go thither, Jer. 42.14. But woe unto them says
the Lord, etc. Is. 31.1, 2. Nay, cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, Jer. 17.5. When the heart is truly turned to the Lord,
they will say, Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses -- for in
thee the fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14.3.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually to move every one to become followers of
David. Let men's opposition against us be our provocations to seek the Lord: so
shall we not only show our selves to be godly, but also reap good from that,
which our enemies intend to be hurtful unto us, which is a special favor,
showing that the Lord is with us, as he was with Joseph, when his brethren sold
him into Egypt: for God was with him, and turned it to his great honor, and
advancement: as Genesis 45.5, 7, 8, and Genesis 50, 20. And as he was with his people
in the Wilderness, when Balack hired Balaam to curse them, but God turned it
into a blessing, Numb. 23.8, 9, 11. and Numb. 24.10. And for further
encouragement hereto, we must meditate on the reasons, that moved David so to
do: for Gods sovereignty is the same, over our enemies, and over us, that it
was over David, and his enemies: he may justly exercise us under such
affliction as he did David, either for correction for sin, or trial of
grace, and if we be in covenant with him as David was, we have the like
interest in his property, and promise of help, that David had. And if we put
our trust in him, and call upon him, he will be likewise our defender and
deliverer. Mark and apply his speech to Joshuah after Moses was dead, to give
him encouragement in his place, Josh. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. As I was with Moses, so
will I be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: which promise the
Apostle extends to every Christian, Heb. 13.5. only let us look to the
obedience, which God requires of us in our places, as he did of Joshuah in his,
and then we shall with him prosper and have good success: for we fly to God
by the prayer of faith, and the Lord is with us, if we be with him, and then we
may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear, what man can do unto
me, Heb. 13.6.

Verse 12. Deliver me not over to the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses
are risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.


The meaning of the words.
A Further petition of David unto God for mercy, in regard of his enemies,
enforced by a strong motive. The mercy he requires is, that God would not
deliver him over to the will of his enemies: the motive he propounds, to move
God to grant that request, is drawn from the behavior of his enemies, whereof
some stood up to witness falsehood against him, and some breathed out violent
wrong or cruelty.

For the first, the word translated enemies, betokens such, (...)
as by violent persecution seek to bring into an inevitable strait, as they
do, that besiege a place in war, according to the use of the word in
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 28.52. He shall besiege thee in all thy gates, and verse
55.57. Siege, and straitness, and distress, causing men and women to eat
their own children, are there joined together in the threatening. (...)
Also the word, translated will, properly signifies the soul, which is often
put for will, lust or desire, when those faculities or passions are eager,
strong, and violent in men, as here they were in David enemies, after his mine.

So as his meaning in this petition is this, in the words implying, that he had
such enemies, as with all their hearts and souls, most eagerly did desire to
bring him into an inevitable strait, for utter ruin, he beseeches the Lord
that he would not give him into their hands, to have their souls satisfied
with his destruction.

The first Observation* metonymia subjecti.
In this petition so understoood rote two things: First, the sacred trope, or
rhetorical phrase, which David here uses to express the unsatiable desire of
his enemies, to work his overthrow, he calls it their very soul: as also Psalm.
35.25. Let them not say in their hearts, ah, ah, our soul, that is, our full
desire, so we would have it: and Psalm. 41.2. Thou will not deliver him to the
soul of his enemy, that is, to the will and desire, where we see he puts the
soul, that is the seat and subject for the will and desire that is seated
therein.

The Reason.
The reason whereof seems to be this, hereof to manifest more plainly, the
excessive measure of spite, and malice, which was in David's enemies, which
seemed to him no less, then if their very souls had been framed and composed
thereof.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction, three ways. First, it shows the lawful use of the art of
Rhetoric, if it be without vain assertation of wit and eloquence, even in the
dispensation of Gods Word; and withal. the necessity of some competent
knowledge therein, for right interpretation of the same.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see, that men endued and guided by Gods holy spirit, when they
speak of corrupt affections in the souls of natural men, do not mince the
matter, with qualifying terms, to make them seem small things of little or no
danger, but do rather aggravate the same, by significant terms and phrases,
which may plainly show, that sin therein is for measure exceeding great, for a
danger damnable, why else should David style the malicious will, and desire of
his enemies, by the very name of the soul it self? whose steps St. Paul does
plainly follow, speaking of the corruption of our nature, which Divines do call
concupiscence, that it may seem in measure fearful, he calls it the old man,
and body of sin, Romans 6.6. yea a body of death, Romans 7.24. having many and
strong earthly members, as fornication, uncleanness, and the like, Col. 3.5.
And that it may seem strong and forcible, he ascribes great power and might
unto it in all natural men, Romans 7.5. When we were in the flesh, the motions
of sin, which were by the law, had force in our members, to bring forth fruit
unto death: it has a kind of spiritual sovereignty in them, it reigns unto
death, Romans 5.21. where mark, their sins dominion is for the souls damnation;
the trouble, and terror whereof in the godly, is acknowledged by Paul, in his
own person, Romans 7.23. but I see another law in my members, warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity unto the law of sin. This
terror, I say, that corruption causes in the godly, may easily manifest how
terrible the tyranny of it is in natural men. That blessed Apostle cries out
of his misery, by reason of this corruption, yet dwelling in him, Romans 7.24.
though then it had received in him a deadly wound, by the power of Christ's
death, effectually applied unto him by Gods holy spirit, at the time of his
conversion. Oh what slavish bondage then are all natural men under, that have
in their souls original corruption, the devils task-master, to keep them
close under the drudgery of sin, for which they shall receive the wages of
eternal death.

The third Use for instruction.
Thirdly, this very phrase, rightly understood, gives plain evidence, where
corruption bears dominion: for look where the motions of sin for force and
strength to bring forth evil actions, are as availeable, as the soul is in
the body, for the effecting of natural actions, How to know where corruption
bears dominion.
there undoubtedly sin reigns and corruption bears sway. The soul we
know gives life to the body, and sets every part a work about those things it
likes: so as we may soundly argue, that he is endued with a reasonable soul,
who does, constantly manage his humane affairs with good discretion. In like
manner does inbred corruption quicken sinful motions in the soul, and gaining
consent of will, draws the parts of the body to become the tools of the
mind, for the execution of sinful actions. Look therefore, where we see a
course held in the practice of sin, there we may be sure, that corruption
bears dominion: when the motions of sin has force in their members, to bring
forth fruit unto death, then men are in the flesh, Romans 7.5. This reigning
power of sin is the law of the members, warring against the law of the mind,
and bringing man into captivity of the law of sin, Romans 7.23.

This reigning corruption, shows it self in man, when his mind is set in evil
works, Col. 2.21. and he minds the things of the flesh, Romans 8.5. when his
heart is fully set in him to do evil. Eccles. 8.11. when his tongue proclaims
his resolution for sin, as Jer. 44.17. we will certainly do whatsoever thing
goes out of our own mouth, Psalm. 12.4. with our tongue we will prevail: our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us? If. 56.12. Come ye, say they, I will
fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink: and when he cannot
endure to be checked, or crossed in his evil course. This cuts them to the
heart, Acts 7.54. stirs them up to rage and fury, as Acts 7.57, 58. Genesis
19.9. 1 Samuel 20.30. whereby they plainly show themselves to be brutish, Prove.
12.1. and sensual having not the spirit, Jude 19.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First, to observe in our selves the force
and strength of corruption in sinful motions and desires, after things
forbidden of God: for if to enjoy them be our soul, so we would have it; as
Psalm. 35.25. then certainly we are wholly carnal, sold under sin, and if we so
die, we perish eternally: for where sin reigns, it is unto death, Romans
5.21. And that we deceive not our selves, in a matter of so great importance,
besides the evidence of this estate, given in the last instruction, which is
very plain, if we examine our selves thereby, The dominion of sin illustrated
by resemblance.
mark some other resemblances that give further illustration. St. James, Iam.
1.15. speaks of a strange conception in the foul, brought forth in life: when
lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: Man's sin is the child born,
there spoken of; man's soul, as it is carnal, is the womb, wherein it is
conceived: the Suggestion of Satan, with man's own evil concupiscence, are the
seed whereof it is formed, and so far forth is man's sin begotten of the
devil, and has him for the father; as he is called the father of lies, John
8.44. for he put it into Judas heart to betray his master, John 13.2. and
filled Ananias his heart, that he lied unto God, Asts 5.3. and so became in
them the father of those grievous sins, treachery in Judas, and hypocrisy in
Ananias. Now to try our estate, for the dominion of sin, by this resemblance,
do we say of any sin, as Rachel did of natural children to Jacob, Genesis 30.1.
give me children, or else I dye? does lust make thee sick, as it did Ammon? 2 Samuel 13.1, 2. do thou like the whorish woman, with an impudent face, allure
others to sin? Prove. 7.13, 18. Is it pastime to thee to do wickedly? Prove.
18.23. do thou not sleep, except thou have done mischief? Prove. 4.16. Do
thou devise iniquity, and work evil upon thy bed: and when morning is light,
do thou practice it, because there is power in thine hand? etc, Mich. 2.1.
etc. upon all these, and the like, the dominion of sin may be concluded: he
that says of evil doing, aha, my soul, is as yet undoubtedly in his soul
void of saving grace, Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the ungodly says within
my heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes. This is likewise evident by
the contrary affections in the godly, in whom grace is renewed: to get grace,
and to practice obedience is their soul: as Christ told his disciples, My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me, John 4.34. As the heart pants after the
water brook, so pants my soul after thee O God. My soul thirsts for God,
Psalm. 42.1, 2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord:
my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. Psalm. 84.2. The word of
God was to David as his soul: the soul we know quickens the body, and Gods
word quickened his soul, Psalm. 119.50.93. They were the joy and rejoicing of
Jeremiahs heart. Jer. 15.16. And Paul was as a woman with child in travail
after the conversion of others, Gal. 4.10. His life was not dear unto him, so
he might further the Gospel, Acts 20.24. Mark these things, and pray for
understanding.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, if we find, that sinful affections be our soul, that is, our desire
and delight, that then we give all diligence for change of estate: for who
would continue in the gall of bitterness, and under the power of darkness, if
he could help it? And though it be not in our own power, for it is a new
creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. and the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6. and who can bring
a clean thing out of filthiness? Not one, Job 14.4. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin, or the Leopard her spots? then may they do good, that are accustomed
to do evil, Jer. 13.23. with man this change of himself is impossible, but
with God all things are possible, Mat. 19.26. He can raise up children unto
Abraham of stones, Mat. 3.9. And for his working of it, the wise and powerful
God of heaven has ordained a way and means, and prescribed the use thereof to
natural men, of the understanding whereof reason is capable. This means is the
preaching of the word, sanctified by prayer, for the blessing of the spirit.
The moral law will discover sin, and the danger thereof to a natural man:
for by the law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. and of the danger
thereof, Gal. 3.10. And by the Gospel comes the knowledge of the remedy, for
it is the word of his grace, Acts 20.32. revealing mercy in Christ, John 3.16.
and showing the way and means to be made partakers of him. John 3.36. And in
the use of these ordinances, a natural man may exercise himself, and wait for
Gods blessing: He may hear, and apply both the law and gospel, and pray for
the blessing of God upon his endeavors. Husbandmen take pains for the precious
fruits of the earth, and pray for the blessing of God upon their labor. And
why may not natural men do so much for their souls? Surely the neglect of
the use of means is and will be the condemnation of many, John. 3.19.

For in the means God wills their gathering, Mat. 23.37. and our Savior
tells the Jews, they would not come unto him that they might have life, John
5.40. saying, that the Queen of the South should rise up in judgment against
them, for her pains to hear Solomon's wisdom, and yet a greater then Solomon
was there, Mat. 12.42. Therefore wait in the means: as John 5.3, 4, 5. So did
Cornelius fast and pray, Acts 10.3. then reverently hear Peter verse 33. The
three thousand converted on the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.41. first heard Peter
preach, and apply the law to the pricking of their hearts, verse 26.27. then
they heard the Gospel, and gladly received it, and after continued in the
Apostles doctrine. verse 41, 42. He, that had but one talent might have
employed it, and is justly condemned for not so doing, Mat, 25.25. etc. The
unbelieving Jews might have heard Paul and Barnabas preach, but they would
not: but put away the word, and judged themselves unworthy of eternal life.
Acts 13.46.

The second observation.
The second thing to be noted in this petition is, the favor and kindness,
which David craveth of God, namely, that he would not deliver him to the will
of his enemies, so as they should have liberty to accomplish their bloody
designs upon him: See Psalm. 35.19, 25. Let not them, that are mine enemies,
rejoice over me -- Let them not say in their hearts, ah, ah, our soul. Psalm.
36.11. Let not the foot of pride come against me, and lot not the hand of the
wicked renone me. Psalm. 71.4. Deliver me, O my God, out of the hands of the
wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man. Psalm. 140.1, 4, 8.
Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil (...)* preserve me from the violent man --
keep me O Lord, from the hands of the wicked -- grant not, O Lord, the desires
of the wicked.

The first Reason.
The reasons hereof are many. First, respecting himself, as the conscience of
his sins. that deserved this evil, to be delivered into the hands of his
enemies: for so he knew God threatened to do with his own people, and had
formerly performed it, Judge. 2.14, 15. The auger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoylers, and sold them
into the hands of their onemies round about them. The hand of the Lord was
against them for evil, as he had said, and sworn unto them.

The second Reason.
Secondly, in regard of his enemies, whom he knew, first, to be without
conscience of dealing justly, and full fraught with all cruelty. This reason is
rendered in this verse: for false witnesses are risen up against me, and such
as breath out cruelty. verse 2. they would swallow him up: as Psalm. 56.1, 2.
For their strength and cruelty he resembles them to strong bulls of Bashan,
Psalm. 22.12. to ravening and roaring Lions, verse 13. and to dogs, verse 16.
Psalm. 57.4. set on fire: their teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword: yea Psalm. 140.3. They have sharpened their tongue like a Serpent:
adders poison is under their lips. Secondly, he knew they would vaunt and boast
of their triumph over him to Gods dishonor: as Ps. 35.19, 26. Let not them,
that are mine enemies wrongfully, rejoice over me -- they rejoice at his hurt,
and magnify themselves against him: saying to his greatest grief, where is now
thy God? Psalm. 42.3.10. Herein no doubt sacrificing to their net, praising
their own power, and policy: as the Philistims praised Dagon, for the conquest
of Sampson, Judge. 16.23.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, in regard of God; knowing, first, that his power and providence
overruled all. Psalm. 135.6. whatsoever the Lord pleases, that did he in
heaven, and in earth: in the seas, and all deep places. If he speak the word,
it is done, Psalm. 33.9. Surely, the wrath of man shall praise thee: the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain, Psalm. 76.10. he shall cut off the
spirit of Princes, verse 12. He knew they would have no power over him, but by
Gods permission: as John 19.11. Secondly, that by his sovereignty he might so
deal with his dearest servants, either for their trial, as he dealt with Job,
or to give way to the wicked, to fill up their sins, in afflicting the godly,
that so his justice and power may be glorified in their destruction: so he
suffered Pharo^^ to afflict his people in Egypt, Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17. Thirdly
that God having received him into covenant, stood bound to help him, as Psalm.
119.94. and Psalm. 89.3, 21, 22.

This serves for instruction, and admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction three ways. First, see here, what may be the estate of the
godly, even of Gods dearest children: they may be in the hand of their enemies,
under the power of their distressors: plainly by the bondage of Israel in Egypt
for a long time, Genesis 15.13. with Exodus 1.9, 10, 11, 13, 14. The three servants
of God were thus cast into the fiery furnace, Dan 3.20, 21. and Daniel himself
into the Lions den, Dan. 6.16. Jeremie felt this evil, Jer. 26.14. yea
Christ himself by the wicked hands of the Jews was taken, crucified, and
slain, Acts 2.23. which we are to mark, to prevent rash judgment, as well
against others, as also against our selves, in this case. A fault in which the
godly themselves may fall, as well against others, Job 4.7. Remember, I pray
thee (says Eliphaz to Job) who ever perished, being innocent? as also against
themselves, Is. 49.14. Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me, Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But if we
mark, every man's deserving by sin, and Gods sovereignty over the best, it
will stay our hearts and tongues, from the sin of rash judgment.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, this petition shows, that if the godly fall into the hands of the
wicked, it is by Gods permission and dispensation: for a sparrow lights not
on the ground, without the will of God. Mat. 10.29. therefore Christ says to
Pilate, thou would have no power over me at all, except it were given thee
from above, John 19.11. and the Church says unto God, thou have given us like
sheep appointed for meat -- thou sellest thy people for naught, Psa. 44.11, 12.
Paul says, I think that God has set us forth the last Apostles, as it were
appointed to death. Which is a thing very observable, as the only ground of
true patience, Psalm. 39.9. with 2. Sam. 16.10, 11, 12. and also of sweet
comfort in the greatest persecution: for he has said, I will not leave thee,
nor for sake thee, Heb. 13.5. Ps. 91.15. I will be with him in trouble, Psalm.
66.10, 11, 12, Thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us, as silver is
tried. Thou broughtest us into the net, thou laydest affliction upon our
loins. Thou causedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and
through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. Mark the
comfortable end of the troubles of the godly: as Job 23.10. He knows the way,
that I take; when he has tried me, I shall come forth as the gold. And so the
story shows, Job 42.12. So God blessed the latter end of Job more then the
beginning.

The third Use for instruction.
Thirdly, see here, that prayer is a sanctified means to obtain of God safety,
and preservation, from the hands of those, that desire our hurt. Thus the Jews
escaped from the bloody design of Haman, Ephesians. 4.16, 17. and 7.3, 4. etc. Thus
Jehosaphat escaped in battle, when the Captains of the Chariots beset him
about, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. And thus were he and his people preserved from three
Kings, that came against him, 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 4. etc. And thus was Hezekiah
preserved from the great Army of Senacherib, Isaiah 37.21, 33, 34. And no
marvel; for as God requires the duty, so he has made the promise, which he
will perform, Psalm. 50.15. Psalm 91.15.

The use for instruction.
For admonition, it serves effectually to stir up every child of God, to
become a follower of David, in the performance of this duty, to be much and
earnest with God in prayer, for the preservation of himself and the Church of
God, out of the hands of their enemies. A most needful duty in these evil
times, wherein the enemies of Gods Church do band themselves, like Edom, Moab,
Geball, Ammon, Amalek and the rest, Psalm 83.3, 4. etc. to root out Religion,
to cut off Gods people, that the name of Israel be no more in remembrance.
Consider the good success of this duty, in this case, by the former examples:
How prayer is prevalent with God against enemies.
for it is not, as natural men do think a vain thing to serve the Lord, and
unprofitable to pray unto him. Mal. 3.14. Job 21.15. experience shows, that
this duty is prevalent with God, one of these three ways, at all times. Either
it prevents their attempts, as the former examples show fully and plainly: or
else it procures deliverance out of the enemies hands, after some time of
trial and correction by them, as it did for Peter, when he was kept in prison
by Herod, with purpose to put him to death, Acts 12.5, 6. etc. and for Israel
to procure their deliverance out of Egypt, Exodus 2.23, 24. or at least, it
procures strength of grace, to bear the violence and the cruelty of the enemy,
though he proceed to inflict upon them most violent death: as we may see in
Steven, Acts 7.59.60. and in the Saints of God, that would not be delivered,
that they might obtain a better resurrection, Heb. 11.35. For indeed, when the
godly do sincerely perform this duty, though the outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed daily, 2 Cor. 4.16. and in death it self, the child of
God is more then conqueror, Romans 8.37. Let us not therefore be weary of this
duty, the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, Jam.
5.16. while Moses his hands were lifted up, Joshuah prevailed, but when they
were let down, Amalek prevailed. Exodus 17.11. God is much moved by prayer, it
stays the wrath of God against his people, as Exodus 33.10, 11. etc. Psalm.
106.23. Deuteronomy. 9.18, 19, 20. And therefore, when God is resolved to bring a
judgment, he forbids Jeremie to pray for the Jews, Jer. 7.16. and 11.14. and
14.11.

Qu. Is this all we have to do to pray in time of danger?

Answ. No, we must likewise serve Gods providence in the use of ordinary means,
and withal use prayer, for Gods blessing thereon. So Moses did for Joshuah,
when he fought against Amalek: and Mordecai prayed for Esther, when she went
unto Ashuerus in the behalf of the Jews. And besides these, we must have due
regard to our estate, and behavior, when we perform this duty, and pray: and
namely, first we must see, that we stand rightly in covenant with God, and be
his people, through faith in Christ for then we have a promise of protection,
as Psalm. 89.3, ^0, 21, 22 and of audience in time of trouble, 2 Chronicles. 7.13,
14. which encouraged the Church in adversity, Is. 63.19. we are thine, thou
never bear rule over them: they were not called by thy name: And Jeremiah
herewith moves God to mercy, Jer. 14.8, 9. O the hope of Israel, the savior
thereof in time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the land? --
as a man that cannot save? yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are
called by thy name, leave us not. Secondly, if we have failed by transgression
(for in many things we sin all, Jam. 2.) then we must be careful to renew
covenant with God, by renewing our repentance for our sins, and our says in
Christ Jesus: so did the Jews, and found help for deliverance, Judge. 10.10,
15, 16. So did Jehosaphat, and was preserved, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. etc.

This renewing of repentance and faith is, for a Christian, with ^od, as the
sounding an alarm on the silver trumpets was, for the old Israelites, when
they went out to war: it causes remembrance before the Lord, that we may be
saved from our enemies, Numb. 11.9. Lastly, we must make conscience of new
obedience, and do that which the Lord commands, then will he be an enemy to
our enemies, and an adversary to our adversaries. Exodus 23.22. If herein we
approve our selves the children of Abraham, we shall receive from God the
blessing of Abraham, God will bless them, that bless us, and curse them, that
curse us, Genesis 12.3.

For false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.

The reason of David's former request, that he might not be delivered to the
will of his enemies, drawn from their unconscionable behavior, and deadly
hatred toward him. Their unconscionable behavior, they rose up against him,
in false witness bearing: their deadly hatred, in breathing out cruelty or
violence.

Both which may be referred to the same persons: for a man that bears false
witness against his neighbor, is as a mawle, and a sword, and a sharp arrow
Prove. 25.1^. all which are evidences of great violence. Yet, because these two
sentences are in the original in diverse numbers (for the latter is expressed
in the singular number, (...)
He that breaths out cruelty) therefore, I take it, in the latter he points
out Saul himself, and in the former such, as did falsely accuse him unto Saul.
For David elsewhere points out Saul by the term and phrase of a violent man,
Psalm 18.48. Thou have preserved me from the violent man: and Psalm. 140.4.
Preserve me from the violent man. Here then we have to consider two grievous
evils, that befell David from his enemies: the first from Saul's flattering
followers, the second from Saul himself.

The third Observation.
For the first, false witnesses did rise up against David, such as without all
conscience accused him of evils, whereof he was not guilty. See Psalm. 35.11.
False witnesses did rise up against me, they laid to my charge things that I
knew not, Psalm. 56.5. Every day they wrest my words, Ps. 57.4. My soul is
among lions: I lie among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men,
whose teeth are spears, and their tongue a sharp sword, Psalm 59.7. Behold,
they belch out with their mouth, swords are in their lips, Ps. 64.3. They whet
their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows even
bitter words: Such a one was Cush the Benjamite, of whom he complains to God,
Psalm. 7. see the title* and such was Doeg the Edomite, Psalm 52. the title.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, Gods divine providence disposing, that
under this affliction, of sustaining false accusations, David should be a type
of Christ who was thus wronged. Mat. 26.59, 60.

The second Reason.
Secondly, this proceeded from the dominion of corruption in David's enemies
themselves: who wanting the fear of God, as Psalm. 54.3. and hating David
without a cause, Psalm. 59.3, 4. even because he followed goodness, Psalm
38.20. and knowing Saul desired to hear evil of David, as 1 Samuel 22.7, 8. that
he might have some color at least to put him to death, to which purpose false
witnesses served fitly, as 1 Kings 21.10. therefore to please Saul, and to
procure David's hurt, did they thus bear false witness against him.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see in David's enemies into what fearful evils, and horrible
sins, the corruption of nature will bring natural men, whom God does leave
to themselves, even to bear false witness against their neighbor, which is a
most heinous and horrible sin, even against the light of nature, which
teaches, that men should not do to others, what they would not have done unto
themselves: and the very heathen have most severely punished this sin. And
the Word of God accounts false witnesses to be the children of the devil: for
who is meant by Belial. 2 Cor. 6.15. but the devil? So the Syriac renders the
word by Satan. Now false witness bearers are the children of Belial, 1 Kings
20.10. Prove. 6.12. and 16.17. and 19.28. they do the lusts of the devil, John
8.44. in a most horrible thing, even putting upon God, the person of the
devil, to be the patron of a lie.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to wicked men, that dare be bold upon such ungodly practices:
consider the heinousness of this sin, as proper to the wicked, and the
dreadful judgments it must needs bring upon them, being so dishonorable to
God, and abominable in his sight. See Prove. 6.16, 19. Psalm. 52.4, 5. Thou
love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue: God shall likewise
destroy thee for ever, and root thee out of the land of the living.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, to the godly, that are thus wronged: it has befallen better then
thy self, Christ Jesus, David, Stephen, etc. See Luke 23.31. and let the godly
consider, that the devil is the false accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12.10. if
they can find, that they have repented truly, and do rest upon Christ, for
pardon, and walk in new obedience, they may rest assured of mercy upon Gods
promise, Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9. and so prove the devil a false accuser in
their consciences, as he was to Job, chap. 13.16. For when God has pardoned
sin, he does not behold it, Numb. 23.21. his sin is covered, Psalm 32.1.

The second branch of the reason, why David desires to be kept out of the hands
of his enemies, is, because of their deadly hatred toward him, The fourth
Observation.
Saul, David's arch-enemy, breathed out violence against him, 1 Samuel 21.31. send
and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely dye: therefore does David so often
style him by the name of the violent man, Psalm. 140.1, 4. and means him and his
followers, when he says, mine enemies hate me, with hatred of violence, Psalm.
25.19. In heart you work wickedness, you weigh the violence of your hands in
the earth, Psalm. 85.2. Magistrates should dispense justice and mercy, Psalm.
101.1. but Sanl and his counsel became the tradesmen of violence: violence
covered them as a garment, Psalm. 73.6.

The 1. reason.
The reason hereof in Saul was twofol. First, envy at David's honor: for when
the women sang to his renown, Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten
thousand, Saul was very wrath, and the saying displeased him: and he eyed David
from that day forward, and shortly after cast a javelin at him to kill him. 1 Samuel 18.7, 9, 10, 11. plainly verifying that of Solomon, wrath is cruel, and
anger is outrageous, but who is able to stand before envy, Prove. 27.4.

The second Reason.
Secondly, ambition, an insatiable desire to enjoy the honor of the Kingdom in
his own person, and to leave the same to his posterity, which he feared would
be crossed by David, and thereupon hates him to the death: so as he cannot
endure his own son Jonathan, who spoke in his behalf, but calls him the son
of a perverse rebellious woman, who had chosen the son of Jesse, David, to
his own confusion -- for as long as the son of Jesse lives on the ground,
thou shall not be established, nor thy Kingdom: wherefore send, and fetch him
unto me, for he shall surely dye, 1 Samuel 20.30, 31.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, touching the state of the godly, that they
are in this world liable to the deadly hatred of ungodly Kings and Governors.
A grievous thing to Gods poor servants, but too true, as with divine testimony
plain instances will manifest. For testimony, Mat. 10.18. Ye shall be brought
before Governors, and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them, Mat.
24.9. They shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye
shall be hated of all nations for my names sake. For instance, consider the
bondage of Israel under Pharaoh in Egypt, Exodus 1, 2, and 3. chapters: their
seventy years captivity in Babylon, Jer. 25.11. the bloody design of Haman for
the destruction of all the Jews, in the Kingdom of Ahashverus, Esther 3.8, 9,
10, 13. the persecutions of the Apostles by the Jews, Acts 4.24, 25, 26, 27.
the persecutions of the Apostles and other Christians by Herod, Acts 12.1, 2,
3, 4. Fox Acts and Monuments. Tom. 1.
and the ten most bloody persecutions by the heathen Roman Emperors, recorded
in the Ecclesiastical stories.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see in this violence of Saul against David, an infallible sign of
the dominion of malice, and envy in the heart: namely, when the mouth does
breath out violence: for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: an
evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil. Mat.
12.34, 35. Indeed sometimes the godly may over-shoot themselves, in words of
violence, through sharp and sudden provocations, as Job and Jeremie did, when
they cursed the time of their birth, Job 3.3. Jer. 20.14. therefore the
dominion of malice, by violent words, must be judged, not by some particular
acts, but by ordinary and continual course: as the Apostle does, Romans 3.9, 14.
prove man to be in the state of nature, under sin, when his mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness: wherewith that of Solomon does fitly accord, Prove.
10.11. saying, violence covers the mouth of the wicked, and Prove. 16.29, 30.
A violent man shuts his eyes, to devise froward things, moving his lips he
brings evil to pass: like unto Saul, Acts 9.1. who breathed out threatening
against the Church.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First, to the godly, not to think it
strange, that the great ones of the world do frown upon them, for they may
breath out violence against them. They are by nature the seed of the Serpent,
as well as others, and so continue, till they be effectually called; and
therefore no marvel, though they show enmity to the seed of the woman, and
join with the old dragon, in bitter persecution against the true members of
the Church: as Revel. 12.17. It is wisdom therefore for the godly, to prepare
for it, by getting strength of grace, to cleave fast to the Lord, in the
strongest oppositions of the world: whereat our blessed Savior directly
aymeth. Luke 14.26, 27. John 16.33. And when their violence is breathing out
against them, then to do as David did in like case, namely, for sure direction
in acceptable carriage toward God and men, to meditate in Gods word, Psalm.
119.23. and verse 95. The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will
consider thy testimonies. verse 161. Princes have persecuted me without cause:
but mine heart stands in awe of thy word. And for preservation and
deliverance give themselves to prayer, as Psalm. 140.1. etc. Psalm. 35.1. Psalm.
59.1, 2, 3.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, this servss very profitably to all natural men, to warn them to
consider their behavior, toward those whom they do not love: for if, like
Saul toward David, they breath out violence with their mouth, then no doubt, as
it was in Saul, the hellish fire of rage and fury is kindled in their breast:
which is a plain evidence, that original corruption has dominion in them,
they are yet carnal, sold under sin, they are in the snare of the devil,
held captive by him at his will. 2 Timothy 2.26. And as, in this particular case
of envy and wrath, the dominion of corruption is discerned, by the ordinary
fruits of these corrupt affections, in bitter words, and cruel deeds; so it
may be in any other sin. Filthy speaking, and wanton dalliance, are plain
flames of the fire of lust: when the mouth is full of cursing and swearing, the
heart undoubtedly is full of corruption: such stinking breath argues unsound
lungs. Coal mines, that lie deep in the earth, do ordinarily discover
themselves by black smuts, in the outward face of the ground: and so does the
corruption of nature, in the heart, bewray its dominion in natural men, by
their ordinary practice of sin in life. Solomon makes the desire of sleep the
smut of sluggishnesse. Prove. 24.33. and keeping company with drunkards. seeking
where the good liquor is, and sitting by it, the smuts of drunkenness, Prove.
23.20, 30. So his oppression, hard dealing, lying, and deceiving for gain, the
smut of covetousness, Mich. 2.2. An high look is a shrewd smut of a proud
heart, Psat. 101.5. and so is meddling with matters above our place, Psalm.
131.1. and humoring those, that may be means of our advancemeut: whether by
flattery, with Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.2, 3. or by bribery, with the devil himself:
that for the honor of homage from our Savior Christ, offers to give all the
Kingdoms of the world, Mat. 4.8, 9. Let all Symonists in the Church, and
bribers in the Common wealth. look toward their ghostly father: for like will
to like, the briber to the devil. Now when, by these smuts of sin, they
discern the black mine of corruption, then (unless they will be as the fuel
of hell fire) they must set themselves to seek a change of estate. This flesh
and blood cannot effect: for the way of man is not in himself, Jer, 10.23. man,
accustostomed to do evil, can no more do good, then the Ethiopian can change
her skin, or the Leopard her spots, Jer. 13.23. Yet with God this is possible,
Mat. 19.26. He can raise up children unto Abraham of stones, Mat. 3.9. And this
change he works by regeneration, whereby we are born again, not of flesh,
nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13. even by his spirit
blessing the word, unto our effectual calling into his holy mountain, his true
Church, where the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard lie down
with the kidd, etc. Is. 11.6. etc. where most cruel and bloody minded men, as
Saul was before his conversion, Acts 9.1. shall lay aside their cruel nature,
and live most lovingly, and peaceably with the children of God: as Acts 9.26.
and 20.24.

Now this holy calling is wrought by God, in the use of means ordinarily, even
in the word preached; the law to discover sin, Romans 3.20. and the gospel to
sow the seeds of grace, Acts 20, 24. Herein must we exercise our selves as
Cornelius did, Acts 10.33. and as Lydia did, Acts 16.14. and sanctify our
endeavor therein, by prayer to God for the blessing of his spirit: for by
prayer the spirit is obtained, Luke 11.13. of those that by repentance turn
from sin. Prove. 1.23. and by new obedience endeavor to adorn the gospel of
Christ. Acts 5.32. Thus waiting on the Lord, we may with comfort expect his
blessing: as the poor impotent people did for their bodily cure, at the poole
of Bethesda, by the Angels moving of the water, John 5.1. etc.

Verse 13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living.


Verse. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage and he shall strengthen thine
heart: Wait, I say, on the Lord.


The meaning of the words.
THese two last verses contain the third and last part of the Psalm, which is
this: Upon acknowledgement of the great benefit he received by believing, he
does notably encourage and stir up himself, and others, to wait still on God
by faith. The acknowledgement of the great benefit of his believing on Gods
promise is, verse 13. the encouragement to his own soul, and others also, by
faith to wait on God is in the last verse.

The sentence in the original, setting down the acknowledgement of the great
benefit David had by believing, Aposioposis.
is for some words, though not in sense, defective and imperfect, requiring
some supply: which the scope and circumstances of the place do show must be,
either what his enemies would have done, if he had not believed; namely, they
had prevailed and overthrown him: and so Juuius and Piscator.
some supply the defect: or what he himself should have done, if he had
believed; namely, fainted, and sunk under the burden of violent persecution,
as vatablus, whom our translations follow. For we must not leave out the word
(...), Bellarm.
except, as the Papists do, saying, it was left out by the Septuagint, because
it was of no great moment. Following therefore the supply, which is rightly
made in our bibles, the words bear this sense: as if he should have said, so
great was my persecution, that I had fainted, and so the enemy had prevaited
against me, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, that is,
to enjoy those good things, both temporal and spiritual, which the Lord has
promised me of his goodness and bounty. So the phrase is taken, Eccles. 2.1.
Enjoy pleasure: in the Hebrew it is, see good, as also verse 24. and 3.13. and
5.18. In the land of the living, that is, in this world, here on earth, where
the living are: so, with the scope of the Prophet here, the use of the phrase
generally in Scripture does show it must be taken, and understood, as shall be
fully showed afterward.

In the words thus understood note two things. First, the name, or title which
the holy ghost gives to this world. Secondly, that in this world God vouchfases
to impart his goodness unto the sons of men. Thirdly, that David for his
part believed to enjoy Gods goodness here on earth. Fourthly, that by
believing he was upheld from fainting in himself, and from ruin by his enemies.

The first observation.
For the first, God by the mouth of David here calls this world the land of
the living. This habitable place of the earth, wherein men live a natural
life, is the land of the living, in the style and and phrase of the holy Ghost.
This is plain, and certain by the ordinary use of this phrase in Scripture. See
Job 28.12. The place of wisdom is not found in the land of the living, that
is, among living men in this world: for it were absurd to say, the place of
understanding were not to be found in heaven, seeing it is there said, God
understands the way thereof, verse 23. See also, Psalm. 52.5. David
foretelling the destruction of Deeg, says God shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living:
not out of heaven, where he never was planted, nor grew, but of this world,
where he grew, as a great tree, till God plucked him up, and rooted him out, by
death and destruction, Is. 38.11. I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the
Lord, in the land of the living, that is, among the living here on earth: for
who can imagine, that Hezekiah meant, he should not see the Lord in heaven? But
here on earth the godly saw him in his ordinances: as Psalm. 63.2. and 68.25.
and his meaning he further clears in the end of the verse, I shall behold men
no more with the Inhabitants of the world. The same phrase in the same sense is
used, Is. 53.8. Ezekiel. 26.20. and 32.23. Psalm. 116.9. and 142.2. Jer, 11.9. and
in the same sense is the like phrase taken, the light of the living, Job 33.30.
Psalm. 56.13.

The Reason.
The reason why this habitable word is called the land of the living is, because
God created it, and does maintain and preserve it for man's habitation, while he
lives a natural life in this world. Psalm. 115.16. The heaven, even the heavens
are the Lords: the earth has he given to the children of men. And opposes
hereunto the place of the dead, calling it a land of darkness, and the shadow
of death a land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of
death, without any order, and where the light is as darkness, Job 10.22, 23. a
land of forgetfulness, Psalm. 88.12.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, see here plainly, that it is an error, and mistaking, to take
the land of the living for the Kingdom of heaven, as generally the Papists do,
following herein the ancient fathers, who Hieron. in Ps. 26. August. in Ps. 26.
Cassiodorus.
many of them do so expound it. Which I do therefore note to show, how
uncertain a rule it is, to tie our selves, for the right understanding of
Scriptures, to the exposition thereof made to the ancient fathers: for in very
many things, they differ in judgment one from another, as the learned do
plainly show. Whitak. de Script. interpret. Controv. 1. quaest. 5. cap. 8.
Reynolds and Heart.
And they themselves, in differences, do disclaim the authority of men,
though never so learned, and send us to the Scripture. See August. Ep. 19.
Iren. 4. adversus haeres. cap. 63.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that we consider Gods providence over us herein, causing us to
have our time in the land of the living, which we cannot deny to be a great
favor: and therefore should endeavor to walk worthy of this blessing which
after the example of Christ is, to work the works of him that sent us, John
9.4. First, that we repent of our sins, Mat. 3.2. Luke 13.3, 5. Secondly, that
we believe on Jesus Christ, whom God has sent to be our Savior, John 6.28.
This God commands to all, that would be saved, 1 John 3.21. with 5.13.
Thirdly, that we work out our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
which is then done, when with reverence to God, who works all grace, we do
humbly and constantly exercise our selves in the means thereof, ever making
conscience of sin, till we receive the end of our faith, which is the
salvation of our souls, 1 Pet 1.9.

The second Observation.
The second point to be here observed is this, That in the land of the living,
that is in this world, God does bountifully impart his goodness to the sons
of men: this is here taken for granted, and elsewhere plainly affirmed, Psalm.
33.5. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 119.64. The earth
is full of thy mercy, Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all: even the brute
creatures do daily taste of his bounty, Psalm. 104.27.28. They all wait upon him,
he gives them their meat in due season. That he gives they gather: he opens
his hand, and they are filled with good.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, because in nature and essence he is
goodness it self, love it self, and bounty it self, and so can no more detain
his goodness from the creatures, then the sun can his light from the world,
when it is risen: and indeed by the exercise of goodness and bounty does he
manifest this essential property: as Psalm 119.68. Thou art good, and do
good. Jam. 1.17. By his good gifts and perfect givings he is seen to be the
father of lights.

The second Reason.
Secondly, by his free and abundant communication of goodness he binds every
creature unto him, and man particularly to honor him: for even temporal
benefits are his witnesses, that he, from whom they come, is the true God, and
that he must be honored for them: see Acts 14.17. Hereupon the godly do stir
up themselves to due and daily thankfulness: as Psalm. 103.1, 2. and 116.12.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, this shows plainly, that the true God is not
known, as he ought to be, no not in this property of goodness. That which
Pharaoh professed of himself without fear, Exodus 5.2. who is the Lord? I know
not the Lord: is true of all natural men: for if they rightly knew this one
property of goodness and bounty, in the communication of blessings, their
hearts would cleave unto him, in an unfaigned desire to be his by covenant: for
every man is a friend to him that gives gifts. Prove. 19.6. while they
therefore say, who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him? Job 21.15. they show themselves worse,
then the devil himself, who said, does Job serve God for naught? have thou not
made an hedge about him? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, Job 1.9, 10.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, this shows, what manner of persons all those ought to be, who call
God father, namely, free and forward in doing good: so we shall resemble our
heavenly father: which is enjoined us. Mat. 5.44, 55. This was Christ Jesus his
property, while he was on earth, he went about doing good, Acts 10.38. And it
is commanded, and commended to us all, Ephesians. 5.1. Be followers of God as dear
children, and walk in love, Heb. 13.16. To do good, and to communicate forget
not.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves three ways. First, in the want of any good thing to
go to God by prayer, for he is the father of lights from whom all good comes,
and for the obtaining thereof, with the use of lawful means, join prayer to
him, that says, ask and ye shall have, Mat. 7.7. But withal we must look,
that we go not on in a course of sin, for that withholds good things, Jer.
5.25. and causes God not to hear our prayers, Ps. 66.18.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, this must move us to labor to be such, as shall surely partake of
Gods best blessings: For God is the great housekeeper, that makes provision for
children, for servants, yea for bruit creatures, even for his very dogs. And
answerable to his greatness in provision, is his justice, and wisdom in
distribution: he gives not to all alike, but to every one his portion, and will
not have childrens bread given to dogs, Matthew. 15.26. Indeed for temporal
blessings he many times gives a larger portion to the wicked, then to his
children, as we may see by the outward state of Divet and Lazarus, Luke 10.19,
20. as great housekeepers will many times feast strangers more liberally, then
their own children. Yet God has better things for his own, then for the
world, as Mat. 3.11, 16. And the right way to partake of the best blessings is,
The right way to partake of the best blessings.
first in general to make sure we be in covenant which God through faith in
Christ Jesus: for he that comes unto God must believe, Heb. 11.6. yea believe
in Christ, for he is the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the
Father but by him, John 14.6. Now being thus in covenant, all is ours, whether
things present* or things to come, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. we partake hereby of his
fatness and sweetness, Romans 11.17. and God will prevent us with blessings of
goodness, Psalm. 21.5. In particular, to testify the truth of our faith, we
must get and manifest the grace of love: for this is a sure companion of faith,
Gal. 5.6. and a sure fruit of the same sanctifying spirit, Gal. 5.22. and this
entitles us unto Gods best blessings, 1 Cor. 2.9. What eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, nor heart conceived, has God prepared for them that love him,
1 John. 3.14. We know we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren.

Secondly, we must fear God with a filial fear: by the consideration of Gods
power and presence, seeking to bring our hearts to true conscience of eschewing
evil, and doing good, wherein his grace is certainly made evident, as Job 1.8.
Prove. 14.2. Thus shall we be surely entitled to Gods blessings; Psalm. 25.12,
13, 14. What man is he that fears the Lord? -- His soul shall lodge in
goodness, or dwell at ease (as it is translated) The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant. Psalm. 31.19. O how
great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and
wrought for them that trust in thee, even before the sons of men.

Thirdly, we must walk in obedience, in well doing, according to the duties of
our places, laboring in all things to keep a good consciente, both toward God
and men. Herein stands the power of godliness, which has the promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. No good thing shall
be lacking to him that walks uprightly. Psalm. 84.11. What man is he that
desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue
from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good,
seek peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34.12, 13. Yea to them, that by continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, shall be eternal life
-- glory, honor, and peace, to every man that works good, Romans 2.7.10.

The thi^d Use for admonition.
Thirdly, when we enjoy any good, we must remember whence it comes, and stir
up our selves to true thankfulness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In all things give thanks.
Psalm. 50.23. He that offers praise and thanks honors him. Therefore we
must with David study the art of thankfulness, as Psalm. 116.12. What shall I
render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? and call upon our souls
for the performance of this duty: as Psalm. 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, etc. remembering the Samaritan. Luke 17.15, 19. who, upon his
thanksgiving, was sent away with a better blessing for his soul, then he
obtained for his body by humble supplication.

For comfort, this makes greatly to all the godly, in any want or distress:
The Use for comfort.
for surely their God is kind to the unkind and in temporal blessings very
liberal, even to the wicked: as we may see, Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5. etc. The wicked
have proserity: there are no bands in their death, their strength is fi^m, etc.
Psalm. 17.14. They have their portion in this world: their bellies God fills
with his hid treasure. Now all they have are but effects and fruits of his
common favor: what then do we think has he in store for those whom he loves
in Christ? Surely for them he has a worthy dowry: as 1 Samuel 1.5. Consider,
Mat. 6.26. etc. Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do
they reap, nor gather into barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds them; are
not you much better then they? etc. when a gentleman keeps his dogs and his
hogs, fat and fair, shall we think he will suffer his children to starve, for
want of food and raiment? Nay, nay, though deer parents may sometimes prove
unnatural, and a mother forget her sucking child, yet will not God forget his
children, Is. 49.15.

The third Observation.
The third thing to be noted here is this. David believed that he should enjoy
the goodness of the Lord in this world. Psalm 116.9, 10. I will walk before the
Lord, in the land of the living. I believed, therefore have I spoken: and more
plainly, Psalm. 23.1, 5, 6. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not lack -- Thou
preparest a table before me, in the presence of mine enemies: thou annointest
my head with oil, my cup runs over: Surely, goodness and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life.

The Reason.
The reason of this his persuasion was the goodness of God to David, both
making promises of these blessings unto David, and also enabling him by grace
to rest and rely thereon, as he confesses unto God, Psalm. 119.40. Remember the
word unto thy servant upon which thou have caused me to hope. The promises of
God to David, were twofold: First general, which are good to all Gods people,
that be truly in covenant with God, and make conscience of obedience: which are
at large set down, Levit. 26.3, 4, etc. to 14. and Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc. to 15. and
fully, though briefly, Psalm. 34.9. there is no want to those that fear him.
Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and
verily thou shall be fed: Secondly, more particular and personal unto David
himself alone, for the honor of the Kingdom over Israel, assured by special
promise, Psalm. 89.20, 21, 22. and ratified by holy annoynting, 1 Samuel 16.13.
and for the building and blessing of his house, 1 Samuel 7.11.27.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

For instruction, The use for instruction.
see here plain evidence of the great use and benefit of faith, it serves to
entitle us, not only unto spiritual and heavenly blessings in Christ, but even
to the good things of this world, in temporal blessings; as here David lays
hold on Gods goodness promised in this world. So did Noah by faith build the
ark, for the saving of his household in the flood, Heb. 11.7. So did Paul
receive safety to himself, and those that sailed with him, in his dangerous
voyage, Acts 27.24, 25. Thus Asa and his people received victory in time of
battle, 2 Chronicles. 18.8. and Jehosaphats preservation from assault, 2. Chron.
20.20. And what shall I more say (says the Apostle) for the time would fail
me to tell of Gideon, of Barack, of Sampson, of Jephta, of Samuel, David, and
the prophets: who through faith subdued Kingdoms, etc. Heb. 11.32, 33, 34. So
as we may well say of faith, what the Apostle does of godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8.
that it is profitable for all things, and has the promise of all kind of
blessings: for true faith is the prime grace of godliness, to the sure
entitling of us to the best blessings; as Gal. 5.6.

Here indeed every Christian must wisely and rightly consider the different
nature of blessings promised, and according to the Lords meaning, entitle
themselves thereunto. For some promises concern blessings, simply necessary to
true happiness, as be justification and sanctification: other promises are
made of blessings, both spiritual and temporal, which are very good and
comfortable, but not simply necessary to salvation, as be peace of conscience,
and joy in the holy ghost, and all degrees of spiritual graces, above that
which shows the truth and life thereof, as abundance of knowledge, strong
faith, fervent love, and the like^ which high degrees of grace some have had,
as Abraham, Romans 4.19, 20. the Centurion, Luke 7.9. and the woman of Canaan.
Mat. 15.28. whereas the disciples themselves were, for a good while, men of
little faith. Mat. 6.30. and 16.8. and the Church of Philadelphia had a little
strength, Rev. 3.8.

Now the promises of blessings, simply necessary to true happiness, are made
absolutely in Christ to true believers, without any other condition, as Acts
16, 31. John 3.16. but the promises of blessings, not simply necessary to
salvation, must be understood to be made with the exception of the cross,
which is this. That God, out of his sovereignty over his dearest children, may
deny the accomplishment of these promises, either for correction, or prevention
of sin, or trial of grace, which well considered prevents much perplexity, and
distress in soul, to those, that labor to walk honestly, and yet are more
under the cross, then some of Gods children be, with whom they live.

For admonition, The Use for admonition.
this serves notably to stir up every one to get true faith: for every one
desires to enjoy Gods goodness, many say, who will show us any good? Psalm.
4.6. Now the way is to get faith, which entitles us to all Gods promise: and
the right course herein is, to begin with the main promise in Christ, to get
that faith in him, which may entitle us to his righteousness: for in him we
are restored to sanctified right in the creature, and in him all things are
ours, things present, and things to come. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. All the promises of
God are in him, yea and in him amen. 2 Cor. 1.20. Therefore Christ himself bids
his Disciples, First seek the King dome of God and his righteousness; and then
all these things, pertaining to food and raiment, shall be ministered unto us,
Mat. 6.33. For if God spared not his own some, but gave him for us, how shall
he not with him give us all things also? Romans 8.32. Now this true faith, is
never severed from true repentance, not new obedience: for by sight and sorrow
for sin the way is prepared for Christ and his Kingdom. Mal. 3.1. and Mat.
21.32. And new obedience in eschewing evil, and doing good, is that behavior
which comes from love, a fruit of the spirit, by which faith works. Gal. 5.6,
22.

The fourth and last point to be here observed is, The fourth Observation.
the benefit which David received, by believing Gods word and promise, hereby
he was preserved from fainting in himself, and from being foiled by his
enemies, in their most violent opposition: for one or both of these evils he
confesses would have befallen him, if he had not believed: see Psalm. 3.3, 6.
Thou Lord art a buckler for me, there is his says, I will not be afraid of
ten thousand of the people, that have set themselves against me round about:
there is his security from faith, Psalm. 57.1, 3. My soul trusts in thee: yea
in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, till these calamities be
overpast -- He shall send from heaven and save me, etc.

The reason hereof is plain: The Reason.
for his faith entitled him to Gods power and providence, for protection and
safety in time of danger, from whence sprang that courage, which upheld him
from fainting in the depth of distress: whereas, if he had wanted faith, he
had indeed been out of covenant with God, and so void of title to Gods power
and providence, and so must needs have fainted, when worldly power and refuge
had wholly failed him. This David's enemies knew well, and therefore, thinking
that God had forsaken him, they do thereupon encourage themselves to persecute
him, with assurance to take him, Psalm. 71.11.

This serves for instruction, The first Use for instruction.
and for admonition.

For instruction two ways. First, it lets us plainly see the great evil of
unbelief, for it takes away heart and courage in time of persecution. This we
may seeby Nabal, whose heart dyed within him, when he heard of deadly danger
already past, 1 Samuel 25.37. and in Saul, when the Philistines came upon him, he
was sore troubled at the sight of that huge Army. 1 Samuel 28.5. and afterward
fainted, when he heard, by the witch of Endors means, the heavy tidings of his
approaching ruin, verse 20. and the day following desperately fell upon his
own sword, when the Philistines pressed near unto him, 1 Samuel 31.4. Hence Ahaz
and his peoples hearts were shaken as a leaf, when they heard, that Syria and
Ephraim were conspired against him, Is. 7.2. at which time the Lord promised
him mercy: but withal tells him of the hurt of unbelief. verse 9. If ye will
not believe, ye shall not be established.

Secondly, here again see the great benefit of faith, The second Use for
instruction.
both for courage and comfort in time of danger, for the righteous is bold as a
Lion. Prove. 28.1. when the wicked fly, and no man pursues: and also for
safety and deliverance, while it is a blessing to them. See Psalm 31.19, 20.
Psalm 91.1, 2, 9.

For admonition, The Use for admonition.
it serves notably to move every one to get the grace of true faith, and to set
the same a working in the time of danger. This world is full of evils and
troubles, as the Sea is of storms and waves: now faith is as the stern that
guides, and the anchor that holds fast, against the greatest blasts and
billows. Heb. 6.19. this intitles us to Gods power and providence, which is
like the pillar of a cloud by day, and fire by night, to guide and keep us, as
it did Israel, Exodus 13.21, 22. and 14.19. This gave courage to the three
children. Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.

Verse 14. wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.


THese words are the Prophets zealous exhortation and encouragement, The
meaning of the words.
both to his own soul and to others to wait on God, and be of good courage,
meaning in time of trouble and affliction. Unto which good duties he does
stir up himself and others, by the benefit they shall receive thereby: viz.
God will strengthen their hearts: and afterward repeats the first duty again,
for waiting on God to show the necessity of it. So that here in genera^l we
have to handle the duties propounded, and the reason to enforce them. The
duties are two, both of them respecting our behavior in time of affliction:
First, to wait on God: secondly, to be of good courage.

For the first to wait on God, is patiently to tarry the Lords leisure, for the
things we desire, whether it be to be freed from evils, or made partakers of
blessings, or both; though here the exhortation has special conference to
expectation of deliverance from evils. So that the first thing we have here to
note is this.

That every child of God, The first Observation.
who is under any evils, of body, or mind, or both, must stir up his heart
to wait the Lords good pleasure, and leisure for deliverance, Psalm. 130.6. Let
Israel hope in the Lord, Luke 21.19. By your patience possess your selves,
when you are betrayed, by parents, kinds folks, and friends: now waiting on God
is the holy art, or work of patience, Romans 8.25. The examples of Gods children,
professing the practice of this duty, are many: as of Jacob. Genesis 49.10. I have
waited for thy salvation, O Lord. Job 14.4. All the days of mine appointed
^ime will I wait. David. Psalm. 130.5.6. I wait for the Lord, yea, my soul does
wait, my soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning.
Yea, this is the practice of the Church it self, Is. 25.9. It shall be said in
that day, lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us.
This is the Lord, we have waited for him. All which are an excellent cloud of
faithful witnesses, showing plainly, that the duty is required of God, and
that the performance of it is acceptable in his sight.

The reasons hereof are plain. The first R^^^^^.
First, all afflictions come by Gods disposing and ruling providence: a^ Is.
45.7. I create peace and evil. Amos 3.6. Is there evil in the City, and the
Lord has done it? and the removing of them is his doing also: for he does
heal and bind up, as well as tear and smile, Hos. 6.2. Jer. 33.6. Therefore
it is wisdom to go to him that smitteth, and to wait upon sin for help.

Secondly, waiting on God is a work of faith, The second Reason.
Is. 28.16. and ascribes unto God the honor of the blessing we wait for: when
as refusing to wait on God bew^ aies an evil heart of unbelief: as 2 Kings
6.33. Wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer?

Thirdly, The third Reason.
by waiting on God we are surely entitled to singular benefits, Lam. 3.25. The
Lord is good unto them that wait for him. See this his goodness in sundry
particular blessings. First, they shall inherit the earth, that is, every good
and comfortable blessing in this world, Psalm 37.9. Secondly, God will save
them from their enemies, Prove. 20.22. Thirdly, he hears their cry and prayer,
Psalm. 40.1. Fourthly, they shall never be ashamed, Psalm. 25.3. Is. 49.23.
Fifthly, they shall renew their strength, Is. 40.30. Sixthly, God prepares for
them blessings spiritual in Christ, which surpass the conceit and reach of
man, Is. 64.4.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

For instruction, it may well inform us to conceive, The use for instruction.
what is like to be our estate in this world, in regard of troubles: namely,
seeing we must wait upon God for deliverance from them, it seems he would have
us to resolve, they may be our portion, here on earth. When an earthly King
enjoins all his subjects to prepare arms, and be in readiness, they will
easily conceive they shall have wars. And thus deals the Lord with his
children, he bids them wait upon him, for deliverance from troubles, when they
come. Now patient waiting is the act of hope in God for his help: which is one
part of defensive a ^^our in time of trouble: as Luke 21.19. by your patience
possess your souls, Ephesians. 6.15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace: which needed not but for afflictions, which are plainly
foretold, John 16.33. Acts 14.22.2 Tim. 2.12. and preparation for them enjoined
Luke 14.26, 27 amplified ^here by two resemblances. verse 28. etc.

For admonition, The Use for admonition.
it serves effectually to stir up every godly man, to make sure he be end^ed
with these graces and give himself to that behavior, which may enable him with
patience to wait on the Lord, in the time of affliction. Every good husband is
provident in summer to make provision for winter: and shall not Christians be
wise for their souls in the like? The way to Christian patience.
The sure way to Christian patience is this.

First, to break off the course of every sin by true repentance, for the guilt
of sin takes away peace of conscience, unless it be seared: and they, that
are in that estate and case, are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast out mire and dirt, Is. 57.20. who can rightly wait on God for
nothing, but judgments: for while they go on in sin, they have no title to
mercy, and therefore it is said the hope of the ungodly shall perish, Prove.
10.28. it shall be like the giving up of the ghost, Job 11.20. but if they
repent, putting iniquity far away, as Job 11.14. then there is hope. verse 18.

Secondly, they must believe in God through Christ: for this they are justified
and have peace with God, Romans 5 1. and this faith is the ground of things hoped
for, Heb. 11.1. and when it is tried in affliction it brings forth patience,
Jam. 1.3. the perfect work whereof is this waiting on God here enjoined.

Thirdly, they must fear God, by remembering his hand and providence in these
evils that lie upon them: for a sparrow lights not on the ground without his
will, Mat. 10.29. This will check and suppress both repining and grudging
toward God, as Luke 23.34.49. and envy, and desire of revenge against men, and
give us hope of a comfortable end. Prove. 23.17, 18. Let not thine heart envy
sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long: for surely there
is an end, and thine expectation shall not be cut off.

Fourthly, they must walk in obedience, Psalm. 7, 34. wait on the Lord, and keep
his may, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the earth.

Be of good courage] The second duty, whereunto David stirs up himself, and
others in the time of affliction: namely, they must not suffer themselves to be
daunted, dismayed, or faint-hearted, but stir up themselves, encourage their
hearts, and keep fast the confidence of their hope, even in the depth of
distress: this is the meaning. Mark then, The third Observation.
Gods children must not suffer themselves to be dismayed, or daunted in time of
affliction, but cheer up their hearts, and encourage themselves in the Lord
their God. See Psalm. 31.24. Be of good courage, Is. 35.3. strengthen the weak
hands, and confirm the feeble knees, 1 Pet. 3.4. not being dismayed with any
terror: even as David did, when his own men would have stoned him, he
encouraged himself in the Lord his God. 1 Samuel 30.6. and this is the meaning of
the Apostles charge. 1 Cor. 16.3. Stand fast in the faith, quit you like men,
be strong.

The reasons hereof are plain, and of great importance.

The first Reason.
First, to be fearful and faint-hearted in affliction comes, either from the
want, or at least from the weakness of grace, even of that most excellent and
needful grace of faith: as Solomon says, If thou be faint in the day of
adversity, thy strength is small, Prove. 24.10. even thy faith: as Christ told
his Disciples, in a great storm upon the Sea, Matthew. 8.26. Why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith?

Now there is great danger herein, for hence comes Apostasy in Religion, when
men withdraw themselves, for fear of persecution. In those the Lords soul
takes no pleasure: such drawing back is unto perdition, Heb. 10.38, 39. and
such fearful ones are set in the first rank of those, that must be cast into
the burning lake. Rev. 21.8.

The second Reason.
Secondly, Gods children must do as much for Gods glory, in a good cause, as
wicked men do to his dishonor: in that which is evil: now they encourage
themselves in an evil matter, Psalm. 64.5. and hearten one another to do
wickedly. Is. 41.6, 7. They helped every one his neighbor, and every one said
to his brother, be of good courage. So the Carpenter encouraged the goldsmith,
etc. about their idols. Say thou therefore with Nehemiah, should such a man as
I fly? Nehem. 6.11. Remember, that the spirit of glory, and of God, is
glorified, when we show courage in suffering for a good cause, 1 Pet. 4.14. Yea
and our weak brethren are much heartened by our example: as Philip. 1.14. Many
of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold
to speak the word without fear: whereto old Eleazer had great respect in his
sufferings, ^2 Maccab. 6.18, 24, 25.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, courage is needful under afflictions, in respect of the reward, which
not of our merit, but of Gods bounty, is no less then a Kingdom, even the
Kingdom of heaven, and the crown of life. See, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. Paul tells the
Thessalonians, that through faith and patience in suffering, they shall be
counted worthy the Kingdom of God: and 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall
also reign with him. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto the end, and I will give
thee the crown of life. Now what courage will men show for earthly Kingdoms?
and what will they not endure to get them? And much more should we do so for
that Kingdom, which is undefiled, immortal, and fades not a way, reserved in
heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, God is with them, that suffer for well-doing, and if they be
courageous for his glory, he will strengthen their hearts, as it follows in
this verse, Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him in trouble. Herewith he encouraged
Paul at Corinth, Acts 18.9, 10. and David herewith did notably encourage
himself, Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear. See Romans 8.31.
If God be with us, who can be against us? Thus the Angel encouraged Gideon.
Judge. 6.12. Jeremie encourages himself, Jer. 20.11. God encourages his
people, Is. 35.4, and 41.10.

This serves for instruction, and admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows what manner of persons the professors of true
religion ought to be, for truth and strength of grace: namely, not babes, or
children, but men of stature and courage in Christ Jesus, even perfect men,
Ephesians. 4.13, 14. Children are so fearful, and not fit for war: but Christians
must sight the Lords battles, against spiritual enemies, Ephesians. 6.12. and
endure hardness, as good soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.3. Few do think on these things:
but the most content themselves with the shows of godliness, and want the
powers thereof, 2 Timothy 2.5. But wisdom is justified of her children, Mat.
11.9.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, according to this charge, every one should give all diligence,
to get this spiritual courage into their hearts, which will enable them to
wait upon the Lord in times of distress.

The way to get spiritual courage.
The way hereto is to make sure of two things: first, that the state of our
persons toward God be good: Secondly. that our godly behavior express the
same. That the state of our persons may be good before God, three things are
required: repentance, faith, and sanctification. Repentance is that grace of
God, whereby we, considering our own ways in our hearts, do humbly confess
our wicked ways unto God, and praying for mercy and pardon, do forsake the
sins wherein we have lived. And this is needful unto true courage, because
the guilt of every sin brings fearfulness: as Genesis 3.8, 10. Deuteronomy. 28.66. Thou
shall fear day and night, Prove. 28.1. The wicked fly, when none pursues:
neither shall any man strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life, Ezekiel.
7.13. Faith is that grace of Gods spirit, whereby we rest, and rely on Gods
mercy in Christ's merits, for justification and salvation: hereby we are
justified, and be at peace with God, Romans 5.1. and the righteous are bold as a
Lion, Prove. 28.1. Hereby we are in Christ the son of God, Gal. 2.20. and in him
we shall be strong and courageous, as Ephesians. 6.10. Phil. 4.3.

Thirdly, sanctification is the work of the spirit, abolishing corruption, and
renewing grace more and more every day. Now they, that are in this estate, have
the spirit dwelling in them. Romans 8.11. which is the spirit of strength, Is.
11.2. the spirit of power, and of a sound mind. 2 Timothy 1.7. These graces bring
quietness, and confidence, which are the strength of the godly, Is. 30.19.

The godly behavior needful to true spiritual courage is threefold. First,
to make sure our trouble be for a good cause: for if we suffer for
righteousness sake, we need not be afraid for any terror, 1 Pet. 3.14. Let
none of you suffer as an evil doer -- but if any man suffer as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed, 1 Pet. 4 15, 16. So the Jews strengthened their hands
for the good work. Nehem. 2.18. Secondly, we must store our hearts with the
word of God, both for direction in carriage, and consolation in distress. So
did David. Psalm. 119.11. hide Gods sayings in his heart: and hereby kept
himself from the paths of the destroyer. Psalm. 17.4. This is my comfort in mine
affliction, for thy word has quiekened me, Psalm. 119.50. And in particular
know God is present with us, Deuteronomy. 31.6. 1 Chronicles. 28.20. 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. Hag.
2.4. Thirdly, beside all the former, we must ever join humble and earnest
prayer, for strength and courage from God: as Nehem. 6 9. They made us afraid
-- Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hand. Acts 4.29. Now Lord, behold their
threatenings, and grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may
speak thy word.

And he shall strengthen thine heart.] The reason whereby he Prophet does
encourage himself, and his godly brethren, to the former duties of waiting
upon God, and being of good courage in the time of affliction, drawn from the
great benefit they shall reap hereby, namely, God will strengthen their hearts:
he will put strength and courage into them, and make them resolute, or
steadfastly minded, as this phrase is translated. Ruth 1.18. and able to hold
out until they have a blessed issue.

The third observation.
Mark then, They that wait on the Lord, and encourage themselves so to do, in
the times of affliction, shall have the Lord in mercy to put strength into
them, for their better enabling to wait on him, Psalm. 31.24. Be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart: all ye that hope in the Lord.
This David found to be true by good experience,

Psalm. 40.1, 2. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me -- and
established my goings, according to the Lords promise. Is. 40.30. They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength.


The first Reason.
The reason hereof is plain. First, to wait on the Lord, and to encourage our
selves in affliction, are notable actions of faith, as is showed before: Now
the grace of faith does surely entitle us to the participation of Gods power, 2
Chro. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established.

The second Reason.
Secondly, in waiting on the Lord, and encouraging our selves in time of
affliction, are the right improving and employing of the talents, which the
Lord has left with us: for in so doing we set faith a work And this behavior
has title to increase: for to every one that has, it shall be given, Mat.
25.28, 29. It is said of Paul, that he increased in strength, Acts 9.22. and
the way and means thereof is showed by himself, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more
abundantly then they all.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, see here plainly that Gods gracious gifts,
and works in our hearts, are vouchsafed, though not for, yet in, and upon our
endeavor, in obedience to his will, in the use of those means wherein he is
pleased to work the same: as here, increase of strength from God is promised,
upon our obedience, in waiting on the Lord, and encouraging our hearts so to
do. So, Is. 55.3. Hear, and your soul shall live: for faith comes by hearing.
Romans 10.17. and he that believes in me, says our Savior, shall never dye.
John. 11.26. A most needful point, worthy of all observation, because the
corruption of nature is such, that we willingly yield to the contrary conceit,
which is, to hope for good from God, though we neglect the means, wherein God
is pleased to work the same, and therein separate the means from the end: as
the Jews looked to have eternal life in the word, and yet would not search to
find therein, what it testified of Christ, John 5.39. They would have life, but
they would not come to Christ to have it in him. verse 40. As on the other
side, we easily persuade our selves, we shall escape damnation, though we make
bold upon sin, the meritorious cause thereof, to live therein.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see the true fountain of al^ that courage, and boldness, which
in all ages Gods children have showed, for Gods glory, and for the maintenance
of his truth, even to the amazement of their adversaries: as in David against
Goliath, 1 Samuel 16.32, 34. Psalm. 3.6. and 23.4. in the three servants of God
before Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 3.16, 17. in the Apostles before the rulers of the
Jews, Acts 3.13. and in many thousand Martyrs before their persecutors,
whereof the Ecclesiastical histories give plentiful testimony. Surely, they
had it from the true God, who did strengthen their hearts: and this the godly
have confessed, as David often, calling the Lord his strength: as Psalm. 18.1,
2. Psalm. 144.1. and Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17. This Lord stood with me, and strengthened
me.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves: First, to observe the ways and means, whereby God
does strengthen the hearts of his children, that so we may therein wait upon
God, in the day of affliction, for increase of strength, and courage in our
souls. Gods ways for this end are of two sorts: some extraordinary, as the
touch of Christ's hand, vouchsafed to Daniel, How God does strengthen the hearts
of his Children.
Dan. 10.10, 16, 18. and the laying on of his right hand, vouchsafed to Fohn,
Rev. 1.17. Others are ordinary, and that of two sorts, outward and inward. Gods
ordinary outward ways of strengthening the heart are four.

First, and chiefly his word spoken, either by God himself, as Josh. 1.6, 7, 9.
or by his servants in the ministry thereof; as Heb. 12.12. Lift up the hands
that hang down, Is. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people -- speak ye to
the heart of Jerusalem. Hence David says, ^his is my comfort in mine
affliction, for thy word has quickened me, Psalm. 119.50. and Jerem. 15.16. Thy
word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. A good weapon in a man's
hand puts courage in his heart against an enemy: now Gods word is the sword of
the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. yea the sword of Gods mouth, Rev. 2.16. nay sharper then
any two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.

Secondly, the works of his providence, wherein we have had experience of his
goodness in former deliverances. Thus David's heart was strengthened, to
encounter with Goliath, by the experience of Gods power and providence, in
killing the Lion and the Bear. 1 Samuel 17, 34, 35, 36, 37. yea, the remembrance
of Gods power, and mercy unto others, in like case, puts life and courage into
the hearts of God children in distress. Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our Fathers trusted in
thee, and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered.
Here thou may say, as Elisha did, at the waters of Jordan, where is the God
of Elijah? 2 Kings 2.14.

Thirdly, the company of the godly puts courage into the distressed, Acts
28.15. When Paul saw the brethren, in his dangerous voyage, he thanked God,
and took courage, Prove. 27.9, 17. O intment and perfume rejoice the heart, so
does the sweetness of a man's friend, by hearty counsel -- Iron sharpeneth
iron: so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.

Fourthly and lastly, prayer to God, as well by our selves, as by others in our
behalf. Thus the Apostles sought courage and boldness, when they were
threatened by the rulers of the Jews, Acts 4.24, 29. and Paul, for this end,
entreated the Ephesians to pray for him, Ephesians. 6.19.

Gods inward way of strengthening the heart is by the work of his spirit: for
that is the comforter, John 14.16, 17. and the spirit of strength, Is. 11.2. of
power, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.

By the assurance of the abode of this spirit among them, the Lord encourages
Zerobabell, Jehoshuah, and the people, Hag. 2.4, 5.

Now these being some of Gods special ways, whereby he strengthens the
hearts of his children, we must stir up our selves to wait for his work of
mercy for the strengthening of our hearts when terror and fears take hold upon
us.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, we must labor to be such, both in state of soul, and behavior of
life, as to whom God will vouchsafe the blessing of strength of heart in evil
times. This requires (besides the duties here named, of waiting upon God, and
encouraging our hearts in evil times) that before hand, in the days of peace.
First, we beware of sin; and break off the course thereof by true repentance:
for guilt of sin brings a trembling heart, and great astonishment, as Deuteronomy.
28.65, 66. even fear, where no fear is, Ps. 53.5. it makes the heart to fail,
Luke 21.26.

Secondly, that we are truly in covenant with God, not only receiving the
seals thereof, for outward admittance and assurance, as Baptism, and the
Lords supper, but humbly receiving, and obeying the word of the covenant,
Christ's holy gospel: which when we do, the Lord will say, fear thou not, for
I am with thee; he not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea,
I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee, with the right hand of my
righteousness, Is. 41.10.

Thirdly, that by faith we rest and rely upon Gods mercy in Christ Jesus. This
is the ground of hope, whereby we wait on God, which has the promise of being
strengthened: as when it is said, that by faith some of weak were made strong,
Heb. 11.34. as Abraham was strong in the faith, Romans 4.20. This faith unites us
unto ^od in Christ, Gal. 2.20. and Gods promise is to strengthen such in the
Lord, Zech. 10.12.

Fourthly, that we be upright hearted toward God, for the Lord makes himself
strong for such, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. This we may see by his promise, and dealing
with David, who was upright before him, Psalm. 18.23. and Gods hand was
established with him, his arm did streng then him, Ps. 89.21.

The fourth observation.
The fourth and last point here to be noted is, the repetition of the first duty
here prescribed. Wait, I say, on the Lord: that is, even after the Lord has
strengthened thine heart, yet wait still on God, and abide his leisure for thy
full deliverance.

The like repetition we may see in the same case, Jam. 5.7.8. Be patient
therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: behold, the husbandman
waits for the precious fruit of the earth -- Be ye also patient, stablish
your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws near.

The Reason.
The reason of such repetitions is, to show the necessity of this duty, of
waiting upon God in the time of afflictions: for tribulations are like to
continue to the godly in this world, as Christ told his Disciples, John 16.33.
in regard of the malice of the devil, and his instruments, who, being the seed
of the Serpent, do bear continual enmity to the godly, which are the seed of
the woman. The wicked ordinarily are many, and mighty, as David complains,
Psalm. 69.4. They, that hate me without a cause, are more then the hairs of
mine head, they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are
mighty. So as the godly had need, with the same prophet, to say and do, as
Psalm. 59.9. Because of his strength will I wait upon thee, for God is my
defense.

The use for instruction.
This serves to justify a profitable ministerial practice, in the zealous
pressing of needful duties, by often repetition. Many have itching ears, ever
desirous to hear novelties: like the Athenians, who spent the time in nothing
else, but to tell or hear some new thing, Acts 17.21. But wisdom is
justified of her children. They, that mind to be Christ's Disciples, are
desirous to hear needful things, again and again: as John 9.29. Wherefore
would you hear it again and again? will ye also be, his Disciples? Acts
13.42. The Gentiles besought, that these words might be preached unto them the
next Sabbath. For which purpose Paul says, To Write to you the same things is
not indeed grievous to me, but for you it is safe, Phil. 3.1. as his often
practice of it plainly shows in the same chapter verse 18. Many walk of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ, Gal. 1.8, 9. Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach unto
you any other gospel, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
gospel unto you, then that ye have r^ceived, let him be accursed. And our
blessed Savior, about material duties, took the same course, as we may see in
his often repeated woes against the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat 23.13, 14, 15,
16. etc. and his pressing the duty of watching, on his Disciples, by this often
repetition, Mark 13.33. Take ye heed: watch and pray. verse 35. watch ye
therefore. 37. What I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch.

The Use for admonition.
Secondly, this repitition of the duty, showing the importance of it, must
stir up our diligence, in the constant and conscionable use of such means, as
God has ordained for the a taining of this virtue. Which way and means is
plainly prescribed, in the use of admonition, where this duty is handled, in
the beginning of the verse.

(...).
DAVID'S Hearts desire: OR AN EXPOSITION Of the 84. Psalm.

By Mr. THOMAS PIERSON.

Late Pastor of Brompton-Brian in the County of Hereford.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens at the gilded Lion in Paul's Churchyard,
1647.

AN EXPOSITION of the 84. Psalm.
Psalm 84. To the chief Musician upon Gittith. A Psalm for the Sons of
Korah.


THis Psalm may not unfitly be called David's hearts desire: for though his
name be not prefixed, as it is to sundry others, yet the matter of it being
well weighed, does most fitly accord to his troublesome estate under
persecution, whereby he was debarred from safe access to the place of Gods
solemn and public service, and most fully express his hearts desire after the
house of God, which was in him both frequent and unfeigned, Psalm. 27.4. in
regard of the blessings there to be enjoyed, Psalm. 65.4. which is matter
profitable for Gods children: for that, which being denied will prove the
hearts desire, should being enjoyed become the hearts delight, and that is the
pure and holy public worship of God.

In the handling of this Psalm we have, first the Dedication of it, in the
title prefixed, then the Psalm it self.

The Dedication.
The Dedication was to the chief Musician, or Master of the Quier. For, 1 Chronicles.
16.4. David ordered a Quier to sing thankesgiving, and penned Psalms for that
end, which he delivered to the Master of the Quier, verse. 7. Of their ordering,
see 1 Chronicles. 25.1.7.

Upon Gittith] Three Psalms has this word Gittith in the title, viz. 8.81.84.
the meaning whereof is difficult, being much controverted amongst interpreters.
The Septuagint reads it (...), pro ^orcularibus: which the Euthymius August. in
Psalm. 8.
ancients Allegorizing expound of particular Churches, where Christ is the
vine, believers are branches, and faith and other graces are grapes, which
yield that wine, which cheereth God and man, Judge. 9.13.

Others following the 72. yet refer it to the time of vintage thus celebrated.

The Chaldee Paraphrast (...)
takes it for a musical instrument, which David brought from Gath, where he
remained in his exile from Saul with King Achish.

Rabbi David Kimhi, takes it to note and signify, that this Psalm was penned
by David in the foresaid Gath.

Also a City of the Levites was called Gath-Rimmon, Josh. 21.25. whereon Obed
Edom the Levite is called the Gittite, 2 Samuel 6.10. and so by Gittith here may
be meant, either such instruments as was used by Obed Edoms posterity the
Gittite, or that these Psalms were made upon occasion of transporting the Ark
from Kiriath-Iearim to Jerusalem, namely the eight, when it was brought to the
house of Obed Edom, the 81. upon the death of Vzza, the 84. when it was brought
to Zion.

It is most probable it was a musical Instrument. The less to be stood upon,
because this music was typical, and in their time the instruments of God, 1 Chronicles. 16.42. but now, as John 4.21.23. Ye shall neither in this mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father: but the true worshipper shall worship the
father in spirit and in truth, singing and making melody in your heart to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.

For the sons of Korah.] These sons of Korah were the posterity of that
rebellious Levite, who with Dathan and Abiram rebelled against Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 16. which Korah was consumed with fire, ver. 35. with 17. Howbeit there
were of his sons that dyed not, Numb. 26.11. departing, as it seems, from
their fathers tent. as all were commanded, Numb. 16.24.26. and of these is
numbered a family of the Korathites, Number. 26.58. of whom came Samuel the
Prophet, and Heman his Nephew, 1 Chronicles. 6, 33. a great singer, chap. 25.4.5.

In this Dedication note two things, first, King David's employment in
troublesome times, 1. Observation.
he composed and penned Psalms of special purpose for the public worship and
service of God, 1 Chronicles. 16.7. The dedication of sundry Psalms to the chief
Musician shows the same.

The reason.
The reason hereof was his holy zeal for gods glory, Ps. 69.9. and fervent
desire thus to testify his thankfulness to God, that had highly advanced
him, Psalm. 78.71, 72. Therefore he argues the matter with his own heart, that
he may do it effectually, Psalm. 116.12.

Here see that neither dignity nor distress should exempt men from the zealous
pursuit of Gods holy worship. David needed not to have taken such pains about
Gods service, as to pen special Psalms. for the solemn and public use
thereof.

A good president for every man in his place, Michals mind, that it is too base
a thing for David to be seen among the Levites, dancing before the Ark,
especially clothed with a linen Ephod, 2 Samuel, 6.20. But them that honor me,
says God, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. Was it not David's special honor that he was a type of Christ? And
herein, among other things, did he prefigure him, that he was zealous for the
house of God, as Psalm. 69.9. with John 2.17.

But alas, how few follow David and Christ herein? David give liberally toward
the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.3, 4, 5. Christ whipped buyers and sellers out of the
Temple, because he would not have his fathers house made a den of thieves: now
many take liberally, and so bring thieves and robbers into the Church; and of
others we may say, as Mat. 23.4. They bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be
born, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

Secondly, 2. Observation.
here note, that the sons, that is, the posterity of wicked and rebellious
Korah, have an honorable place in Gods sacred and solemn service: for to them
sundry of David's Psalms are commended, as Psalm. 42.44, 45, 46, etc.

No doubt David saw them, The reason.
being by place and birth Levites, to be faithful and diligent in their place,
and thus renownes them to all posterity; that he composeth special Psalms for
their ministry in the solemn service of God.

Ezekiel. 18.14.17.20. if he see his fathers sins and turn from them.

But Exodus 20.5. God says he is a jealous God, 1. Objection.
visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children.

That is enquiring for the sin of the fathers among the children, Answer.
and if there he find it, then pays he them home.

Achans sons and daughters and stoned and burnt for the fathers sacrilege,
2. Objection.
Josh. 7.24.25. and Dathans and Abirams little children are swallowed up, Numb.
16.27.

For ought we know they might be of years of discretion, Answer.
and privy to their fathers stealth.

When little ones dye in the punishment of the sathers sin, God lays not the
punishment of the fathers sin upon the children, but to make the fathers sin
more odious, does then bring upon the children the fruit of their own original
corruption, which is death determined upon all flesh, as appears, Genesis 2.17.
with Romans 5.12. As a creditor, that has both the father and the son debtors
unto him by bond, may upon the fathers provocation lay the forfeiture upon
both, being both in his danger.

Secondly, Psalm. 58.3. The wicked are estranged fromt he womb: yet if they
leave their fathers sins, and become faithful to the Lord, here is comfort
for them in the honor of Korah's posterity. See Is. 56.3. Let not the son of
the stranger, that has joined himself to the Lord, speak saying, The Lord has
separated me from his people: for ver. 6.7. The sons of the stranger, that
joined themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord,
Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my house
of prayer, etc. for 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor, says the
Lord.

Verse. 1.


THe matter of this Psalm is a most solemn and patheticall expressing of
David's high esteem of the place of Gods public worship, with his ardent and
earnest desire to have freedom and liberty to enjoy the same, which Musculus
Piscator.
some think, and that probably, he penned in the time of Absoloms rebellion,
when he sled for his life out of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15.14. for he mentions
appearing in Zion before the Lord, verse 7. which was after the ark of the
covenant was brought thither, which was not in Saul's lifetime, but after 2 Samuel 7. about the 13. year of his reign. Or as Mollerus
others, in the troublesome times of his great wars, whereby he was detained
from the public place of Gods worship: for that Absoloms rebellion was not so
long.

He begins with the high esteem he had of the place of Gods public worship,
which by way of admiration he does acknowledge unto God to be most lovely and
amiable; verse 1.

In the handling whereof we have these two things: First, the description of
the person, unto whom the acknowledgement is made: Secondly, the matter, that
is acknowledged.

The description of the person is the Lord of Hosts, 1. Observation.
(...) so as the point is this, The true God is the Lord of hosts. The reason.
So verse 3.8.12. Ps. 24.10.

He is so called, because all creatures in Heaven and Earth are at the Lords
command, as soldiers in an Army at the command of the General, ready pressed to
do his will. Hence all creatures in heaven and earth are called the host of
heaven and earth, Genesis 2.1.

This title shows the Lords power and sovereignty over all creatures, he may
command and set their places and stations at his pleasure, as generals do their
Soldiers in an Army. See 1 Kings 22.19, 20. And hence are those strange events
in war, that the weaker do conquer, as Deuteronomy. 32.30. One chase a thousand, and
two put ten thousand to flight. So 1 Samuel 14.6.13. Jonathan and his
armor-bearer smote a whole garrison of the Philistines.

Ps. 50.1.4. The mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth,
from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof. He shall call to the
heavens from above, and to the earth that he may judge his people, Jer. 5.22.
Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence? Mat.
10.28. Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

Secondly, that we take heed of abusing any of Gods creatures; for be they
never so mean, God can make Armies of them to destroy the wicked. Consider his
wonders in Egypt, of hail, of frogs, of flies, of lice, Exodus 8.9. etc. his
dealing with Herod, Acts 12. Reason, as Isaiah 36.9. etc. How will thou turn
away the face of one Captain of the meanest of my Masters servants? A terror
to the wicked.

Thirdly, That we make sure we fight under his banner: for he is the Lord of
hosts, and has his spiritual armies and weapons. See Psalm. 110.3. Ephesians. 6.10.
etc. and 2 Cor. 10.5. See Psalm. 24.7. etc. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and
be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in:
that is, the Ark. Then the Lord himself into men's hearts, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye
not, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you?
Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him, and he with me.

Psalm. 46.7.11. As he is the Lord of hosts, so he has made Jesus Christ the
Captain of his host, Iosb. 5.14. No weapon that is formed against thee shall
prosper, If. 54.17.

Secondly, to any child of God in his particular distress; for he has all
creatures at command to serve and save his children, and to destroy their
enemies. See Exodus 14.28, 29. the waters of the red Sea are a wall unto the
Israelites, but drown the Egyptians, Dan. 3. fire save the three servants of
God, and kills them that cast them in. So do the Lions, Daniel, Dan. 6. dest
thou want? the Ravens shall feed thee. 1 Kings 17.4.6. or Angels, Psalm. 78.23.
Art thou in the Sea? a Whale shall bring thee to land, Jonah, 1.17. and 2.10.

The matter acknowledged is the loveliness of Gods Tabernacles, which
surpassing David's ability to express, he propounds by way of admiration,
implying that they were to him most lovely and amiable, far surpassing his
ability to express.

For our better understanding hereof we are to search out, as well the place,
as the property, for which David does admire it.

The place is Gods Tabernacles, or dwelling places: whereby he means that
special place of Gods public and solemn worship, which God had chosen for
himself among his people in David's time, promising there to be present with
them, and to dwell among them, Exodus 25.8. Levit. 26.12.

Qu. But why does he use a word of the plural number, saying Tabernacles,
whereas Moses erected but one for the Lord, neither did the Lord allow of any
other, till the Temple was built by Solomon.

Au. Iunius Piscator.
Some think he has reference to the diverse places, where God was worshipped at
the time; for the Tabernacle was at Gibeon, and the Ark at Mount Meriah, 2 Chronicles. 1.3, 4.

But it is more probable that he has respect to the several parts and places
of the Tabernacle, which were made distinct by Gods appointment. The Court was
for the people, as verse 2. the holy place was for the Priests, and the holy of
holies was for the high Priest once every year, as Heb. 9.2.3.6, 7. In all of
which God dwelt, though not inclusively as men do in their houses, for so the
heavens of heaven cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8.27. But in regard of more
special manifestation, testifying his favorable respect unto their worship
and service, as 1 King. 9.9.

The property ascribed to this place is lovely or amiable, 2 Observation.
that is, such as draws the best affections of the heart unto it.

Here then note two points: one taken for granted, the other purposely
inteuded. The point taken for granted is, That God has his Tabernacles or
dwelling places, where he does in special manner abide among his people: so as
we may say, The Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,
Rev. 21.3. Under the Law he had a material building, called the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, erected by Moses at his appointment, Exodus 25.8. and
40.34.35. which place was movegble, and continued for Gods worship, till God
had given rest unto his people round about, and then he caused Solomon to build
him a Temple, 1 Kings 6.1, 2. Under the Gospel he has a spiritual building,
1 Pet. 2.5. Ye, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, whose house
are we: speaking of all the faithful, who believe in God through Christ, Heb.
3.6. who are the Temple of the living God, in whom he dwells, 1 Cor. 3.16.
whether we conceive them jointly altogether, Ephesians. 2.21. or divided into
particular holy assemblies, Matthew. 18.20. or personally considered, 1 Cor.
3.16, 17. and 6.19.

The reason hereof is twofold: First, The 1. reason.
the deerer evidence of his especial favor and respect unto them above all
the people of the world: for the whole world is his, and the fullness thereof,
Psalm. 24.1. yet none can say, but the Church of God, who are his people by
covenant, that God does dwell among them.

Secondly, for the better assuring of all the blessing of the Covenant to those
that be his people. The 2. reason.
For God in Christ is the true fountain of all good things: and his dwelling
among them, in that manner which he did ranifest in his Tabernacle, gave plain
evidence of his readiness to communicate his goodness unto them, according to
all that he had promised in his Covenant. This will appear by a brief view of
the several parts of Gods tabernacle, considered with the special ends for
which they were ordained. The whole Tabernacle was made according to the
pattern showed in the mount: It contained three distinct places, the Court;
the holy place, and the holy of holies, and in each of these, there were
several ordinances, serving by their use and signification to testify Gods
readiness, who there dwelt among them, to communicate his goodness to his
people there serving him.

Take a view of some: In the Court (which signified the visible Church, wherein
hypocrites may have a place for outward worship) was first the ministry of the
word and prayer: Here the Priests and Levites taught the people, as it is said
of Christ, Luke 17.47. he taught daily in the Temple; here the Scribes and
Pharisees sat in Moses chair, Matthew 33.2. and here both Priests and people
prayed, as Luke 1.10. for my house shall be called the house of prayer, Luke
19.46. Secondly, here was the altar of burnt-offering, a type of Christ: for
the altar and the twelve pillars resembled God and the 12. tribes, making a
covenant together with sacrifice, Exodus 24.4. This altar in the Court of the
Tabernacle was overlayed with brass a strong metal, to signify that Christ
God did sanctify his manhood to be an acceptable sacrifice, and strengthen him
to do and suffer all things needful for our redemption and salvation: Thirdly,
the laver for washing, a type of sanctification, Titus 3.5. Heb. 10.22.

In the holy place were three memorable things: First, the altar of incense,
shadowing out Christ's intercession in heaven; Secondly, the table of
shewbread, signifying that standing table of the Word and Sacraments, wherein
God keeps plentiful provision to feast his elect in Christ: Every one had in
his incense cup pure incense put upon it, signifying fullness of joy in Christ
Jesus.

Thirdly, the golden candlestick, a figure of the Church, Revel. 1.20. because
it holds up the light of Gods Word; The several branches resembled
particular Churches; and the lights therein signified the words of the
Prophets, or the holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 2.19. The seven branches from one
shaft, all of one matter, signified variety of gifts and graces, proceeding
from one spirit, Zech. 4.2.6.

In the most holy place, or holy of holies was first the ark, whose lidd was
called the mercy seat, overlaid with pure gold, and within it the two tables of
the covenant, all shadowing Christ, who is our covenant, Is. 49.8. and our
propitiatory, Romans 3.25. 1 John 2.2. Over the ark did God appear between the
Cherubins, signifying God teaching through Christ, who is attended by the
ministry of Angels.

Secondly, here were the golden censers, to bring fire with incense to the
mercy-seat, signifying that with the incense of the spirit of Christ's
sufferings must be mingled by Christ himself upon the altar with fire, before
that our service can be accepted, Lev. 16.12. with Rev. 8.3.4.

Thirdly, here was the ^ot of Mannah, which God gave them from heaven,
signifying Christ crucified, the bread that came down from heaven, John 6.41. 1
Cor. 10.3. Also Aarons rodd that budded, testifying their rebellion, Numb. 16.
yet being near to the mercy seat was pardoned in Christ: These two last, Heb.
9, 3, 4. are said to be within the ark; where * some refer the relative to
the former antecedent, which needs not, Iun. par.
seeing that standing before it they were with it; for nothing was within but
the two tables, 1 Kings 8.9.

Besides these, that did severally belong to some of the holy places, there
were some things common to all. As first, the anointing oil, wherewith every
particular vessel and instrument was consecrate to his holy use, signifying
the graces of the spirit, sanctifying us to God. 2. the coverings for the whole
tabernacle, signifying Gods protection, by his special providence over his
whole Church and every member thereof, as Is. 4.5, 6. upon all the glory shall
be a defense, etc. Psalm. 27 5. Thou will hide me in thy Tabernacle.

In all these, and many other, he both manifested his presence among his
people, and also his readiness to do them good by communicating spiritual
blessings among them. If any say, these things proved his presence amongst the
Jews, but what are they to us? I answer, much. They were types and shadows of
good things to come; but the body is Christ, Col. 2.17. who is come by a more
perfect Tabernacle, Heb. 9.11. and him we have among us in the word of the
Gospel, fully performing all that was prefigured in legal Ceremonies.

Quest. Are our Churches and Chapels answerable to the Jews Tabernacle and
Temple for prerogative of Gods presence?

Answ. No difference of place in respect of holiness for Gods service is taken
away by Christ in the new Testament, John 4.21.23. 1 Timothy 2.8. But the
Congregations of Gods people, assembled for holy worship according to Gods
ordinance, have Christ present, as Mat. 18.20. They are Gods house, Heb. 3.16.
and Gods temple, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

Jews more holy then others under the law. Papists say consecrated places for
holy worship be more holy then other places, Bellar. de cultu Sanct. lib. 3.
cap. 4. But the truth is, our Churches and Chapels are as the Jews
Synagogues, whereof, Psalm. 74.8. Of which we may say, as Mat. 23.16.17. Woe
unto you blind guides, etc. or as Bernard. Habent sanctitatem, sed propter
corpora vestra, etc. Churches are holy because of your bodies, your bodies
because of your souls, your souls because of the Spirit of God. As it was
said of the Israelites, non propter locum gentem, sed propter gentem locum
elegit, Council: Aquisgr. As Austin, Quid supplicaturus Deo locum sanctum
requiris? Volens in Templo orare in te ora, and ita age semper ut Deo Templum
sis: ibi enim Deus exaudit, ubi habitat. Aug. lib. sentent. And Origin. Hom. 5.
in Levit. Locum sanctum in terris non requiro positum, sed in cord.

John 4.4.

David's affection toward the Tabernacle, Psalm. 42.2, 3. and Psalm. 63.1, 2. and
show forth our desire to glorify God by provoking others to frequent the same,
Is. 2.2, 3. Mic. 4.1, 2. But alas, here justly we may complain, as Lam. 1.4.
The ways of Zion mourn; few frequent these assemblies, in comparison of
those, that run thick and threefold to sinful and shameful assemblies, where
Satan dwells, as he does In places of Idolatry and impiety.

For comfort, it makes greatly to all Gods children, who are the true members
of his Church; they have a double assurance that Christ dwells in them, their
inward piety, and their outward profession. Hereon they may say, as Ier. 20.11.
The Lord is with me, as a mighty terrible one, therefore my persecutors shall
stumble, and they shall not prevail, they shall be greatly ashamed, for they
shall not prosper, their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten, and
with David Psalm. 113.5, 6. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on
high, who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the
earth? Consider Luke 11.21, 22. and John 14.17, 18.

The point purposely intended is, 3. Observation.
that Gods Tabernacles are most lovely and amiable, surpassing David's, ability
to express, Psalm. 268. Psalm. 27.4. and Psalm 122.1.

for so he shows himself in his Sanctuary, the place of his worship, and his
presence is lovely, Psalm. 63.2. To see thy power and glory, so as I have seen
thee in thy Sanctuary, this liked Moses so well, that he had rather stay with
it in the Wilderness, then go without it to Canaan, Exodus 33.^5. Mat. 17.2,
3, 4. When Christ was transfigured in the Mount, in the sight of Peter, James
and John, Peter liked the place so well, that he said, Master it is good to be
here, and moves for liberty to build three Tabernacles.

Psalm. 50.5.7. Is. 40.1. and hearing them speak to him in prayer, Psalm. 50.15.
as Cant. 2.14. It is (as we may speak with reverence) the wooing place between
Christ and his Church: here the contract is made in the covenant of grace, as 2
Cor. 11.2. here is the love of espousals, Ier. 2.2. here God allows and speaks
comfort, Hos. 2.14.

blindness of mind, Is. 22.7. with 2 Cor. 3.14. secondly, hardness of heart,
Ezekiel. 36.26. thirdly, transgression of life, Hos. 14.4. His gracious bounty is
seen in spiritual and heavenly gifts: for where is regeneration wrought but in
his Church? Psalm 87.4, 5. Man and man (that is, every man that is borne
again) was borne in her: for Jerusalem is the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. Now
hereby by we are made the sons of God, heirs of heaven, 1 Pet. 1.3.4. Where
are all the particular saving graces of the spirit begotten in the hearts of
men, but in the Churchordinarily? Psalm. 87.7. All my springs are in thee. The
spirit is the fountain, and peculiar graces the streams that issue thence, see
John 7.37.39. Here God begets grace in thy soul, and is it not a most lovely
thing to have such near and sweet society with God? It was divine joy to the
Virgin Mary, that the holy Ghost did overshadow her, and form the blessed body
of Christ in her womb, as we may see by her song, Luke 1.46, 47. My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: O consider,
that God begetting grace in thy heart in his Church, Christ is formed in thee
spiritually, Gal. 4.19. which should be more joyful unto thee (if more might
be) then Christ's conception was to her: because she might have been saved
without that honor, but thou can not, unless Christ be formed in thee; here
thou beholdest and art changed into the same image, 2 Cor. 3.18.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

David said of the legal Tabernacle is most true of Evangelicall assemblies
for the holy worship of God in Christ in the word, Sacraments, and prayer: For
Hebr. 9.11. Christ is now come an high Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle: And here he is present, Mat. 18.20.
admitting his elect to holy society and fellowship with himself, also
exercising most gracious mercy and bounty in removing evils, and bestowing
heavenly blessings and graces upon his.

David's strong affection toward the legal tabernacle, and proportionably of
the affection of Gods children toward Evangelicall worship, he was sick for
sorrow when he was debarred from it, see Psalm. 42.1, 2. and most joyful when
he had freedom thereto, Psalm. 122.1. The reason is the loveliness of the
place, for the presence, favor, and grace of God, there to be enjoyed after a
special manner. The world does account Gods children, for their zeal in
following the preaching of the Word, brainsick persons, giddy-headed, and such
like. But the truth is, these censurers (like sorry Physicians, (...) Job.
13.4.) mistake the place affected (as Festus did of Paul, Acts 26.24.) they are
sick indeed, yet not brainsick, but heart-sick, sick of love, as Cant. 5.8.
(...) after Christ. Whereof they need not to be ashamed, for God the father
loves them, and Christ also, Joh. 14.21. Now it is no^ news that those that
are in love should frequent the places, where they may meet with their beloved.

David's heart, and he was a man according to Gods own heart, Acts 13.22. Such
are, first, recusant Papists, secondly, profane contemners, of both whom we
may say, as Matthew. 11 16, etc. Whereunto shall I liken this Generation, etc.
These have no heart for God, that are weary of his worship. See Mal. 1.13. Amos
8.5. It is not the May Pole dance that will draw recusants. the dance about the
golden Calf would draw them all, Exodus 32.6, 19. Jeroboans Calves at Dan and
Bethel they like well, 1 Kings 12.28, 29. and to set their posts by the Lords,
as Ezekiel. 43.8. But wisdom is justified of her children, Matthew. 11.19. These
men professing themselves to be wise become fools: see Romans 1.22, 23, 24. Mark
well, till thou have an heart for Gods worship thou have no soul fit for
heaven. How can thou be a pillar in Gods house, and never brought to the
framing place? In the material Temple there were three places: so public
assemblies are for regeneration and glory. For motives, think on Joh. 3.5.
Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.



Men of authority and wealth must apply both for the mgintenance and
furtherance of Gods, worship, so did David, 1 Chronicles. 29.2, 3. I have prepared
with all my might for the house of my God, etc. Because I have set my affection
to the house of my God, etc. Ministers especially must show love unto and
delight in the Lords worship, by negligence they conceal the knowledge of God,
see Mat. 23.13. Luke. 11.52. The show bread must be set upon the table in the
Tabernacle every Sabbath new, Lev. 24.8. By profaneness they cause the Lords
Tabernacle and service to be forsaken and loathed, 1 Samuel 2.17. people also
must call one on another, Is. 2.2, 3. and all both Magistrates, Ministers and
people must pray for the Lords power and providence in maintaining his pure
worship. The next week being the time of ordination of Ministers, it is not
unfit to take notice of it, to do that which Christ enjoined, Mat. 9.38. Pray
ye therefore the Lords of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into
his harvest.

Though Papists observe such times superstitiously, yet we may do as Gideon,
who sacrificed to the Lord that which was prepared for Baal, Judge. 6.26.

Verse. 2.


IN the former verse David by way of admiration acknowledges unto the Lord the
loveliness of his Tabernacles. In this verse he does in his own person
verify his former confession by discovering his own ardent and earnest
affection, first to the place of Gods worship, then to God himself, for whose
sake he so affected the place. His fervent affection toward the place is in
these words, My soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord.
The Courts of the Lord were two: one was the great Court, that place whither
the people came, the other was for the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. For this David's
soul longed and fainted; he had as great a desire after it, as a woman with
child has after the things she longs for, and being deprived hereof his
soul ^ainted, as women will do, when they miss of the things they long for:
His vehement desire after God himself is in the latter branch, My heart and my
flesh cries our for the living God.

In the words note two points: First, David's earnest and ardent affection
toward the places of Gods public worship, 1. Observation.
his soul longed and fainted after them, his affection toward this place was
like the appetite of a woman with child, who is apt to desire some things
inordinately, see Psalm. 27.4. Ps. 42.1. Ps. 63.1.

The reason hereof stands on a double ground: First, the sense of his own
estate in soul for some spiritual wants: Reoson 1. and 2.
His estate in soul was this, first, he had a true spiritual hunger and
thirst after heavenly things, as Psalm. 107.5. which things were only to be had
in the Tabernacles of God: His case was like the prodigal child's, Luke 15.17.
he was hunger-starved, and there was bread enough at his fathers house, for the
Tabernacles of God are Beth-lehem, the house of Bread, Matthew. 2.6. Here Christ
is borne, the true bread of life, John 6.48.50. It might well be called the
house of bread, for anciently it was Ephath, or Ephratha a place of
fruitfulness, Genesis 48.7. and at Bethlehem was an excellent Well, after which
David longed, 2 Samuel 23.15. so in Gods Tabernacles is the river of his
pleasures, the fountain of life: Hither apply Ezekiel. 47.1. the waters of the
Sanctuary, and Zech. 13.1. a fountain for uncleanness.

Secondly, David was in love, which affection will grow to be strong strong as
death, Cant. 8.6, 7. Now the party he loved was here, and here only to be
enjoyed, for special spiritual society, 1 Kings 9.3. See Canticles 1.7, 8.

Thirdly, David's soul was with child, he had spiritually conceived Chist: Now
longing is ordinary to women, Plin. lib. 23. cap. 6.
with child, its gravidarum malacia: and the thing he longed for was in the
courts of the Lord.



For instruction, touching the good or bad estate of men's souls, for if our
souls be in good estate, we must be affected toward Evangelicall worship, as
David's was toward legal, for hunger and thirst, love and longing after
heavenly things. In Evangelicall worship is our communion and fellowship with
Christ and his benefits, and indeed in this world herein only and chiefly
because of Gods ordinances: If thou say with Naaman, Are not Abana and Parphar,
rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? 2 Kings 5.12. thou
must keep thy leprosy of sin unless thou change thy mind, for all Gods
springs are here, Psalm. 87.7.

Now after trial it will be found true, that many neither hunger nor thirst,
love nor long, but say, as Mal. 1.13. It is a weariness, and as Amos 8.5. when
will the new Moon and Sabbath be gone, as Job. 21.14. they say unto God, depart
from us, and as the mixed multitude, Numb. 11.6. Our soul is dried away, there
is nothing at all besides this Manna before our eyes.

David's was toward legal. The way is to inform our selves of our natural
misery in our selves, for which there is no remedy but in the Lords Tabernacles
his Bethesda, John 5.2, etc. where whosoever first after the troubling of the
water stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had: Our misery is
spiritual in blindness of mind, hardness of heart, etc. Now here only is
the Lords eye salve, Rev. 3.18, and the spirit, that takes away the stony
heart, and gives an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26.

give testimony to them as he did to David, I have found David the son of
Iesse, a man after mine own heart, Acts 13.22. of them it may be said, as Mat.
13.16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear, and
as Mat. 16.17. Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona, for flesh and blood has not
reveiled it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven.

My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God.] The second sentence,
declaring David's vehement desire after the true God, here called the living
God: He names both heart and flesh to show the truth of his affection, as it
was conceived in his soul, so it was expressed and manifest in his body, in
voice and gesture, looking toward it and crying out for it: so the word is
translated, Prove. 1.20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the
streets, Lam. 2.19. Arise, cry out in the night, Psalm. 17.6. I have called upon
thee, Ps. 78.65. Like a mighty man that shouteth.

Here note the description of God, and David's affection toward him.

For the first, 2. Observation.
The true God is the living God: So Psalm. 42.2. Ier. 10.10. and in other
places: For the better understanding whereof we must consider, first in
general what the life of God is, and then more particularly, what those
special properties are, whereby God shows himself indeed to be a living God.

For the first, Reason 1.
the life of God is an essential property of the divine nature, whereby it is,
and is conceived of us to be, in perpetual action, living and moving in it
felfe and of it self. To give a reason hereof a priori, by way of causality,
it is impossible; but a posteriori, or from the effect, we may argue thus: If
God had not life in himself, he could not give life and being unto other
things. But in him we live, we move, and have our being: yea, he gives unto
all life and breath and all things, Acts 17.23.25. Therefore he is a living God.

For the second, the special properties, whereby God shows himself indeed to
be a living God, are three, his wisdom, his power, and his will. His wisdom,
whereby in and of himself he does know both him self, and all things else, both
universal and particular, that either have been, are, or shall be, yea that
might have been or may be: His power, whereby he effectually does whatsoever he
will, and is able to do whatsoever he can will, both how, and when, and where
he will: His will, whereby he does, most freely and justly, by one eternal
immutable act, will his own glory, as the end of all things, and all things
else, as the means of that end: He that has these properties, Reason 2.
and exercises these effects of life, must needs be a living God, which
consideration may serve for a second reason of the point.

By way of use, it serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

Jeremiah makes of it, Ier. 10.10. and the Apostle Barnabas and Paul, Acts
14.15. and 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.

David had, we must imitate him in his esteem of God, and labor to have our
hearts well settled in this persuasion, that the true God is indeed a living
God. Otherwise, as he were not worth the crying after, so would it not be easy
to induce us to it: For were he not a living God, how loud soever we should
cry, he could not hear, and then we might conceive it as good to besilent, a
deaf God and a dumb Religion may do well enough together.

But (as the Psalmist intimates, Ps. 65.2. when he says, Thou art the God that
hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come) hope of audience is that which
oneneth the mouth of invocation: For how shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? Romans 10.14. and how shall men believe in any but a living
God? what good can a dead god do them?

Darius seems to have made of this consideration, Dan. 6.20.26, 27. and God
himself may be thought to aim at and intend the same, when to confirm the
faith of his servants, in the assured certainty of his promises, he swears by
his own life, as Is. 49.18. and teaches his people so to swear, Ier. 4.2.
and when they commemorate his mercies unto them to make mention of his life,
Ier. 23.7, 8. as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 18.48.

To this description of the true God, the Psalmist adds this expression of his
affection toward him, my heart and my flesh cries out: as much as to say, I
do not only earnestly desire to enjoy Gods presence in his sacred ordinances,
but likewise outwardly, in all the parts of my body, I give evidence of that
earnest desire: 3. Obsorvation.
The observation will be this. They, that have the same esteem of the true God
that David had, will earnestly in their hearts desire, and diligently in their
actions and behaviors, endeavor to express and give evidence of that desire:
The like expression is used, Psalm. 73.25, 26. whom have I in heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee: my flesh and my heart
fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.



By him they expect to be freed from all evil, and made partakers of all good
things: as the Psalmist expresses more at large in the four and five, the
eleven and twelve verses.

As the ointment in the hand will not be hid, but bewrays it self, Prove.
27.16. So grace in the heart will discover it self in the words of the mouth,
and the actions of the life: Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, Mat. 12.34. and if the heart be inditing a good matter, the tongue
will be as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1. I believed, says the
Plalmist, therefore have I spoken, Psalm. 116.10. we also believe, says the
Apostle, and therefore speak, 2 Cor. 4.13.

By way of use it serves for reproof and admonition.

Psalm. 4.6. but with him to cry out for the living God, is a thing they think
not of; such spiritual sluggards the world has too many, whose souls desire
and have nothing, Prove. 13.4. nay whose desires kill them, because their hands
refuse to labor, Prove. 21.25.

David had, to believe him indeed to be the living God, and account his
Tabernacles amiable, that they labor with him to stir up both their hearts
and their flesh to cry out for him, that they earnestly desire the fruition of
him, and communion with him, that they diligently endeavor by all good means
to express and give evidence of that desire. To move them the rather hereunto
let them consider, that God is so delighted with his servants importunities,
and loves the loudness of their voice so well, that of purpose sometimes he
takes upon him as it were to be a sleep or hard of hearing, and will not be
seen to take notice of their desires, until they attain to such an height of
fervency, that he cannot rest for them, as the phrase is by the Prophet Isaiah,
Is. 62.6, 7. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man a vaileth much,
Jam. 5.16. Feruency makes much to the efficacy of desires amongst men, much
more with God; as our Savior shows plainly in the Parable of the importunate
widow and the unjust judge, Luke 18.1, etc. To weary men is but a small thing
in comparison of wearying God, Is. 7.13. If we walk after the Lord, as Hos.
11.10. we are never so like to overtake him as when we have wearied him: A
memorable example to this purpose we have in the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.21.
etc. who, as if she had meant to try masteries with our Savior, wrestled first
with his silence by her importunity, crying after him so, that his Disciples
besought him to send her away, and then with his speech by her faith, making
such advantage of his arguments against her, for her own behoof, that with
reverence we may say she got the better of him, and went away with an ample
commendation, and grant of her desire to the full.

Verse 3.


HAving in the first verse by way of admiration acknowledged unto God the
loveliness of his Tabernacle, the place of his holy worship, and in the second
verifyed the same, by discovering his own ardent affection, first, to the place
of Gods holy worship, then to God himself for whose sake he so affected the
place in his third he proceeds in the former discovery of his hearts desire
toward the place of Gods worship, by debasing his present estate, as worse
then the condition of the Sparrow and Swallow, the one whereof finds her an
house, the other a (...), where she may lay her young, but he wanted liberty of
access to the Lords Altars, that is, to the Lords Tabernacle, where his altar
was, the holy place of his solemn worship, which was to David's soul, as the
house to the Sparrow, and the nest to the Swallow.

This application he enfoldeth in an Aposiopasis, an interrupted exclamation
unto God of his Altars, concealing some words, which should express his full
meaning, from the passionate, affection of his soul, which kind of speaking is
most frequent, and fit to manifest fervent desires.

I am not ignorant, that the Chaldee paraphrase has other names of birds, viz.
the dove, and the turtle, (...) and (...), and the Septuagint (...), the
Sparrow and the Turtle, whom the vulgar latin follows, but the proper
signification of the words is as our English Bible has them: Besides,
interpreters differ in applying the latter part of the verse; some refer it
by opposition to the former, as though the Lords Altars were the place, where
these birds did build their nests: which yet some others, not without cause,
do dislike; because, though in the Temple Sparrowes and Swallows might build
their nests, it being very spacious, yet it is not like they did build them in
the Tabernacle, which was the place of Gods worship, when David penned this
Psalm: Now the application which I make, in a sacred Aposiopaesis, prevents
that scruple, and yet prefers the condition of these birds before David's for
outward liberty, which way soever we refer it. Though I conceive the true
meaning of the prophet to be this, that the Sparrow and Swallow had liberty to
build their nests, and breed their young, in houses which went ^^longing to
others, whether near unto or far off from the Tabernacle it matters not, all
houses were alike to them, yet in houses they desired to build, and were
permitted. wherein these birds had their desire: but David was debarred from
the Lords Tabernacle, where his Al^r was, which to his soul was as an house
and nest to the Sparrow and Swallow, and whereto he had right and interest,
having the Lord of hosts for his King and his God.

In the words thus explained and taken, note these points.

First, 1. Observation.
that David prefers the outward condition of silly little birds as the Sparrow
and Swallow before himself, to his sense and feeling their outward estate was
better then his.

They had liberty to enjoy the place of their desire, even other men's houses to
rest and nestle in, whose birds they were not; Reason.
but he was debarred from the Lords Sanctuary. the only resting and nestling
place for his soul, though he had title thereto by special covenant, having
the Lord of hosts for his King and his God.



For instruction thus, that Gods special favor must not be measured by
outward things, we must not judge them rejected from Gods favor, whose outward
estate is mean and miserable, for so shall we offend against the generation of
Gods children, Ps. 35.15. David was a man according to Gods heart, own Acts
13.22. a pattern of piety to all succeeding Kings of Judah and Israel, as 1
Kings 3.14. to Solomon. and 1 Kings 11.38. to Jeroboam: yet for outward estate
he was very miserable, 1 Samuel 26.20. hunted as a flea, or a partridge, Ps.
102.6, 7. as a Pelican, an owl, and a Sparrow. Yea, Christ himself, the son
of Gods love, Col. 1.13. had not whereon to lay his head. This his mean and
miserable estate made the people in his time to judge rashly of him. See Isaiah
53.3.

David and Christ before mentioned, the parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.
and the state of many, whom the world was not worthy of, Heb. 11.37, 38. which
is a needful thing in these troublesome times of the Church of God: beware of
rash judgment; consider that judgment must begin at the house of God, 1 Pet.
4.17.

David's case at this time, nay the case of Christ, who had not whereon to lay
his head, Mat. 8.20. Now the servant is not above the Master: if it were so
with the green tree, what may it be with the dry? Luke 23.31. In such case we
must say, as Christ of his kingdom; so we of our comfort, It is not of this
world, Joh. 18.36. In this case and state nothing does befall us, but that
which appertains to man, and God will give the issue, 1 Cor. 10.13. Consider
the case of Christ's Apostles, who were near and dear unto him, yet 1 Cor. 4.11.
Such as did both hunger and thirst, were naked, were buffeted, and had no
certain dwelling place.

Secondly, here see, 2. Observation.
that to David's soul the Lords altars were as house and nest to little Birds:
the place of Gods worship was the place of his chief desire: Psalm. 27.4. Psalm.
137.5, 6.

For the good things, which were there to be enjoyed: Reason.
which are fully set down in the next verse.



David was: for then undoubtedly his heart cleaves to the place of Gods
worship, as David's did here, and verse. 10. Oh Lord of Hosts, my King, and my
God.] These titles serve to amplify David's complaint: The first, Lord of
Hosts, shows what God is in himself; and has been handled in the first verse:
The two later, my King, and my God, are titles of relation, showing what God
was unto David, namely his King and his God, as he stood in covenant with him.
In calling God his King, he does not only acknowledge his absolute
sovereignty, whereby he is King of all creatures, as Psalm. 103.19. Dan. 4.32.
but his special Regiment by his word and spirit, which he does exercise in his
Church on earth, which is his kingdom of grace, wherein David was a subject,
being a member of his Church, and so speaks to God as to his King: So likewise
calling the Lord his God, he means not only by creation and preservation in
general, but also by special covenant, wherein God requiring faith and
obedience of his creatures, does undertake to afford unto them all the
blessings of the covenant, as well pertaining to this life, as to the life to
come: see Exodus 23.22. Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19.

Here observe, 3. Observation.
that David a King acknowled geth God to be his King; as likewise he does,
Psalm. 5.3. So that God is King of Kings, Dan. 2.47. Nebuchadnezzar confesses
it; Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods and a Lord of Kings.

The reason is, Reason.
because he has the rule and command over Kings, as Kings have over their
subjects.

Ephesians. 6.9. And if this were thought upon, it would prevent negligence and
injustice, the bane of superiority.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. and that of the Apostles,
Acts 4.19. and 5.29.

Psalm. 95.6. children asking blessing kneel to their bodily fathers: how much
more should we to the father of sp^rits? And reason to that purpose as the
Apostle does, for patient suffering of correction, Hebr. 12.9. For howsoever
kneeling be not of absolute necessity; yet humility in gesture is necessary.

Verse. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house; they will be still
praising thee. Selah.


IN these words, the Psalmist expresses the state and behavior of the true
members of Gods Church, who have the free and comfortable fruition of Gods holy
worship and service, their estate is happy, and their behavior godly and
comfortable: which does notably justify the equity of David's complaint, who
by trouble and persecution was debarred from this happy and comfortable estate,
in which regard he preferres the condition of silly birds before himself, verse.
3. This verse does naturally branch it self into two parts or propositions:
whereof the first shows the happy estate; the second, the holy and comfortable
behavior of the true members of Gods Church.

For the first he says, Blessed are they that dwell in thine House. Gods house
in David's time, was the place where the Lords Tabernacle was, as Psalm. 26.8.
unto which, till the Temple was built, God had appropriated his holy solemn
worship, whereof see, 1 King. 9.3. But now in the new Testament, difference of
place in respect of holiness is taken away, John 4.21. and the true Church of
God is the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. that is, such companies and assemblies,
as meet together in Christ's name, Mat. 18.20. that is, by warrant and authority
from him, and according to his will revealed in his word; worship God in the
right and reverent use of his holy Ordinances, the holy Word and Sacraments
sanctified by prayer, 1 Pet. 2.5. To dwell in Gods house, is to abide and
continue a true member of Gods Church, enjoying the comfort and liberty of Gods
holy worship and service, either in the place of the ministry, or of one of
Gods people: for though the Priests and the Levites made special abode there,
1 Samuel 3.2. and Psalm. 134. yet others of the people, who did diligently
frequent, and freely enjoy the liberty of Gods worship, might be said to dwell
therein, else David would not have used that phrase praying for himself, Ps.
27.4. which I say, because some Interpreters would limit the first branch to
the Priests and Levites, Piscat. Junius.
but the 15 Psalm does enlarge the benefit to all the godly.

The thing then to be observed in the first branch of the verse is this; 1.
Observation.
that the true Members of Gods Church, who have the comfort and liberty of Gods
holy worship and service, are blessed and happy. See Psalm, 65.4. Blessed is the
man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in
thy Courts. Hence it follows, verse 10. A day in thy Courts is better then a
thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell
in the tents of wickedness.

The reason hereof is, from the wonderful, rare, heavenly blessings, Reason.
which are here certainly enjoyed, by the true Members of the Church, and no
where else. Whereof the first and principal, from which all the rest do flow,
is the fruition of communion and fellowship with the true God, one in essence,
three in person; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: who is only in his
Church to the true members thereof a God of grace and mercy: and therefore they
that are out of the Church, are without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. Here the
first person, is the father of mercies, and God of all consolation, 2 Cor. 1.3.
the second person is a blessed Savior and Redeemer, Isa. 9.6. unto us a child
is born, unto us a Son is given, a Savior, Luke 2.10, 11. with Isa. 49.6, 8.
the holy Ghost is the blessed sanctifier, and comforter, being the spirit of
grace, Zech. 12.10. yet only in his Church, Joh. 14.17. Now this true God is
in his Church, to all the true members thereof, not only a Master, far
excelling Solomon, of whom the Queen of Sheba testifies, that his servants were
blessed, 1 King. 10.8. with Mat. 12.42. and such a Master as says, where I am,
thereshall also my servant be, Joh. 12.26. with Luke 12.37, 43, 44. but a
father, Matthew. 23.9. Joh. 20.17. Yea, an husband, Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thine
husband, and Isa. 62.4, 5. Thy land shall be married. As a young man marries a
Virgin -- as the Bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice
over thee, Ier. 3.14. I am married unto you, Hos. 2.19, 20. I have betroathed
thee unto me for ever, etc.

Secondly, this true God in Christ gives to all the true members of his Church,
freedom and deliverance from all the miseries of nature; that is, from the
whole guilt and curse of sin in original corruption, and actual
transgressions. See Luke 1.68.74. Gal. 3.13. Romans 8.1. Acts 13.39.

Thirdly, here is afforded the full fruition of all needful blessings, as Ephesians.
1.3. who blesses us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ. And not only so, but even with all needful temporal blessings, Matthew.
6.32, 33. These blessings may be reduced to four heads:

First, to direction in all the ways wherein they ought to walk, Psalm. 32.8.
I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way that thou shall go, Psalm.
73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel. If the good houswife order the
ways of her household, Prove. 31.27. how much more God?

Secondly, to provision both for soul and body: for Psalm. 34.10. They that
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, for soul, John 6.33.35.55.63. 1
Cor. 10.16. Here is Christ the tree of life, and the well of life, whereon
Psalm. 87.7. All my springs are in thee, Rev. 22.1, 2. And heaven for an
inheritance, Luke 12.32. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. For temporal, see Is. 65.13. Psalm.
37.3, 4.

Thirdly, to protection and preservation by special providence, Psalm. 25.5.
and Psalm. 91.1. employed and assured to all the faithful, Mat. 10.29, 30, 31.
The Kings servants in ordinary may not be arrested but upon warrant from the
Lord Chamberlain: but Gods servants have a greater privilege, God himself must
grant the warrant, else they may not be meddled with, Job 1.10. John 19.11. Acts
18.10. Psalm. 89.22.

Fourthly, to remuneration, both here with honor of grace to be his friends,
John 15.14, 15. 1 John 3.1. and attendance of Angels, Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11.
and hereafter, Mat. 25.21.23. Luke 19.17, etc. Mat. 19.28, 29.

Is it such a blessing to dwell in Gods house? then it is a great curse to
dwell out of it: David to say, Woe is me that I sojourne in Meshech, that I
dwell in the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. and 1 Samuel 26.19. If they be the
children of men, cursed be they before the Lord: for they have driven me out
this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other
Gods. The ancient resemblance of Gods Church to Noah's Arc is true, and fit for
this place.

for no man comes to the Father but by him, John. 14.6. Whereby will be
excluded all Gentiles, who are without Christ, Ephesians 2.12. and Turks and
Jews, who though they acknowledge the God that made the world, and brought
Israel out of Egypt, yet not believing Christ Jesus the son of the Virgin
Mary, to be the son of God and savior of the world, they shall dye in their
sins, John 8.24. Luke 13.28.

Yea, besides them Papists holding the Doctrine established in the Council of
Trent, who do not only Rhem. on Romans 3.22.
deride, but Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. can. 10.
accuse the Doctrine of justification by imputed righteousness, will be found
Ismaelites, the sons of the bondwoman, such as must be put out of the house,
Gal. 4.21.30. and such guests as want the wedding garment, which is Christ's
righteousness imputed and received by faith; see 2 Cor. 5.20. Rev, 3.18. Our
white raiment to cover our filthy nakedness of sin must be had of Christ: also
by their Idolatry they hold not the head, Col. 2.18, 19. Also they, that
profess the truth, and yet content themselves with a dead faith, are not
dwellers in Gods house; that is such as have a show of godliness, but want the
power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. who profess they know God, but by their works deny
him, Tit. 1.16. Of such St. James speaks, James 2.18.20. Show me thy faith
without thy works, etc. He that must abide in the house for ever, must be a
son, John 8.35. which we all are through faith in Christ, Gal. 3.26. and by
regeneration, 1 John 5.1. for of such the Apostle says, Thou art no more a
servant, but a son, Gal. 4.7. Therefore whosoever would certainly know
himself to be in Gods house, and to continue therein must get true faith, and
keep it, and show the truth of it by works of love, Gal. 5, 6. and of obedience
to Gods word, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Cor. 1.2.9. Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.12. and our perseverance and continuance in the
same faith is it that does manifest our abode and dwelling in Gods house, 1
John 2.19. Now this faith is one, Ephesians. 4.5. as God is one, and if it be true it
works by love, Gal. 5.6. and is seen by obedience, wherein we must be
constant, Phil. 2.12. Mat. 24.13. and herein we must aporove our selves
dwellers in Gods house, having our ears boared, Ex. 21 6. Psalm. 40.6.
endeavoring as, 1 Timothy 1.19. to keep faith and a good conscience, and 2 Timothy
1.13. holding fast the wholesome word in faith and love: In great houses here on
earth, we see great men make use of retainers, which are not servants in
ordinary at bed and board, but have houses of their own, where for the most
part they live, and look to their own business; only at good times, as they
say, and on some special occasions, they come to their Lord and master, and
wait upon him in his livery, and are welcome to him, and well accepted as his
servants: but in the Church of God, which is the house of the living God, the
Lord of heaven and earth, it is not so; all, whom he owneth and acknowledges
for his servants, are servants in ordinary, they dwell in his house, Psalm.
65.4. performing the service of prayer and thanksgiving, and the works of
obedience every day: he has no retainers acknowledged by him for his servants,
I mean, such as take liberty to live as they list, and for the service of God,
like retainer, think now and then, as on high days, and once on the Sabbath
is well enough.

Indeed such attendance will serve for a retainer, but God acknowledges none
such for his servants, see Jer. 7.9, 10, 11. He knows, that is acknowledges,
those that be his, John 10.14. but such as be workers of iniquity he knows
them not, as Mat. 7.23. So we may say for idolaters, as Papists be, in the
worship of Saints, and of their breaden God, they have another master then God,
namely vain idols, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Now none can serve two masters, Mat. 6.24.
Time servers are in the same rank, which be, first such as make conscience of
sin at Communion times, but afterward live as they list: also such as embrace
and hold true Religion, only because the authority under which they live does
enjoin it, and if it should alter by the will of man, they would turn with it:
Thirdly, Church Papists, who now and then come to our service and sermons, to
answer the law, but in their hearts they are for Romish superstition, like the
carnal Israelites, whose hearts turned back into Egypt. Of these we may say,
as 1 Kings 18.21. How long halt ye between two opinions, etc.

Matthew. 24.13. Revel. 2.10. and 3.12. Every one that is such shall be made a
pillar in Gods house, and shall go no more out. Therefore in general let all
be encouraged to follow the good servants that improve their masters takents,
Matthew. 25.21.23. and the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. In special let
Ministers, who are stewards and disposers of the mysteries of God, look to
their behavior, showing all good faithfulness. 1 Cor. 4.2. This fidelity is
set down, Luke 12.42, 43, 44. with 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

Thus much for their happy estate: 2. Observation.
their holy behavior is answerable, they will be still praising thee, Gods
children and servants, who have the happiness to dwell in Gods house, will be
much and constant in praising God, see Psalm. 135.1, 2. Praise the Lord, ye
servants of the Lord, etc. -- and verse 19. Bless the Lord, O house of Israel,
bless the Lord, O house of Aaron, 20. Bless the Lord, o house of Levi, ye
that fear the Lord, bless the Lord, Psalm. 145.1, 2. I will extol thee, my
God and my King: I will bless thy name for ever and ever. Every day will I
bless thee, Ps. 126.1. Hallelujah: Praise the Lord, o my soul, 2. while I
live I will praise the Lord.

Psa. 50.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. This makes it pleasant and comely, Ps. 147.1.

Cor. 5.14. and hence it is with Gods servants in the matter of praising God,
as it was with the Apostles for preaching, Acts 4.20. and as Luke 19.40. If
these should hold their peace the stones would immediately cry out.

This by way of use serves,

Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.



Thirdly, this should serve as a most forcible motive to endeavor this duty,
which we shall the rather do, if we consider the motives in God, in his
properties, his works, for his Church and against his enemies: also what our
behavior in heaven should be, whereto we should begin to inure our selves here
upon earth.

Verse 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, the high ways are in
their heart.


6. They going through the valley of Baca make it a well.


7. They go from strength to strength, every one of them appears before God
in Zion.


HEre the Prophet proceeds in the commendation of the state of Gods people,
whom he does expressly affirm to be blessed, and likewise plainly and
particularly describes them by their true and certain properties: which are of
two sorts: First, they are such as are strong in the Lord.

Secondly, they do sincerely and earnestly affect the holy worship of God;
which property is here fully expressed by three things, first, their hearts are
set upon the high ways that lead to the Lords Sanctuary, verse 5. Secondly,
they do courageous and comfortably endure and break through all difficulties in
the way, verse 6. They increase in number and strength in their journey, and
all of them in troops appear before the Lord in Zion, verse 7.

For the first: Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee] To be blessed is
to be in an happy estate, wherein a man enjoys the true and chiefest good,
which is the true God in his special favor, as Psalm. 144.15. But who do so?

Answ. First, the man whose strength is in the Lord, that is, who rests not
nor relyeth upon himself, but on the Lord, and by him is made strong against
enemies both corporal and spiritual, and also enabled for every good duty,
which the Lord requires at his hands. And thus understanding the words, the
point is clear to be observed: That man is in a blessed and happy estate, whose
strength is in the Lord; that is, who trusts not to himself, or to any other
person or thing; for his safety from evils and ability to do well, but only on
the Lord his God, on whom he rests, and rests by true faith and confidence,
see Proverbs 16.20. who so trusts in the Lord is happy, and Jer. 17.7, 8.
Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, Psalm. 125.1.146.5. Happy is he
that has the God of Jacob for his help.

Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. and to the soul, John 15.5.

Psalm. 89.21, 22. With whom mine hand shall be established, mine arm also
shall strengthen him. The enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son of
wickedness afflict him, 23. I will beat down his foes before his face. Hence
Psalm 3.6. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set
themselves against me round about, and Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. The Lord is my light
and my salvation: whom shall I fear? etc. Jer. 20.11.

Cor. 3.5. and 12.10. Phil. 4.12, 13.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

For instruction: First, in the way to true happiness: it stands not in any
outward thing, Psalm 33.12. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, and
the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance, Genesis 15.1. Fear not
Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward: and 17.1. I am the
Almighty God, walk before me, and be perfect. Hence Exodus, 33.15.19. If thy
presence go not with me, carry us not up hence, etc.

He communicates his goodness to those that enjoy him, as 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
Psalm 28.8. Hence Jer. 9.23, 24. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
etc.

Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
whose heart departs from the Lord: Now such are many as well for earthly as
for heavenly things. For earthly all such as use unlawful means to procure
earthly blessings, as lying, fraud, stealing, oppression, etc. Can these say as
Ps. 44.3. thy right hand and thine arm, etc.

Nay as 1 Kings 21.19. Have thou killed and also taken possession, etc. And for
heavenly, they that trust to their own righteousness, as Papists do, the
Jews did, Romans 10.3.



To this end we must give all diligence for three things: First, that we stand
truly in covenant with God in Christ, which is by believing on him, so Psalm.
125.1. Secondly, that we be upright hearted, dealing truly and sincerely with
him in our profession, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Thirdly, that we be constant in
obedience. 2 Chronicles 15, 2. Psalm. 81.13.


Psalm. 91.1. Let such assure themselves the Lord will be their strength: see
Psalm. 68.28.35. Psalm. 28.6, 7. They may say as Ps. 3.6. and 27.1, 2, 3. The
Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength
of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

The high ways are in their heart] Here the second property of those that are
Gods true people is expressed, they do sincerely and truly affect the holy
worship of God, as is manifest by their behavior in three branches: First, the
ways to Gods house are in their heart, that is, they love and like, and in
heart desire and delight in the ways that lead to Gods house.

They that be truly Gods people, 2 Observation.
have their hearts set upon the way and means of Gods worship, see Psalm. 122.1.
Psalm 26.8.

Because by those ways, Reason.
they come to enjoy the presence of God, society and fellowship with him in
whom they place all their happiness.

Mal. 1.13. that say of the Lords day, as Amos 8.5. when will it be gone? And
of the word and worship of God, as Job 21.14. Depart from us: we desire not the
knowledge of his ways. Certainly these are in a cursed estate, as Acts 13.10.
as Elymas the Sorcerer was; see Acts 19.9.

Matthew. 16.17. Let these consider, Luke 11.22.

Hebr. 8.2. so our ways are not material but spiritual, which we must love
and mind: and that is the Evangelicall worship, by which we come to have
society and fellowship with God: See Acts 24.14. and 19.9. This is called the
Lords highway, Isa. 358. (...) and 11.16, and 49.11, and 40.3, and 19.23, and
62.10. Jer. 31.21.

Verse. 6. They going through the valley of Baca make it a Well: even with
blessings shall the rain cover.


THe second evidence of Gods peoples sincere and earnest affection toward his
holy worship; they do courageously and comfortably endure and break through all
difficulties and troubles in the way.

That we may conceive so much by the words, we must know that the word Baca
signifies a Mulberry tree, (...) 2 Samuel 5.23, 24.
which loves to grow in dry places that be sandy and barren: Now they whose
hearts be set upon. Or, 1 Chronicles. 14.14, 15. (...)
Gods house and holy worship, when they go thitherward through a sandy, dry,
barren valley, do make it a well, that is, repute and count it as a well: the
word signifies to put or set, as Genesis 3.15. Psalm. 21.6, 12. Psalm. 83.11, 13.
For thus will they say with themselves, thinking upon the comfort of Gods
favor to whom they go, that it shall be to them as the rain of blessings, a
plentiful and liberal rain upon the dry ground: Or, as Tremellius, and
Junius, Wilcocks, etc. whom also the rain of blessing falls much upon, that
is, they sometime endure the trouble of the way, when abundance of rain falls
upon them. If we follow our own translation, the rain also fills the pools,
that is, where springs are not, the people dig, and make pits and places to
receive rain water, and therewith refresh themselves in their way to Sion:
though I most incline to the first of them. The 70 Interpreters, (...). In the
valley of tears, in the place which he has set* (...): for the Lawgiver
shall give a blessing. The Chaldee Paraphrast, Peccatores autem transibunt in
profundum gehennae planctum plangent, sicut fontem ponent illum: atqui
benedictione amici^stur qui insudunt, us discant legem tuam.

In the words note two points: First, 1 Observation.
what manner of way some of, Gods people had to go to the public solemn
worship of God: secondly, how the godly esteemed of it; and cheer up themselves
in it. For the way, it was the valley of Baca, that is, of Mulberry trees, and
so dry, and barren, and sandy, which is very wearisome: some say the vale of
misery, others vale of tears, of weeping: all import painful and troublesome
way.

The reason was the providence and ordinance of God* Reason.
his providence in their situation by lot, for so Joshuah divided the land to
Gods people, Jos. 14.12. and his ordinance in appointing them to come to that
place, which he should choose, Deuteronomy. 12.5. which was Jerusalem, Mount Sion.

See then here, Use.
that God in his providence may dispose so of the estate of his children, that
it shall be troublesome and painful for them to go to the place of Gods
public and solemn worship: so it was to those that dwelt far from Jerusalem,
in the latter end of the days of David; and afterward. And so he dealt upon
his soveraigntie, to teach them, and all after them, that there is but one
Christ, in whom we can come to the father, John 14.6. for partaking of whom, he
may in his providence dispose that it may be far more troublesome and
painful for some then others, as it was among the Jews, for partaking of his
special worship: which we must take notice of to acknowledge Gods sovereignty
over us and our estate, as John 21.22, with 18. as also Job. 21.23, 25.

In the second place, 2 Observation.
observe how the godly deal about the troubles of the way unto Gods solemn
worship, they put it for a well: now in those countries, wells were cheerful
and refreshing places, Judges 1.15. So as the godly among the Jews, esteemed
the troublesome and painful way to Gods solemn worship, pleasant and
cheerful.

The reason was, Reason.
the great desire they had unto the service of God, and the true delight they
took therein: this made the wearisome way seem pleasing. They looked al^ the
comfort they should enjoy in the presence of God, and therewith refreshed
themselves against the wearisomnesse of the way: as Jacob was affected with his
seven years service for Rachel, Genesis 29.20.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

Cant. 8.7. Many waters cannot quench love. For pains here we see it: and for
cost in David, 2 Samuel 24.24. 1 Chronicles. 29.3, 4. Nay it breaks through wordly
credit and esteem, which is a strong let, as John 12.42. Yet Luke 19.2, 3, 4.
we see it had little force in Zaccheus, and in David, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21, 22.

Solomon's simple one, whom ease slays, Prove. 1.32. and 13.4. and 20.4. So
Prove. 24.10. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strongth is small.
Consider Matthew. 12.42. and 11.22, 23.



Matthew. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear.

Even with blessings shall the rain cover: Or, the rain of blessings shall even
cover.] This translation I take to be most proper, and agreeable to the words
and matter in hand.

In these words the Prophet propounds the very thought and meditation of the
godly going up to Gods worship, whereby they do cheer up their hearts against
the weariness of the dry and hot sandy way: They say thus within themselves in
their greatest weariness, The rain of blessing shall even cover: thinking
upon the grace and favor, which God showreth down upon his servants in his
holy worship, which as comfortably and sweetly refreshes their souls in any
weariness, as a plentiful rain does the dry ground: For the better conceiving
whereof we must know that it is usual with God in Scripture to resemble the
sweet comfort of his grace and favor vouchsafed to the souls of his servants
in his holy worship to the sweet refreshing that rain and showers give to the
dry ground; see Deuteronomy. 32.2. My Doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech
shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the
showers upon the grass, Psalm 72.6. He [that is, Christ in his doctrine, as
the truth, and also Solomon, as the type, in his wise and righteous judgment]
shall come down as rain upon the mowen grass, and as showers the dispersed
moisture of the earth, Hos. 6.3. He shall come to us as the rain, as the
latter and former rain upon the earth. No marvel then if the godly do in
such phrase and words express their thoughts and meditations upon Gods grace
and favor vouchsafed to his children in his holy worship, especially in the
time of their bodily weariness through heat and drought in a sandy way.

Now then thus taking the words of the Prophet, to express the thoughts of the
godly in their wearisome way, to be set upon the comfort of Gods grace and
favor, wherewith in his holy worship, he plentifully refreshes their souls,
as a plentiful rain does the dry ground, in them we may plainly note and
observe three things; two expressed, and the third necessarily employed: The two
things here expressed are, first, their gracious thoughts and meditations in
their wearisome way: secondly, the esteem and account they make of Gods grace
and favor: The thing employed or presupposed is the means and place wherein
they make account to enjoy the same.

For the first, 3. Observation.
The godly Jews that dwelt far from Jerusalem, in their wearisome way to Sion,
do set their hearts to think upon the sweet and plentiful refreshing of Gods
grace and favor, which shall be showred upon their souls in his holy worship:
We are now, say they, parched and scorched with heat in this dry and barren
wilderness, but when we come before the Lord, our souls shall be plentifully
refreshed with the showring down of his grace, we shall be satisfied with the
goodness of his house, even of his holy Temple, Psalm. 65.4.

This they do to strengthen and hearten themselves, Reason.
to endure the toil and pains of their wearisome way, even as in nature
Merchants do hearten themselves by the hope of gain, to endure the toil and
terror of the troublesome Seas; and husbandmen, by the hope of harvest, do
readily undertake the labor of seed-time.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

For instruction two ways: First, it lets us see plainly the right way to
sound comfort, Acts 14.22.) namely, to bring the heart to feel, and feed upon,
Gods spiritual and heavenly blessings and graces, which be contrary to our
misery; as in worldly poverty and want, to set thy meditation upon the heavenly
treasure, and riches of Gods grace in Christ, Mat. 6.20. Col. 1.27. whereby the
poorest in the world may by true faith be made rich to God, Jam. 2.5. for by it
thou purchasest the field wherein the treasure is his, Mat. 13.44, 45. and
buyest the pearl of price, and so art rich to God, Luke 12.21. So in
imprisonment of body, by faith to meditate on our Christian liberty, and
enlargement from spiritual bondage by Christ Jesus: In banishment and exile
from our friends and country on earth, to meditate upon our heavenly home, and
consider that our heavenly father is with us leading us, Ps. 107.4.7. In
bondage to hard masters, to remember we are Christ's freemen, 1 Cor. 7.22. In
danger, to remember Gods presence and providence, Psalm. 118.6, 7. In sickness,
to meditate on the health of the soul, in the pardon of sin in Christ, as Mat.
9.2. In blindness, to meditate on the spiritual light, and sight of grace,
which Christ gives, Luke 4.18. Yea, in death it self, either natural or
violent, both which be the loss of life, to meditate upon our spiritual life
in grace, and of eternal life hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.4. And so for any
worldly want, or hurt, or loss, we may see there is a spiritual and heavenly
supply, Mat. 19.29. Luke 18.29, 30. Thus we shall see Gods servants have done
in former times, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Heb. 11.8, 9. by faith they so
journed in the land of promise as in a strange country, looking for a City,
whose builder and maker is God.

Thus Job did in his losses consider Gods providence and hand, Job 1.22. and in
deepest distress meditates on the resurrection to life, Job 19.19, 20, 21, 25.
Thus did David, Ps. 27.13. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living: And hereupon in distress he
stirs up his soul to wait upon God, Psalm. 42.11. Psalm. 43.5. and prays to
God, as Psalm. 116.3, 4. The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of bell
gate hold upon me; Then called I upon the name of the Lord, yea he says, Psalm.
94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my
soul, and Ps. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear none evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort
me: Therefore see, Zech. 11.7. Thus did the godly under the persecution of
Antiochus. Heb. 11.35. 2. Mac. 7.7. Thus did Paul, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. and
chap. 5.1. yea, the son of God in our nature did thus, Heb. 12.2.



First, in times of danger, wherein the righteous are bold as a Lion, but the
wicked flee when none pursues, Prove. 28.1. As we may see in David at Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30.6. and Nabal hearing of a danger past, 1 Samuel 25.37. Surely the godly
have an heart endued with grace, which is as an hand to lay hold on Gods mercy
and providence, and so have hope even in death, whereas the wicked is driven
away in his wickedness, Prove. 14.32. The wicked are men without hope, 1 Thessalonians.
4.13. Now hope is the anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19.

Secondly, about Gods worship and service they greatly differ. Gods child takes
great delight in pains about Gods service, as here we see, and Psalm. 122.1. and
in cost also, as 1 Chronicles. 29.9. the people rejoiced at their great gifts, and
David rejoiced with great joy, and 2 Samuel 24.24. yea, though it cost them their
lives, Acts 20.24. and Phil. 2.17. But the wicked count it a weariness, Mal.
1.13. and with the Gaderens had rather want Christ and his gospel, then their
hogs, Mat. 8.32.34.

And no marvel, for they think it a vain thing to serve God, Mal. 3.14.

Jews to give our selves to meditate and think upon the true and sweet
comfort, which the blessings of grace bestowed in Gods holy worship will bring
to our souls; for certainly herein is plentiful spiritual supply to all
wants, as is employed, Luke 4.18. whereof if we were resolved, we would watch at
the posts of wisdom, Prove. 8.34. and hang upon this ordinance, as the
impotent persons did at the poole of Bethesda, John 5.3, 4. The want hereof
causes contempt of Gods worship in some, Mal. 3.14. and formal usage in the
most, as John 4.11. Acts 28.22.

Phil. 4.12, 13. in persecution, Heb. 10.38. yea resist the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.9.
and quench all his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. But know it works by love, Gal. 6.5.
purging the heart, Act. 15.9. and reforming the ife, Act. 19.19.

God may hide his face and we may be troubled, Psalm. 30.7. and 69.2, 3. but as
Ps. 43.5. wait, for Heb. 13.5. he has said. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee; and consider, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet
not distressed: we are perplexed, but not in despair: persecuted, but not
forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed, verse 16. Though the outward man
perish, yet the inward is renewed daily, while we look not at things that are
seen, but at things which are not seen.

The second thing to be noted here, 4. Observation.
is the high esteem and account which the godly Jews did make of Gods
blessings of grace to be received in his holy worship; namely, that they are to
their souls as the rain of blessings that covers, that is, as a plentiful
rain, which abundantly refreshes the dry and thirsty land. This may be seen
in David's desire and acknowledgement answerable to the matter in hand, Psalm.
63.1, 2. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and
thirsty land, where no water is. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have
seen thee in thy Sanctuary. What benefit should David reap by this? ver. 5. My
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, for Christ in grace comes
down into men's hearts as rain upon the mowen grass, as showers that water the
earth, Psalm. 72.6. In his days shall the righteous flourish, verse 7. So Hos.
6.3.



want of grace, what is the soul but as dry barren ground without rain or
water, Jer. 17.5, 6. He whose heart departs from the Lord shall be like the
heath in the desert, and shall not be seen when good comes, but shall inhabit
the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land, and shall not abide
(...) But the soul stored with grace is like a field which the Lord has
blessed with plentiful rains, viz. both fruitful in it self, and pleasing and
profitable to the owner, see Ps. 72.6.16. When Christ comes down like showers,
there shall be an handful of corn upon the top of the Mountains, the fruit
thereof shall shake like Libanon, and they of the City shall flourish like
grass of the earth, Ezekiel. 34.26. I will make them and the places round about
my hill a blessing I will cause the shower to come down in his season, there
shall he the showers of blessing, and the tree of the field shall yield her
fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase.

This serves for instruction, for admonition and comfort.

Is. 5.6. and by the Mountains of Gilboa, whereon Saul and Jonathan fell, 2 Samuel 1.21, which is a most material point for every man's heart to be resolved
of.

viz. that saving grace to the soul is a supernatural gift of God, neither is
it in the power of man of himself to get saving grace; see John 3.27. A man can
receive nothing except it be given him from heaven, as before, verse 3. Except
a man be born from above he cannot see the Kingdom of God, with verse 7.8. Can
the earth be fruitful without moisture? and can it of it self cause the clouds
to drop down rain upon it? No such thing.

set his heart to think seriously on this resemblance, as Deuteronomy. 32.46. with
reference to verse 2. that so we may labor to bring them to be affected to
Gods saving graces, as dry ground is toward rain and moisture, which we see
does chop and gape after moisture, and so in its kind cry to the clouds for
showers.

This was in David, Ps. 143.6. with 63.1. But alas this thirst is rare to be
found. Worldly thirsts there are in many, the drunkards thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
the worldlings thirst, Hab. 2.5. the Epicures thirst, whose belly is his God,
Phil. 3.19. the ambitious man's thirst, Diotrephes, 3 John 9. and the malicious
man's thirst, the blood-thirsty, Psalm. 5.6. Thirst after these things does keep
away this thirst after grace, without which we shall never escape Dives thirst
in hell, Luke 16.24. If we have a godly thirst, it will appear by diligence in
frequenting the place and means of grace, Prove. 8.34. bruit beasts for want of
water will break through hedges, and grace-thirsty souls will make their ways
through all incumberances to come where they may have satisfaction; secondly, we
will delight herein, as David did, Psalm. 4.7. thirdly, we will receive
satisfaction, and show it.

Jews did here, viz. to esteem them as the rain of blessings, they may assure
themselves that they likewise shall find the like fruit and effect of them, to
be covered, that is, to be abundantly refreshed by them.

The third point to be noted here is employed, 5. Observation.
viz. the place and means wherein they assure themselves of these blessings,
namely, in the holy worship of God, which he ordained in his Tabernacle, which
made David to long and to thirst after them, verse 2. see Is. 2.3. Let us go
up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, Psalm. 65.4.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, etc.

The reason hereof is Gods sacred ordinance, Reason.
who has here assured the blessing and life, for 1 Kings 9.3. his eyes and his
heart are there perpetually, and so as elsewhere it is not to be had, Zech.
13.17, 18. Now the gospel preached is to us Gods tabernacle, Rev. 21.3. as
Acts 15.16.

This serves for instruction, and that two ways:

Mal. 1.13. with 3.14. and Job. 21.14. as John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me,
that ye might have life, so Acts 13.46.

Micah. 4.1, 2. Here is the well of life, and tree of life, Rev. 22.1, 2. all
his springs are here, Psalm. 87.7.

Verse 7. They go from strength to strength: every one of them in Sion
appears before God.


THe third thing whereby the Prophet does declare the sincere affection of the
godly toward Gods holy worship is their alacrity and courage, which they like
valiant soldiers in marching array toward the enemies do manifest in the way
to Sion: For the better conceiving whereof we must know, that the word (...),
here translated strength, does properly signify vigor, courage, alacrity,
power, or spirit, as Exodus 18.21. Jethroes Magistrates must be (...) men of
courage, and a woman complete and furnished for all good parts of a wife is
(...) mulier strenua, a virtuous woman, a woman of all good parts for her
place, Ruth. 3.11. Prove. 31.10. and therefore also the people of God by this
word express their valor, as Psalm. 60.12. Through God we shall do valiantly,
Psalm. 108.13. (...) And Ruth. 4.11. do thou worthily, Deuteronomy. 3.18. Moses
calls men of prowess and valor, (...) sons of prowess or power. And
hence it is taken to signify an army wherein power is both required and
showed, Exodus 14.4. and it signifies riches and wealth, because that makes men
potent in the world, as Psalm. 49.7.11. Prove. 10.15. and 18.11. and in all the
book of Job: for compare Job 21.7. with 2 King. 15.20. and it will be plain.

Now in this place I take it in the first and proper sense, for the alacrity
vigor and prowess, which a man of spirit will show in that thing which he
desires to effect. So the godly Jews desiring to come to Sion the place of
Gods worship, go from strength to strength, that is, they do not faint or leave
off through weariness, or length of the way, but ever and anon renew their
courage, and cheer up themselves, and so go from strength to strength. And the
latter part of the verse shows what it is which puts life and courage into
them, namely, their spiritual sight or vision of God in Sion, when there they
appear before the ark of the covenant, the pledge of his presence, according to
his ordinance, Deuteronomy. 16.16. as was said from Abraham's time, In the Mount will
the Lord be seen, Genesis 22.14.

To come then to the first part of this verse, 1 Observation.
therein this is plain.

The godly Jews in David's time, went cheerfully and courageously to the place
of Gods worship, and did increase in strength and courage, notwithstanding the
weariness and length of the way, and so went from strength to strength. Psalm.
42.4. I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with
the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday. Psalm. 122.1. I
rejoiced in them that said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Look
how courageous soldiers will stir up themselves, and hearten one another
unto fight, so did the godly Jews stir up and cheer up themselves in the way
to Gods worship.

The reason was their desire through grace to enjoy spiritual society with
God, Reason.
which was assured unto them in the holy worship of the Tabernacle and Temple,
as 1 Kings 9.3. I have chosen this place, here will I dwell: mine eyes and mine
heart shall be their continually. Hence Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired,
etc. This is the wooing place between Christ and his Church; and hence is his
direction prescribed to her, enquiring where he did feed, and make his flock to
rest? and her affection declared toward this place. Cant. 3.4. It was but a
little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves: I held him
and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mothers house, and
into the chamber of her that conceived me. And the nearer they come to God, the
more lively they are: from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. with 13.11.

This serves for instruction, reproof, admonition, and comfort.

Cor. 3. from 13, to 18. Though the same God, and the same Mediator Jesus
Christ, to day, yesterday, and the same for ever, Hebr. 13.8, See 2 Cor. 4.13,
16, 18. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25, 26. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. So that a Christian may say as Paul
does Acts 21.13. What do ye weeping, etc.

The path of the just is as a shining light, that shines more and more unto
the perfect day. Psalm. 92.13, 14. Such as be planted in the house of the Lord
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, etc. Rev. 2.19. The last works of
Thyatira are more then the first: add Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Rev. 3.16. Certainly, they want the spirit of grace, for it is as fire that
will break out, Jer. 20.9. like new wine that will vent, Job 32.18. See Prove.
6.17.

Hebr. 12.22.
They did it going to Mount Sion, we to the heavenly Jerusalem. Consider what
wrestlers do, 1 Cor. 9.25, 26. Qu. How shall we get it? Answ. It is a fruit of
the spirit, as 2 Timothy 1.7. in those that are redeemed, Tit. 2.14. Rev. 3.19.

Mark 3.21. and Festus, Paul, Acts 26.24.

The God of Gods shall be seen in Sion.] This is the thing that puts life and
vigor into Gods servants, when their way to Gods worship is long and painful
unto them, God shall be seen in Sion, the place appointed by himself for his
holy worship: or, as our translation has it, Every one of them in Zion
appears before God: both one in substance, for when God is seen in Sion, they
that see him appear before him. The reason of the different manner of
translation, is the diverse acception of the word (...), (...)
which sometime is a praeposition signifying ad, to, unto: otherwhile it is a
noun, signifying strong, and so notes the mighty God: the ordinary difference
is, (...) Deus, is written with (...) a long e^, but (...) ad, a praeposition,
with a short e: and so most Hebrew Books with pricks have it here, which moved
our new translatours to take it for a praeposition: wherein many others godly
and learned do join with them. Which yet others as learned stick not at,
because they say that vowel is there short because of Maccaph, which joyneth
two words together, and usually does abreviate the precedent vowel. And so the
most ancient Greek and Latin translations take it, Sept. and Vulg.
and diverse learned modern Writers, as Pagnin, Calvin, Mollerus, and our old
Church-Bibles. But since in sense and substance both come to one; I will herein
follow the ancients, and so note in the words two things; first, that the true
God is the God of Gods; secondly, that this true God shall be seen in Sion, the
place where the Temple was built.

For the first. The true God is the God of Gods, 2 Observation.
Jos. 22.22. The God of gods the Lord, Psalm. 50.1. and 136.2. The mighty God,
(...)
Dan. 11.36. The Lord of lords; and King of kings, Rev. 17.14. and 19.16. 1 Timothy 6.15.

The reason of this title, (...)
is his divine soveraignety over all those that do partake with him in his
name, Reason.
as Angels, and Magistrates: Angels, Psalm. 97.7. with Heb. 1.6. and Psalm. 8.6.
with Hebr. 2.7. and Magistrates, Ps. 82.1. Exodus 22.8, 9, 28. Joh. 10.34, 35.
And false Gods though unlawfully, for they are vanities, (...). Now Gods
sovereignty over them is plain: for Angels, Hebr. 1.7. with Job 1.6. and for
Magistrates, 1 Timothy 6.15. and for idols, Exodus 12.12. Dagon falls down before
the Ark, has his head and hands cut off, 1 Samuel 5.3, 4.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord? and Psalm 144.15. For
he has power over Angels, and Kings, and Devil.

Rahab, Josh. 2.9, 11. and Joshuah, chap. 24.15. and Naaman, 2 Kings 5.15, 17.
Now our way is through Christ, John 14, 6. Mat. 11.27.

Isaiah 8.13. Remember the Angels before his glorious Majesty, cover their
faces with their wings, Isaiah 6.2.

Pet. 3.6. as Psalm. 23.1, 4. and Psalm. 3.6.8. and Psalm. 116.7, 8. and Psalm.
118.6. as Dan. 3.16, 17. and hereon as Romans 8.31. what shall we say to these
things? If God be for us who can be against us?

The second thing to be noted here is, 2 Observation.
That in Sion, the holy hill, the seat of his Sanctuary, will God be seen. This
was so well known, that from Abraham's naming of it Jehovah-jireh, when there he
should have sacrificed his son, it became a Proverb and common saying, In the
Mount will the Lord be seen; and so Musculus acknowledges, that all the late
writers do translate it, though he himself do not very well like of it, saying,
that if he durst he would think that those who put pricks to the Bible in
Hebrew, did without need change the verb active (...) will see, into the
passive (...) will be seen. But Mercerus a most learned and judicious man for
the Hebrew text, judges it was done by divine providence, that posterity might
know that there God would place his Sanctuary, and therein appear unto his
people, and there also have Christ the Lord to be seen; and the 72. do
translate it by the verb passive (...). And for proof, see Psalm. 87.2. The
Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. Its the
Mountain of his holiness, beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth is Mount Sion, where God is known, Psalm. 48.1, 2, 3. and Psalm. 50.2. Out
of Sion the perfection of beauty has God shined. When Solomon had built his
Temple here according to Gods direction, then God said, I have chosen this
place, here will I dwell, etc. 1 Kings 9.3.

Quest. How was God seen in Sion? Answ. Not in essence; for so no man has seen
God at any time, John 1.18. But first, in his sacred ordinances, which were
pledges of his presence, as the ark of the covenant, Numb. 10.35. 2 Chr. 6.41.
Psalm. 132.9. Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, etc. also the cloud
sometime filling the house, Exodus, 40.34. 2 Chronicles. 7.2. 1 Kings 8.10, 11. and
the fire consuming the sacrifices, Lev. 9.24. 1 Kings 18.36, 38, 39.

Secondly, and chiefly in his son incarnate, as Mal. 3.1. with Luke 2.26, 27,
28. For in Christ the father shows himself, as John 14.9, 10.

This God was pleased to do; Reason 1.
First, for the honor and advancement of his people Israel, as Deuteronomy. 3.7. what
nation is so great, that has God so nigh unto them?

Secondly, to beautify his Sanctuary, as Hag. 2.7. I will fill this house with
glory. Hence it is called high, 1 Kings 9.8.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
and chiefly, to stir up his people to desire and delight to come to his
sanctuary, as Ps. 42.1, 2.

Quest. What is this to us? This place belonged to the Jews.

Ans. See Is. 2.2. Mic. 4.1. It was a type of the Church of Christ, as Heb.
12.22. which is therefore called the holy City, new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.3.10.
and thereof its true, Mat. 28.19, 20. with 18.20.

This serves for instruction, reprehension, admonition, and comfort.

John 4 21.23. yet in respect of Gods facred ordinances there used, some places
have an honor above others, at least for the time when those ordinances are in
hand, as Mat. 18.20. And so M. Calvin acknowledges, that there is a beauty
belonging to temples and Churches in the new Testament, which should draw the
affections of the faithful unto them.

David's mind, Psalm. 26.8. with Psalm. 42.1, 2. and Psalm. 122.1. and verse 1, 2.
of this Psalm, nay they are as those, Job. 21.14. that say unto God, depart
from us.

David did: Consider his comfort in death, Psalm. 31.5. which will be contrary
to the wicked, as Mat. 25.41.

Pet. 1.9, 10.

Verse 8. O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer, give ear, O God of Jacob.
Selah.


HEre he returns to pray for audience to his request for free and safe
fruition of the place of Gods worship; in which he shows the more earnestness
by doubling his requests, and enforcing them by several titles given to God to
whom he prays, which may strengthen his heart in his assurance to obtain his
requests.

The first title is, O Lord God of hosts, which he has given to God twice
before in this Psalm, viz. verse 1.3. yet here it is repeated with more
emphasis by addition of the title God: 1. Observation.
which shows that the godly in prayer do not faint but increase in zeal and
fervency, till they obtain their requests, as Dan. 9.19.

Romans 8.26.

Luke 18. 1.6.7. and fervency, James 5.16.

Which should be a president and encouragement to us in prayer, Use.
to show fervency and constancy therein.

For the first description of God by these titles, O Lord of hosts, it has
been handled in the first verse, with the application thereof:

The point is this, The true God is the Lord God of hosts, 2. Observation.
etc.

The matter he here prays for is audience, 3. Observation.
hear my prayer, give ear: the doubling has its emphasis, and shows his
fervency and earnestness for audience: Mark then, The holy Prophet prays
earnestly to have his prayers heard, see Psalm. 5.1, 2. and Psalm. 13.1, 2.

This he does, Reason.
because to his seeming God did too long delay to satisfy his desire; for
David longed and fainted like a woman with child, verse 2. whose case will
hardly admit delay.



For instruction see this, that sometime God uses long delays in answering
the prayers of his children, see Psalm. 22.2. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 80.4.

Quest. How can this be, seeing he says, Ask and ye shall have? Mat. 7.7.

Answ. First, the sins of Gods children may hinder this blessing, as Psalm.
66.18. John 9.31. Is. 59.2. as 2 Samuel 12.16, etc.

Secondly, God may delay to answer for a time to kindle zeal in his children,
as Mat. 15.22, 23, to 28. as our Savior dealt with the father of the child
that was possessed with a dumb and deaf spirit, Mark 9.18, 22, etc.

Thirdly, to express their patience under the cross, as 2 Cor. 12.19.

Fourthly, to teach them to rest contented with scuh supply as God ministers,
for he hears and answers not always in that particular men beg, but
sometime in that which is more for Gods glory, and as good for his children, as
Heb. 5.7.

David's case, and Christ's: we should wisely consider the reasons of Gods delay,
and make use thereof.

The latter title he gives to God is, O God of Jacob, which he propounds upon
his second and more earnest request for audience.

Mark then, 4. Observation.
that when David would fain have audience with God in prayer, he calls him the
God of Jacob.

The reason of this title here is; First, in regard of the covenant which God
made with Jacob and his posterity, Reason 1.
who are often styled by the name of Jacob, as Psalm. 59.13. God rules in
Jacob; and Is. 43.1. But now says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he
that formed thee, O Israel; and 44.1. Hear now, O Jacob my servant, and Israel
whom I have chosen, I am the Lord thy God the holy one of Israel, Is. 43.3.
Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and thou Jesurun whom I have chosen, Is. 44.2.
Now this is a great ground of assurance of audience, that the God to whom he
prayed, was his God by covenant; for God says of this people, O Jacob and
Israel, thou art my servant, I have formed thee, thou shall not be forgotten of
me, Is. 44.21.

Secondly, and more especially, Reason 2.
in regard of the special favor that God showed to Jacob when he changed his
name to Israel, in suffering himself to be overcome by Jacob when he wrestled
with him, Genesis 32.24, 26, 28. as a Prince, says he, have thou power. Hosea
says, chap. 12.3. By his strength he had power with God, verse 4. yea, he had
power over the Angel (that is, Christ the Angel of the covenant) he wept and
made supplication unto him; mark the means of his prevailing, prayers and
tears. Now David remembers this, and calls him the God of Jacob, to encourage
himself in prayer, and to get assurance of prevailing: For the God of Jacob is
he that suffers himself to be prevailed with in prayer, and he is without
shadow of turning, Iam. 1.17. to day, yesterday, and the same for ever, Heb.
13.8.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

David, when he calls God the God of Jacob: but more plain in Elisha. 2 Kings
2.14. when coming back to the waters of Jordan, with the mantle that fell from
Elijah, wherewith Elijah had a little before made a way through the river on
dry ground, verse 8. he does the like thing that Elijah did, using these words,
where is the God of Elijah: as if he should have said, sure he can do to me as
he did to him. This thing moved the Church of God often to mention Gods
gracious dealing with their forefathers, as Psalm. 44.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 99.6, 7,
8. See Psalm. 74.13, 14. and Isa. 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of
the Lord: awake as in the ancient days: Art thou not he that has cut Rahab?
(that is, Egypt) and wounded the Dragon in the waters? (that is, Pharaoh) and
verse 10. Art not thou he which has dried up the sea, etc. Meaning, that he
can do so still. So Jehoshaphat in his prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20.7.

Romans 15.4. We therefore must read the Scripture with observation, and thus
encourage our selves in prayer to prevail with God for his Church, and for our
selves.

For comfort, in prayer remember the true God is the God of Jacob, he will be
prevailed with by prayers and tears: but follow and imitate Jacob, leave not
off, give not over till he answer, as Isa. 62.1, 2.

Verse. 9. Behold, O God our shield: and look upon the face of thine anointed.


IN the former verse, David did most earnestly beg of God audience to his
prayer. In this verse, continuing the same duty of prayer, he begs of God (whom
he calls their shield) with like earnest affection (for he doubleth his
request) the favor and kindness to be beheld and looked upon: moving the Lord
thereto by the honorable state whereunto God had advanced him, in anointing
him to be a King, so as he was the Lords anointed.

In this Petition note three things: first, the title which he gives to God;
secondly, the favor he crave of God: thirdly, the reason whereby he would move
the Lord to to grant that favor. For the first, the title he gives to God is
their shield, O God our shield. A shield we know is a part of armor for
defense, serving to keep off and award the hurts and blows which an enemy
might give: and so by fit resemblance shows what God becomes to those that be
his, namely, a sure defense and saveguard from all hurtful* assaults of their
enemies. Mark then in this title, 1. Observation.
that God is a shield for his children, that is, their sure and safe protector
and defender from the hurts of all their enemies, Psalm. 3.3. Thou Lord art a
shield for me, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, my deliverer,
my God, my strength, in whom I will trust: my buckler, and the horn of my
salvation. Psalm. 33.20. He is o^^ help and our shield, Psalm. 59.11. Bring them
down, O Lord our shield: and as it follows in this Psalm, verse. 11. The Lord
God is a Sun and shield.

The reason hereof, Reason.
is his own free grace and favor in Christ to those that be truly in Covenant
with him, as Genesis 15.1.

This serves for instruction; admonition, and comfort.

Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee? O people saved by
the Lord, the shield of thy help, Psalm 144.15. Happy are the people that be
so, yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

Psalm. 82.6. so they should become shields, that is, sure protectors and
defenders of the godly, so Job was, Job 29.11. when the ear heard me it
blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave ear to me, 12. Because I
delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him, 13. The blessing upon him that was ready to perish came upon me, and
I caused the widows heart to sing for joy, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc. Magistrates
are called shields, Ps. 47.9. Hos. 4.18. and therefore should become protectors
of the good, unless they will have their own names to rise up in judgment
against them.



First, that we stand rightly in covenant with God, having avouched him for our
God, not only by receiving the seals of the covenant, in being baptized and
coming to the Lords Table, which Hypocrites may do, but especially by reverend
receiving the word of the covenant, and humbly submitting our selves thereto,
as God required, when he avouched Israel to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17, 18.
and they performed, when they sat down at his feet, every one receiving his
word, Deuteronomy. 33.3.

Secondly, we must see that our hearts be endued with true faith, whereby we
trust in God unfeignedly, resting and relying upon his promise for all the
blessings of the covenant. This grace entitles us to have God for our shield.
Prove. 30.5. Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to those that trust in
him. Psalm. 18.30. The word of the Lord is tried, he is a buckler to those that
trust in him. Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart
trusted in him, and I am helped: also, Psalm. 33.18, 19. 20.

Thirdly, we must walk uprightly before him, making conscience of all sin,
and leading a godly life. This God required of Abraham, to whom he promised to
become a shield, Genesis 17.1. with Genesis 15.1. and Solomon gives assurance hereof,
Prove. 2.7. He is a buckler to them that walk uprightly, that is, to those that
look in all things to please God, and lean neither to this sin nor that. And
to move us hereunto, let us consider the evils of the times in the abundance of
iniquity, which cry to heaven for most heavy judgments: let us think upon the
troubles of other nations, and our own present danger sundry ways, especially
from divisions both in Church and state. Now in times of trouble, nothing can
be better for us, then to have the Lord for our shield, for then we need not
fear, what can man do unto us? Psalm. 118.6.

Psalm. 27.1, 2. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear, etc,
Jer. 20.11. The Lord is with me like a mighty terrible one, therefore all mine
enemies shall be confounded, but I shall not be confounded. This made David not
to fear ten thousand of the people that should beset him round about, Psalm.
3.6. nor walking through the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4. This made the three
servants of the Lord not fear the hot fiery furnace, nor the fierceness of the
King, Dan. 3.16, 17. etc.

Now consider that God is without shadow of change. Jam. 1.17. and he was a
shield to Abraham, David, Jeremie, and others; let us therefore labor to be
like them, and we may with like confidence rest assured of Gods protection, as
the Lord promised, 1 Kings 9.4, 5. and as the godly do comfortably expect,
Psalm. 22.4, 5.

The second thing to be noted here, is the favor which he begs and craves of
God, namely, 2 Observation.
that God would behold and look upon his face, that is, look upon him
favorably, taking gracious notice of his estate and desire, Psalm. 142.4. look
upon my right hand and see, so the words are in the original as the marginall
reading has it, Psalm. 119.132. Look upon me and be merciful unto me, Psalm.
80.14. Look down from heaven and behold, so Is. 63.15. Look down from heaven
and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory.

Psalm. 80.3.7.19. Cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved, Psalm. 31.36.
Make thy face to shine, save me for thy mercies sake. This is more plain by the
contrary Gods hiding of his face, which is in scripture a plain sign of Gods
anger and displeasure, Deutr. 31.17, 18. Then shall mine anger be kindled
against them, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them: and
Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou
hide thy face from me?

David desired God to look upon his face, because conceived it might be a
special means to move to mercy. For David no doubt, showed in his very
countenance a godly sorrow for his restraint from Gods sanctuary, as also an
earnest desire of that favor, that he might safely frequent the place of Gods
worship, see Psalm. 42.1, 2. for his earnest desire, and verse 3, 4.9. for his
sorrow and mourning.

This serves for instruction and for admonition.

David entreat the Lord to look upon his face, that the view of his mournful
countenance might stir up compassion toward him, so Lam. 1.12. Is it nothing
to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow like my
sorrow.

depart from us, what can the Almighty do for us? Job 22.17. But with the
godly it is otherwise, Psalm. 30.5. In his favor is life, nay Psalm. 63.3. His
loving kindness is better then life, which made David to bid Zadock to bring
back the ark of God unto his place, saying, If I have found favor in the eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation.
But if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I am, let him do to me,
as seems him good, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.

David in our prayers, laboring in our very countenance to express truly the
good affections of our hearts, by mournful looks in confession of sins, as
Psalm. 55.2. Attend unto me, and hear me, I mourn in my complaint and make a
noise, and by cheerful countenance in thankesgiving; so serving the Lord with
a cheerful and glad heart for his good blessing, as Deuteronomy. 28.47.

David how to stir up our hearts to charitable compassion toward them that
be in misery, namely, exercise our senses upon the objects of mercy. Hitherto
belongs the charge, Is. 58.7. Hide not thy self from thine own flesh. That was
the uncharitable practice of the Priest and Levite to turn away from the
wounded man, Luke 10.31, 32, 33.

David to make high account of Gods favor, esteeming it as our own life, as
David did. And for the sure obtaining of it, labor to be found in Christ, in
whom only it is to be had, John 14.6. with Ezekiel. 39.29. Neither will I hide my
face any more from them. Also to beware of all sin, whereby it is certainly
lost, as Deuteronomy. 31.17, 18. Ezekiel. 39.23, 24. And in particular, seeing the want
of faith and obedience, the chief fruits of the word of the Kingdom, cause God
to take it from us, Mat. 21.43. therefore in special manner we must give all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, etc.

The third thing to be noted here is, the reason or argument employed in the
title, which David gives to himself to move God to show favor unto him,
namely, because he is the Lords anointed. It is most true, that the son of God
the second person in Trinity was at this time, and from the beginning of the
world in Gods purpose and promise, the Lords anointed, as he is called the
lamb slain, Rev. 13.8. whereon he is called the Messiah or anointed long
before his incarnation, Dan. 9.24, 25. whose coming was expected by all the
Jews, as John 4.25. And it may be David in this title had reference to his
mediation, in whose alone merits and worthiness the godly in all ages have
audience with God, as Dan. 9.17. Cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary for
the Lords sake, that is, for the Lord Christ Jesus sake. And so from David, we
must learn to beg all blessings of God for Christ's sake, as John 16.23, 24.
with John 14.6. Yet withal we must know, that David styles himself Gods
anointed, with special reference to that high favor and honor whereto God
had advanced him. when he anointed him by Samuel, to be King over his people,
as 1 Samuel 16.12. Psalm. 89.20. whereby he made him not only a type, but an
honorable progenitour of Christ, as that same Psalm implies, verse. 26, 27, 28,
29. And upon consideration of that great and extraord^nary favor, he begs that
which is less, even a gracious respect for freedom and liberty in Gods holy
sanctuary, as the next verse, which propounds the reason of his earnest desire,
does plainly import.

Mark then, 3 Observation.
that because David was the Lords anointed, therefore he begs that grace and
favor to enjoy with freedom, the Ordinances of God in his holy Sanctuary. To
the same effect, he prays, Psalm. 132.10. For thy servant David's sake, turn not
away the face of thine anointed.

Sam. 15.17. When thou wast small and little in thine own eyes, wast thou not
made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee King over
Israel? But being joined with the thing signified, even the inward graces of
the spirit, as it was in David, 2 Samuel 23.1, 2. where he is said to be the
man that was raised up on high, the anointed of the LORD, endued with the
Spirit, thus it did entitle him to GODS special mercy, as Psalm 89.20, 28. GOD
promised, saying, I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I
anointed him -- My mercy will I keep for him for ever: and David acknowledges,
Psalm 18.50. Great deliverances gives he to his King: He shows mercy to his
anointed.

David propounds this motive to God, to bestow upon him this favor, because
hereby he should be better enabled to walk worthy of the honor conferred upon
him, in his anointing: as see Isaiah 2.3. here God teaches his ways for their
enabling to walk in his paths.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

Sam, 17.34, 37. Thy servant kept his fathers sheep, etc. Psalm. 56.13. Thou
have delivertd my soul from death: will thou not deliver my feet from falling?
So did Sampson in his great thirst, Judge. 15.18. This we should the rather
mark, for our example in following the godly herein, both because God requires
it for our good, Psalm. 111.4. He has made his wonderful works to be
remembered: and verse 2. they are sought out of all them that pleasure therein.
Michah 6.5. Remember now, O my people, what Balak King of Moab consulted, and
what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, from Shittim unto Gi^gal, that ye
might know the righteousness of the Lord. And also blames those that forget
his works and dealing toward them, as Psalm. 106.7. Our fathers understood not
thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies: but
provoked him at the sea, verse 13. They soon forgate his works, they waited
not for his counsel, verse 21. They forgate God their Savior For this, good
King Asa is blamed, 2 Chronicles. 16, 8. Were not the Ethiopians, etc.

Psalm 50.5.15. the honor of holy unction, they are the Lords anointed ones,
though not with material oil (the use whereof ended in Christ, as all legal
types did, Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.6.) yet with the graces of the holy Ghost, which
are spiritual oil, as 1 John 2.20.27. By which they are made Kings and
Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; whereon they are called Christ's
fellows, Psalm. 45. yea Christ himself is not ashamed to call them brethren,
Heb. 2.11. And so they are indeed by the grace of faith, as Gal. 3.26, ^ John
5.1. Christ indeed has the pre-eminence, for he is the natural son, as he
is the second person in Trinity, the only begotten, John 1.14. and as
incarnate, made man the son of God also, Mat. 3.17. by the grace of personal
union.

For admonition two ways to every one that would pray with comfort.

Romans 6.13. yield up your selves unto God, Romans 12.1. which is known by
sanctification joined with profession of faith, as Romans 15.16.

Secondly, our prayers and praises, as Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set forth
as incense, and Heb. 13.15. the sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips, or
as Hos. 14.2. the calves of our lips.

John 14.17. whence Christ told his Disciples he had chosen them out of the
world, John. 15.19. meaning by his holy calling, whereto Paul exhorts the
Romans, chap. 12.2. Fashion not your selves, etc. The worlds fashion to be
left is sin, in general, 1 John 5.19. and in particular the lusts of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life, 1 John 2.16. Now this is by true
repentance, whereon the spirit is promised, Prove. 1.23. with Acts 2.38.
Secondly, wait for this gift of the spirit in the sacred ordinances of the word
and prayer, the word Acts 10.44. Gal. 3.2. and prayer, Luke 11.13. do herein as
the people did at Bethesda, John 5.3, 4. yet let us look to the affections of
our hearts toward this anointing in the use of means; for we must do it with
an holy desire, Is. 44.3. and ever join obedience with our endeavor, Acts 5.32.

Verse 10. For a day in thy Courts, is better then a thousand. I had rather be
a Doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.


THe Prophet having sundry ways expressed his zealous affection toward the
house of God, first, by way of admiration, verse 1.2. By plain discovery of his
affection, verse 2.3. By lamentation, verse 3.4. By instruction, touching the
happiness of the Priests and Levites, verse 4.5. By humble and earnest
supplication for audience and favor to enjoy the blessing he so much desired,
verse 8, and 9. does in this verse (to prevent the admiration of some, and the
derision of others, who would account this holy longing to be but foolish
doting) render a good reason of his earnest affection toward the Lords
Sanctuary, drawn from the surpassing benefit of time spent there above any
other place in the world; for a day in thy Courts (says he) is better then a
thousand, any where else; speaking of the Sanctuary, as the spouse does of
Christ, Cant. 5.9, 10. to give a reason of her ardent affection toward him, she
says, He is the chiefest of ten thousand. And because the greater number might
perhaps be otherwise affected, therefore he does make instance in himself,
because he best knew his own heart, and plainly professes that his affection
did more cleave to the Lords sanctuary then to any other place, saying, I had
rather be a doore-keeper, etc. like as Joshuah had done before about the
worship of the true God, Josh. 24.15.

To begin with David's reason; it stands upon this ground. Man's heart for
earnest desire and delight should be there set where most and best good is to
be received; this is according to the Apostles council, 1 Cor. 12.31 Covet
earnestly the best gifts, and 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. Prove all things, hold that which
is good.

There (...) must needs sometimes be (...): for we must not only choose good
before evil, but of diverse good things the best, as the very heathen have well
prescribed. Now the Prophet David does here assume. But a day in Gods Courts is
better then a thousand elsewhere. Tull: Off. lib. 1.
And therefore do I desire it.

In this, which the Prophet assumeth, this must be remembered for the meaning,
that by Gods courts here is not meant heaven the place of glory, but the place
of his solemn worship here on earth even his sanctuary, which to David's
religious heart was heaven upon earth. And so the point to be observed is this;

That time bestowed in Gods holy worship and service is better then a thousand
times so much spent elsewhere. 1. Observation.
This is here plainly affirmed, and to gain our more cheerful assent, mark the
reasons following;



A Postscript by the Publisher to the READERS.
Christian Readers,
HAving drawn forth this Exposition of the 84 Psalm, as far as the perfect
Copy of the Authors own handwriting had carried it on, and having lost the
hopes I had once of supplying what is wanting, on the three last Verses, out of
his other papers, I had an intent to undertake that task my self: but upon
further consideration, I have now resolved to let it alone, and leave it as I
found it, rather then to fall under his censure, that said, Infoelix operis
summa; and to owe them an answer, who should ask a reason of the dissimilitude
in the words of the Poet, when he said; Amphora caepit Institui, currente rota
cur urceus exit? For why should I strive, non passibus aequis, to follow him
afar off, whom I can have no hope to overtake? Such a Master of this sacred
Art (rightly dividing the word of truth) he was, that it would be presumption
in me to imagine, that what was left unfinished by him, should be perfected by
me. And for works of this nature, to be published in this sort, is not without
example, amongst the writings either of ancient and modern Authors. Besides (if
I be not mistaken) both the matter and expressions in these three Verses,
either all or the most part, are such as you may find handled, either in the
former Verses of this Psalm, or in the Expositions of those other three; which
it is intended shall be published together with this, viz. 27, 85, 87. As, the
former part of the tenth verse, A day in thy courts is better then a thousand,
seems parallel to that of the fourth Verse; Blessed are they that dwell in
thine house: the latter part of the same Verse, I had rather be a Doorkeeper
in the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tents of wickedness, unto the
fourth Verse of the 27 Psalm, One thing have I desired of the Lord, etc. So the
former part of the 11 Verse, The Lord God is a Sun and a shield, does not
differ much more from that of the 9 Verse, Behold, O God our shield, and look
upon the face of thine anointed, then a profession does from a petition, and
mercy acknowledged, from mercy desired: and the latter part of the same Verse,
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, what is it but
the same with that of the 85 Psalm, Verse. 12, 13. The Lord shall give that
which is good, etc. The like I might say of the rest, but that I suppose this
to be sufficient, if not more then needed.

Vale.
THE Churches Exercise UNDER AFFLICTION. OR, AN EXPOSITION OF THE LXXXV Psalm.

By Mr. THOMAS PIERSON, late Rectour of Brompton-Brian, in the County of
Hereford.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

To the Right Worshipful, my truly noble and thrice most honored Patron Sir
ROBERT WHITNEY Knight.
IT is not unknown unto him, unto whose eyes all things are naked and opened,
that a strong desire does possess me (if it be not more proper to call it
ambition) of offering to the present age, and leaving to posterity, some
public evidence of that unfeigned thankfulness, which I humbly acknowledge
to be due unto you, for your altogether undeserved as well as unexpected at the
first, and now little less then twenty years continued, favor, expressed,
amongst many other particulars, by three several presentations unto such
Church Livings as were in your power to dispose of: and those, not only so
freely, but also so friendly, not granted, but offered, that would the severest
censurer of Symonie that ever was choose of purpose a pattern, in that
particular for patrons perpetually to practice by, the world could not afford
him any one, that might more truly say then you can, nec prece, nec precio. And
of all the relations wherein men stand to one another, in that between
Ministers and their people, I think it is the greatest happiness, when we can
tell our selves truly, that it was not our own doing, but Gods by the means of
others, without any solicitation of our own, that brought us together. This
has been my comfort in many trialls of affliction, and will be I hope, my joy
and my crown, when ever God shall see it good to turn his hand upon me, and
next under him I shall ascribe it unto you. And having long ago put on almost
an obstinate resolution never to send mine own name to the press (except it
be, as now I do, to bring to light another man's labors) I am glad I have such
a good opportunity, that whilst I am publishing some of his works, whose
memory is not only precious with you, and others unto whom he was known, but
also like to last as long as Orthodox Christian religion keeps footing in
England, I may both honor one part with your name, and withal tell the world,
what I hope you will believe, that I am

Your Worships most obliged Orator, in the strictest bonds of all observant
duty unfeignedly devoted, CHRISTOPHER HARVEY.

THE CHVRCHES EXERCISE UNDER AFFLICTION. OR, An EXPOSITION of the LXXXV Psalm.
Psalm 85. To the chief Musician. A Psalm for the sons of Korah.

VERSE. 1. Lord thou have been favorable to thy land; thou have brought back
the captivity of Jacob.


I Have chosen to entreat of this Psalm, as containing fitting matter unto our
times and occasions: wherein, as well the works of Gods providence, as the
godly government and authority under which we live, do call us to the
consideration both of former mercies and favors* as also of present evils and
further dangers: that renewing our thankfulness for blessings received, and
humbling our souls to beg of God the removal of judgments, both present
and imminent, we may with better assurance wait upon God, for the fruition of
his blessings.

The scope and general division of the whole Psalm.
Answerable to all which, we have in this Psalm, as a pattern showed us in Gods
holy mountain: First, the Churches acknowledgement of Gods favor and mercy, in
the removal of former evils, verse 1.2, 3. Secondly, her humble and earnest
prayer, for the perfecting of that mercy begun, by the removal of some heavy
judgments, which were renewed upon them for their sins. verse 4.5, 6, 7.
Thirdly, her godly behavior, in waiting for mercy, in a gracious answer to her
prayers, with the sure grounds thereof. verse 8. etc.

The title of the Psalm explained.
These are the general parts of this Psalm: which I will handle in order: But
first a word or two of the title prefixed, which shows the dedication
thereof, To the chief Musician: and points out the persons, that were
specially to be employed in the singing thereof, namely, the sons of Korah.

The dedication is to the chief Musician, or master of the Quier. For 1 Chronicles.
16.4. David ordered a Quier, to sing thanksgiving, and penned Psalms for that
end, which he delivered to the master of the Quier, verse 7. Of their ordering.
See 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 7.

The parties, by whom it is to be used, are the sons of Korah. These sons of
Korah were the posterity of that rebellious Levite, who with Dathan and Abiram
rebelled against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. Which Korah was consumed with fire,
verse 35. with 17. Howbeit there were of his sons that dyed not, Numb. 26.11.
departing, as it seems, from their fathers tent, as all were commanded, Numb.
16.24, 26. And of these is numbered a family of the Korathites, Numb. 26.58. of
whom came Samuel the Prophet, and Heman his nephew, 1 Chronicles. 6.33. a great
singer, 1 Chronicles. 25.4, 5.

The first Observation.
In this title observe two things. First, that God required joy and gladness in
his service, which David prepared, 1 Chronicles. 23.5. and 25.1. and bids all his
people to rejoice in their feasts, Deuteronomy. 16.11.14. which feasts did represent
the life of Christians. And in Evangelicall worship he requires making melody
to the Lord in their hearts, Ephesians. 5.19.

The Reason.
The reason is great. For in Gods service we have society with God, which is a
just cause of exceeding joy. Herein God vouchsafes evidence of special
favor; and if we should take no delight therein, it argues fearful contempt:
which God cannot endure without revenge, as Deuteronomy. 28.47.48. whereto add, Amos
8.5, 11.

The Use.
This should make us to stir up in our hearts, and to express in our
behavior this spiritual joy in Gods service. To this end we have need of the
spirit to sanctify us, which will make us to rejoice in Gods word, as one that
finds a great spoil. Psalm. 119.162. and conceiving it to be the food of our
souls, labor to hunger and thirst after it, and then with Job, shall we
esteem it above our appointed food, Job 23.12. And, when we know God to be our
God, and the fountain of blessings to us, we shall come before him with
gladness in prayer. Psalm. 100.2. and our mouth shall praise him with joyful
lips. Psalm. 63.5.

The second Observation.
Secondly, here note that the sons, that is, the posterity of wicked and
rebellious Korah have an honorable place in Gods sacred and solemn service,
for to them sundry of David's Psalms are commended: as Psalm. 42.44, 45, 46.
etc. which is no small honor.

The Reason.
No doubt, David saw them, being by place and birth Levites, to be faithful and
diligent in their place, and thus renownes them to all posterity, that he
composeth special Psalms, for their ministry in the solemn service of God.

The use for instruction.
Here see the verifying of Gods word, for the comfort of all godly children,
that the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, Ezekiel. 18.14, 17, 20.
if he see his fathers sins and turn from them.

Obj. Exodus 20.5. Visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children.

Answ. That is, inquiring for the sin of the fathers among the children, and,
if he find it there, then pays he them home.

Obj. Achans sons and daughters are stoned and burnt for the fathers
sacrilege, Josh. 7.24, 25. And Dathans and Abirams little children are
swallowed up. Numb. 16.27.

Answ. For ought we know, they might be of years of discretion, and privy to
their fathers stealth.

When little ones dye in the punishment of their fathers sin, God lays not
the punishment of the fathers sin upon the children, but to make the fathers
sin more odious, does then bring upon the children the fruit of their own
original corruption: which is death determined upon all flesh: as Genesis 2.17.
with Romans 5 12. As a creditor, that has both the father and the son debtors
unto him, The Use for comfort.
may, upon the fathers provocation, lay the forfeiture upon both, being both in
his danger.

Secondly, here is special encouragement to the children of wicked parents, to
become godly and faithful in their places. In some sense, they are the sons
of strangers: for the wicked are estranged from the womb, Psalm 58.3. Yet, if
they leave their fathers sins, and become faithful to the Lord, here is
comfort for them in the honor of Korah's posterity. See If. 56.3. Let not the
son of the stranger, that joyneth himself to the Lord, say, the Lord has
utterly separated me from his people: for verse. 6, 7. the sons of strangers,
that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the
Lord, shall be brought unto his holy mountain, and made joyful in his house of
prayer: for them that honor me, I will honor, says the Lord. 1 Samuel 2.30.

Thus much of the title: the Psalm it self follows.

Verse 1. Lord, thou have been favorable to thy land: thou have brought again
the captivity of Jacob.


The meaning of the words.
IN this and the two next verses, are contained the Churches acknowledgement of
Gods great favor and mercy: here propounded, not only, to testify their
thankfulness for the blessings they enjoyed, but also, to be a ground of
encouragement unto their new requests, in the 4, 5, 6, and 7. verses. And so
conceived, we may therein observe one thing in general, viz,

The first Observation.
That Gods Church does think upon and acknowledge the blessings they lie still
in other things, under some heavy judgments. Compare the three first verses
with the 4, and 5, which will well agree, either, to the times of Ezra and
Nehemiah, when, notwithstanding their return from Babylon, the people were in
great distress at Jerusalem: as Nehem. 1.3. or, to the more heavy times, when
Antiochus Epiphanes did tyrannize over them, as the book of Maccabees shows
more at large, 1 Marcab. 1.25, 36. etc. Like unto this is Psalm. 44.1. etc. We
have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what works thou
did in their days, in the times of old, etc. Thou have saved us from our
enemies, and put them to shame that hated us, verse 7. But thou have cast off,
and put us to shame: and go not forth with our armies. verse 9.

The first Reason.
The reason is two fold. First, to show themselves thankful for blessings
received: for, so God is honored, Psalm. 50.23. Who so offers praise
glorifyeth me, which is very profitable, as Luke 17.17, 18, 19.

The second Reason.
Secondly, to lay a ground of assurance of deliverance in present evils: For,
hereby their hearts are settled in assurance of Gods power, and further in the
love of his mercy, as appears by that of David, 1 Samuel 17.34. etc. The Lord,
that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the bear,
he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

For instruction, The use for instruction.
see a difference between the wicked and the godly under crosses and
afflictions. The godly, we see here, does guide his affairs with discretion:
as he looks with one eye on Gods present judgments, so with the other he
beholds precedent mercies. See Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away; blessed be the name of the Lord: and Job 2.10. What? shall we receive
good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? But, the wicked are
like Haman, all his honor is nothing, while Mordecai sits in the Kings gate,
Est. 5.13. The godly are like David, 1 Samuel 30.5, 6. who, when the people spoke
of stoning him, encouraged himself in the Lord his God: but the wicked like
Nabal in distress, whose heart dyed within him, and he became as a stone; 1 Samuel 25.37. or, like Saul, that, when God would not answer him, consulted with
a witch, 2 Samuel 28.7. Seek me a woman, that has a familiar spirit, that I may
go to her and enquire.

For admonition: The Use for admonition.
labor to become followers of Gods Church and people in this godly behavior.
We have just cause so to do in this land, every true member of Gods Church,
Gods favor has been great unto us, in preventing the designs of our enemies,
and in withdrawing the heavy judgment of plague and pestilence from our
brethren, and that, not once alone, but often; the remembrance of which
mercies no present judgments should be able to deprive us of.

Now particularly in the Churches acknowledgement of Gods great favor and
mercy to them, we have sundry things to note.

First, the Prophet calls Judea, wherein the people of Israel dwelt. The second
Observation.
Gods land, Thou have been favorable to thy land. So Psalm. 10.16. The Lord is
King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of his land: that is, the
Canaanites, and the rest of the nations, that once possessed it, are now
destroyed. Jer. 2.7. Ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination.
Ezekiel. 36.5. God is angry with all those heathen, that appoint his land into
their possession: and verse 20. these are the people of the Lord, and are gone
forth out of his land. and Ezekiel. 36.5. I will bring thee against my land, Hos.
9.3. They shall not dwell in the Lords land, Joel 1.6. A Nation is come upon my
land.

The first Reason.
The reason, or ground hereof, is threefold. First, God chose this land for his
own people, wherein he promised to dwell among them. See Lev. 26.11. Psalm.
47.4. Psalm. 48.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 76.1.2. Ezekiel. 20.6. Ezekiel. 37.26.

The second Reason.
Secondly, he became King over this land, Zechar. 14.9. Judah was his sanctuary,
and Israel his dominion. Psalm 114.2.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, he undertook to be protector and blesser of this land, and that in an
extraordinary manner, as Deuteronomy. 11.11, 12. The land, whither thou go to
possess it, is a land of hills, and valleys, etc. A land, which the Lord thy
God cares for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it. Experience
whereof may be seen by example, 1 Samuel 7.10, 11, 12. 2 Kings 19.32, 33.

In these respects the land of Jurie was, as it were, Gods peculiar enclosure,
hedged in from his commons, which was the whole earth.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The use for instruction
For instruction: it shows plainly, that some lands and people have a
privilege above others, for sure title and interest unto the true God: namely,
those, that do receive, believe and obey the word of the covenant, as did the
Jews under the law, and all Christian nations under the gospel, It is true,
that, by creation and common providence, all lands, and all people are the
Lords: as Psalm. 50.12. The world is mine, and the fullness thereof: yet, they
only are his by bond of covenant, and so entitled to his special mercies,
that truly receive, believe and obey his holy word, See Exodus 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy.
10.14, 15. Psalm. 65.1.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First, to those, that as yet, are without,
not called, nor brought into the bond of the covenant with God, that, if ever
they desire true happiness for their souls, they labor to become rightly
entitled to the true God, by special covenant through Christ Jesus: for happy
are the people, that have the Lord for their God, Psalm. 144.15. Now, for this
end, they themselves must seek unto Gods ministers, and say, as a man of
Macedonia did unto Paul in a vision, come and help us, Acts 16.9. they must
enquire of them, as the ^unuch did of Philip, I pray thee, of whom speaks the
Prophet this, Acts 8.34. Nay; they must study in the word themselves, and
search the Scriptures daily, by the example of the noble Bereans, Acts 17.11.
And, above all, they must desire of God, that he will teach them to do that
which is pleasing unto him: as Psalm 143.10.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to us in this land, who by our holy profession, do entitle our selves
to the true God, and say, as Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever: we must
look unto it, that we do truly and sincerely receive, believe and obey the word
of the covenant, and take heed of those things, which tend to separate between
God and his people Amongst which, we are most in danger of these two: first,
the idolatry of Popery.

Secondly, profaneness in Christianity. Popery is a false faith, and
profaneness in the profession of the true religion argues a dead faith.

For Popery, it is at this day, amongst Gods people, in comparison of true
religion, as the worship of the golden calves, erected by Jeroboam at Dan and
Bethel, was to the true worship, appointed by God himself at Jerusalem, 1 Kings
12.26, 28, 29. etc.

For, Papists worship God in images, as they did: now, the danger thereof see,
2 Chronicles, 15.13. Israel without a true God: and 2 Chronicles. 25.7. The Lord is not
with Israel. Therefore, if we desire the continuance of this privilege, to
have our land to be Gods land, we must set our selves against Popery, lament
and repent, that it has any corner and closet by allowance among us, yea, we
must, by prayer to God, seek the removalll of it. Consider, Psalm. 81.8, 9.
Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou will
hearken unto me. There shall no strange God be in thee, neither shall thou
worship any strange God.

Then, for profaneness, among the professors of true religion, this argues a
dead faith: for such deny the power of true Religion, 2 Timothy 3.5. Now, Gods
Kingdom is not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. And this is a spreading
evil amongst us, as Gods judgments show. See Jer. 23.10. The land is full of
adultery, and because of oaths the land mourns. Also, Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. The Lord
has a controversy with the land, etc.

The same sins are rife amongst us, whereof we must take special regard
against the day of humiliation.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to any land or people, that keep covenant with
God, when they are oppressed with idolatrous enemies, or wicked men, as usually
the true Church is: they must remember their interest in the true God, and in
the time of danger, with Hezekiah, Is. 37.6, 29. humble themselves in earnest
prayer, and with Jehosaphat, fast and pray, 2 Kings 20.3, 4, 12. and then, they
shall receive a gracious answer, as he did. verse 14. and good success, as
Abijah did, 2 Chronicles. 13.8, 10, 12.

The third Observation.
Secondly, note here, as taken for granted, That Jacob, that is, the Jews, who
were the posterity of Jacob, had been taken captive. For, the Churches
thankfulness, for their bringing back, is an acknowledgement of their carrying
out.

The truth hereof is manifest by plain and manifold relation in the holy story.
See 2 Kings 24.10, 11. Dan. 1.1, 2. for the beginning of it, in part, in the
reign of Jehojakim: and for the accomplishment thereof, see 2 Kings 25.2, 8,
11. Jer. 39.2, 3; etc. and Jer. 52.4. etc.

The reason hereof was their grievous sins againd God. Lam, 1.8. Jerusalem
has grievously finned, therefore she is removed: according to Gods threatening,
Levit. 26.14, 15, 25, 33. Deuteronomy. 28.15, 20. Jer. Wherefore has the Lord
pronounced all this great evil against us? verse 11. thou shall say, because
your fathers have forsaken me, verse 12. and ye have done worse then your
fathers. verse 13. therefore will I cast you out of this land.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: see plainly, that Gods own people, for the sins committed
among them, may lie under most heavy and grievous judgments, as here we see,
they are led into captivity, among whom were Daniel, Shadrach, Meshuch and
Abednego. Dan. 1. also, Mordecai and Esther. Est. 2.5, 6. yea, Zerobabell and
Jehoshuah. Yea see, Psalm 44.9, 10. etc. to the 18.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to beware of rash judgment, either against
our selves or others, for the greevous calamities, that lie upon us and them:
for, God says, many are the afflictions of the righteous, Psalm. 34 19.
Whosoever will live godly must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Through
manifold afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Acts 14.22.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, hereby learn to know, to repen^ of for the time past, and to beware
of for the time to come, those sins that brought the captivity; which are
these. In general, the transgressing of Gods Commandments: as, Lev. 26.14,
15, 25. In particular. idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 7.19.20. Sabbath breaking. Nehem.
13.15, 16, 17. Covetuousnesse, Jer. 6.12, 13. Soothing teaching, Jer. 6.14. etc.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, to the godly, in the times of their great affliction. Consider,
that nothing befalls thee, which has not light on Gods deer children, whatever
thine affliction be, whether inward in mind, or outward in body. See 1 Cor.
10.13. Consider the state of Job, Jeb 1. and 2. chapters; and of David, Psalm.
77.2.4. My soar ran in the night, and ^easednot: my foul refused to be
comforted. Thou hold mine eyes waking, I am so troubled, that I cannot
speak, yet, I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice, and he
gave ear unto me verse 1. Consider also the restoration of Israel, in this
text, and Zeph. 3.14. etc. Is. 12.1. etc. Is. 54.1. etc. Micah 4.6, 7.

The fourth observation.
The third particular thing to be here observed, is expressed: namely, that God
brought back his people that had brought back his people, that had been led
into caprivitie. This is plain, for the captivity of Babylon, in the first and
second chapters of Ezra, where both time, and means, and persons that did
return, are set down particularly, and at large.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, and chiefly in God, who of mere grace and
favor undertook this great work. and bound himself thereto by promise: See
Jer. 27.22. They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be, until
the day that I visit them: then will I bring them up, and restore them to this
place, Jer 29.10. After seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit
you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this
place, 2 Chronicles. 36.22 Now in the first year of Cyrus King of Persia ( that the
word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished) the Lord
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, that he made a Proclamation through out all his
Kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, etc.

The second Reason.
Secondly, God herein had respect to the godly behavior of his children, in
true repentance, and earnest prayer, whereunto he did enable them by his grace,
that so he might perform his good word unto them. For that was Solomon's
request, at the dedication of the temple, 2 Chronicles. 6.36, 37, 38. assented unto,
chapt. 7.1. by sign of fire consuming the sacrifice, and by voice, verse 12. I
have heard thy prayer. And so we find, that Daniel did, Dan. 9. according as
God had said the godly should do, Jer. 29.12. etc. Then shall you call upon me,
and go, and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you: and ye shall seek me,
and find me; I will be found of you, and turn away your captivity.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First see, that God does actually for his Church
exceeding abundantly, above all that men can ask, or think, Ephesians. 3.20. with
Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, we were like
them that dream. Such was Peter's deliverance, both to himself, and others of
the Church, Acts 12.9.15, 16.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see a plain difference, between Gods dealing with his own
people, and with the wicked, when he enters into judgment with them. His
people, we see here, do return, but the wicked are cut off, and cast off for
ever, Is. 27.7, 8. Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? etc.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, two ways. First, to the wicked, that they insult not over Gods
children in their affliction and misery: for God will one day restore comfort
to his children, and judge the wicked. See Mich. 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O
mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall
be a light unto me. And for judging the wicked, see Psalm. 137.7, 8, 9. and
Zeph. 2.8, 9.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to the godly in affliction, that they be not dismayed with any
terror, for peace and deliverance shall come. See, Psalm. 23.4. Jam. 5.7, 11.
Acts 2.24. Christ now is made both Lord and King, though once crucified, Acts
2.36. declared to be the son of God, with power, according to the spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4.

Verse 2. Thon have forgiven the iniquity of thy people: thou have covered all
their sin. Selah.


The meaning of the words.
HEre the Prophet proceeds, in the further acknowledgement of Gods favor to his
people: and does instance in this great blessing, the remission and
forgiveness of their sins, which were the cause of his judgments, that
formerly sight upon them.

In expressing whereof he uses variety of phrase, for the greater comfort of
his people: intimating thus much, that whether their sins were small or
great, yet God had pardoned them, and hid them out of his sight.

In this confession note two things. The first employed, That Gods own people
have their iniquities and their sins. The second expressed, that God forgives
the iniquity of his people, and covers all their sins.

For the first, Gods own people, that are his by covenant have their iniquities
and their sins. The first Observation.
2 Chronicles. 6.36. If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins
not.) Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made mine heart clean: I am pure from my
sin? Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and
sins not, Jam. 3.2. In many things we sin all, 1 John 1.8. If we say, we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Consider the
best that have lived, Noah, Abraham, Job, Moses, David, Peter, etc. who, though
they were most worthy men, yet were not pure and free from sin.

The reason hereof is their original corruption, furthered by the malice of
Satan, and the deceitfulness of the world.

And touching this corruption, The Reason.
which is in every man the seed of his sin, thus much we must know, that it
is in Gods people in a different manner and measure, according to their estate
before God. For, among Gods people, some are his by a general calling only,
and outward profession, and in them corruption reigns: for, the grace they
have as yet is restraining only, which keeps them from the servitude of some
gross sins only. Others are his also by effectual calling, and inward
sanctification, in whom, though corruption do not reign, and hold them captive
under the bondage of sin, yet does it remain in them, and allure and draw
them, many a time to commit iniquity and sin.

Thus much Paul confesses, speaking of himself regenerate, Romans 7.

Now there he says (to express the strength of his corruption remaining) what
I hate, that do I: verse 15. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me: For, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no
good thing. The good that I would I do not: but, the evil which I would not
that do I: I see a law in my members warring against the law of my mind, etc.
verse 17, 18, 19, 23.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The first Use for instruction
For instruction two ways. First, that original sin is not quite taken away
by Baptism. True it is, they that rightly believe in the Lord Jesus, and are
regenerate by the holy ghost, are both freed from the guilt of original sin,
and have corruption though not quite removed, yet so weakened and lessened,
that sin shall not reign in them: yet some part thereof remains, and thence
proceed actual transgressions, as St. Paul confesses, Romans 7.21.

The second Use for instruction
Secondly, here see the error of the more ancient Heretics, as the
Catharists, the Novatians and Donatists, who held a man might live in a state
of purity and perfection in life. From whom the Papists do not much differ, who
do not only hold the total removal of original corruption by Baptism, but
also, that the child of God may keep Gods Commandments. For proof whereof they
arge, 1 John 2.4. and do inst ance in Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. But they
err, mistaking evangelicall obedience there spoken of, as though it were
legal.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to the wicked, that they beware of the common
stumbling block, whereat many natural men do fall, that is, to mislike true
religion, because of the faults and sins of those that be the professors of
it. For, Gods people have their iniquities, they have their sins.

There is a woe to them that give that offense, yet thou shall not be excused
that take it. For, we be to the world because of offenses. Mat. 18.7.

Secondly, The second Use for admonition.
the godly have hence to consider their estate of subjection to commit iniquity
and sin; that thereby they may be moved to daily repentance for their sins
past, and to watchfulness against sins to come: For which end they must
remember Christ's charge of pulling out the right eye. etc. Mat. 5.29, 30. and
beware of the sins, which their constitution of body, and their calling, or
state of life does tempt them unto: for there especially is this right eye,
that must be plucked out, and right hand that must be cut off. And against all
sin we must labor daily to put on the whole armor of God, prescribed, Ephesians.
6.12, 14, 16. And also, ever labor to weaken corruption, and to renew and
strengthen grace in our souls: for which end we must be much exercised and
conversant in the word and prayer.

For comfort, The use for comfort.
it makes greatly to those, that be in Christ Jesus, and yet be troubled for
their iniquities and for their sins.

Quest. wherein then do they differ from natural men?

Answ. In the servitude of sin, whereto natural men give themselves
willingly, and with delight, if they may so do with safety from men's laws: but
the child of God is grieved for them, and does watch against them, and strive
to leave them, and so walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit, whereby
he is freed from condemnation, in Christ, though he be not quite cleared from
his own corruption, Romans 8.1. with Romans 7.24, 25.

The thing here expressed is, The second Observation.
that God forgives the iniquity of his people, and covers all their sins.
When God describes himself to Moses, he makes this a part of his name, one of
his special properties, to forgive iniquity, transgression and sin. Ex.
34.7. The Lord is long suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, Numb. 14.18. Who forgiveth all thine iniquity. Psalm. 103.3.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is principally in God, even his mercy and truth, which go
before his face. Psalm. 89.14. Mercy moves him to pity those that be in misery
as all are that stand guilty of sin: and therefore he is said to pardon
iniquity and to pass by transgression, and not to retain his anger for ever,
because he delights in mercy, Mich. 7.18.

Also, his truth causes him to perform covenant with those that be his people
in Christ: which is to pardon their sins, for the merit of his death and
passion, when they do repent and beg mercy and pardon, whereunto he does enable
them, and extite and stir them up, by his word and works: as Levit. 26.40,
41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, etc. If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then
accept of the punishment of their iniquity: Then will I remember my covenant,
etc. Likewise, Jer. 32.39. etc. I will give them one heart, and one way, that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them and of their children after
them, etc. So will I bring upon them all the good, that I have promised them.

Quest. Why does Moses say, he will not pardon your transgression, Exodus 23.21.
and Joshua, He is a jealous God, and will not forgive your transgressions, nor
your sins, Jos. 24.19:

Answ. The circumstances of those places show the true meaning: namely, if men
provoke him, and forsake him by idolatry, serving other Gods: and if they sin
presumptuously, despising the word: so Numb. 15.30, 31. The soul that does
ought presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord: and that soul shall be
cut off from among his people. Because he has despised the Word of the Lord,
and has broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off: his
iniquity shall be upon him.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it shows the excellency of the true God,
above all false Gods: as Mic. 7.18. who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? Yea,
and above all creatures: for, who can forgive sin, but God only? Mark 2.7.
which will better appear, if we consider the way, which God makes for the
satisfying of his justice, in this work of mercy: namely, he gives his son to
become man, that so he may be righteousness and redemption to his people, 1
Cor. 1.30. and gives his gospel to reveal that mercy, 2 Timothy 1.10. And his
holy spirit, to teach and sanctify the souls of his elect, and to furnish
them with those graces, that may entitle them to Gods mercy in Christ, Zech.
12.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. That the Ephesians might have the knowledge hereof, Paul
bowed his knees to God, Ephesians. 3.14.18.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here a prerogative of Gods people, above all others: For they,
that stand rightly in covenant with God, are the proper subject of this great
blessing, to have from God the pardon of their sins, wherein we know stands
true happiness, Psalm. 32.1, 2. and in that regard especially, though not only,
are those people said to be blessed above others, that have the Lord for their
God, Psalm. 144.15. Psalm. 33.12.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to all natural men, that are yet strangers
from the covenant of grace, as wanting true faith and true repentance, that
they give all diligence to the blessing of forgiveness of sins from God. See
Esther 8.17. Many of the people of the land became Jews upon the view of a
temporal blessing. Rahab embraced the Jews religion, upon the notice of Gods
power and mercy in the delivery of Israel out of Egypt, etc Jos. 2.9. etc. And
shall not we, upon evidence of greater power and mercy be induced to enter into
covenant with God?

Obj. But what is this to us? we are all in covenant with God already?

Answ. As, He is not a Jew, that is one outwardly, etc. Rom 8.28, 29. so Rev.
2.1. thou have a name, that thou live, and art dead. Consider Simon Magus,
Acts 8.13. 21, 22. though said to believe, and be baptized; yet in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. See Psalm. 94.20. and 1 John 1.6.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, Gods own people must hereby learn to fear and love the true God. For
fear, see Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared. And for love, Luke 7.47. Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved
much.

Now, true fear makes a man eschew evil, Job 1.1. Prove. 8.13. Prove. 14, 27.
And true love moves to obedience in keeping Gods word, as John 14.21, 23. 1
John 5.3. Yea, they must, with David, pray against presumptuous sins, Psalm.
19.13. and give themselves daily to the exercises of faith and repentance,
which entitle them truly to this blessing of forgiveness.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to Gods children, that do repent and believe in
God through Christ: for then this prerogative belongs unto them, wherein stands
true happiness. Even, as David also imputes righteousness, without works,
saying, Blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, Romans 4.6, 7. Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Verse 3. Thou have taken away all thy wrath: thou have turned thy self from
the fierceness of thine anger,


The Use for comfort.
THe last effect of Gods favor to his people, here acknowledged. For the
understanding whereof, we must search out two things: First, whether wrath and
fierce anger be in God properly, for they are often ascribed unto God in
Scripture: Secondly, in what sense they are ascribed unto God.

For the first, wrath and fierce anger are strong sudden passions and
perturbations of the mind, caused by things offensive and displeasing. Now, to
speak properly, they are not in God: as Isay 27.4. Fury is not in me.

For the second: the Scripture speaking of God, by way of resemblance unto men,
ascribes these passions to God, for two causes. First, to acquaint us with the
inward constant disposition of his nature against sin: namely, that he
distasteth and disliketh the impurity and impiety thereof, as man does the most
hateful things. Secondly, to let us know the course of his actions in
punishing sin: namely, that it shall be with that severity, which men use,
when they are angry, Exodus 32.10. Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them.

The first Observation.
Here then there are two things to be observed. The first is employed: That, in
the sense before showed, God has been wrath and fiercely angry with his own
people. When God heard this, he was wrath, and greatly abhorred Israel: He was
wrath with his inheritance, Psalm. 78.59, 62. The wrath of the Lord was kindled
against his people: insomuch, that he abhorred his own inheritance. Psalm.
106.40.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is the sins of his people, which many times are many and
grievous, such as the holy nature of God cannot but detest, and in divine
justice severely punish. For sin is the provocation. 2 Kings 22.13. For great
is the wrath of the Lord, which is kindled against us, because our fathers have
not hearkened unto the words of this book. Jerusalem has grievously sinned:
therefore she is removed, Lam. 1.8. And, we have transgressed, and rebelled,
thou have not pardoned. Thou have covered with anger, and persecuted us, Lam.
3.42. etc.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, here we may plainly see the contrariety of
sin to the holy nature of God. It is such a thing as God cannot endure, no,
not in those that be most near and dear unto him, even his own people. Nay,
when his own son takes upon himself our sins, divine justice will not spare
him: Gods heavy wrath makes him to sweat water and blood, and to cry out, my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, Mat. 27.46.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly see, that God is a God of justice against sin, he will not wink at
it, nor endure it, no, not in his own people: though that be a great privilege
to be in covenant with God, yet, that procures not a dispensation to sin
freely: much less will other outward things, as worldly wealth, and strength,
and honor, and the like.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, to all Gods people, that they beware of all sin, and
especially of those, that are said in Scripture to provoke the Lord to wrath,
whereof I will name some of the chief.

Special sins provoking God to (...)
As first, Atheism, Zeph. 1.12. I will search Jerusalem with candles, and
punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in their heart, the Lord
will not do good, neither will he do evil.

2. Idolatry, Psalm. 78.58, 59. They provoked him to anger with their high
places: and moved him to jealousy with their graven images. When God heard
this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel.

3. Witchcraft. See it in Manasseh, 2. Kings 21.2, 3, 6. He did that which was
evil in the sight of the Lord, etc. He made his son pass through the fire,
and observed times, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits, and
wizards: he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him
to anger. With 2 Kings 23.26. His anger was kindled against Judah, because of
all the provocations, that Manasseh had provoked him withal.

4. Opposing Christ in the gospel, not receiving it, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the
earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord,
and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast
away their cords from us. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord
shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and
vex them in his sore displeasure, 1. Thessal. 2.16. Forbidding us to speak to
the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always; for the
wrath is comeupon them to the uttermost. Typified in the spies and people
disliking the land of Canaan. Numb. 14.11.23.

5. False and flattering teaching. Jer. 5.30, 31. A wonderful and horrible
thing is committed in the land. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests
bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so: and what will ye
do in the end thereof? So Ezekiel. 13. throughout.

6. Lukewarmnesse, opposed to zeal, Rev. 3.16, 19. Because lukewarm, and
neither cold, nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. As many as I love I
rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent.

7. Blessing a man's self in his sinful course, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. If it come to
pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but then
the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, etc.

8. Rebellion against Gods Magistrates, and Ministers, Numb. 16.30. Then shall
ye understand, that men have provoked the Lord.

9. Helping the wicked. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and
love them, that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the
Lord.

10. Oppression of the poor. Zeph. 3.1, 3.8. Woe to her that is filthy and
polluted, to the oppressing City. Her Princes within her are roaring Lions: her
Judges are evening wolves. Therefore wait ye upon me, says the Lord, until
the day, that I rise up to the prey -- to power out upon them mine indignation,
even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of
my jealousy.

11. Adultery. Jer. 5.7, 8, 9. When I fed them to the full they committed
adultery, etc. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall not my
soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

12. Drunkenness, Isaiah 5.21, 24. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink
wine, and men of strength, to mingle strong drink. Therefore is the anger of
the Lord kindled against his people, etc.

13. Blasphemy against God, either in common swearing, or in more fearful
perjury. See Jer. 23.10. Because of swearing the land mourns, the pleasant
places of the wilderness are dried up. And for perjury, it puts upon God the
person of the devil, by calling him to be a witness of a lie, whereof the
devil is the father, John 8.44.

All these we must lay to heart, lament and repent for that which is past, and
for the time to come beware of them, if we look to remove and prevent the wrath
and fierce anger of the Lord.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be here observed is expressed: That, though God had been
fiercely angry with his people, yet afterward he took away his wrath, and
turned from the fierceness of his anger. So, Jer. 29.10, 11. After seventy
years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you, etc. Ier. 30.17, 18. I will restore health unto thee, and I will
heal thee of thy wounds -- I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs tents,
etc.

The Reason.
The reason hereof was not any merit or worthiness in them, but indeed Gods own
mercy, and work of grace, bringing them by his judgments to be humbled, and by
his grace to repent, to pray, and to rely upon him for deliverance. See Ezekiel.
36.32, 33. compared with verse 25. etc. to 31. according to the promise, Deuteronomy.
30.1, 2, 3, 4.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction: it does acquaint us with the gracious disposition and sweet
mercy of God toward his children. His anger endures but a moment. Psalm. 30.5.
He will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever, Psalm 103.9.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition: consider what it is in us, that turns away Gods anger, that so
we may conscionably exercise our selves therein. As first, true and unfeigned
repentance, whereby we consider our own ways in our hearts, Special means to
turn away Gods anger.
confess our sins with godly sorrow, and turn from the evil of them. Jer.
18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it. If that nation,
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the
evil, that I thought to do unto them, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves
from all you transgressions: so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Even Ahabs
legal repentance turned away a temporal judgment for a time, 1 Kings 21.29.

Secondly, earnest and effectual prayer for mercy and deliverance. Joel 1.14.
and 2.16, 17. Gather the people, etc. Then will the Lord be jealous for his
land, and pity his people. There it is commanded, and was notably practiced by
Moses. Deuteronomy. 9.25, 26. etc. Psalm. 106.23.

Thirdly, justice must be exercised in the punishment of sinners, that provoke
Gods wrath: as did Phinezas on Zimri and Cazbi, Psalm. 106.29, 30. and Jonah,
that troubled the ship, was cast into the sea, and so it was calm, Jonah 1.12,
15.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort to the godly in trouble and affliction: for peace shall come, Psalm.
34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them
out of them all, Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright there arises light in
darkness, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the
end of that man is peace.

Verse 4. Turn us, O God of our salvation: and cause thine anger toward us to
cease.


The meaning of the words.
IN this verse, and the three next, we have the second part of this Psalm,
containing the Churches petitions and complaints about the great miseries, that
yet lay heavy on them. The petitions are propounded in this fourth verse and
the seventh; the complaints are inserted between them verse 5, 6.

This fourth verse contains two requests: First, that God would turn them:
Secondly, that he would cause his anger toward them to cease: Both which
blessings they beg of the true God, whom they call the God of their salvation,
that is, the God who saves and delivers them from the evils and miseries that
lie upon them.

Here then in this verse we have to note both, to whom they pray, and for what.
They pray to God, whom they call the God of their salvation: and therein we
have two things to be observed: First, what God is to his Church, namely, the
God of their salvation. Secondly, what they do to God in that regard, namely,
pray unto him for that blessing.

The first observation.
For the first, note. God is the God of salvation to his Church, Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation belongs unto the Lord, Psalm. 68.19, 20. Blessed be the Lord -- the
God of our salvation. He that is our God is the God of salvations. The word in
the original is of the plural number, showing that all manner of salvation
belongs to God, both of body and soul, (...)
temporal and eternal, in this world and in the world to come. So Psalm.
74.12. God is my King of old, working salvations in the midst of the earth. See
admirable instance of temporal saving. Exodus 14.13. etc. of Israel at the red
sea: and Dan. 3.17, 27, 28. of the three servants of God out of the fiery
furnace: and undoubted assurance of eternal. Tit. 3.4, 5. Rev. 19.1. Mat.
1.21. Jesus shall save his people from their sins: and this is the great
salvation, Heb. 2.3.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is Gods power and mercy, which in him are infinite: as we may
see, for power, Psalm. 115.3. and 136 6. whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did
he in heaven, and in earth: in the Seas, and in all deep places. And for his
mercy, it is as large. Psalm. 119.64. The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy,
Psalm. 145.9. His render mercies are over all his works. Now, both these God
does put forth for those that be truly in covenant with him: as Exodus 33.19. I
will make my goodness pass before thee, Psalm. 89.17. Thou art the glory of
their strength: and in thy favor our hom shall be exalted.

Ob. 1. But sometimes Gods people are not saved from temporal evils: as Psalm.
79.1, 2. etc. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance -- The dead
bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the
heaven, etc.

Answ. Outward and bodily safety is but a temporal blessing, and thereof must
be understood with exception of the cross: so as, when God will either correct
them for their sins, or make trial of his graces in them, then they may want
outward safety. But, though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is
preserved and renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. nay their eternal glory is
hereby increased. verse 17, As Revel. 7.9.14. an infinite number clothed with
white robes and palms in their hands came out of great tribulation.

Obj. 2. But, the Scripture acknowledges other saviors beside the true God,
both for temporal and eternal salvation: as Judges 2.16. for temporal, and
Obadiah, Psalm. 21.1 Tim. 4.16. for eternal

Answ. Understand them to be insirumentall saviors under God, not sole, or
principal: as 1 Cor. 3.5, 9. And know that it pleases God sometime to ascribe
the effect to the instrument, as Jam. 5.20. to teach us not to contemn the
means, which is a fearful tempting of God, as Acts 13.46. and otherwhile to
deny it to the means, as 1 Cor. 3.6. that we should not trust in it, Psalm.
44.3, 6, 7. They got the land in possession with their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance -- For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save
me. But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame^
^^^^^hated us.

The Use for instruction.
This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

For instruction: see the prerogative of Gods Chu^^^ and people, above all
other states and conditions in the world: they, being by covenant the people of
God, have him to be unto them the God of salvation. See Deuteronomy. 32.31. Their rock
is not as our rock, even our enemies themselves being judges, Jer. 3.23. Truly,
in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
mountains: truly, in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here the impiety of Popery, that sets up other Saviors among
them then the true God, both for temporal and spiritual safety.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to take heed of those sins, that deprive a
people of this prerogative, to have the true God to be the God of their
salvation. And those are especially two: First, Idolatry, when men either
worship a false God, as the heathen did and do; or else worship the true God in
a false manner, as did Jeroboam and his successors, 1 Kings 12.28. and as the
Papists do at this day: for which sin see God forsaking, Judge. 3.8. compared
with 10.13. ye have forsaken me, and served other Gods: wherefore I will
deliver you no more. Secondly, Impiety, when men hold the truth in unright
eousnesse. Romans 1.18. have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. for the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, we must all labor to become such, as are truly entitled to Gods
power and mercy for salvation: that he, which is the God of salvation, may
become our God: for assurance whereof we must look to these things.

First, that we become the children of Abraham: for to such salvation comes.
Luke 19.9. Now, such may be known by doing the works of Abraham, John 8.39. He
is the father of the faithful, Romans 4.11. who by faith, first, forsook his own
people, and his fathers house, Heb. 11.8, 9. compared with Genesis 12.1, 4.
secondly, commanded his household to serve God. Genesis 18.19. thirdly, made
intercession to God for the sparing of Sodom, no doubt for the elects sake,
that he hoped had been therein, Genesis 18.23. etc. fourthly, by faith offered his
own son, yea his only son Isaac, for an offering upon Gods command, Genesis
21.1. etc. Heb. 11, 17. In all these we must labor to show our selves to be
the sons of Abraham. Consider all, and look especially at the mortification
of corruption, the sins of our hearts and souls. See Romans 8.12. Gal. 5.24.
Col. 3.5. we should be ashamed to hear, that we love our sins better, then
Abraham did his only son.

Secondly, the true God is a savior unto every one, that is a true member of
Christ's body, Ephesians. 5.23. Now, true members are joined to their head, by the
spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. and by virtue thereof receive life and sense from Christ
spiritually, as Romans 8.11. Now such with Christ 1. leave the grace of sin,
Romans 6.17, 18, 2. they converse with the godly, Acts 10.40, 41. 3. they walk in
the spirit, Gal. 5.25. 4. they talk and speak religiously, Col. 4.6. Prove.
31.26.5. they taste spiritual food with delight the Word and Sacraments.

Thirdly, God will save those that trust in him. Psalm. 17.7. Psalm. 91.1. etc.
they shall be as mount Zion, Psalm. 125.1. Now they, that trust in the Lord,
will not use unlawful means to help themselves out of misery, but will wait
his leisure, as Isaiah 28.16. He that believes shall not make have.

Fourthly, he, that would be delivered by God, must be upright hearted. Psalm.
7.10. Now such lean not to sin, but, as Isaiah 38.3. can say to God with
Hezekiah. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight.

The use for comfort.
For comfort to Gods children in trouble and misery: they have a savior and
deliverer: see Psalm. 23.1, 4. and Dan. 3.17.

The second Observation.
The second point to be here observed is the practice of the Church toward God
in their trouble, namely, they go to God in prayer for salvation and
deliverance: See Psalm. 79.9. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of
thy name, and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy names sake: and
Psalm. 80.1, 3. Give ear, O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph as a
flock, thou that dwell between the Cherubins shine forth. Turn us again, O
God: and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. Psalm. 118.5. I called
upon the Lord in distress, etc.

The reasons which induce them to do so are these.

The first Reason.
First, Gods command, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble.

The second Reason.
Secondly, Gods property to hear and help, Psalm 65.2. O thou that hear
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 46.1. God is our aefuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble: See this in the heathen Mariners,
Jonah 1.14, 15.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, God stands bound by promise and covenant to hear and help his Church
in distress: see 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people, which are called by my name,
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their land. Psalm. 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I
will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and hono^r him.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, observation of the success of this duty in others before them: as
Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 1.3, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 99.6, 8, 9 and in their own
persons, as Psalm. 56.14. Thou have delivered my soul from death, wilt not thou
deliver my feet from falling?

The use for instruction.
First, this serves to discover a threefold impiety, as contrary to the practice
of the Church, of Atheists, Witches, and Idolaters. 1. Atheists, in their
hearts, say there is no God, and therefore make no conscience of this practice
of the Church to call upon God: See Psalm. 14.1, 4. The fool has said in heart
there is no God. They call not upon God, Psalm. 10.4. God is not in all his
thoughts, Job 21.15. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Job 22.17. which say unto God,
depart from us, and what can the Almighty do for them? 2 Witches, wisards and
conjurers, for a show and color, may have the name of God in their mouths, but
sure the affiance of their hearts is in the devil, with him they are in league
and socieay: all their spells, charms, circles, and incantations are prayers,
homage and service done to him. And like unto these, though not in so high
degree, are all they, that seek unto them, and use their help, Isaiah 8.19.
when they shall say unto you, seek unto those that have familiar spirits, and
unto wizards, that peep and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their
God? When Ahaziah King of Israel sent unto Baalzebub the god of Ekron, to
enquire whether he should recover of his disease, the Lord by Elijah tells his
messengers, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to
enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? 2 Kings 1.2, 3. Lastly, Idolaters say to
Saints and Idols, here us, help us, pray for us: as 1 Kings 18.26. This we
know is the common practice of Papists, to the Virgin Mary, and to all the
Saints. But, herein they show themselves not to be Gods people, but such, as
have forsaken the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out broken
cisterns, that can hold no water, Jer. 2.11, 12, 13.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that we observe and remember this practice of the Church of
God, and conscionably endeavor to conform our selves thereto, in the day of
our trouble, to seek the Lord, remember God and complain: as Psalm. 77.2, 3. to
say with the godly man, whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.25. and with
the Church Isaiah 63.16. Though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not: thou O Lord, art our father, our redeemer, thy name is from
everlasting, Psalm. 20.7. Some trust in charets, and some in horses, but we will
remember the name of the Lord, our God. Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, we
will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless find mercy. Consider the
reasons of this duty, as before, and the success, as Psalm. 20.8. They are
brought down, and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright. Psalm. 118.5.
etc. I called upon the Lord in distress, the Lord answered me, and set me in a
large place, etc.

Thus much of him to whom they pray, the things for which they pray are two. 1.
That God would turn them. 2. That God would cause his anger toward them to
cease. For the first, when they beseech God to turn them, they mean from the
evils under which they lay, whether of sin or punishment, unto a comfortatble
state: for so largely does the use of the word extend: sometime therewith is
begged conversion from sin, Jer. 31.18 19. Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned -- after that I was turned, I repented, etc. sometime restitution to
comfortable outward state, which is turning from punishment: as Psalm. 126.4.
Turn again our captivity, O Lord. And though here the latter is specially
aimed at, yet we may not exclude the former, because, without turning from
sin, the ceasing of Gods wrath would not be expected, Psalm, 7.12 etc. If he
turn not, he will whet his sword, etc.

The third Observation.
Mark then, Gods people do beg of God the blessing of conversion from evils,
under which they lay, whether of sin or punishment: see Lam. 5.21. Turn thou
us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our days as of old, Psalm.
80.3, 7, 20. Turn thou us again, O Lord God of hosts: cause thy face to shine,
and we shall be saved.

The Reason.
The reason is infoulded in the title, which here they give to God; namely, that
he is the God of their salvation, both for soul and body. He restores the
soul, Psalm. 23.3. the same word is there used. (...)
And he preserves and delivers the body and outward estate, Psalm. 91.15 I
will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, Job 5.19. He shall deliver
thee in six troubles, yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee. He is
almighty, and so all-sufficient, nothing is too hard for him, Jer. 32.27. and
this power he puts forth for the good of his people.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, touching the author of true conversion to the soul. The
practice of the Church shows her judgment herein: she prays to God to be
turned from evils, whether spiritual, or corporal, and therefore no doubt
acknowledged him to be the sole author thereof. It is true, in temporal
evils, man by nature has some ability, to discern and endeavor the way and
means of his deliverance: but in spiritual evils, of corruption and sin, it
is not so: for therein man naturally is dead, and so wants ability of himself
to conceive and act the things that belong to the life of grace, see Acts 26.9.
The wisdom and will of nature is to oppose the means of conversion: I verily
thought with my self says the Apostle, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. For to be carnally minded is death:
because the carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8.6, 7. Therefore hereof
men do not become Gods children, John 1.13. which will be plain, if we
consider that the Scripture calls regeneration a new creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. and
the first resurrection, Revel. 20.6.

1. Quest. Why then does God bid men turn? as Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn
your selves from all your transgressions.

Ans. First, to show us our duty, not our ability, what we ought, not what we
are able of our selves to do. For John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. We
are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, 2 Cor
3, 5. No man can come to me, except the father, which has sent me draw him,
John 6.44. Believers are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13.

Secondly, God in these commandments has an aim at the outward actions,
wherein he desires reformation, whereto naturally man has some power, as we
may see by Ahabs humiliation, 1 Kings 21.27.

Thirdly, God requiring of us the grace of conversion, means; we should
endeavor our selves in the outward means thereof; to get ability thereto of
God. Though grace be Gods gift, yet is the use of means in our power.

2. Quest. Are not such commands unjust, or vain?

Ans. No: not unjust, because in Adam we were able to any thing; God should
require of us. And vain they are not, because they are means of conversion in
Gods elect, as to Lydia, Acts 16.14. whose heart the Lord opened, that she
attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Set your
hearts unto all the words which I testify amongst you -- for it is not a vain
thing for you, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ,
in them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are the savor
of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life. And they
leave the wicked without excuse, because they yield not such obedience, as
nature enables them unto. Luke 10.10, 11.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves to move every one, under any evil or misery,
corporal or spiritual, to become a follower of Gods Church, in beseeching God
to give deliverance from it. This Christ teaches in the Lords prayer, deliver
us from evil, Mat. 6.13. Is any man afflicted? let him pray. Jam. 5.15. Herein
we must continue and watch, Col. 4.2. yea, pray and not faint. Luke 18.1.
Remember the many sharp repulses which Christ gave to the woman of Canaan. Mat.
15. in the 23. verse, he is silent: in the 24, he denies he was sent to such:
in the 26, he likens her to a dog: but in the 28. there is this happy
conclusion, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will.

Obj. But natural men cannot pray.

Answ. Not so well as they ought, but let them do so well as they can: as did
the Ninevites, Jonah 3.8. and get others to pray for them, as Simon Magus did,
Acts 8.24. do, as the sick of the palsy did, Mar. 2.3. who got four men to
bear him, being not able of himself to come to Christ.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this shows that Gods Church has no evil to befall them, from
which they have not an all-sufficient deliverer, to whom they may go: as Dan.
3.17. And this door cannot be shut up against them: as 2 Cor. 4.8. We are
troubled on every side, yet not distressed (...) therefore remember and apply
the precept, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing, by prayer
and supplication with thankesgiving, let your request be made known unto God.

And cause thine anger toward us to cease. The second request of the Church,
here made unto God, for the ceasing of his anger, that is, for the removal of
his judgemets, which they conceive to come from his anger, provoked by their
sins.

This petition may be considered two ways. First, with reference to the
confession, made in the former verse: secondly, by it self.

In the former verse we have this confession, Thou have taken away all thy
wrath, and turned thy self from the fierceness of thine anger: yet here the
Church entreats, that God would cause his anger toward them to cease. How do
these things agree? well enough, if we refer the confession to the time of
their return out of Babylon, caused by Cyrus, Ezra 1. Psalm. 126.1, 3. and this
supplication to some time of troubles, that befell them after their return, as
under Cambyses, Artaxerxes, or Antiochus Epiphanes, in which times the
adversaries did sore vex Gods people. Now then in this reference see plainly.

The fourth Observation.
That Gods Church and people, who have formerly felt his great favor and love,
may afterward come to the sense and feeling of his bitter anger and
displeasure. This thing is plain in this Psalm, by comparing the first verse
with the fifth and sixth; also, in the 29. and 30. chapters of the book of Job:
and in David, Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and many others, both for
their own persons, and the people of God under their government. For David's
person, see Psalm 30.6, 7. I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved --
thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. And for the estate of Gods people
under him, Psalm. 89.20, 28. compared with the 38. and 39. verses: in his time
were war, famine and pestilence. For Solomon, his peace, power and plenty are
at large set down, 1 Kings 10.27. etc. his troubles, chapt. 11.11. etc. For
Asa, his power and peace, see 2 Chronicles. 14.6. his great conquest over the
Ethiopians, verse 9. the joy of his people renewing covenant with God, chap.
15.15. but, chap. 16.8, 9. a great change. So for Jehosaphat, 2. Chron. 17.3.
the Lord was with him: and ver. 5. he had riches and honor in great abundance:
yet, chapter 19.2. wrath from the Lord was toward him: and chap 20. fearful
war was made against him. So for Hezekiah; the Lord was with him, and he
prospered whithersoever he went forth, 2 Kings 18.7. and, by restoring of
religion, he brought great joy to Gods people at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 30.26. and
dealing uprightly, he prospered, 2 Chronicles. 31.21. but, chap. 32. troubles come
upon him by Senacherib: and yet, upon Gods deliverance, he was magnified in the
sight of all nations, verse 22, 23. but, verse 24. he is sick unto death: from
which being extraordinarily delivered, he was lifted up with pride, and so
wrath was toward him, verse 25.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold, First, and most usually, correction for sin, as
we may see in the forenamed examples of David, Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat and
Hezekiah. So Psalm. 89.31, 32. If they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments. Then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their
iniquities with stripes.

The second Reason.
Secondly, God does it sometime for the trial of grace: as is plain in Job, by
Gods own confession, Job 2.3. Still he holds fast his integrity, although
thou movest me against him, to destroy him without cause.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction: see here, that the Church of God, here on earth, is very fitly
resembled to the moon, not only, for receiving all the light of knowledge and
comfort she has from Christ, but even because of change and alteration in
estate. As the moon is sometimes in the wane and eclipse, and sometimes in the
full, so is Gods Church here on earth. Though outward prosperity, with the
sense and feeling of Gods favor, do most properly belong to Gods Church and
people; yet they are not so intailed upon them infallibly, but that many times,
instead of prosperity, they have great misery.

Christ is to his Church, for joy and comfort, the sun of righteousness; but
yet, sometimes the lig^t of his countenance does not appear for many days.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition it serves two ways. First, in the days of peace and comfort to
take heed of all sin, as being the true cause of eclipsing the light of Gods
favor: as we may see in general, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man
complain? a man for the punishment of his sins? verse 42. we have
transgressed, and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned. If we would know the
causes of Gods anger more particularly, in those special sins that stir up
his wrath, see before in the third verse, the use of admonition upon the first
observation.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, when Gods favor is any way eclipsed toward his Church or any member
of it, hence learn to enquire into the true cause thereof, which ordinarily is
some sin, or sins: for the finding out whereof we must use Gods law, as
Joshuah did the lot to find out Achan with the execrable thing, Jos. 7.18. and
the Mariners did to find out Jonah, Jonah 1.7.

This concerns every one for the true peace of his own soul, that hereby they
may be brought to repentance and reformation, and so shall Gods favor be
restored unto them.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to those, that find and feel Gods anger
toward them, either in outward crosses, or in inward terrors. Herein consider,
thy state is no worse then Gods dearest children have been in, as Job, David,
etc. do therefore, as they have done, repent of thy sins, pray for mercy,
and wait by faith and patience, and peace shall come.

The fifth Observation.
The Petition, considered in it self, sets before us this practice of Gods
Church and children. That, when they lie under any evil or misery, they pray
for the removal of Gods anger toward them. See Psalm. 74.1. O God, why have
thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy
pasture? Psalm. 79.1. etc. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance,
thy holy temple have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps, etc.
Psalm. 89.46. How long Lord, will thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath
burn like fire? So did David, Psalm. 38.1. etc. O Lord, rebuke me not in thy
wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure, etc.

The reason.
The reason is, because they know, that all affliction comes by divine
dispensation, and ordinarily is the proper fruit of Gods anger provoked by our
sins: see Job. 5.6. Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground. It is a thing of Gods sending, Isaiah 45.7. I
form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create evil. I the
Lord do all these things. Amos 3.6. Is there evil in the City, and the Lord
has not done it? Mat. 10.29. A sparrow shall not fall on the ground without
your father. The sword, the famine, the noisome beasts, and the pestilence are
Gods four sore judgments, Ezekiel. 14.21.

The first Use for instruction.
This serves for instruction and for admonition.

For instruction two ways. First, it lets us see the blindness of some, that
in miseries never consider Gods anger, but only look at second causes: hereof
the prophet Isaiah does complain, Isaiah. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted
up, they will not see. This provokes to anger, and desire of private revenge,
which is a brutish part: the dog bites at the stone, without regard to him that
threw it.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly see, what a desperate course they take, that under miseries use
unlawful means to help themselves: as especially they do, that go to wizards
and witches: they increase the wrath of God against themselves, as Saul did by
this course, 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. See Isaiah 8.19.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition three ways. First, in every misery we must do as Gods Church
here does, lift up our thoughts to Gods anger against us provoked by our
sins. For ordinarily misery is a fruit of Gods anger against our iniquity:
and therefore, if we desire the removal of the evil, we must take a course
for the appeasing of Gods anger: which is only to be done through Christ his
son, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation for sin, Romans 3.5. 1 John
2.2.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, as we desire to escape evils, we must beware of provoking the Lord
to anger, 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger
then he? Jer. 7.19. Do they provoke me to anger, says the Lord? do they not
provoke themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?

The third Use for admonition.
Thirdly, that under every misery, we follow the Church in prayer to God, for
the appeasing of his anger. This will prevail, if it be joined with true
humiliation. See 2 Chronicles. 6.36, 37. compared with chap. 7.13, 14. and consider
how far Ahab prevailed. 1 Kings 21.27, 29.

Verse 5. Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thine anger
to all generations? 6. Will thou not revive us again, that thy people may
rejoice in thee?


The meaning of the words.
THese words contain the Churches humble complaint unto God for two great
evils: first, the long continuance of his anger toward them: secondly, the
long delay of his favor from them.

The long continuance of his anger is twice propounded, verse 5. to express
their deeper sense thereof, and their more earnest desire to have it removed.
The delay of his favor is lamented, in the sixth verse, and there amplified by
the good effect of his renewing thereof, namely, their rejoicing in him.

In their double complaint of his anger continued note two things.

The first Observation.
First, that Gods anger may long continue toward his own children and people.
This is the matter of their complaint in this place: and so, Psalm. 74.1. O God,
why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against the
sheep of thy pasture. Verse 10. O God, how long shall the adversacy reproach?
shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Psalm 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord
cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone
for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be
gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Psalm. 79.5. How long,
Lord, will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? Lament.
5.20, 22. Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time.
Thou have utterly rejectedus: thou have been very wroth against us.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, the committing of sin, and omitting of
repentance, either in general, as Isaiah 9.13. The people turns not unto him
that smites them: neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. ^4. Therefore the
Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day. 17.
Every one is an hypocrite, and an evil doer, and every month speaks folly:
for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
18. For wickedness burns as the fire, etc. When men grow obstinate in sin,
God becomes resolute in punishment: see Jer. 6.17.18, 19. The watchmen say,
hearken to the sound of the trumpet: the people answer, we will not hearken.
Therefore hear, ye nations -- behold, I will bring evil upon this people. 21.
Fathers and sons together shall fall, etc. Jer. 7.13, 15, 16, 19. I speak
unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not: and I called you, but
you answered not. Therefore will I cast you out of my sight. Pray not thou for
this people -- for I will not hear thee. Do they provoke me to anger, says
the Lord? do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?
Or they repent not in sincerity, Is. 58, 2, 3, 6. Or repentance is not
practiced in particular, by the sinners themselves amongst Gods people, though
the godly there may repent and lament. See this plainly in the days of good
King Josiah, who did greatly humble himself, 2 Kings 22. and most worthily
endeavor the reformation of religion, the rooting out of idolatry and impiety:
as 2 Kings 23. where his rare goodness is commended, from verse 2. to 25. and
yet, verse 26. the Lords anger still continued. And the reason we may see,
Zeph. 1. and Zeph. 3. where is showed, that in his days continued much
impiety: and the like we may see, Ezekiel. 14.13, 14. When the land sins
against me, by trespassing grievously, etc. Though these three ni^^, Noah,
Daniel, and Job were in it, they sold deliver but their own souls by their
own righteousness,

The second Reason.
The second reason is the continuing of scandal and reproach unto religion,
amongst the wicked, by the grievous sins of Gods children. Though they
themselves may truly repent, yet their sins, causing the enemies of religion
to blaspheme, may procure the continuance of Gods anger in temporal
judgments: as in David's case, 2 Samuel 12.10. etc.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it lets us see, what a fearful thing it is
to live in impenitency, or to commit sins that are scandalous to religion,
though we do repent, for both these ways we kindle Gods anger, and who may
stand when he is angry? for thereupon follows destruction. See Psalm. 2.12.
Psalm. 76.7.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, he see who be the greatest enemies to the welfare of any estate,
Church, Common wealth or family: namely, the wicked, who commit sin with
greediness, and draw iniquity as it were with cart-ropes These are the
persons, that bring plague, famine, war and other judgments. For affliction
follows sinners: where is lying, swearing, stealing, etc. where the Lord has
a controversy with the inhabitants, Hos. 4.1. etc. so Jer. 23.10. because of
swearing the land mourns, etc. and 1 Kings 18.18. Thou art he that troubles
Israel.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, take notice of the causes, for which Gods
anger is kindled, and does continue, that we may avoid them: and when we have
fear or feeling of his anger, then make sure we look back toward our sins
committed, and see what repentance we have showed and reformation: and ever
beware of hypocrisy and of scandalous sins.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to beware of rash judgment, either against our selves, or others,
when Gods anger does long continue toward us, or them. Indeed this state
causes the godly to think themselves forsaken of God; as Is. 49.14. and to
judge hardly of others, that be in that estate: as Job 4.7. but both without
good ground. Therefore we must do, as Micha 7.8, 9, 10. Rejoice not against me,
O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise, etc. --

The Use for comfort.
For comfort to them, that lie long under the heavy hand of God in any
affliction, in soul, body, or outward estate, wherein they cannot but
apprehend Gods anger continued. They must consider, that herein nothing does
befall them, but what has light on Gods dear children, and therefore must
neither murmr, nor despair.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be observed, is the behavior of Gods people, under the
sense and feeling of Gods long continued anger, They return to him, that smote
them, in humble complaint of his long continued anger toward them. See Psalm.
44.9, 10, 17, 23. Psalm. 74.1, 2. So in Job, Job 7.7, 8, 12. in David, Psalm.
6.1. Psalm. 38.1. Psalm. 88.14. in Christ Jesus, in his agony, Mat. 26.38, 39.

The first Reason.
For first, they know that afflictions come; from God, Amos. 3.6. it comes not
by change, Job 5.6. but by divine providence and dispensation, Mat. 10.29, 30.

The second Reason.
2. They know God sends them afflictions, to make them seek unto him, Hos. 5.14,
15. Is. 26.6. as Absalom, by setting on fire Joabs corn field, brought Joab to
come to him, 2 Samuel 14.29. etc.

The third Reason.
3. They know that, till Gods anger be appeased, the strongest helps do fail,
Job 9.13.

The fourth Reason.
4. That, when they complain with godly sorrow, God is merciful, and will heart
and help, Exodus 22.27. when he cries unto me, I will hear, for I am gracious,
Psalm. 22.24. He has not despised, nor abhorred the affliction of the
afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him: but, when he cried unto him,
he heard, Psalm. 51.17. A contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not
despise, Psalm. 102.17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not
despise their prayer.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, that all Gods people do conceive the true God
to be, not only a God of power, able to deliver, but a God of mercy and
compassion, most willing to help and relieve those, that be in misery, Joel
2.13.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here the great impiety of those, that under the sense of Gods
anger, in any affliction, seek other help, then from God: as do seekers to
witches and sorcerers, forbidden of God, Isaiah. 8.19. and Papists, that make
intercession to Saints, for deliverance from sundry evils. They have fourteen
helping Saints, by whose intercession and merit men may be delivered from all
adversity: as St. George, St. Blase, Erasmus, Panthaleon, Vitus, Christopher,
Denis, etc. See Tilheman. Heshusius in erroribus pontificiorum, loco 28. de
cultu and invocatione sanctorum. Wherein they deal like to Ahaziah, that sent
to Baalzebub the God of Ekron. 2. Kings 1.1. etc. Add Isaiah 9.13, The people
turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that we become followers of the Saints, and people of God, who
in time of distress go to God, and make their complaints to him. See Jobs
resolution in keeping close to God, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him.

The use for comfort.
For comfort to the godly, they may go unto God for mercy and help, when they
feel Gods anger toward them: as Psalm. 77.1. etc. Judge. 10.10.15. Here it is
true, though fire be in the bush, the bush consumes not. Hence 2 Cor. 4.8. We
are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, yet not in
despair.

Verse 6. Will thou not receive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee?


The meaning of the words.
THe second complaint of Gods Church and people, for the long delay of his love
and favor, which, testified by restoring them to comfortable state, they
esteem and account as life it self; and therefore do complain of the want
thereof, as of the state of death: for the change whereof they have recourse to
God, saying, wilt not thou receive us again? moving him thereto by his good
fruit and effect thereof, that thy people may rejoice in thee: as if they
should have said, while we remain in misery, under the sense of thy
displeasure, we are as dead men, and therefore do complain to thee, who by
removing our miser^^ and renewing thy favor, can revive us; whereupon will
follow this good effect, that we thy people shall rejoice in thee, which will
be for thy glory.

Here then we have to consider, as well the Churches complaint, as her reason,
propounded to move God to give them relief from that misery, whereof they
complain.

The first observation.
In their complaint note two things: the first employed, That the sense of Gods
displeasure, in a state of misery, is to Gods people, as a state of death,
Psalm. 31.9 10, 11. David complains of his trouble and misery, and verse 12.
says, I am forgotten, as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel,
Psalm. 88.3, 4, 5. My soul is full of troubles: and my life draws nigh unto
the grave. I am counted with them, that go down into the pit: I am as a man
that has no strength. Free among the dead, like the slain, that lie in the
grave, whom thou remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thine hand.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is, the high esteem, which Gods people have of his favor,
when once they have felt the joy and comfort of it in their souls: as, Psalm.
30.5. In his favor is life, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better then
life. For look, as the reasonable soul is a spirit of life from God,
quickening the body, and giving unto it sense and motion, Genesis 2.7. so, Gods
favor, testified to the soul, by the spirit of grace, gives a lively
cheerfulness to the heart of man, which makes him leap for joy, Psalm. 32.11.
Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart: yea, even in affliction; as, Acts 5.41. they rejoice with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

This serves for instruction and admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it gives light to the better understanding of
some places of Scripture, which under the terms of life and resurrection, note
out unto us the calling of the Jews, wherewithal God will vouchsafe unto them
comfortable outward estate; as, Isaiah 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, etc. In
assurance whereof, was showed to Ezekiel the vision of the dry bones, raised up
to a great Army, Ezekiel. 37.1. etc. there plainly showed to belong to their
restoring, by the union of the two sticks, to signify the union of Judah and
Israel, verse 16. etc. This is their resurrection, from the dust of distress,
Dan. 12.1. for, what shall their restoring be, says St, Paul, but life from
the dead. Romans 11, 15.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, it lets us see a plain difference, between Gods children, and
natural men under affliction. The child of God lays more to heart Gods
displeasure toward him, testified by his affliction, then the affliction it
self. As a toward child is more grieved, that his loving father is offended
with him, than for the smart of his correction. This David showed in his flight
from Absalom, when he bade Zadock the priest carry back the ark of God into
the City, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. If, says he, I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation. But,
if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me,
as seems good unto him. Secondly, they more desire the feeling of Gods
favor, then the removal of the affliction: as Psalm. 51.8. after Nathan had
told David, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. 2 Samuel 12.13.
yet, he prays the Lord to make him to hear joy and gladness: and, verse 12.
to restore him to the joy of his salvation. Now, natural men in these cases
deal otherwise: First, they look more at the outward misery, then at Gods
displeasure: as Is. 26.11. when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, Psalm.
10.5. Thy judgments are far above out of his sight. Secondly, they more
desire the removal of Gods judgments, then the renewing of of his favor: and
therefore are said, not to cry to the Lord with their hearts, when they howled
upon their beds. They assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel
against me, Hos. 7.14. If they respected Gods favor, above freedom from
evils, and fruition of blessings, they would not for these things use
unlawful means, which increase Gods displeasure: as Saul did, 2 Samuel 28.7.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, that in all afflictions, we endeavor to
approve our selves to be Gods people, by laying to heart Gods displeasure for
our sins, above the smart of our affliction, and also desire the renewing of
his favor, above the removal of any outward evil: or the fruition of any
temporal blessing.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, that we beware of those things, which will eclipse his favor, and
provoke his anger against us: for those are to the soul, as poison to the
body. Oh, that we could esteem sin in every action, as the children of the
Prophets did the wild vine in the pottage, run away, and cry, death is in the
pot, 2 Kings 4.40. From the deadly plague, and noisome pestilence, we are
careful to fly away betime, and far enough off: and so should we do from
the unprofitable works of darkness, which are death to the soul.

The second Observation.
Secondly here observe, both in the phrase, and matter therein expressed, That
it seems strange to Gods people, that he suffers them to lie long in
affliction, under the sense of his displeasure, Psalm. 13.1, 2. four times is
the length of Gods delay complained of, and Psalm. 77.7, 8. by way of
admiration, will the Lord cast off for ever, etc.

The first Reason.
The reason is, in a double knowledge which they have of God. First, in his
essential properties of mercy and compassion, Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is
merciful, and gracious: slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy: Psalm. 86.15.
Thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious: long suffering, and
plenteous in mercy and truth. Psalm. 145.9. His tender mercies are over all his
works.

The second Reason.
Secondly, in his gracious and faithful promise made to his people, when they
enter into covenant with him, Psalm. 50.5.15. Gather my Saints together unto me:
those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. Call upon me in the day
of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Luke 18.7, 8.
Shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though
he bear long with them? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, this their admiration does presuppose their
good, and commendable information in the knowledge of God, for his gracious
disposition toward his children, and the truth of his promises, assured in
covenant with them: else, they would never have thought it strange, it should
be otherwise with them. And therefore, men should take heed, how they lay
claim to be Gods people, and yet be ignorant of his properties, and promises.
1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, their admiration shows plainly, that there is a justice and wisdom
in God; even in the course of his providence over the state and ways of men,
which many times surpasses the reach of Gods children, to discern and find
out, till it please God of himself, to reveal the reason and cause of his
dealing: as Jer. 12.1, 2. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee:
yet, let me talk with thee of thy judgments: wherefore does the way of the
wicked prosper? etc. Who can but admire, that the wicked Benjamites should
twice prevail in fight against their brethren, that came for the execution of
justice upon the sons of Belial, that had committed villainy with the Levites
concubine, Judges 20.18, etc.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves very fitly to move us to godly behavior under long
affliction, that we carefully suppress in our selves, all thoughts of hard or
unjust dealing in God toward us therein, bringing ou^ hearts to this
resolution with Jeremy; that God is righteous, even then, when his dealing
seems most strange unto us.

Qu. How shall we be able so to do?

Answ. By evincing our hearts of four things in God; justice, sovereignty,
wisdom, and power. First, of justice, to do right to all, and wrong to none.
This is so essential in God, that he may as soon cease to be God, as not to do
right, Genesis 18.25. Psalm. 145.17. Jer. 12.1. Job 34.10.23. And therefore, the
godly under affliction must not be worse, than Pharaoh, who confesses, Exodus
9.27. I have sinned. The Lord is righteous, I and my people are wicked.
Secondly, we must lay to heart God; sovereignty; whereby he may do with his own
what he will: he may exercise his under the cross, not only for correction
for sin, but also for trial of grace, as he did Job, Job 2.3. We grant this
liberty to men, over their goods and cattle, which are the gifts of Gods
providence unto them, and shall we deny it to the Lord over man, who has
absolute sovereignty over him, both by creation and providence?

Thirdly, we must bethink our selves of Gods wisdom, which indeed is
infinite, Psalm. 147.5. and therefore may in himself perfectly discern, that
that affliction which he continues upon his children, is most for his own
glory, and best for their good, though they conceive the contrary; as children
do under the rod, in the hand of their parents. Lastly, consider his Almighty
power, he can bring light out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. and so he uses to do
to his children, Psalm. 112.4. so as they shall confess it is good for them
that they have been afflicted. Psalm. 119.71. And indeed, whosoever considers
the end, which God brought unto Job, to David, and the rest, whom he exercised
under great affliction, will confess no less. These things, well considered,
will make us know our duty, and acknowledge, that repining against Gods
correction continued, is ever a fruit of corruption, which reigns in natural
men, and makes them to blaspheme under Gods judgments, Rev. 16.9.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to Gods children under long affliction, to
consider that such an estate may continue upon his own children and servants,
by the rule of his justice, sovereignty, wisdom and power: and therefore,
they need not to murmr or despair; when nothing befalls them, but that which
has befaln their betters in grace, as Job, David, etc.

That thy people may rejoice in thee. The reason propounded by Gods Church, to
move the Lord to hasten their deliverance out of misery, and the removal of
their afflictions: namely, because thereupon, they should be justly occasioned
to rejoice in God, as plainly discerning this to be a fruit of his mercy, and
loving providence over them.

The third Observation.
Here then note, that when Gods people are delivered from affliction, they
rejoice in God: as well, by receiveing it, as from Gods hand; as Psalm. 126.3.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad: as by giving all
the honor and praise thereof to God alone, as Moses and Aaron did for their
deliverance at the red sea: Exodus 15.1, etc. and as Deborah and Barak did,
Judges 5.1, etc. David also, Psalm. 118.1, etc. and Jehoshaphat and the people,
2 Chronicles. 20.26, 27.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is, that though means be used by Gods people, yet they know,
that the blessing is not in the means, but in the Lord, who does prosper the
same. Psalm 44.6, 7, 8. For I will not trust in my bow: neither shall my sword
save me. But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame
that hated us. In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows us a plain difference, between Gods children, and
natural men, in the fruition of temporal blessings; and so gives evidence of
nature and grace in the days of peace: For mere nature looks at outward
means, and at second causes: and so men either glory in themselves, as Dan.
4.30. or sacrifice to their nets, as Habak. 1.15, 16. But the godly, though
they use means, yet they first look at God, and give the chief praise to him,
and look to the means in the second place, as 1 Samuel 25.32.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually to move every child of God, to conform
himself to this profession, and practice of the godly, even for every blessing,
whether of deliverance from evil, or fruition of good, to rejoice in the Lord.
This was David's ordinary practice: Psalm. 34.1, 2, 4. This also we shall do, if
we be careful of three things. First, to see Gods hand of mercy in every
thing, wherein we rejoice: as Psalm. 118.15, 16, 23, 24. The voice of rejoicing
and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the
Lord does valiantly, etc. Secondly, to give him praise and thanks for every
blessing: thus God is honored, Psalm. 50.23. therefore David stirs up his
soul hereunto, Psalm. 103, 1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all
his benefits. The very blind heathen have done this, for the honor of their
idols: as Judge. 16.23. Dan. 5.4. Shall not Gods people much more do it to the
true God?

Thirdly, to use the blessings, wherein we rejoice, to Gods glory, stirring up
our selves thereby, to walk more obediently to Gods commandments. Psalm. 116.8,
9. Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet
from falling: I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

Verse 7. Show us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.


The meaning of the words.
HEre the Church does return again unto humble petition or supplication, and
that for two things: First, that the Lord would show them his mercy: Secondly,
give them his salvation.

For the first, when they say, Show us thy mercy, O Lord, they do plainly
imply, that his mercy or loving kindness was hid from them: and yet for all,
that they do not leave the Lord in that estate, but humbly beg the sight and
evidence of his mercy. So that in this first petition, we have to note two
things: the miserable state of Gods Church for a time, and the godly behavior
of the Church in that estate.

The first Observation.
For the first, the miserable estate of Gods Church is this, for a time they are
without the sense and feeling of Gods mercy and kindness, else they would not
desire to see it. Psalm. 74.1, 9. O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? We
see not our signs, to wit, of thy mercy toward our help, Psalm. 77.8, 9. Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? Has God forgotten to be gracious: Psalm. 89.49.
Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses?

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is. First, trial of grace, as in Job, Job 13.24. Wherefore
hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy. Verse. 20. Thou writest
bitter things against me.

The second Reason.
Secondly, correction for sins, which stir up Gods anger against his people, and
so hide his mercy and kindness from them. Lam. 3.42, 43, 44. We have
transgressed, and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned. Thou have covered with
anger, and persecuted us: thou have slain, thou have not pitied: Thou have
covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through. This
is acknowledged in Salomons prayer. 2 Chronicles. 6.36. If they sin against thee
(for there is no man which sins not) and thou be angry with them, etc. Psalm.
106.39, 40. Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring
with their own inventions. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against
his people: insomuch, that he abhorred his own inheritance.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, touching the true God: this state of the
Church, wanting the sense of Gods mercy, teaches us to conceive and know, that
though God be to his Church a God of mercy in Christ, and so delight therein,
that his mercy is said to be above all his works, Psalm. 145.9. and that he
would be known to delight therein, Jer. 9.23. yet withal, that he is a God of
severity and justice, not sparing his own people, when they sin against him.
Thus he describes himself, Exodus 34.6, 7. Though be keep his mercy for
thousands, yet he will by no means clear the guilty. How did he punish his own
people the Jews? see Lam. 1.12. and his own dearest servants for sin? David,
2 Samuel 12.10. etc. Asa, and others? nay his own son, when he bore our sins?
Which, well considered, will be the ground of Gods fear in our hearts, Exodus
23.20, 21. I will send mine Angel, which shall keep thee in the way, etc.
Beware of him, ohey his voice, provoke him not: for he will not pardon your
transgressions: for my name is in him, Heb. 12.28, 29. Let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear: For our God
is a consuming fire. Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me says the Lord? will ye not
tremble at my presence? Jer. 10.7. Who would not fear thee, O King of nations?
for unto thee does it appertain.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, touching Gods people: see here that they may truly belong to God by
covenant in Christ, and yet for a time be without the sense and feeling of his
mercy and kindness: as Psalm. 74.1, 19. O God, why have thou cast us off for
ever? why does thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? Forget not
the congregation of thy poor for ever, Psalm. 77.8, 9. Is his mercy clean gone
for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God for gotten to be
gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?

Ob. Where then is the truth of his promise, Isaiah 54.10. The Mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
etc. Whereupon, Psalm. 23.6. Mercy and kindness shall follow me, all the days
of my life: for, Psalm. 89.28. My mercy will I keep for him for ever, Psalm.
126. twenty six times, in every verse once. For his mercy endures for ever.

Answ. We must put a difference, between Gods mercy, and kindness conceived in
himself, and vouchsafed to his children and people, and the expressing, and
manifestation thereof. The former once begun is ever continued, toward those
that be in Christ, John 13.1. Having loved his own which were in the world, he
loved them unto the end. Romans 11.29. For the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance. But the manifestation thereof is many times restrained, for
good causes: as either trial of grace, or correction for sin: which liberty
we give to natural parents, toward their children, and therefore must take
heed we deny it not to God.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, that we take heed of all those things, that
cause the Lord to hide his favor from us; which indeed is all sin and only
sin, that seperates, Isaiah 59.2. even pride and haughtiness upon the
fruition of his favor: as Psalm. 30.6, 7. In my prosperity I said, I shall
never be moved. Lord by thy favor thou had made my mountain to stand strong:
thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, not to be dismayed, or to despair under the sense of Gods
displeasure; for it is the state of the godly sometimes to feel it. We must say
with the Church, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. Micah 7.9. we must humble our selves, and wait for mercy: as Psalm.
42.11. and then know, that his favor shall be renewed. They that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength. We must learn to walk by faith, and not by
sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. to live by faith, and not by sight. Hab. 2.4. for, Psalm.
89.30. etc. If his thildren forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments. If
they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: Then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail, etc.

The second Observation.
The second thing here to be noted, is the behavior of Gods people in this
their miserable estate, here plainly expressed; when they want the sense and
feeling of Gods mercy and kindness, they leave not God, but go to him by
humble and earnest prayer, for some evidence thereof, Psalm. 77.2. In the day of
my trouble I sought the Lord, Psalm. 40.11, 12. Withhold not thou thy tender
mercies from me, O Lord, let thy loving kindness and thy truth continually
preserve me. For innumerable evils have compassed me about, etc. Psalm. 42.7,
8, 9. All thy waves, and thy billows are gone over me. Yet the Lord will
command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall
be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. I will say unto God, my
rock, why have thou forgotten me, etc. Psalm. 44.17, 24. All this is come upon
us, yet have we not forgotten thee -- wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
forgettest our affliction.

The first Reason.
The reason of this their behavior is, partly, in their knowledge; but
principally in their faith in God. For their knowledge, by Gods word they are
certainly assured, that mercy is essential in God, Psalm. 62.12 Also unto thee,
O Lord belongs mercy. He is plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 103.8. His mercy is
great above the heavens, Psalm. 108.4. The earth is full of his goodness, Psalm.
33.5. His tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. Also they know,
he takes pleasure in those, that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. Now, will
they that know this do less to God, then Benhadads servants did to the King of
Israel? 1 Kings 20.31, 32. we have heard, that the Kings of the house of Israel
are merciful Kings, etc.

The second Reason.
Secondly, they trust in God; and therefore have recourse unto him in misery,
and under the sense of his anger, Psalm. 13.3, 5. Consider and hear -- I have
trusted in thy mercy, Psalm. 22.1, 4, 5. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? -- Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted and thou did deliver them.
They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction, it lets us see a difference, both in judgment and practice,
between the godly and the wicked: For judgment, even about prayer in
affliction: the wicked think it unprofitable to pray, Job 21.15. Mal. 3.14. But
the godly know it is otherwise, James 5.16. For practice, the wicked call not
uoon God, but only for show, Psalm. 14.4. Hos. 7.14. But the godly are much in
this duty, Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, etc. Psalm.
55.17. Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud, Psalm.
119.164. Seven times a day do I praise thee. Yea, herein they offer an holy
violence unto God, as Jacob held the Angel, and would not let him go, till he
blessed him, Genesis 32.24, 26. and Moses as it were, held God from destroying the
Israelites, when they had made the golden calfe, Exodus 32.10. etc.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that we endeavor to approve our selves, to be Gods people, and
true members of his Church, by following them in this godly practice, even
then, to press upon the Lord by our humble and earnest prayers, when he
seems to oppress us with his judgments: when he hides his mercy from us, we
must by our prayers sue, and seek to find mercy with him: as David did, 2 Samuel
24.14.

Quest. how shall we be enabled hereunto?

Answ. By doing two things. First, we must inform our hearts rightly, in the
nature of God, for mercy and compassion, as is showed in the first reason: and
in the gracious promises, made to his people, even when they are in misery.
Secondly, fit our selves to have good title to the same: which requires two
things at our hands. 1. True and unfeigned repentance, whereby our sins be
removed, and so a way made to his mercy, Jer. 18.7, 8. 2. The getting, and
exercising of those graces of the spirit, which testify, we stand rightly in
covenant with God. As 1. Faith in God, through Christ: rely upon him, for the
pardon of sin, and saving of our souls, and we shall not distrust for lesser
deliverances: as Psalm. 56.13. Thou have delivered my soul from death, will thou not deliver my feet from falling? 2. Fear God in heart, and show it by
eschewing evil, and doing good in life, Psalm. 25.12, 14. What man is he, that
fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them his
covenant, Psalm. 103.11. For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is
his mercy toward them that fear him. 3. Exercise mercy toward our brethren,
so shall we find the Lord merciful unto us, Psalm. 18.25. With the merciful
thou will show thy self merciful. For on the contrary, Jam. 2.13. He shall
have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy: and Psalm. 109.12, 16.
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him, etc. Because that he remembered not
to show mercy, etc. 4. Be much in prayer to God, in the name of Christ, for
whatsoever we lack, Phil. 4.6. See encouragements, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: and Psalm.
86.5. Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto all
them that call upon thee.

And grant us thy salvation. The second benefit, which Gods Church and people
here beg of God, as a fruit and evidence of his mercy and kindness; namely, to
give them his salvation: that is, deliverance from that troubles of their
enemies, and from all other evils that lay upon them: for that is the
salvation here meant: as Exodus 14.13. Stand still and behold the salvation of
the Lord, which he will work for you.

The third Observation.
In this petition note two things, 1. The place and order, in which this
blessing is sought. 2. What kind of salvation they desire: namely, that which
comes from God: grant us thy salvation.

For the first, note, Gods people seek Gods salvation, after they have sought
his mercy: first, they beg mercy at his hands, and then deliverance from evils:
Psalm. 40.11. Withold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy
loving kindness, and thy truth, continually preserve me. Psalm. 6.2. Have mercy
upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed. First
mercy, then healing. Psalm. 30.10. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, be thou my
helper.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, their partaking of Gods mercy, was
necessary for the removal of the cause of their misery, which ordinarily is
sin: that brings death, and all evils that before-runners thereof, Romans 5.12.
Now there is no way to have sin removed, but through Gods mercy in Christ: as
David shows, Psalm. 51.1, 2, 14.

The second Reason.
Secondly, mercy and kindness in God is properly the moving cause of his
saving us, both temporally in this world, and eternally in the world to come:
for preservation, which is temporal salvation, see Psalm. 6.4. David being sick
and weak, prays thus, O save me for thy mercies sake: and so, when he was in
danger of his life by enemies, he makes the same prayer, O save me for thy
mercies sake: Psalm. 31.16. Psalm. 44.3. Their own arm did not save them: but thy
right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance; because thou had
a favor unto them. This the people say of Gods dealing with their
forefathers, bringing them out of Egypt into Canaan: and thereupon being in
misery, they fly to the same ground of help, verse 26. Arise for our help,
redeem us for thy mercies sake: so David, as a type of Christ in his passion,
prays; Help me, O Lord my God: O save me, according to thy mercy. And for
salvation eternal, it is wholly founded on Gods mercy in Christ, Tit. 3.5. Not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, etc. Psalm. 141.4. Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I
have sinned against thee.

This serves for instruction, for admonition, and for comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, they that have no good title to Gods mercy,
can have no good assurance of Gods salvation, either temporal or eternal. A
point very considerable of wicked men, that hate instruction, as Psalm. 50.17.
and encourage themselves in a wicked course, as Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. blessing
themselves in their hearts, saying, we shall have pence, etc. such the Lord
will not spare -- see Prove. 1.25, 26. Hereupon, Psalm. 119.155. salvation is
far from the wicked. It is true, wicked men flatter themselves in their own
eyes with this, O, God is merciful. But who so is wise will consider, whose
word shall stand, Gods or theirs: as, Jer. 44.28.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here, the true Church, seeking Gods salvation, pleads mercy, not
merit: and so did Paul profess, and teach, 1 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.9. Tit. 3.5. So
Psalm. 115.1. Isa. 64.6.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to all that look for Gods salvation, temporal
or eternal, to make sure they stand rightly entitled to Gods favor and mercy:
for salvation follows mercy. Now Gods mercy is only had in and thorough faith
in Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in
his blood, etc. Romans 3.25.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, in the use of lawful means for preservation, to renew our title to
Gods mercy. The want hereof hinders many times the fruition of Gods blessing:
as in Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. In his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians, and so died. But the practice of it by Hezekiah, procured the
reversing of the sentence of death. Isaiah 38.2, etc.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, to those that are truly entitled to mercy, and yet lie under
affliction: they may assure themselves of a better deliverance: as, Heb. 11.35.
Gods mercy shall be magnified in them, whether by life or death. Phil. 1.20. If
deliverance be good, they shall have it: if they want deliverance, their
affliction shall be sanctified unto them.

The fourth Observation.
The second thing to be noted in this last petition is, what kind of salvation,
or deliverance the people of God do desire, when they are in misery; namely,
that which comes from God. Gods people in misery desire the deliverance, which
is of Gods sending, Psalm. 60.11. Give us help from trouble: for vain is the
help of man. Psalm. 20.7. Some trust in charets, and some in horses; but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God, verse 9. Save Lord, Psalm. 106.47. Save
us O Lord our God.

The first Reason.
First they know, that salvation belongs unto him, Psalm 3.8. He is the God of
salvation, Psalm. 68.20. with him is plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130.7.

The second Reason.
Secondly they know, that without him the strongest helps do fail: as Job 9.13.
If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him: and
Isaiah 30.1, etc. Woe to the rebellious children, etc. -- They were all ashamed
of a people, that could not profit them, nor be an help, etc. --

The third Reason.
Thirdly, they know, that deliverance is easy unto him, when distress and
danger is most grievous, Jer. 32.27. there is nothing too hard for him. He can
save with many or with few, 1 Samuel 14.6. with weak means, Judges 7.20. without
means, Isaiah 63.5. by his bare command, Psalm. 44.4. as Mat. 8.3. I will: be
thou clean. Yea, by destroying means, as Israel thorough the red sea, Exodus
14.26, etc. and the three servants of God in the fire, Dan. 3.25, 27.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, they know, that God stands bound by promise in the covenant, which he
makes with his people, to deliver them out of misery and distress, when they
humble themselves and pray: See Psalm. 50.5, 15. 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

This serves to discover their impiety, which use unlawful means, to help
themselves from under miseries and afflictions; as the help and direction of
witches and wizards, like to Saul, 1 Samuel 28.7. and to Ahaziah, 2 Kings 1, 2,
3. forbidden, Lev. 20.6. Isaiah 8.19. Also theft, oppression bribery, perjury,
lying, etc.

This is not the practice of Gods people: help and deliverance; by such means
as these, is not of God, but of the devil: and such persons should think of
Christ's speech to the Jews, John 8.44. You are of your father the devil: for
the lusts of your father you will do.

The Use for admonition.
Secondly, to admonish us in all miseries to imitate Gods people, in seeking
only that help and deliverance, which comes from God. Consider herein the
practice of the godly, that would not receive deliverance by unlawful means.
Heb. 11.35. alluding to 2 Machab. 6.23, 30.

Verse 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace to
his people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly.


The meaning of the words.
IN this verse, and those which follow, to the end of the Psalm, is contained
the third and last part thereof, showing the Churches godly behavior, after
she had made her complaint and prayer, in promising to wait upon God, for a
gracious answer: whereof she lays down sufficient ground. First, in general
in this verse; then more particularly in the rest of the Psalm.

Her behavior is in these words. I will hear, what God the Lord will speak:
meaning by way of answer to my complaint and prayer. Wherein we have to note
two things. 1. How she styles God in this place. 2. What duty she undertaketh
toward him.

The first Observation. (...)
For the first, the titles here given to God by the Church are two, God, the
Lord: the first notes out his power, the second his performance of what he has
promised: as Exodus 6.3. I appeared unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by the name
of God almighty; but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them, verse 6.
wherefore, say unto them, I am the Lord, I will bring you out.

And this is used by the Church and godly elsewhere: as Psalm. 118.27. God is
the Lord, who has given us light.

The Reason.
The reason of this practice of the Church is, to strengthen her self to the
better performance of the duty she undertakes, which is to wait for Gods answer
to her prayers: whereto she shall be the better encouraged, and enabled by
considering; that God is Jehovah, one that not only has being of himself, but
gives being to his promises. Now being God, he is able, and being Jehovah, he
is faithful: as, Heb. 10.23. He is faithful that promised, 1 These. 5.24. He
will also do it. And for his promise, see Psalm. 50.15.

The first use for admonition.
This should teach us to labor to understand the holy titles, whereby God is
styled in Scripture, that so we may the better make a right use of them both to
terrify us from sin, and to encourage us in faith and obedience. As for
terror, to consider, that he is called an everlasting burning, and devouring
fire, Is. 33.14. For encouragement in difficult cases, to consider, that he is
the maker of heaven and earth, great in counsel, mighty in work, Jer.
32.17.19. for mercy, the good God. 2 Chronicles. 30.18. for encouragement in prayer,
Our father, which art in heaven, Mat. 6.9. which lays a ground, both of
confidence, in that he is our father, and of fear, and humility, in that he is
in heaven.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, is God the Lord? then those that call him so must fear him in regard
of his power, Jer. 5.25. Mat. 10.28. obey him as their Lord. Luke 6.46. and
rest upon him by faith; because he makes good his gracious promises, 2 Cor.
1.20.

The second Observation.
The duty, which the Church here undertakes to perform to God is this, she will
patiently attend for Gods gracious answer, to her complaint and prayer. So does
Job, Job 14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change
come, Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently for the Lord, Psalm. 130.5, 6. I wait for
the Lord, my soul does wait.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is, from the work of Gods spirit in his children, enabling
them by faith. 1. To reverence his command, enjoining them so to do, Psalm.
27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage. 2. To rely upon his promise to
hear and help, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. wherein they know he will not fail: because he is
a God of power, able to do whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. and of mercy,
exceeding abundant, above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, it acquaints us with a plain difference, between the godly,
who are believers, and the wicked, who are unbelievers: the godly do not only
pray to ^od, but wait also for an answer when they have made their prayer: as
Psalm. 42.5, 11. Isaiah 28.16. But the wicked, either pray not, as, Psalm. 14.4.
or if they do pray, yet they will not wait: as 2 Kings 6.33. What should I wait
upon the Lord any longer? They deal with their prayers, as the Oftrich does
with her eggs, which she leaves in the earth, etc. Job 39.14, etc. because God
has deprived them of uunderstanding, as punishment of their contempt of the
means of grace, else they would not account the exercise of prayer
unprofitable: as, Job 21.15 Mal. 3.4.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, that we endeavor to approve our selves to be Gods people, by
waiting upon God for a gracious answer to our prayers. This we should do every
day, according to the practice of the Church in this place: whereunto if we did
indeed set our selves, we would make conscience of all sin, that we might
keep our selves in the love of God, without which we cannot comfortably expect
a gracious answer from him to our prayers. Now to enable us to wait and listen
for a gracious answer, when we have prayed, we must be well exercised in godly
consideration and practice.

The consideration needful hereto is three fold First, of Gods promise made to
those that pray unto him: for it is presumption to wait for that, which God
has not promised to give: True expectation is a fruit of faith, which ever
looks at Gods word of promise. Secondly, of Gods power and mercy: for as his
power will assure us, that he is able, so his mercy will show, that he is most
ready and willing to grant our requests. Thirdly, we must consider his manner
of answer: it is threefold. Sometime, by giving that particular blessing we
ask: as 1 Samuel 1.27. For this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my
Petition, which I asked of him. Sometime, by giving some other thing answerable
to the blessing: as, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee. And
sometimes by giving patience and strength to bear the evils which we would have
removed; as, Heb. 5.7.

The godly practice hereto needful, is threefold. First, to stir up our hearts
to lay hold on Gods promises by faith: as, Psalm. 43.5. And herein we must show
godly judgment, in laboring to trust perfectly for spiritual blessings,
simply needful to salvation: as, 2 Timothy 1.12. I am not ashamed, for I know
whom I have believed, etc. But for spiritual blessings less necessary, as
also for all temporal blessings, to submit our wills to Gods will. Secondly, we
must hold on in the way of obedience. Psalm. 37.34. Wait on the Lord, and keep
his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land. Thirdly, continue in
prayer. Col. 4.2. Keep not silence; give the Lord no rest. Isaiah 62.6, 7.

For he will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints. The reason or
ground, whereby the Church does encourage her self, to the former godly
practice, drawn from Gods gracious dealing with his people, in giving
comfortable answer to their prayers: for peace in Scripture does oftentimes
note out all manner of welfare: as, Exodus 18.7. Psalm. 122.6. Psalm. 35.27.

In this reason we have two things to note. First, the honorable title whereby
Gods people here be styled; namely, that they are his Saints. Secondly, the
special favor which God will show unto them, in answer to their prayers: he
will speak peace unto them.

The third Observation.
For the first, they are his Saints, even gracious Saints, such as he does
prosecute with special grace and favor: as we speak, the Lords favorites:
Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his. Psalm. 31.23. O love the
Lord ye his Saints; for the Lord preserves the faithful. I salm 37.28. He
forsakes not his Saints.

The Reason.
The reason and ground of this happy and honorable estate is in God alone. 1
Cor. 4.7. For who makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou, that
thou did not receive? First, in God the father electing and choosing them to
be holy. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation
of the word, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.
Secondly, in God the Son, redeeming them from sin, washing and cleansing
them with the washing of water, by the word, that he might present them to
himself without spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that they might be
holy and without blemish. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Thirdly, in the work of the Holy
ghost, applying the merit and power of Christ's death unto them, for the
abolishing of corruption, and the renewing of the graces of his holy image. 1
Pet. 1.22. Ye have purified your selves, in cheying the truth, through the
spirit. Fourthly, in a work of all three persons vouchsafing unto them an
effectual calling. 1 Con. 1.2. Called to be Saints.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction, First, it lets us plain y see, that God has his Saints in
this world, such as from election through redemption and sanctification are
holy and pure in his sight. Numb. 23.21. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob.
It is not as Papists say, that there are none but in heaven: for here they have
their beginning, and now are truly, though not perfectly holy.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see how far the prephane do deceive themselves, when they lay
claim to be Gods people. Psalm. 94.20. Shall the throne of iniquity have
fellowship with thee? which frames mischief by a Law? 2 Cor. 6.14. etc. What
fellowship has righteousness with unrigh cousnesse, etc. 1 Job. 1.6. If we
say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, welye, and do not
the truth.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition. First, that if we lay claim to be Gods people, we labor after
holiness. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord: and see how furre forth, in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. For this cause we must ^^ercise our selves in the
word and prayer, the Lords ordinances sanctified to his elect for the beginning
of holiness, and increase thereof in their souls.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, that we learn to delight in the godly, Psul. 16.2, 3. My goodness
extends not unto thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them
that fear thee: and of them that keep thy precepts: as the Lord does, Psalm.
147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him: in those that hope in
his mercy.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly against the contempt of the world, 1 Samuel 2.9. He
will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness,
Deuteronomy 33.2, 3. Cant. 2.14. Psalm. 149.9.

The fourth Observation.
For the second, God will speak peace to his people: he will give a comfortable,
and gracious answer, to their complaints and prayers: Psalm. 29.11. The Lord
will bless his people with peace, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor,
for the sighing of the needy, I will up, says the Lord, and set him at
liberty, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee,
Isaiah 26.12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us, Isaiah 40.1, 2. Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, says your God: speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem. Thus
he answered Daniels prayer, Dan. 9.20, 21, 23.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, his covenant of grace, made with his
people in Christ, through whom it becomes the covenant of peace, is. 54.10. for
Christ is the Prince of peace, Is. 9.6. yea, our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. in whom we
have peace, John 16.33.

The second Reason.
Secondly, because his Saints be endued with those graces and virtues, which
give them title to true peace: as faith in God, Romans 5.1. and love to Gods law,
Psalm. 119.165. and obedience to his commandments, Is. 48.18.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it shows the sweet fruit and benefit of true
piety, in the profession of Gods holy religion. It is not, as wicked men think,
a vain thing to serve God: Job 21.15. Mal. 3.14. but undoubtedly, there is
fruit for the righteous, Psalm. 58.11. Godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. It
is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. This will more plainly appear, if we
consider the extent of this peace, which God promises to his people. It is not
only, 1. The peace of God, that is, Gods favor and love, which passes all
understanding Ephesians. 3.19. which Christ gives to those that be godly, John
14.27. but, 2. Peace of conscience, Romans 5.1. which is a continual feast,
Prove. 15.15. and gives boldness with God in prayer, 1 John 3.21. and, 3. Peace
with the good Angels in heaven, Psalm. 34.7. and 9.10. Heb. 1.14. 4. Peace with
Gods Church, Acts 4.32. yea, 5. Peace with all earthly creatures, for their
comfortable use and service, Job 5.23. Hos. 2.18. even, 6. With wicked men, as
Joseph had in Potiphars house and Pharoahs Court, Genesis 39.2. etc. and 41.37.
etc. and Daniel in the Kings Courts of Babel and Persia, Dan. 2. and 5. and 6.
and 7. With hurtful creatures, when it makes for Gods glory, in the good of
his Church: as we may seeby the three children in the fire, Dan. 3. by Daniel
in the Lions den, Dan. 6. by Jonah in the Whales belly, Jonah 2. and by Paul
among the Barbarians, when he shook of the viper, Acts 28.2. etc. And are not
all these great blessings and privileges?

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, this teaches Magistrates and Ministers, how they ought to carry
themselves in their places, for they are both in the place of God sent and set
in by him: as Romans 13.1, 4.2 Cor. 5.20. and Magistrates bear the name of God.
Psalm. 82.1, 6. John 10.34, 35. Therefore they must be followers of God, speak
peace to the godly, deal kindly with those that walk uprightly. Magistrates
mus: look at God: Job 8.20. He forsakes not the upright, nor takes the wicked
by the band: either to show kindness, or to yield support. And Ministers, as
ambassadors, must deliver the will of their King and master, and as stewards
must give to every one his due portion, Luke 12.42. which, if it were done,
would encourage the good and daunt the wicked. But alas, the contrary practice
of both marres all, in all estates. Magistrates stretch out the hand to
scorners and drunkards, Hos. 7.5. and beat the good, Ezekiel. 34.3 etc. And
ministers, some by ill teaching, but more by bad living, do strengthen the
hands of the wicked, Jer. 23.14. and make sad the hearts of those, whom God
has not made sad.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually to all that are desirous God should speak
peace unto them, to be careful to become truly his Saints and people: for to
them God will speak peace, and to none else indeed: as Isaiah 48.22. There is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Now, they that would approve themselves
to be Gods people and Saints, must do three things.

First, by true repentance break off the course of their sins, and turn from
every evil way: for else God will not own themfor his people, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
They, that live in sin, walk in darkness, and so cannot have fellowship with
him, 1 John 1.6. 2 Cor. 6.14.

Secondly, by true faith in Christ rest and rely upon Gods mercy, for pardon of
sin and salvation: for he, that comes unto God, and has fellowship with
him, must believe, Heb. 11.6. therefore Christ bidding his Disciples to believe
on him, as they believe on God, John 14.1. does encourage them thereto by this,
that he is the way, the truth, and the life, by whom alone they must have
access to the father. verse 6. In whom we have boldness, and access with
confidence, by the faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12.

Thirdly, walk in new obedience, to testify the truth of their repentance and
faith: for faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. And this is the love of God, that
we keep his commadements, 1 John 5.3.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to Gods people and children, in any misery or
trouble, that does befall them: for God will speak peace unto them: peace shall
come, Isa. 57.2. though for a time they be in heaviness, through manifold
temptations, yet believing in Christ, they rejoice with joy unspeakable, 1.
Pet. 1.6, 8. God will give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning,
etc. Isa. 61.3. Only they must wait in the way of obedience, Psalm. 42.5.11.
Isa. 40.31. They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength.

The fifth Observation.
But let them not turn again to folly. A needful caveat, or item for Gods
people, touching their behavior, whereby they wait for peace from God, they
must not turn again to folly. By folly he means their sins, which formerly
had brought misery upon them, thereto he would not have them turn again.

In this caveat there are two things to be observed. First, the title given to
sin. Secondly, the behavior required of Gods people toward it.

For the first, sin is here called folly or foolishness by the Holy ghost:
so also, Prove. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; that is,
corruption sticks fast to the heart and soul by nature, even in childhood.
Psalm. 38.5. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness: that
is, because of my sinfulness. Psalm. 107.17. Fools, because of their
transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted. Prove 26.11. As a
dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to his folly: that is, a wicked
man returns to his sin.

The first Reason.
In reason this is plain. For first, in every sin there is a rejecting of the
word of God, which is divine wisdom. Jer. 8.9. Nay, a forsaking God himself,
and cleaving to the devil, which is extreme madness.

The second Reason.
Secondly, every sin gives a deadly would to the soul, being indeed the sting
of death, 1 Cor. 15.56. See Romans 5.1^. and 6.23. Now who but fools or madmen,
will hurt themselves? I very man that is wise, will be wise for himself, Prove.
9.12.

The 3 Reason.
Thirdly, every sin must be undone by repentance, or else the the doing of it
will destroy the sinner: Psalm. 7.12.13. If he turn not, he will what his sword:
he has bent his bow, and made it ready: he has also prepared for him the
instruments of death. The wicked shall be turned into hell. Psalm. 9.17.

The Use for instruction.
This shows first, that the world is full of fools: for sin abounds every where,
the whole world lies in wickedness. 1. Joh. 5.19. Which well considered, may
stay our hearts from doubting of Gods providence; because of the general
disorders, that be in the world: see Psalm. 75.3, 4. The earth, and all the
Inhabitants thereof are dissolved -- Isaith unto the foolish, deal not so
foolishly, etc.

The Use for admonition.
Second y, as we desire to escape the brand of folly, so we must be careful to
shun the practice of sin and impiety: for sin is folly, and they that
commit it deal foolishly: as 2 Samuel 24.10. The rather because of the devils
dealing with these fools, they are in his hands, and he deals with them, as
many times great men in the world do with naturals, make a prey of their
estate, and sport themselves with their folly: so the devil makes a prey of
their souls, and sports himself with their sins, which be their folly: Even
as the Philistims deal with Sampson, Judge. 16.15. who turned him to grind in
their prison house, and brought him forth as a laughing stock, to make them
merry. Men may be wise for the world, and yet such scols for the devil. Luke
12.20.

The sixth Observation.
The second point, here purposely intended, is this. They, that look for peace
and welfare from God, must not turn again to sin. Jer. 18.9, 10. When God
speaks concerning nation to build or plant it, if they do evil, and obey not
his voice, then will he repent of the good he intended for them Dent. 29.19,
20. When wicked men bless themselves in their hearts, with a persuasion of
peace and welfare, and resolve to go on in sin, God will not spare, but cause
all his wrath and jealousy to smoke against them, till they be destroyed. His
charge unto his people, whom he brought out of Egypt, that they should not
reture thither any more. Deuteronomy. 17.16. teaches us that he cannot endure men's
turning back to the servitude of sin, which was sigured by Egyptian bondage:
and, as God punished the Jews, that would needs return thither, with sword,
famine, and pestilence till they were destroyed, Jer. 42.10, 16, 17. so, he
will not spare any, that turn back to the service of Satan, in the works of
sin.

The first Reason.
The reasons hereof are four: First, sin being the deadly disease of the
soul, as Romans 5.12. and 6.23. turning back thereto must needs be a spiritual
relapse, and so more dangerous, then corporal, by how much spiritual death is
worse then corporal. Hereupon Salomm says, He, that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove.
29.1.

The second Reason.
Secondly, returning unto sin is not only foolishness, but indeed most base
and brutish behavior, and therefore is resembled by the Holy Ghost to the dogs
returning to the vomit, and the sowes wallowing again in the mire, after she
has been washed, 2 Cor. 2.21, 22. Prove. 26.11.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, sin provokes the Lord to anger, Jer. 5.16, 17, 18, 19. and so takes
away peace between God and us, Psalm. 38.3. for it makes us wicked, and there is
no peace to the wicked, Is. 48.22. It shall not go well with the wicked,
Eccles. 8.13. A man cannot harden himself against God and prosper, Job 9.4.
What peace says Jehu whilst the whoredoms of Jezabel remain yet in great
number, 2 Kings 9.22.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, as sin brings us into bondage, 2 Timothy 2.26. so returuing unto it
does renew and strengthen this spiritual bondage, under the dominion of Satan:
as Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, and
returns again, he takes with him seven other spirits, more wicked then
himself, and they enter in, and dwell there, and the last state of that man is
worse, then the first. And therefore St. Peter speaking of such, says, better
for them, never to have known the way of righteousness, then to turn from the
holy Commandment, given unto them, 2 Pet. 2.21.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction. First, here see the fearful measure of man's corruption, in
blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, that notwithstanding this divine
charge, upon such weighty grounds, of fearful evils accompanying relapse unto
sin, yet wicked men do judge it, both pleasing and profitable so to do. In
the committing of it, sin is sweet unto them. Job 20.12. Hereby they have
their wealth, Acts 19.15. and hereupon grow desperate in sin: as Jer. 44.16,
17. This they would not do, if they did see, or fear the evil of sin.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, this lets us see the main and general cause of war abroad, and of
the fear thereof, and of other evils at home in our own land: surely, either
they and we have not turned from our evil ways, or upon some outward show
thereof, have made revolt and relapse thereinto again. This we should consider,
to stir up our hearts, to sound conversion from our sins, and to constant
resolution against relapse thereinto.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, every child of God must yield obedience to this holy charge,
and beware of turning back to sin; and, to arm their souls against relapse,
lay to heart the four former grounds or reasons. It is no small matter to
transgress any commandment of God, Psalm. 50.16, 17. God disavoweth such, from
laying claim to covenant with him, and will cast them away, as he did Saul, 1 Samuel 15.23. yea destroy them, Prove. 13.13. Add also this consideration, that
Gods favor is better then life, Psalm. 63.3. and shall we loose it for the
pleasure of sin? Then are we not like Moses, who chose rather, to suffer
affliction, with Gods people, then to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season,
Heb. 11.25. nor like Paul, who had rather dye, then loose his rejoicing, in the
furtherance of the gospel, by abstaining from a thing lawful, which was
outward maintenance for preaching, 1 Cor. 9.19. what then could have drawn him,
to disgrace the gospel, by returning unto sin? If we well consider of these
things, we shall say with Joseph, Genesis 39.9. How can we do this great
wickedness, and sin against God.

Verse 9. Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell
in our land?


The meaning of the words.
IN this verse, and the rest to the end of this Psalm, are propounded the
special branches of that peace and welfare, which God vouchsafes to his
people and Saints, not returning unto folly. The first of these is salvation,
here undoubtedly assured to be nigh to those, that fear God, and also amplified
by the end, for which God gives it to his people, viz. that glory may dwell
amongst them. By salvatition, the blessing prayed for in the seventh verse, is
here meant deliverance and freedom, from all those evils and miseries, that
any way lay upon them: which blessing is here undoubtedly assured, to those
that fear God.

So as in the first part of the verse this point is plain.

The first Observation.
Gods salvation is undoubtedly nigh to those that fear him. God will certainly
vouchsafe, to such as truly fear him, both temporal deliverance, and
preservation from evils, and spiritual and eternal salvation in heaven, Prove.
19.23. The fear of the Lord tends to life, and he, that has it, shall abide
satisfied: he shall not be visited with evil, Psalm. 25.12, 13. His soul shall
dwell at ease, Psalm. 33.18, 19. The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear
him, to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine, Psalm.
31.19, 20. How great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee? Thou shall hide them, in the secret of thy presence, from the pride
of man. etc.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is plain. First, the true fear of God is a fruit of his holy
spirit: Isaiah 11.2. which unites us unto Christ, 1 Cor. 6.17. and entitles us
unto covenant with him, in the nearest bond of mystical union, 1 Cor. 12.13.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, he will show them his
covenant, Psalm. 25.14. Now they, that are truly in covenant with God, have true
title to all the blessinsg thereof, even to preservation on earth, and
salvation in heaven: for there is no want to them, that fear him. Psa. 34.9.

The second Reason.
Secondly, the true fear of God moves a man to eschew evil, Job 1.1. Prove.
14.27. and to cleave unto God in holy obedience, Jer. 32.40. Now to such belong
the salvation of the Lord, Acts 13.26. Whosoever amongst you fears God, unto
you is the word of this salvation sent.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows the miserable condition of those that want the fear
of God: for salvation must needs be far from them. For they, that want the fear
of God are wicked, Psalm. 36.1. and salvation is far from them. Psalm. 119.155.
Howsoever it be true in the world, that they, who work wickedness, are set up;
yet it is not so with God: he puts a difference between those that fear him,
and those that fear him not. Eccles. 8.12, 13. As he did between the Egyptians
and the Israelites. Exodus 8.22, 23.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition it serves two ways. First, to search and try, whether we be
such, as truly fear God, that so we may know Gods salvation belongs unto us.
The infallible marks hereof are three. First, a constant care and endeavor to
shun all sin. Prove. 3. (...). Fear the Lord, and depart from evil. Prove.
8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil. Prove. 14.27. The fear of the Lord
is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. This is plain by the
contrary, Genesis 20.12. where the fear of God is wanting, there is no conscience
of sin, Psalm. 36.1. Secondly, true delight in Gods commandments, testified by
obedience thereto, Psa. 112.1. Thirdly, to be plentiful in all well-doing,
according to our places, Job 1.1, 8. Prove. 14.2.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, every one that wants the fear of God, and desires his salvation, must
labor to get it: for, though it be a fruit of the spirit, Isaiah 11.2. yet
there is means to be used, for the obtaining of it which is required at our
hands, and that is consideration and prayer. The consideration is twofold:
First and principally of God himself: Secondly of our selves.

Our consideration of God respects his properties and his works. His special
properties to be considered for this and are six.

First, his infinite greatness, which does evince his presence. See Psalm.
145.3. Great is the Lord, etc. 1 Kings 8.27. Jer. 23.24. Now Gods presence is
fearful. Genesis 28.16, 17.

Secondly, his infinite wisdom, whereby he knows all things, even the most
hidden thoughts. Psalm. 147.5. His understanding is infinite: and Psalm. 139.2,
3. Thou understandest my thoughts a far off, etc. Hebr. 4.13. All things are
naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

Thirdly, his infinite purity and holiness, which cannot admit fellowship
with the least sin. 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at
all: And 2 Cor. 6.14. What communion has light with darkness?

Fourthly, his power and justice; both which make him a consuming fire against
sin. Heb. 12.28, 29. with Mat. 10.28.

Fifthly, his mercy in pardon and forgiveness. Psalm. 130.4. There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. Whereon Noah being moved
with fear, prepared an Ark, etc. Heb. 11.7.

Sixthly, his works of power and wisdom and justice: as, Psalm. 89.7. God is
greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, etc. Psalm. 139.13, 14.
specially the day of judgment. Eccles. 12.13, 14. Fear God -- for God will
bring every work into judgment. Acts 24.25. As he reasoned of righteousness,
temperance and judgment to come, Felix trembled.

Our consideration of our selves is of our own frailty and vanity: being but
dust and ashes. Genesis 18.27. For all flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse
thereof as the flower of of the field. Is. 40.6. And every man, at his best
estate, is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5.

With consideration we must join prayer: for that sanctifies all Gods
ordinances, 1 Timothy 4, 5. 1 Cor. 3.6. and obtains the spirit, Luke 11.13.
which works Gods fear, Isa. 11.2.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to those that serve God truly: for, when they are
in any distress or misery, they must think upon the privilege of this grace,
and that will minister comfort unto them, to know, that Gods salvation is near
unto them.

That glory may dwell in our land.] The end, for which God sends his salvation
to his people, that do fear him, namely, that glory may dwell in their land.
By glory, he means an happy and honorable estate, both of Church and
Commonwealth, in freedom from evils, and fruition of blessings, both
spiritual and corporal. By dwelling in their land is noted, the long
continuance of the same blessings amongst them.

The second Observation.
Here then note: That God would have the very land of his people, that truly
fear him, to abide and continue in a glorious estate. Gods salvation does
therefore come unto them, that they may be renowned for glorious estate, in
abundance of blessings continued among them. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh, that there were
such an heart in my people, that they would fear me always, that it might go
well with them, and with their children for ever. Psalm. 81.13, etc. Oh, that my
people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, etc. The like
is, Isa. 48.18. and Psalm. 72.7.

The fifth Reason.
The reasons hereof are two: First, such as fear God are his by covenant. Mal.
3.17, They shall be mine, says the Lord: even his sons and daughters. 2 Cor.
6.16. Now, a natural father desires the honor, and advancement of his
natural children, much more then will God do it: Luke 11.13.

The second Reason.
Secondly, God takes pleasure in those that fear him. Psalm. 147.11. He loves
their prosperity, and delights to make them glorious and renowned above
others: as, Psalm. 35.27. and Ps. 149.4. He will beautify the meek with
salvation. Psalm. 44.1, 2, 3. Because thou had a favor unto them. Ps. 84.11.
He is a sun and a shield, he gives grace and glory.

Qu. How comes it to pass, that Gods people, fearing God, are yet sometimes in
great contempt and reproach: as, Psalm. 44.10, etc. 1 Cor. 4.9, etc.

Answ. This may be, either for trial of grace, as in Job: or for correction
for sins committed by them, or by the wicked that live among them: as Psalm.
44.10, 11. or else, to give way to the wicked, in spite to them, to fulfill
their sins, for speedier judgment: as, 1 These. 2.16. For these reasons, the
outward glory of Gods children may be eclipsed; but yet, even then are they
glorious with God through grace: as, Isa. 49.5. and one day shall it be made
manifest, as is promised, Isa. 61.3.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it shows again the great benefit of true
piety, as is noted before on Verse. 7. Gods salvation shall make them glorious,
that truly fear God. Take a view of the heads and branches of their renown:
whereof the first and chiefest is, the fruition of the true God himself in
Christ, who is the great glory of those that truly fear him. He is the glory of
their strength, Psalm. 89.17. the glory of his people, Luke 2.32. He is the King
of glory: even coming into their hearts, and dwelling in them, and with them:
Psalm. 24.7, etc. compared with, John 14.23. Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me:
my glory, and the lifter up of mine head, Psalm. 3.3.

The second branch of their renown and glory, that truly fear God, is the
fruition of Gods saving ordinances, of true religion, and holy worship,
vouchsafed to those that fear God, as a means to bring them to grace and
glory. This was the prerogative of the Jews under the law: Psalm. 147.19, 20.
Romans 3.1, 2. The presence of the Ark was to them a great glory: as 1 Samuel 4.21,
22. and so is the Gospel unto us. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14.

Thirdly, glory does here comprehend the good blessings of Gods providence,
appertaining to outward estate: which, being enjoyed, make men renowned and
glorious in this world, as victory, peace, plenty, and the like: whereof see
fully, Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc. to 15. All which, attending those that fear the Lord,
show plainly the great worth of their piety. Which, well observed, will arm us
against the error and reproach of carnal men, that account it a vain thing to
be godly, Job 21.15. Mal. 3.14. and will make us say and think with Paul, that
godliness is profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 6.6. having the promises of a
double life, 1 Timothy 4.8.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here, who be the true friends to the peace and prosperity of any
place, as Kingdom, Town, or Family; namely, such as fear God: for they bring
glory to the place of their abode. God in Christ is with them: to them belong
the holy ordinances of grace and glory, and also all comfortable blessings of
Gods providence, respecting temporal welfare: as before is showed. Hence God
said to Abraham, the father of the faithful, Thou shall be a blessing, Genesis
12.2. which also belongs to his godly posterity. Lot was so to Sodom, Genesis
19.22. Jacob to Laban, Genesis 30.27. Joseph to Potiphars house, Genesis 39.2, 3. and
to the land of Egypt, Genesis 41.38. etc. Not so the wicked: they trouble the
state and place where they live: as Achan, Jos. 7.25. and Ahab, 1 Kings 18.18.
They consult shame to their own houses, Hab. 2.10. as Elies wicked sons did
bring ruin on their fathers house, 1 Samuel 2.30. etc. and 3.13, 14. The sinner,
being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. Isaiah 65.20. and leave his
name for a curse, verse 15.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to every one, to beware of those things, that
move God to take away glory from a land: and these are especially three. First,
Idolatry: see Ezekiel. 9. there is their horrible idolatry, and chap. 10.4. the
Lord begins to depart. Secondly, impiety and profaneness in the Priests and
Ministers of God, 1 Samuel 2.17. compared with chap. 4.21, 22. Thirdly,
Barrenness in the people, when they profit not by the word of God, Mat. 21.43.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to examine our selves thoroughly, whether we have the true fear of God
before our eyes. The way of trial is showed before, in the first admonition on
the first point of this verse.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to those, that have the true fear of God in their
hearts: they are surely entitled to glory. Though they may want it in this
world: as 1 Cor. 4.9, 13. yet, in the world to come, they shall have it, 2 Timothy
4.8. Mat. 19.28, 29. Luke 16.25.

Verse 10. Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.


The meaning of the words.
In this verse, those and that follow to the end of this Psalm, the Prophet does
particularly make instance in sundrygarcious blessings, which God vouchsafes
to those that fear him, as beams of that glory, which he will have to dwell
amongst them, when he sends them his salvation. These blessings he still
propounds by couples, whereof this verse contains two, mercy and truth,
righteousness and peace: which being here assured, without any special
limitation, from God, or man alone, I think we may safely take them, in that
latitude of sense, which may comprehend mercy and truth, righteousness and
peace, both divine and humane: that is, as they are vouchsafed from God to men,
and also as they are exercised between man and man: the rather because, where
either way these be wanting, g^ory does not dwell there. Their meeting
together, and kissing each other, are borrowed terms, serving to express,
more significantly, the sweet and comfortable continuance of these gracious
blessings, amongst that people, whom God will make glorious by his salvation.

The first Observation.
Now then, understanding the words in this large sense, we have to note in them
these particulars. First, that with whomsoever true glory makes abode, unto
them both Gods mercy, and Gods truth, are undoubtedly vouchsafed. Gods mercy is
his gracious and favorable acceptance of them for his people, and his kind
dealing with them, being received into covenant: and Gods truth is his
faithful performance of those gracious promises, which he has made unto them.
These do meet together with all those, that God makes glorious in estate: as,
Psalm. 89.1, 2, 24, 28, 33. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever:
with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations, etc.

The Reason.
The reason is plain: for this mercy and truth from God to men, is the ground of
their happiness and glorious estate: till God, of mere mercy and kindness,
receive him into covenant, and then in faithfulness perform his gracious
promises unto them, they lie dead in sin, and in spiritual bondage under
Satan the Prince of darkness, being without Christ, without hope, without God
in the world: see Ephesians. 4.17, 18. and 2.1, 12. But when God, out of his rich
mercy, receives men into his love and favor, giving them an holy calling,
whereby they are brought into covenant with him, then are they brought from
darkness unto light, from the power of Satan unto God. Acts 26.18. then they
enter into the happy and honorable estate of sons and daughters unto God,
which is no small glory, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction, this leads us plainly and rightly to see, where true glory
dwells, whether we speak of Kingdom, City, Town, Family, or person; namely,
where Gods mercy, and Gods truth in the covenant of grace do certainly meet.
Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea happy is that perple, whose
God is the Lord. Psalm. 144.15. for there mercy and truth from heaven are met:
see Exodus 19.5, 6. with Psalm. 65.4. Exodus 33.16. Of this mind was Paul. Acts
26.29. when he wished Agrippa a King to be like him in Christianity. This also
is Christ's judgment. Revel. 2.9. with 3.17. But most plainly, Jer. 34.8, 9.
with Is. 62.7. Jerusalem hereby is for a name and praise, etc.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, here see the common error of the world, in judging of glory and
renown by outward things; as large dominions, great wealeh, pomp and pleasures:
but, unless with these Gods mercy and truth do also meet, we may well say of
them all, This their glory is their shame. Phil. 3.19. For in shame and
confusion will they all end, without saving grace: as we may see in Babel, the
glory of Kingdoms, Is. 13.19. etc. Jer. 51.6, 7. and in Dives, the picture or
pattern of worldly wealthy Epicures.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually both to people in general, in Towns and
Kingdoms, and to persons in particular in every family: that, if they desire
true glory, should dwell among them, they make sure, that Gods mercy and truth
do meet together with them, and in them. Now this mercy and truth is revealed
in the word of the gospel, and indeed in the preaching of the gospel is
offered unto all that hear it, Tit. 2.11. They therefore that receive, believe,
and obey the gospel, have Gods mercy and truth to meet among them, and in
them: and if their faith do work by love, Gal. 5.6. and their love be showed by
keeping Gods commandments, 1 John 5.3. then they need not doubt of their
glorious estate in Gods esteem. It is true, the world derides this course and
counsel, and think it a vain thing, Mal. 3.14, 15. they call the proud happy,
etc. but wisdom is justified of her children, Mat. 11.19. and they that make
trial shall find the comfort and assurance of it.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to the godly, in whose hearts mercy and truth are
met together, against the contempt and reproach of the world: for it is as the
householders kind welcome, against the barking of his dogs. Let us therefore be
of Paul's mind, 1 Cor. 4.3. With me it is a very small thing, that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgment: and we shall feel his comfort, Romans 8.18.
I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory, that shall be revealed in us: and 2 Cor. 4.17. Our
light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of glory: and of David's, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. It was
before the Lord, etc. -- and I will yet be more vile then thus, etc. --

The second observation.
Secondly, here note also, that where a state or people, or particular person,
be truly glorious before God, there mercy and truth, between man and man, must
be duly and conscionably practiced: They that are beautified with Gods grace
and favor, and other blessings of the covenant, must answer Gods goodness
with the exercise of mercy and faithfulness toward their brethren: 2 Cor.
4.1. As we have received mercy of the Lord, we faint not; meaning, we labor
faithfully, to bring others to the participation of the same mercy. See it
notably practiced by David, Psalm. 51.1, 13. Have mercy upon me, O God -- and
then will I teach transgressors thy ways, etc. As, Psalm. 101.1. I will sing
of mercy and judgment: Psalm. 26.3. Thy loving kindness is before me, and I
have walked in thy truth.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is plain: First, Gods graces, and blessings toward his
children, are in a mavelous manner operative in them, causing them to do the
like toward their brethren: see Exodus 34.29. when Moses had conversed with the
God of glories in the Mount, he received glory into his countenance; which made
his face to shine before the people: and so, we all behold the glory of the
Lord in Christ, with open face, and are transformed into the same image, from
glory to glory: 2 Cor. 3.18. his love in Christ, constrains us to love men's
souls, and to seek their conversion: see, 2 Cor. 5.14, etc, Gal. 1.15, 16, 17.
Psalm. 16.2, 3.

The second Reason,
Secondly, the want of mercy and truth toward our brethren, declares us to be
destitute of true grace, and liable to Gods displeasure: Hos. 4.1, 2. God has
a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth nor
mercy, etc.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows plainly, that men's behavior and carriage toward
their brethren, will discover and manifest their state and condition before
God. A constant course in the exercise of mercy and truth toward men, by those,
that live in the Church, and profess the truth, shows plainly, that God in
Christ has extended mercy and truth toward them: and so for other graces. As
we have received mercy, we faint not: 2 Cor. 4.1. Meaning, in faithful
dispensation of the truth, to bring others to the participation of the same
mercy: for the love of Christ constrains us: 2 Cor. 5.14. See 1 John 3.14.
Hence are those exhortations to love and mercy: Matthew. 5.44, 45. Luke 6.36.
Ephesians. 5.1.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, that we give our selves to the exercise of mercy and truth
toward our brethren, ^f we desire assurance of Gods mercy and truth to our own
souls: else we discredit Gods works of grace, whereof we make profession, if no
fruit thereof appear toward our brethren. Those, in whom the devil works by
suggestion, and temptation unto evil, are very forward and bold to draw others
unto evil: and shall not the power of Gods spirit in grace, be as mighty in
the godly, to move them to well doing? See how Paul labored for the glory of
God in the conversion of others, when he had once tasted of gods mercy and
grace in his own. 1 Cor. 15.10. Acts 20.24. 2 Cor. 11.28, 29. Phil. 2.17.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to those, that give themselves to the exercise of
mercy and truth toward their brethren: for they shall find mercy with God,
and the truth of his promises shall be made good unto them: see Jam. 2.13.
Mercy rejoices against judgment.

Righteousness and peace have kissed each other. The second couple of heavenly
blessings, most assuredly vouchsafed in Christ's kingdom, to all that truly
fear God: which, as the former, being generally propounded, without any
limitation to God, or man alone; I take so largely, as to comprehend, both Gods
righteousness and peace, vouchsafed unto men, and the righteousness and
peace, which men are to exercise and prosecute one toward another: because
indeed, if either of these be wanting, the glory of Gods salvation is not yet
come: Now, their kissing one another is, a metaphorical phrase taken from
lovers, and friends meeting together, who use to greet one another with a kiss
of love, here serving very fitly to set out the sweet accord and comfort of
grace, amongst Gods people.

Here then we have to note two things, touching the state of Gods people in
Christ's kingdom; truly fearing God, for their comfortable fruition of
righteousness and peace: First, that they have these graces truly vouchsafed
unto them from God: Secondly, that they do most lovingly and sweetly exercise
the same one toward another.

The third Observation.
For the first, in Christ's kingdom, God does most lovingly bestow on those,
that truly fear him, both his righteousness and his peace. Gods
righteousness, bestowed on his people, is not his own divine essential
righteousness, for that indeed is infinite, and incommunicable; but it is the
righteousness of Christ, as he is Mediator, God and man, which he fulfilled
for his redeemed, and is accepted of God as theirs, that do truly believe.
Consider Heb. 7.2. Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Cor. 1.30. Jer. 23.6. And Gods
peace, sweetly accompanying the same, is peace of conscience, a sweet
persuasion of reconciliation, and so of love and favor with God in Christ.
Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. Romans 14.17. His
kingdom stands not in meat and drink, but in righteousness and peace.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is in God alone. First, he bestows on his Church,
righteousness in Christ, to make a way for his mercy, by the satisfying of his
justice: for all have sinned, and so in themselves are unable of glory. Romans
3.23. The unrighteous cannot inherit the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.9. Therefore
God, intending in mercy to free his elect from hell, which their sins did
deserve; and to bring them to heaven, which for want of righteousness, they of
themselves could never attain unto, does bestow upon them Christ's perfect
righteousness, as he is Mediator, both active and passive, that by his
sufferings* they might be freed from hell, Gal. 3.13. and by his obedience, in
doing all that the law required, for them, might be made righteous, and so
worthy of life, Romans 5.19. and 8.30. and 10.4. Then with righteousness he
gives peace of conscience, by the work of his Holy Spirit, that those, who
fear him, may have confidence and boldness with God in prayer, 1 John
3.19.21. and also may have in them matter of stay and comfort, against the
hatred, and contempt, and persecution of the world, John 16.33.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction: first, see the bountifulness of God in Christ Jesus toward
those, that fear him: he multiplies heavenly blessings in great variety and
abundance, he adds grace to grace, and that by couples, mercy and truth,
righteousness and peace: Well may we say with the Prophet, Psalm. 33.5. The
earth is full of the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 86.15. Thou art a God
full of compassion, and gracious, long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and
truth: Psalm. 130.7. With the Lord is mercy, with him is plenteous redemption.
The riches of his grace, and mercy in Christ, are unsearchable. Ephesians. 3.8.
That which he said to Moses, Exodus 33.19. he does fully accomplish in Christ; I
will make all my goodness pass before thee. It pleased the father that in him
should all fullness dwell. Col. 1.19. And, if he spared not his own son, but
gave him for us, how shall not he with him give us all things also? Romans 8.32.

Qu. What shall we say to these things? Romans 8.31.

Answ. Surely, we must labor to walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing,
Col. 1.10. and in some measure labor to answer Gods bounty: which requires
first, conversion from sin; Romans 2.4 secondly, love to the word of grace, 1
Pet. 2.2, 3. Thirdly, that we admire Gods goodness, Psalm. 31.9. Psalm. 116.12.
Fourthly, that we praise him for it: Psalm. 136. throughout: and Psalm. 145.1, 7,
etc. Ephesians. 1.3. Fifthly, that we order our lives a right. Romans 12.1. This has
the promise of Gods salvation. Psalm. 50.23.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here plain evidence of the miserable state of all unrighteous
persons, that keep a course in sin: undoubtedly Gods salvation is not come
unto them: for he, that is the servant of sin, is quit or freed from
righteousness; Romans 6.20. and salvation is far from such. Psalm. 119.155.
neither can they have any true peace. Is. 48.22.

The third Use for instruction.
Thirdly, here see both evidence and assurance for those, that fear God and
believe in him through Christ; of their blessed and happy estate of salvation:
for Gods righteousness and Gods peace do kiss in their souls. By faith they
are made righteous in Christ, Romans 3.28. Gal. 3.11, 24. and, when they are
justified, they have peace with God. Romans 5.1. For God gives both joy and peace
in believing, Romans 15.13. Papists call it a doctrine of presumption, to lay
claim to the knowledge and assurance of salvation, by ordinary grace: But
Wisdom is justified of her children, Math. 11.19. If we receive the witness
of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of God which
he has testified of his son. He that believes on the son of God, has the
witness in himself. And this is the witness, that God has given to us
eternal life. These things have I written unto you, that believe on the name
of the Son of God, that ye may know, that ye have eternal life. 1 John 5.9,
10, 11, 13. Add 1 Cor. 2.12. with Romans 6.23. and Romans 8.16, 17. And by
effects, 1 John 3.14. 2 Pet. 1.5, etc.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves effectually to move all those that desire in their
souls the true comfort of peace with God, to labor to be partakers of Gods
righteousness: for righteousness and peace do kiss one another. He, that is
made righteous by faith in Christ, shall likewise by the same faith have peace
with God through Christ: for he is our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. he makes peace by the
blood of his cross, Colos. 1.20. therefore at his birth the Angels sung, Glory
to God on high, and in earth peace: Luke 2.14. Now Christ's righteousness is
made ours by faith. Gal. 2.16. Knowing, that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ. Now this faith
is the work of the spirit, 2 Cor. 4.13. in the ministry of the Gospel, Romans
10.17. and shows it self to be true by good works, of love to God and to our
brethren. Gal. 5.6.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to those, that truly fear God, professing the
Gospel, they undoubtedly be righteous before God, and in him, they shall have
peace, John 16.33. Isa. 57.1, 2.

The fourth Observation.
Secondly, here note, that Christian righteousness and peace are conscionably
exercised between man and man, of all those, that fear God, living in his
Church: see Isa. 11.6, 7, 9. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb -- none shall
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: see instance, Acts 2.44, 46. and in
Paul, Acts 9.1, etc. with verse. 26. and chap. 20. verse. 24. Phil. 2.17.

The Reason.
The reason hereof, is in the powerful work of Gods spirit, which gives them an
holy calling; and therein does subdue corruption so far, that sin shall not
reign in them, to keep them in the practice of injustice and contention, and
also does renew the graces of Gods image in the soul, which stands in
righteousness and true holiness, and sets them into the kingdom of Christ,
which is righteousness and peace, Romans 14.17.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The Use for instruction.
For instruction: first see by the contrary the fearful case of those, that
give themselves to the practice of injustice and contention: they are not yet
called of God with an holy calling, but remain in the fearful case of corrupt
nature: see, Romans 1.28, 29, 31.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, that as we desire the comfort and assurance of Gods salvation,
so we conscionably give our selves to the practice of these virtues, of
righteousness and peace toward our brethren.

The use for comfort.
For comfort to those, that conscionably follow peace and righteousness amongst
men: it is a comfortable assurance; that God has bestowed on them,
righteousness and peace with Christ.

Verse. 11. Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look
down from heaven.


The meaning of the words.
BEcause the graces and blessings of Christ's kingdom, mentioned in the former
verse, be of great worth and comfort, and indeed do manifest the presence of
his salvation; therefore does the Prophet here further insist in two of them,
truth and righteousness; letting us know, whence these two shall show
themselves, to wit, the one from earth, the other from heaven.

For the first, Truth shall spring out of the earth. The truth here spoken of
must needs be such, as does accompany Gods salvation in Christ; and that is
true and faithful dealing, both in word and deed. The springing of it out of
the earth, is the plain and certain evidence thereof, in the lives and actions
of men: earth being here put by a Metonymie of the subject, for men that dwell
thereon: as if he should have said; It is so certain that mercy and truth shall
meet, that truth in word and deed; true and faithful dealing, shall be plainly
and plentifully exercised among men, living here on earth.

The first Observation.
Mark then, that in Christ's kingdom, when Gods salvation comes to men, true and
faithful dealing in word and deed, shall be plainly and plentifully exercised,
here on earth, between man and man. Psalm. 15.2. Every citizen of Christ's
kingdom, speaks the truth in his heart. Ezekiel. 18.9. They that look to live
with God, must deal truly. Zech. 8.3. Jerusalem, which is Gods true Church, is
a city of truth. 1 Cor. 5.8. The Christians Passover, is not the feast of I
after Week, but a life led in sincerity and truth.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is plain. First, God, who sends his salvation, is a God of
truth, Psalm. 31.5. Jer. 10.10. He is truth, Psalm. 51.6. and is a teacher of all
those, whom he means to save. Isa. 54.13. John 6.35. Now, this is his lesson,
that his people should love the truth, Zech. 8.29. and speak the truth every
man to his neighbor, verse 16.

The second Reason.
Secondly, when God sends his salvation to men, he bestows upon them his holy
spirit, which is the spirit of truth, John 14.17. leading men into all truth,
John 16.13. whose fruit is in all truth, Ephesians. 5.9.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, when God sends his salvation to men, he gives them his word of truth,
both law and Gospel. For the law see, Mal. 2.6. The law of truth was in his
mouth: And the Gospel is the word of truth, Ephesians. 1.13. This word of truth,
being sown in the ground of our hea^ts, and watered by the dew of grace,
springs up and grows, as good seed in good ground.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction: First see here, how powerful the work of God is in the hearts
of men, in the ministry of the word, blessed by the spirit, it changes their
very nature, which of it self is full of all unrighteousness, and loves lying
and untruth: as Romans 1.29.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here, to whom Gods salvation is come, whose state God makes
glorious in grace, namely, those, that having the word of truth amongst them,
receive therewith that blessing of the Spirit, that they love truth in their
hearts, and practice it in their lives. Ephesians. 4.24, 25. But as for those, that
make no conscience of true and upright dealing among men, undoubtedly they are
out of Gods Kingdom and state of grace, having the devil for their God: see,
John 8.44. Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. This does charge a fearful state upon the
pillars of Popish Religion, who maintain and practice equivocation and
officious lies. See and apply to them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Timothy
3.8. Tit. 1.14. Gods true servants in the Ministry can do nothing against the
truth, but for it, 2 Cor. 13.8.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition to every one, that lives in Gods Church, that we labor to feel
in our hearts the love of the truth, and to express the springing and growing
of it in our lives, by our words, and by our deeds: wherein we conscionably,
and constantly, both speak the truth, and do the truth, else we shall not feel,
nor manifest Gods salvation to be come unto us How can he say the God of truth
is his God, and has taught him, or that the spirit of truth is given to him,
which leads men into all truth, whose fruit is in all truth, or that the word
of truth, as good seed, was sown in his heart, who makes no conscience of
truth in word and behavior. See the Apostles pressing of this duty, Ephesians. 4.25.
upon verse 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. which shows also the way and means, whereby it
must be attained.

The Use for comfort.
For consolation, this makes greatly to all those, that speak the truth, and
deal truly with their brethren, in a constant and conscionable course; for
this shows, that Gods salvation is come unto them, that the God of truth is
their God: that the spirit of truth is given them, and the word of truth is
sanctified unto them.

And righteousness shall look down from heaven.] Here he shows, whence comes
that true righteousness, whereby such as fear God in the Church, must be
justified and saved, namely, from heaven. This righteousness is the
righteousness of Christ, as mediator, who as God is from heaven, and is
revealed unto men in the Gospel, which is a doctrine from heaven. as Mat.
21.25. with Gal. 1.11, 12. Mark then,

The second Observation.
When Gods salvation comes to men here on earth, he shows unto them the
righteousness of Christ, which is from heaven, Romans 3.21, 22. The
righteousness of God, without the law, is manifested, being witnessed by the
law and the Prophets. Even the righteousness of God, which is by the faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them, that believe.

The Reason.
This he does for the praise of the glory of his grace, in saving sinners, with
full satisfaction to his justice. For the unrighteous (as all are by nature.
Romans 3.9, 10.) cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: therefore, what the law
could not do, because we could not fulfill it, God provides to be done for his
elect in Christ, Romans 8.3. and, when they believe, makes them partakers of it,
that so he that rejoices might rejoice in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. for
boasting is taken away by the law of faith. Romans 3.27.

This serves for instruction, admonition; and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, it shows unto us the unspeakable riches of
Gods wisdom, grace, and goodness in Christ Jesus to his elect: of wisdom, in
finding out this way of justification to a sinner, which no created nature
could of it self ever conceive. 1 Cor. 2.7, 9. of grace and goodness, in
bestowing the same freely on his elect, 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, this shows us the fearful judgment of blindness of mind, lying on
the Church of Rome at this day, who are so far from beholding this
righteousness, which looks down from heaven, that they deride it, calling it a
new no-justice, a fantastical apprehension of that which is not, a false
faith, and untrue imputation. Rhem. on Romans 3.22. Nay, they show such enmity
unto it, that they pronounce them accursed, who by true faith rest, and rely
upon it alone for justification before God. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. can. 9.10,
11, 12. Of them is that spitituall judgment verified, Romans 11.8. God has
given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears,
that they should not hear. They, like Israel, following after the law of
righteousness, have not attained to the law of righteousness. Why? Because
they seek it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law, Romans 9, 31.
They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to stablish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God:
for Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that
believes. Romans 10.3, 4. Well therefore may we say of them, Hear, ye despisers,
and wonder, and vanish away: the veil hangs over your eyes, when the Gospel
is read unto this day. God has sent upon them strong delusions to believe
lies, because they have not received the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves very effectually to all, that live in the Church of
Christ, to take notice of this bounty of God, in revealing by the Gospel this
righteousness of Christ, that we may endeavor to walk worthy of the same:
First, in laboring to conceive rightly of this righteousness of Christ, which
God causes to look down from heaven. Secondly, in giving all diligence to be
made partakers thereof: both these see in Paul, Phil. 3.9, 10, 11. Indeed they
are both the gift of God, but yet in the use of means, the word and prayer,
wherein we must wait for the work of the spirit, as the poor did at the pool of
Bethesda, for the moving of the water, John 5.1, 2, 3.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to those, that know Christ crucified, and do rest
and rely upon his merits for justification and salvation. Oh, God has done
great things for them: see Mat. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and
your ears, for they hear.

Verse 12. Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good: and our land shall
yield her increase.


The meaning of the words.
HEre the Prophet proceeds in expressing further blessings, that accompany
Gods salvation in the Kingdom of grace. The blessings here mentioned are of
two sorts: First from the Lord, then from the earth. From the Lord, in these
words, yea, the Lord will give that which is good: here he means whatsoever
gift or blessing is good for his people, whether it be spiritual or temporal:
for so largely is the word here used taken in Scripture, as we shall see in the
confirmation of the point here to be observed, which is this.

The first Observation.
When God sends among men his salvation in Christ, he will give to such as fear
him, whatsoever is good for them, both for their souls and bodies. See this
confirmed, first in general, Exodus 32.19. I will make all my goodness pass
before thee, Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord shall not lack any good
thing. Then particularly, for blessings temporal, Deuteronomy. 28.11, 12. The Lord
shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit
of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground. The Lord shall open unto thee
his good treasure, the heaven to give thee rain unto thy land in his season,
and to bless all the work of thine hand. Also for blessings heavenly and
spiritual. Ephesians. 1.3. He blesses us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places, or things in Christ: even with the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the
good thing indeed for the soul. Psalm. 143.10. Thy spirit is good: and it is
Gods gift in the kingdom of grace, Acts 2.16. and 10.44, 45.

This is it, which makes the souls of Gods people like a watered garden, Jer.
31.12. Herewith does he satiate the souls of the Priests with fatness, and
satisfy the people with goodness, verse. 14. as Paul was persuaded of the
Romans, that they were full of goodness, Romans ^5.14. and of the Corinthians,
that in every thing they were enriched by him, and came behind in no gift. 1
Cor. 1.5.7.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is threefold. First, to make known the riches of his mercy
and goodness in Christ: how well he is pleased in him, that with him he will
g^ve all manner of blessings, Romans 8.32.

The second Reason.
Secondly, to draw men unto him, by beholding the abundance of blessings, which
accompany the receiving of Christ by faith: for, though many times they want
the possession, yet the right of all Gods blessings, belong to them that are in
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Thus was Simon Magus drawn to be baptized, Acts
8.13. As, Hest. 8.17. The Jews had joy and gladness, a feast and a good day:
and many of the people of the land became Jews.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, to keep those with him, that come in sincerity, and to move them to
cleave fast unto the Lord, in faith and love: as John 6.68. To whom shall we
go? thou have the words of eternal life. So Paul reasons, Romans 8.31, 32, 35.
What shall we say to these things? etc. who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? etc.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways: First, it opens unto us the true and right way,
whereby we may receive from God, that which is good. Few men doubt of his
sufficiency and ability, but how they should be interested thereunto, and
partake thereof, they know not. Well, mark here, Gods good gifts come with his
salvation in Christ: therefore seek the Lord in Christ, and thou shall lack
nothing that is good: Psalm. 34.10. To this agrees, Matthew. 6.33. First seek the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness: and all these things shall be added
unto you: For godliness has the promise of both kind of blessings. 1 Timothy
4.8. in the means whereof we must endeavor: as, John 4.10. Ezekiel. 47.1.
compared with Isa. 55.1, etc.

Object. Such as take this course are yet in much want.

Ans. It may be so for outward things: For the disciple is not above his
master: now the son of man has not whereon to lay his head: Matthew. 8.20. and
the promises of temporal blessings are to be understood with the exception of
the cross. Yet know, that Gods grace is sufficient: as 2 Cor. 12.9. compared
with 2 Cor. 4.16. And in the blessings of grace, he makes supply to all
temporal wants: as, Phil. 4.11, etc.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here plain evidence of the worlds unbelief. Lord who has
believed our report? Isa. 53.1. Are men persuaded that good gifts from God,
both temporal and spiritual, accompany his salvation in Christ? No surely,
for then they would labor first to become religious, because that is the way
to get Gods favor in Christ: as, John 14.6. Solomon says, Prove. 19.6. Every
man is a friend to him that gives gifts: that is, seeks to be in his favor:
but few take this course. Nay, they rather seek to the God of this world the
devil: for so indeed they do, that seek to thrive by ungodly courses, as
oppression, lying, stealing, and the like.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition it serves two ways. First, to natural men living in the
Church, that they take notice whence good things come, both spiritual and
corporal, and thereupon labor for that estate, whereby they may be interested
thereto. Hereto two things are required, repentance from dead works: for sins
withhold good things, Jer. 5.25. and faith in Christ: for so is Christ himself
ours, and all things with him.

If any say, they, that regard not these things, speed well in the world: let
them consider, whether here they have not their portion: as, Psalm. 17.14. and,
Luke 16, 25. Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things. But for the best
blessings they have no part in them, while they live in sin, and want faith:
as, John 14.17. Acts 8.21. They have starved souls in pampered and well clad
bodies.

The Use for admonition.
Secondly, this must stir up the godly, who have received good things from God;
to be careful to continue in Gods goodness: as, Romans 11.22. which is by keeping
faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. Heb. 10.39.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the godly in worldly wants: for certainly
God will give that which is good: and though the outward man perish, yet is the
inward man renewed daily: 2 Cor. 4.16. and we rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. Romans 5.2. Jam. 1.9. The brother of low degree must rejoice in his
exaltation with God: for, being a believer in Christ Jesus, he is rich in God,
though poor in the world: as, Jam. 25. and, Rev. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but
thou art rich.

And our land shall yield her increase.] The second blessing accompanying Gods
salvation in the kingdom of grace, here assured to those, that fear God: and
it is merely temporal, concerning the plentiful increase of the fruits of the
earth, where they live, that fear God. Mark then, in this part of their
acknowledgement, two things: First, their title to the land: secondly, the
blessing, whereof they assure themselves from it.

The second Observation.
For the first: Gods people call the land of Canaan, where they dwell, their
land, their own land: Verse 9. That glory may dwell in our land. 2 Chronicles. 2.16.
the land of Israel.

The Reason.
It was Gods gifts to them and their progenitors by covenant: as, Genesis 12.7.
and, 13.15. Psalm. ^4.3, 2. 2 Chr. 6.38. Judge. 11.24. 2 Chr. 20.6, 7.

The Use for admonition.
And if we look for blessing and comfort, in the place where we live, as the
Israelites here assure themselves, we must make sure we have good title to it
from the Lord: for there is small hope of Gods blessing to accompany the devils
getting: as 1 Kings 21.19. Jer. 22.13. Micha 2.1, 2. Hab. 2.9, 10. Isa, 5.8.

The third Observation.
The second thing to be here observed is purposely intended: namely, when Gods
salvation in Christ comes among a people, it brings with it plentiful increase
of the fruits of the earth: see Psalm. 67.2, 6. Psalm. 72.16. Salomons kingdom,
there spoken of, was a type of Christ's kingdom. See the truth hereof by Gods
special blessings accompanying those, that in sincerity have received the
covenant: as, Genesis 13.2, 6. Abraham was very rich in cattle, in silver, and
gold: their substance was so great, that the land was not able to bear them:
and Chap. 24.35. The Lord has blessed my Master greatly, and he is become
great, etc. Yea, also Isaac sowed and received an hundred fold, Genesis 26.12.
Also Jacob was a blessing to Laban, and himself increased exceedingly. Genesis
30.27, 43.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is this: Gods salvation brings to men reconciliation in
Christ: for, as he is Gods salvation, Is. 49.6. so, in him God reconciles the
world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. Col. 1.20. Romans 5.10. And hence comes a double
benefit tending to plenty.

First, the removal of the curse, which Adams sin brought even upon the
ground, Genesis 3.17. (for though want may befall the godly, yet not as a curse)
Gal. 3.13. it is only (as sickness is, 1 Cor. 11.32.) a chastisement and
correction.

Secondly, hereby a land is entitled to the special blessings of Gods
providence, that bring plenty: as, Deuteronomy. 11.9, 10, 11, 12. And no marvel, for
if he have given Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things? Romans
8.32.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, here we may see, that the earthly blessings
of Gods providence, are attendants on the heavenly blessings of his grace;
great plenty does accompany true piety: when men first seek Gods kingdom, and
his righteousness, all outward things needful shall be ministered unto them.
Matthew. 6.33. Godliness has the promise of all manner of blessings, both
temporal and eternal. 1 Timothy 4.8. This we may see, as before in Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, so manifested afterward to Gods people by special promise.
Lev. 26.3, 4, 5. If ye walk in my statutes -- I will give you rain in due
season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall
yield their fruit, etc. And as he spoke with his mouth so he performed indeed,
unto David a man according to his own heart; whom God advanced from a
Shepherds crook to a Scepter, Psalm. 78.70, 71. and raised him on high, 2 Samuel
23.1. and gave him great substance: as, 1 Chronicles 29.3, 4. But more apparently to
Solomon, while he continued upright with God: see, 1 Chronicles. 29.25. and 2 Chronicles.
1.12, 14, 15. And to Jehoshaphat, who walked in the ways of David, God gave
riches and honor in abundance. And the right hereof still continues to all
the godly: All are yours, 1 Gor. 3.21, 22. If at any time it be otherwise with
Gods people, it is either for correction of sin; as, Jer. 5.25. or for trial
of grace, as in Job.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here the error of many worldlings, who do not once think, that
the yearly increase of fruit from the earth, and from trees, does depend upon
the special will and providence of God, appointing the same every year, but
either, like mere naturallists, ascribe it to that virtue and power, which God
gave them by creation, or more profanely attribute it to the aspects and
influences of stars and planets. It is true, God gave virtue and power in the
beginning to the earth, and to fruitful trees, to bring forth fruit, according
to their kind, Genesis 1.11, 12. And the sun, moon, and stars, by heat and
light, do work upon the earth, and trees that grow thereon; but not so, as that
some of them, by a more favorable aspect, should cause plenty, and others, by
a malignant aspect, should cause scarcity, No, no, men's behavior in sin, or
in obedience, do work more powerfully for scarcity, and plenty, then any
stars: as is plain, Deuteronomy. 28.

For admonition, it makes two ways.

The first Use for admonition.
First, that they, who look for plentiful increase from the earth and trees, in
the place where they live, do break off the course of sin, which brings
scarcity. Psalm. 107.34. Jer. 5.25. and labor to become truly godly, in
receiving. believing, and obeying the Word of God, which does give title to the
blessing of plenty: as, Levit. 26.2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 4.8.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, that we, who live in Gods Church, where the word of salvation is made
known, beware of being barren in grace: lest the earth and trees that grow
thereon, rise up in judgment against us: for they, by Christ's coming in the
gospel, received by faith, become more fruitful unto men, Psalm. 67.5, 6. How
then shall we escape, if we continue barren of grace in heart, and obedience in
life toward God: Consider Christ's cursing the barren fig tree, Mat. 21.19. and
his command to cut that down, which kept the ground barren, Luke 13.6, 7. also
the fearful state of those, that be barren ground to the Lord, Heb. 6.7, 8.
add also, Matthew. 11.21, 23.

If any ask, how we may be fruitful to God for his salvation in Christ? I
answer, by laboring to add grace unto grace: as, 2 Pet. 1.5, 7, 9. And
amongst other fruits of godliness, beseeming the gospel, look to these two.
First, the maintenance of Gods worship and service, which has the promise of
plenty: Prove. 3.9, 10. Hag. 2.17, 18, 19. compared with, Hag. 1.9, 11. Mal.
3.10. Secondly, the charitable relieving of the poor. Deuteronomy. 15.10, 11. Prove.
11.24, 25. Heb. 6.10. 2 Cor. 9, 6, 10.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to all those, that conscionably receive, and
obey the word of salvation, the holy gospel; undoubtedly the outward blessings
of Gods providence shall be ministered unto them, so far as it is good for
them. See, Psalm. 23.1, 2, 5, 6. Psalm. 34.10. and 37.3. And when there shall be
any defect or want for temporal things, God will make supply unto them, by the
comforts of his favor in Christ, and grace of his spirit: see Jam. 1.9. and
2.5. Whereupon with Paul they are taught, both to be full, and to be hungry,
both to abounc, and to suffer need, etc. Phil. 4.13.

Verse. 13. Righteousness shall go before him, and he shall set her steps in
the way.


The meaning of the words.
IN these words he does the third time give instance in a special virtue;
accompanying Gods salvation in Christ; namely, justice, or righteousness,
which Verse. 10. he said kissed with peace: First, in Christ, who is the true
Melchisedech, and King of Salem, Heb. 7.2. that is, King of righteousness and
of peace: then in all those, that are his redeemed and saved, Romans 5.1.
Secondly, lest men should mistake in a grace and virtue of that necessity and
worth, Verse. 11. he shows whence it shows it self, namely, from heaven; and so
it is not a mere humane civil righteousness, but the righteousness of God in
Christ: as, Romans 10.3, 4. Phil. 3.9. with the fruit thereof inherent
righteousness renewed by the spirit. Thirdly, that men might better know the
excellency of Gods salvation in Christ, and discern where it comes, here he
shows, that this virtue shall show it self in Christ's kingdom, going before
him, and ever accompanying him, where he brings salvation. Righteousness shall
go before him: that is, the publishing of justice and righteousness shall go
before Christ, when he brings salvation. He shall set her steps in the way:
that is, Christ shall set the steps of righteousness in the way that he goes
with salvation: which seems to import, both evidence, and settled continuance of
the practice of virtue in the kingdom of Christ, where Gods salvation comes.

The first Observation.
Here then mark these two points: First, by collection from this verse, compared
with the former, that Christ Jesus, who brings salvation to his Church, is
Jehovah: that is, true and very God: for he, before whose face righteousness
walks, is he that brings salvation: that this verse says, compared with
the 9, and he is Jehovah, verse. 12. for to no other can the affixe here used be
referred: (...)
and Jer. 23.6. and 33.16. in the title there given to Christ it is most plain:
The Lord our righteousness: and 1 John 5.20. Is. 9.6. Romans 9.6. Christ is over
all God blessed for ever.

The Reason.
And needs he must be so, because he was to justify, to sanctify, and so to
save: else none could be saved: as 1 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.27. Now, no creature
could do these things, Romans 8.3.33. therefore Is. 43.11. I the Lord, and
beside me no Savior.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction. First, against the Arrians, that denied Christ to be God. But
Jehovah is God. Now Christ is Jehovah.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, it shows us the depth of man's misery, that by no created power could
be delivered, Acts 4.12. Is. 63.5. The resemblance of a captive unransomable,
but by the bondage of the Kings only son, does plainly illustrate our
natural misery.

For admonition two ways. First, to the wicked, that they take heed of such a
course of life, The first Use for admonition.
whereby they stand in opposition and enmity against Christ: for Christ is
God, and so it is a fearful thing to fall into his hand, Heb. 10.31. Who has
hardened himself against God, and has prospered? Job 9.4. Now it is true, that
all sin seperates, Is. 59.2. and therefore they must break off the course of
every sin: and in particular, in a more special manner, both repent of for
the time past, and for the time to come beware of these four sins.

First, ignorance of God in Christ: for in the knowledge of him stands eternal
life, John 15.3. and therefore not to know him must needs be dangerous, not
only shameful, 1 Cor. 15.34. but damnable, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.

Secondly, hardness of heart, to be obstinate in sin: as Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
see Mark 3.5. He looked round about upon them with anger, being grieved for the
hardness of their hearts. Such have not Gods spirit, which takes away the
stony heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. and so are none of his, Romans 8.9.

Thirdly, persecuting Gods holy Religion, or the professors of it, Acts 9.4,
5. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.

Fourthly, Idolatry, that stirs up jealousy in the Lord against men, 1 Cor.
10.22. What husband can endure the adultery of his Wife? See Prove. 6.34, 35.
Jealousy is the rage of a man, etc. what then is the Lords jealousy, which he
professes is kindled by idolatry? Exodus 20.5.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to those, that profess the faith and lay claim to redemption, and
salvation by Christ Jesus, they must endeavor themselves to walk worthy of the
Lord unto all pleasing, Col. 1.10. And for this end, they must first labor to
partake of the main benefits of Christ's incarnation, which are redemption,
adoption, justification, and sanctification in this life.

Now our redemption is showed by leaving sin, 1 Pet. 1.18. for we are
redeemed from our vain conversation. And here consider, and eschew the ordinary
abuse of the time, set apart to celebrate the memory of our Saviors nativity:
how unworthy it is of the Lords coming, nay clean contrary, see 1 John 3.8. and
1 Pet. 4.3. Our adoption comes hence, Gal. 4.5. Now, such as God takes to be
his sons should live in obedience unto him, 1 Pet. 1.14. etc. 2 Cor. 7.1, 2.
Our justification is by faith, which purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. and brings
peace with God, Romans 5.1. Our Sanctification is by the spirit, which renews
the soul into the graces of Gods image, Gal. 5.22.

The first Use for comfort.
For comfort. First, against temptation: for Gods work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
and in him we are complete, Col. 1.10. and therefore neither need to despair
through guilt of sin, nor want of righteousness.

The second Use for comfort.
Secondly, against persecution. Consider 2 Timothy 2.12. if we suffer, we shall
also reign with him, Acts 18.9, 10. Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy
peace: for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee. And do
as they did, Dan. 3.16, 17. say, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter. Our God; whom we serve, is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us.
Remember Romans 8.18. The sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared, with the glory which shall be revealed in us, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory.

The second observation.
The second thing here to be considered is purposely intended.

That righteousness does ever accompany Christ Jesus, where he brings
salvation: it goes before him, and he sets her steps in the way that he walks,
Is 9.7. He sits upon the throne of David, to order it, and to establish it,
with judgment, and with justice for ever. Is. 11.4, 5. with righteousness
shall he judge the poor. Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins.
Heb. 1.8. A Scepter of righteousness is his Scepter. Psalm. 96.10, 13. He shall
judge the world righteously -- with righteousness: therefore he tells John the
Baptist, let it be so now, for so it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness,
Mat. 3.15. that is, to do every thing required of us by God.

The first Reason.
The reason hereof is twofold. First, because Christ is Jehovah, true and very
God, and so must needs be ever attended with righteousness, which is an
essential, and insepearable property of the true God, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord
is righteous in all his ways; Romans 3.4, 5. Is God unrighteous? God forbid.

The second Reason.
Secondly, Christ as mediator, God man, is called of God the father in
righteousness, Is. 42.6. and he is faithful unto him that called him, Heb.
3.2. being, even in his manhood, filled with the gifts and graces of the spirit
above measure, Is. 42.1 John 3.34.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways. First, that the ordinances of Religion, which are
instituted by Christ in his Church, and the observance thereof required both of
Ministers and people, be all most just and righteous. When Moses the servant of
the Lord, had delivered to the Jews laws and ordinances from the Lord, he
commends them all for righteous, and thereupon presses the people to
conscionable obedience; saying, What nation is there so great, that has
statutes, and judgments, so righteous as all this law, which I set before thee
this day -- Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest
thou forget, etc. -- Deuteronomy. 4.8, 9. Why then may we not say the same of the
ordinances of Christ? who is faithful as Moses in all the house of God, and
herein above Moses a servant, that he is a son over his own house, Heb. 3.2,
3, 6. Now Christ's ordinances for salvation, are the ministry of the word, the
administration of the Sacraments, and prayer, with Church discipline. See Mat.
28.18, 19, 20. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: therefore go
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost: there he enjoyneth the preaching of the word, and baptism. The
Lords Supper, or holy Communion, he had instituted a little before his passion,
Mat. 26.26. etc. And the exercise of public prayers, to sanctify Gods
ordinances, in obtaining blessings, and removing judgments, and praising God,
he appointed himself, Mat. 18.19, 20. John 16.23, 24. Mat. 7.7. and by his
Apostles, 1 Timothy 2.1.2. I will that prayers and supplications, etc. -- be made
for all men. For discipline, see Mat. 18.15. etc.

And for the right and reverend use of these, he gave gifts unto men, by his
spirit, some to be Prophets, some Apostles, for the planting of the Church,
others to be Pastors and Teachers, for the going on of that building, the
foundation whereof is Jesus Christ: See Ephesians* 4.8, 9, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28.
These are Christ's ordinances, and the observance hereof both by Ministers and
people is plainly required. For Ministers see, 1 Cor. 4.2. Moreover it is
required of the disposers, or stewards, that a man be found faithful: which
faithfulness stands, in giving unto every one his portion in due season. Luke
12.42, 43.46. That is, judgments to the wicked, and mercies to the godly,
after instruction, See, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. and 4.1, 2. for instruction, for
rebuke, 1 Timothy 4.20. with Psalm. 11.6. and 75.8. and for comforting the godly,
see, Isaiah 40.1, 2. Colos. 4.8. 1 These. 5.14. warn the unruly, comfort the
feeble minded: and for necessity, 1 Cor. 9.16. Then for the people, the
necessity of their subjection, and observance, is plain. Luke 10.10, 13, 16.
with, Prove. 13.13. who so despises the word shall be destroyed. Prove. 28.9. He
that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. The charge of Christ, in all his Epistles, to the seven Churches
of Asia, that he that has an ear to hear must hear; what the spirit says unto
the Churches, Rev. 2.7, etc. shows the same; besides the allurement from
benefits thereby; as, Isa. 55.3. Hear, and your soul shall live, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: it is the word of his
grace. Acts 10.32. And for the sacraments, the legal commination, for neglect,
or contempt of circumcision, Gen 17.14. and of the Passover, Exodus 12.24. with
Numb. 9.13. shows in equity the necessity of due partaking of the
^^vangelicall Sacraments. And for prayer, the neglect thereof is the brand of
Atheist. Psalm. 14.1.4, and a sin liable to a grievous curse. Psalm. 79.6. Power
out thy wrath upon the heathen, that have not known thee: and upon the
kingdoms, that have not called upon thy name. And he, that shall refuse
subjection to the censure of the Church, must be cast out as an heathen. Matthew.
18.17. The weight of their censure, following Gods word, see Verse 18. Verily,
I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. 1 Cor. 5.3,
4, 5. I have judged already -- in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ -- to
deliver such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here also, that the difference observed by Christ Jesus, as well
about the means of grace, denying it some, and vouchsafing it to others, at
least for a time: as, Matthew. 10.5, 6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel: and Act: 16.6. they were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to
preach the word in Asia: but verse. 9, 10. they endeavored to go into
Macedonia, assuredly gathering, that the Lord had called them to preach the
Gospel there: as also, for the gift of grace it self to some, and the denial
of it to others, amongst whom the means is sent; as we may see, Mat. 13.11. It
is given to you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, but to them it
is not given. See, I say, that in both these is divine justice; for they are
the ways of Christ, and therefore just.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition two ways. First, to the wicked, that they consider their
fearful and dangerous state, wherein they stand, being indeed enemies to
righteousness, both in the affections of their hearts, and the actions of
their lives: as Paul told Elymas, Acts 13.10 Thou child of the devil, thou
enemy of all righteousness. Now if Christ's ways be righteous ways, which
they oppose, then will it be a righteous thing with God to judge them, as he
threatens. 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? They must know, that if in this life they do not by true
repentance prevent it, hereafter under Gods severe judgments they shall with
Pharaoh, when it is too late, acknowledge the righteousness thereof Exodus
9.27. I have sinned this time: the Lord is righteous, I and my people are
wicked.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, to the godly, that they give evidence of their approbation of the
righteousness of Christ's ordinances, and thereon so subject themselves
thereto, that they approve themselves wise Virgins, who have the oil of grace
in the vessels of their hearts. Matthew. 25.4. and good and faithful servants,
who have well improved their masters talents, verse. 16, 17. with 20, 23. moved
thereto by the fearful state of the foolish Virgins, verse. 8, 9. and the idle
servant, verse. 24, etc.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to all those, that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake: for, as God is righteous in this kind of trial and
correction upon his children, Psalm. 119.75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments
are right: and that thou in very faithfulness have afflicted me: so he will
approve himself righteous in an happy deliverance. Seeing it is a righteous
thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
that are troubled, rest with us, 2 These. 1.6, 7.

THE GREAT CHARTER OF THE CHURCH.

CONTAINING, A Catalogue of gracious Privileges, granted unto it by the King
of HEAVEN.

OR, AN EXPOSITION OF THE LXXXVII Psalm.

By Mr. THOMAS PIERSON, late Rectour of Brompton-Brian, in the County of
Hereford.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS and religious, my most honored Lady, the Lady ANNE
WHITNEY.
MADAM,
ALthough the eminence of your well known worth will admit no addition from any
expressions, that I by my tongue or pen can make, yet I hope your Ladyship will
give me leave, as well as I can, to improve the evidence of mine own unfeigned
thankfulness by a public acknowledgement of the dutiful respect, wherein I
stand obliged unto you, for your many undeserved favors unto me and mine,
whereof I may sooner cease to be, then suffer ungrateful oblivion to blot the
memory out of my mind. Nor will it (I am confident) be any grief of heart, or
occasion of offense unto your Ladyship, that I take this opportunity, at once
both to tell the world how much I am indebted unto you, and to entitle your
Ladyship in a special manner unto a part of his works, of whom you not only
had a reverend esteem whilst he lived, but likewise still preserve his memory
as precious. I doubt not but you, and many others, have long ago thought it
high time that he, whose happy hand was an instrument to bring many posthume
works of Mr. Perkins to the Press, and after to reduce the scattered pieces
into three large velumes, should have the like measure measured unto him again,
wherewith he had meted to another. And so it had been, but that there were some
obstructions in the passage to the Press, the womb of printed books. Those
rubs being now removed, and his Expositions of four select Psalms ready to
be offered to the public view, I am bold to present this unto you, and under
your name to commend it to the use of all those children of the Church, who
enjoying the comforts are willing to maintain the credit of those great
privileges, that are granted to it, and would be as loath to forfeit, as they
are to forgo their Charter. Amongst whom your Ladyships sincere affection and
zeal to religion entitles you to so high an esteem, that they unto whom you
are best known will soonest conceive, that it is not resolution only, but
reason also, which moves me to bind your name as a frontlet on the forehead of
this book, and to underwrite my self.

Your Ladyships most humble servant CHRISTOPHER HARVEY.

AN EXPOSITION Of the 87 Psalm.
Psalm 87. A Psalm or song for the sons of Korah.

Verse 1. His foundation is in the holy Mountains, etc.


IN this Psalm the holy Ghost does plainly set out sundry Privileges and
prerogatives of Gods Church, The scope and general division of the whole Psalm.
wherein she has surpassing advancement, above all other places, states and
conditions of the people in the world beside.

Whether it were penned after the return of the people from the captivity of
Babylon, for their encouragement, being but very few, and for their comfort,
being under great contempt, from enemies round about them (as some godly and
learned interpreters do think) is not set down, and so not certain? Yet sure it
is, this Psalm was penned for the comfort and encouragement of the godly, in
such times, as the Church is in danger, misery, and calamity; by the
consideration of her founder, which is the Lord Jehovah, verse 1. of his
special affection toward her, werse 2. of the glorious things, which are
spoken of her, verse3. as great increase and enlargement, by the calling and
conversion of foreign nations, verse 4. great honor, by the regeneration or
effectual calling of many in her, and great safety, by the Lords own
establishment of her, verse 5. and great renown, by inrowling her true members
in his book, verse 6. Lastly, joy and comfort unspeakable, by the cheerful
service of God, and the well-springs, or fountains of saving graces in her, The
Title of the Psalm explained.
verse 7. Before this Psalm is this title. A Psalm or song for the sons of
Korah. Which Title shows two things; the use of it in Gods service, and the
parties, by whom it should be used.

For the use, it is a Psalm or Song, or a Psalm and Song, that is, an holy
hymn, which was both to be played on their musical instruments, and to be
sung with voice together. And here the musical instruments were to lead the
voice, as Psalm 67.1. and 68.1. Sometime the voice was to lead the
instruments, as Psalm 48.1. A Song or Psalm.

Hereon we need not long insist, because this kind of singing was peculiar to
the Tabernacle and Temple, and so ended in Christ. as Heb. 7.11, with 19. as
Colos. 2.17.

Yet thus much it shows; 1. Observation.
That God required joy and gladness in his service, therefore would he have
instruments of joy used in his service, which David prepared, 1 Chronicles, 23.5.
and 1 Chronicles. 25.1. And he bids all his people to rejoice in their feasts, Deuteronomy.
16.11.14. which feasts did represent the lives of Christians. And in
Evangelicall worship he requires making melody to the Gord in their hearts,
Ephesians. 5.19.

The reason is great; for in Gods service we have society with God, The Reason.
which is a just cause of exceeding joy. Herein God vouchsafes us evidence of
his special favor: and if we shall take no delight therein, it argues
fearfell contempt which God cannot endurt without revenge, as Deuteronomy. 27.47, 48.
Because thou serv^^st not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with gladness
of heart, for the abundance of all things: Therefore thou shall serve thine
enemies, which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and
in nakedness, and in want of all things, and he shall put a yoke of iron upon
thy neck, until he have destroyed thee. Whereto add Amos 8.5.11.

The Use.
This should move us to stir up in our hearts, and to express in our
behaviors this spiritual joy in Gods service.

To this end we have need of the spirit, to sanctify us, which will make us to
rejoice in Gods Word, as one that finds a great spoil, Psalm. 119.162. And
conceiving it to be the food of our souls, let us labor to hunger and thirst
after it, and then with Job shall we esteem it above our appointed food, Job
23.12. And when we know God to be our God, and the fountain of blessing to us,
we shall come before him with gladness in prayer, Psalm. 100.2. and our mouth
shall praise him with joyful lips, Psalm 63.5.

The second thing to be noted in the dedication, is the parties, by whom it is
to be used. The sons of Korah.

These sons of Korah were the posterity of that rebellious Levite, who with
Dathan and Abiram rebelled against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. which Korah was
consumed with fire, verse 35. compared with 17. Howbeit, there were of his
sons, that dyed not, Numb. 26.11. departing, as it seems, from their
fathers Tent, as all were commanded, Numb. 16.24.29. And of these is numbered a
family of the Korathites, Numb. 26.58. of whom came Samuel the Prophet, and
Heman his Nephew, 1 Chronicles. 6.33. a great singer, 1 Chronicles. 25.4, 5.

Here then we may observe, 2. Observation.
that the sons, that is, the posterity of wicked and rebellious Korah, have
an honorable place in Gods sacred and solemn service, for to them sundry of
David's Psalms are commended, as Psalm. 42.44, 45, 46. etc. which is no small
honor.

The Reason.
No doubt, David saw them, being by place and birth Levites, to be faithful and
diligent in their place, and thus renownes them to all posterity, that he
composeth special Psalms, for their ministry, in the solemn service of God.

the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, Ezekiel. 18.14, 17, 20. if
he see his fathers sins and turn from them.

But, 1. Objection.
the Lord is a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the
children, Exodus 20.5.

That is, Answer.
enquiring for the sin of the Fathers among the children, and if he find it
there, then pays he them home.

Achans sons and daughters are stoned and burnt for their fathers sacrilege,
2. Objection.
Josh. 7.24, 25. and Dathans and Abirams little children are swallowed up
Numbers 16.27.

For ought we know, they might be of years of discretion, Answer.
and privy to their fathers stealth.

When little ones dye in the punishment of their fathers sin, God lays not the
punishment of the fathers sin upon the children, but to make the fathers
sin more odious, does then bring upon the children the fruit of their own
original corruption, which is death determined upon all flesh, as appears,
Genesis 2.17. compared with Romans 5.12. As a creditor, that has both the father
and the son debtors unto him, may upon the fathers provocation, lay the
forfeiture upon both, being both in his danger.

the wicked are estranged from the womb, Psalm. 58.3 yet if they have their
fathers sins, and become faithful to the Lord, here is comfort for them, in
the honor of Korah's posterity. See Isai. 56.3, 6, 7. Let not the son of the
stranger that joyneth himself to the Lord, say, the Lord has utterly separated
me from his people. For the sons of the stranger, that joined themselves to
the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants,
etc. Even them will bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my
house of prayer, etc. For them that honor me I will honor, says the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Thus much for the Title; the Psalm it self follows,

Verse 1. His foundation is in the holy Mountains.


The meaning of the words.
THat is, God founded his holy City, and Sanctuary, among the holy Mountains of
Judea, even on Mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. and Mount Sion, Psalm. 48.2. For the
relative here used, has the Lord, named in the next verse, for his antecedent,
to which it is most fitly and properly referred, according to our translation,
wherewith, among variety of references by interpreters, I rest best satisfied.

In the words so understood, two things are contained, First, the author and
founder of the Church, shadowed out by the holy City and Sanctuary at
Jerusalem. Secondly, the seat thereof.

For the first, The true Church, 1. Observation.
typified by the holy City and Temple at Jerusalem, is a spiritual building of
Gods own founding and making. Here it is called his foundation. And, in regard
of him founding it, it is called his Tabernacle, Rev. 21.3. and the holy City
coming down from heaven, Rev. 21.2. Jerusalem from above, Gal. 4.26. This is
that City, in the glory of it, which the Patriarchs sought, whose builder and
maker is God, Heb. 11.10.

This is most plain, if we consider, 1. the foundation Christ Jesus: For other
foundation can no man lay, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.11. and God himself says,
he lays this, Isaiah 28.16. Thus says the Lord God, Behold I lay in Zion for
a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation. 2. The upper building Christians, 1. Pet. 2.4.5. To whom coming, as
unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious,
ye also, as living stones, are built up, a spirit all house. 2. The builders,
both efficient, and isntrumental, God and his Ministers, 1 Cor. 3.9. For we
are laborers together with God; ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building.

The reason is, The Reason.
the praise of the glory of his grace, among his elect, and chosen people: For
here God sets his name, Deutr. 14.24. and will be glorified in his people,
Isaiah 49.3.

This serves for instruction, concerning the stability of the Church; The use
for instruction.
not only in the whole, as Gods building, against which the gates of hell shall
not be able to prevail, Mat. 16.18. but in every true member of it, as Gods
workmanship in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. For it is God that establishes us in
Christ, 2 Cor. 1.21. Christ, as a shepherd, will not loose one sheep. My sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them
eternally life, and they shall never perish, Neither shall any man pluck them
out of my hand, John 10.27, 28. while I was with them in the world, I kept them
in thy name; those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost
but the soune of perdition, John 17.12. He being their head, and they being his
members, 1. Cor. 12.27. will he suffer them to be pulled away? Nay, he is the
savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23.

The first use for admonition.
It serves for admonition likewise; First for Ministers, in regard of their
doctrine, whereby they are workers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. compared with
2 Cor. 6.1. They must not be ignorant, nor negligent, but wise and faithful,
in this great work of spiritual building. The foundation being laid, which is
Jesus Christ, they must take heed what they build thereupon, for every man's
work shall be made manifest, the day shall declare it, of what sort it is, 1
Cor. 3.10, etc. The second use for admonition.


Secondly, for Gods people; every one must suffer himself to be wrought upon
in the ministry of the word, to be hewn and squared and fitted, to lie upon
Christ: which we then are, when we be brought to leave sin, by true
repentance, to live in Christ, by true faith, and to walk in new obedience, in
the course of our lives, thereby testifying the truth of our faith and
repentance. Therefore with St. Paul, Heb. 13.22. I beseech you brethren, suffer
the word of exhortation.

The second thing to be here observed is, the seat of Gods building, where he
lays the foundation of his holy City and Temple, namely, in the holy
mountains; which may be understood generally of the land of Canaan, which was a
mountainous country, Deuteronomy. 11.11. Gods inheritance chosen for his own people,
Psalm. 97.1. compared with Psalm. 47.4. called his holy border, Psalm. 78.54. that
land which he bordered out for his people, Numb. 34.3, etc. Or more
particularly of the Mountains Sion and Moriah, whereon God by his special
providence caused Jerusalem his holy City, and the Temple his holy Sanctuary,
to be seated and built.

And these mountains are called holy, not for any holiness, or sanctity
inherent in the soil, or ground; but first, from Gods presence, who chose
chief hills for his seat to dwell in, as Psalm. 68.16. Psalm. 74.2. Psalm.
132.13. Is. 8.18. and Zechar. 8.3. Thus says the Lord, I am returned unto
Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a
City of truth, and the Mountain of the Lord of hosts, The holy Mountain,
Secondly, from that holy use and employment, whereto he put these mountains,
for hereon was built the holy City, Dan. 9.16. and the holy Sanctuary, or
Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Psalm. 78.68, 69.

Mark then, God builds Jerusalem the holy city, and the Temple his holy
sanctuary, on the holy mountains, Sion, 2. Observation.
and Moriah: the places before quoted show it plainly; with Psalm. 122.1. etc.

The reason hereof is twofold; First, Reason 1.
to let his people know, that their God, with whom they enter covenant, is a
most holy God; for the very place of his spiritual abode, and of his holy
solemn service, is an holy place, Psalm. 99.9. Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy, Josh. 24.19. Ye cannot
serve the Lord, for he is an holy God.

Moriah, so is Gods Church built upon Christ Jesus; all holy. Christ Jesus as
the foundation and fountain, that holy thing, Luke 1.35. the holy one of God,
Mark 1.24. Christians thorough his redemption, and the sanctification of the
spirit, holy ones, Ephesians. 5.25.26, 27. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify, and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by
the word, That he might present it to himself, a glorious Church, not having
spot, or blemish. Hence is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? If
any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God
is holy, which Temple ye are. And 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. What agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. And 1
Pet. 2.5, 9. Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an
holy Priesthood, -- a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction. It plainly discovers the fearful estate of all profane and
wicked persons; as idolaters, swearers, Sabbath Breakers, drunkards,
adulterers, and the like. For though they have been baptized, and do come to
the Lords service, yea to his holy table, yet certainly they are no true and
lively members of the Church; but like Cham, in Noah's ark, Genesis 9.18.25. an
accursed person, in a godly family; like chafe among the corn, on the
barnfloore, Mat. 3.12. like tares among the wheat in the field, Mat. 13.38.
like dross among the good fish, in the net, Mat. 13.47, 48.49. like Simon
Magus, though baptized, yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity,
Acts 8.13.23. For every true member of the Church must needs have fellowship
with Christ Jesus, the true foundation being built upon him. But shall the
throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, Psalm. 94.20. What fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that
believes, with an Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. If we say, that we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth, 1 John 1.6.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, a most effectual motive unto holiness; as well to get it into
our hearts, as also to express the truth of it in our lives. This duty is
commanded, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord. And 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. Now, though the worker of this holiness be God
alone, by his spirit; for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job
14.4. Yet ordinarily he does it in means; wherein God requires, that natural
men should exercise themselves. For want hereof, he complains of the Jews,
that therein he would have gathered them, as an hen does her chicken under her
wings, but they would not, Matthew 23.37. They would not come to him that they
might have life, John 5.40. Therefore he says; The Queen of the South shall
rise up in judgment against this generation, and shall condemn it; for she
came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
behold, a greater then Solomon is here, Mat. 12.42.

Gods means for holiness.
Gods means for holiness, enjoined to man, is twofold, the word and prayer. The
word is the feed, even the immortal seed of our new birth, wherein corruption
is abolished, and grace renewed, 1 Pet. 1.23. John. 17.17. And prayer obtains
the spirit, Luke 11.13. which is the author of holiness, in the hearts of Gods
children, 1 Pet. 1.22. whereupon David prays, to be washed thoroughly, to be
purged and washed, to have a clean heart created, and a right spirit renewed in
him, Psalm. 51.2, 7, 8,

and how they must be used.
Yet every kind of exercise in these ordinances, does not entitle unto
holiness, but such, as is joined with reformation of life, Prove. 1.23. with
true earnest desire after holiness, Is. 51.1. with conscionable endeavor of
obedience to that we know, Acts 5.32. In all which we must wait upon the Lord,
for that we do desire, and not limit him, either for time or measure; as
Coloss. 4.2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thankesgiving: And
then, if we wait patiently, God will hear, as Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently
for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.

Now holiness must be expressed.
The careful expressing of holiness in life must be in all manner of
conversation. As he which has called you his holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation, 1. Pet. 1.15. seeing then all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness,
2 Pet. 3.11. that is, as well in the duties of our civil callings, as in the
exercises of Religion, else we have show of godliness, but deny the power of
it, 2 Timothy 3.5.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to all that be truly godly, living in the
Church; for they are living stones, surely built upon Christ Jesus, the tried
foundation; they are pillars in the house of the Lord, and shall go no more
out, Rev. 3.13.

Now the truth of our piety and holiness must be expressed, according to
Christ's direction, Luke 6.47, 48. to come, and hear, and do; so shall our
building stand against all assaults, and blasts of temptations, from the world,
the flesh, and the dewill.

Verse 2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of
Jacob.


A Second evidence of the Churches happiness, in being the chief object of
Gods special love, The meaning of the words.
having a greater part and portion therein, then any other state or condition
of men in the world beside. Which indeed was the true ground and cause of the
former benefit, and of all other that follow.

For the better understanding whereof, we must know, that there is a double
trope in the words: First, the gates of Sion, part of the building of the city,
upon mount Sion, are put for the whole city, as it was a type of Gods Church in
Christ, who, as Mediator, here began the settled building and government of it;
as Psalm. 2.6. compared with Luke 1.32.33.

Secondly, Jacob is here put for his posterity, the whole twelve tribes, who
inhabited all the land of Canaan, as if he would have said, The Lord indeed
bears a good affection to the whole land of Canaan, where his people dwell; as
Deuteronomy. 11.12. A land which the Lord thy God cares for, the eyes of the Lord thy
God are always upon it? but above all the places thereof, he bears a good
affection toward Mount Sion, whereon his holy city is built, which is the
type, and beginning of his true Church in Christ, visibly represented in a
settled choice place.

In the words thus conceived, note this point, The observation.
that God loves his Church above all other states and conditions of men in the
world whatsoever, Mal. 1.1, 2,3. The word of the Lord to Israel (that is, the
posterity of Jacob, the Church in those days) I have loved you, says the
Lord; (and that more then others) for, was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the
Lord? yet I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, which, in the most mild and
favorable interpretation, taking hatred for less love, as Genesis 29.30,31.
proves the point in hand, that God loves his Church, above all other states
and conditions of men in the world, John 13.1. Having loved his own, which were
in the world, he loved them unto the end. Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands, love your wives,
even as Christ loved his Church. Christ Jesus in love to his Church makes
himself a pattern to husbands to love their wives. Now we know, every husband
should love his own wife, more then any other woman in the world, and
therefore we need not to doubt, but Christ does so to his Church.

The greatness of Gods love to his Church seen in three things.
This will yet more plainly appear, by these three things:

First, Gods delivery vouchsafed to his Church from evils.

Secondly, his advancement of her to special estate of happiness.

Thirdly, the means of both, which is Jesus Christ given unto her.

1. In delivering her from evils.
For the first, the greatness of Gods love, in his delivery of his Church, will
plainly appear by that which is said thereof, both in general, and in
particular: In general. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers him out of them all, Psalm.34.19. He visits and redeemeth his
people, and delivers them out of the hands of all their enemies, Luke
1.68.74. In particular, Gods Church in her self, is liable to temporal evils
in this world, and to evils eternal in the world to come; for they were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2.3.

Now, from eternal evils, God gives to his Church absolute and perfect
deliverance. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.1. On them the second death has no power, Rev. 20.6. But it is not so with
others, that be ont of the Church; to them it will be said, Depart from me, ye
cur^^d, into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.

And, for deliverance from temporal evils, in this world, whether corporal,
or spiritual, Gods Church has a great prerogative above others, though not in
absolute freedom from them; for we must, through many tribulations, enter into
the kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. and the Church of God is greatly afflicted,
when all the earth sits still, and is at rest. Zech. 1.11, 12. Yet in her
sufferings, the Church of God has a great measure of deliverance, which the
world does ever want: namely, from the curse of God, which ever accompanies
temporal evils, upon the men of the world; as Zech. 5.3. For, Christ has
redeemed his Church, from the curse of the law, Gal. 3.13. and. the evils that
lie upon them, are corrections for sin. When we are judged, we are chastened
of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. or
trials of grace: as Jam. 1, 2,3. My brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall
into diverse temptations. Knowing this, that the trying of your faith works
patience, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. wherein ye greatly rejoice: though now for a season
(if need be) ye are in heaviness, through manifold temptations: that the
trial of your faith being much more precious, then of gold that perishes,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor and glory,
at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Job 2.3. The Lord said to Satan, have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth; a perfect
and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? and still he
holds fast his integrity, although thou movest me against him, to destroy
him without cause.

For the second.

2. In advancing her to a special state of happiness in this world.
Gods advancement of his Church to a special estate of happiness is two fold:
partly, in this world, and principally, in the world to come. In this world,
sometime with outward peace and plenty, to the admiration of the world, as in
the days of Solomon, 1 Kings 10.21, etc. And though many times the Church of
God has a small portion in temporal blessings, for their felicity is not in
this life, if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. yet has she always in Christ Jesus true right unto
all temporal blessings, for Christ is Lord of all, Mat. 28.18. and in him all
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, 1 Cor.3.21, 22. She has also a
sanctified use of what she enjoyes, and sweet content therein, whether her
portion be small or great. I have learned, in what ever state I am, therewith
to be content. I know, both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every
where, in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both
to abound, and to suffer need, Phil. 4.11, 12. living under that special
providence, whereby she is preserved night and day, Isaiah 27.3. But in
spiritual blessings is her special advancement above the world. Blessed with
all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places, in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. As, in effectual
calling to the state of grace, wherein they have spiritual society with God in
Christ: Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto
thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts; we shall be satisfied with the
goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple, Psalm. 65.4. being married unto
him. For thy maker is thine husband, Is. 54.5. And, I will betroath thee unto
me for ever, yea, I will betroath thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, I will even betroath thee
unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord, Hos. 2.18, 19. so Psalm.
45. and Canticles. In justification. from the guilt of sin. Even as David
also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works; saying, Blessed are they, whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord
will not impute sin, Romans 4, 6, 7, 8. In adoption, to the honor and state of
sons and daughters; Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the sons of God, 1 John 3.1. In sanctification, to
the abolishing of corruption, in regard of dominion, and the renewing of the
soul, in knowledge, righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 23, 24.
In which estate, they are made Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.5, 6.
strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, Col. 1.11. and
stablished, in Christ, and on Christ, so as the gates of hell shall not
prevail against them, Matthew 16.18. See 2 Corinthians 1.2. etc.

In the world to come.
In the world to come, Gods advancement of his Church is perfect, unto all
fullness of joy, and height of honor for evermore.

Then they receive the Kingdom prepared for them, Mat. 25.34. and wear the
crown of righteousness laid up for them, 2 Timothy 4.8. Now they have on them
white robes, of perfect holiness, and palms in their hands, of full conquest
over all enemies, Rev. 7.9. Now they are in Gods presence, where is fullness of
joy, and at his right hand, where are pleasures for evermore, Psalm, 16.11. They
enjoy that glory, wherewith, the afflictions of this present time are not
worthy to be compared, Romans 8.18. the hope whereof will sustain the soul in
the greatest distress, as 2 Cor. 4.14, 16, 17. Knowing, that he which raised
up Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For
which cause we faint not, but, though our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. So as
indeed we may say of these glorious joys, as the Queen of Sheba said of
Solomon's wisdom, 1 Kings 10.7. the one half thereof was not showed unto me.

3. In the means of both Christ Jesus.
Thirdly, the greatness of Gods love to his Church does appear, in the means of
both the former; which is the gift of Jesus Christ, his only begotten son, to
become man, and to dye for their sins, and to rise again for their
justification, Romans 4.25. He redeemeth his Church from the curse of the law by
becoming himself a curse for them, Gal.3.13. He delivers them from the wrath
to come, These. 1.10. And hereupon, by way of excellence, is called the
deliverer and redeemer, Romans 11.26. out of Is. 59.20. where the same word is
used, which Job has, calling Christ his redeemer, Job 19.25. It is he also,
that does exalt and advance his Church to salvation and glory. My sheep hear
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life, John 10.27, 28. For God has not appointed us to wrath; but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.9.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is not any thing in the Church, existent or foreseen, as a
meritorious, or moving cause; for God loves her freely, Hosea 14.4. Her
loathsome state in corruption shows it plainly, when the first evidence
thereof is given. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, I
said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. Thy time was as the time of
love, Ezekiel 16.6, 8. Yet, when the Church has being, as it is built upon
Christ Jesus, and is endued with the spirit, and beautified with the graces
thereof, even for all these does Gods love actually increase toward his
Church, to the daily provocation of her love to him again, with praise and
thanks, and more conscionable obedience for his glory, as Deuir. 10.12, etc.

This serves for instruction, for admonition, and comfort.

The first use for instruction.
For instruction two ways; First, it shows what a blessed thing it is to be a
true member of Gods Church; for all such have true part and portion in Gods
special love, as is before showed.

Now, this is the fountain of all blessings, even of the blessing of blessings,
the gift of the son of God. For, God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Sonne^ that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life, John3.16. with whom come all other good things. He that
spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. We know that love is kind,
or bountiful, 1 Cor. 13.4. and hence we count Kings favorites happy, as being
near and dear to those, that are so able to enrich and honor them in the
world: as Esther 6.6, etc. How happy then are they, that are favorites to the
King of Kings, the eternal omnipotent Lord of all? See Psalm. 146.3, etc. Put
not your trust in Princes, etc. Happy is he, that has the God of Jacob for his
help: whose hope is in the Lord his God, etc. Happy is the people, that is in
such a case: yea, happy is the people, whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. For
who is like unto the Lord our God: who dwells on high, etc. Psalm. 113.15.

The 2. use for instruction.
Secondly, it shows one reason of the manifold and great troubles and
afflictions of Gods Church and children here on earth, when the wicked world is
at ease and rest. Zechar. 1.11, 12. A case that troubled the Prophets of God,
as for me, my feet were almost gone: my steps had well nigh slipped. For I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Psalm. 73.2,3.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments: wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are
all they happy, that deal very treacherously. Thou have planted them, yea they
have taken root: they grow, yea they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their
mouth, and far from their reins, Jerem. 12.1, 2. And so may easily make weak
Christians to stagger: as Judges 6.13. If the Lord be with us, why then is all
this befaln us? It is true, that the sins of Gods Church and children lay the
foundation of these evils: for affliction follows sinners: as Jer. 9.12, etc.
Who is the wise man, that may understand this, and who is he to whom the mouth
of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perishes,
and is burnt up like a wilderness, that none passes through? And the Lord
said, Because they have forsaken my law, which I set before them, and have not
obeyed my voice, (...) peccatum. (...) danum.
neither walked therein, etc. Sin brings in death it self, and all evils
that forerunne or accompany the same. By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans
5.12. Yet* Gods dear and fatherly love to his Church comes in as a moving cause
of the Churches afflictions, that thereby he may bring them to repentance, and
to escape condemnation; see Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke, and
chaster, whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son, whom
he receives, Heb. 12.16. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you,
and many sleep. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.30,32. Herein it is with our
heavenly Father, as Solomon says of earthly parents, Prove. 13.24. He that
spares his rod, hates his son; but he that loves him, chasteneth him
betimes. Hence David pronounces them blessed, whom the Lord corrects, Psalm.
94.12. and acknowledges, it was good for him, and that God did it of very
faithfulness, Psalm. 119.67.71, 75. Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but
now have I kept thy word, etc.

This we are to note, to prevent rash judgment, against our selves and others,
under the cross; whereto how apt we are against our selves, see Is 49.14. Zion
said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; against
others, If. 53.3.12. He is despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with grief, and we hid, as it were, our faces from him, he was
despised, and we esteemed him not. He was numbered with the transgressors.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition two ways: First, to give all diligence to become true members
of the Church, that so we may have part in Gods special love, wherein stands
true happiness. And hereto two things are required; first, that we know the
true Church; and secondly, that we be not only in it, but of it.

For the first; where the true Church of God is, what people, professing
religion, be Gods true Church is a great question, of large extent, and much
disputed between Protestants and Papists. For our direction and resolution
briefly let us learn this. That the true Church is Christ's mystical body, Ephesians.
1.22, 23. Gave him (that is Christ) to be the head over all things, to the
Church, which is his body. That spiritual building which consist of spiritual
living stones, built upon the foundation Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.5, 6, 7. Mat.
16.18. 1 Cor. 3.9. That is, such professors of the the faith of the Gospel,
as by the work of the spirit are endued with true faith, and adorn their
profession with new obedience. Now then, those that profess Religion, and have
communion and fellowship with Christ, through the work of the spirit in grace,
undoubtedly are true members of Christ's Church. But those, that be evidenced to
want fellowship with Christ through faith, are no Church of God, nor true
members thereof. Now they of the Church of Rome are cut off from this
fellowship by their ido atry, Col. 2.18, 19. Let no man beguile you of your
reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those
things, which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind and not
holding the head, etc.

By their opinion of justification by works. Christ is become of none effect
unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace,
Gal. 5.4. By making the Pope the head of the Church; for he is Antichrist, and
those that so hold are Antichristian; the true Church has not two heads.

The way to become true members of Christ's Church, for sure title to Gods
special love, is humbly and reverently to receive the word of the covenant,
and conscionably to yield obedience thereunto: as, Deuteronomy. 33.3, Mark 16.26. The
right receiving is by faith, 1 Pet. 2.7. And the truth thereof must be
testified by obedience. For true faith works by love, Gal. 5, 6. And this is
the love of God, that wet keep his Commandments, 1 John 5.3.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, the wicked of the world must hereby be admonished, to beware of
wronging Gods children; for God, that loves them above others, will require and
requite it, Psalm. 10.14. as Psalm 105.14, 15. He suffered no man to do them
wrong; yea he reproved Kings for their sakes: saying, Touch not mine anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm; He that touches you, touches the apple of mine
eye. Zech. 2.8. Therefore it will be good to regard, and follow the counsel of
Gamaliel, Acts 5.38. Refrain from these men, and let them alone; lest we be
found fighters against God, and it be said to us, as it was unto Paul, Acts
9.4, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, etc.

For consolation, it makes greatly to every true member of Gods Church, in any
distress: for certainly they have a special part and portion in Gods love;
from which no afflictions can separate them, see Romans 8.35,37,38,39. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these
things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved us, etc. Having
loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end, John 13.1.
Therefore, even in affliction, they may say, Rejoice not against me, O mine
enemy, when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be
a light unto me, Micah 7.8.

Verse3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God.


The meaning of the words.
A Third thing setting out the happiness of the Church, that though her present
outward state be not always comfortable, and glorious; yet, even then her
future hopes, upon divine prophecies and promises, are great and excellent.

In the words note two things: First, the description of the place.

Secondly, the declaration of her happiness, in the ground of her hopes.

For the first, the place here spoken of is Jerusalem, thus described, thou
City of God: so called, because of Gods sanctuary here seated on Mount Sion,
which place God chose and desired for his habitation, saying. This is my rest
for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it, Psalm. 132.13, 14.
Whereupon, in the new Testament, it is called the City of the great King, Mat.
5.35. Now, the earthly Jerusalem here spoken of must be understood to denote
the true Church of God in all ages, as being in the Prophets time, when this
Psalm was penned, both the chief feat and true type thereof, so as for us the
point here contained is this: The true Church of God is Gods own City. The
first observation.
Hence it is called Jerusalem from above, Gal. 4.26. The heavenly Jerusalem,
the holy City, the new Jerusalem, the great City, the holy Jerusalem, Rev.
21.2, 10.

The reason hereof is Gods free grace and favor, choosing his Church in Christ
to be his own by covenant, The reason.
even his house, Heb. 3.6. 1 Timothy 3.15. His Temple, so as he will dwell in
them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. And so his city, where the Tabernacle of
God is with men, Revel. 21.3.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, to our great comfort, that God certainly will defend his
Church against all enemies; for so much will every King do for his chief city,
that is the chamber of his Kingdom, and every householder for his own
habitation; as Mat. 24.43. If the good man of the house had known, in what
watch the thief would have come, he would have watched, and would not have
suffered his house to be broken up. See Gods promise and performance for
Jerusalem, while it remained the seat of his Sanctuary, Is. 37.35. I will
defend this City to save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.
Hereupon the people of God say, God is our refuge and strength; a very present
help in trouble: Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be removed; and
though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; Though the Waters
thereof roar, and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling
thereof. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God,
the holy place of the Tabernacles of the most high. God is in the midst of her,
she shall not be moved; God shall help her, and that right early, Psalm. 46.1.
etc. God is known in her palaces for a refuge, Psalm. 48.3. And for the true
Church her self in all ages: Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. No weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against
thee in judgment, thou shall condemn, Isaiah 54.17.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways; First, as we desire true safety, and
salvation eternal, so to join our selves truly to Gods Church; for upon Mount
Sion shall be deliverance: Obad. 17. This is as Noah's Ark, into which all must
come, that look to be saved from the deluge of damnation, Heb. 11.7. Therefore
it is said, that God added to his Church daily such as should be saved, Acts
2.47. Now the way into Christ's Church is by true repentance, and faith in
Christ Jesus, as Acts 2.38.41. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be
baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Then they, that gladly
received his Word, were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them
about three thousand souls.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, when we do profess the truth of Chirst, we must walk worthy of this
holy place, by a continual daily strife and endeavor after sanctification,
testified in new obedience. Hereinto none do enter, or continue, that are
unholy, or profane. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they
which are written in the Lambs book of life, Rev. 21.27. This is Gods holy
city, not only in regard of the owner, God himself, but of all the free
denisons, the true inhabitants thereof. Gods people are an holy nation, 1 Pet.
2.9. and the Lord says, Be ye holy, for I am holy, Levit. 11.44, 45. Even holy
in abstaining from outward pollution by unclean creatures. The same duty is
enjoined upon the prohibiting of idolatry and witchcrafts, Levit. 20.7. So
that, whether the sin be small, or great, we must abstain from it, because we
have an holy God, and live in an holy place, which is his Church; as we say in
the confession of our faith, I beleev the holy Catholic Church. Who shall
ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? He
that has clean hands, and a pure heart, etc. Psalm. 24.3, 4. Hence was the use
of the paddle in the camp, to cover their excrements; because God walked in the
midst of the camp, Deuteronomy. 23.13, 14.

The second thing to be noted here is, the declaration of the Churches
happiness, in the sure ground of her certain hopes of her future blessings,
namely, Gods gracious promises of glorious things to be done unto her; every
one whereof is mentioned in Gods Word, as the phrase in the original does
imply, joining a participle of the singular number to a noune of the plural;
which some render thus, Glorious things is spoken of thee: meaning, that every
one of them, concerning the Churches happiness, is particularly mentioned in
Gods Word.

The second Observation.
Mark then, that God in his word does plainly and particularly mention exceeding
glorious things, belonging to the Church, touching her future happiness. These
do concern partly her happy deliverance from evils: for, God shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm. 130.8. When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee. and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, etc. Is.
43.2. etc.

But chiefly her fruition of blessings, even in this world, under the Kingdom
of Christ, called the accepted time, and day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. the time
of reformation, Heb. 9.10. Glorious things indeed were spoken of these times,
as 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man's, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1
Pet. 1.12. See some particulars, which are for quality admirable, and for
number almost innumerable Now the light of the Moon shall be, as the light of
the Sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven fold, Is. 30.26. meaning,
that there shall be a wonderful increase of knowledge and of the comforts of
grace. Now Kings shall be her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers,
etc. Is. 49.23. Add hereunto, Is. 54.1, 2,3, 11, 12, 13. and Is. 60. 1, 2. and
62.1, 2. and 65.17, 18. and 66.11, 12. and the 21. and 22. chapters of the
Revelation. And whatsoever shall be wanting to the Church, or to any true
member thereof, in this world, shall be superabundantly supplied, and
recompensed in the world to come; as Romans 8.18. 1 Cor. 15.53, 54. 2 Cor. 4.14,
16. and 5.1. etc. Philip. 3.20, 21.

The ground and reason of this course of Gods dealing, in mentioning glorious
things, to belong to his Church, is threefold;

The first reason.
First, to allure and draw natural men to join themselves unto the Church, that
their part may be in the fruition of these glorious things, as Moses allured
Jethro (called also Hebab) to go with them into the land of Canaan, Numb.
10.12,32. Come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for the Lord has spoken
good concerning Israel, And it shall be, if thou go with us; yea it shall be,
that what goodness the Lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

The second Reason.
Secondly, to encourage the true members of the Church, unto growth and
perseverance in grace and obedience; for, in these glorious things promised, we
may see the reward of religion, even the comforts of grace here, and crown of
glory hereafter; as Moses on Pisgah saw all the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34.1.
etc. Herewith the Patriarchs were allured to follow the Lord, and Moses to
leave the honor of Pharaoh 's court, Heb. 11.13, 24, 25, 26. This hastened St.
Paul to his holy endeavor for perfection in grace, Phil. 3.13, 14. This one
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things, which are before, I press toward the mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, to comfort the godly under afflictions, which follow the sincere
profession of the faith, and are as sharp and dangerous storms to passengers by
sea. But in these glorious things promised, we may cast anchor safely, and
behold the quiet harbor of rest and safety. In the multitude of my thoughts
within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Psalm. 94.19. Remember the word unto
thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. This is my comfort in mine
affliction: for thy word has quickened me, Psalm. 119, 49, 50. See also. Romans
8.18. with 2 Cor. 4.14, 16. and 1 Pet. 1, 5, 6.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction, two ways: First, that the happiness of Gods Church and
children must not be measured by their outward state in this world, which many
times is not only very mean, but miserable: as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor.
15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ Jesus, we are of all men
most miserable. Their happiness therefore must be measured, by their present
title to Gods favor in Christ, through the covenant of grace, whereby they
have the Lord for their God, which is true happiness. Psalm. 144.15. Happy is
that people, that is in such a case: yea happy is that people, whose God is the
Lord. And by their certain title to future glory, wherein they greatly rejoice,
though for a season they be in heaviness, 1 Peter 1.6.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here, what a profitable and comfortable thing it is to be much
conversant in Scripture, which is the Great Charter of Gods Church, showing all
the glorious things, whereto she has right and interest in Christ Jesus. And
indeed they are very great: for, if God spared not his own son, but delivered
him up for us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Romans 8.32. He is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Those Gentlemen, that fall Wards, in their
minority, take great delight to read or hear of their deeds and evidences,
which show what Lordships, what demaines and royalties do belong unto them. Why
should not we so delight in Gods word? The godly have so done, Job 23.12. I
have esteemed the words of of his mouth, more then my necessary food. Thy words
were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing
of mine heart, Jer. 15, 16. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? yea sweeter
then honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119.103. I rejoice at thy word, as one that
finds great spoil, Psalm. 119.162.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition, two ways: First, that living in the Church, we make sure we
have good right and title to these glorious things that are spoken of her. It
is true, these days of grace under the Gospel have accomplishment of them, in
good measure, as 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is
the day of salvation. But yet our personal right must be measured by the truth
of our Faith: for, these precious promises do belong to them, that have
obtained like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1, 4. We must therefore prove our
selves, whether we be in the faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. which is best known by the
work of the word, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. in the sanctification of the heart, Acts 15.9.
and reformation of the life, Acts 19.18, 19.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, that we walk worthy of the Lord, and of his glorious promises, in the
profession of our faith. The way is showed upon this ground, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having
therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh, and spirit, perfecting holiness, in the fear of God.
And Coloss. 1.10, etc. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge
of God, etc.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly, to every true member of the Church, in any
misery: They must call to remembrance these precious promises of future glory:
and so, though the outward man perish, yet the inward man will be renewed
daily, 2 Cor. 4.14, 19. Thus have the godly comforted themselves in all times.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Micah 7.8. As the sufferings of
Christ abound in us, so our consolations also abound by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. For
if we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. Hence it is said, that Christ himself for the joy
that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame. Hebr. 12.2.
So says, St. Peter, Rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings: that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13.

Verse. 4. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me.
Behold, Philistin and Tire, with Ethiopia: this man was born there.


The meaning of the words.
HEre he comes to confirm the truth of that he had said in the former Verse,
touching the glorious things spoken of the Church, by particular instance, in
the calling and conversion of many foreign nations, even of such, as formerly
had been cruel enemies of Gods people.

For the better conceiving whereof, we must search out two things: First, the
countries, or people here spoken of: Secondly, how their calling or conversion
to the Church is expressed.

The Countries here named, by which we must understand the people inhabiting
them, are in a double rank: First, Rahab and Babylon. By Rahab we must
understand not the harlot Rahab, that received the Spies, Jos. 2. as many of
the ancient Fathers do, viz. Jerome, Austin, Theodoret, Euthymius, Cassiodorus,
and others. For first, her name in the original, is written with a dense
aspirate (...): but this word is written with a mild aspirate (...). Secondly,
the conjoined names do show, that by Rahab here is meant a nation or people,
rather then one particular person: whereby we may see how injurious and
prejudicall to truth it is, to make the unanimous or general consent of
Fathers, the right rule of interpreting the Scripture; whereto we should tie
our selves for the understanding of it, as the Council of Trent does in the
fourth Session.

But by Rahab we must here understand Egypt, as in many other places it is
certainly taken. Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain. Psalm.
89.10. Art thou it, that has cut Rabab, and wounded the dragon? Isa. 51.9.
Where Rahab is Egypt, and the dragor is Pharaoh the King thereof, as the Verse
following does plainly intimate.

Why Egypt is called Rahab, is very probable from some City so called; or
rather, as I conceive, from her conceited strength, wherein she did pride her
self: whereto, some think, allusion is made Isa. 30.7.

Babylon is the chief City of Assyria, as Genesis 10.10. here put, as Rahab, or
Egypt, also is, for the inhabitants thereof. And their calling into the Church,
or enfranchising into the City of God, is thus expressed. God will make mention
of them, or cause them to be remembered, to those that know him, that is, to his
own people of Israel, who being the Lords by covenant, both knew the Lord, and
were known of him.

Philistia also, and Tire, with Ethiopia, are places often mentioned in
Scripture, and as the former, are here put for the inhabitants thereof. Their
calling also to be Gods people is thus expressed: This man was born there. That
is, any one of the forenamed countries was born, by spiritual regeneration in
Gods Church among them.

In the words thus understood note these things:

The first observation.
First, the description of Gods people, the Israelites, by this good quality, or
property, that they know God: where this is plainly taken for granted, that
those that be the Lords people, having true society and acquaintance with him,
do undoubtedly know the Lord: Israel shall cry unto me, my God, we know thee,
Hos. 8.2. They shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of
them. Jer.31.34.

The reason hereof is plain: for whomsoever God accepts into society and
fellowship with himself by covenant, unto them does he reveal and make known
himself, that thereby they may be enabled to walk worthy of him, as John 10.14.
I am the good shepherd, I know my sheep and am known of mine. He that loves
me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self
unto him, John 14.21. Thus he dealt with the Jews, when he took them into
covenant with himself, Exodus 3.6.13, 14, 15, 16. And so he dealt with the
Gentiles, when he called them into the fellowship of his son, as St. Paul's
speech to the Galatians plainly shows, Gal. 4.8, 9. When ye knew not Gad, ye
did service unto them, which by nature are no Gods. But now, after ye have
known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again, etc.

The use for instruction.
This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

For instruction, it shows plainly the miserable condition of all ignorant
people that know not God: it is a fearful sign, they are not the Lords by
covenant of grace. They that want the knowledge of God are like horse and mule,
Psalm. 32.9. worse then the ox or ass, Is. 1.3. Which is not only a state of
shame: For some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, 1
Cor. 15.34. but of woeful danger, for the Lord has a controversy with them,
Hos. And will come in flaming fire rendering vengeance to them, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually two ways: First, to try our estate,
touching this knowledge of God, whether we have so much, as may entitle us to
his society, that we are his by covenant, whereunto is required, not only a
right conceiving of God in our minds, that he is one in essence, and three in
persons, most holy, wise, eternal, and infinite in power and essence, creator
and governor of all things; but also, affiance of heart, whereby we
acknowledge him, and rest and rely upon him, for all the blessings of the
covenant of grace in Christ, which is indeed a justifying and saving knowledge;
whereof see Is: 53.11. John 17.3.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly; in the want hereof to give all diligence to attain unto it,
exercising our selves in his word and works, and sanctifying our endeavor by
prayer, for the blessing of Gods spirit, to bring us to this saving knowledge,
and acknowledgement of God, by which an entrance shall be made unto us
abundantly, into his everlasting Kingdom of grace here, and of glory
hereafter. This saving knowledge of God is fruitful, ever joined with other
graces, as faith, virtue, patience, temperance, etc. which who so lacks, is
blind, and cannot see a far off, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to all those, that thus rightly know the Lord,
and acknowledge him; for, if herein they persevere, undoubtedly the Lord will
one day own them, and acknowledge them before his father. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him shall the son of man also confess before the
Angels of God, Luke 12.8. The greatness of which benefit will appear by the
misery of the want of it; which see Mat. 7.23. I never knew you, Depart from me
ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.23. and 25.12.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be observed here, is the favor of God to these heathen
people in their conversion. The Lord will remember them, or make favorable and
loving mention of them, to his people, or among his people; as some understand
the place: Which is plainly confirmed, Is. 19.24, 25. In that day shall Israel
be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the
Land: whom the Lord of hosts shall bless; saying, Blessed be Egypt my people,
and Assyrta the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.

The Reason.
The reason is plain; Gods holy and effectual calling brings men into the
fellowship and society of his son, 1 Cor. 1.9. And in this estate there is no
difference from outward things: Where there is neither Greek nor Jew,
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond, nor free, but
Christ is all, and in all, Colos.3.11. It pleased the father, that in him
should all fulness dwell, Colos. 1.19. and all that are effectually called,
are complete in him, Colos. 2.10. Whereupon the same Apostle says, Art thou
called being a servant? care not for it. For he that is called in the Lord,
being a servant, is the Lords freeman; likewise also, he that is called heing
free, is Christ's servant, 1 Cor. 7.21, 22.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

For instruction, see plainly here, that the dignity and honor of an holy
calling, to be a Christian, is exceeding great, The use for instruction.
their prerogatives above natural men, that remain uncalled, be much every
manner of way, as Romans 3.1, 2. It is the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil.3.14. A chosen generation. a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Now they are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. Fellow heirs,
and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ, Ephesians.3.6. Upon
occasion of which spiritual and heavenly dignities undoubtedly it was, that
Paul a prisoner wished of God, that Agrippa a King, and all that heard him were
altogether such, as he was (that is true believers in Christ) except his
bonds, Acts 26.29.

The first use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways: First, to natural men, if ever they
desire true spiritual happiness, and honor to their souls, they must take
notice of that ordinance of God, wherein he vouchsafes unto men an holy
calling, and of that right manner of using the same, whereby Gods ordinance may
be sanctified unto them. The ordinance is the holy Gospel preached, That the
Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise in Christ, by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. God has from the beginning chosen
you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the
truth, whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of
the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. I declare unto you the Gospel, which
I preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand: By
which also ye are saved, etc. 1 Cor. 14.1, 2. This Gospel preached is the word
of faith, Romans 10.8. The immortal seed of our new birth in all saving graces,
1 Pet. 1.23.25. And so the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes, Romans 1.16.

The right manner, wherein we must wait in the foresaid ordinance, for the
blessed work of the spirit, in an holy calling is this: First, by the law to
see our miserable estate by nature, which will stir up the soul to seek
mercy, as Acts 2.37. they were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do; and to break off the course of sin, whereon is
promised the gift of the spirit, Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof, behold, I
will porore out my spirit unto you.

Secondly, to hunger and thirst after the work of the spirit, as the dry ground
does after rain, as Psalm. 143.6. I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul
thirsts after thee as a thirsty land.

This has the promise of the spirit, Is, 43.3. I will pour water upon him,
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. This carnest spiritual desire
must be testified by waiting in the means for the work of the spirit, as the
impotent persons did at the poole of Bethesda for the moving of the waters by
the Angel, John 5.3, 4. And also by earnest prayer to God, whereto the spirit
is promised, Luke 11.13. If ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit to
them that ask him?

Thirdly, to yield obedience to that we know, for to such the spirit is
promised, Acts 5.32. We are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the
holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him.

The second use for admonition.
Secondly, all godly men professing the faith must hereby be admonished to walk
worthy of their holy calling, as Ephesians. 1.4. which if they would do, they must
remember their present state, which is fellowship with God in Christ, 1 Cor.
1.9. and their future hopes in eternal glory, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. Both which do
call for daily and constant care and endeavor to leave sin, and to live
godly: as 2 Cor. 7.1, 2. And every one that has this hope, purifieth himself,
even as he is pure. 1 John 3.3.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to all godly ones, that are effectually called,
when misery and distress in the world shall come upon them, they have
wherewith to comfort themselves: for, God by his holy calling has brought them
into the society of his son, as before is showed, and nothing that befalls
them outwardly, can separate them from them his love, but, in all the
afflictions of this world, they are more then conquerours, Romans 8.35,37,38.
This calling is of grace, Gal. 1.15. And grace is a sufficient ground of
comfort under the greatest buffeting: 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for
thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will
I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

The third obervation.
The third thing to be noted here is, that special state, which declares any
man, of any nation, to be a free Denison of Gods City, and a true member of his
Church, namely, to be born there: yet not by natural generation, but, by
spiritual regeneration: whereof Christ speaking says, they must be born
again, or from above, John3.3. borne of water, and of the holy Ghost, John3.5.
Not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God: Joh. 1.13.

Mark here, then, that, To be born again, declares any man, of any nation, to
be a free Denison of Gods holy City, and a true member of his Church.

This is plain by the former place, Joh. 3.3, 6. to all those, that understand
the nature and force of an exception to a general rule, which is, to put the
contrary to the rule. It is indeed a true rule in Scripture, That Gods Church
is Gods kingdom, into which man in the corrupt state of nature cannot enter,
as heir to inherit. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God: neither
does corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.50. But yet, if such a one be
born again, he does certainly enter, as heyr, and shall inherit: as, 1 Pet.
1.3.4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant mercy has begotten us again, unto a lively hope by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, To an inheritance incorruptible,
etc.

Mark also, that true faith and regeneration do accompany each other. Whosoever
believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5.1. Now, true
believers are children, Gal. 3.26. For, ye are all the children of God. by
faith in Christ Jesus, and so free, as Matthew. 7.26. they are heirs, Gal. 4.7.
and have great prerogatives employed, John 1.12, 13. expressed Ephesians. 2.19.
Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God. Fellow-heirs of
the same body, Ephesians. 3.6.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is plain: for this change of state in soul, by regeneration,
is the proper fruit of the spirit of Adoption, in an affectuall applying of the
power and efficacy of Christ's death and resurrection: both which proceed from
the special love of God the father, in that saving work, which actually makes
them his children, and so heyrs of the kingdom, Romans 8.17. joint heirs with
Christ: and so free, for the children are free, Matthew. 17.26. Christ Jesus: the
natural son, does make them free, and so they are free indeed, Joh. 8.36.
For, where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Therefore
the Apostle says, this begetting again is to a lively hope, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first use for instruction.
For instruction, two ways. First, that man's being in the state of grace may be
truly and certainly known. For regeneration or the new birth may be certainly
known which is the unfailing foundation of the state of grace. 1 John 5.1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. And true faith
may be known, 2 Cor. 13.5. Again, we see natural generation is evident by the
enlivenec parts of a true humane body their view and employment does evince
natural or corporal generation: why then shall not the lively parts of the
new man, declare certainly our regeneration, whereby we are begotten and born
of God; as knowledge in the mind, holiness in the will and affections, and
righteousness in life and conversation, Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. compared with
Romans 6.19. Whence we may see, that the Papists do err, in saying that the
state of grace cannot be certainly known, but by extraordinary revelation. We
may well say, they err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the power power of God.
See 1 John 5.13. for faith, and 1 John 3.14. for love; as declaring this estate.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, that Gods children shall undoubtedly persevere in the state of grace.
They that be endued with true faith and repentance, and other saving graces,
shall never lose the same. True grace may be lessened, or weakened in degree,
but not finally or totally lost. For all such are regenerate by the spirit, and
his work abides: his seed remains so, as they cannot make sin their trade,
by sinning unto death, or with full consent, 1 John 3.9. and 5.18.

Objection. Answer.
But some believe for a time, Luke 8.18.

Their faith is humane, acquired and got by reading, hearing, and other good
exercises of religion, without the work of the spirit: it is not infused by the
holy Ghost in the foresaid means. Between which kinds of faith, this is the
true difference, that acquired faith ever leaves some corner for the devil,
some sin unreformed, as Acts 8.13, 19, 23. but faith infused purifies the
heart from the dominion of every sin, as Acts 15.9.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves effectually to move every one to give all diligence
for this estate, first to get it, then to keep it. For the getting of it,
consider Christ's command, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate.
Which strift stands in two things. First, that we receive with meekness the
word of God, hoth the law, to disecver sin, and to humble us for the same,
and the Gospel, to cast into our hearts the seed of grace: as Jam. 1.21.
Receive with meekness the engrafted word, wherein Gods spirit does beget, Jam.
1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, 1 Pet. 1.23, 25.
Being born again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible by the word of
God -- and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you. It is
the word of faith. Romans 10.8. which does ever accompany regeneration, 1 John
5.1. Whence John ^.11, 12, 13. He came unto his own, and his own received him
not: But, as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons
of God, even to them that believe on his name; which were born, not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Secondly,
that we pray unto God instantly and earnestly for Gods spirit, which does beget
unto eternal life, Luke 11.13.

For the preserving and keeping of this estate, we must do three things: First,
keep fuel to the spark of grace cast into our hearts by regeneration; which
is, by endeavoring, that the word of God may dwell richly in us, Colos. 3.16.
Secondly, blow upon the spark, when the fuel is put to: which is, by prayer,
as 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. This David did, Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12. Cast me not away from
thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Thirdly, wrath against sin,
which is as water to quench the spirit, and walk in obedience which is pleasing
unto God, and entitles us to Gods presence and preservation. If ye continue in
my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, John 8.31. Whosoever hears these
sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built
his house upon a rock. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not: for it was founded upon
a rock Mat. 7.24, 25. Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed: not as
in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Seeing you have purified your
souls, in obeying the truth, through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
brethren, 1 Pet. 1.22.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the regenerate; for God has begun a good
work in them, and will undoubtedly perfect it, until the day of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 1.6. herein is the riches of Gods love and mercy seen. Of his love, 1
John 3.1. Of his mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. Now whom he thus loves, to the end he
loves them, John 13.1. His gifts and calling are without repentance, Romans
11.29. By regeneration we are sons and so heirs, Romans 8.17, 17. And who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, Romans 8.31.33.

The fourth Observation.
The fourth thing here to be noted is, the people and nations in whom he gives
instance, pointing them out by name, with command of special observance, that
by effectual calling and regeneration shall become true members of his Church;
namely, the Egyptians, Babilonians, Philistims, men of Tire, and Ethiopians,
under whom he comprehends other Gentiles, yet names such as were well known
unto the Jews (then Gods only people) formerly to have showed themselves their
greatest enemies. Egypt and Babylon were the places of Isreal's bondage and
captivity. The Philistims likewise were sore oppressors, and Lords over them,
Judge. 15.11. even forty years together, Judge. 13.1. The men of Tire were bitter
enemies, delivering up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the
brotherly covenant, Amos 1.9, Their cruelty see further, Joel 3.4, 6. and Psalm.
83.7. The Ethiopians were likewise grievous enemies, as their bloody assault
with a huge Army did plainly show. 2 Chronicles. 14.9. Yet for all this, Behold,
says the Lord, these shall be converted, and become friends to the Church,
free Denisons of Sion; for all Nations shall serve him, meaning Christ
prefigured by Solomon, Psalm. 72.11. The Gentiles shall come to thy light; The
abundance of the Sea shall he converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles
shall come unto thee, Is. 60.3, 5. That the residue of men might seek after the
Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, says the Lord, Acts
15.17. In particular of Egypt and Babylon, see Is, 19.19, 21, 25. In that day,
shall there be an Altar to the Lord, in the midst of the land of Egypt: And the
Lord, shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that
day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation, yea, they shall vow a vow unto the
Lord, and perform it. And, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of
my hands, And of Tire, Psalm. 45.12. The daughter of Tire shall be there with a
gift. And of Ethiopia, Psalm. 68.31. Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia
shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.

But why does he instance in these nations especially, when as in them he
intends to show the conversion of the Gentiles?

The first Reason.
This he does for three causes: First, to show the greatness of his power, who
can not only confound, but even convert the greatest enemies of his Church: For
their confounding, see Exodus 14, 27, 28. and Numb. 16. And for conversion, see
Acts 9.1, etc.

The second Reason.
Secondly, this he does to manifest even to enemies his great love unto his
Church; as he says, Revel. 3.9. I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan,
which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to
come, and worship before thy feet, and to know, that I have loved thee.

Thirdly, for the encouragement of his Church and children unto faith and
patience, The third Reason.
in the times of opposition by mighty enemies: For the true God, who is God of
the Church, can either confound or convert them at his pleasure; or if he do
neither of those things, yet he can cause the wrath of his enemies to turn to
his praise, Psalm. 76.10. as is plain in the rage of Nabuchadnezzar against his
servants, Dan. 3.19, 20, 28, 29.

This serves for Instruction with confutation, admonition, and comfort.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, In the conversion of these mighty enemies we may plainly see,
that when God is pleased to show mercy in Christ the gracious work of his holy
spirit is irresistible: corruption indeed is strong, but yet the grace of the
spirit is stronger, as is said, 1 John 4.4. Greater is he, that is in you, them
he, that is in the world. The Devil indeed is the strong man armed, that keeps
the house of every natural heart, but yet Christ by his spirit is stronger,
and can come in, and cast out the strong man, Luke 11.21, 22. This is plainly
showed in fit resemblances, Is. 11.6. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and
the leopard shall lie down with the kidd, etc. which was truly verified in
Saul, that of a most bloody persecutor was made a zealous preacher, Acts 9.
according to that of our Savior, John 6.37. All, that the Father gives me
shall come unto me. Though none can come except the Father draw, John 6.44.
yet when God draws, they run, Cant. 1.4. By which it is plain that they
grossly err that hold Gods saving work of grace man be resisted by man's
corruption: for who has resisted his will, that can raise up children unto
Abraham of very stones? Romans 9.19. Mat. 3.9. Indeed our Savior says to the
rebellious Jews, Mat. 23.37. How often would I have gathered you as an heme
gathers her chickens under her wings, but you would not. And St. Stephen
tells the rebellious Jews, they had ever resisted the holy Ghost. Acts 7.51.
But they both speak of resistance made to the outward Ministry, not to the
inward powerful work of the spirit.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves profitably both to godly Ministers and people, not to
despair of any man's conversion, though never so refractory or rebellious to
Gods ordinance, till they manifest their rejection of God by committing the
unpardonable sin, whereof St. John speaks, 1 John 9.16. For he can make a
Paul of Saul, and cause the Lion and the Lamb to live together quietly.

This indeed ought to be their behavior, that wish and wait for the means of
grace, according to their places, in instruction, exhortation, admonition, and
the like, as a Tim. 2.24, 25, 26. in public, if they be Ministers, and in
private, if they be private Christians; as Mat. 18.15. etc. If thy brother
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault, between thee and him
alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother, etc. For private
Christians may be be means of conversion, Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of
you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he, which
converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. Secondly, they must pray earnestly
to God, for the work of his spirit, 1 John 5.16. If any man see his brother sin
a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life,
for them that sin not unto death. From unfeigned desire, as Paul did, Romans
10.1. My hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be
saved. And Romans 9.2,3, I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my
heart: For I could wish, that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh. Consider David's behavior for the
natural life of his child, 2 Samuel 12.16. David besought God for the child, and
David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth. And shall not the
spiritual life of the soul be esteemed much more precious. Thirdly, they must
walk before them in the example of a godly life; as St. Peter exhorts
Christian wives to do, before their heathen husbands, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2,3. Ye Wives
be in subjection to your husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may
without the word be won by the conversation of the wives, etc. This godly
life has a gracious promise, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes even his enemies to be a^ peace with him.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the godly in the strongest opposition by
malicious enemies, let them look up to God, and consider what he can do, either
for the confusion or conversion of their enemies: For confusion, see what has
been said before, and add the consideration of Gods dealing with the two
Captains, 2 Kings 1.10, 12. and for Gideon against the Midianites, Judge. 7.22.
and for Jehosaphat against the three Kings of Moab, Ammon, and mount Seir, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. For conversion of enemies, God can do it, either to temporal
outward kindness, as in Laban toward Jacob, Genesis 31.29. in Esau toward Jacob,
Genesis 33.1, 4. or to true sincere and unfeigned love, as in Darius, Dan. 6. and
in Saul, that was afterward called Paul, toward the Church, Acts 9.26.

Verse 5. And of Sion it shall he said, This and that man was born in her, and
the highest himself shall establish her.


The meaning of the words.
HEre the Psalmist proceeds in the confirmation of that he had said of the City
of God, in the third verse, that glorious things were spoken of her: namely,
that beside the conversion of many unto her, out of foreign Nations, which had
formerly been her greatest enemies, verse 4. she should enjoy within her self a
double honor; first, the calling and conversion of many within her, secondly,
confirmation and establishment from the most high.

For the first, the calling and conversion of many within her is thus
expressed; Of Sion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her. Where
by birth (as has been said, verse 4) we must understand, not natural birth by
corporal generation, but spiritual birth in regeneration. And the phrase,
this and that man, or man and man (as it is in the Hebrew, and the Greeks do so
render it) may note out every man (meaning that is converted) as the like words
are taken, Est. 1.8. and so Paul says, Jerusalem which is above is the mother
of us all, Gal. 4.26. Or in regard that the phrase, man and man, here used is
opposed to the like phrase in the former verse, this man was born there; it
seems likest, that here he denotes the conversion of more in Zion, then in
other particular places.

The first observation.
Mark here then, that it is and shall be Sions glory, and renown, to have man
and man born in her, that is, many men of all sorts and conditions born of God,
called and converted in her to the true faith. See Is. 54.1. Sing, O harren;
thou that did not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that
did not travel with child: for more are the children of the desolate, then
the children of the married wife, says the Lord. Which place is best
expounded, by Gal. 4.27. Sarah long barren and her son did prefigure
Jerusalem from above, the heavenly Jerusalem, Mount Sion, Heb. 12.22. Hagar and
Ismael prefigured the people of the Jews that clave to the covenant of works,
given in Mount Sinai, which gendreth unto bondage, see Gal. 4.22, 26. This
glorious thing foreshewed of Gods City, received accomplishment, partly in the
Apostles time, when even in Jerusalem more were converted unto the faith, at one
or two sermons, then we read of in any other place; three thousand, Acts 2.41.
five thousand, Acts 4.4. Believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes
both of men and women, Acts 5.14.

But chiefly it shall be accomplished, in the second calling of the Jews, when
all Israel shall he saved, Romans 11.26.

The reason is plain: For multitude of converts is a manifest evidence of Gods
special favor, The Reason.
in the blessing of saving grace, which is the greatest renown, that can be;
as we may see by Christ's own rejoicing in it, Heb. 2.13. Behold, I and the
children, which God has given me.

In ancient time, it was counted a great renown to have many children, as Genesis
30.20. Leah said, God has endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband
dwell with me, because I have born him six sons. And of O bed Edom, that he
had eight sons, because God blessed him, 1 Chr. 26.5. How much more then is
it an honor to bring forth children unto God?

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

For instruction, see here what is the true renown of any Kingdom, The use for
instruction.
County, City, Parish, or Family; namely, to have man and man born of God
there; that is, many people effectually called and converted unto God: as Acts
19 10.

There be many things that will commend men in the world, as honor, wealth,
beauty, power, etc. but none of these, nor all of them, without an holy
calling, will commend men unto God.

The use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves effectually, both to Ministers and to people, that
they give all diligence in Gods means for the attaining of this estate.
Ministers must endeavor both for themselves and others: and for this end must
receive into their own hearts, and dispense to others, the pure word of God,
which is the immortal seed of this new birth, as it is called, Jam. 1.18. 1
Pet. 1.23, 25. For their diligence in faithful dispensation, see 2 Timothy 4.1. 1
Cor. 9.16. 1 Cor. 4.2. And, because all their endeavor without Gods blessing
is nothing, therefore they must pray instantly and earnestly for the blessing
of the spirit, to sanctify the word, as St. Paul does, Ephesians. 3.14, etc. For
this cause I how my knee unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the
whole family in heaven and earth is named, That he would grant you, according
to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, by his spirit, in
the inner man. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being
rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is
the breadth and length, and depth, and height; And to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.
And that they may have better title to audience, they must endeavor to walk
before God, uprightly and and honestly. For God hears not sinners; but if any
man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears, John 9.31.

And the people, seeing the benefit is theirs, must conscionably exercise
themselves in the same Christian duties, viz. hearing the Word, praying unto
God, and a godly living. For the word, it is the seed, therefore receive it
both morning and evening; Consider what Solomon says, Eccles. 11.6. In the
morning sow thy seed, in the evening withhold not thine hand: for thou know
not, whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be
alike good. And seeing the blessing is in the hand of God, not in the means,
as Romans 9.16. Is it not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy. And John 1.11, 12, 13. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not: But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
the fonnes of God, even to them that believed on his name. Which were born, not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God;
therefore must they be instant in prayer, and careful of godly behavior, that
their prayers may be more availeable with God: as Jam. 5, 16. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

The second thing in this verse, showing the glorious state of the Church,
foreshewed by David is this, The highest himself shall ^stablish her. Which is
a great prerogative; for the Church of God has many and mighty enemies, the
devil himself, and all his instruments, who are all wicked spirits, and all
wicked men; yet this is sufficient ground of comfort, that the true God, who is
Lord of the Church, is above them all, and can restrain, or confound them all,
when he will; and can stablish his Church and children in the state of grace,
unto all eternity.

In this prerogative note two things: First, the title whereby God is styled:
Secondly, the work he undertakes for the good of his Church.

The title is, the highest, or most high; where this is plain,

The second observation.
The true God is the highest above all, Psalm. 97.9. Thou Lord, art high, above
all the earth: thou art exalted far above all Gods, Genesis 14.19, 22. Blessed
he Abraham of the most high God, possessour of heaven and earth.

The reason.
The reason is plain: The true God is infinite in power and Majesty, and others
besides him, in heaven and earth, are finite and under him. Great is the Lord,
and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable. Psalm 145.3.
Angels, and authorities, and powers are subject unto him, 1 Pet.3.22.

This serves for instruction, admonition and comfort.

For instruction; that we choose the most high for our God, The use for
instruction.
and labor to know and acknowledge him; as, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my
son know thou the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind; and give him our hearts in love, fear, joy, and
confidence; as Prove. 23.26. so shall we be free from the fear of evil, as
Psalm. 91.1, 2, 9, 10, 14. He that dwells in the secret place of the most
high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, etc. Because he has set
his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because
he has known my name.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition; that we make this sovereignty in God, above all others, to be
the ground of inward fear, and outward obedience to the true God. See Luke
12.4, 5. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more
that they can do: But I will forewarne you, whom ye shall fear: Fear him,
which, after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you,
fear him. And add, 1 et.3.22. who is gone into heaven, and is on the right
hand of God, Angels, and authorities, and powers being made subject unto him.

The use for comfort.
For comfort, it makes greatly to the godly against all oppositions from the
great ones of the world. For the most high is their God, and for them:
whereupon they may say, as Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear
what can man do unto me, yea, as Psalm.3.6. I will not be afraid of ten
thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about. Consider
what the Prophet Jeremie says, Jer. 20.11. The Lord is with me as a mighty
terrible one, therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not
prevail, they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper, their
everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten. Also, Dan.3.16, 17, 18.
Shadrach, Mesbach, and Abednego answered and said unto the King, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so,
our God, whom we serve, is able to diliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King, etc.

The second Observation.
The second thing to be noted here is, the gracious work which God undertakes
for his Church, he himself will establish her.

The true God will confirm and establish his Church, and every true member of
it, in their good and comfortable estate, against all opposition by their
mightiest enemies. See Psalm. 46.1, 2,3, 4. God is our refuge and strength; a
very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be
removed, etc. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of
God.

This river is the Lord himself, Is. 33.21, 22. The glorious Lord will be unto
us a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go no galley with oars,
neither shall gallant ships pass thereby. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord
is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. God is in the midst of
her, she shall not be moved. God shall help her, and that right early, Psalm.
46.5. God is known in her Palaces for a refuge, Psalm. 48.3.

The Reason.
The reason is, for that Gods Church is his, by a more near and peculiar title,
then any other people in the world, as namely by election, 1 Pet. 1.2.
redemption, Tit. 2.14. sanctification by the spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. and by
special covenant of grace, Psalm. 50.5. called a covenant of salt, for the
perpetuity of it, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. from which God will never turn away; as
Jer.32.39, 4^, 42. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear
me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them. And I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from
them, to do them good: but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. Yea, I will rejoice over them, to do them good, and I will
plant them in this land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The first use for instruction.
For instruction, see that the Church of God, and every true member of it, is
more blessed and happy, then the state and condition of any other people: for
the most high will stablish them; who then can weaken or overthrow their
comfortable state? If God be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. The
steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand, Psalm. 37.23, 24. we^l therefore may it be said of them, as Psalm.
144.15. Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is that
people, whose GOD is the Lord.

The second Use for instruction.
More particularly, this is a sure ground of perseverance to every true child of
God in the state of grace, for they are true members of that Church, which God
himself will stablish.

The use for admonition.
For admonition; this must stir up every one effectually to labor, to be
truly born again in Gods Church: for the Devil goes about, like a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. And only they, that be truly
regenerate, shall be able to withstand his assaults: for they only have the
Lord with them, and for them. Now true regeneration contains a total change,
both in mind, heart, and life; and is indeed the work of God, by his spirit,
yet, in the means, the word, and prayer, wherein we must exercise our selves,
in an holy manner, and beware we do not quench the spirit, or cool any good
motion begun thereby.

Verse 6. The Lord shall count, when he writes up the people, that this man
was born there. Selah.


The meaning of the words.
THis verse sets out another great privilege of Sion, Gods true Church, in
regard of the honor, and happiness of every true member of it; namely, that
when God writes down the names of the people, that belong unto him, he does
count and reckon those for his, that be born again in the Church.

For the better understanding whereof we must know, that the Prophet does here
speak of God, after the manner of great personages, who use to write, and
enrowle in a book, the names of those, that they accept and receive into their
houses and families, as members thereof, to any place of service; for which see
Genesis 40.20. Pharaoh, on his birth day, making a feast unto all his servants,
lifted up the head of his chief butler, and of his chief baker, among his
servants, that is, taking a view of all his servants, according to their names,
written in his book, (as the same phrase is used, Numb. 31.49. there
translated, taking the sum, which in Genesis is rendered, lifting up the head)
he reckoned his chief butler, and chief baker, among his servants. In like
manner, the scripture calls the Church the house of the living God, 1 Timothy
1.15. and for our better conceiving of his certain, and perfect knowledge, and
remembrance, both of all things, that ever were, are, or shall be in the world,
and also of all those persons, that in a special manner belong unto him, as
true members of his Church on earth, whom he means to glorify in heaven, does
tell us of certain books, which God has, even three in number, which we may
not uafitly thus distinguish by name. First, the book of his eternal
prescience, Psalm 139.16. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect,
and in thy book all my members are written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. This is nothing else, but his
perfect eternal foresight of all things, before they were, whereby he knew
them, as perfectly, as if they had been actually written in a book.

The second is the book of his actual providence, whereby he does most
perfectly take actual knowledge of, and remember all things whatsoever, even
every thought, word, and deed, of every man. Hereof see Psalm. 139.1, 2,3. O
Lord thou have searched me, and known me; Thou know my down sitting, and
mine uprising, thou understandest my thought a far off, etc, and Psalm 56.8.
Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in
thy book? and according to this he will judge the world, Rev. 20.12. I saw the
dead both small and great stand before God; and the books were opened, and
another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged,
out of those things, which were written in the books, according to their works.

The third is the book of life, which is Gods eternal purpose, for the saving
of his elect by Christ actually declared by their effectual calling, or
regeneration, by the holy ghost, in this life, in which estate they are
referved and kept for glory.

This book may be said to betwice written in. First, from all eternity in Gods
purpose, whereof see, Rev. 13.8. whose names are not written, in the book of
life of the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world. Secondly, actually in
Gods work of effectual calling, or regeneration, in the time of natural life,
which is termed Gods calling according to purpose, Romans 8.28. And indeed, of
this latter writing in the book of life, by regeneration or effectual calling,
is this place to be understood. As if he should have said, That the Church has
great honor, and the true members of it great happiness, is hereby apparent,
that when God writes up the people actually in the book of life, that be is, he
reckons those for his, that be regenerate, and born again in his Church.

In the words thus understood note two things; First, Gods work of special
mercy to the true members of the Church: Secondly, the quality and condition of
those persons, to whom the foresaid work of mercy is certainly vouchsafed.

The first observation.
For the first, Gods special work of mercy, to the true members of the Church,
is this, he actually writes their names in the book of life, and then reckons
and accounts them to be his own. This is plainly showed in his golden chain,
Romans 8.29, 40, Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be conformed
to the image of his son, that he might be the first born, among many brethren.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Upon this effectual calling he bids his Disciples rejoice, that their names
were written in heaven, Luke 10.20. and upon the good effects and signs of
effectual calling, he says of certain teachers, that were zealous of Gods
glory, in the Church of Philippi, that their names were in the book of life,
Phil. 4.3.

The reason hereof may be two ways confidered.

The first Reason.
First, of the fact it self in God, writing men's names in the book of life; and
that is only Gods good pleasure. According as he has chosen us in him, before
the beginning of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame, before
him in love. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus
Christ, to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. I
thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have revealed them
unto babes; even so, father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11.25, 26.

The second Reason.
Secondly, of this manner of expressing Gods special favor, in effectual
calling; saying, it is his writing their names in the book of life. For thus he
speaks; partly for his own sake, to manifest the stablenesse of his counsel,
and purpose, for their salvation; for in Gods divine wisdom and good pleasure,
it is as sure and firm, as if their names were really written in a book: partly
also, for the true peace and comfort of those, that be truly and effectually
called, that they may not doubt of their happy estate, but in and by this
strong consolation of Gods writing their names in the book of life, encourage
their hearts to perseverance against all oppositions, from the world, the
flesh, and the devil; as Romans 8.33,35,38,39. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? etc.

This serves for instraction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, see here that the state of the true members of Gods Church, is
for Gods special favor and life eternal most stable and firm: for God has
written their names amongst his people in the book of life, and accounts them
for his own. Now them that be thus his own he loves to the end, John 13.11. The
gifts of grace in this calling, are without repentance, Romans 11.29. This their
estate has a sure foundation, he knows them to be his, 2 Timothy 2.19. This is
to be marked to arm our selves against the uncomfortable doctrine of Papists
and Arminians, that teach, the true Saints of God may fall from grace.

For admonition, to give all diligence unto the assurance of this estate for
our selves, which is St. Peter's counsel, The use for admonition.
2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 10, 11. where also he shows the way, by adding grace to
grace, and expressing the truth thereof in obedience. Giving all diligence,
add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. And give diligence to
make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall, etc.

The second observation.
The second point to be noted is, the quality and condition of those parties,
whom God writes with his people in the book of life, and so reckons for his
own; They are borne there, that is, born again by regeneration in the true
Church. See 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. To an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you. And James 1.18. Of his own will, begat he us, with the word of
truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.

The Reason.
The reason is plain; for by effectual calling, which is actually writing in
the book of life, men are brought into spiritual society and fellowship with
God in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. which necessarily requires regeneration. For the
state of man in corrupt nature, is darkness under the power of Satan, which
can have no society with God, as 2 Cor. 6.14.16. 2 John 1.6. Therefore it is
said, they that are brought to the state of sons by faith, are born again.
John 1.12, 13. 1 John 5.1.

The first Use for instruction.
This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

For instruction two ways: First, that man's particular state in soul, for
fruition of Gods saving love, and favor in Christ, may be known by ordinary
grace without extraordinary revelation. For whosoever is born again, is in that
estate, his name is actually written in the book of life, as this text implies,
Now, the state of this new birth may be known by faith, 1 John 5.1. with 2 Cor.
13.5.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here the great necessity of the faithful dispensation of the
word in the preaching of it, unto man's true happiness; for without
regeneration there is no salvation, John 3.3, 5. Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. And the word preached, is the means in which
God works, as before, Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23.25. Consider, that though God can
convert without preaching, by his absolute power, yet he is pleased to work by
this means. For, after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them, that
believed, 1 Cor. 1.21. as in the Eunuch, Acts 8.27. etc. and in Cornelius, Acts
10.1. etc.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, this must stir up every one, to give all diligence, to get
into the state of regeneration. It is indeed Gods work, but ordinarily by his
spirit, in the ministry of the word; both the law, to break up the fallow
ground, and the Gospel, to cast in the feed of grace as before, 1 Pet.
1.23.25. We must therefore exercise our selves in this word, and pray for the
word of the spirit, and so to use these ordinances, that we may have title to
the work, and blessing of the spirit.

In which holy endeavor, breaking of the course of sin, and hungring and
thirsting after grace, we must continue, till we find our selves renewed, and
our selves horn again.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, to those that find and feel this blessed work of the new birth;
for blessed are they, this work shows their names are written in heaven, and
they are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation. Let us Took
well therefore unto both parts of it, as well in the mortification of
corruption, as in the repair and renewing of Gods Image, and then we cannot
want the comfort of assurance, to have our names written in the book of life.

Verse 7. As well the singers, as the players on instruments, shall be there:
all my springs are in thee.


The meaning of the words.
IN these words the Prophet concludes the Psalm, with two most comfortable
privileges, and prerogatives of the Church; first, that it is the only place
for true delight and pleasure; secondly, that it is the well head of all
heavenly and spiritual blessings.

The first he expresses in a Metonymie of the efficient, naming singers and
players on instruments, which were special agents, in the cheerful praising
of God, under David and Solomon, and in the succeeding times of legal service;
as we may see, for David's time, 1 Chronicles. 9.33. and 25.1, 2,3. Which vocal
music did prefigure the joy of the holy Ghost, under the gospel; and so
shows plainly,

The first observation.
That, the Church of God under the gospel, for the true members of it, is the
only place for true spiritual joy and rejoicing for evermore. So it is
prophesied, Is. 35.10. The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion
with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. And they shall call thee,
the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy on of Israel. Whereas thou have been
forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. The Lord shall be thine
everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended, Is. 60.14, 15,
20. For your shame ye shall have double, and for confusion they shall rejoice
in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess the double; ever
lasting joy shall be unto them, Is. 61.7. See it assured by Christ himself,
John 16. 20, 22. Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy, your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man ^^keth from you. And
verified in Christians, Acts 2.40.47. They continuing daily with one accord, in
the Temple, and breaking bread, from house to house, did eat their meat, with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all
the people, Acts 5.41. They departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy, to suffer shame for his name. As 1
Pet. 1.8. Believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Rejoice evermore. And, rejoice in the Lord always; again, I say,
rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

The true ground hereof, is from the incomparable blessings of the covenant,
vouchsafed to the true members of his Church.

The first reason.
For first, in Christ Jesus, God himself does betroath them unto him, yea marry
them and become their most dear, and loving husband; as Hos. 2.19, 20. Is.
54.5. Now times of espousall are times of rejoicing. Let us be glad, and
rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, Rev.
19.7. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought; they shall enter into
the Kings Palace, Psalm. 45.15. We will be glad, and rejoice in thee, we will
remember thy love, more then wine: says the Church to Christ, Cant. 1.4.

Secondly, he does fit them for his near spiritual society, by giving his own
son, The second Reason.
to be their Savior and Redeemer, washing away their sins in his blood, 1 Cor.
1.30. He is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, Ephesians. 5.25.26. Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might
sanctify, and cleanse it, and make it to himself a glorious Church, etc. Now
the remembrance hereof is matter of exceeding great joy, Luke 2.10. Therefore
the blessed Virgin Mary says, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has rejoiced in God my savior, Luke 1.46, 47.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, he bestows on them is holy spirit, John 14.16, 17. for whosoever
has not the spirit of God, is none of his, Rom.3.9. Now this spirit is the
fountain of joy, and thereupon is called the Comforter: the graces whereof he
does plentifully bestow upon them, and therein gives them cause of everlasting
joy.

The fourth Reason.
Fourthly, God sends and continues unto them his blessed word, the gospel of
peace, and the word of their reconciliation with God, and of salvation to their
souls; whereof the Psalmist says, Blessed are the people, that know the
joyful sound, Psalm 89.15. and the Apostle Paul, out of the Prophet Isaiah.
How beautiful are the feet of them, that preach the gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things, Romans 10.15. Solomon says, light is a
pleasant thing, Eccles. 11.7. Now the gospel preached is a spiritual light,
that shines unto those that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
even to guide their feet in the way of peace; then which, nothing can be more
pleasant and joyful, see Mat. 4.16. Luke 1.77, 79.

The fifth Reason.
Fifthly, Gods special providence is over his Church, not only to preserve them
from evil, both corporal and spiritual, which their enemies would bring upon
them; but also to enrich them, with all needful comforts and blessings, both
temporal and spiritual. In that day sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine,
I the Lord do keep it, I water it every moment, lest any hurt it; I will keep
it night and day, Is. 27.2,3. This is that keeper of Israel, who does neither
slumber nor sleep, who keeps his Church from all evil. The Sun shall not
smite her by day, nor the Moon by night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all
evil: he shall preserve thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and
thy coming in, from this time forth, even for evermore, Psalm. 121.3. etc.

This serves for instruction, and for admonition.

The use for instruction.
For instruction, it shows plainly, that natural men are fearfully blinded,
by the God of this world; for they live in the Church among the godly, yet they
do not conceive of, nor discern their happy estate: as St. John says, the
world knows us not, 1 John3.1. They think the state of a Christian to be very
forlorn and miserable, void of all content and comfort; therefore do they
debase them in their esteem, accounting them the filth of the world, and the
onscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. They reproach and revile them, with most
base and odious terms: as 2 Kings 9.11. What did this mad fellow with thee?
Acts 24.5. We have found this man a pestilent fellow. And Festus says, Paul
thou art beside thy self, much learning does make thee mad, Acts 26.24. Yea
Christ's own friends judged so of him, Mark 3.21. and the Jews said, he has a
devil and is mad, why hear ye him, John 10.20. Now, if they do this to the
green tree, what will they do to the dry, Luke 23.31. But wisdom is justified
of her children, Mat. 11.19. As the things, that are magnified in the world,
are abomination with God, Luke 16.15. see it in the lukewarmnesse of the
Laodiceans, Rev. 3.16, 17, 19 So the things that are magnified with the Lord,
are abominable to the world; as to live godly, making conscience of all sin,
and of every good duty, and being zealous of Gods glory. Whereby we may see,
that the veil of ignorance hangs over their eyes. They can no better discern
the happy state of the godly, then a blind man can judge of colors.

The Use for admonition.
For admonition, this serves notably to move every one to be as careful, to
become a true member of the Church, as he is desirous of true and lasting joy.
The way is hewed, 1 Pet. 2.4, 6. in so yielding to Gods means of an holy
calling, that we forsake our sinful ways, as Is. 55.7. do come to Christ by
faith, and as living stones be builded on him, the tried corner stone, to
become a spiritual house. Which estate we must testify, by the properties of
the godly, who be true Citizens of Sion, set down particularly, Psalm. 15. and
Psalm. 24.3, 4. And so we shall find, that a day in Gods Courts is better, then
a thousand elsewhere, Psalm 84.10. Better to be a doorkeeper here, then a
Commander elsewhere, For here is the true comforter, and no where else: the
world cannot receive him, John 14.17.

This seems to be otherwise by a double affliction, that does follow the
Church, Objection.
and the true members of ^t; one from the world in persecution, as Christ
foretold, John 16.33. the other from the Lord, in terror of soul, and sorrow
for sins, as Job 3.24, 26. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for
thine enemy? For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth. And Psalm.38.3, 4. There is no soundness
in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones,
because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy
burden, they are too heavy for me.

The first affliction, from men, Answer.
hinders not the fruition of this spiritual joy, as Acts 5.41, They went
away, from the Council rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his name. Ye rejoice in the faith, though for a time ye be in
heaviness, through manifold temptations, I Pet. 1.6. Whereupon St. James bids
them count it exceeding great joy, when they fall into sundry temptations, Jam.
1.2. And our savior Christ bids the godly rejoice, and be exceeding glad, when
they are persecuted and reviled for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. And
the second affliction, from the hand of God, in terror of soul, is but a
temporary bitter preparative unto everlasting joy. The Lord, for their true,
and through humiliation, does visit upon them the days of Baalim, but
afterward he will betroath them to himself, as Hos. 2.13, 14.18, 19. Though
they sow in tears, they shall reap enjoy, etc. Psalm. 126.5, 6. Thus are they
chastened of the Lord, that they might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor.
11.32. Say therefore with the Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness, Mic. 7.9.

The second observation.
All my springs are in thee. The last prerogative of the Church, that in it be
all the well-springs and fountains of all Gods spiritual and heavenly
blessings. Springs, we know, are such places, whence water does flow out of
the earth, constantly, and continually, for the refreshing of man and beast,
and by fit resemblance, the Lord would have us to conceive, that in his Church,
he does provide plenty and store of all spiritual and heavenly blessings.

Two spiritual springs of blessings in the true Church.
This will more plainly appear, if we consider what spiritual fountains, and
springs of blessings, be in ^he true Church and no where else.

The first, and chief wellspring of all blessings, is the true God; 1. The
true God.
who is therefore called the fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.23. And,
according to the threefold use of watersprings, to the sons of men, may we
well conceive the true God to be the fountain of blessings to his Church.

First, water springs serve for washing, cleansing and purifying. So God in
Christ Jesus does open a fountain to the house of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem (which is his true Church) for sin and for uncleanness, Zechar.
13.1. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John. 1.7.

Secondly, water springs serve to make fruitful both herbs and plants, that
grow thereby. So God in Christ, by his spirit, makes the hearts and souls of
his children fruitful in grace. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty,
and stoods upon the dry ground; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring. And they shall spring up, as among the grass,
as willowes by the water courses, Is. 44.3, 4.

Thirdly, springs of waters are very comfortable, and yield great refreshing
both to man and beast, especially in hot countries and time of drought, see
Genesis 21.15, 19. Judge. 15.18, 19. Psalm. 104.10, 11, 12. So God in Christ, by his
spirit, which is the comforter, becomes the everlasting fountain of spiritual
refreshing, to the hearts and souls of all his children. O God my God, early
will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a
dry and thirsty land, where no water is. Because thy loving kindness it better
then life, my lips shall praise thee, Psalm. 63.1,3. If any man thirst, let him
come unto me, and drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said;
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. This spoke he of the
spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, John 7.37,38, 39.
Whosoever drinks of the water, that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but
the water, that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life, John 4.14.

2. The Evangelicall Ministry.
The second spring of blessings in the Church, is the Evangelicall ministry,
even the gospel preached, and Sacraments administered, sanctified by prayer for
the blessing of the spirit. Hereof the Lord says, A fountain shall come forth
out of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim, Joel 3.18.
And to the same end serves the vision of waters coming from under the door
threshold of the sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.1. etc. both which may be well expounded
by, Is. 2.3. for out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. Now this derived wellspring, of the Evangelicall ministry,
serves instrumentally in the Church.

First, for washing and cleansing the foul, from the filth of sin. Therefore
has God ordained Baptism, to represent our spiritual washing in Christ's
blood, by the holy ghost; whereof also with the word it becomes a gracious
instrument, when this free spirit pleases, John 3.8. The (...) blows, where
it lists. So is every one that is born of the spirit. Not by works of
righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy, he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. That he
might sanctify, and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by the word.

Secondly, for making the heart fruitful in grace. Therefore is the gospel
called the work of his grace, Acts 20.32. and is said to bring forth fruit,
Colos. 1.6.

Thirdly, for ministering spiritual joy and refreshing to the soul; therefore
is the whole Evangelicall ministry called the ministry of the spirit, which is
the Comforter, 2 Cor. 3.8. because it works therewith, 1 Cor. 3.5. and is
given therein, Gal. 3.2. And we through patience, and comfort of the Scripture,
have hope, Romans 15.4. Gods words to Jeremie were the joy and rejoicing of his
heart, Jer. 15.16. David rejoiced therein, as one that finds a great spoil.
And the Lords Supper is the seal of our redemption and salvation in Christ,
the tidings whereof is exceeding great joy, Luke 2.10.

Now, all these fountains are in the Church and no where else. The world is
without the true God by covenant of grace, Ephesians. 2.12. and so has nothing but
dry p^ts, and cisterns that hold no water; as Jer. 2.13. And the Evangelicall
ministry is not out of the Church; for when it comes among the heathen, it is
Gods merciful visitation to take out of them a people for his name, Acts
15.14. See Psalm 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
his judgment unto Israel, He has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them.

The Reason.
The reason hereof is Gods own good pleasure; as of mere grace and favor,
choosing them in Christ, and accepting them into covenant, so vouchsafing the
participation of these spiritual springs, and fountains of heavenly blessings
unto them, that hereby they may be fitted, for society and fellowship with him,
and become such as he may take delight and pleasure in. See Ezekiel. 16.8. etc.
When I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, Behold, thy time was the time of
love, and I spread my skirt over thee and covered thy nakedness: yea, I swear
unto thee and entered into a covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou
becamest mine. Then washed I thee with water, etc. If I wash thee not, thou
have no part in me, John 13.8.

This serves for instruction, admonition, and comfort.

The first Use for instruction.
For instruction two ways: First, hence will plainly follow, that out of the
Church there is no salvation; for these springs are the wells of salvation, Is.
12.3. and the text says, they are all in the Church, which is plain by
induction. They, that are out of the Church, are without Christ, and without
God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. And with him only in Christ, is the Well of life,
Psalm. 36.9. He, that has not the son, has not life. 1 John 5.12. And
wanting Christ, they cannot have the spirit, John 14.17. and so cannot be
sanctified, nor saved.

The second Use for instruction.
Secondly, see here the surpassing excellency and happiness of the Church,
above all other states of people in the world. The Church is as the garden of
Eden, wherein is a pure river of the water of life, and the tree of life, Rev.
22.1, 2. whereas the rest of the world is as a barren wilderness, Jer. 17.6,
8. The Church is like the heritage of Jacob, blessed of God, and the rest of
the world, like the Mountains of Esau, which God has cursed, Mal. 1.2,3, 4.
The Church is the Fathers house, where every servant has meat enough, the rest
of the world is like the Citizens fields, where husks with hogs are the best
provision, Luke 15.16, 17. The true Church is like the land of Canaan, flowing
with milk and honey, that drinks water of the rain of heaven: a land which
the Lord himself cares for: the eyes of the Lord are always upon it, the rest
of the world is as the land of Egypt, which men water with their feet, Deuteronomy.
11.10, 11, 12.

The first Use for admonition.
For admonition, it serves two ways. First to natural men, to stir them up
to consider seriously of these privileges of the Church, to have all Gods
springs in her, that so they may be affected toward her, as David was, Psalm.
84.1, 2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hoasts. My soul longs,
yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: my heart, and my flesh cries out
for the living God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the water brooks,
so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the
living God: when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou
art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh
longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is. Psalm. 122.1. I
was glad when they said unto me: Let us go into the house of the Lord. Yea of
Sampsons mind, Judge. 15.18, 19. crying out after these springs, as for the
means of spiritual and eternal life.

The second Use for admonition.
Secondly, to all that profess themselves to be members of the Church, that
they labor to give evidence of their participation of these springs of God in
his Church, which they shall do three ways.

First, by the abolishing of corruption in regard of dominion: being purged
from sin, and from uncleanness, by the blood of Christ: as the Corinthians
were after their effectual calling. 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you: but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

Secondly, by becoming fruitful in grace, and plentiful in good works, by the
blessing of the spirit, sanctifying the ministry of the word, as St. Paul
testifyeth of the Churches, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7. In every thing ye are enriched by
him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge. So that ye come behind in no gift,
Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God, Colos. 1.6.10. Which (speaking of the
Gospel) is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth fruit
as it does also in you. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work; and increasing in the knowledge
of God. And as the Lord foreshewed in the vision of waters, Ezekiel. 47.1, etc.

Thirdly, by joyful and cheerful going on in their holy profession: as the
Apostle commands, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always: and again, I say,
rejoice. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil.3.3.

The Use for comfort.
For comfort, this makes greatly to the true members of the Church, in the
sorest distresses that can befall them.

First, does the sense of corruption, and guilt of transgression make thee ugly
in thine own sight? Go to the clensing fountain, and spring of Christ's blood,
and with the hand of faith wash and cleanse thy sinful soul, and pray the
Lord to wash thee thoroughly, as David did, Psalm 51.2. wherewith if thou join
upright endeavor after reformation in practice, thou may rest assured, that
the blood of Jesus Christ shall cleanse thee from all thy sins, 1 John 1 7, 9.

Secondly, does the barrenness of thine heart, in the want of grace, make thee
afraid? Then get thee to the sanctifying fountain of Gods holy spirit, which is
the spirit of grace: beg of God the good fruits of this spirit, in love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, faith, etc. -- Remember who made Aarons rodd to budd,
Numb. 17.^, 8. and who can raise up children unto Abraham of stones? as Mat.
3.9. to whom all things are possible, Mat. 19.36. and nothing is too hard,
Jer.32.27.

Lastly, does heaviness and deadness of heart oppress thee? Then get thee to
the comforter, even to God in Christ by his holy spirit: who is the God of hope
that can fill thee with all joy in believing, Romans 15.13.

FINIS.
A Table of some special matters, contained in these Expositions of the
27.84.85. and 87. PSALMS.
The first number has reference to the Psalm, the second to the Page.
A.
Abraham. HOw the Sons of Abraham may be known. 85.26. Affliction. How to be
so prepared for afflictions, as that we may glorify God under them. 27.42, 43.
How the godly may comfort themselves in afflictions. 27.47. All affliction
comes by divine dispensation. 85.36. The difference between Gods children and
natural men under affliction. 85.43, 44.
Anger. Anger what it is: how and why ascribed unto God in Scripture. 85.18,
19. Special means to turn away Gods anger. 85.22, 23. Gods anger may continue
long toward his own people, and why. 85.37,38,39.
Anointed. All true believers are Gods anointed. 84.67, 68. What we must do
that we may be of the number of Gods anointed ones. 84.68, 69.
Answer. Why God does sometimes deny to give gracious answers to the prayers of
his servants. 27.56. What we must do that we may be enabled to to wait and
listen for a gracious answer when we have prayed. 85.60.61. What is required of
men that they may walk worthy of the Lord, and labor in some measure to answer
his bounty. 85.92. Apostasy. They that end in Apostasy began in hypocrisy,
or at least had only an humane acquired faith. 27.89, 90. Assembly. Christian
Assemblies for Evangelicall worship are lovely places. 84.15.

B.
Behave. HOw Gods children must behave themselves, when he hides his face from
them. 27.73. Men's behavior and carriage toward their brethren, will discover
and manifest their estate and condition before God. 85.89.
Blessing. The right way to partake of the best blessings. 27.129, 130. What it
is to be blessed. 84.36. The difference between Gods children and natural men,
in the fruition of temporal blessings. 85.48. Though many times they want the
possessions, yet the right of all Gods blessings, belongs to them that are in
Christ. 85.90. They that live in sin and want faith, have no part in the best
blessings, have starved souls, though in pampered and well clad bodies. 85.92.
There is small hope of Gods blessing to accompany the devils getting. 85.92.
The earthly blessings of Gods providence are attendants on the heavenly
blessings of his grace. 85.93.
Book. God has three Books, and what they are. 87.122.
C.
Calling. HOw men must wait upon the Gospel preached, for an holy calling.
87.106. Effectual calling is actually writing in the book of life. 87.125.
Captivity. What sins brought the Captivity. 85.10. Censure. He that shall
refuse subjection to the censure of the Church, must be cast out as an heathen.
85.101. Charms. Conjurers charms are prayers to the devil. 85.28. Church.
What wonderful blessings are certainly enjoyed in Gods house his Church, and
no where else. 27.25, 26, 27. In the visible Church, hypocrites may have a
place for outward worship. 84.10. Gods Church on earth is fitly compared to the
Moon, and why. 85.34. Gods true Church seeking Gods salvation pleads mercy not
merit. 85.56. The true Church is a spiritual building of Gods own founding and
making. 87.79. The inseparable property of Gods true Church, is, that it is
holy and sanctified. 87.82. Profane and wicked persons are no true and lively
members of the Church. 87.82, 83. God loves his Church above all other states
and conditions of men in the world whatsoever. 87.85. The greatness of Gods
love to his Church seen in three things. 87.86, 87, 88, 89, 90. How to know the
true Church, and how to become true members of it. 87.93. The true Church of
God is his own city. 87.95. Gods Church is as Noah's Ark, unto which all must
come, that look to be saved from the deluge of damnation. 87.96. What the way
into Christ's Church is. ibid. Why God does mention glorious things, to belong
to his Church. 87.98, 99. The outward state of Gods Church in this world, is
many times not only mean but miserable. 87.99. The happiness of Gods Church
and children, must be measured by their present title to Gods favor in Christ,
and their certain title to suture glory. ibidem. Gods Church is Gods kingdom,
into which man in the corrupt state of nature cannot enter, as heir to inherit.
87.107. By what titles Gods Church is his, more then any other people in the
world. 87.120. The Church of God is the only place for spiritual joy. 87.127.
What incomparable blessings God vouchsafes to his Church, which makes it the
place for spiritual joy. 87.128.129. Out of the Church no salvat on, and why.
87.^34, ^35. The Church of God is surpassing excellent and happy, above all
other states of people in the world. 87.135.
Comfort. True courage and comfort in evil times is the Lords gift. 27.9. The
right way to sound comfort and true patience in any distress or bodily misery.
84.44, 45.
Contempt. Gods people sometimes are in great contempt, and why. 85.74.
Conversion. No man's conversion is to be despaired of. 87.113. What they must do
that wish and wait for the conversion of rebels. 87.113, 114. Multitude of
converts is an evidence of Gods special favor. 87.116.
Corruption. Natural corruption judges many of Gods ways unequal. 27.98.
The terror that corruption causes in the godly, may easily manifest how
terrible the tyranny of it is in natural men. 27.108. How to know where
corruption bears dominion. 27.108, ^09, 110. Corruption of nature in the heart
bewrays its dominion in natural men by their ordinary practice of sin in
life. 27.122, 123. Original corruption is in Gods people in a different manner
and measure, according to their estate before God. 85.13, 14. Original
corruption is not quite taken away by baptism. 85.14.
Covenant. They that stand rightly in covenant with God are in an happy estate.
27.4. How to get into Covenant with God. 27.6.
Countenance. We should labor in our countenances, to express truly the
affections of our hearts. 84.64, 65. Courage. The way to get spiritual
courage. 27.141, 142. Courts. Gods Courts are the place of his solemn worship
here on earth. 84.70. D. Delay. WHy God sometimes uses long delays in
answering the prayers of his children. 84.58. Deliverance. Deliverance by
unlawful means is not of God, but the devil. 85.58. Disease. Sin is a
deadly disease in the soul, to which turning back is a spiritual relapse more
dangerous then a corporal. 85.68. Displeasure. The sense of Gods displeasure
in a state of misery, is to Gods people as a state of death, and why. 85.42,
43. Doubling. Doubling requests in prayer, shows fervency and earnestness for
audience. 84.57. Dwell. What it is to dwell in Gods house. 27.24,32. Three
things required of them that would dwell in Gods house. 27.29. Gods public
dwelling places are the holy assemblies of ministers and people in holy
worship. 84.13.

E.
Egyptian. BY Egyptian bondage was figured the servitude of sin, to which there
must be no returning back. 85.68. Enemies. Gods d^^rest children (...) be in
the hand of their enemies. 27.114. Wicked men are the greatest enemies to the
welfare of any estate, Church, Commonwealth or family. 85.39. By what sins in
a special manner men stand in enmity a ainst Christ. 85.97, 98. Gods power is
such, that he cannot only confound, but even convert the greatest enemies of
his Church. 87.112.
Enquire. What benefits come by enquiring of God. 27.36. The Church of the new
Testament is not inferior to the Church of the Jews, but preferred before it,
for means to enquire of God. 27.37,38.
Example. It is a dangerous thing to neglect good example. 27.53. Experience.
Experience of Gods ^elp in former evils is a ground of prayer for present
favor in renewed troubles. 27.79. Extremity. Man's extremity is Gods
opportunity. 27.78.

F.
Faith. FAith is profitable for all things. 27.132. True faith is never severed
from true repentance and new obedience. 27.133. What faith is. 27.141. The
difference between acquired and infused faith. 87.109.
Favor. Gods special favor must not be measured by outward things. 84.26.
Gods favor is highly to be esteemed: 84.65. How to obtain Gods favor. ibidem.
Fear. That the godlies fear comes from the weakness of their faith. 27.8.
Servile fear was not in Ad^m, till he sinned against God. 27.^^0. What they
must do that desire to be freed from fear and endued with confidence. 27.21.
Guilt of sin brings fearfulness. 27.141. Salvation is far from them that
want the fear of God. 85.71. The marks of them that truly fear God. ibidem. How
to get the fear of God. 85.71, 72.
Fervency. Fervency makes much to the efficacy of desires. 84.24. Folly. Sin
is folly and why. 85.66. Foundation. When we are squared and fitted as living
stones to lie upon Christ as our foundation. 87.81. Fountain. God is a fountain
of blessings to his Church, and why. 87.132. Friends. The truest friends to the
peace and prosperity of any place, as Kingdom, Town or family, are such as
fear God. 85.75. Fruitful. How we may be fruitful to God for his salvation in
Christ. 85.95.
G.
Gifts. GOod gifts from God both temporal and spiritual accompany his
salvation in Christ, and why. 85.89, 90. Glory. Wherein the great glory of Gods
people does consist. 85.74. What things move God to take away glory from a
land. 85.75. Where true glory dwells. 85.77.
Godliness. Great gain in true godliness. 27.85. Goodness. They that have
received good things from God, must be careful to continue in Gods goodness.
85.92. Grace. Grace in the heart will discover it self in the words of the
mouth and the actions of the life. 84.23. Grace absolutely necessary to the
welfare of the soul. 84.48. Saving grace to the soul is a supernatural gift
of God, not in the power of man himself to get. ibidem. Man's being in the state
of grace may be truly and certainly known. 87.108, 126.
Guilt. How the child of God under the guilt of sin differs from the
unregenerate. 27.90.
H.
Hearing. TO make them able and willing to bear the cross is a gracious
hearing to the prayer of the afflicted. 27.56. Heart. God has special regard
unto the heart above all the parts of man. 27.67. There is sweet intercourse
between the Lord and an upright heart. 27.69.
Helper. How we may have the true God for our helper. 27.78. Hid. The fignes of
Gods favor may be hid sometimes from Gods dearest servants. 27.81. Gods hiding
his face is a sign of his anger. 84.63.
Holiness. Gods mean for holiness, and how they must be used, 87.84. How
holiness must be expressed. ibidem. Hope. Hope of audience is that which
opens the mouth of invocation. 84.21.

I
Jacob. Why God is called the God of Jacob. 84.58, 59. Idolatry. Idolatry and
impiety deprive a people of this prerogative to have the true God to be the God
of their salvation. 85.26. Immutable The true God is immutable, not only in his
essence, but also in his love toward his elect. 27.79. Importunity. God is
delighted with his servants importunities. 84.23. Incarnation. What the main
benefits of Christ's incarnation are. 85.98. Iniquity. Gods own people that are
his by covenant have their iniquities. 85.13. Instrument It pleases God
sometimes to ascribe the effect to the instrument, and why. 85.25. Joy.
Affliction from men hinders not the fruition of spiritual joy. 87.131.
Irresistible The gracious work of Gods Holy Spirit is irresistible. 87.112,
113. Judea. Judea called Gods Land, and why. 85.6, 7. Justice. What way God
makes for the satifying of his justice in forgiving the inquities of his
people. 85.17.
K.
Knowledge. WHat is required to such a knowledge of God as may entitle us to
his society 87.103.
L.
Lead. WHat we must do that we may be such as God will lead. 27.101. Light.
Where God is the light of grace and comfort to the soul, he will be the light
of joy and gladness to the heart. 27.4 How it may appear that God is become
the light of grace unto our souls. 27.5. The light of nature is but darkness
in the ways of God. 27.94.
Lock. To look upon the miseries of others, is a means to move compassion
toward them. 84.64.
M.
Magistrates. MAgistrates should show themselves toward the godly as shields.
84 61. Malice. Malice and hatred against the godly shows wicked men to be the
children of the Devil. 27.14. Means. Neglect of the use of the means of grace
is, and willbe the condemnation of many. 27.111, 112. Meet. Where mercy and
truth do meet together. 85.88. Members. How to know who are true Members of
Christ. 85.27. Mercy. Mercy and kindness in God is the moving cause of his
saving us both temporally and eternally. 85.55. They that have no good title to
Gods mercy, can have no good assurance of Gods salvation. 85.36. What Gods
mercy is. 85.76.
Music. Vocal Music in the times of legal service did prefigure the joy of
the Holy Ghost under the Gospel. 87.127.
N.
Natural. WHerein the child of God differs from natural men. 85.15. Natural
men that cannot pray so well as they should, must pray as they can, and get
others to pray for them. 85.32.
Nature. The wisdom and will of nature is to oppose the means of conversion.
85.31.
O.
Obstinate. WHen men grow obstinate in sin, God becomes resolute in purishment.
85.38. Operative. Gods graces and blessings toward his children are operative
it them toward their brethren. 85.89. Ordinances. The Ordinances of Religion
instituted by Christ in his Church, and the observavance thereof required both
of Ministers and people, are all most just and righteous. 85.100.
P.
Pardon. WHen God has pardoned sin, he does not behold it. 27.120. Pardon of
sin is the prerogative of Gods people above all others. 85.17.
Patience. How we may be enabled to give evidence of our faith in God by
p^tient bearing the trial which his providence lays on us. 27.10^, 103.
Waiting on God is the holy a^t or work of patience. 29.136. The sure way to
Christian patience. 27.138.
Peace. What graces give title to true peace. 85.63. The extent of that peace
which God promises to his people. 85.64. Gods peace what it is. 85.81.
Perfect. A perfect heart is discerned by an obedient life. 27.15. Perjurie.
Perjury puts upon God the person of the Devil. 85.22. Persecution. How to make
good use of persecution. 27.102. Perseverance The true ground of the
perseverance of the godly in the state of grace is not in themselves, but in
and from the Lord. 27.100. and 87.109. Piety. Piety gives evidence of being in
covenant with God. 27.85. Place. How to judge rightly of difference of place in
respect of holiness. 84.12. Plenty. Great plenty does attend true piety.
85.93. Praise. Praising God is not a thing indifferent, but a necessary duty.
84.35. Prayer. How prayer is prevalent with God against enemies. 27.115, 116.
What is to be done in times of danger besides praying unto God for
preservation. 27.116, 117. What difference there is both in judgment and
practice between the godly and the wicked about prayer in affliction. 85.53.
How we may be enabled to press upon God by our humble and earnest prayers when
he seems to oppress us with his judgments. 85.53, 54. Neglect of prayer is
the brand of an Atheist, and liable to a grievous curse. 85.101.
Popery. Popery is a false faith; amongst Gods people in comparison of true
religion as the worship of the golden calves. 85.8. It is the impiety of Popery
to set up other Saviors then the true God. 85.26.
Preaching. Preaching of the word is necessary unto man's true happiness.
87.126. Profession. Profession without practice is nothing but hypocrisy.
27.76. Promise. Promises of temporal blessings are to be understood with
exception of the cross, 27.8, 17, 133. Profaneness. Profaneness among the
professors of the true religion argues a dead faith. 85.9. Profane men
deceive themselves when they lay claim to be Gods people. 85.62.

R.
Regeneration. FAith and Regeneration do accompany each other. 87.108.
Regeneration is the proper fruit of the spirit of Adoption. ibidem. What we
must do to get and keep the state of regeneration. 87.109, 110. In the work of
regeneration the riches of Gods love and mercy is seen. 87.111. True
regeneration contains a total change both in mind, heart, and life. 87.121.
Repentance. What repentance is. 27.141. Repining. Repining against Gods
correction continued is a fruit of corruption. 85.47. Rejoice, Gods people
delivered from affliction rejoice in God, and how. 85.47, 48. Rhetoric. The
use of Rhetoric is lawful, even in the dispensation of Gods word, and some
competent knowledge therein necessary, for the right interpretation of the
same. 27.197. Righteous. God is righteous even then when his dealing seems most
strange to us: and how we may bring our hearts to be resolved he is so. 85.45,
46. Gods righteousness what it is. 85.81.

S.
Sacrifice. WHat spiritual sacrifices are. 84.68. Saints. Gods people are his
Saints, and how they come to be so. 85.61, 62. Sanctification. What
sanctification is. 27, 141. Salvation. That God becomes our spiritual and
eternal salvation is known three ways. 27.5. What we must do that the God of
salvation may become our God. 85.26, 27.
Scripture. Scripture is the perfect register of Gods revealed will. 27.96.
What a profitable and comfortable thing it is to be much conversant in
Scripture. 87.99.
Separate. What things tend to separate between God and his people. 85.8, 9.
Service. The service of God is not an arbitrary matter. 27.64. Servant. To be
Gods servant is a good stepp toward the attainment of Gods favor. 27.74. The
properties of good servants. 27.76. All Gods servants are in ordinary, not as
retainers. 84.33,34.
Shield. What we must do that we may have God to be our shield. 84.62. Sin.
Reigning sin and saving grace cannot stand together. 27.22 Reigning sin is
spiritiuall leprosy. 27.29. Sins dominion is for the souls damnation.
27.108. Sin is such a thing as God cannot endure, no, not in his own people.
85.19.
Sovereignty. Sovereignty in God ought to be the ground of inward fear and
outward obedience to him. 87.119. Springs. What spiritual springs and
fountains of blessings are in the true Church and no where else. 87.132.133.
The Evangelicall Ministry is a spring of blessings in the Church of God, and
why. 87.133. How men may give evidence of their participation of the springs of
God in his Church. 87.136.
Stabilitie. Whence the true Church of God in general, and every true member
thereof in particular, have their stability. 84.13. and 87.80. The state of
every true member of Gods Church is for Gods special favor and life eternal
most stable and firm. 87.109, 124.
Strength. How God does strengthen the hearts of his children. 27.144, 145.
What we must do that we may be such as whose be^^^^ God will strengthen in
evil times. 27.146. What we must do that we may be strong in the Lord. 84.38.

T.
Tabernacle. A Brief view of the several parts of Gods Tabernacle, considered,
with the several ends for which they were ordained. 84.10, 11. Gods Tabernacle
is the wooing place between Christ and his Church. 84.14. The Gospel preached
is to us Gods Tabernacle. 84.50.
Teach. Who they are whom God will teach. 27.96. Temporal. Of temporal
blessings God many times gives a greater portion to the wicked then to his
children. 27.129. Terror. Terror of soul to Gods children is but a temporary
bitter preparative unto everlasting glory. 87.131. Thirst. Worldly thirsts
there are in many, godly thirst is rare to be found, and how it will appear.
84.49. Time-servers. Three sorts of time-servers. 84.34. Titles. The holy
titles whereby God is styled in Scripture must be understood and made use of,
both to terrify from sin, and to encourage in faith and obedience. 85.59.
Trouble. Why Gods childen while they live here on earth are liable to many and
great troubles. 27.40. Worldly troubles may hasten us sooner to the Kingdom of
heaven, but they cannot ^^prive us of it. 27.66. In times of trouble nothing
can be better for us then to have the Lord for our shield. ^4.62.
T^^^^. We may trust to men as the means, but not as the foundation of our
help. 27.88. Those that be truly godly trust not in themselves, but put all
their trust in the Lord. 27.100. They that trust in the Lord will not use
unlawful means to help themselves out of misery, but will wait his leisure.
^5.27.
Truth. What Gods truth is. 85.76. Turn. Why God does bid men turn, though of
themselves they cannot and why such commands are not unjust or vain. 85.31.
W.
Wait. BY waiting on God we are surely entitled to singular benefits. 27.137.
Want. Want may befall the godly, not as a curse, but as a correction. 85.93.
Way. The way of help is never shut to the prayer ^f faith. 27.78. In Gods ways
there is safety. 27.95.
Worship. Neither dignity nor distress should exempt men from the zealous
pursuit of Gods holy worship. 84.3. Till we have hearts for Gods worship we
have ^o souls fit for heaven. 84.16.
Wrath. WHat sins especially provoke God to wrath. ^5.20, 21, 22.
Z.
Zeal. HOw to get zeal and fervency in prayer. 27.58, 59. Zion. How God was
seen in Zion. 84, 55. Zion a type of the Church. 84.56.

A Table of some places of Scripture explained or vindicated in these
Expositions of the 27.84.85. and 87. Psalms.
Psalm. Page. Genesis. 2 1 THe Host of Heaven and earth. 84 6 -- 6 5 -- heart
evil continually. 27 68 -- 40 20 Pharaoh lifted up the head of the chief
Butler. 87 122 Exodus 20 3 Before me 27 62 -- 20 5 Visiting iniquities of
fathers on children. 84 4 -- 21 13, 14 Take him from mine Altar that he may
dye. 27 39 -- 23 21* Will not pardon your transgression. 85 16 -- 24 4 Twelve
Pillars. -- Twelve Tribes. 84 10 Joshua 24 19 Will not forgive the
transgression. 85 16 Judges 2 16 Jud es which delivered them. 85 25 1 Samuel 21
12, 13 David feigned himself mad 27 22 -- 22 15 Did I then begin to enquire for
him. 27 36 2 Samuel 6 17 David set the Ark in his place. 27 54 2 King. 2 14 Where
is the God of Elijah? 84 59 2 Chronicles. 7 14 Seek my face. 27 63 Job 26 14 Lo
these are parts of his ways. 27 93 -- 28 13 Wisdom not in the land of the
living. 27 125 -- 40 19 Chief of Gods ways. 27 93 Psalm. 10 16 Heathen
perished out of Gods land. 85 6 -- 18 28 Thou will light my candle. 27 3 -- 18
48 From the violent man. 27 118 -- 24 7 The King of glory shall come in. 84 7
-- 25 19 Cruel, or Hatred of violence. 27 120 -- 35 25 Ah so ^ould we have it.
27 107 -- 37 9 They shall inherit the earth. 27 137 -- 37 32 The wicked
watches the righteous. 27 29 -- 38 5 Because of my foolishness. 85 66 -- 41 2
Wilt not deliver him to the soul or will of his enemy 27 107 -- 46 4 Though the
earth be removed. 87 120 -- 46 5 God is in the midst of her. 27 43 -- 52 5 Root
thee out of the land of the living. 27 126 -- 53 4 They eat up Gods people as
bread. 27 13 Psalm. Verse. Psalm. Page. -- 69 12 They that sat in the gate. 27
103 -- 72 11 All nations shall serve him. 87 111 -- 72 6 My doctrine shall drop
as the rain. 84 33 -- 74 9 We see not our signs. 85 49 -- 77 19 Thy way is in
the sea. 27 93 -- 88 18 My kinsmen stand afar off. 27 86 -- 89 10 Broken
Rahab in pieces. 87 102 -- 89 15 Blessed that know the joyful sound. 27 52 --
103 7 He made known his ways unto Moses. 27 93 -- 105 4 Seek the Lord and his
strength. 27 63 -- 119 58 I entreated thy favor with my whole heart. 27 66 --
140 4 Preserve me from the violent man. 27 118 Proverbs 2 7 A buckler to them
that walk uprightly. 84 62 -- 13 4 The sluggard desires and has nothing. 27
30 -- 19 6 A friend to him that gives gifts. 85 91 -- 22 15 Foolishness in
the heart of a child. 85 66 -- 26 11 As a dog to his vomit, so a fool. 85 66
Canticies 5 4 My beloved put in his hand. 27 67 Isaiah 11 6 The wolf shall
dwell with the lamb. 27 123 -- 30 26 Light of the Moon as the light of the Sun.
87 98 -- 37 35 For my own sake and David's sake. 27 44 -- 38 11 In the land of
the living. 27 126 -- 51 9 Has cut Rahab, wounded the Dragon. 87 102 Ezekiel
47 1 Waters issued from under the threshold. 87 133 Daniel 9 17 Cause thy face
to shine for the Lords sake. 84 65, 66 Hoseah 12 4 He had power over the Angel.
84 59 Joel 3 18 A fountain forth of the Lords house. 87 133 Zechariah 13 1 A
fountain for sin and uncleanness. 87 132 Malachi 1 1, 2,3 The word of the
Lord to Israel. 87 85 Matthew 3 15 To fulfill all righteousness. 85 99 -- 5
29,30 If thy right eye offend, pluck it out. 85 15 -- 6 9 Our father which art
in heaven. 85 59 -- 18 20 Meet together in my name. 27 55 -- 23 33 Generation
of Vipers. 27 102 -- 23 37 I would have gathered you, but you would not. 87 113
Luke 1 6 Righteous before God. 85 14 -- 8 18 From him shall be taken what he
seems to have. 87 109 -- 10 10 Rejoice that your names are written in heaven.
87 124 John 3 21 He that does truth, comes to the light. 27 5 -- 4 14 In him a
Well of water springing up. 27 90 -- 7 37 39 If any man thirst let him come to
me and drink. 84 15 -- 10 14 Workers of iniquity he knows not 84 34 John 15 19
I have chosen you out of the world 84 68 Acts 7 51 Ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost 87 113 Romans 7 20 No more I, but sin that dwells in me. 27 91
Romans Verse. Psalm. Page. -- 7 23 Captivity to the Law of sin. 27 98 -- 12 2
Fashion not your selves 84 68 69 1 Corinthians 1 21 The world by wisdom knew
not God 27 33 -- 11 22 Despise ye the Church of God? 27 55 2 Corinthians 4 1 As
we have received mercy we fains not. 85 80 -- 6 15 What concord has Christ
with behall? 27 119 Gal. 4 27 The desolate has more children then, etc. 87 116
Philip. 2 11 Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. 27 127 -- 4 3
Whose names are in the boo^ of life. 87 124 1 Timothy 4 16 Thou shall save thy
self. 85 25 Hebrews 11 10 A City whose builder and maker is God. 87 79 James 1
15 Lust conceiving brings forth sin. 27 109, 110 1 Peter 2 5 Ye also as
living stoves are built up. etc. 87 93 2 Peter 1 19 Until the day Star arise
in your hearts. 27 34 1 John 2 4 The truth is not in him. 85 14 -- 2 19 They
would have continued with us. 27 32 Revel. 7 9 Clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands. 87 89 -- 13 8 Whose names are not written in the book of
life, 87 123 -- 20 12. And the books were opened. 87 122

Material faults escaped in Printing the Expositions of the 27. 84, 85, and
87. Psalms. fit to be amended before reading.
IN the Epistle to Sir Robert Hatley page 2. line 28. for effect, read affect.
In the Exposition of the 17. Psalm, p. 6. l. 5. for prayer r^pray l. 11 for
u^r. us. p. 55 l. 22 for recreation r. correction. p. 61 l. 8. for so r. sow l.
7. after evils r. as 2 Chronicles. 7 13, 14. Thirdly, to the comfortable fruition of
all needful good l. 26 after worship r. under the Gospel, prophetically. p. 66
l. 23 for 20 r. 10 p. 68. l. 7. for scattered r. flattered, p. 80. l. 30 for
need r. deep. p. 81 l 14 for carnal r. corporal. p. 82. l. 6 for bed r. God.
p. 87 (...) last r. the stream. l. 34. for head r. hand. p. 97. l. 8. after
humility r. and meekness. Psalm. 25.9. the meek will he teach his way. p. 103.
l. 28 for exposition read opposition p 107. l. 33 after great r and for danger
p. 125. l. 2. r. had not p. 131. l. 3. r. prosperity. p. 136. l. 9. for
conferen^^^r. reference l. 34. r. has not. p. 142. l. 24 r the Prophet. In the
Exposition of the 84 Psalm. p. 17 l. 5. r. maintenance. p. 37. l. 34 r. whom
whosoever. p 4^. l. 4. r. shall not see. In the Epistle to Sir Robert Whitney.
l. 4. r. Sir, In the Exposition of the 85 Psalm. p. 4. l 32. r. the Lord, p. 5.
l 11. r. blessings they have received from him, though notwithstanding those
blessings they lie. p. 11 l. 6. Dele brought back his people that had. p. 14.
l. 12. r. this life. p. 17 l. ^^. after diligence r. hereunto to become Gods
people, that so they may have title. p. 18. l. 18. after also r. describes the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God. l. 19. after 7. r. See Mat. 9.^ p. 2^.
l. 10. in the margin read to wrath. p. 21. l. 17 r. these men p. 25. l. 10. for
Pal. r. verse. l. 22. r. got not. p. 73 l. 3. for serve r. fear. p. 76. l. 10.
r. and those. that follow. l. 12. r. raciows. p. 101. l. 25. r. an Atheist. In
the Exposition of the 87. Psalm. p 98. l 20. r. Hobab. p. 108. l. 18. r.
effectual. p. 110. l. 21. for wrath r. watch p. ^^^ l. 33. after for. r the
conversion of Rebels. First, they must endeavor in. p. 115. l. 30. r. and
renown. p. 118. l. 4. r. belliever l. 7.^^ instant p. 126. l. 16. for word r.
work. I^^^^^ faults are left to the Readers ingenuity.

FINIS.

