Imprimatur,

C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
October 17. 1685.
THE LAW and EQUITY OF THE GOSPEL.

OR THE Goodness of our Lord AS A LEGISLATOR.

Delivered first from the Pulpit in Two plain Sermons. And now Repeated from
the Press, with others tending to the same End.

To which is added, The Grand Inquiry to be made in These Inquisitive Times;
together with The Resolution of Paul and Silas.

AS ALSO An Improvement of That Inquiry, Containing, in its Parts, A Resolution
unto It self.

AND A Scriptural Prognostic of Jesus Christ's Second Advent to Judge the
World.

LASTLY A Proeservative against Ambition.

By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his MAJESTY, and Dean of Sarum.

London, Printed by S. Roycroft for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1686.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THo some Disputes are made Needful by needless Questions which are raised by 2 Timothy 2. 14.
strife of Words; and tho when Malice, or Curiosity, Carnal Interest, or
Ambition, have brewed and broached such Doctrines, as are dishonorable to God,
and his holy Gospel, or have a Tendency to the Ruin of Church and State, The
greatest Lovers of Peace and Silence must so dispute against the Former, as by
their Arguments to assert and secure the Later; Tho the most peaceable Dr.
Hammond, Johannes Oxon in vita H. H. p. 45. et 53.
the Best of Men, and Humfredus Sarum in Operum Hammondi Vol. 4. p. 853.
The Divinest, (as two eminent Prelates have publicly styled him from the
Press,) thought it his Duty to be the Author of more Disputes and Defensatives,
than I and my Betters have ever yet been, (as his Controversial Writings do
make apparent, his second Volume being spent like the Eighth Volume of Erasmus)
yet 'twere heartily to be w^sh'd such powerful Courses could be taken, as might
prevent the every Cause and Occasion of them.

Experience tells us it is often easier, by Obstinate Silence to prevent, than
by Reason to confute, or to shame an Error. And next to such a Resolved
Silence, I know not any better Preventive of needless Controversies and
Questions, than our Medit^^ing on Questions which are not needless; But of
great Consequence to be asked, and of greater Necessity to be Answered. And
such as to which we ought to give our selves 1 Timothy 4. 15.
wholly. As Acts 16. 30.
what we must do that we may be saved? What is the certain Matthew. 7. 16, 19,
20, 21. Mark 16. 16.
Diagnostick whereby to judge without Sin of our selves, and others? and as
well of our present, as future state? What is that we call The Gospel? and
wherein especially does It consist? What is it to be able to Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
comprehend with all Saints, the Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and Highth,
and so to know the Love of Christ which passes Knowledge? to know the
Immensity of his Love, expressed to us (as by an Emblem,) by all the Dimensions
of the Cross he was fastened to; Extended upwards, and downwards, and on Both
the sides of it; a Type of the Fathomless love of Christ, whereof the Knowledge
is supereminent, surpassing and transcending All other knowledges in the World.
In so much that we may fitly espouse our Apostles Resolution, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Not to know any thing in comparison of Jesus Christ, and Him Crucified;
whereby is pithily represented The Law and Equity of The Gospel, which is the
Sum of All the Theology a Faithful Steward needs Preach, toward 1 Timothy 4. 16.
the Saving of himself, and of Them that hear him.

And as in the Days of our Forefathers, when Christian Simplicity was at its
purest, A vicious Life was justly reckoned, not only the greatest, but the
worst Haeresie in the World; So of Convictions, and Confutations, Religious
Practices were the most Cogent. (...) (as St. Chrysostom somewhere calls them,)
Convincing Syllogisms and Arguments, not to be answered by the Acutest, nor
ever heartily gainsaid by the worst of men. And therefore as Controverted
Doctrines have taken up much of my Time passed, so These (I am sure) are the
Grand Requisites, which 'twill be better to advance for the Time to come.

I easily guess what will happen, to me and others of the Old Stamp, (the
envied Friends and Disciples of Dr. Hammond,) whilst we engage in This Course
of Preaching up Christ as a Legislator; and of celebrating The Law, as well as
the Equity of The Gospel; of walking evenly in our Doctrines 'twixt two
Extremes; to wit Socinians on the one side, and Solifidians on the other. Even
the same that befell the Ancient Fathers of the Church; who for distinguishing
the Persons or Subsistences of the Deity, were called Tritheites and Arians by
the Followers of Sabellius; and yet were called Sabellians too, both by the
Tritheites and the Arians, for not dividing the very Substance, or the Deity it
self. So for teaching that our Savior did consist of two Natures, they were
branded as Nestorians by the whole Sect of the Eutychians; and yet were styled
Eutychians too by all the Gang of the Nestorians, for asserting that our
Savior was no more than one Person. After the very same manner; We, for
holding the Necessity of impartial Obedience to Christ's Commands, and (by
consequence unavoidable) a Necessity of Good Works, as Part of the means of our
being saved, do commonly pass for Socinians in the Rash Censure of Solifidians;
and yet are accounted Solifidians by the like Rashness of the Socinians, for
our disclaiming All Merit in our Obedience and Good Works, as to the making
Satisfaction to the Justice of God for our Transgressions; and for desiring
with St. Paul, To be found only in Christ, Philip. 3. 9.
not having our own Righteousness, But That which is of God by Faith.

But we must not be afraid to assert and propagate The Truth, because there are
who infer it from diverse Falsehoods; Nor may we dishonestly let it go, for
other men's holding it in unrighteousness. For for us to Romans 1. 18.
deny our Obligation to Good Works, because there are who do contend for the
Merit of them; or for us not to own the perfect Necessity of Obedience, which
does naturally tend to the Glory of God, because Socinians own the same to his
great Dishonor; or for us not to infer it from the Divinity of our Savior,
(as well as from the Perfection both of his Covenant and his Commands,) because
such Haereticks do infer it from their Denial of His Divinity, and of his
Plenary Satisfaction for the Sins of the World; is just as bad as if the
Christians should now begin to dogmatize, That there are Three distinct Gods,
(the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,) because The Jews and The Mahomedans do
constantly hold there is but ONE.

I shall therefore so order the following Parts of my Design, betwixt the
Enemies of Truth upon either side, as to hazard the displeasure of both
Extremes. But yet because I am convinced by the best Searches I can make, That
the preaching up of Faith in its vulgar Notions, has been generally the Cause
of such a Carnal Security, as has shrunk up those Sinews of Virtuous Living,
wherein the strength of Religion does chiefly stand; and that Men are made
Infidels (not to say Atheists) in their practice, by no means more, than by
their Errors about the Nature and the great Privilege of the Gospel, and so of
their Belief in the Lord Jesus Christ; I shall give such a Bias to my ensuing
Meditations, as may incline them most strongly to the Advantages of Obedience,
and strict Converse. Whether by solving such Objections, as still remain to be
Considered; or by the clearing of such Scriptures, as men have Appetites to
obscure; or by showing the Agreement, of such as may seem to contradict, or
else by pointing at such Instructions, as all the Premises put together shall
chance to yield us.

And this I shall do, if God permit upon some future Opportunities; if This I
presently lay hold on shall prove as worthy of Acceptance, as by Me it is
well-intended. That it may, I think fit to premise beforehand This Declaration:
That if in any Thing I have spoken, I seem to have spoken somewhat Austerely; I
have not done it with any particular Reflections, upon any man's Person, alive,
or dead. My Propositions are Universal, as well as True; and my Severities to
the Guilty lie All in common. As many as find themselves concerned, may make
their personal and their private Applications of my Reproofs; so as they carry
it in their Memories, that I have made None at all. For the longer I live, the
more I am of this Opinion, that Truth it self may be asserted, and Questions
about it decided also, without reflecting upon the Persons (tho we must
intimate the Parties) from whom we differ.

And here I am tempted to take Occasion (where None is offered) to tell my
Reader for his Service, (if I can rightly apprehend it,) that when I am now and
then consulted by a young Student in Divinity, and a Candidate for the
Priesthood, what kind of Cynosure he shall steer by, when he is newly launching
forth in the vast Ocean of Theology; I do not presently direct him, (as Dr.
Steward at St. Germans directed Me,) to begin with Vincentius Lirinensis; to
proceed with Baronius and The Magdeburgenses; Then with the Fathers of the
Church for the first Three hundred years; Nor do I presently engage him in the
Learned and Elaborate and laudable Method of Mr. Dodwell, whose Parts, and
Piety, his Patience, and his Pains-taking, many Theologues may imitate, but few
can equal; But first I tell him, that the shortest and surest way, whereby to
make himself a sufficient and sound Divine, is (next to his reading and
revolving the Word of God,) to study the Works of Dr. Hammond; beginning with
his Annotations, at least with his Paraphrase on the New Testament, His
Practical Catechism, and His Book of Fundamentals. For I have been long of this
Opinion; that He whose important Office it is, to be a Leader of other men in
the Way of Truth, and either not at all to err, or else to err as
inoffensively, as it is possible for him to do in a state of Frailty, will find
it Safest to be a Follower of the most Excellent Dr. Hammond, who (if any man
ever was) was a Circumspect Follower of Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for ever
and ever.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 17. read dear. and l. 18. r. dearer. p. 14. l. 12. after of r.
That. p. 27. l. 3. in marg. r. (...). p. 31. l. 5. from the bottom, r. Receive.
p. 53. l. 2. from the bottom, r. Good. p. 103. l. 10. in marg. r. c. 47. p.
106. l. 9. r. straight. and l. 18. after Them r. in. p. 110. l. 17. after
option r. to be. p. 119. l. 18. r. Six and twentieth. p. 126. l. 5. in marg. r.
tra. p. 216. l. 11. for at r. of. p. 253. l. 3. from the bottom, r. art. p.
277. l. 9. r. most Congregations do consist. p. 280. l. 10. after elegantly r.
call's it. p. 313. l. 4. after Spouse) r. we are. p. 331. l. 19. after or, blot
out to. p. 423. l. 7. after near add to. p. 431. l. 17. r. Modrevius. p. 433.
l. 14. dele The. p. 434. l. 18. after and dele The. p. 485. l. 12. r. promised.
p. 571. l. 18. r. especially. p. 704. l. 1. after is r. many thousand.

THE NECESSITY OF WEARING THE Yoke of Christ.
JOHN XIII. 13. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am.
1. THat we may see how well the Text may be made suitable to the Time, both to
the Day of the Month, and to the Buis'ness of the Day, we shall do well do bear
in mind, throughout the Tenor of my Discourse, that our Savior's last Supper
did consist of two parts. There was a Coena, and a Post-Coenium: which we may
fitly enough express, by calling them the first, and the second Course. Our
Savior rose from the first, to wash and wipe his Disciples Feet, (v. 5.) which
as soon as he had done, he sat him down unto the second, (v. 12.) And then
designing to institute the tremendous Sacrament of his Body, he prepared his
Communicants with these words following, (v. 13.) Ye call me Master and Lord,
and ye say well, for so I am.

The word Lord, and the word Master do so agree in the Translation, and yet in
the Original do so much differ, that we must bring in the Greek to explain the
English, or else we shall miss of its full Importance.

2. (...) is a word which refers to Power. (...) a word which relates to
Knowledge. (...) is from (...), which properly signifies Authority; but (...)
from (...), which properly signifies to Teach. Our blessed Savior is the first
in his Kingly Office, and the second in his Prophetical. He is [(...)] a Lord,
to protect and govern; He is [(...)] a Master, to direct and teach us; And Both
he is (...), in such a degree of supereminence, as is not common to him with
others; (...), THE Lord, and (...), THE Master. In as much as he is the Lord,
we are to serve in his House; And in as much as he is the Master, we are to
learn in his School. He is (...) the Lord, to stretch his Scepter over our
Hearts; And (...) the Master, to light his Candle within our Heads. As a
Master, he instructs us to know our Duties; but as a Lord, he commands us to do
them also. He is proposed to us as Both, for our Observance and Imitation. That
looking on him as our Lord, we may be humble; and taking after him as our
Master, we may be wise.

3. And this which helps us to Understand, may help us also to divide, and
apply the Text. For

First of all, If he is (...), which properly signifies a Lord, whose
Prerogative it is to Command and Rule us; then must we pay him a strict
obedience, in as much as we are his Subjects, or as being his Soldiers, and
Servants too. (Such as promised in our Baptism to fight manfully under his
Banner.)

Secondly, If he is (...), which properly signifies a Master, whose property it
is to instruct and teach us; then do we owe him obedience too, as being his
Followers and Disciples, placed under his Discipline, and trained up in his
School.

Thirdly, It follows by way of Inference from two expressions in the Text,
(towit the first, and the last,) that he is not only to be called our Lord and
Master, but to be seriously received and owned as such. For mark the manner in
which he speaks.

Ye call me Lord, and ye call me Master; and in that ye say well, because what
ye call me, I truly am. But to say well, is one thing; and to do well, another.
And therefore because I truly am what ye call me, be you as truly what you
pretend. If I your Lord and your Master have washed your feet, remember then to
do as ye have me for an Example, and see that ye wash oneanothers feet. If they
have called me Beelzebub, who am the Master of the House; how much more should
such as You (who are but some of my Household) be content to be called as bad,
or worse?

In the two first of these Particulars we have the Doctrine of the Text; and in
the last we see the Use. Not an Use of my framing, but such as the Author of
the Text was pleased himself to draw from it for our Instruction.

4. The Result of the Doctrine is briefly this. That we must not expect to live
as Libertines under Christ, who is not only our Elder Brother, to make us
partakers of his Inheritance; but our Lord and our Master, to make us obedient
to his Commands. Not our Lord only to Save us, but especially our Lord to be
served by us. Nor our Master only to teach us by the Veracity of his Doctrine,
but more especially to reform us by the convincingness of his Life. Our Lord
and Master in the Text has such a twofold Importance, as comes to one and the
same end in the Application. We may distinguish the Notions, but must not
separate or divide them. They must be coupled in my Discourse, as here they are
in the Subject of it. For as Scholars of Christ, we ought to imitate his
Example; which how can we do, unless as Servants of Christ, we obey his Will?
When Acts 1. 1.
Jesus began both to do, and to teach, he taught according to what he did. As
were his Precepts, and his Doctrine, such exactly was his Life, and his
Conversation. He led his Life by the Rule of the Moral Law; by his perfect
obedience unto which, he was pleased to blunt the edge, and to abate the Rigor
of it. So that it is absolutely Impossible for us to follow his Example, unless
by yielding our Obedience to his Commands. We cannot embrace him as a Master,
unless we receive him as a Lord too.

5. And with this I am desirous to fill my Readers so much the rather, because
I take it to be a point, concerning which as it is dangerous, so it is easy
for us to err. And so much the easier, because it is acceptable and pleasant to
the natural Appetites of the flesh, to look on Christ as a Redeemer, but
nothing else. To entertain him as a Lamb, fit to be fed upon at his Table,
whereby we may be nourished to Life Eternal; But not at all as a Shepherd to
guide and govern us, and by the strictness of his Discipline, to keep us from
straying out of his Pastures. For let us look a little within us, and examine
our own hearts by our own experience. Do we not naturally esteem it an happy
Thing, to have as much of this World as we know what to do with? as much as we
can sacrifice to all our Senses? to live in as great a superfluity of Sports
and Pleasures, as a Tiberius can in joy, or a Petronius think of? And (when we
are deeply run in debt by our expenseful Sensualities) to have all our Debts
paid out of Another man's purse, all our recknings made even, Acquittances put
into our hands, and nothing more required to be done on our parts, than to
believe we owe nothing, and that if by continuing in our Exorbitant expenses we
plunge our selves in new Debts, they shall all be discharged out of the very
same Treasure? Nay, is it not yet a more pleasing Error, a more delicious kind
of mistake and madness, to think our Debts were all remitted before we were
able to contract them? And then with a greater force of Reason, Are we not apt
to look on Them (I do not say as the most rational, but) as the most
comfortable Preachers, who bring us Tidings even from Heaven, that all our
Duties are done already by Another man's obedience in our behalf? that all our
Sins are discounted by Another man's Sufferings? all our Punishments inflicted
upon Another man's Shoulders? And that it is safe for us to Sin, upon condition
we despair not of being pardoned, but believe without doubting that we were
justified from Eternity, and that our Sins were all forgiven before they could
possibly be committed? not only all the Sins that are, but all that shall be?

6. I need not say who they are, by whom this Carnal Christianity is preached
and printed; Nor can we choose but confess, that to the men who have embraced
this present world, as did Demas, (the men who are afraid there is a Heaven,
because it infers there is a Hell too, the men who live after the flesh, and
most pretend unto the Spirit, the men who pray and despise dominion, the men
who praise God and defraud their Neighbor,) it is an admirably pleasant and
gladsom Doctrine. And this I take to be the Reason, why so much of the Libertine
does show it self with bare face in the Christian world. For what the Sons of
Disobedience do think most pleasant, they do passionately desire to have most
true. All their Wits are set on work to find our Arguments and Reasons, whereby
to evince it, and make it good. What soever they feed upon is so exceedingly
fermented by this four Leven, that the wholsomest of meats is made to nourish
their Disease; and none so much, as the Bread of Life. Even Sermons and
Sacraments are most perverted to their destruction. And therefore the Tendency
of Opinions ought to be diligently Weighed. For when men's Opinions in Religion
are gratifications to the Flesh, and when they are Servants to those Opinions,
and transported with the pleasure of being Such, there is hardly any passage in
all the Scriptures, which they will not prevail with to sound that way.

But seeing the Joy and Contentment which is wont to arise from a pleasing
Falsehood, is but like the Joy of Hypocrites, exceeding Job 20. 5.
short, and cannot last any longer than a Natural man's life, (which, if it
continue till he is old, is much too young to be but the childhood of
Aeternity,) we ought to look upon Them as our surest Friends, who are so
courteously severe, as to awaken us out of our Reverie; not permitting us to go
on in our merry Dream, for fear it prove a dead sleep by long continuance,
whose danger will not be discerned, until we awake in Another world.

7. They indeed do say truth, who say that Christ is our Savior, our
Sacrifice, our Elder Brother, and our Advocate, and that by him we are redeemed
from the Curse of the Law; (Gal. 3. 13.) But nothing hurts more than Truth it
self, when it is not solidly and wholly, but only partially delivered. And they
say not the whole Truth, until they add this unto all the rest, that Christ is
our Joh. 13. 13, 14.
Master, our Joh. 13. 34. Gal. 6. 2.
Lawgiver, our Rev. 19. 16.
King, and our Mic. 5. 1.
Judge; and that he came not to abrogate, but to perfect the Law. To fulfill it,
says the English; To fill it up, says the Greek; for (...) is the word,
Matthew. 5. 17. Hence therefore I shall argue the obligation lying upon us, that
we exceed the Jews as much, by our obeying the moral Law, as They did us, by
their obeying the Ceremonial. And this I shall do by three such steps or
Degrees, as may serve for three Rounds of a Jacob's Ladder; whose Bottom,
although it touch the Earth, yet it reaches at the Top within the Heavens.

8. First, If Christ were nothing more than our Lord and Master, we must be
concluded to be his Servants; because they are Relative and Correlative, which
do mutually infer the one the other. And were we nothing more to him than hired
Servants, we could not sure but be obliged to do his work: which is not only to
believe he is true, and righteous, and will pay us the wages which he has
promised; But (over and above) it is to come when he calls, to go when he
sends, and to do what he bids us, without exception, or delay. For was it ever
yet the work of an hired Servant, to believe that his Master is an honest meek
man, who first will suffer himself with patience to be abused by his Servant,
and then besides his forgiveness, will give him also a great Reward? No. It Is
the keeping of his Commandments which is the Doing of his work; And that is
strictly recommended by Christ himself, as the (...) or touchstone whereby to
judge what we are; whether loving, or faithful, or knowing Servants. If loving
Servants, we will keep his Commandments, John 14. 15. If faithful Servants, we
will be sure to do whatsoever he commands us, John 15. 14. If knowing Servants,
and such as know that we know him, his best beloved Servant tells us, we will
keep his Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. Still the keeping his Commandments is as
'twere the great Vein, carrying spirits and life throughout the Body of the
Gospel, that is, Health and Salvation to them that read it. Let men write never
so much; let them Dispute never so well for the cause of Christ; or let them
preach never so often; this at last will be the product and Sum of All, Fear
God, and keep his Commandments. And therefore Eccles. 12. 13.
the keeping of his Commandments, which is the doing of his work, is every
where set before us as the only-sufficient Proof, or Demonstration, that we do
not only call him our Lord and Master, but that we practically receive him as
truly such. But this is not all.

9. For he is such a Lord and Master, as deserves more of us than bare
obedience; in as much as he has not only hired us, but has bought us
outright. So said St. Paul to his Corinthians, We are not our own, for we are
1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
bought with a Price. And therefore if he had been pleased, he might justly of
Servants have made us Slaves. Lord! how exactly should we be dutiful to this
our Master, if we would only do for him, as we would that our Servants should
do for us? we look for absolute, impartial, universal obedience, from a Servant
only hired from year to year. And sure much more from such a Servant, as is
bound in an Apprentiship for six or seven. Much more yet from such a Servant,
as we have bought out of the Galleys, and dearly paid for, and made as much our
Peculium, as either our Sheep, or our Oxen, or as the Furniture of our House.
But now the blessed Lord and Master speaking to us in my Text, has bought us
all from what is worse than the Turkish Galleys; even as much as a Lake of Fire
and Brimstone is worse than a Sea of Salt and Water. Nor must we serve him the
less (with the Antinomians,) but rather the more for our being bought: because
being bought, we cannot possibly be our own; And sure the less we are our own,
the more we must needs be his that bought us; He having bought and delivered us
out of the hands of our Enemies, as well to the end that we might Luke 2. 74.
serve him, as to the end that we might be safe. He bought us for his own sake,
as well as ours. We indeed were deer to him, but he was deerer unto himself.
The very Disgraces which he suffered as having a Tendency to our Good, were
first and chiefly suffered by him as having a Tendency to his Glory. And
however he intends our present Good, in order to our Future Glory; yet he
intends our Glory too, so far forth as it is in order, and subordination unto
his own. So that if when he bought us, and made us His, he aimed sooner at his
own Glory, than our Salvation, it cannot but follow from that supposal, he
aimed sooner at our Salvation from the Tyranny of Sin, than from the Torments
of Hell as the wages of it. And this he did as for his own sake, so very
particularly for ours. I say for ours; because the Torments of Hell could not
possibly come near us, were it not for the Tyranny and Filth of Sin. When men
do sin as with a Isa. 5. 18.
Cartrope, (to use the Phrase of the Prophet Esa,) with the strength of the
Cartrope, they draw Hell to them. But especially for his own; because the
Tyranny of Sin is an impudent Rebellion against his Will, and immediately
tends to his Dishonor; whereas the Torments of Hell are great
Discouragements from Sin, and executions of vengeance on them that do it. Hell
is God's Bridewell, or House of Correction; but Sin is that Tyrant which drags
us thither. Hell is God's Creature, but Sin is Satan's. The Torments of Hell
are extremely useful, as well to satisfy the Justice, as to set forth the
Glory of our Creator; whereas the Tyranny of Sin does oppose itself against
Both. In so much that the Reasons are great, and many, why we are bought with a
Price by our Lord and Master, that we might live in obedience to Him that
bought us. Sin was the object of his Hatred, for being the subject of his
Dishonor; And therefore the Scope of our Savior's Purchase, was rather to
purify, than to forgive us, although it was to forgive us too. To forgive in
the second place, tho to purify in the first. According to the Method St.
Peter used in his Preaching; Repent and be converted, that your Sins may be
blotted out, (Acts 3. 19.) Without Repentance and Conversion, no such Blessing
as Forgiveness can ever be.

10. But neither is This the greatest Title, our Savior has to his being our
Lord and Master. For as he has not only hired, but bought us outright, so
neither has he bought us with any Corruptible things, as Silver, or Gold, or
precious Stones, but with his own most precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Now
had we been People never so lovely, or been worth never so much, he could not
have bought us with more expense; He could not have paid at a Deerer Rate; even
Almightiness itself could not have given more for Us. For he that bought us was
the Word, the Word that was in the Beginning, the Word that was with God, the
Word that was God, the Word by whom all things were made, (John 1. 3.) And sure
the Word that was God, was Almightiness itself; Add He it was who gave himself
for us, (Tit. 2. 14) And more than Himself he could not give. For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11. 36. and Heb. 2. 10.

11. Lord! by how many Rights and Titles, may He pretend to our obedience when
he commands us? All the Relations of sub and supra are made use of in Scripture
for our Conviction. Not only here in This Text, is he said to be our Lord, and
we his Servants; He our Master, and we his Scholars; But he is every thing to
us (in other passages of Scripture) which may oblige us to the Love, and the
Service of him. He (for Example) is our Head, and we his Members. He our
Bridegroom, and we his Spouse. He is our Shepherd, and we the Sheep of his
Pasture. He our Everlasting Father, and we his Children. He our King, and we
his Subjects. He is our God, and we his People. He our Potter, and we his Clay.
He our Creator, and we the work of his hands. And as if all this together were
hardly enough to indear him to us, He is also our Redeemer, and we the Price of
his Blood. Now to what purpose, or for what reason, should our Savior be said
to be All this to us throughout the Scriptures, unless it were to afford us
this general Lesson, That whatsoever can be due, in any measure, from any
Inferior to a Superior, of any Quality or Degree, the same is due in
perfection, and out of all measure, from Us to Christ. In one Capacity our
Love, our Fear in another, our veneration in a third, our meek submission in a
fourth, our delectation in a fifth, our admiration in a sixth, our perfect
dependence in a seventh, and our absolute obedience in every one. 'Twould be a
profitable Impertinence (if an Impertinence) to insist on this Last, from every
one of our Savior's Relations to us. But not to run out beyond the time which
is allowed for this Service, I shall press it no farther, than the Text and the
Context will give me warrant.

12. First then let us consider, that seeing our Savior is (...), a Master to
Teach, and to Instruct us; nor only so, but also (...) a Lord, to Command, and
Govern us; It is not only our Duty, to learn the knowledge of his Doctrine, as
his Disciples; but withal as his Servants, we must yield obedience to his
Commands. For if we follow him as a Master sent to principle, and teach us, and
nothing else; so that as Scholars of his School we hold his sentiments or
tenets, and entertain his Propositions as sure and certain, but go no farther;
what then do we more by way of Reverence to Christ, than the several Sectaries
of the world to the several Authors of their Opinions, whether their opinions
are true, or false? shall we be followers only of Christ, as they of Geneva are
of Calvin, or as they of Helvetia do follow Zuinglius, or as they of Saxony
follow Luther, or as the brethren of Scotland do follow Knox? shall we be
factious only for Christ, as the Franciscans are for Scotus, and the Dominicans
for Aquinas? Nay shall we follow Christ no otherwise, than as the Stoics did
Zeno, or the Academicks, Plato? or as Julian did Iamblicus, and the old Magi,
Zoroastres? shall we think we are Christians good enough to serve turn, for
having been baptized in the name of Christ, and for historically believing his
holy Gospel? the very Scholars of Pythagoras were most exactly of his Creed,
and great Admirers of his Philosophy, and perfectly led by his (...). His Mouth
was their Oracle; his words their Text; what he said, they were sworn to,
because He said it. And shall we who are Christians give no more Reverence unto
Christ, than the old Pythagoreans were wont to give unto Pythagoras? or than
the Turks at this day do give to Mahomed? shall we live as if we believed, that
Christianity is but a Sect, if not a Faction? And that nothing is to be done,
but to be orthodox Professors, embracing the (...) (as the Heathen called it,)
that is, the Doctrine, or Tenet, or Faith of Christ? whilst at the very same
time we do abjure him by our neglects, revile him by our Oaths, spit upon him
by our uncleanness, buffet him by our Blasphemies, strip him by our Sacrilege,
and even Murder him by our Rage? methinks the Blindness of the Heathen may be
of some virtue to clear our Eyes. For the Disciples of Pythagoras did not only
give assent to their Master's Dictates, but also did imitate his Example, and
were obedient to his Commands. Just as Alexander's Soldiers did so ambitiously
affect to be like their General; that they were loath to speak plainly, because
He stutter'd. Or as the Scholars of Plato were so exceedingly concerned to have
a similitude with their Master, that they espoused his Deformities, and prided
themselves in his Imperfections. They would have Cushions under their Dublets,
because he was Gibbous, or too thick Backed. So devoted they were to their
Master Plato, that because he was not strait, they would reckon none hansom who
were not Crooked.

13. Lord! what a shame it is for Christians, to be less conformable to a
Master, who is infinitely fairer than the Children of Psalm. 45. 2.
men, most accomplished and perfect in every kind? And yet we know without
Obedience we cannot possibly be conformable, either to his Precepts, or his
Example. For notwithstanding he was a Son, yet learned he obedience by the
things which he suffered, ( Heb. 5. 8.) And being made perfect through
sufferings, he thereupon became the Author of Eternal Salvation, (not to them
that believe him only, but) to them that obey him also, ( v. 9.) not to any
Believing Rebels, not to Treacherous Believers, of which the world is too full;
but to them who have Faithfulness, as well as Faith; who so believe, as to
serve him, and do his Will. He is not the Author of Salvation to them that know
it, but do it not; or to them who do promise, but not perform it. (For almost
All do know his Will, and all do promise to perform it, not only in their
Baptism, but over and above on their Bed of Sickness.) No to Them, and Them
only, is he the Author of Salvation, who live according to what they know; and
justify their Promise, by their Performance. Our Savior intimates by a
parable ( Matthew. 21. 28, 29, 30, 31.) that the obedient Churl is much better,
than the mealymouth'd Rebel. It is a vain thing to say, we are Sons of God, and
Servants of Christ, unless we practically Show, as well as Say it. A Son
honors his Father, and a Servant his Master (said God heretofore by the
Prophet Malachi;) If I then be a Mal. 1. 6.
Father, where is mine honor? if I be a Master, where is my Fear? Now what was
thus said to others, by God the Father under the Law, is as effectually said to
us, by God the Son under the Gospel. Luke 6. 46.
Why call ye me Lord Lord, and do not the things that I say? To say, Sir your
Servant, is either a Complement, or a Ieer, when we say it with our Lips, but
without our Actions. And this does seem to be intended by the words of my Text,
if we compare it with the Inference deduced from it. Ye call me Lord and
Master, and ye say well. But to say very well, is not sufficient; For the Mat.
8. 29. Mar. 5. 6, 7* Luke 8. 28, 30.
Devils said well, in saying that Christ was the Son of God. And the Worldling
Mat. 19. 20.
said well, in that he said unto our Savior of the Commandments of the Law,
All these things have I kept from my Youth. But not every one that says unto
me Lord Lord, Mat 7. 21.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for the Life of Christianity consists
in Practice. And therefore the Inferences are These, which
are drawn from the Text by Him that spoke it. If I then your Lord and Master
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash oneanother's feet, (v. 14.) If ye
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, (v. 16.) And by the same Logic
he argues in the very next Chapter, which is another part of his
Farewell-Sermon: If any man love me, he will keep my words, (v. 23.) and He
that loves me not, keeps not my words, (v. 24.) which is as if he should
have said, [He that loves me will obey me, and do the Things that I appoint
him; which if any man does not, let him say what he will, he does not Love me.]
For no good Tree can bear ill Fruit, (that is an Aphorism of Christ, Matthew. 7.
18.) there is not any thing more impossible, than that sincere Love, and a
solid Faith, should ever bring forth Rebellion, and Disobedience. (Or so much
as consist with that which does.) No, no more Luke 6. 43, 44, 45, 46. Jam. 3.
12.
than a Vine can bring forth Thorns, or no more than a Fig Tree can bring forth
Thistles. From whence the Sequel is Unavoidable, That if we do not justly Obey
our Master, we neither heartily Love him, nor do we cordially believe him. For
let our Faith and our Love be what they can be, they are no more than a Couple
of Trees, which must be known by their Fruit. That Is the great Diagnostick
commended to us by our Savior, whereby to judge of ourselves and others,
Matthew. 7. 20. If the Fruit is Disobedience to the Commandments of our Lord;
then the Love that is pretended is but a Thorn, and the Faith so much talked
of, an arrant Thistle. Let the Lover or the Believer be commonly called what he
will, either a Vine, or a Fig Tree, A Godly man, or a Saint; And let the Leaves
or the Branches be never so specious to the Eye, (I mean Professions, and
Shows, and Forms of Godliness,) Yet Matthew. 3. 10.
our Master's Affirmation is still as true, as it is Terrible, Every Tree
[without exception] which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the Fire, (Matthew. 7. 19.)

Lord! what a change of men's manners
would this one word produce, were it but thoroughly Understood, or but
sufficiently considered? had it the happiness to be taken, as well into the
Hearts, as the Ears of men? behold the only sure way whereby to judge without
Sin of our selves or others. If we are fraudulent persons, or Drunckards, if we
are Schismatics, or Rebels, if we are Slanderers, or Railers, or falls
Accusers, or any otherways abounding in the fruits of the Flesh, (Gal. 5. 19.)
it is plain that God, when he cuts us down, will also cast us into the Fire. I
say he will and must do it, because of his Justice and Veracity, unless
Repentance step in timely 'twixt Us, and Death. And still, by Repentance, I
mean Amendment. Not an empty confession that we have sinned, nor yet a cheap
wishing we had not sinned; no nor expressions of Attrition for having sinned; but
a bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance; A Renovation of the outward and
inward man; such a through Reformation as does make a 2 Cor. 5. 17.
New Creature; A Change of mind, and of manners, even the fruits of the spirit,
Gal. 5. 22. In a word; If we are not our own, but are bought with a Price, and
bought out right by our Lord and Master, and that as to the whole of us, both
Soul and Body; Then (as St. Paul does well infer) let us glorify him that
bought us both in our Bodies and in our Souls, because they are not truly ours,
but his that bought them, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

14. But there is yet another Lesson to be derived from this Doctrine, and such
as our Master in the Text has taught us how to draw from it by his Example. For
it being to be praemised, that the Disciple is not above his Matthew. 10. 24.
John 13. 16.
Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; we must not only do as our Master did,
But (when God shall call us to it,) it is our Duty also to suffer, as he has
suffered. First we must do as our Master did; For it is his own way of arguing
in the next verse after my Text; If I your Lord and Master have washed your
feet, ye ought also to wash oneanother's feet; for I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done. Here he argues from his being our Lord and
Master, the obligation lying upon us to give an active obedience to his
example, and (by way of consecution) to his Command. And this being so, what
manner of men ought we to be in the 2 Pet. 3. 11.
course of our Lives and conversations? we ought to Love oneanother, as He did
Us; not only unto the Death, but to the fulfilling of the Law too. And how far
are they from that, who are ((...), that is) Inventors of evil things? of Lies,
and Slanders, and most malicious Accusations, against a People more Innocent,
and better Reputed than themselves? This is not to do as we would be done by.
Much less is it to love our Neighbor as ourselves. Much less yet to love our
friends, as our Lord loved us when we were his Enemies. To be Imitators of
Christ, (which men must be, if they will be Christians,) we ought to (...).
Chrysostom.
serve oneanother, as he did us; yea to serve our Inferiors, as he did His;
and that with such a kind of Service, as is the washing of their feet. And his
reason to enforce it is chiefly this, [the Disciple is not above his Master,
the Servant is not above his Lord, and I have given you an example, that ye
should do as I have done.] But now besides that this Argument does evince the
moral Necessity of our Active obedience and conformity to his Example and
Command; it also shows us our obligation of having a fellowship with his
Philip. 3. 10.
sufferings, and a conformity to his Death, which connotates our Passive
obedience also; and is the main thing intended in this second Lesson the
Context yields us.

15. For when he had said to his Disciples, that he would shortly send them out
as so many Sheep amongst Wolves, from whom their usual entertainment should be
to be persecuted, and hated, and to be scourged in their Synagogues, and all
for the sake of him that sent them, ( Matthew. 10. 17. etc.) he labored to give
them an acquiescence in all their Sufferings, from this one single
Consideration, that it is enough, for the Disciple, if he be as his Master, and
the Servant as his Lord, (v. 24.) If they have called the Master of the House
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household? (v. 25.) There
he argues from his being our Lord and Master, the obligation lying upon us, to
suffer the evils which he has suffered. Then if at any time we shall fall into
the Enmity of the World, into a Cross or Disgrace which is undeserved; we may
relieve ourselves enough with this one Remembrance, That it is the friendship of
the world which is enmity with God, (James 4. 4*) and that it is well for the
Servant, if he be as his Lord; we must not be ambitious to be above him* It
will be useful to expostulate and reason the matter within ourselves. Shall we
be such mad Disciples, as to expect, or but desire, to fare any better than our
Master? shall we be such overnice, or such delicate Servants, as to repine at
those hardships, which were the Portion of our Lord? shall we expect to be
applauded, and well reported by all the world, not only by the Best, but by the
worst of men also, when our Blessed Lord and Master is called a winebibber, a
Glutton, an Hypocrite and a Deceiver, a Blasphemer, and a Boutefeux, a
Conjurer, and a Demoniack? or shall we shamelesly be seeking great things for
ourselves, whilst our Master is the outcast and Scorn of men? (when he who is
at once the King, and also the Bishop of our Souls, is trodden down into the
Dust, It may seem a thing improper, an Absurdity, and a Soloecism for us to
prosper.) Shall we who are not our own, but are bought out right by our Master
Christ, be either so arrogant, or so stately, as to be stretching our selves on
Couches, and Beds of Ivorie, whilst he our Lord, and our Lawgiver, our King,
and our Head, our Advocate and our Judge too, is either groveling upon the
Earth in a bloody sweat, or stretched out upon the Cross in Tears of blood, as
well as Brine? shall we be drinking wine in Bowls, (like the Amos. 6. 6.
Wantons of whom we read in the Prophet Amos,) whilst our Master cry's out, he
is a thirst, and has nothing wherewith to quentch it, but the Cup of Trembling
and Astonishment, not only sharp as vinegar, but bitter as Gall too? shall we
be crowning our selves with Wisd. 2. 8.
Rosebuds, (like the Atheists of whom we read in the Book of Wisdom,) whilst
our Lord and Master's Diadem is made of Thorns? shall we be dancing to the
sound of the Viol, whilst His Ears are bored through with the most
sharp-pointed Sarcasms, that the Wit of Insultation can well invent? Let us
look upon the Case in another color, and admit it were our own. Would we not
wonder at such a Servant, and think him mad, who should affect to eat finer,
and take less pains, to be much better clad, and to lie softer than his Master?
It is enough then for us, that we fare at least as well as our Master Christ;
that we suffer no more, than to be spit upon, and buffeted, and scourged, and
Crucified. If a Christian is but beggared, or if but railed at, and slandered
for conscience sake, he fares a great deal better than his Master Christ did;
if he is Crucified, or hanged, he fares no worse. The Thought of which will be
sufficient, (if we are qualified with Faith,) to make us smile upon our
sufferings when they are wrongfully cast upon us, and to furnish us with
Patience (if not with Pleasure) in all our Pains. I say with Pleasure, because
our Master taught his Disciples, to Rejoice in that Case, and to leap for Joy;
for that is the English of our Savior's (...), Matthew. 5. 12. Rejoice (says he
to his Disciples) and leap for joy, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsely, for my Sake.

16. Thus having seen the obligation, laid upon us by Jesus Christ as our Lord
and Master, both to imitate his Example, and to yield obedience to his
Commands, as well by doing him Passive, as Active Service; I shall conclude
with the Necessity, the Indispensable Necessity we all are under, either of
rising to life eternal, if we accomplish this Condition; or of incurring (if we
do not) by so much the greater Condemnation. For let our Professions be what
they will, of Faith in Christ as a Redeemer; we cannot own him as a Master,
Unless we are Followers of his Life; nor without sincere obedience, can we
Recive him as a Lord. And yet unless we so receive him, He will not then
receive us, in the great day of Discrimination, when he shall solemnly put a
Difference betwixt the Wheat, and the Chaff, taking the one into his Garner,
and burning up the other with Fire unquentchable. For not to him, who hides his
Talent in the Earth; much less to him, who vainly throws it into the Air; But
to him who does employ and improve his Talent, the righteous Judge of all the
world will use that Sentence of Approbation, ( Matthew. 25. 21.) Well done thou
good and faithful Servant, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. From whence it
follows as unavoidably, as that God cannot lie, That we must All without
exception be first well Doers, we must first of all be good and Faithful
Servants, before the Judge can say to us, well done good and faithful Servants.
And yet again he must be able to say That to us, before he can possibly bid us
Enter into the Joy of our Lord. He cannot say well done, to an Evil Doer; He
cannot call him a Faithful, who is an unfaithful Servant; He cannot say Come ye
blessed, and Enter ye into the Joy of your Lord, to whom the Sentence of Go ye
Cursed into everlasting Fire does of right belong.

17. And if these things are so; then as we tender the greatest Interest both
of our Bodies and of our Souls. Let no man cozen us to Hell, by making us
believe we are sure of Heaven. Beware of Comfortable Preachers (as they that
love to be flattered do fasly call them,) who either write or speak much in the
Praise of Faith, But in Disparagement of obedience to the Commandments of our
Lord. And often quarrel at the necessity of being rich in good works, as if
Salvation were to be had at a cheaper Rate. Let me put the case home, as well
to others as to myself, in the fewest words. Have we an earnestness of Desire
to live for ever in Bliss and Glory? or are we careless and indifferent what
shall become of us hereafter? Do we seriously believe an Immortality of our
Souls, a Life after Death, and a Day of Judgment? Or do we but talk of these
things in civility to the men amongst whom we live? if we are in good earnest
in the Rehearsal of the Creed, of the two last Articles in particular, the
Resurrection of the Body, and the Life everlasting; Then let the Condition of
the New Covenant abide forever in our Remembrance. And seeing this is the
Condition on which the promise of Salvation is given unto us, that we receive
and own Christ as our Lord and Master, as our Savior, and our Prince, as our
Advocate, and our Judge too; And that we so own him in our Lives, as well as in
our Beliefes, as well in our practice, as speculation; Let us not flatter
ourselves for shame (as so many Traitors to our own Souls,) that Salvation will
be found upon easier Terms. For to such as cannot pretend to be Babes, or
Idiots, or never to have lived within the sound of Christ's Gospel, the words
of the Apostle are very positive and Express, That without Holiness and Peace,
(that is to say, without our Duties both to God, and to our Neighbor,) No man
living shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12. 14.

And this I think may suffice us to have learned at this time from the Text in
hand. For tho I say not that these are All, yet these Especially are the
Lessons we are concerned to draw from it, and such as willingly flow to us from
its most rational Importance.

Now to him who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we are able
to ask or think, according to Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.
the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus,
throughout all Ages, world without end.

THE Yoke of Christ Easier than That of MOSES: AND HIS Burden a Refreshment to
such as Labor.
MATTHEW. XI. 30. For my Yoke is Easy, and my Burden is light.
(A Text not unsuitable to all the Severities of the Lent, which is (if St.
Jerome may be believed, and other Fathers more ancient,) of Apostolical
Institution. A Time sequestered by That Authority, for the Exercise and Practice
of Christian Strictness, expressed pithily in my Text, by our bearing both the
Burden and Yoke of Christ.)

1. The Affinity and Connection is as obvious, as it is close, betwixt my
present, and former Text. For it was the last Service which I performed in this
Place, to show how Christ is our Lord and Master. Such as he was pleased to
assert himself, in the thirteenth of St. John, at the thirteenth verse. It now
remains that we Contemplate the Moderation of the Laws, whereby our Lord is
exceeding Gracious, and our Master extremely Good. For it seems not sufficient
that he is known to be a Lord, in Exacting obedience to his Commandments,
unless he be as well known to be good and gracious, in that his Commandments
are not grievous. (Nothing near so insupportable as they were thought by those
Gnostics St. John alludes to, 1 John 5. 3. who fell away from Christianity,
and disowned Christ himself, for fear their Loyalty and obedience should cost
them dear; living then, as they did, in Times of Trial, and Persecution;) He is
our Lord, and our Master, in respect of the Yoke with which he binds, and in
regard of the Burden wherewith he loads us. But this our Master is Good, and
our Lord Gracious, in respect of the Easiness which he gives unto the one, and
in regard of the Lightness wherewith he qualify's the other. But

2. Our Translation, however True, is so far short of the Original, that (as
before, so now also,) the Greek must come in to assist the English, or else we
shall miss of its whole Importance. For it is not only my Yoke is Easy, But
(...), my Yoke is Good. My Yoke is profitable and useful. My Yoke is an
indearing and delectable Yoke. For all this and more is imported by the word
(...), as Lexicographers and Glossaries do make apparent. That is, (to express
it without a Metaphor) The Service of Christ is a most gracious, and Desirable
Service. What he commands us to perform, is not only very possible, but facil
and easy to be performed. Nor only so, but sweet and pleasant in the
performance. It is not only our Bounden Duty, but it is our Interest, our
Delight, our Reward to serve him.

3. And such as the Yoke is with which he binds, such is also the burden
wherewith he loads us. Whatsoever his Burden may here import. If the Burden of
his Precepts, then it is absolutely light. For then the Burden and the Yoke are
Terms aequivalent. The lightness of the one explains the Easiness of the other;
and the later clause of the Text is but an Exegesis of the former. Or admit
that by his Burden is meant the Burden of his Cross; yet even then we must
confess it is comparatively light. And so indeed it is in two considerable
respects. First in respect of the endless punishment, which will fall upon Them
that refuse the Burden; and again in respect of that unspeakable Reward, which
will be given unto them that shall take it up. The Cross of Christ at its
heaviest is but a Burden of Afflictions, which St. Paul accounts light for
these two reasons. First because it is but for a moment; next because it works
for us a far more exceeding and 2 Cor. 4. 17.
eternal weight of glory. For as the same Apostle says to the same
Corinthians, (what seems at first hearing a contradiction,) (...), that That
which was glorious was not glorious at all, in respect of the 2 Cor. 3. 10.
glory which excels. So it is as true That our Afflictions are no
Afflictions, in comparison with the Beatitudes which they work for us as our
Reward.

4. This is the meaning of the Text considered simply in it self. Wherein are
two Things especially which offer themselves to our Consideration.

First the Greatness of Christ in the Extent of his Authority; and

Secondly his Goodness, in the merciful use or employment of it.

First his Greatness is very evident, in that he has the power to impose a
Yoke, and a Burden. A Yoke of Injunctions upon our Necks, and a Burden of
Sufferings upon our Backs.

Next his Goodness is as apparent, from the easiness of the one, and from the
lightness of the other. For besides That Eternal and exceeding weight of Glory,
which gives an easiness to the Yoke, however hard; and a lightness to the
Burden, however heavy; The one is so easy in it self, and the other in it self
is so truly light, (considering that dolor, si gravis, brevis, is just as much,
as si longus, levis,) that even the Yoke of his Injunctions does give us
Freedom, and the Burden of his Sufferings affords us strength.

If we put them both together, they make a Text without length extremely
copious; for it exhibits to us at once the Law and Equity of the Gospel. The
Yoke and the Burden do prove the first, as the easiness and the lightness infer
the second. It serves to keep us in the Fear, and the Faith of Christ. For
first the nature of a Yoke implies a Bridle to our Presumption; and then the
easiness of this Yoke does also forbid us to despair. Christ is here both in
his Kingly, and Priestly Office; at once to rule, and to bless us too. He is an
Absolute Sovereign, because to Him it does belong to put a Yoke upon our Necks,
But yet withal he is a good and a Gracious Sovereign, because It is not only
easy, but gives us ease too. And though it may sometimes vex the Body, yet it
brings Verse. 29.
Rest unto the Soul.

The Reason of which is wrapped up in the causal For, being considered in its
Retrospect on the Verse going before. Where no sooner had he said, Take my
Yoke, and ye shall find rest; but immediately it follows, For, or Because my
Yoke is easy. And this again affords us a double Reason, for which we should
come at his Invitation, (v. 28.) First because my Yoke is easy, Therefore come
unto me; Next because it is so gracious as to give Rest unto your Souls,
Therefore come unto me all ye that labor. And this is the meaning of the Text
in its relation to the Context.

5. To Contract my meditations within the compass of the time, and withal to go
forwards with the design I have in hand, (which is not only to show the Law,
but also the Equity of the Gospel,) I must not now consider Christ in the
extent of his Authority, as he is (...), (that is to say) an Absolute
unaccomptable Master, to whom of right it does belong to impose a Yoke, and a
Burden; (for That was properly the Subject of the last Service which I
performed;) But only in the exercise and usage of it, as he is (...), (that is
to say) a Mild, and a Gracious Master; whose Commands are so far from being
burdensome and grievous, that even his Yoke makes us able to bear his Burden,
and his Burden does enable us to wear his Yoke. At which Paradox to Nature if
any Natural man stumble, he may illustrate it to himself by the Wings of an
Eagle, which are indeed a Real Burden, and of Considerable Weight to the
Eagle's Body, but such a Burden as by which she soars up loftily toward
Heaven, which for want of That Burden would be a Groveler on the Earth. Or he
may clear it by the weights of a Vulgar Clock, which, the heavier they are, do
make it go so much the faster.

6. A Subject upon which I do the rather indulge my Thoughts, (tho better
handled I doubt not by other men, and somewhat often by my self upon Ezekiel. 18.
31. Chapter 3. 9. Mar. 10. 17. Sermon. 3. Joh. 14. 15. Chapter 2. and 4. 10. and 1 Cor.
16. 22. Chapter 3.
other Texts,) because we have Libertines in our days, as there were Gnostics
in St. John's, who make the Law by which we live (I mean Romans 3, 27. Jam. 2. 8.
12. 1 Cor. 9. 21. (...)
the Law of Christ's Gospel) to need our Apologies and Defensatives, by
bringing up an ill Report of the Christian Yoke, as if it were as hard as the
Yoke of Moses, which neither we, nor our Fathers, neither the Prophets, nor the
Apostles, were ever able well to bear, (Acts 15. 10.) Just as They who went to
spy out the Land of Canaan, giving it out to be a Land which did eat up its
Inhabitants; Number. 13. 16, 27, 30, 32, 33.
a Land full of Giants, the Sons of Anak, in comparison with whom Themselves
were Grasshoppers. Yet they confessed it was a Land which even flowed with milk
and honey, excellent Figs, and Pomegranates, and such Gygantaean Grapes too, (in
full proportion to the Inhabitants) that one single Cluster was fain to be
carried on two men's shoulders. And Caleb thought it not impossible to take
Possession of the Land, in order whereunto he pressed earnestly for an Essay;
implying that All the Explorators, excepting Joshua and Number. 14. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Himself, deceived the People with their own Fears; thereby tempting them to
murmur against the means of their Redemption, and to think hardly of their
Redeemer, as if he had put them upon the doing of things impossible to be done.
So there are Multitudes even in Christendom, (and at this very day) Antinomians
and Solifidians, who having not courage enough as Christians to make a Trial of
their Ability, how far forth they are empowered to wear the Yoke of Christ's
Commands, or bear the Burden of his Cross; And being unwilling that other
Christians should be less cowardly than Themselves, have given it out among the
People, that Christ commands Impossibilities. Which is as much as to say, that
His Yoke is too hard, and his Burden too heavy, and that by consequence their
Rebellions are but the Infirmities of their Nature, which might have been
possibly in their Wishes, but not at all in their Abilities to be avoided.
Whereas the Truth is, they are resolved to sit still, to be at peace with their
Temptations, and not to make the best use of the Powers within them; So that
the Devil becomes strong, in that they make themselves weak; and it is in stead
of Wisdom to him, that he finds men foolish. If at any time He conquers, it is
because they do not fight; yea if he does not fly from them, it is because they
do not resist him; for so says St. James expressly, Jam. 4. 7.
Resist the Devil and he will fly from you. But Cowards call their mean
Submissions, their Inabilities to resist, that so they may Sin without Scruple,
or at least stop the Mouth of a clamorous Conscience. For building (as they do)
upon a very great Falsehood, that Christ commands Impossibilities; They make
their Error the more Incurable, by adding to it as great a Truth, [that having
done all we can, in our submission to the Burden and Yoke of Christ, we shall
never be accountable for All we cannot; because where our utmost obedience
Ends, our Savior's begins to be reckoned to us.]

Thus Truth and Falsehood are tied together by the Necks, (as Jupiter in Plato
served Joy and Sorrow,) that if they will not be friends, they may be made to
be Companions; and even forced to conspire against their Wills, to make us
tamely submit our Necks to the Yoke of Satan, in Pretense that our Savior's is
too ruggid for us to bear. And Truth it self becomes hurtful, by being
dishonestly tacked on to as great a Falsehood.

7. But God be thanked there are others of Caleb's brave Judgment and
Disposition; who think of Christ with more Reverence, than to believe that His
Yoke is insupportable, or that he looks for harder Services than he enables us
to perform. They judge that Christ commands nothing but what is reasonable, and
congruous, and therefore Possible to be done; at least in That sincere measure
wherein he mercifully exacts it, and with all those Assistances which He
continually affords* and with those Equitable Grains, which as a Savior he
allows for human Frailty. And therefore they strive so much the harder to put
his Commands in Execution; to wear the Yoke of his Precepts in all parts
equally. They think the Difficulties are such as by the strength of his Grace
they are empowered to overcome; more Invited by the Pomgranates and Grapes of
Canaan, than discouraged with the Giants, which are to be grapl'd with in the
way. And thence it is that they neglect not the Visible means of being happy to
all Eternity, for fear of a temporary unhappiness 'twixt Them and It.

8. Indeed the Sons of Disobedience, who court the Friendship of the World, and
thence are said by St. James to be The Enemies Jam. 4. 4. Phil. 3. 18.
of God, may make an Objection of their Experience against the Saying of our
Savior touching the Easiness of his Yoke, and against St. John's Exposition of
it, when he 1 John 5. 3.
says of Christ's Commandments, they are not grievous. For has not Christ
commanded all men to love their Enemies? and is not That a Grievous Precept
unto Them who forsake and detest their Friends? Has not Christ commanded all
men to be content with their Own, nor so much as to covet their Neighbors
Goods? and is not That a Grievous Precept, to such as live upon Plunder, or
Defraudation? Has not Christ commanded all men the rigid Duty of Selfdenial?
and is not That a Grievous Precept to our Proverbial Apolausticks, who deny
themselves nothing that Heart can wish, but indulge themselves in all that
either their Appetites can crave, or their Fancies call for? Nay has not
Christ commanded all men to take up his Cross, and to bear That after him? and
is not That a Grievous Precept, to such as love to lay it heavily upon other
men's Shoulders? How then are his Yoke and his Burden easy, when the greatest
part of men do slip their Necks out of the former, and cast the later (not
upon, but) behind their Backs?

9. Thus in the person of a Demas, who has embraced this present world for
want of a 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Confidence in the next, I have objected against my Text as strongly at least
as I am able, and against the Exposition St. John made of it against the
Gnostics: And I think I have done it with very great Reason. For as an
Objection is never stronger, than when it is borrowed from Experience; So Truth
is never more Glorious, than Oppositions and Objections (by being well
answered) are apt to make it. Nor can an Objection be better answered, or more
to the Snarler's satisfaction, than when Experience as well as Reason, even in
the Greatest and Best of men, is opposed to the Experience and Wants of Reason
in the Worst. The Answer cannot be Categorical, but must be adaequate to the
Objection, and so proceed by several Steps; First in general, and then in some
of the choicest or the most difficult of the Particulars. First I answer in
general, That when it is said by our Lord, his yoke is easy, and burden light,
it is not meant in relation to That inveterate rank of Sinners, in whom the God
of this World (as St. Paul 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Timothy 4. 2.
calls the Devil) has blinded the Minds; whose Consciences are callous, and
cauteriz'd, Acts 7. 51.
who (like Them in the Acts) do always resist the Holy Ghost, and have not only
1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
grieved, but even quenched the Spirit of Grace. It is not meant of Those
Profligates, who shake Christ's Yoke from off their Necks, Heb. 10. 29.
and tread his Burden under their Feet. But as it is meant that his Yoke is
smooth and easy in it self, or easy to Them who are wont to wear it, (whereby
they have fitted it for their Necks, and their Necks for It,) so it is meant
that his Burden is not absolutely and simply, but comparatively light; in
respect of That Glory, whereof it works for us a weight unspeakable; and in
respect of That Burden, of God's heavy Vengeance, from which it frees us. In
like manner when St. John affirms of Christ as a Legislator, that his
Commandments are not grievous, it is not meant with respect to the Romans 8. 7.
Carnal minded, who are said by St. Paul to be at Enmity with God; (for to men
of sore Eyes the glorious Bounty of the Sun is the greatest Nuisance, and so to
men of sick Palates the very best meat is the most unsavorie;) But it is meant
that his Commandments are not grievous in Themselves, nor to such as have the
Patience to try them thoroughly, nor have forfeited or lost the moral honesty of
their Nature, which The God of good Nature implanted in them. Shall sore Eyes
object against the soundest, that of All noxious things, Light it self is the
most hurtful? or shall a Blind man infer, (and that from the Topic of
Experience,) that the Sun in his Meridian is in reality but a Shadow? Or shall
a man of the most depraved and paved Palate, be allowed to argue well from his
own Experience, that Salt it self has no Savor? nor any thing else that is
seasoned with it? and is therefore Luke 14. 35.
fit for nothing but to be cast unto the Dunghill? No, the Objection lies
clearly against the Soreness of the man's Eyes, and the Sickness of his Palate,
Not at all against the Sun, and as little against the Salt, which are evinced
by the Experience as well of the Most as the most judicious, (indeed of All
mortals who are not mad,) to be as good and useful Creatures, as any are in the
upper, and lower world.

This is the Monogram of the Answer I purpose in general to the Objection,
(before I descend to the most difficult of the Particulars,) And I am now to
fill it up with as good a Zographesis as I am able.

10. First then to strengthen our Resolutions of accustoming our selves to Law
and Discipline, And not to wear the Yoke of Christ, just as the Ox wears his
Master's, merely for fear of being goaded, but from a principle of Love to the
Yoke it self; let us consider how those Commandments, which do make up the Law
or the Yoke of Christ, do but exact the things of us which are agreeable to our
Reason, and therefore suitable to our Nature, and therefore consonant to our
Desires. I mean our Rational Desires, which we Enjoy, as we are Men; though not
our brutish ones, which we suffer, as we are Animals, and which (without any
difference) are common unto us with the Beasts that perish. Psalm. 49. 12, 20.
It should be natural for us (as Men, endued with Reason,) to Love the Beauty
of our Lord, and to fear his Power. Because we naturally incline to the Means
of Safety, at least as far as we do know them, or believe them to be such. Now
all that tends unto our Safety may be reduced to two Heads, Seeking God, and
Eschewing Evil. And Rational Job 1. 1, 8. 1 Pet. 3. 11.
Nature does incline, as well to the first, as to the Second. Nay as Things
which are good, and have a Tendency to our Safety, are more or less excellent,
and useful to us; so Nature, whilst it is Rational, must needs incline to That
of the Higher, more strongly than to That of the Lower Value. And that which
saves a man for ever, being of much an higher value, than that which saves him
but for a Time, It Is plain that Nature, being Rational, does most incline
toward the former: And all the Commandments of our Lord having a Tendency unto
That, are by consequence agreeable to human Nature. Especially when our Nature
is also rectified by Grace, which does not fail to work with any, who do not
fail to work with It; And however insufficient to make us Sinless, is yet
abundantly sufficient to make us single and sincere. Less than which in our
Service our Master's Justice cannot exact, And the Equity of his Gospel exacts
no more.

11. The Truth of which may be evinced, from the Absurdity which would follow
its being supposed to be False. For the Moral Commands of Christ, like the
Moral commands of Moses, must be acknowledged to be Romans 7. 12.
Holy, Just, and Good. Which yet I know not how they could be, were they not
adequate to the Faculties of Grace and Reason. For what Goodness can there be,
in an Impossibility of doing the Good that is required? or what holiness can
there be, in unavoidable transgressions for want of strength? Or what Justice
can it be, that any Rational Agent should be accomptable for the Things he
could never help? To command Impossibilities is not agreeable to Reason, in Him
who threatens an Endless Punishment for not performing what is commanded. And
therefore no such hard Yoke can be imposed by our Lord on the Neck of Any. No
such heavy and grievous Burden can be laid by a Savior on any Shoulder. For
though it is true that the Reprobates, (both men, and Devils,) being left, and
forsaken, and finally given over by the Judge of all the world, are Genesis 18.
25. Rev. 22. 11. Ezekiel. 24. 13.
under a sad Impossibility of doing Good; yet it is as true too, that they drew
upon themselves such a deplorable Necessity of doing evil, They were not
created in That Condition. For God created them upright, and made them capable
of Duty; But they found out and followed their own Inventions, whereby to lose
the Capability which God had given them, Eccles. 7. 29. If men are so wilful in
using the Liberty of their Wills, as to make an absolute Covenant with Death,
and with Hell to be at Agreement; if they Isa. 28. 15.
will Sin with both hands, (as one Micah 7. 3.
Prophet words it) and draw Iniquity as with a Cartrope, (as it is in Isa. 5.
18.
Another) No wonder if in the words of the Book of Wisdom, they Wisd. 1. 12.
pull Destruction upon Themselves with the work of their hands. And in These
considerations, All who are Lovers of Christ indeed, and think ingenuously of
him, and are not grossly injurious to him, nor have an evident pique at him,
must either say that he commands us in proportion to our Talents of Grace and
Reason, or will not punish us for the Not doing what is impossible to be done.
Thus as the Antinomian Error may be sufficiently confuted by Arguments leading
ad Absurdum, so the Truth of Christ's Doctrine is as sufficiently confirmed, by
the Absurdity which would follow its being supposed to be false.

12. Again if we are not out of our Wits, nor have cast off the Gentleness and
Humanity of our Nature, we are not able to give an Instance in any one of
Christ's Commands which is truly grievous; we cannot pitch on That precept
which is not agreeable to our Nature. For what other is the Sum of all his
Commandments put together, than that we do to all others, as we would that Quod
Tibi non vis fieri, Alteri ne feceris. Quam Sententiam usque adeo dilexit, ut
in Palatio and in publicis operibus praescribi juberet. Aelius Lampridius in
Alex* Severi Vita.
all others should do to us? And what is That, but the Law of Nature? not only
written by Severus (a merely Heathen Emperor) in all his Plates, and public
works, But by the invisible finger of God, in the natural Heart and Conscience
of man as man, till Tract of Time and Evil Custom (in some depraved persons)
have razed it out? Let us keep but This precept, and break the rest, if we are
able. For what does our Lord require of us in any one or more parts of his
Royal Law, which is not easily reducible to this one Head? Deal we as
righteously with men, as by men we would be dealt with; And let us do the Will
of God, with as much singleness and Zeal, as we desire that God himself will be
pleased to do ours; And then we have at once fulfilled the Law of Nature, and
of Matthew. 7. 12.
Christ too.

13. Now if the Yoke of Christ's Precepts is thus easy in it self, how smooth
and easy is it to Them, who have inured themselves to it by their Obedience? an
Argument taken from Experience will be as cogent as any can be. David found,
after a great and a long Experience, that the Commandments of God were sweeter
to him, than the Honey, and Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10. where the word Honey being
used, by a kind of a Proverb among the Hebrews, for all imaginable objects of
Sensual Pleasure, it is plain the meaning of the Prophet must needs be This;
that the Pleasure arising to him from the Rectitude of his Actions, and an
uniform obedience to Gods Commands, was as much greater than any pleasure which
he had ever yet enjoyed in the Breaches of them, as the Pleasure which smites
the Soul, is greater than That which affects the Body. Betwixt which two there
is so signal and wide a Difference, that (by an obvious Antimetabole) the
Pleasure of the Soul is the Soul of Pleasure; to which the pleasure of the Body
is in comparison nothing more than a putrid Carcass. And as the Pleasures of
the Soul are by much the greatest, so it is the Soul's greatest Pleasure, to
arrive at an Ability to despise That of the Body. Such was the Savor and the
Gust which David had of God's Precepts, and such was his Account of the Delight
he took in them. And surely All People of Virtue in all the Ages of the World,
have ever said the same thing from the same Experience. So that if any body is
not of David's Mind, it is merely for want of his Experience. For the Proof of
sweet things lies in the Trial, and the Taste. As the Psalmist cried out in one
place, Lord how sweet Psalm. 119. 103.
are thy words unto my Taste! yea sweeter than Honey unto my Mouth! So he prayed
in another, Lord open thou my lips. For he knew he could not Taste that Food
from Heaven, whilst carnal prejudice and perverseness had shut his Mouth. First
therefore having prayed that God will open our lips, (as the Psalmist did) we
must endeavor (as He did too) to taste, and see, how gracious the Lord is, and
not only in his Promises, but Precepts also. Which the oftener we taste, with
the more Appetite shall we desire them. But we know not how they taste, before
we taste them. As he who covets, knows not the sweetness of Contentment. Nor he
the Delights of living chastely, who has Eyes full of Adultery. Nor he the
deliciousness of Temperance, who has made himself a Slave to Debauch and
Surfeit. Fraudulent Persons could not be Fraudulent, if they experimented the
Pleasure of upright Dealing; But they must actually be upright in all their
Dealing, before they can find out the Pleasure of it. The Royal Prophet
therefore said well, That WHEN Psalm. 119. 167.
he had KEPT the Commandments, he loved them exceedingly; Not that he loved
them exceedingly before he kept them. What else was it which induced him to
speak so kindly of his Afflictions, to say that God of very Faithfulness had
caused him to be troubled, but that he was thereby much Ps. 119. 72, 75.
assisted in the keeping of the Commandments, which, he knew by much
experience, are naturally apt to rejoice the Heart, Psalm. 19. 8. and that in
the very keeping of them is great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11. But where a Cloud of
Vicious Habits does incessantly interpose bewixt the Eye and the Object, how
can the Beauty of the Commandments be rightly seen, or apprehended? The Prophet
David was sain to pray, not only that God would open his lips that he might
taste, But also his Eyes, that he might SEE the wondrous things of his law,
Psalm. 119. 18. And by the help of his Grace, (which we must pray for, as well
as David,) we are to cast out the mote, (perhaps the Beam) out of our Eyes,
before our Eyes can be ravished with the Charming Beauty of Christ's Commands.
And the way to do That, is ipso facto to obey them. For they are Pure (says
the Psalmist) and inlightning the Eyes, (Psalm. 19. 8.) they give wisdom unto
the Simple, are altogether undefiled, and converting the Soul; moreover by Them
is thy Servant Taught, (v. 7, 11.) From which expressions of the Psalmist it
plainly follows, that the Commands of the Law Moral (which are common to Moses
with Christ and Nature,) do make an excellent Collyrium, a Sovereign Ointment
or Eyesalve, to clear our Sight of those Mists, which the Devil and the World
have cast before them.

14. Say then Thou Demas, Thou Crude, and unexperienced Christian, or whoever
thou art who have a share in the Objection. Do thou find within thy self
nothing of Appetite or Love to the Yoke of Christ? It is because thou do not
know, how pleasant a thing it is to wear it. And will thou know the true Reason
why thou do not know That? It is because thou art not used to the wearing of
it. For how can any man find the Pleasure of keeping close to Christ's
Precepts, before he keeps them? Do but live a strict life, (and begin now in
Lent) till thou have got into an Habit of living strictly, and my life for
thine thou will find it Pleasant. But He who will not live exactly, till he
arrives at those Pleasures, which nothing less than Experience can bless him
with, is neither more nor less foolish, than the mere Scholar in Hierocles his
(...), who would not adventure into the Water, until he was certain that he
could swim; or one who utterly refuses the putting of meat into his Mouth,
until he shall have tasted the Goodness of it. For as thou can not taste
meat, till thou have put it into thy Mouth, nor find its goodness, till thou
have chewed it, and (by digesting it into Blood) have made it a parcel of thy
self too; so thou can never discern the sweetness of the Commandments of
Christ, until for some time they have been thy Diet. Do but feed upon them
enough, and digest them into thy Soul by obedience to them, and Then how soon
will thou resemble the men in Homer? who having eaten a while of Lotum gustasse
non inconcinne dicantur Illi, qui simul atque voluptatem recte vivendi
degustarunt, ad pristina studia revocari non possunt.
Lotos, were as much captivated in Love with the Place it grew in, as our
Ecstatical St. Peter with the Delights of Mount Tabor.

(...), Odyss. 9.

(...).
Were thou but wonted, and inured, as much to the keeping of Christ's
Commands, as now thou art to the breaking of them, Thou would find as great a
change, as from Hell to Heaven. And if from this Instant wherein I speak, Thou will but serve The Lord Christ with as much Zeal and Assiduity, and as long as
thou have served thy Master Satan; ((...),) I dare lay a Wager of Gold to
Brass, Thou will not change Masters for all the World.

15. But here perhaps it may be said, that the main Aching Tooth is not drawn
out of the Obection. For tho the Yoke of Christ's Precepts is thus evinced to be
easy, yet the burden of his Cross is not hence proved to be light. Nor does it
follow his Yoke is easy in That ruggidest part of it, wherein both his Yoke and
his Burden meet. For so we know they Both do in his Precept of Selfdenial, and
of bearing his Cross after him, whether laid upon us by others, or freely taken
upon our selves.

16. To which I answer by these following Degrees, (beginning with the least
and lowest.) First when laid upon us by others, there is matter of Comfort in
it, from the Consideration of its bare Nature For we know 'twas the Prerogative
of Goodly men heretofore above other Mortals, that they were able out of choice
to be bravely Miserable, (if such a Latinism as That may be used in English.)

Fortiter Ille facit qui miser esse potest. Many Examples of which we have, not
only in the Christian, but Heathen World. It was for no other reason, that
Hierocles flung his Blood in his Lictor's face; that Zeno spit out his Tongue
into the Teeth of his Tormentor; that the Indians in Valerius did chose to
suffer the Extremities of Heat and Cold; that the Brachmans and the
Gymnosophists maintained their Paradox even to Victory, Nihil jucundius esse
quam pati; I say for no other reason, than to demonstrate that their Souls were
above the Infirmities of their Bodies. Somewhat like the Brave Martyrs in the
Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, (tho not from the same religious Ileb. 11. 35.
Principle,) who having been tortured, would not accept of a Deliverance. In
the midst of all their Agonies, they would not admit of a Relaxation. And we
know that an Army of Frogs and Lice (as in Egypt) may have the power to do
Mischief, But are utterly incapable of being Injured. They are the Great and
the Good, who are most of all subject to suffer wrong. Regium est and
Magnificum, been facere, and male pati. We may explain it out of St. Peter; If
ye do 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. and Matthew. 5. 12.
well, and suffer for it, Happy are ye. For this is thankworthy, This is
acceptable with God. And hereunto are ye called, because Christ also suffered
for us, leaving an Example that we should follow His steps. God himself is most
capable of insolent Usages and Affronts, by the Transcendency of his Being, and
the Praerogative of his Omnipotence; most obnoxious to Indignities, by his
being All Goodness; and the most liable to Dishonours, by his being All Glory.
So next and immediately under God, the most susceptive of Abuses are His
Vicegerents? Whose highest privilege it is, and that which makes them most
like their Maker, (whose Lieutenants they are on Earth,) that All the Subjects
put together are not obnoxious to the wrongs which their Sovereigns suffer. In
so much that we should scorn to need a more Effectual Motive, to make us an
Obedient and Loyal People, than our resentment of the hardships they suffer for
us. Besides that All Crowns are so lined with Crosses, and All Crowned Heads so
apt to ache, (even abstracting from all the injuries which they are ever subject
to as the Butts of Envy,) that they deserve the Ease and Comfort of their Best
Subjects good Affections, if but to make them some Amends for All the
Malignities of the Worst; and in Requital of their Cares for the Common Safety.
And here I am tempted to a Digression I cannot easily forbear: For if it is
profitable and short too, it will be pertinent enough. It is but This; that if
the People of these Realms will either All travel abroad into Foreign Parts, or
at least take the pains to be taught at home, how much like Princes rather than
Subjects, they live in the Land of their Nativity, (being compared with other
Subjects throughout the habitable World,) they will say of our British
Sovereign, what No other People can say of Theirs, that his Yoke is very easy,
and his Burden exceeding light.

17. Another Comfort the Cross affords, when laid by the Guilty upon the
Innocent, does lie in This; that the Judge upon the Bench can but condemn a
Malefactor; The King himself can but reprieve him; It Is GOD only who can
forgive him. So that Mischievous men have This common to them with the Devil,
that they are able to wrong the Innocent; whereas the Innocent man has This
derived to him from God alone, that he is able (as to himself) to acquit the
Guilty. Here then we may demand with Psalm. 52. 1.
the Royal Psalmist, Why boastest Thou thy self, o Tyrant, that thou can do
mischief? so can a Toad, so can a Spider, so can a Pest, or an Imposthume. Why
do thou glory in thy ability of blasting thine Enemy with a Lie, or of
bearing False witness against thy Neighbor? so can the Father of Lies the
Devil, who thence is called by way of Eminence (...), the Detractor, and (...),
The Accuser of the Brethren. Nay why do thou pride it in thy power of being
skilful to destroy, either the Livelyhoods or the Lives of a world of men? so
can the Palmer-worm, or Mildew, so can a Deluge, or a Drouth. Which if
seriously considered by him who suffers, as well as by him who does an Injury;
'twill yield the First matter of Comfort, and the Second matter of Terror. For
Qui tulit injuriam ignoscere potest; Qui fecit, nunquam: whilst he who suffers
Injury has a divine Opportunity of giving Pardon, He who does it has nothing
left as the Issue of it, but Bitter Repentance, or Condemnation.

Hence therefore we must learn to discriminate two Things, which most commonly
are confounded, and apprehended to be the same. For it is one thing, to Insult,
or to domineer; And quite another, to gain a Victory. Just as it is one thing,
to be wronged; And quite another, to be worsted. The Devil and Pilate (for
example) did Domineer over our Savior, who yet (we know) had the best of Both.
Dives insulted over Lazarus, (as it is expressed by way of Parable,) though
Lazarus in the end had the better of him. Anytus and Melitus could not hurt
Socrates, though they could kill him. And though St. Paul could be beheaded by
the Emperor (...). Epict,
Nero, yet he could not be conquered or worsted by him. The Mode or Fashion of
a Victory does not detract from the Essence of it. It does not cease to be a
Victory because it is got by not fighting; as That against Cade by King Henry
the Sixth. Nor does it cease to be a Victory, in case it is purchased by Delays;
as that against Hannibal by Fabius Maximus. Nay it is a Victory, though it be
won even by flying out of the Field; which was the way by which the Parthians
were wont to Conquer. And so it is Victory nevertheless, though obtained by
suffering; as by the noble Army of Martyrs against the whole Heathen world. It
being impossible that a thing should cease to be what it is, through the Nature
of the means, by which it is so. It is so far from being necessary, that
Conquest should consist in making Havoc of an Enemy by wounds and slaughter,
That it is but one sort of Conquest, and that the Meanest. Let us therefore set
it down as a Truth unmovable, upon which we may adventure to lean with safety;
That to be mightily overborn, whilst by Impiety, must needs be either none at
all, or a glorious Overthrow. Because it is clear that God's Mercy is overborn
by men's Impenitence; And even his greatest Longanimity may be quite beaten out
by our Provocations.

18. Thirdly the Burden of the Cross, when it is laid upon us by others, is made
exceedingly lighter to us than I have hitherto showed it to be, by our looking
up to Him, who has born it for us, and before us; and by our reflecting on the
Reward, toward which it does lead us, and lift us up. Eusebius tells us of
some in Egypt, who, however Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 17.
groaning at once under Three sorts of Tyranny, that of Poverty, and
Pestilence, and Persecution, did yet express so great a Joy at the Return of
Good Friday, upon which they were to celebrate their Master's Sufferings on the
Cross, as that the sense of Their sufferings seemed to be wholly swallowed up,
by the far greater sense which they had of His. Though they were scattered and
dispers't as far asunder, as the Ingenie of Malice could well contrive, (some
imprisoned upon the Land, some under Hatches upon the Sea, some in Caves of the
Wilderness, and some condemned upon the Scaffold,) Yet, as the Angles of a
Pyramid, however distant at the Basis, do still come nearer as they Ascend, and
at last Concenter in the Conus; so how distant soever the one from the other
those Christians were, in respect of their Bodies here below, They met together
in their Affections at the same Throne of Grace. And though Our Church, like
Theirs, in the late ill Times, was truly Militant, when with the Burden she
labored under she sadly hung down her Head, yet Sursum Corda, she lifted up
her Heart to the Lord of Glory, And by an union of Affections kept all her Holy
Days and Feasts with the Church Triumphant. It would be certainly a voluminous,
if not an Endless Undertaking, (tho otherwise easy enough) to prove by way of
Induction, or by a Catalogue of the Particulars, how many Myriads have been
enabled to run with Patience the Race that was set before them, by merely
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of their Faith, so far forth as for
the Joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame,
Heb. 12. 1, 2.
and so sat him down at the right hand of God. Nor indeed can it be otherwise,
with such as Love and believe in the Lord Jesus in sincerity, And give an
Evidence of Both by their new obedience. For so long as we are such, the Spirit
it self (says St. Paul) bears witness with our Spirits, that we are children
of God. And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of Romans 8. 16, 17.
God, and joint Heirs with Christ; if so be we suffer with him, that we may
also be glorified together with him. And suffer with him we shall with the
greater ease, (if not Ambition,) because we shall reckon with St. Paul, That
the Verse. 18.
Sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
which shall be revealed in us; and because the whole Trinity is clearly engaged
in our behalf: (For so St. Paul tells us in the following Parts of the same
Chapter.) God the Father gave us his Verse. 32.
Son, and all good things together with him. God the Son gave us Himself, not
only that he might dye, but also rise from the Dead, and be an Advocate for us
incessantly at the right hand of God. Thirdly God the Holy Ghost ingageth Verse.
34.
for us as much as either; both by helping our Infirmities, through which we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, And by making Intercession for us
with Groans Verse. 26.
not to be uttered. And whilst so great a Care is taken both of us, and our
Interest, by God Himself, It cannot but follow that all the Crosses which shall
be laid upon us by others, will work together for our Comfort in this life
present, as well as for our Glory in that to come.

19. Lastly the Burden of Christ is light, when freely taken upon our selves;
as (in particular) when he Commands us (somewhat like what the Ammonites
commanded the men of Iabesh Gilead) to pluck out an Eye, (a right Eye too,) and
to cast it from us. For

First it is not an Absolute, but a Conditional Command. We are to pluck out an
Eye, upon a supposal that it offends us; that is to say, If it is scandalous,
and makes us stumble into Sin; and into such wasting Sin, as makes us fall
headlong into Hell; for so our Savior does infer in his very next words. In
such a formidable Case, and for the preventing of such a Mischief, It is not
only not grievous, but (...) (says our Savior) It is profitable for thee,
that one Matt. 5. 29, 30. and Matt. 18. 8.
of thy Members perish, and not that thy whole Body be cast into Hell. So that

Secondly it is not a Positive, but a Comparative Command. And it is the Dictate
of Common Sense, That of two evils of Punishment, we are in Prudence to choose
the least. As rather to lose one Eye than Both, and rather Both than the whole
Body; and rather the Body than the Soul. To suffer any thing, rather than
Death; and Death it self, rather than Hell. A man having a Gangraene in any
Limb of his Body, will not only permit, but hire the Artist to cut it off. And
by consequence will confess it very much better and more desirable, to Pluck
out his Eye, and to cast it from him, than, by keeping it in his Head, to be
Cast into Hell. Better suffer under Them who can destroy the Body only, than
under Him who can destroy both Body and Soul. Yea Matthew* 10. 28.


Thirdly it is the Dictate of Sanctified Reason, That of any two evils, whereof
the one is of Sin, the other of Affliction, we must choose to Suffer the
greatest, rather than wilfully Do the least. Our first Care must be, to make a
Covenant with our Eyes, not to look Ecclus. 9. 7.
upon a Maid. Next in order to That Design, we should not look round about us
in the Streets of the City, for fear our Eyes become our Enemies. Or if our
Eyes chance to wander beyond the Bounds of That Counsel, our third degree of
Care must be, not to gaze upon a Woman, lest we fall by those things that are
precious in her, (v. 5. and 8.) Or if This cannot be done, it is better to out
them whilst they are innocent, (as Virginius did his Daughter,) than continue
them as Inlets to Sin and Hell. Nor should we be grieved at our Advantage,
though it be bought with great Pain, whilst it is for the Prevention of a very
much greater.

Last of all, this Commandment which is so grievous to us in Sound, is very far
from being such in its intrinsic signification. For, in our Savior's gracious
sense, It Is but the Vanity of the Eye which we are bound to pluck out; It Is but
the Violence of the Hand which we are bound to cut off; And the obliquity of
the Foot which we are bid to cast from us, (as is shown more at large in an See
the third Sermon on Mar. 10. 17. Part 2. 5, 6, 7.
other Place.) Several vices of the Soul being fitly enough expressed by so
many Members of the Body. And That severest of our Lord's Precepts, If thy
Right Eye offend thee, pluck it out; if thy Right hand offend thee, cut it off;
if thy Right Foot offend thee, cast it from thee; may very well admit of this
Serene Signification: That we must pluck out a Lust, tho as dear to us as a
right Eye. And we must cut off an Avarice, tho as dear to us as a right Hand.
And we must cast away an Ambition of greater things than are good for us, tho
perhaps as dear to us as both our Feet.

20. Thus we see this very Precept, which seems a very rough Part of our
Savior's Yoke, and a very heavy part of his Burden too, does upon serious
Consideration appear as Easy, and as Light, as any Servant can expect from so
kind a Lord. For this Maxim being praemis'd as most unquestionable, and cogent,
That without the pursuing Heb. 12. 14.
of Peace and Holiness, no man living shall see the Lord; And that no unclean
Thing can ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but does inevitably belong to
the Commonwealth of Hell, how could our Master have obliged us with better
expressions of his love, than by Commanding us to flee from the wrath to come?
and to forbear the least evil which may possibly lead unto the greatest? rather
to crucify the Flesh, than permit it to defile and destroy the Spirit? even to
pluck out our right Eye, rather than suffer it to pollute us? to lose any
thing, rather than Heaven? to endure any thing, rather than Hell? And rather to
smart for some Time, than to all Eternity?

21. Say then again thou Habitual Sinner, or who ever else thou art who have a
Share in the Objection. Since it is thy Duty and thy Interest to bear the Yoke
of Christ's Precepts and the Burden of his Cross with Faith and Patience, by
whomsoever it is laid upon thee, whether spitefully by others, or piously by thy
self; what pretense can thou invent for thy unkindness to those Commandments,
which are not only not grievous, but very agreeable to thy Nature, if at least
thou retainest and have not rooted out that Nature, which the God of Good
nature implanted in thee? or what Apology can thou make for thy starting
aside from the Cross of Christ, which alone can exalt thee to wear a Crown? nor
that a mere Earthly and Perishing Crown, but one which fades not away, eternal
in the Heavens. So that admitting the Cross of Christ were heavy or grievous in
it self, yet in respect of thy Reward it should cease to be so. Shall any Thing
be called grievous, which does evidently tend to thy greatest Good? All the
Apology Thou can make, and all the Reason thou can give, is, that thou art
not yet arrived at a True Christian Faith, nor by consequence at a Love of the
Lord Jesus in Sincerity. For do but imagine (honest Friend) thou were just
falling from a Praecipice, or from the Pinnacle of a Temple; And a Neighbor
standing by should thrust his hand to thy Rescue, and catching hold of thine
Arm should snatch thee back with such a vehement and sudden Twinge, as either
to dislocate or break a Bone; would thou be angry with thy Neighbor for so
much rudeness? And in stead of being thankful for springing in to thy
Deliverance, would thou accuse him of being hasty, and quarrel the roughness
of his motion, asking why he did not use thee with greater softness, and would
not deliberate before he acted? would thou not rather kneel down before him,
and make an offer of obedience, as well as thanks, and look upon him
thenceforwards as dearer to thee than thy life? And in case thou art a rich
man, as He a poor one, would thou not give him an yearly Pension for such an
obliging act of Friendship, as that ransoming of Thy life with the utmost
hazard of his own? Apply this now to the Case in hand. Imagine as strongly as
thou art able, that thou art even now falling into the Bottomless Pit of Hell,
(a Lake eternally burning with Fire and Brimstone,) And suppose in this Case
that God the Son shall spring forth from the Bosom of God the Father; ascend
the Cross with set purpose, to fetch thee down; and descend into the Grave, for
no other end than to raise thee up; And go purposely into Hell, to fetch thee
back from thence to Heaven. Will thou repine at That Deliverance, in case the
violence of the Twitch shall happen to cost thee a little pain? or be
displeased with thy Deliverer, in case he should not set thee Free at a cheaper
rate, than that of taking off the Weights that kept thee down, (that is) by
mortifying the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; by Commanding thee to be
clean, and pure, and holy; And that for this obliging reason, because thy
happiness does depend on thy being Such? Will thou grumble at thy Physician,
for being severely Faithful to thee, in using the means of thy Recovery? Or
will thou not rather bethink thy self, with the Royal Psalm mist, Quid
Retribuam? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits and Blessings
bestowed upon me? If this Redeemer of thine is poor, (as in his Members indeed
he is,) will thou not give him an yearly Pension, (devote a Part of thy Revenue
to Pious uses,) as a small Token that thou resentest his Goodness to thee? or
admit that He is Great, (as in Himself he is immensly and unspeakably such,)
will thou not Sacrifice unto him the constant Tribute of thy obedience, though
he should rigidly command thee to fight with Anakims and Lions, to fetch him
Water from Bethleem, or Grapes from Canaan? Suppose he orders thee, (as he
does,) to pluck out an Eye of Lust or Vanity; To cut off an Hand of Fraud or
Violence; To cast away a Foot which is swift to shed blood; rather than keep
them to thy undoing; will thou not execute those orders for the Love of thy
Savior, and of thy self too, rather than thine Eye shall find the right Rode
to Hell, Thine Hand work out thine own damnation, Thy Foot carry thee in the
Broad way which leads to Destruction? Imagine strongly that thy Savior does
long as much for thy obedience as King David did to drink of the Well of
Bethlem; 2 Samuel 23. 15.
Christ as Perfectly out of kindness, as David out of Curiosity. Will thou not
do as much for Christ, as David's Soldiers did for Him? what They did to please
David, was at the Peril of their Lives. But what thou do to please Christ, is
for the Safety of thine own. And it is so natural for a man to pursue his own
Interest, that there is no better way to make a Rebel become Obedient, than by
convincing him of This, That it is his interest to be so, as well as Duty.
Although a man be such a passionate Idolizer of his Wealth, that he will part
with his Blood, a great deal sooner than with his Money, yet a desperate fit of
Sickness will make him send for the Physician, And He conceiving it for his
Interest, will give him very large Fees too. The tenderest Person and the most
delicate, who values his Body above his Soul, if he esteems it for his Interest
to have a Member sawed off, being infested with a Gangraene, will (as I said a
little before) even hire the Surgeon to use his Tool. And (after the very
same manner, as well as on the same ground,) He who is now the greatest Enemy,
both to the Counsels, and Commandments, and Cross of Christ, If he be but once
brought to an inviolable Belief, (without all Scruples, or Peradventures,) That
every man shall live eternally either in Heaven, or in Hell, And that it is
clearly for his Interest to do or suffer as Christ commands him, because in
order to his Escape from all the miseries of the one, and in order to his
Attainment of all the Beatitudes in the other; He will presently break off his
Sins by Righteousness, as Daniel charged Nebuchadnezzar. He Dan. 5. 27.
will be ready for Restitution to every one whom he has injured, as Zachee the
Publican when He repented. He will bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, as
the Jews were admonished by John the Baptist. He will be glad to be thought
worthy to suffer shame for Christ's sake, as the Apostles at Jerusalem, Acts 5.
41. The Consideration of his Interest will give an high Relish to all his
sufferings, making his Torments and his Tormentors to become his great
Instruments and means of pleasure.

22. Thus we see in all cases, both Temporal, and Spiritual, every man is for
himself, and intends his own Interest, in whatsoever it is which he undertakes;
either the Interest of his Profit, or of his Pleasure, and Reputation; The
Interest of his Flesh, or of his Spirit; his present Interest, or his future;
still it is one Interest, or other, which leads him on unto the best, or the
worst Performances in the World. Is any man Covetous and extremely close
sisted? He thinks it is for his Interest, as being the way to be Rich in money,
which is the only Grand Project that he is driving. Or is he Free, and
open-handed? He thinks it for his Interest, because it is the ready way to make
him Rich in good Works, which is the highest and noblest end at which he ayms
in this World. Is there any man running headlong into a Customary Contempt of
his Savior's Yoke? He thinks it is for his Interest, as being the way to live
merrily, and in Prosperity here on Earth, which is the Sovereign Allective of
his Desires. Or does any man take pleasure in supporting both the Burden and
Yoke of Christ? He thinks it is for his Interest, as being the way to dye
safely, and to live after Death a life of Bliss and Immortality; which is the
utmost Achievement his heart is set on. Lastly would ye know the Reason, why I
have meditated so much upon this kind of Subject? why I have struck so many
Blows upon this great Anvil? made so many long Discourses (though on occasion
of diverse Texts) touching the Equity and the Law of our Savior's Gospel? and
indispensable Necessity of our obedience unto the end? The Reason of it is
truly This, Because I have thought it most mine own, and other men's Interest
so to do. And till we are able to be so happy, as to convince our selves and
others, that it is most for our Interest to bear the Yoke of Christ's Law, and
the Burden of his Cross when it is laid upon us; It Is very sure that neither of
us shall bear the one, or the other, as is required. Whereas it is as sure, on
the other side, That as we never neglect our Interest in what is Secular, or
Carnal, (as touching our Credits, or our Estates, or our Temporal
Preservation;) so as little shall we endure, to start aside from the Burden or
Yoke of Christ, if indeed we do believe it our greatest Interest to bear them
as He requires. For can the very same man who is sollicitously careful to get a
Trifle, be as perfectly careless to gain a Talent? or stand in very great Dread
of a lesser Punishment? But of an infinitely greater, in none at all? If we are
strict in our conforming to the Commandments of men, with whom the Penalties
are but Temporal, and the Recompenses but finite.; we cannot sure be
Non-Conformists to the Commandments of Christ, on a Supposal that we believe it
as great a Truth as any is, That his Punishments and Rewards, are both
Immortal, and Immense. Nor can I think of a more rational or a more
satisfactory Account, why the Commandments of men should be so commonly heeded
by us, with more circumspection than those of Christ, but that we fear Them
more, and believe Him less; or value the Interest of our Bodies above the
Interest of our Souls; or prefer the seeming certainty of what is Present,
before the Hope and Expectance of what is future; And had rather become the
owners of Earthly Contentments in Possession, than to be dealing for Reversions
in Heaven it self.

23. And therefore to the end we may be able even to feel, and by consequence
to arrive at the Conviction of Experience, That the Yoke of Christ's Law is
really Easy in it self; and the Burden of his Cross is in comparison very
light; And that they have Both a secret virtue of giving Rest unto the Souls of
Them that labor, and of Refreshing the heavy laden; (for so our Savior tells
us expressly in the two next Verses before the Text,) let us be Conversant
incessantly in all the means of attaining to a True Christian Faith, That so by
cordially believing, we may passionately love the Lord Jesus Christ. And that
loving him as we ought, we may by consequence delight in doing that which he
requires, and by consequence may attain to that Reward which he has Promised.
For as our Faith and our Love, do what we can, will beget obedience, (if the
first is unfeigned, and the second without Dissimulation,) So it is sure that
our obedience will end in bliss. Not in bliss whilst we are Passengers, but
when we shall arrive at our Iourneys end. For here we are Dead (says our
Apostle,) and Coloss. 3. 3, 4.
our life is yet hid with Christ in God. But when the Lord Jesus Christ who is
our life shall appear, Then shall We also appear with Him in Glory.

Which God the Father of his mercy prepare us for, through the working of his
Spirit, and for the worthiness of his Son; To whom be Glory for ever and ever.

THE INDISPENSABLE NECESSITY OF Strict Obedience Under the GOSPEL.
THE INDISPENSABLE NECESSITY OF Strict Obedience Under The GOSPEL.
HEB. XII. 28, 29. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let
us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with Reverence and godly
Fear. For our God is a Consuming Fire.
THere is something Difficult in the Text, which will (I think) be best
explained by way of Answer to an Objection. For why is it said here, Let us
have Grace? It may seem at first hearing a strange expression, whether we have
it, or have it not. For if we have it, it seems superfluous; and if we have it
not, it seems as vain. We need not say Let us have, what it is plain we have
already before we say it: And we say to no purpose, Let us have this or that,
which whilst we have not, it is not in our power to have. For, Is the Grace of
God Almighty at our Disposal? Can we confer it upon our selves, that it should
hear be said to us, (...), Let us have grace? we cannot have grace till we
receive it, nor can we possibly receive it, till God most freely bestows it on
us. What is this that he says then, let us have grace?

To answer this it must be known, that in many places of Scripture Grace does
signify the Gospel. Whether as being the chief Instrument or Means of Grace;
or as containing and exhibiting the Covenant of Grace, which does often stand
opposed unto the Covenant of Works; or else as being the great Message of Grace
and Favor from Heaven to Earth. Whether for these, or for other Reasons, so it
is that the word Grace does often signify the Gospel; especially then, when
it is opposed unto the Law. A clear Example of which we have, John 1. 17. The
Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth from Jesus Christ: that is, The Gospel
of Grace and Truth. For there was truth in the Law, as well as in the Gospel;
and grace was given unto the Jews, as well as to the Gentiles, of whom we are.
And therefore the meaning of it must be, That as the Law came by Moses, so the
Gospel of grace came down from Heaven by Jesus Christ; and so it is called by
St. Paul, Acts 20. 24. Another Instance of it we have Romans 6. 14. We are not
under the Law, but under Grace: that is, the Gospel of Christ which is the Word
of his Grace; and so St. Paul calls it again, Acts 20. 32. For it cannot be
meant concerning the grace of Sanctification; because even They were under
that, who were under the Law that was given by Moses; else would Caleb and
Joshua, and Moses himself have been void of Grace. Which being eminently
Impossible, it is plain the Gospel must be the thing which is there opposed unto
the Law.

And as in other places of Scripture, so particularly in This which now is
under consideration, the Grace of God is so set, as to signify nothing but the
Gospel. And (the word (...) very often being put for (...)) to Have it in this
place, is nothing else but to hold it fast. So that the Scope of the
Exhortation, is, that we hold fast the Gospel or Law of Christ, described to be
the Instrument, whereby we may perform a Service acceptable to God. But
acceptable Service it cannot be, unless attended with Fear and Reverence. To
wit with a reverence of his Mercy in the beginning of the Text, and with a fear
of his Wrath in the later end. The Duty therefore is here enforced both before
and behind; and that with such Reasons, as it is not easy to resist. For first
the Reason going before is drawn from the richness of our Reward, in case we
serve God as he here requires. And then the Reason coming behind is from the
Grievousness of the Punishment, in case we serve him not at all, or not at all
with due Reverence and godly Fear. Our reward, if we do, is no less than a
Kingdom, and a Kingdom not to be moved. But our punishment (if we do not) is to
perish by the hand that should make us whole; to feel the God of our life a
consuming fire. The one affords us an Allective, whereby to draw us to the
Duty; the other an Impellent, to drive us on. It is the Wisdom and the Care of
the holy Penman, to place our Duty in the midst of a double motive, that if the
one cannot engage us, the other may. He begins with a Promise, to feed our
Hope; and concludes with a Threat, to excite our Fear. The first as a Spur does
provoke to Virtue; the second, as a Bridle, withholds from Vice. And he is sure
a dull Beast, whom such a Spur cannot excite, or at least a very wild one; whom
such a Bridle cannot restrain.

The whole circuit of the Text being thus explained, there are five things
especially to be inferred.

First that the Liberty of a Christian does carry its Yoke along with it. It
being a liberty from Moses, but not from Christ; the Condition of whose Gospel
is our obedience unto the Law. I do not mean the Mosaical, whether Judicial or
Ceremonial, which were but positive Laws at best, but the Natural, or Moral,
which is withal the Aeternal Law; The Law, of which our Savior says, that he
came not to abrogate, but to fulfill it: Not to evacuate, but fill it up. Rather
to strengthen, than to destroy it. (...), let us have Grace, that is, (...),
let us hold fast the Gospel or Law of Christ. And let us hold it as an
Instrument whereby to serve him. And let us serve him (...), so as our Persons
and our Service may be accepted. But yet

Secondly, we cannot Serve him so, as to be accepted; (we cannot do it (...),
so as to satisfy and please him in what we do,) unless we serve him with
Reverence and godly Fear With a reverence of his Mercy, whereby we are capable
of a Kingdom; and with a fear of his Wrath, whereby he becomes a consuming
fire. So that the Reverence has a Retrospect on the beginning of the Text; and
the fear has a Prospect upon the End. And therefore

Thirdly, here is a reason for each of these Qualifications, by which our
Service is to be such, as to be accepted. A reason why it must be with
reverence, and a reason why it must be with fear. Let us serve God with
reverence, because thereby we receive a Kingdom, (a Kingdom of Grace and Glory
too; the first being as 'twere an Inchoation of the second; and Both as I
conceive, alluded to in this Text;) Again let us Serve him with godly fear;
Because he is else a consuming fire. And then

Fourthly, it is obvious to infer even from hence, that the Fear of God, as a
Destroyer, may nevertheless be a godly fear; because it is coupled here with
Reverence, and by consequence with love. For Reverence is a Compound, which
has love as well as fear for a chief Ingredient. And the Fear here expressed
by godly Fear, is not only a fear of God's Power and Majesty, in respect of
which he is a Severaign, who has an absolute Do minion over the work of his
hands; nor only a fear of his love and mercy, in respect of which he is a
Father, who by his Children must be revered: but especially a Fear of his Wrath
and Justice, in respect of which he is a Judge, and so an Executor of
Vengeance. It is a fear indeed of God, but under the notion of a Consumer. A
fear enforced with a Reason all armed with terror; (for nothing strikes terror
so much as Fire.) Lastly a fear whereof the Terror is ushered in with the
Causal For, which shows the Tendency of the Terror toward the Godliness of
the fear: for thus lies the order and the coherence of the words. Let us serve
him with Reverence and Godly fear, For our God is a Consuming Fire.

Last of all we may infer from the Pronoun Romans 2. 6. to v. 11.
our, That God is no such Accepter of Persons, as to connive at Sin in us,
whilst he does punish it in others. No, the times of their ignorance God winked
at, (says the Apostle,) But now commands all men every where to repent. To
us indeed, if we repent, he is a God ready to pardon; swift to show mercy, and
slow to wrath. But to us being Impenitent he is a Terrible, See Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
where a consuming Fire is explained by a jealous God. Which compare with Exodus
24. 17. where the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire upon the top of the
Mount.
a jealous, and an avenging God. From whence it is inferred by the holy Writer,
That we, as well as the People Israel are bound to serve God with Fear and
Reverence; Because Our God as well as Theirs is a consuming Fire. That is, the
same God is such, as well to Us, as to Them. For here it is worthy to be
observed, That as Moses exhorting his people Israel to take heed unto
themselves, that they forget not the Covenant of the Lord their God, gave his
reason in these words, For the Lord Thy God is a Consuming Fire; So our Apostle
in this Chapter, having first of all compared the Law with the Gospel, Moses
with Christ, and a Contemner of the one with a Despiser of the other; and
having exhorted us to the Duty incumbent on us as we are Christians; gives the
very same reason in the very same words, (with no more than the change of a
Monosyllable,) for OUR God is a consuming Fire. Such he is, as the God of All;
but above all, as he is OURS; because we sin, when we sin, against greater
light; and against greater obligations to cease from sinning.

Having now done with the explication and with the division of the Text, 'twill
be most useful as well as natural to begin with the first of the five
Illations, Because the greatest numbers of men do stand in need of a
conviction, That Christianity is a Service requiring our Industry and Care. A
Service consisting of Obedience, as well as Faith; in as much as the Promises
of the Gospel are clogged with Precepts. Tho the Yoke of Christ is easy, yet
it is a Yoke; and tho his Burden is light, yet it is a Burden To stand fast in
that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, is to hold fast the Gospel or
Law of Christ, and to hold it as an Instrument whereby to serve him: and to
serve him (...), so as our Persons and our Service may be accepted.

A Doctrine the rather to be Imprinted in all our memories and our minds, (as
either a method for prevention, or means of cure,) because throughout the whole
catalogue of damning Haeresies, whether as that Catalogue was begun by
Irenaeus, or as continued by Epiphanius, or as perfected by St. Austin, (and
other Writers of the Church,) none has shed a more killing Influence upon the
minds and manners of Christian People, (so far at least as I am able to
conjecture,) than the mistaken, but pleasant notions, of Justification, and
Faith, the imputed Righteousness of Christ, and Christian Liberty. Hardly any
four things are more needful to be believed; or more subject to be mistaken.
Never was Poison more pernicious, or more to be antidoted than that, to which I
oppose the main drift of the well intended project I have in hand.

There were Gnostics, and Nicolaitans, Carpocratians, and Valentinians, whilst
yet the day of the Gospel began to dawn; whom the Tempter had betrayed into
such a Lust, That Lust had blinded with such an Ignorance, That Ignorance was
the Mother of so many and great Errors, and those Errors brake forth into such
execrable Sins, that 'twere perhaps another Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 12. p. 57.
Sin to make men acquainted with their nature, or but to tell them their very
names. For there are Sins (says St. Paul) which it is a shame even to speak of.
So as Tertullian passed them by with a Refer erubescimus, etc. Tertul. de
praescrip. advers. Haeret. cap. 46.
profession of his Bashfulness; he wanted the confidence and the courage, to
name those things which were done in secret. To such as these we can award no
fitter punishment, than that to which the Ephesians condemned Herostratus;
when, having burnt Diana's Temple (just as Pausanias killed King Philip,) for
no other end than to be talked of, He was decreed by that Senate to be
forgotten. (And forgotten he had been, if one single Theopompus had not put him
into his Story.) And therefore there was need of Epiphanius his Epiphan.
Haeret. l. 1. Tom. 2. p. 11, 82.
Apology, for having given us a Narrative of those Tacenda, although he did it
in detestation.

Now as often as I consider within my self, how the oldest and the worst of all
those Haeresies do walk about in new names through our English Streets; that
though the Scenes are somewhat different, yet still the Actors do all agree;
That the Irenae. p. 58.
Gnostics, and Clem. Alex. l. 1. Paedag. p. 107.
Nicolaitans, and Carpocratians of the First times are repeated as 'twere by a
Metempsychosis, in the Antinomians, and Solifidians, and sanguin Fiduciaries of
Ours; that we have had, if not as false Christ's as Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6. quem
locum confer cum l. 2. c. 10.
Barch^^hebas, yet as false Prophets as Barjesus; who have so preached up the
Gospel, and so cried down the Law, (I only mean the Evangelical or Christian
Law,) And made obedience so cheap a thing by enhauncing the price of Faith, as
to have turned Christian Liberty into Libertinism, and the Grace of God into
wantonness; I am tempted to wish the Gospel were sometimes preached, as the Law
of God was first published, in thundering and lightning. That God were sometimes
represented, as well by us unto the English, as by St Paul to the Hebrew
Christians, not only, as in his nature, a quickening light; but as he is also in
his Effects, a consuming Fire. If not in hope to raise some who seem to be dead
in their Security, yet at least to awaken others, who (it is to be hoped) are
yet but drowzy.

For as it is the custom and the craft of some cunning Pleaders, by citing the
Authority of Laws and Statutes, to patronize the Breach of them; or as Ausonius
could compile the most loathsome Fescenine, out of Virgil Himself, the
Parthenian Poet; or as a Spider sucks poison from the very same flower, from
which a Be does extract the most sovereign honey; so I know not which has
drawn the more deadly Venom from the wholesome Omnia adversus veritatem de ipsa
veritate constructa sunt: operantibus operationem spiritibus erroris. Tertul.
Apol. c. 41. p. 78. In veriverbium abiit apud Italos. Con l'Evangelio si
diventa Haeretico.
Letter of the Gospel, the Gnostics heretofore, or the Libertines now; whether
the former were worse corrupters of the Third Vid. Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 2. p. 89.
Chapter of St. John, or the later of the Fourth of St. Paul's Epistle to the
Galatians. For as the Gnostics in those times, so the Libertines in These, are
wont to cocker up themselves (with the she Tempter in Epiphanius) that they are
all the chosen Vessels; not vessels of a Respective, but of an absolute
election. They think it much below Them, to look upon God as a consuming Fire.
It is for men of their Perfection, not to serve him with fear, but with
Familiarity. Thence they commonly do so startle at the legal obedience of the
Jews, the mo ral honesty of the Gentiles, and the pretendedly meritorious good
works of the Romanists, as to fortify themselves against these, with the naked
Faith of the Antinomians. And so like him in Spartianus, who poisoned himself
with too much antidote, (not considering that there is poison, as well in the
Quantity of the best meats, as in the Quality of the worst,) they prevent a
less Disease with a greater, and kill themselves with their Preservative. For
men to sweeten their malady, and make their sickness pleasant to them, they
think it better than to cure it; and so the Humor be not painful, it is no
matter how peccant it is. They think they have met with the great Purchase
Timotheus bragged of in Athenaeus, (...): All the Fortunate I stands are caught
forsooth in their Net. They dream they have found the new skill of the old
Athletae, (...), to conquer the Devil without a Combat. And though St. Paul
(poor man) was fain to work out his Salvation with fear and trembling; to beat
down his Body, and bring his Flesh into subjection; to crucify the world unto
himself, and himself unto the world, always bearing about in his Body the dying
of the Lord Jesus; lest whilst he preached unto others, He himself might become
a Castaway; yet the Professors I allude to are so much happier than St. Paul in
their own opinion, that their Victories cost Them neither Dust, nor Sweat. They
imagine they have got a peculiar knack of being saved; and without any more ado
can so believe themselves to Heaven, that it seems to Them as easy to Dye like
the Thief on our Savior's Cross, as it is to Live like him. For they have set
up a New Faith upon Mount Sion, as Manasses and Sanballet did erect a New
Temple upon Mount Ierezim; that the most Scandalous Malefactors, who have been
any way obnoxious for breach of Law, may Fly for Refuge to That Asylum, and so
become of their Party. Their Vices many times do so border upon Virtue, (or
appear at least in that Visard,) that conceiving they are Sanctified with that
Unclean Spirit, with which indeed they are possessed; mistaking the corruptions
of Common Nature, for the secret suggestions of Special Grace; an hypocritical
Sigh, for a sincere Repentance; a sturdy Presumption for an unshaken Faith; and
a carnal Security, for an assurance of Salvation; they make no doubt but to
enter at the very striat Gate, merely by walking in the very broad way;
supposing that the chiefest reason why so very few do find it, is their seeking
to acquire it with too much Pains. And therefore for their own parts, That they
may not be in danger to put their Trust in good works, they live as if they
took care to have them bad enough. Hence they swallow the greatest Camels, and
never feel them going down; Sacrilege, and Schism, and the Sin that is as bad
as the Sin of Witchcraft, Deposing of Kings, and Subversion of Kingdoms. For if
(say They) they are once Regenerate, none of these things can ever hurt them.
Humbly supposing it the privilege of Freeborn Christians, not to need the
common honesty of Moral men.

These especially are the Persons who stand in need of a conviction, that to be
such, as they would be thought, they must be some of God's Servants, as well as
Sons. And withal, they must be showed wherein The Service is to consist. For
most agree upon the word, but many differ about the thing. Our Savior tells us
of certain Jews, who took the killing of his Apostles to be doing God Service.
And Saul did seek to serve God, by madly blaspheming against his Son. How many
Professors of Christianity, within our knowledge, and observation, have thought
it a Service to the Bridegroom, to offer violence to the Bride? most inhumanly
to deprive her of all her Ornaments and Jewels? and to expose her stark naked,
to the derision of her Enemies on every side? How many Refiners upon Religion
have verily thought to serve God, by shedding the Blood of his Vicegerent? just
as certain old Heathens did worship Hermes, by throwing Stones at the Image of
him. It is not therefore so much my business, to prove that God is to be
served, As to show what we must do whereby to serve him (...), so far forth as
to please him by it, and so as our Service may be accepted. The single word
(...) is of Invaluable Importance; It seems to be one of the main Hinges, on
which the Door of our Hope and Salvation turns. It concerns us more than the
World is worth, to know exactly how much it means; And so to be able to
demonstrate (at least to our selves, if not to others) what kind of Service it
is to be, which God will reckon to be sufficient. For considering those words
of our blessed Savior, Seek to enter in at the strait Gate, for many shall
seek and shall not enter; how can we quiet our Understandings, or safely set
our Hearts at rest, before we know what it is, which will please our Master?
and when our Service will be accepted? Now a Service only consisting of naked
Orthodoxy and Faith, (as it is an Assent of the Understanding,) is not the
acceptable Service commended to us in the Text. But (as appears by the Context)
The chiefest requisite is obedience to the Commandments of our Master, whereof
our Faith is a special Instance. It Is an Employing of our selves in our
Master's business; a careful observance of his Will, in whatsoever he commands
us to do, or suffer. Our Savior tells us the way to life is Matthew. 7. 14.
(...), not only narrow, but craggy too; (for that is imported by the Original,
though not expressed in our English Bibles;) A way so encumbered with Christian
Precepts, and so block't up with strict Commands, that as nothing but Faith can
open the Door, so nothing but Obedience can clear the way.

So that Faith and Obedience are to a Christian, (as the two Comets to a
Mariner, whereof the one is called Castor, the other Pollux,) never auspicious
but in conjunction. By Faith indeed we may have the Gospel; but we hold it not
fast, without Obedience. Without them both in conjunction, we cannot have
Grace, as the Text injoyns. For naked faith without obedience (like either of
those Comets without the other,) is apt to raise up a Tempest of God's
displeasure, enough to shipwreck the Soul of man. I cannot set them both off
with a better color, than if I compare them to Jacob's Genesis 29. 17. etc.
two Wives; whereof the One was very beautiful, but barren too; the other was
fruitful, but yet deformed. For as Faith (like Rachel) is wholly barren without
obedience, so Obedience (like Leah) is but deformed without Faith. Again, as
that without this is void of Eyes, so this without that is utterly destitute of
Feet. And though I take it to be impossible, for any follower of Christ to
arrive at Heaven, until obedience take up Faith upon her shoulders, that the
one may traverse the way thither, and the other direct it; yet because I
conceive it less impossible of the two, for an Honest blind Heathen to show me
his Faith by his virtuous works, than for a knavish and knowing Christian to
show me his works by his naked Faith, (a thing esteemed by St. James the
greatest Absurdity in the World,) were Jacob's option mine, I should rather
choose Leah with her blere Eyes, than Rachel with her barrenness, that is,
obedience without faith, rather than faith without obedience. And do think it
by so much a safer thing, to be a very strict Moralist, than a very loose
Christian, by how a likelier thing it is, for a Traveller to arrive at his
Journey's End, by being a Baiard that can go, than a Cripple that can but see.

They who know not, must be instructed; and they who know, but are wilful, must
be convinced; and we who acknowledge as well as know, must be for ever put in
mind, That when we are said in any Scripture to be saved, or justified by
Faith, it can be meant of no other Faith, than what is the Mother of Obedience,
and evermore attended with it. Which may appear as by other Arguments, so
particularly by this; That as faith and disobedience are set as Terms of
opposition, (I Pet. 2. 7, 8.) so faith and obedience are set as Terms
aequipollent, (Rev. 14. 12.) From whence it is obvious to infer, that our Lord
is not an absolute, but a conditional Redeemer. How else can That God who is a
comfortable Light, be said to be in This Text a consuming Fire? It is the
property of Satan, to be an Abaddon, or (...). And how can an Attribute of
Hell, be in any sense applied to the God of Heaven, but that it is spoken by a
Metonymie of the effect for the efficient, and imply's God Almighty his
deportment toward us, after the measure of ours to Him? A fire to purify and
preserve, if we are Gold; but a fire to consume, if we are stubble: A case to
be easily illustrated by the waters of Iealousy; which if a woman were chaste,
would make her fruitful; but if adulterous, they made her thigh to rot, and her
belly to swell. Just so said Simeon of the holy Child Jesus, that he is set for
the fall, and for the rising again of many in Israel. For the fall of the
rebellious, and for the rising again of his loyal Subjects; for the fall of
such Persons as will not serve him (...), but for the rising again of such, as
will serve him with Reverence and Godly fear. Which proves by a consequence
unavoidable, That as he is not an absolute, but a conditional Savior; so the
Condition on which he saves us, is our being true Subjects and Servants to him.
It Is our repentance from dead works, and our bringing forth fruits meet for
Repentance. It is an heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and a conscience
void of offense toward God and toward men. It is our having no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, and the keeping of our Selves unspotted
from the World. Lastly the condition on which he saves us, is the Denying of
our selves, and the taking up of his Cross; not to put it out of the way, but
to follow Him with it whithersoever he shall lead us; nor to lay it upon other
men's shoulders, but meekly to bear it upon our own. This is the acceptable
Service pointed at in my Text. Less than this is too little, because it is less
than will be accepted. And if we come short of the (...), the (...) in the Text
will be nothing worth.

Of this I must labor so much the rather to convince my self, and such as hear
me, because the best of us all is apt to have something of the Fiduciarie, and
(without a continual watch) will have a smack of the Antinomian. For let us
examine our selves thoroughly, and sift our selves unto the Bran; and then speak
freely as honest men unto our selves. Do we not flatter our selves often, that
we are good enough to serve turn? and that we must not be Righteous overmuch?
that it is improper for us to live as in the Commonwealth of Plato, whilst we
are in the Dregs of Romulus? and that we need not be better than other men, of
whose Salvation we suppose it is not Charity for us to doubt? Have we not often
sinned the more, if not that Grace may abound, yet because it has already so
much abounded? and the rather adventured to be evil, because of our knowledge
that God is good? Do we not generally conceive, (like Him in Zosimus) that we
may sin the more safely for being Christians? And have a privilege to be
wicked above the rest of mankind, because we are Worshippers of a God who is a
God ready to pardon? Are we not much the more careless of falling headlong into
Sin, and much the less careful of getting out, because we read, that if we sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, who is the propitiation for all our Sins?
Compare the lives of most Christians, (I mean Professors of Christianity,) with
what we read of Unbelievers, (whether ignorant Gentiles, or stubborn Jews,) And
you will say they have need to be all instructed, or atleast to be put in mind,
that Believers being the men with whom the best of God's Talents have been
entrusted, are by consequence the men too, of whom the best Service will be
required.

This I shall briefly make appear from two general Topics, or Heads of
Arguing. From the principal end or final cause of our Savior's coming hither,
and from his Principal business which took him up when he was here.

First for the end of his coming hither, it was rather to redeem us from Sin,
than Hell. Rather to sanctify our Nature, than merely to justify our Persons;
rather to make us truly Righteous, than only to reckon or count us Just. And
this may appear, as by other Reasons, so more especially by These. First that
Sin is by nature far worse than Hell, Because our sins can serve for nothing,
but to Injure and Incense the Righteous Judge of all the World; whereas Hell is
good for something; even to satisfy the Justice which Sin has Injured, and to
glorify the Judge whom it has Incensed. From whence it follows, that it is
much more conformable to the Holiness of God, and more advances his Glory too,
To have sent his Son into the world, rather to purify, than to forgive it. To
forgive it indeed by a secondary intention, but to purify it by the first;
(for purity by nature being better than Pardon, by a very good sequel was
sooner meant,) To reduce us to our obedience as the chief purpose of his
coming, and to give us Heaven as the Accession. For real happiness consisting
in being holy as God is holy, It Is plain that Heaven can be no more, than a
good Appendix of our felicity. For can we imagine, that God himself can be any
whit the happier for being in Heaven? No; It Is Heaven which is the happier for
being God's Throne: which should he fix upon the Earth, Heaven would presently
be his Footstool. As it is not the Court which gives Majesty to the King; But
wheresoever the King is, there is the Court. To be in Heaven without holiness,
(like the lost Regiment of Angels) would be to make it a second Hell. And
therefore They, at the Day of Judgment, who shall entreat the Hills to cover
them, and the Mountains to fall upon them, will have no other reason for that
Entreaty, than to be hid from the face of him that sits upon the Throne.
From whence it is obvious to infer, that to a man of impure Eyes, nothing
smarts more than the Sight of Bliss. And therefore our Savior's coming hither
was first to fortify our eyes, or to make them pure, and then to procure us
the Blessed Vision.

Besides, Secondly, Had he been sent into the world, only to amplify our
Charter, but not our Statutes; to free us as really from the Moral, as from the
Ceremonial Law; or from the observance of the Law moral, as well as from the
curse, and the rigor of it; And so to make us no whit holier, but only happier
than before; (if yet a man can be happy who is not holy, which rather implys a
contradiction,) he might have been buried before he was born; ( buried, I mean,
in his Mothers womb;) or he might have been born, only to be buried; He might
have been murdered as commodiously by Herod in the Cradle, as by Pilate upon
the Cross; and with as great a convenience, have dyed a Savior at a year old,
as in living till three and thirty. For what better reason can we imagine, why
he should live so long a Saint, before he dyed a public Sacrifice, but that as
'twere by the Equator, or standing Rule of his life, we might reform and
regulate all the obliquities of our own? that he might free us from Sin's
Dominion, by his Precepts and Example, his Life and Doctrine, as well as from
the wages of it by his Death and Resurrection?

For 3dly, let us expostulate and reason a little within our selves. Can there
be any thing more irrational, more dishonorable to God, or more disgraceful to
our Religion, than to think that our Savior came down from Heaven, only to
open, and so to shut up the Gates of Hell? To be a Friend of Publicans and
Sinners in the same ill Sense, in which his Matthew. 11. 19.
Enemies spoke him to be so? It Is true indeed in one sense, there can be
nothing more Orthodox, than was the malice of those Blasphemers. Christ indeed
was the friend of Publicans and Sinners, the greatest Friend to be imagined.
But 'twas by Saving them from their Sins, as he did Matthew, and Zachaeus, Mary
Magdalen, and the like; not by Saving them for all their Sins however
indulgently lived in. Not by making it safe for them to be Sinners without
Amendment. Could he come for nothing else but to proclaim a Iubilee for
Malefactors, and so to make them more voluptuous, not more virtuous than
before? Can we imagine that the Law was so a Schoolmaster to Christ, as that the
end of his coming should be to turn us from our Books? to beg us a kind of an
endless Playday, and so to send us out as Truants into a Mahomet's Paradise?
Can it be possibly consistent (I say not with Scripture only and Reason, but
indeed) with common Sense, that he should purify to himself a peculiar people,
not by bridling Sin, but by letting it ride? That the (...) in Zosimus should
be (as Zosim. l. 2. p. 61.
the Spaniard there calls it) (...); (that is to say in plain English) that the
mere Christianity of our Opinions should abundantly expiate for all the Atheism
of our Lives? and so that the Gospel should be intended, not for a Rule, but a
Dispensation? It Is true this Fallacy of the Tempter is too too commonly
swallowed down; although not only the Stream of Reason, but all the Current of
the Scripture runs quite against it.

For in the third of the Acts, at the twentieth Verse, God having raised up his
Son Jesus sent him to bless us, (says St. Peter;) but how? even (...), etc.
That blessing altogether consisted in his turning us away every one from our
Iniquities. So in the second to Titus, at the eleventh Verse, The Grace of God
which brings Salvation has appeared indeed to all men. But to what end?
'Twas (...), etc. that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Again in the fourteenth
Verse of the same Chapter, Christ is said indeed to have given himself for us;
But immediately it follows, (...), etc. The gist consists in his Redeeming us
from all Iniquity. To which at least we may accommodate what is said of our
Savior, Matthew. 8. 17. where the (...), which is in Beza's Translation he bare
their Sicknesses (or their Sins,) is in Tertullian's he took them away. And let
the Translation be what it will, sure I am that the reason is very good. It
being the noblest benefaction, and much most worthy of a Savior who came from
Heaven, rather to cure the lame, than to give them crutches; rather to rid us
of our sins by reducing us to obedience, than by acquitting us only of
punishment, to make our sins the more supportable.

And as the prime end of his coming hither, was to correct and reform our
practice, so his prime business when he was here was (as our Lord) to prescribe
us Precepts, and to press for a due obedience to all the Precepts which he
prescribed. Though it is the custom of the world, to look upon him as a Savior,
and nothing else, in his Priestly Office only, which is to bless us, and to
insist upon his being our Elder Brother; yet Rev. 19. 16
the name written upon his Garment, and on his Thigh, is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. His name is Christ as well as Jesus. Moses was his Type, as well
as Joshua. And observe in what order. He is our Moses in the first place, to
make us fit for a blessed Canaan; and then our Joshua to give us possession.
The general Title of the Gospel [(...)] which we love to call the New Testament
(and nothing else) would (by a more genuine Translation of the word) be
expressed by The new Covenant, that is to say, the new Compare Romans 3. 27. with
Romans 8. 2.
Law. For so it is called by St. Paul, (...), the Law of Faith, (Romans 3. 27.)
And as the whole Moral Law was published by Christ, as well as Moses, (which
any man may see who will not wink, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of
St. Matthew,) so Christ, as well as Moses, thought fit to give it upon a Matthew.
5. 1.
Mountain. Nor is it unworthy our observation, That throughout the New
Testament, though there is many times a Precept without a Promise annexed to
it; yet there is not one Promise which is not clogged with some Precept. As if
our Savior had esteemed it an easier thing, to make us believing and orthodox
Christians, than obedient and sincere ones. According to which he elsewhere
tells us, that they only shall enter into the Kingdom of his Father Matthew. 7.
21.
, not that call upon his Name, but that do his Will. Nay (as there he goes on
in the following Verses,) Though a man may have Faith to the working of
Miracles, yet if it be built upon the Sand, (as most certainly it is, when it is
not seconded with obedience,) he foretells what he will say unto men of that
sort at the Day of Judgment, (...), I never knew you. (Not that Verse. 26. 23.
Christ can be ignorant of their persons, or their works, to whom he will say,
I never knew you. For even that very saying imports he knew them well enough,
that is, he knew them to be such, as did deserve that such words should be
spoken to them. And therefore the meaning must needs be this, I never knew you
to be members of my Body, or to be sheep of my Fold; that is, I know you to be
Persons I cannot own. For as to know in the holy Dialect does often signify to
approve; so not to know does very often import no more than to disown.) I must
confess we might think it exceeding strange, but that our Oracle does assure us
it is very true, That as Believers we may be able to cast out Devils, and yet as
Disobedient may be our selves possess't with them* We may preach to save
others, and yet be Castaways our selves. For be we never so zealous Preachers,
or Professors of the Gospel; and at the very same time Indulgent Transgressors
of the Law; our very Advocate will say, when he shall come to be our Judge,
(...), Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity.

And therefore our blessed Savior being about to leave the world, and to teach
his Disciples ( before he left them) how to serve him (...), in such a manner
as he would like; did not speak in this style, If ye love me, cast all your
Care upon my Promises; or If you love me, stoutly rely upon my merits; (although
there is a place for each of these too,) But, as preparatory to Both, If ye
love me, keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. which was as if he should have
said, show me your Faith by your works, and your Love by your obedience.
Plainly implying to Them and Us, that our Sonship does not give us any
Exemption from our Service; our Service being the only thing by which we are
able to prove our Sonship. As Christ has a Priestly, and a Prophetical, so
has he also a Kingly Office. Nor may we kick at the Scepter and Throne of
Christ, and think it sufficient to declare we are his Majesty's most humble and
loyal Subjects. Some Earthly Potentates have been thus mocked, but the King of
Kings will never be so. We cannot honor our Lord by disobeying him; or show
our selves kind, by being undutiful; For we see that our obedience is both the
Argument and the Badge of a True Affection. Our Savior says, Matthew. 10. 38.
He that follows me not, is unworthy of me. Where to follow him, is to be like
him; To conform our selves to him more than a Parasite to his Patron; not to
walk in his Path only, but to tread in his very Footsteps. According to that of
the Pythagoreans (which deserves for its worth to be Christianiz'd, however
writ by that Hierocles who writ a Book against Christ,) (...). Thou shall
honor God the better, the more thou studiest to be like him. For him we love
most, whom we most imitate; and he honors God best, who does best resemble
him; And what kind of Resemblance he most requires, St. John has told us twice
together in his first Epistle and third Chapter; to wit, our being pure as he
is pure, (v. 3.) and our being Righteous as he is Righteous, (v. 7.) And our
Savior to the same purpose, having mustred up his Precepts with the several
Promises annexed, makes a kind of a Corollarie or rather Abridgment of the
whole, not at all with a command, that we be happy as God is happy, but with an
(...), be ye perfect as he is perfect. Matthew. 5. ult.


Thus as briefly, and yet as fully as I could possibly contrive, I have showed
the chiefest end of our blessed Savior's coming hither, and his principal
Business when he was here. It was not only as a Savior, to propose Promises to
our Faith; nor only as a Teacher, to fiill our heads with new knowledge, but as
a Sovereign, and a Prince, (as St. Peter calls him) to exact obedience to his
Commands. And to place it without dispute, He made it part of his business,
when he was here, to let us know, why he came hither. For as he tells us in one
place (enough to keep us from despair) that he came not to destroy men's lives,
Luke 9. 56.
but to save them; so he tells us in another, (enough to keep us from
presumption,) that Matthew. 5. 17.
he came not to destroy the Law, but to save and preserve That also: and that
in each sense of the word (...), not by fulfilling it only, but by Ita Meletius
Monachus, concra Isphacanem Persam Musulmanum. Et Tertullianus c. 3. de poenit.
Christus, inquit, susterstruit Adjectionem Legis. Idem de Patient. c. 6. p. 131.
filling it up too. For tho nothing could be completer than the Law Moral in it
self, yet did he fill up those vacuities which Moses left in his Delivery. From
all which it follows (do what we can) that Unless our Righteousness shall
exceed the Righteousness of the Jews, we shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

For can there be any thing more agreeable to the judgment of common Sense, (I
had almost said of Carnality it self) than that where God has afforded a
greater Stock, he should expect a greater Increase; that where he has
strengthened the Shoulders, he should in proportion increase the Burden? And
that as he has shrunk up the Mosaical Law, so he should also extend the Moral?
Of Moses we know, that he had a Vail upon his Promises, as well as upon his
Face; and was as obscure upon Mount Nebo, as before he had been upon Mount
Sinai. Whereas our Antitype of Moses has been graciously pleased to Vetus
dicitur Testamentum quia promissiones terrenas habet. August. de Civ. Dei. l.
18.
uncover Both. The Jews beheld Christ as in a Glass, but we (in comparison)
face to face. They walked by Twilight, but we by the Sun in his Meridian. They
were used like little Children, but we like Men. They had a Sensible Vid. Grot.
Discus. Apol. Rivet. p. 30, 31.
good proposed, but we an Intellectual. They as 'twere an Apple, but we an
Inheritance. They a transitory Kingdom, but we a Kingdom not to be moved. They
were promised a Redemption indeed from Egypt, but we from Hell. They to be fed
with milk and honey, but we never to hunger or thirst. They a long life, but we
an Eternal one. They a Canaan, but we a Heaven. And that God will exact the
Luke 10. 13, 14, 15. with which compare Matthew. 10. 15.
most strict account of our wanderings, to whom he has held the greatest light
for the better clearing of our ways, we may infer from our Savior's words in
the eleventh Chapter of St. Matthew, where Tire and Sidon are more excusable
than Corazin and Bethsaida, because the later had been obliged with greater
Means of Conviction, but all in vain.

This affords a Lesson for our Humiliation, That however our Reward is
extremely Great, even a Kingdom which cannot be moved, (a Kingdom of Grace and
of Glory too,) yet God has placed it very high, and the way to it is very
steep. We must not flatter our selves therefore, that we are able to fall
upwards; that with a yawning Relyance we can ever climb up the Hill of Sion,
and drop as 'twere into Heaven with a drowzy Confidence. We have no
encouragement from our Apostle, to believe we shall go thither, by merely
believing we are Regenerate, and cannot fail of our being there. He does not
here press on his Hebrew Christians, to receive their Salvation with Faith; but
to serve for it with Reverence. Not to expect it only with confidence, but
strictly to endeavor it with godly Fear. For our God is a Consuming Fire.

To Him be Glory for ever and ever.
HOW A Man is to work out HIS OWN SALVATION.
PHILIP. II. 12. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.
THe words (in general) are a Command, delivered by St. Paul, in the Name of
God the Great Master, to the Servants of God, in the Church at Philippi. In
which there are chiefly four things to be considered.

First the quality of the Servants. Next the wages which they expected. Thirdly
the work, with which the wages was to be earned. And lastly the manner, or
qualification, with which the working was to be clothed.

First for the Quality of the Servants, They were such as had been diligent in
the performance of their Duty. They had not only been sometimes dutiful; they
had not only been good by fits; but (...), they had always obeyed; They had
evermore lived in the fear of God.

Next for the Wages which they expected, That is expressed by [(...)] to be
Salvation; both as it signifies a deliverance from the tremendous Pains of
Hell, and as importing an Advancement to the ravishing Ioys of Heaven

Then Thirdly for the Work, with which the Wages was to be earned, That is
evidently obedience to the Lord Jesus Christ Very significantly employed in the
(...), as that looks back upon the (...). As ye have always obeyed, so now much
more obey the Gospel. Continue the Course of your obedience. Go on to finish
the work which ye have begun; (...), work, and work out your own Salvation.

Last of all, for the Manner or Qualification of the working, whereby to make
it become effectual for the receiving of the Reward, There must be (...), our
Salvation is to be wrought for, with Fear and Trembling; And that according to
the threefold Signification of this expression.

First with Meekness and Humility. We must not put the least Trust in the
greatest Performances of our own; nor must we be puff't or lifted up with the
Gifts and Graces which God has given us.

Next with Diligence and Solicitude. That we may not for want of Perseverance,
finally miss of the Prize that is set before us, and for which we have hitherto
as it were contended by our obedience.

Thirdly with Awefulness, and Horror, or holy Dread; Because as God is (in one
Cafe) a quickening Light, so he is (in another) a consuming Fire. He who
purposely created us to do him service, is He who will turn us to Destruction,
unless we serve him as he Requires.

And now to anticipate an Inquiry, how Humility, and Solicitude, (as well as
Awefulness and Dread, are comprehended under the notion of Fear, and Trembling,
I think it is easy to make it clear from the consideration of the Context;
without recourse to those other Scriptures, wherein we meet with the same
expression. For

First in vain should we endeavor the working out of our Salvation, but that
it is God who works in us both to will, and to do. And therefore we must do
it with all Humility of Mind, because in our selves (as of our selves) there
dwells no good thing; no not so much as Inclination to any thing that is
good, no not so much as Aversation from any thing that is evil. But every good
and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights. If
we can triumph over the Law, as the strength of Sin, by treading Sin under our
Feet, as the sting of Death, All the Thanks must be to God, who has given us
the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. And yet

Secondly; Although it is God that works in us both to will, and to do; yet
the Apostle makes it a Reason, why we our selves are to work out our own
Salvation. And therefore we must do it with Care and Diligence, lest whilst God
by his Grace is not wanting unto us, we finally miss of his Glory, by having
been wanting unto our selves.

Thus we see there is pregnant Reason, for the Double Importance of the Phrase
as it is merely rational. And of the literal Signification I suppose there
cannot be any Doubt. For

We must work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, (in as much as that
signifies the greatest Awefulness and Dread,) because of the Dreadfulness of
our Doom, in case we work not at all, or not at all to that purpose that God
requires. And thus I hope I have so divided, as withal to have explained, and
cleared the Text.

The first three Parts of the whole Division may well be thrust up together
into this Doctrinal Proposition. [That our Salvation is not attainable by a
mere Orthodoxy of Judgment in point of Faith, or a bare Rectitude of Opinions
concerning God; But by obedience to the Gospel or Law of Christ.] For what is
expressed by obedience, in the former part of this Verse; is also expressed in
the later, by the working out of our own Salvation. And as Salvation is a Thing
which requires our working; So it is not any kind of working will serve our
Turn. For

The last Particular of the four affords us a second Proposition, which is as
apt to defend us from Carnal Security, as the First. To wit, [That however
Unavoidable our State of Bliss may seem to us, by our having (with the
Philippians) obeyed Always, yet our obedience unto the Gospel or Law of Christ,
by which alone we are to work out our own Salvation, is to be qualified and
seasoned with Fear and Trembling.]

The first of these I have considered in a former Subject of Meditation, when I
enlarged upon the Matter of which our working is to consist. I now am come to
that Part of my General Method and Design, which obliges me strictly to the
consideration of the Second; as touching the Manner or Qualification wherewith
our working is to be clothed, whereby to make it become effectual for the
receiving of our Reward. To wit, with Meekness and Humility, with Diligence and
Solicitude, with Awefulness and Horror, or holy Dread; the threefold Importance
of Fear and Trembling; which must first be considered in the Gross, and after
that, in the Retail.

First considered in the Gross, it shows us a ready and easy way of reconciling
and understanding those parts of Scripture, which being taken but in the
letter, do seem to differ, and contradict. For there is not any One Passion or
Affection of the Mind, either more rigidly forbidden, or more earnestly
commanded, than that of Fear.

It is so rigidly forbidden, that the fearful and unbelieving have their part
in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, (Rev. 21. 8.) where St. John making a Muster
of such as are listed under the Devil, and bound for Hell, sets the Fearful and
Unbelieving (as it were) in the Front of the whole Battalia, with which the
desperate Prince of Darkness is wont to wage War against the Father of Lights.
As for The Murderers, and Whoremongers, The Sorcerers and Idolaters, They all
march after in Rank and File; Implying the Fearful and Unbelieving to be the
Ringleaders in Hell, and as it were in the Van of the Devil's Army. Unbelief is
so commonly the Cause of Fear, and Fear is commonly such a Tempter to Unbelief,
that we find them often yok't together, if not so as to signify, one, the
other. Woe be to fearful Hearts, and faint Hands, and the Sinner that goes two
ways; woe be to him that is faint-hearted, for he believes not, therefore
shall he not be defended, (Ecclus. 2. 12, 13.) It seems that Fear is a Thing,
of which we ought to be sore afraid; Because it is apt to make us sinners going
two ways at once. One in our Principles, and quite another in our Practice.
Very fit to be compared unto wandering Stars, which are carried toward the
West by the Primum Mobile, whilst They are stealing toward the East by their
proper motion. When Peter was frighted upon the Sea, and cried [ Lord save me]
as he was just ready to sink; although it was a good Prayer, yet because it
proceeded from Carnal Fear, rather than Faith, our Savior presently took him
up with an (...), O Thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? And so it
was fitly said by Zachary in his Divine Benedictus, That God did Therefore
deliver us out of the hands of our Enemies, that we might serve him without
Fear, (Luke 1. 74.) With which agrees That of St. Paul to Timothy; He has not
given us the spirit of Fear, but of Love, (2 Timothy 1. 7.) To which it is added
by St. John, That there is no Fear in Love, for perfect Love casts out Fear,
(1 John 4. 18.)

Thus we see how this Passion is very rigidly forbidden throughout the
Scriptures. And yet for all that it is so earnestly commanded, that we cannot
serve God acceptably, unless we serve him with Fear, as well as Reverence,
(Heb. 12. penult) Nor can there be any such thing as the working out of our
Salvation, unless we do it with Fear and Trembling. For the fear of the Lord is
the Beginning of Wisdom, (Prove. 1. 7.) Nay (as Solomon goes on in the
fourteenth Chapter, v. 27.) The fear of the Lord is a Fountain of Life; the
attainment of which is the end of Wisdom. And thence it is set by our Apostle as
the highest accomplishment of a Christian, To perfect holiness in the Fear of
God, (2 Cor. 7. 1.)

What then may be the meaning of these (...), these so seeming Contradictions,
that we must serve God with Fear, and that we must serve him without Fear? that
there is no fear in love, yet no true love without some fear?

The Reconcilement of These is extremely obvious. It is no more but to
distinguish betwixt that which is Carnal, and that which is Spiritual; betwixt
the spirit of Bondage, and the spirit of Adoption; betwixt a servile, and
filial Fear. As it is true in one sense, that perfect Love does cast out Fear,
so it is true in another, that perfect Love does carry fear along with it.

When I say with St. John, It casts out Fear; I mean that childish unmanlike
Fear, which betrayeth those Succors that Reason offers; especially that
heathenish and carnal fear, the fear of Poverty, and Pain, and other effects of
Persecution; the fear that made so many Sinners going two ways at once. And so
it casts out one fear with another; the fear of them that can kill the Body,
but are not able to hurt the Soul, with the fear of Him who is able to cast
them both into Hell. In this sense it is said, we must serve God without Fear.

But when I say the same Love does carry fear along with it, I mean the fear of
offending God, the fear of quenching or grieving his holy Spirit; the fear of
never doing enough whereby to please him; the fear of falling into Temptation;
the fear of a treacherous deceitful heart; that is, the fear of Unsincerity in
the performance of our Service; the fear of falling from our own steadfastness,
and so of receiving the Grace of God in vain. In this sense 2 Cor. 6. 1.
it is said by the Royal Prophet, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him
with Reverence. And thus it is said by the Royal Preacher, Happy is the man that
fears always. As a mere carnal fear is a fear of that which is carnal, so a
godly fear is the fear of God. First a fear of his Majesty, in respect of which
he is a Sovereign; next a fear of his Mercy, in respect of which he is a
Father; (for so it is said by the Prophet David, There is Mercy with thee, o
Lord, therefore shall thou be Feared.) Lastly a fear of his Wrath and Justice,
in respect of which he is a Judge, and also an Executor of Vengeance.

This Fear of God is so necessary for the Qualification of our obedience, that
all without it is nothing worth; and even this, of it self, is wont to supply
the place of all. For (...); (that is) men fearing God, is an expression made
use of by God himself, whereby to signify conscientious and pious men; men who
live in obedience to all his Precepts. Job was said to be an upright, and Job
1. 1.
perfect man, because he was one that feared God. And the words of Moses to
Israel have a remarkable Importance; What does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but only to fear the Lord thy God? (Deuteronomy. 10. 12.) And what is it to fear
him, but (as it follows in the next words) to walk in all his ways, and to love
him, and to serve him, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? Without this
Fear, we shall easily fall into presumption, or into carnal security. We shall
not strive to enter in at the strait Gate; Nor give all diligence to make our
Calling and Election sure. We shall not give an earnest heed unto the things
which we have heard, (Heb. 2. 1.) If we do not fear, lest a promise being left
of entering into his Rest, any of us should seem to come short of it, (Heb. 4.
1.) we shall not labor to enter into that Rest, (v. 11.) For who will labor
to get a thing, which he verily thinks he has as good as in possession? Or who
will labor to keep a thing, which he verily thinks he can never lose? I will
not here stand to show the manifold danger of their Opinion, who say they were
justified from Eternity, and their Sins so forgiven, before committed, That
they cannot fall totally, much less finally from Grace; although my Text would
bear me out in such a profitable Severity. Nor dare I otherwise be severe to
any difference in opinion, than as I find it corruptive of Christian Practice.
The case is clear, that our Apostle having commended his Philippians, for
having always obeyed the Gospel, does not there make a stop, as if they had
done enough already, or needed no more of his Admonitions; but immediately
adds, that they must work for their Salvation; and work so far, as to work it
out; and work it out in such a manner, as to do it with Fear and Trembling; and
that according to the threefold Importance of this Expression; which having
thus considered in the Gross, I shall now consider in the Retail too.

First we must work it out with meekness, and humility of mind, because it is
God that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. All we have
is but little, and all that little is but received. All the good we have
received, we have received as entrusted, or lent unto us; And whatsoever God
lends us, he lends us purposely to Employ. Of all that is lent us to be
employed, we are every one to render a strict Account. And this alone may serve
to keep us in all humility of mind, that the more we have, the more we owe, and
for so much the more we are accomptable. And for the more we are unable to
render a satisfactory Account, by so much the more we shall be appal'd at the
Day of Reckoning.

It Is true indeed (what St. John says) that by keeping the Commandments we
may come to have a Rev. 22. 14.
right to the Tree of Life; And by suffering for God, may be counted worthy of
the Kingdom of God. Affliction suffered in such a Case is said to 2 Cor. 4.
work for us a weight of Glory. It Is true indeed we may be profitable Servants
in God's Account; because the unprofitable was commanded to be cast into utter
Darkness, Matthew. 25. 30. And the Joys of Heaven are expressed by a Col. 1. 10.
2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Rev. 3. 4.
Crown of Righteousness; as if Eternity of Life were become our due. But all
this only by the force of God's Promise who cannot lie; or by the Tenor of the
Covenant which God was pleased to make with us; Not by virtue of our Obedience,
as that that is equal to our Reward. Which, when it is in its Apogaeo, at the
utmost Top of its Exaltation, is not worthy to be compared with the Glory which
shall be Romans 8. 18.
revealed in us. For however St. Paul had preached the Gospel, and preached it
too without 1 Cor. 9. 16. Verse. 15. 18.
charge, not living of the Gospel, (which yet by right he might have done,) but
making Verse. 14.
his own hands to serve and minister to his Necessities, that he might not be
burdensome unto any; yet he professed he had nothing to glory of, for so
gratuitous a preaching the Word of God; because a moral Necessity was laid upon
him, and woe had been to him if he had not preached it, (1 Cor. 9. 16.) Our
blessed Savior so puts the Case, as to illustrate it with a Color, Luke 17.
7, 8, 9, 10. Admit a Servant is very diligent in the performance of his Duty;
ever going when he is sent; ever coming when he is called; and ever doing as he
is bid. Does the Master give Thanks to that diligent Servant, for doing the
things that were commanded him? I trow not (says our Savior.) Even so ye, (as
our Lord goes on to Application,) when ye shall have done all those things that
are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable Servants, we have done but our
Duty; and had been liable to wrath, if we had not done it.

Away then with those Philosophers St. August. Epist. 52.
Austin speaks of, qui sibi vitam beatam fabricare vellent, who designed
themselves a Heaven of their own skill and industry. And away with those
Pharisees, not only of our Savior's, but of these our own Times; whose custom
it is to thank God, for that they are not like other men. And confining Sanctity
to the men of their Sect, do separate from the rest of the Christian World, as
from Publicans and Sinners; Sinners not to be approached by men of their
Purity. Stand farther off (is their language) for we are holier than you, (Isa.
65. 5.) Conform we rather to St. Paul, the special Badge of whose Saintship was
the profoundness of his Humility. For as the chiefest of Sinners do call
themselves (by an impious Antiphrasis and Hyperbole) the chief of Saints; so
That Apostle on the contrary, although Chieftain among the Saints, does call
Himself (by an holy M(...)osis) The chief of Sinners. When therefore our
obedience has led us to Christ, and Christ is leading us to Heaven, Let us
remember the New Jerusalem, though a vastly great City, yet (contrary to
Myndus) has a very low Gate. And seeing the lowness of the Gate, stoop we down
to enter in. Let us love Good works, but let us not lean too hard upon them.
Let us love them as things, without which we cannot be saved; but let us not
hope to be saved by them. Let us not labor with an ambition of being more
meritorious, but less unworthy than heretofore. Claim we Heaven by a Right, not
of Purchase, but of Donation. Having added Obedience to our Faith, add we
Meekness to our Obedience. Having done Justice, and loved Mercy, let us walk
humbly with our God. And so expect our Salvation with Faith, and Hope, as
withal to work it out, with Fear and Trembling. And that according to the first
Importance of this Expression.

Again we must do it with fear and trembling, in as much as that signifies the
greatest anxiety and solicitude, that we do not run in vain, nor labor in
vain, (Philip. 2. 16.) that we do not faint as we are running, and possibly
miss of the Prize within a stride of the Goal. For though we work for Salvation
whole years together, and work for it never so hard, yet whilst we are in the
Body, and compassed about with a Tempting world, we cannot say we have worked
it out. So that That is a Thing to be still in doing, and to be done with Fear
and Trembling. For as there are a sort of Laborers who do not come into the
Vineyard, until the ninth or tenth hour; so there are that fall off in the very
Evening, and lose the benefit of their Labor during the heat of the Day. (For
when they cease from being Righteous, all their passed Righteousness shall not
be mentioned, (Ezekiel. 18.) Had not Judas been worthy, Christ had not made him an
Apostle; and had he not been a good Apostle, he had hardly been trusted with
the Bag, much less had he been sent to dispense the Gospel. It Is very late e're
we read the Devil entered into Judas, hardly sooner than a day or two before
his Death. And though our Savior said, he chose twelve, whereof one was a
Devil; yet did he not say, He chose a Devil. For Judas was not a Devil, that
is, a Traitor, 'till some time after he had been chosen. Which fitly serves to
put us in mind, that if we know what we are, we are not sure of what we shall
be. What our last days will be, we cannot tell till we have lived them. We may
speak out of Hope, but out of Certainty we cannot.

I know who they are, who breath nothing but Assurance of Life eternal, as if
That were the english of (...) And as if their Rebellions were meritorious,
mistake the sturdiness of their Presumption, for the stability of their Faith.
So little or nothing are they concerned in St. Paul's Exhortation to Fear and
Trembling, that supposing they are sure, they think it below them to be
solicitous.

I would to God that such Professors had but the patience to consider, that St.
Peter does not exhort us to make our selves sure of our Election; but to make
our Election 2 Pet. 1. 10.
sure. The word is (...), not meant in an Active, but Passive sense; nor of
the Person, but of the Thing. St. Paul had sure as much reason, not to doubt of
his Election to life Eternal, as any mere mortal, before, or after. And yet
with what a deal of fear and trembling, did he run the Race that was set
before him? how did he strive for the 1 Cor. 9. 4.
Mastery? And in order thereunto, how very temperate was he in all things? How
did he keep under his body? how did he bring it into Subjection? and all for
fear, left whilst he was preaching unto others, He himself might be a Verse. ult.
Castaway? How did he Philip. 3. 8, 11, 12, 13, 14.
suffer the loss of all things, and count them but Dung for the winning of
Christ, who was at once his (...), and his (...), at once his Rewarder, and his
Reward; the setter out of the Prize, and the Goal it self? It Is true indeed, He
wins that loses, who loses All to win Christ. But, in order unto this end, with
what fear and trembling did he press toward the Mark, and reach forth to those
things that were before him, embracing a fellowship with the Sufferings of
Christ, and being conformable unto his Death; if by any means he might attain
to the Resurrection of the Dead; if by any means he might apprehend That, for
which he was also apprehended of Christ Jesus?

And here to anticipate an Objection which very easily may be made by a sort of
men, I think it of use to be observed, That He first had fought the good Fight,
and finished his Course, before he durst presume to say (in the following
words,) Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. It was not till
after his Perseverance with Faith and Patience unto the end, that is, but a
little before his Death, when the Axe and the Headsman stood ready for him, (at
least when both were within his Prospect,) that he was able to speak with so
great Assurance. For before that Season, whilst he was yet but in his Course,
and had not fought to a perfect Victory; he flatly told his Philippians, He did
not speak of his Proficiency in the School of Christ, as if he counted himself
to have apprehended, or as if he thought he were already made perfect; But on
the contrary, He did so work out his Salvation with Fear and Trembling, as that
he macerated himself, and (what with fasting, and watching, and other
Austerities of Life,) he did bear in his body the Dying of the Lord Jesus; lest
whilst he preached to save others, he himself might not be saved. He had not
yet endured unto the end, and so he was not yet free from Fear. For he that
endures unto the end, the same is he (says our Savior) who shall be saved;
(Matthew. 24. 13.) It was the voice of God himself, (revealed from Heaven five
several Times) He that overcomes shall inherit all things, Rev. 21. 7. He that
overcomes is He that shall eat of the Tree of Life, (Rev. 2. 7.) He that
overcomes is He that shall not be hurt with the second Death, (v. 11.) He that
overcomes is He that shall eat of the hidden Manna, (v. 17.) And who is he
that overcomes, but he that keeps God's works unto the end, (v. 26.)

To Apply this now unto our selves; If we can say with St. Paul, that our
Battle is quite fought, (against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,) And that
our Course is quite finished, (in so much that we are able to lay our hands
upon the Goal,) we then may say with him too, Henceforth is laid up for us a
Crown of Righteousness. We may say, we have a Right to the Tree of Life; That
God is (...), a righteous Judge, who will not be so Unfaithful (having given us
a Promise,) as to forget our work and labor of love, (Heb. 6. 10.) And so
being sure to be with Christ, we may desire to be dissolved too.

But whilst we are upon the way, and we cannot tell how far from our Iourneys
end; Nor what may happen 'twixt This and That; sure the use we are to make of
our present standing, is to take great heed that we do not fall. We must
beware, if we are righteous, that we do not return from righteousness to sin.
The higher we stand in God's Favor, we must beware so much the more, that we
be not high-minded, but rather fear; lest for having (like Capernaum) been
lifted up to Heaven, we be the rather (like Capernaum) cast down to Hell.

There was a Proverb among the Jews, The Sow is turned being washed to her
wallowing in the Mire. And St. Peter applys it to certain Christians, who have
made it good in the Application; even by growing Unrighteous after
Regeneration, (2 Pet. 2. ult.) For having been washed from the Mire of Sin
Original by the Laver of Baptism, and from the Mire of Sins Actual by the blood
of Jesus Christ, in the other Sacrament of Eucharist, they have committed the
very Sins, of which they had solemnly repented, and so their latter end has
been worse than their beginning. Now* putting the Case unto our selves, we know
not what may arrive betwixt the Cup and the Lip, much less betwixt This and the
Day of Judgment; especially if we meet with a Time of Trial. We cannot be
confident of our strength upon any better Ground than St. Peter stood on. And
having not Grace at our own Disposal, we must not boast (as he did) what we
will do above others, when Christ is under a Condemnation. If we have followed
him to Golgotha, we must religiously fear to forsake him there. For let our
Enduring be what it will, it will be found to no purpose, unless we endure unto
the end. And thence it follows, that 'till we have Happiness in Possession, we
are to live by such a Faith, as does admit an holy mixture of fear and
trembling. This Mode or Manner of our obedience being as rigidly required by
God Almighty, as the Matter, and Measure, and Method of it. Not only Faith, and
Repentance, and Amendment of Life, but also Perseverance in each of These, is
the Condition of the Promises which God in Christ has made to us. Whose House
we are (says the Epistle to the Hebrews) if we hold fast the confidence, and
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, (Heb. 3. 6.) Take heed therefore
Brethren (as it follows a little after) lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, (v. 12.) But exhort one
another daily, whilst it is called, To Day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of Sin, (v. 13.) For we are made partakers of Christ, (not
absolutely, but with an If,) If we hold the beginning of our Confidence
steadfast unto the end, (v. 14.)

Now what needed the holy Penman to have crowded and thronged so many Caveats
so thick together in that one Chapter, (and in other Chapters of that Epistle,)
if the People of God are so sure of Heaven, that there is not place left for a
fear of Hell? If some at least who were enlightened, and by true Grace
sanctified, do turn Mammelucks and Apostates, as Lycerus has observed, and as
Lycerus in Harm. Evang. p. 1562.
the Apostle does take for granted, ( Heb. 6. 6.) we ought to fear, and take
heed, that We be none of their Number. For God's promises to us of a Spiritual
Canaan, are no more absolute than those of a Temporal Canaan, which he made
heretofore to his People Israel. And since he swore to the Heb. 3. 15, 16.
Provokers which came with Moses out of Egypt, that notwithstanding his
promise, (which appears by that to have been conditional,) they should not
enter into his Rest, (Heb. 3. 18.) the Apostle tells us we ought to fear, lest
(if we do as they did) we come short (as they did) of the conditional promise
proposed to us, (Heb 4. 1.) And conformably to this, St. John does earnestly
exhort us, to look to our selves, that we lose not the things which we have
wrought, but that we may receive a full Reward, (2 John 8.) And he that says
here for our Consolation, [ It is God that works in us to will and to do of
his good pleasure,] does also say for our greater Caution, that we our selves
are to work out our own Salvation. Plainly intimating unto us, (for he is not
guilty of Contradictions,) That God's working in us to will and to do, is not
after an irresistible, but congruous manner; not as with natural, but as with
voluntary Agents; not by physically enforcing, but by morally persuading our
peevish Wills. He does so work with us, as to require that we also do work with
Him. It is evinced even from hence, that as God has his part, so we have ours,
in the great Business of our Salvation, Because we are many times threatened
with falling short of the promise, in Case we depart from the living God. For
God cannot threaten to be revenged upon his Creatures, for what Himself does
either do, or not do, but for what is either performed, or not performed, by
his Creatures. It being not possibly imputable to the Creature, that God has
made it Thus, or Thus; any more than God himself can be accomptable to his
Creature, why he made it Thus, or Thus. God indeed does (...), most divinely
work in us both to will, and to do, the work required to our Salvation. But
it is that we may (...), work out that work which he is pleased to work in us.
And by consequence we must do it with fear and trembling, lest when God has
done his part, we finally miss of Salvation, for having been wanting in doing
ours.

And this does lead us to consider the third Importance of the expression, the
very great Awefulness or Dread, with which we are to work out our own
Salvation. The two first were rational, this third is Literal. And indeed the
third may be deduced out of the second. For if we may fall as well as others,
we may be liable to vengeance, as well as others. That which calls for our
solicitude, deserves our Fear. And that which was St. Paul's reason, may well
be ours, even because our God is a Consuming Fire.

I may say in some sense, that God made Hell for the use of all; as well of the
best, as the worst of men. For a Torment only to These, who have hated
knowledge, and will Prove. 1.
not choose the fear of the Lord; But for a Terror also to Them, whom he would
therefore have to fear, that they may not feel it. That working out their
Salvation with fear and trembling, they never may come to the place of Torment.
The same Spirit that says, Fear not them that can kill the Body only, (which
is a fear proceeding from the spirit of Bondage,) does also say at the same
Time, But rather fear Him who can cast both Body and Soul into Hell. Implying
This to be such a Fear, as does very well consist with the spirit of Adoption.
It Is true indeed, we may be brutishly valiant, and over-daringly encounter the
wrath of Heaven, without the least fear of the pains of Hell. But this (I say)
is a beastly courage; an arrant (...) that is to say, A fool-hardiness rather
than valor. True Valor being That, that is built on Reason. Nor can we
Reasonably be free from the fear of Hell, until we come to be sure of Heaven.
And sure of Heaven we cannot be, until we have fought the good fight to a final
victory, and perfectly finished our Christian Course.

We must not suffer the novel Fancy of unconditional Election to flatter us out
of all fear of the wrath of God, and make us sure to miss of Heaven, by making
us dream it is unavoidable. For as God in his Judgment is no Respecter of
Persons, so neither was Romans 2.
he in his Decrees. As his Rule is in Time, to judge us according to our works;
so he decreed from all Aeternity, to proceed in Time by that Rule. He did
determine the end of men, with a special respect to their Qualifications, (from
whence his Decree is called respective,) But he did absolutely determine that
men who are thus or thus qualified, should come to this or that end. And I
could wish that this Distinction (since it is sufficient of it self) might find
so much favor in all men's Eyes, as to appease and reconcile dissenting
Brethren. That as the Decrees of the Almighty are said to be Absolute in one
sense, so they may heartily be granted to be Respective in Another. This
methinks should be the Judgment of all Mankind, (being so visible in it self,
and of so necessary Importance to the well-ordering of our Lives,) That God did
absolutely decree a most indissoluble Connection betwixt Repentance and
Salvation, as betwixt Impenitence and Condemnation. Which proves the end to
have been decreed with a special respect unto the means. Let this one thing be
granted, (as well for the Comfort of the good, as for a Terror to evil Doers,)
And I, for my part, shall ask no more. For the Decree which is respective in
sensu diviso, may so be proved to be Absolute in sensu composito, as to afford
a Demonstration, That God's Decree of the several Ends was in respect to the
several Means. For if in sensu composito, He did absolutely decree, that all
who are faithful and repent should belong to Heaven, and that all who are
faithless and impenitent should in like manner belong to Hell; Then his Decree
was respective (in sensu diviso) of that Repentance, or Impenitence, by which
Professors do belong to Heaven, or Hell. From whence it follows unavoidably,
that if we are faithless and impenitent, (be it in a greater, or lesser
measure,) we ought to be affected with fear and trembling, (in the literal
sense of this expression,) and never to give our selves Rest, until we be
faithful, and do repent. But faithful and penitent we cannot be, till by the
power of God's Grace, (after our Prayers and Tears shall have given him no
Rest) he shall be pleased to work in us, and with us too, not only to will, but
to do his work. That by the power of his Grace we may all endeavor, and by the
power of his Grace on our Endeavors, we our selves may have a Power too,
whereby to work out our own Salvation. And work for it we must with a sacred
horror, because of the Dreadfulness of our Doom, if we work remissly. For as
(on one side) God himself cannot condemn us, (although our sins past have been
very great,) if we immediately repent and amend our lives, because he is
faithful who has promised, and he has promised forgiveness to all that repent
and turn unto him; so withal (on the other side) Let our Righteousness past
have been what it will, yet if we return from Righteousness to Sin, God himself
cannot save us, without our Repentance and Reformation, because he has sworn
that the Impenitent shall not enter into his Rest. Not that God can be
overpowered by any Quality in the Creature, whether Repentance in the first
Case, or Impenitence in the second; But because his Power (in the first) is
suspended by his Mercy, as it stands in conjunction with his Truth. For in his
Mercy he made a Promise to give us pardon if we repent, and in his Truth he
must perform it. Just so his Power (in the second) is suspended by his Justice,
as it stands in conjunction with his Truth too. For in his Justice he made an
Oath to be revenged on the Impenitent, and in his Truth he must make it good.

Now since each of these Cases concerns us All, (be we never so good, or be we
never so evil,) I need not show by another Medium how the love of God's Mercy
does consist with a fear of his Indignation, and how whilst we love him as a
Father, we ought to fear him as a Judge.

But (to conclude with such a Caveat, as may best of all become an Ingenuous
People) Take we heed that our Fear do not swallow up our Love; for fear it
swallow up us too in the Bottomless Pit of Desperation. We must serve God with
Fear, but so as to fear him also for Love. Ever saying with the Psalmist, There
is mercy with thee o Lord, therefore* shall thou be feared. The Psalmist did
not thus argue, There is Mercy with Thee o Lord, Therefore shall thou be relied
upon, Therefore we shall make the bolder with thee; we shall break thy
Commandments without the fear of being damned, because we know thou art slow to
anger, and being angry art quickly pleased; But because of thy mercy thou shall
be feared. And there is good reason for it. For by how much the kinder a Father
is, a well-natur'd Son will fear to offend him so much the more. And the more
our Father which is in Heaven does even delight to please us, (by heaping his
Mercies and Favors on us,) by so much the more shall we be afraid, (if we are
well-natur'd Children) to exasperate our Father which is in Heaven.

What then remains, but that we ponder these things, and lay them up in our
hearts, and draw them forth into our Actions, and daily repeat them in our
Lives, And reap the comfort of so doing, in the hour of Death, and the Day of
Judgment.

Which God of his Mercy prepare us for, even for the glory of his Name, and for
the worthiness of his Son; To whom, with the Father, in the Unity of the
Spirit, be ascribed by us, and by all the World, Blessing, and Glory, and
Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this time forward for
evermore.

THE GRAND INQUIRY To be made In these Inquisitive Times, Taken from the Mouth
of The Frighted Iailour OF PHILIPPI.
THE GRAND INQUIRY To be made in These Inquisitive Times.
ACTS XVI. 30. What must I do, that I may be saved?
THus the Iailour at Philippi sought to his Prisoners for a Deliverance. Not
his ordinary Prisoners, who at once were in Bondage to Him and Satan; And were
bound up in Misery as well as Iron; who had (...), spirits so gross, and so
incrassat, and so manacl'd to the Flesh, that together with their Bodies, their
Souls were put into the Stocks, as knowing no better Liberty than what
consisted in the Freedom of Hands and Feet. But the Prisoners in the Text were
Prisoners only (...). Men whose Liberty did consist in the ubiquity of their
Thoughts, and in being made free of the New Jerusalem. Men, who by living the
Life of Faith, maintained an Intercourse with God and his glorious Angels. And
though their Carcasses or Outsides were contiguous to the Earth, yet their
Commerce and Conversation was still in Heaven. They were at once such a Free
and such a Dreadful sort of Prisoners, as by their Liberty to pray, and to sing
praises unto God, (v. 25.) may be said to have taken their Prison Captive. For
their Midnight Devotions were suddenly followed with an Earthquake; in so much
that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken, the Doors flew open of
themselves, and the Bands of the Prisoners were all unloos'd, (v. 26.) Nor
indeed is it a wonder, that such a Miracle should be seen in so blind a
Dungeon, whilst the Prisoners that were in it were Paul and Silas. For These
were two of that little number, by whom the world had been turned upside down,
Acts 17. 6. not in that malicious sense, in which the words were there used, by
the certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, who had assaulted the House of
Jason, and set the City in an uproar, (v. 5.) They having turned it upside
down, not for the worse, but for the better. The Confusion which they made did
tend to Harmony, and Order. They made men Antipodes to themselves, by their
contrary walking to what they hitherto had done. And so in effect, They turned
a Chaos upside down, more properly than a World. Or if it must needs be called
a world, it was the world lying in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. The world composed
of three Ingredients, which made it fit to be cleans'd by another Deluge. For
all that is in the world (as the same St. John says) is the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. And this alone was That world,
which by Precept, and Example, by Life, and Doctrine, these first Preachers of
Christ were to turn upside down. And this accordingly they did in a great many
respects. As in opening the Eyes of the Ignorant Gentiles, and in mollifying
the Hearts of the stubborn Jews, and in breaking down the Partition Wall, which
God himself had built up betwixt the Jew and the Gentile. They turned the world
upside down, by beating Swords into Plough-shares, and warlike Spears into
peaceful Pruning Hooks. By making the Lamb to lie down with the Wolf, and the
Kid with the Hyaena. By making Friendship and Peace between the Greek and the
Jew, as between the Jew and the Samaritan. By turning Infidels into Believers;
Idolaters into Christians; and the rebellious Sons of Darkness into Children of
the Light. Thus without Archimedes his Postulatum or Hypothesis, (...), or (as
it is in the Dorick Dialect) (...), an easy way was found out, to turn the
world upside down.

Sure I am that in my Text there was somewhat like it. For Paul and Silas who
were yesterday as the off-scowring of the Earth, are now on a sudden
entertained as two Inhabitants of Heaven. They who yesterday had been dragged,
both in their Persons, and in their Names, through the public Marketplace of
Philippi, (v. 19.) who had had their Clothes rent, and been beaten with Rods,
(v. 22.) who had been thrown into a Dungeon as a Couple of pernicious and
insufferable men, (v. 24.) are now revered and sought unto, as the very Oracles
of God. That very Iailour who was yesterday putting their Feet into the Stocks,
and thrusting them into the inner Prison, (v. 24.) is now awaked by their
Music, and stands affrighted at their Liberty, and is ready to kill himself
with his Sword, for fear of dying by their Escape; when, being hindered by his
Prisoners from offering violence to Himself, he even springs into their
Presence with fear and trembling, and (by Faith coupl'd with Fear) falls down
prostrate at their Feet with this short Inquiry, (an Inquiry very plain, but
yet sufficiently mysterious, and as copious in the sense, as it is short in the
letter,) What must I do, that I may be saved? Which is as if he should have
said, (that I may paraphrase his words,) Seeing I cannot but acknowledge, that
the Doctrine you Teach is the Truth of God, and the Truth of That God who now
has testified it by Miracle, in shaking my Prison by its Foundations, in
compelling its Doors to do you Reverence, and in making your Fetters afraid to
hold you; And seeing I cannot but acknowledge, That such a God is to be served
by every one who will be saved; I beseech you Sirs inform me wherein his
Service is to consist, and how I may attain to so great Salvation. It is not
Silver, or Gold, or Security for your Persons, that I demand* I do not
earnestly entreat you to confine your Heads within the Dungeon, or to return
your Feet into the Stocks, (though That is as much as my Life is worth;) But if
there is any Thing in the World which you will do for my sake, Tell me what I
must do, that I may be saved.

And here I am sorry that I must say, (what yet I must, if I deal uprightly,)
That we who pass for very prudent and sober Christians, may very well be sent
to School to this frighted Heathen. We may learn from this Iailour in his time
of exigence and distress, how our Souls should be employed at our Times of
leisure. Not in progging for Riches, or worldly Greatness, asking what we must
do to get a fortune when we have none, or to increase it when it is gotten, or
to keep it when it is increas't, or to recover it when it is lost, or to secure
it if recovered from running the risque of a Relapse; Nor yet in progging (with
Eudoxus) for Ease and Pleasure, without either End, or Interruption, asking
what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we shall be clothed.
We must not be carefully contriving with the unjust Steward, (Luke 16. 3.) in
his What shall I do to put a cheat upon my Lord, and to oblige his Debtors to
me, that when I am put out of my Stewardship, they may receive me into their
Houses. Nor may we ask with the wealthy Miser, (Luke 12. 17.) What shall I do
for sufficient Treasuries and Barns, wherein to bestow all my Fruit and my
Goods; (as if his Life had consisted in the Abundance of the Things which he
possessed, v. 15.) But our Inquiry must be rather like that of the Multitude to
our Savior, What shall we do that we may work the work of God? (that is to say
in plainer Terms,) what course shall we take, that we may do what thou bidst
us? that John 6. 27.
we may labor for the meat which will never perish, but endure unto Life
everlasting? or as the Publicans and Soldiers, and other Proselytes to the
Baptist, who had warned them to flee from the wrath to come, (Luke 3. 7, 10.)
What shall we do whereby to anticipate our Destruction, and to avert the sad
effects of the fatal Axe, which now is laid to the Root of the Tree? what shall
we do, as to the bearing good fruit, to prevent hewing down, and being cast
into the Fire? or as the Iailour of Philippi Verse. 9.
to Paul and Silas, (in the words which are now before us,) what must we do
that we may be saved?

In which Inquiry of the Iailour there are Four Things observable. First the
End of the Inquiry; Next the Means conducing to it; Then the necessary
Connection between the one and the other; And lastly the Person here Inquiring,
together with the Persons inquired of.

First the End of the Inquiry is here expressed to be Salvation. It Is (...),
That I may be saved.

Next the Means of its Attainment (which make the Object of his Inquiry) are
here implied to consist in Practice. For it is not thus ask't, what must I
outwardly Profess? or what must I inwardly believe? But (...); what must I Do,
that I may be saved?

Thirdly the necessary Connection between the Means and the End, is very
significantly implied in the little word Must. For it is not only (...); what
shall I do? (though That is also comprehended,) but (...); what Must I do that
I may be saved?

Lastly The Person here Inquiring, together with the Persons inquired of, are
The Iailour and his two Prisoners, Paul and Silas. These He earnestly consulted
about the Business of his Salvation. Yet not as Prisoners, or Private men, but
as attested by the Miracle to be Ambassadors from God. For as God the Son had
His mission from God the Father, so had They Theirs from God the Son. As my
Father sent me, so send I you, was the saying of Christ to his Twelve Apostles.
And He that receives you, receives me, As he that receives me, receives
also him that sent me. They were not only The Nuntio's, but Representatives of
Christ. He alone was the Oracle, at which Salvation was to be ask't; But Paul
and Silas were two of those sacred Mystae, by whom the Responses were to be
given. And so of Them in That Notion our Neophyte Iailour did fitly ask,

What must I do, that I may be saved?

This indeed is the Division, But it is not nice enough to be the measure of my
Intent in the Tractation of the Text. Wherein I purpose to consider, not so
much the Matter, as the Condition of the Question. No nor That, in a
Dogmatical, but in an Applicatory way. Nor so, in general, or at large, but as
particularly relating unto the Terrors in the Context, whereby the Iailour of
Philippi was happily frighted into Devotion. It being chiefly my present Aim,
(not to touch on those Notions which I have used on a Text of some Affinity
with This in another Place, but) to fill up the Vacuities of my former Design,
by supplying That Here, which was there omitted. For the accomplishing of which,

As in all Moral Subjects of Meditation and Discourse, The Method is still to
be Analytical; so in This (above All) which now does call for our Attention, I
must begin with the End of the Iailor's Quaere. For

He who is so great a Sluggard, as not to open his Lips for the way to Heaven,
will hardly be so industrious, as to labor with his Hands, or so much as pluck
them out of his Bosom, whereby to lay 1 Timothy 6. 12, 19.
hold on Eternal Life. How very far are They from striving to enter in at the
strait Gate, who are not anxious enough to ask, whereabout the Gate lies, or
which is the way to get it open? How little can we expect they should give all
diligence, to make their Calling and Election sure, who have not the Courage or
Curiosity to learn of what sort it is? who are too Lazy to contemplate, or too
delicate to inquire, either into the End, or the Nature of it? Can they be
heartily employed in working out their Salvation with fear and trembling, who
will not trouble themselves to ask, (no not so much as this Heathen-Iailour)
what it is they must do that they may be saved? It Is very strange that so it
should be, but very clear that so it is: That of the All which concerns us as
Men or Christians, though nothing makes a greater Noise than the Salvation of
the Soul, yet there is nothing in the World of any considerable account,
(whether for Profit, or Pleasure, or Reputation,) which is so little looked
after, or labored for. For

This is sure the sole reason, (or at least one of the chief) why a far Matthew.
7. 13, 14.
lesser number of men belongs to Heaven than to Hell; And why the Harvest of
Satan will be very Matthew. 3. 12.
much greater than That of Christ; because Men commonly are industriously and
expensively wicked, They sin as with a Cart-rope, and drink iniquity like
water, they think they can never bid enough, whilst they are purchasing a
Mansion in the Territories of Darkness; And therefore in the words of the
Prophet Isaiah, (though spoken by Him in Mortem vocat Hostem mortiferum. Ut
sensus sit, sperabant se, blandiendo, salutem reperturos apud Sennacharibum.
Grot. in locum. Micah 7. 3. Wisd. 1. 12, 16.
another sense,) They make a Covenant with Death, and with Hell are at
Agreement, (Isa. 28. 15.) or, (as the excellent Book of Wisdom does more
designedly express it,) They even call Death to them, and pull Destruction upon
themselves with the works of their Hands. They are as studious of variety, and
as wittily inventive of evil things, as if the Burden of their Inquiry were
none but. This, What must we do that we may be damned? But now so far are most
men from being either as expencefully or as elaborately virtuous, that they
rather are afraid of being righteous overmuch; (as they love to misinterpret
the words of Solomon;) Their strictest Care is, not be taken for Praecisians;
And they are really ashamed to be holy indeed, for fear it should make them
look like Hypocrites. They are so far from taking pains, and making a Business
of Religion, that they do not so much as say, with the (...). Pythag. (...).
Pythagoreans, (who summoned the Actions of every Day before the Tribunal of
every Night,) (...); What evil have I done since I rose this morning? or what
Good Deed have I omitted? whither goes the way that I am now walking in? goes
it to Egypt? or to Canaan? leads it to Heaven? or to Hell? Much less do they
ask with this frighted Iailour in the Text; What must we do that we may be
saved?

Now the reason of this Reason does seem to be chiefly A want of That, which
was required of the Iailour as a chief means of his being saved; even a cordial
Beliving in the Lord Jesus Christ, and a Belief of That Salvation which in the
Text is inquired after. Of which I doubt there are but few that are True
Believers, even of Them who do not doubt of their own Belief. So that there is
not a greater Instance of the Deceitfulness of a man's Heart, than his
Treacherous Belief that he does Believe; when yet he proves by all his Practice
that he is either no Believer, or else no better than a Gamester when he
believes that he shall win. How many Professors of Christianity who daily
assent unto the Creed, do still confute their own Belief of the two last
Articles, The Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting? For is it
possible that a man should very seriously believe he shall last for ever, and
not be vehemently solicitous, whether in Heaven, or in Hell? or that he really
should believe there is a Heaven, and a Hell, without a minutely concernment,
to which of the two he must needs belong? If a man's Neck be but obnoxious to
the Gallows or the Block, or his Goods but in danger of Confiscation, sleep it
self will not be strong enough to give him rest, until he has used his whole
strength to purchase a Pardon, or a Reprieve. And did he as really believe,
that he shall rise after Death to a Day of Judgment, when evil Doers shall be
cast into a Bottomless Asphaltites, a Lake which evermore is burning with Fire
and Brimstone, o with what Horror and Indignation would he look back upon his
Sins? with what Remorse and Self-Revenge would he afflict himself for them in
Soul and Body? with what a vehement desire would he demonstrate his Repentance
by Change of Life? o with what Carefulness and Concernment would he endeavor
to make his Peace with abused Justice? with what strong crying and Tears would
he sue for Mercy? Not in the language of St. Peter, when transported out of his
wits by his great Amazement, Depart Luke 5. 8.
from me o Lord, for I am a sinful man; But rather with Christ upon the Cross
where he recited in Syriac those words of David, My Matthew. 27. 46. Psalm. 22. 1.
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! How much rather would he choose, to do
it now to some purpose, and that but once, than at last to no purpose, and that
for ever? Say then, good Reader, and say without Partiality; Can a man in good
earnest believe his own Immortality, whilst he so seldom or never minds the
future condition of his Soul? and is not solicitous what to do, that he may be
saved? There can be nothing more incredible, than that a man of such a Faith
should be so destitute of Fear. For what account can be given, why a man should
shrink at Death, a great deal more than at Damnation, and more provide against
the pains of a dying Life, than the Torments of a Death which will live for
ever, (that is, more against the first, than the second Death,) but that he
steadily believes the first may easily come to pass, whilst he hopes that the
second is but a Fable? They who hitherto have thought they were True Believers,
whilst yet their Infidel Lives have strongly proved that they were none, will
confess what I say, if they ever shall have Patience enough to meditate; and
shall meditate long enough, to comprehend the whole force of my present reason.

Now in order to my purpose, which is to rouse up some or other out of the
Lethargy they are in, and to set them on work in this Grand Inquiry, I shall
reason a little farther with the Paganish Professors of Christianity. And first
of all let it be granted, (what ought not yet to be supposed,) That what they
have not in Themselves an active Power to demonstrate, cannot have a passive
Power of being demonstrated by others; that so they may not be offended at the
uncivil possibility, of other men's being deeper or quicker sighted than
Themselves. For some are so strongly of opinion, that their particular
Comprehension is the Adaequate measure of all Existence, that they are apter to
deny, and to disbelieve, that there is any thing in the World beyond the
Horizon of their Conceit, than to suspect, or confess, that their Souls are
short-sighted. Not vouchsafing to consider, how great a number of Things there
are about the Body of a Flea, which are invisible to their Eyes, whilst
unassisted, and yet are evident unto any, who shall behold them through a
Microscope. And if to the natural Eye of Reason, we add the Telescope of Faith,
which is the Evidence of Things not seen, we shall have an easy Prospect of
that Salvation, which the Iailour of Philippi enquired after. And discern the
true reason, why the Sciolists of the Age (who are called the Wits) do first
contend there are no Spirits, and thence infer there is no Hell, and so
conclude they need not ask, what it is they must do that they may be saved;
even because they have too much, and too little wit. For if they had less, they
would not raise their Objections; and if they had more, they would be able to
refute them. But be it so that they themselves are not able to demonstrate,
there is a Hell to be saved from; Dare they say they are better able to
demonstrate that there is none? Can they say that they have dyed, to make a
Decision of the Question? And been restored again to life, to declare the
Negative by Experience? Do they suspect the Galilaean whom we commonly call
Jesus, in what he says of an outer Darkness, and therein of a Worm which never
dies, and of a Fire which is not quenched? And do they so far suspect him, that
they resolve to make an Essay of his Veracity, and therefore trust not his
Doctrine, till they have tried it? will they admit of no Philosophy, but what
they call Experimental? and therefore stay till they are dead for a
Determination of their Doubt, because (forsooth) until the time that they have
tasted the first Death, they know not if they can feel a second? I say admit
they do not know, that there are Torments after Death to endure for ever.
Should not this suffice to Awe them, that such there are for ought they know?
Or are their Souls so wholly drowned and swallowed up in Sensualities, as that
they have not any leisure wherein to consider their latter End? Have they not
Melancholy enough in their Constitutions, to fix their volatile spirits (no not
so much as for an hour) upon that which concerns them the most that may be,
even the Subject of a joyful or sad Eternity? Or have they the leisure to
consider their latter end, but only want sufficient Courage and Resolution to
endure it* as being a pungent, and a dismal, and not only a sad, but an
insupportable Consideration? This methinks is as absurd, as whatsoever it is
that has been alleged. For if they have not the patience to think or meditate
upon Hell for a little season; How much less will they be able to undergo it
with Patience to all Eternity? If the wages of Sin is such, whilst it is yet
but in the earning; Lord! how terrible will it be at the Time of Payment? And
what a strange Contradiction does this imply in some men's humors, That they
should dare incur the danger of enduring those Torments of Hell it self,
whereof they dare not endure so much as a deep consideration? no not long
enough to inquire, what they must do to be saved from them?

But all this is no more than an empty Mormo, to Them whose Faculties are
possess't with a spirit of slumber, being benumn'd Romans 11. 8.
by those foolish and hurtful Lusts, which 1 Timothy 6. 9.
drown the Soul in Misery and Perdition. Some are either so entangled with
worldly Cares, or else so transported with carnal Pleasures, they do so hunger
after some sins, and so thirst after others, and are so satisfied in the misery
of enjoying God's Anger, (by being at a full agreement with Sin and Hell,) that
they are Isa. 28. 15.
still too much diverted by offering Sacrifice to their Senses, to be able to
reflect, or to look before them. Either they do not at all remember, in the
midst of their Enjoyments, that for all these things God will bring them to
Eccles. 11. 9.
Judgment; or if some times they do, they straight contrive how to forget it.
And if nothing else will, either Wine, or Women, or Sleep, or Music, or all
these together, will put it out of their Remembrance. Prosperity is a weapon,
which hardly one in Ten Thousand has ever known how to wield. No not Solomon
the wise, in a state of Grace; no nor Adam the incorrupt, in a state of
Innocence; no nor Lucifer the Beatified, in a state of Glory. They that have so
much Peace without, as to beget a stupefaction, called Peace within, who live
at ease in their Possessions, and have a great Friendship with the World, will
be rather lifted up, like the men Hos. 13. 6.
of Ephraim, or fall a kicking, like Iesurun, or Deuteronomy. 23. 15.
stretch themselves upon their Couches and drink Wine in Bowls, like the
wantons in Zion of Amos 6. 4, 6.
whom we read in the Prophet Amos, than let it enter into their Thoughts, That
the Feet of those Darlings do lead to Death, and that their Hands take hold of
Hell. They will be otherways employed, than in contriving how to stand in the
Day of wrath, or in studying what to do, that they may be saved?

It concerns us therefore to pray, with the Poenitent Emperor Mauritius, That
God will use us as he did here the frighted Iailour of Philippi, even terrify
and scare us out of our carnal Security, (into which our successes are apt to
cast us,) and awaken us into a sense of the great Concernment of our Souls.
That he will fetch us unto Himself, although it be by the sharpest and
dreadful'st Methods. That he will use us as severely, as once he did
Nebuchadnezzar; even drive Dan. 4. 25, 32, 33.
us from the Comforts of Human Society and Converse, And give us our Dwelling
with the Beasts of the Field: That he will make us eat Grass as an Herd of
Oxen, and let our Bodies be wet with the Dew of Heaven; until we come to
consider, as well as know, That the most high God rules in the Kingdoms of
men, And that the great year of Recompense will shortly come, when he will put
a vast difference between the Wheat and the Chaff, taking the one into his
Garner, and burning up the other with Fire unquenchable. If after all his fair
warnings both by his Prophets and by his Rod, after his shaking the very
Foundations both of a Kingdom and of a Church, (as here he shook Those of the
Jailour's Prison,) And now if after his shooting at us, not only with his
venomed, but invisible Arrow, the Plague of Pestilence, we are not quickened
into a sense of our Sin and Misery, It is but high time to pray for what we
most of all deprecate; That to the end we our selves may be some way bettered,
He will make a much worse thing happen to us. That He will make us as the
(...), the Dung, and Refuse of the Earth. That he will load us at once with
Disgrace and Torment, whilst from the Pleasures, and the Plenty, he reduces us
to the Beggary and Byles of Job. That he will do to us in Mercy, what St. Paul
decreed in Justice to his Incestuous Corinthian; 1 Cor. 4. 5.
even deliver us up to Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh, that our Spirits
may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. That finding This to be a cruel, and
an inhospitable World, we may live in it as Pilgrims and Sojourners on the
Earth. That our weariness of This, may make us long and look out for a better
Country. That being brought to the Extremity of lying with Lazarus and the Dogs
at the Rich man's Door, we may be thereby instructed, if not compelled to cast
about, how we may lodge also with Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom. This, I say, is
our Interest, and so it should be our option, Therefore our wish and our
Contrivance, and by Consequence our Prayer, That if we cannot be brought to God
but by the Buffettings of Satan, nor be made in love with Heaven without a
Foretast of Hell, (which has been to most Patients the wholsom'st Med'cin,)
that then he will make our very Torments a means of Bliss; that he will make
our very Destroyer become an Instrument of our Safety, and even give us up to
Satan, to deliver us from him. That he will bless us with the Miseries of a
sinful World; and wean us utterly from the Flesh, by making it loathsome to our
Remembrance. For That God who at the first commanded Light out of Darkness, and
an Harmony of Creatures out of an indigested Chaos, can by the same creative
Power, so overruled and dispose of our three Grand Enemies, the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, as to make them three Antidotes against the Venom of
Themselves. To give an Instance in each of These; The terrible Buffettings and
Roarings of the Lion or the Dragon, (that is the Devil,) are made an excellent
kind of Antidote against the serpentine Wiles and Allurements of him. The many
Deceiptfulnesses and Frauds and cruel Usages of the World, do make the fittest
Prophylactick against its Vanities and its Pomps. The natural rottenness and
stench, and noysom Diseases of the Flesh, become the best (...) against its
Lusts. Just as the Bitings of the Scorpion are said to be cured by the skin; or
as the Fire of the Chemist in Spirits of Wine, is most anodynous, and
asswaging, to whosoever has been burned, or scalded with it. Or as the Root
Piso in medicina Brasiliensi, l. 3.
Mandihoca, though of it self a rank Poison, does (with no greater praeparation
than that of its being well press't,) afford a Meal to make Bread for many
great Nations in America. And shall we not pray that by any means, (be they
never so pungent) by any Method, (be it never so sharp) we may be made to
perform our Vow in Baptism, by forsaking the Devil and all his works, the Pomps
and Vanities of the World, with the sinful Lusts of the Flesh? If hardly any
thing but Shipwracks will make us pray, we are deeply concerned to pray for
Shipwracks. If we are grown so Atheistical, as not to cry out to God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, but in a Fit of the Strangury, or the Stone; well may we
pray for such Fits, as St. Basil once did for a Relapse into his Fever, as
soon as he found his Soul the worse for the Recovery of his Body. If nothing
but Dangers can keep us safe, (as indeed all Dangers contribute to it, unless
the Danger of Security be of the number) we have most reason to fear, what we
commonly most affect, such a full flowing Tide of Good Things here, as made our
Savior's Description of Dives his Heaven upon Luke 16. 25.
Earth. If we find in our selves that Heb. 11. 8.
Scriptural Character of a Bastard, a being suffered to live in Sin without the
chastisement of Verse. 7.
Sons, we well may wish for those Terrors which take so much from our
Felicities, as to give us good hope that we may be Sons.

We can never better discern the great Advantages coming to us by Frights and
Terrors, (such as These in my Text,) than by reflecting upon them in some
Examples. When God himself would gain Reverence both to his Majesty and his
Law, and beget in his People a fear to break it, it pleased his Wisdom to
deliver it with many Circumstances of Terror; even with Thundering and
Lightning, with Fire and Tempest, with the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of
words, Heb. 12.
which voice was so terrible, that they who heard it entreated they might not
hear it any more. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly
fear and quake, (Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20.) And St. Paul having premised a (...), we
must all appear before the Iudgment-seat of God, does presently 2 Cor. 4. 10.
add thereupon an (...), Knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord we persuade
men. Which is as if he should have said, That the Due Consideration of a
Judgment to come should be the strongest of all Incitements to the Amendment of
our Lives. This in reason should prevail, when all things else are ineffectual.
Nor does any thing more dispose us for such a sad consideration, than the happy
Interruptions of our Prosperity. David boasted in his Prosperity, He should
Psalm. 30.
never be removed, Psalm. 30. 6. But when God hid his Face, it presently
follows, that he was troubled, v. 7. Then he cried unto the Lord, and piously
made his Supplication, v. 8. Just so it was with the whole People Israel. The
more they were compassed about with Blessings, they presently sinned so much
the more, (Psalm. 78. 17.) But when he slew them, Psalm. 78.
they sought him, and inquired early after God, (v. 34.) Nor was it otherwise
in the Times of the Prophet Jeremy, and Amos; Woe be to them that are at ease in
Zion, (Amos 6. 1.) For they put far off the evil Day, (v. 3.) But in the Time
of their Trouble, men are ready to say, Arise, and save us, Jer. 2. 27. Exactly
thus it was with the very Disciples of our Lord. For whilst all was well with
them, and that their Ship enjoyed a Calm, Their Blessed Master was asleep, and
They as perfectly secure, as if his Eye had been watching over them. But behold
a great Tempest, which made the Sea cover the Ship, made them also cry out, and
awake their Master out of his sleep, with a (...), Lord save us, Matthew. 8. 25.
we perish. It Is true indeed they so spoke of a mere Temporal Destruction; And
of That they spoke too from a Panick Fear. But how many in the World do hardly
come to [ Lord save us, or what must we do that we may be saved,] until they
are like the poor Syrian, just ready to perish? Yet even This becomes an
Argument to prove the Danger of our Felicities, and the benefit growing to us
from seeing the Terrors of the Lord, That They who are Scoffers at Religion
during the Time of their Health and Plenty, are universally on their Deathbeds
of the Religion of the Clinicks; and being brought down to the Brink of Hell,
will commonly lift up their Hands and their Eyes to Heaven; crying out in the
language, though not in the Spirit of Christ's Disciples, Lord save us we
perish. And sometimes too, (although very seldom) not only in the language, but
in the sense and syncerity of the poor Seeker in my Text, what must we do that
we may be saved? Belshazzar had not in all his Life so much as a Fit of true
Devotion, until the fingers of a man's Hand coming forth out of a Dan. 5. 5* 6.
25. 29.
wall of their own accord, (or invisibly helped by an hand from Heaven,) and
setting his Judgment before his Eyes in Mean Tekel upharsin, had even loosed
the Joints of his Loins and Knees, and together with his Countenance had
changed his Heart too. And (to conclude with That Instance which is afforded
out of the Text, as being That that gave Occasion to all the rest) we see the
Iailour of Philippi was never truly in his wits, until thus frighted. Until the
Miracle of the Earthquake had struck his Prison into a Palsy, and Himself into
a Trembling, it never entered into his Thoughts, what should become of him
hereafter. But when he saw by signs and wonders which filled him with Ecstasie
and Astonishment, That there was Punishment for the Wicked, Reward for the
Righteous, and a God that judges the Earth, and Quite another kind of God than
what He had hitherto adored; A God that could bow down the Heavens, and make
the Earth become Quaker; A God that gave Light to the blackest Dungeon, shook
the Prison by its Foundations, conveyed Liberty to the Captives, and filled
the Hearts of the Despised with unspeakable Joy in the Holy Ghost; He very
easily inferred, that they had hitherto been but Idols, which he had paid
Devotion to; and That in requital of his Idolatries, he was liable to the wrath
of the only True God: That Paul and Silas were apparently two of his Emissaries
or Heralds, as might be gathered from the Miracles which had been wrought for
their sakes: That They by consequence could inform him, touching the means of
his Escape: And therefore instantly he resolved to lay himself at their Feet,
(though They were Prisoners of the Dungeon, and He the Master of the House,)
saying, (...), Sirs, (so the English) or rather Masters and Lords, (so the
Greek,) What must I do that I may be saved? And this does lead me from the End,
to the proper Object of his Inquiry, or the Means inquired after for its
Attainment. The second Part of my Division, and now in order to be considered.

The End of the Inquiry being Future, and Invisible, is only the object of our
Thoughts, or at the most of our Desires. But the Means of its Attainment, are
(as I noted) here implied to consist in Practice. And therefore This is That
part, whereof the most of Mankind can least endure the Consideration. Of the
few who are concerned to wish and supplicate for the End, fewer yet are
contented to trouble themselves about the Means. They will readily ask, that
they may be saved; But not so readily inquire, what they must do that they may
be saved. For should they ask what they must do, they are afraid it would be
answered, That they must cease to do evil, and learn to do good; That they must
seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, Isa. 1. 16, 17.
help the Fatherless, and plead for the Widow. That they must mortify the
Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. That they must crucify the world unto
themselves, and themselves unto the world. That if an Eye, or a Hand, or a Foot
offend them, they must pluck out the one, and cut off the other. That they must
not take any thought for the morrow, but sell all they have, and give it to the
Poor; deny themselves, take up Christ's Cross, and follow him. They will be
saved with all their hearts, provided it may be gratis, either upon none, or on
easy Terms: But dare not ask what they must do, with a serious purpose to be
doing whatsoever shall be answered to be a Requisite to Salvation, for fear the
answer should be harder, than they are able to endure. As That they must hate
their own Lives, and Love their Enemies. That they must fast as well as pray,
but feed their Enemies when they hunger. That they must turn the right Cheek to
him that strikes them on the left. That when they are persecuted and railed at,
they must not only rejoice, but (...) Matthew. 5. 12.
leap for Joy. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 17, 18.
That they must pray without ceasing, rejoice evermore, and in every thing give
Thanks. Make a Job.
Covenant with their Eyes, not to look upon a Maid; and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
abstain from all appearance of Evil.

But now the Iailour in my Text, although he had hardly yet the knowledge, had
the true Courage of a Christian. Upon Condition he might be saved, he did not
care on what Terms. It Is true Salvation was the End, but the Means of its
Attainment did make the Object of his Inquiry. For he did not simply beg that
he might be saved, as if he thought he might be saved* without the least
cooperation or any endeavor of his own; But as if he had concluded within
himself, (as St. Augustine did some Ages after,) Qui creavit te sine te, non
salvabit*te sine te.
That God who made us without our selves, will never save us without our
selves, He ask't how much he was to contribute toward the Means of his
Salvation. And This he asked in such a manner, as to imply his being ready, to
contribute whatsoever could be exacted. For he did not thus ask, What must I
say? or what must I believe? what Opinions must I hold? or what Sect must I be
of? what must I give? or whither must I go? but (in a manner which employed all
This, and more,) (...) (...), what must I Do, that I may be saved?

But though this is praiseworthy, it is very far from being enough. For it is
one thing to ask, what things are to be done that we may be saved; and
effectually to do them, is quite another. The wealthy Quaerist in the Gospel
could easily ask what he should do, that he might inherit eternal Life; and as
easily learn the Things ask't after: But when he was answered, that he must
sell all he had, and give it to the poor, he could not so easily fall to
practice what he had learnt, by putting the Precept in execution. So the
Multitude of Jews could easily ask our Blessed Savior, what they must do that
they might work the work of God, Joh. 6. 28. But being told they must believe,
that He was the Bread that came down from Heaven, Then (...) they murmured, v.
41. nay they despised him for his Parentage, v. 42. It was an hard saying, v.
60. Nay so far they were from doing the work of God, who had so lately and so
readily ask't him what they must do that they might work it; that from thence
they drew back, and would no longer walk with him, v. 66. Such a peevishness
there is in the minds of men, that though they love to be asking the Will of
God, they cannot endure to be told it, much less to be employed in the Doing of
it; no not though they are also told, that This alone is the Price at which
Salvation is to be had. Men may come to be baptized, as the Multitude did to
John the Baptist, And yet may be at That Instant a generation of Vipers, Luke
3. 7. A Generation of Vipers, and yet have Abraham for their Father, v. 8. that
is, their Father after the Flesh; In which respect God is able out of arrant
Stocks and Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. But when it is ask't what
we must do, to be his Children after the Spirit; The Answer is, we must inherit
at once the Faith and the Works of Abraham. And accordingly the Baptist did
proportion his Directions to such as ask't them. He did not tell them what they
must Teach, whereby to be Orthodox Professors; or what they must hold, whereby
to be Orthodox Believers; But as they asked what they must do, so he told them
those Things that were of necessity to be done. Begin not to say within your
selves, we have Abraham to our Father, (for so have They who are Sons of
Belial,) But bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, v. 8. If ye are
Publicans, exact no more than is appointed you, v. 13. If ye are Soldiers, do
violence to no man, neither accuse any one falsely, and be content with your
wages, v. 14. If ye are Christians of any Calling, Let him that has two Coats
impart to Him that has none; And He that has Meat, let Him do likewise, v.
11. Still it is our Doing the things asked after, not our Asking what we must
do, which is effectually the way to our being saved. And accordingly when it is
said by the Apostle St. James, That Faith without Works is dead, and nothing
worth, It is intimated to us by that expression, That a Rectitude of Judgment
is nothing worth, but as it stands in conjunction with a like Rectitude of
Life. As if our Faith, and our Knowledge, and good Professions, could amount
unto no more than the mere Body of Religion, whilst the Soul that enlivens it
is still the sanctity of our Actions. Thence a Good man is called, not an
Hearer, or a Believer, But (...), a Doer of the Word, Jam. 1. 22, 23. And when
it pleased our blessed Savior to give a general Description (in the fifth
Chapter of St. John,) as well of the Few that belong to Heaven, as of the Many
that go to Hell, He did not give them their Characters from their being of this
or that Country, of this or that Calling, of this or that Church, or
Congregation, of this or that Faith (not to say Faction) in Religion; But only
from their being qualified with such and such Practice, with such and such
Works, with such and such Habits of Conversation. Our Saviors words are very
plain, but (in my apprehension) of great Remarque, And such as being well
considered would teach us how to pass a Judgment (without any prejudice to our
Charity) touching the Safety, or the Danger, the unworthiness, or the worth, of
our selves, or others. For when All that are in the Graves shall hear the voice
of the Son of Man, and shall come forth, our Savior adds both their Qualities,
and the Ends of their coming forth, They that have done good shall infallibly
come forth unto the Resurrection of Life, And They that have done evil, unto
the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 29. Now certainly He who is the Savior,
can best of all tell us what belongs to Salvation, and to whom it does belong;
who they are that must be saved, and what we must do that we may be saved. It
is not merely the privilege of being received into the Church, and of being
admitted to all her Public Dispensations, but especially the Abstaining from
so much evil, as would denominate Evildoers, and the Doing so much Good, as
does denominate a Good and a Faithful Servant, by which a man has just Ground
to think himself in God's Favor, and that he is doing what he must do, that he
may be saved.

And if this is the Exegesis of what is said by Paul and Silas, (and that by
way of Answer to the Inquiry of the Iailour) Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved, so as it cannot be understood concerning Faith without
Works, but of such a Faith only as works by Love, and so fulfilleth the Law
of Christ, (The proof and evidence of which we have in part seen already, and
shall see more at large upon the next opportunity,) Then let us not so mistake
the words in the next Verse after my Text, or take them so by the wrong handle,
as to imply that Paul and Silas were but a Couple of Antinomians; Or that
nothing is to be done as of necessity to Salvation, but barely to believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, (which being abstracted from obedience, is nothing
better than Presumption; But rather let us work out our own Salvation, and let
us do it with fear and trembling. Let us give all diligence, by adding to Faith
Virtue, and one Virtue unto another, to make our Calling and Election sure. Let
us not look upon our selves as having already apprehended, or as being already
made perfect, but forgetting those things that are behind, let us reach forth
to those things that are before; ever pressing toward the Mark, for the Prize
of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. And leading a life of Self-denials,
by frequent watchings, and fastings, and other warrantable Austerities, which
are found in holy Scripture to be fit Instances of Attrition, let us beat down
our Bodies, and bring our Flesh into Subjection; if by any means we may attain
to the Resurrection of the Dead, if by any means we may apprehend That, for
which we are also apprehended of Christ Jesus. That so when Time it self shall
be lost into Eternity, and all days shall be ended in that one great Sabbath
which never Ends, we may also lose our hopes, and our endeavors of being
saved, into the ravishing experience and presence of it: There with Angels and
Archangels, and with all the Company of Heaven, singing Hosannahs, and
Halleluiahs, to Him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever
more.

A SHORT and EASY RESOLUTION Of the forementioned ENQUIRY Borrowed from the
Mouths of the Two Free-Pris'ners, Paul and Silas.
A RESOLUTION OF THE INQUIRY FROM A Practical Belief. etc.
ACTS XVI. 31. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.
1. THere are such shallownesses and depths too in this little short passage of
the Isa. 55. 1. Heb. 2. 1. Rev. 21. 6. Rev. 22. 1, 17.
Waters of Life, (as I am prompted out of Scripture to call the Gospel,) that I
may say of this Rivulet, what St. Austin once spoke of the whole Ocean of holy
Writ, The tenderest Lamb may here wade, and the tallest Elephant may swim. It
is a small Current of words, But such as opens and will engage us in a full Sea
of matter. A Sea as hospitable and easy, as That which is now called The
Euxine, But yet as hazardous, and as difficult, if not as proverbial as The
Aegaean; and so as famous for danger, as it is for safety. A Sea we all are to
sail in, if bound for Heaven; And yet for want of good steerage, How many
Adventurers unaware have been embarked in it for Hell? and been even split upon
the Rock of their own Salvation? The Antinomians, Fiduciaries, and Solifidians,
(betwixt whom there is a nice, but a real Difference,) do not more differ in
the ground, and the occasion of their Error, than they agree in the danger, and
issue of it. For making use of the literal against the rational Importance of
many Scriptures, and blending many great Truths with the greatest Falsehoods,
(so as the latter do pass for current by their vicinity with the former,) they
commonly reason within themselves in this following manner.

2. Sure we need not live so rigidly by The Objection of several Haereticks.
Rules and Praecepts, as some Arminian and Legal Divines would have us. For
Romans 6. 14.
we are not under the Law, but under Grace. And Romans 3. 28.
we are justified by Faith) without the Deeds of the Law. Nor are we justified
from some things, whilst we are answerable for others; but (as St. Paul taught
at Antioch, where he is written to have preached Forgiveness of Sins,) Acts 13.
39.
All that believe are justified from all Things, from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. Then why should we busy our selves with Martha
about many Things of little moment, when it is so easy for us with Mary to
choose the One that is needful? for can any Thing be easier, than to believe
without doubting that Jesus is the Christ? yet 1 John 5. 1.
whosoever so believes is born of God. And Verse 4.
whosoever is born of God, overcomes the world. Nor indeed is it a wonder,
considering the Virtue of such Belief* For our Savior tells us expressly, Mark
9. 23.
That all Things are possible to Him that believes. From whence it follows
that to believe, is The unum Necessarium, which a Christian is to provide in
his way to Heaven. And accordingly said our Savior unto the Ruler of the
Synagogue, not only (...), believe, but (...), Mark 5. 36. Luke 8. 50.
Only believe. Nor can this be thought the Privilege of but here and there
one; for it is indefinitely extended to all in general; John 6. 47.
He that believes in me has eternal life. Where the word He, being
indefinite, is tantamount to whosoever, and every one. And so indeed it is
expressed in other passages of Scripture; As when it is said to Cornelius, and
others with him, Acts 10. 43.
whosoever believes in Him, shall receive remission of sins. And in the
Epistle to the Romans we find it said of the Gospel, Romans 1. 16.
That ' it is the Power of God unto Salvation to every One that believes. Where
the Gospel cannot be meant as being inclusive of the Law, because it is said of
our Lord in the same Epistle, Romans 10. 4.
He is the End of the Law to every one that believes. Besides, need we care to
be Better, or better advised than St. Paul, That great Apostle of the Gentiles,
and precious Vessel of Election? Do we not find him confessing, and that in the
time of his Apostleship, That Romans 7. 14, 18, 19.
He was carnal, and sold under sin? That the Good he would, he did not; But the
evil which he would not, That he did, whereby he sinned against God and his
Conscience too? That no good Thing did inhabit in him, and that he was brought
into Captivity to the Verse. 23.
Law of Sin which was in his Members? Well therefore did he desire, in his
Epistle to the Philippians, Philip. 3. 9.
to be found only in Christ, not having his own righteousness which is of the
Law, but That which is through the Faith of Christ, The righteousness which is
of God by Faith. Why then should we be going such a long way about, whilst
behold in the Scriptures so much a nearer way home? what need we shut up our
selves from a thousand Pleasures and Contentments, by our endeavor of living
up to the Moral Law, by a Contempt of this World, by mortifications of the
Flesh, by daily contendings against the Devil, by bearing both the Yoke and the
Cross of Christ, by frequent watchings and fastings, and other Denials of our
selves, by making Prayers, and hearing Sermons, and by a world of good works,
(which are commonly very chargeable, or at least troublesome in the
performance,) I say what need of all This, whilst Salvation may be had upon
easier Terms? We cannot certainly be wiser, nor need we probably be warier,
than Paul and Silas in the Text. Who being asked as Ghostly Fathers, and that
by a newly-converted Heathen, what he was to do that he might be saved, gave
him no other Answer of Direction or Advice, than That He must believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ.

3. Which, in the sense of the Solifidians, The Objection laid open as to the
Venom contained in it.
Antinomians, and Fiduciaries, (for whom I have hitherto been objecting, if not
as well as they can wish, at least as strongly as I am able,) is just as if
they had answered Thus.

Jailour, be of good Comfort. For we were lately in as much jeopardy, as Thou
can possibly be in. And though thy Danger is great, thy Escape is easy. For
do not think that Christianity is such a Difficult Religion as some would make
it. It is rather the easiest and most indulgent, as well as the safest in all
the World. It has indeed many Praecepts, but by virtue of One alone (which we
shall presently tell thee of) all the rest will be waved, or dispensed with. So
that although it is a Law, it is a Law of Liberty. A Law of Liberty from the
Rigors and Austerities of the Law. A special part of Christ's Purchase, and the
great Privilege of a Christian. Nor is it only his Privilege, but Duty too:
He being commanded, and so obliged, (not only suffered, or allowed,) to stand
fast in that Liberty wherewith Christ has made him free. What Sins soever thou
have committed which cannot be expiated for amongst Jews or Gentiles, by thy
Conversion unto Christ will be blotted out. Be it so that thou have lived in
perfect Enmity to God; yet to Us has He committed the word of Reconciliation.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, in whom alone we preach pardon, and forgiveness
of Sins; not an absolute necessity of moral obedience and good works, which
assist not our Faith, but declare it only. He has satisfied by his Death for
all the Debt we owed to it, and is the Propitiation for all our Sins. He is our
Wisdom, and our Redemption, and all besides that, which we are able to want or
pray for. Nor stand we in need of an Inhaerent, as being safe by a transferred
and imputed Righteousness. For as Abraham believed and 'twas imputed to him for
Righteousness, (Romans 4. 22.) So also to Us shall it be imputed, if we Believe
on him that raised up Jesus from the dead, (v. 24.) We have been scourged on
his Back, and born a Cross on his Shoulders; we have been cleans'd by His
blood, and still are healed by His stripes; we are beheld in His Face, and
shall be judged in His Person, Just we are by His Righteousness, and for ever
reprieved by His Condemnation. It is for Christians to distinguish betwixt
external and internal Grace, and so betwixt an outward and inward Holiness. For
our Holiness without us (that is, in Christ) does supersede the necessity of
one within us. And is extremely more effectual to the saving of the Soul than
any Holiness within us could ever possibly have been. We shall not therefore
need to load thee with heavy Burdens, which neither we nor our Fathers have
been able to bear. Nor shall we trouble thee at once about many Things. For
though thy Quaestion is very Copious, and of ineffable Importance, as to the
End inquired after, Thy being saved; yet it is so easy to be resolved, as to the
means of its Attainment, that all The Answer we shall give thee is only This,
(...) Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.

4. And now it would be high time to The Objection objected against from the
Absurdities couched in it.
divide the Text, (after such a pleasant and easy Paraphrase, as the wit of
Flesh and Blood is too too* apt to make of it, especially when assisted by
learned Patrons,) but that I think the way to it is not sufficiently praepar'd.
For should so weighty a Quaestion be so very lightly answered, as with a bare
(...) Believe, and be saved? This is short work indeed, and such as would make
Paul and Silas to be the comfortablest Preachers in all the World. I mean the
pleasantest, and the most popular, I say not the faithful'st, and most sincere.
For if This Answer is sound and Orthodox, That nothing more needs be done
toward any man's being saved, than to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; Why
then says our Savior, Narrow is the way, and strait is the Gate that enters
into Life, And few there be that go in thereat? or to what purpose are we
commanded, That we strive to enter in, and also told at the same time, That
many shall seek who shall not enter? Or why does St. Paul in other places press
so earnestly for Obedience to the Commandments of Christ, which are at least
comprehensive of the whole Moral Law? or why do we read in the New Testament,
That every man is to work out his own Salvation, to fight, and to labor, and
to use all diligence for the making of his Calling and Election sure? Are These
things necessary for others* but not for the Iailour of Philippi? was He alone
to be saved at so cheap a Rate, as a single Belief on the Lord Jesus Christ? or
was he not one of those Philippians of whom St. Paul required more? Or did he
require at other men a great deal more than there was need? Or does He now join
with Silas in soothing up the poor Iailour, and sowing Pillows under his
Elbowes, which is no better than to dawb with untemper'd Mortar, to lead their
Convert into a Paradise, wherein there lurks both an old and a cunning Serpent?
A Serpent apt to persuade him (and by the help of this Text) That though there
are in the Gospel, which is the Garden of God, a great many sorts of forbidden
fruit, yet it is so far from being deadly, that it is not dangerous to taste it,
(as the best of God's Children have ever done,) so long as he can eat of the
Tree of Faith too; which is not only better tasted, but also wholsomer by far
than the Tree of Knowledge, by being grafted on the stock of the Tree of Life.
What (I say) might be the Motive which induced Paul and Silas to give this
Answer, (...), Believe and be saved? Is there more than This needful, or is
there not? If any thing more than this is needful for the attainment of
Salvation, why then did They conceal it, and that from one who even thirsted
after a full Draught of Knowledge, What was the All he was to do, that he might
be saved? Or if This is so sufficient, that nothing more than this is needful,
what Necessity is there of preaching, or of learning any thing else? For, as
when it was said by our Blessed Savior, [ It is easier for a Camel to pass the
Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,] his
Disciples ask't presently, [ Who then can be saved;] so when to One that had
inquired, [ what he must do that he might be saved,] no other Answer was given
by Paul and Silas, than that he must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; It may
be ask't with as good reason, who then can be damned? For thus (we see) the way
to Heaven is not only made Broader, but less encumbered than That to Hell. The
Flock of Christ is made a great and a numerous Flock. So as The Kingdom of
Heaven is but improperly compared unto a Pearl of great Price, which a Merchant
sold all that he had to purchase, since one may have it for a Believing in the
Lord Jesus Christ. All which being Absurdities, and very profanely inconsistent
with the Veracity of our Savior, may seem to speak Paul and Silas to be a
Couple of gross Casuists, for having given the Jailour's Quaere so lame and
partial a Resolution. But This again is an Absurdity as little allowable as the
former. For besides that 2 Timothy 3. 16.
All Scripture is of Divine Inspiration, and Paul and Silas in particular had
been acknowledged by The Daemoniack (in the 17th Verse of this Chapter) to be
The Servants of the most high God, who show unto us the way of Salvation; The
Text which now lies before us may be justified by a Parallel out of our
Savior's own Mouth. For having been asked by the People who flock't about him
at Capernaum, what they should do that they might work the work of God, (John
6. 28.) This (replied our blessed Lord) is the work of God, That ye BELIEVE on
Him whom He has sent, (v. 29.) In so much that to obviate, and to satisfy all
Objections, we must not quarrel, or suspect, but meekly study to understand,
and explain the Text. Which I shall first attempt to do by a full Division, and
after That (not by a curious, but) by a pertinent, and useful Tractation of it.

5. First to Divide the Text aright, (and so as that it may contain an
Explication of its Importance,) we must view and review it in its double
relation to the Context. I mean in its Dependence on the words going before,
and its Cohaerence with the two Verses which do immediately follow after.

The words before are an Inquiry, touching The Objection more directly and
fully answered.
the Thing of all the World which is to every man living of greatest moment,
even the Necessary Means of his being saved. This is the Ground, and the
Occasion, and Introduction to the Text. The Text it self is an obscure, because
a short Resolution of That Inquiry. And the two Verses coming after, do very
happily, though briefly, (and so indeed the less plainly) expound it to us.

The Inquiry was made by the frighted Iailour of Philippi. The Resolution is
given by Paul and Silas. The Exposition is St. Luke's, to whom we also owe the
Narrative and the Contexture of the whole.

The Text abstractively considered, does afford at first view, but a single
Act, and a single Object. Yet in relation to the Context, each of these is
twofold; one whereof is expressed, and the other implied.

First the Object here expressed is ( in sensu composito) The Lord Jesus
Christ. And this is Objectum formale Quod. It is not Christ without Jesus, nor
is it Jesus without The Lord. For That were the gross and common Fallacy, A
been conjunctis ad male divisa, which yet the Flesh of most Professors is apt
to impose upon their spirits. He is in all his Three Offices to be the Object
of our Belief. And in his Three v. Acts 2. 36.
special Titles his Threefold Office is here included. His Prophetical in the
first, his Priestly in the second, and his Kingly in the third. If Salvation is
the end, and if we aspire to have it also the event of our Belief, we must
impartially believe in the whole Messiah. Not as Jesus only, a Savior; no nor
only as Christ, a King; but undividedly, and at once, as the Lord Jesus Christ.
This is the Object of our Faith which is here expressed.

Next the Word of God preached is the object of our Faith, which is here
implied. And (as the men of the Schools do love to word it) This is Fidei
objectum formale Quo. For as Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Romans
10. 17.
Word of God, which Word cannot be heard without a Preacher; so no sooner was
it said by Paul and Silas, that the Jailour must believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, but in the next breath it follows, They spoke unto him the WORD of God,
(v. 32.) They had in vain told him he must, had they not taught him how he
might. And therefore they did not only possess him with the necessity of his
believing, But in tenderness to his Soul they straight afforded him the means
too. They did not train up their Convert (like the Catechists of Rome) only to
believe as the Church believes, that is to say, by a blind and implicit Faith,
making Ignorance and Credulity the only Parents of Devotion; But they built up
his Faith on the Foundation of the Scriptures; That by the knowledge of some
Praemisses which he might easily comprehend, he might attain to a Belief of
what was yet Incomprehensible. To beget in him a solid and a well-grounded
Faith, such as whereof he might be able to give a rational Account, they both
exhorted him to believe in, and also preached to him the WORD of the Lord Jesus
Christ; the object of our Faith which is here implied.

Come we now, from the double Object, to observe in the Text a double Act too.
Whereof the first is Internal, and that expressed; the second External, and
that implied.

The Act Internal, which is expressed, is (...), to believe. The Act External,
which is implied, is to confess what is believed in spite of Temptations to
conceal it. (And this did the Iailour of Philippi in the next Verses after my
Text.) For as inwardly with the Heart a man believes unto righteousness, so
outwardly with the Mouth Romans 10. 10.
Confession is made unto Salvation. Indeed the Gnostics were all for the
Inward Act only, for the better avoiding of Persecution. But the Outward is by
God as indispensably required; And the Inward Act without it is not sincere.
Thence it is that they are coupl'd as the condition of Salvation, Romans 10. 9.
If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine Heart
that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. Believing and
speaking are from the same spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. It is written, I
believed, and therefore have I spoken. We also believe, and therefore speak. A
double Act then there must be, if the end be to be saved. A True Believer must
be a Confessor in time of Trial, And when duly called to it, a Martyr too.

Again, As the Object, and the Act, so too the Subject of it is double. For
though begun in the Intellect, yet it is consummated in the Will, (as Aq. 22^.
q. 4. art. 2.
Aquinas and his Followers do rightly state it,) or else it would be merely an
human Faith, Fides cui potest subesse Dubium, a Faith whose very formal Reason
is a radical Fear, (I do not mean an ingenuous, but carnal Fear,) a Faith
without Love, and without Activity, and so without the effect of Obedience too.
And therefore Cajetan argues well, That an habit of Salvifick or saving Faith
must be at once both a Speculative, and a Practical habit. And truly such is
That Faith which is required in the Text, as may appear by the Effects and
Products of it in the Context. For first the Iailour did assent unto the Things
that were preached by Paul and Silas; which infer's the Christian Faith to have
got already into his Head. And then immediately after, we find it sunk into his
Heart too; witness the Sacrament of his Baptism which he received from Paul and
Silas; witness also his tender Charity in his washing of their stripes, his
entertaining them at his Table, and his rejoicing even in That that might be
temporally his Ruin, (v. 34) which are a proof of his abounding in those fruits
of the Spirit, Acts of Justice, and Gratitude, and works of Mercy, and
spiritual Joy in the Holy Ghost; All Effects and Diagnosticks of saving Faith;
The overflowings of That Love, which (to use St. Paul's phrase) is shed abroad
in the Heart of a true Believer. And thus we have the twofold Credere est actus
Intellectus secundum quod movetur a voluntate ad assentientium; procedit autem
hujusmodi Actus a voluntate and ab Intellectu, quorum utrumque natum est
perfici secundum praedicta. Et ideo oportet ut tam in voluntate sit aliquis
Habitus quam in Intellectu, si debeat Actus fidei esse perfectus. Sicut etiam
ad hoc quod actus concupiscibilis sit perfectus, oportet ut sit habitus
prudentiae in ratione, and habitus Temperantiae in Concupiscibili. Ibid. in
resp. ad obj. p. 11.
Subject, of Believing (as we ought) in the Lord Jesus Christ: to wit the
Intellect, and the Will too. Our full Assent must be seconded by our Love of
the Truth, and Obedience to it; and that by a natural Production of the one out
of the other. For what at first is no more than The light of Knowledge in the
Brain, does, by enkindling in the Bowels the Fire of Love, (of Love to God in
the first place, and to our Neighbor in the second,) produce Obedience to the
first and the second Table of the Law.

After the Object, and the Act, and the Subject of this Belief, (each of which
is twofold,) we are in order to reflect on the Nature of it. Which is indeed
very closely, but significantly couched in the Praeposition. For it is not
(...), believe the Essence or Existence of Jesus Christ; nor is it (...),
believe his Truth or Veracity; But it is (...), believe and trust IN, or UPON
the Lord Jesus. Believe at once his Propensity and Power to save thee. Believe
his Power, for he is Dominus, The Lord. And believe his Propensity, for he is
Jesus, the Savior. Well therefore said the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Whosoever comes Heb. 11. 6.
to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Now what is thus said of God, is exactly true of the Lord
Jesus Christ. For God was in Christ 2 Cor. 5. 19.
reconciling the World unto himself. And whosoever comes to Christ, must
believe, as that he is, so withal that he is a Rewarder too. A Rewarder, but of
whom? and on what Condition? for he is not a Rewarder of all in general, no nor
of All that do believe him to have the Office of a Rewarder, But of all such as
seek him, and that with diligence, And of all who thus believe in Him as in the
Lord Jesus Christ. Such an important monosyllable is the Praeposition in, (as
it is the English of the Greek (...), and in conjunction with an Accusative,)
that the Life of the Text would be lost without it. For standing here, as it
does, betwixt the Act, and the Object, it does imply the true nature of saving
Faith.

Pass we on from the Nature to the Necessity of Believing. Which here is
visibly implied by the Retrospect of the Text, as it is an Answer to the
Question, [(...), what must I do that I may be saved?] for sure the sense of
the Answer, if it be adaequate to the Question, must needs be This, Thou must
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. It is of absolute Necessity, and
indispensably required. For, as without our pleasing God, it is impossible to
be saved, so (we know) without Faith, it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11.
6.

Last of all we have here the Issue, or the Conclusion of the whole Matter, at
once employed in the Reflection of the Answer upon the Question, and expressed in
the words of the Answer too. Salvation is not the Effect, but yet the necessary
event of our Faith in Christ. Nor is it properly the wages, but most certainly
the Reward of a true Believer. It comes to pass as unavoidably upon the
Praemisses supposed, as an Effect on a supposal of all things requisite to its
Production. For the Question having been This, [ What must I do that I may be
saved,] to which the Answer is, Believe, and thou shall be saved, (An Answer
given by Paul and Silas who spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance,) here does
arise a mutual Inference, as of the Praecept and the Promise, so of the Duty
and the Reward. Here is a necessary Tendency of the first toward the second,
and a necessary Dependence of the second upon the first. For as Salvation
cannot be had (by such as live under the Gospel, without a praevious Belief in
the Lord Jesus Christ, so wheresoever such Believing does go before, it is very
plain that Salvation must follow after. Both afford us matter of Caution, and
Comfort too. The former serving to humble, and the latter to support us. That
defends us from Praesumption, and This secures us from Despair.

Thus have I done with the Division, and (in the ordering of That) with the
Explication of the Text. Wherein if I have trespass't by too much length, it
will in justice be imputed to my Desire of Perspicuity, and of making it one
Arrest unto the Plausible Objection that lies against it.

6. In the ensuing Tractation of it, I A further and final Amulet against the
Antinomian Poison.
must begin with the Act which is here expressed, and consider it as relating
to the first and chief Object. And this I must do in such a manner, as to make
it a farther Antidote against the venom of the Objection. Which to the end that
I may do with the more success, I must explore by such ways as are not able to
mislead us, what of necessity must be meant by such an Act of Believing, as
does arise from an Habit of saving Faith. For as every one that paints is not
presently a Painter, nor every Painter an Apelles; so it is not every Belief
which can denominate a Believer, nor is it every Believer who can be saved. It
will not therefore be sufficient to preach up the Faith of Christ in general,
(which yet too many are wont to do, because it is easiest to be done,) nor to
depredicate in particular the several rare Fruits and Effects of Faith, without
distinguishing all along betwixt the Roots and the Causes from whence they
grow; But we must first have the Patience to learn our selves, and then the
Care as well as Skill to make it visible unto others, how much The Habit of
salvifick or saving Faith is meant to grasp and comprehend in its whole
Importance; and so (by a consequence unavoidable) how much short of Salvation,
every Faith, without This, will be sure to land us.

Now in the bringing of this about (wherein it is certainly as needful, as it is
difficult to be Orthodox, and yet wherein Learned men have seldom hitherto
agreed,) we are all apt to err with the greater ease, the less we are able to
determine, how many Acceptions of the word Faith may be found in Scripture. For
(not to speak of its Import in human Authors) we may observe it in holy Writ to
have been used in so Many and Different senses, that School-Divines have
strangely varied touching its various significations. For first Michael Medina
De recta in Deum fide lib. 1. cap. 1.
Medina will acknowledge but two Acceptions of the word Faith. Albertus Magnus
in 3. d. 23. art. ad 3.
Albertus Magnus allows of five. Alfonsus a Castro in summa de haeresibus,
verbo Fides, Haeresi 2.
Alphonsus a Castro admits of seven. Vega in Tractatu de Justificatione, q. 1.
Vega goes higher, as far as Nine. Bonaventura in 3. d. 23. in explicatione
Textus, litera B.
Bonaventure and Greg. de Valent. in 2. 2ae. Disp. 1. Q. 1. Punct. 1.
Valentia arise to ten. Alexander Hallensis p. 3. qu. 77. membro 1.
Alexander Hallensis will have eleven. Nay Sotus de Natura and Gratia l. 2. c.
6.
Sotus tells us of some who are for fifteen significations, whereas Himself
(with Medina) will own but two.

I will not presume to be an Umpire between so many and subtle Schoolmen,
though I confess I am not able to give an absolute Assent unto either of them.
I can evince that the word Faith has very various significations, and easily
instance in the chief, whereof it is dangerous to be ignorant, or which at least
it will be useful very particularly to know. But when I shall have given
pregnant Instances of Many, and those the Most that at present I can discern, I
shall not be so Dogmatical as to deny that there are more.

First it is clear that the word Faith does Eight Acceptions of Faith, whereof
the Last only is Saving.
signify Faithfulness and Truth. As Romans 3. 3, 4. What if some did not believe?
shall their Unbelief make the Faith of God of none effect? no, (1)
let God be true, and every man a liar. Next it signify's The Promise, which is
in faithfulness (2)
and Truth to be performed. And of this we have an instance 1 Timothy 5. 12. where
the wanton young Widows are said to be liable to Damnation, because they have
cast off their first Faith. That is, their Promise of constant widowhood which
they had made unto the Church, whose single Interest and Service they had
thereby wedded and espoused. Thence it (3)
signify's a Confidence, as that is opposed to Distrust; A full Dependence on
the Power, and a firm adhaerence unto the Promises of our Lord. Thus it was
used by our Savior, when Peter cried as he was sinking, [ Lord save me,] O
thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Matthew. 14. 31. In the same
sense he said to the two blind men, Do ye believe that I can do this? according
to your Faith be it unto you, Matthew. 9. 29. And thus it is used by St. James, by
whom we are exhorted to ask in Faith, nothing wavering, James 1. 6. (4)
Again we find the word Faith set to signify Conscience, or knowledge compared
with the Rule of Action, as it is observed by Theophylact, and the Interlineary
Gloss upon Romans 14. 23. whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. Nay Faith, (5)
by a Synecdoche, is made to signify the Gospel. Whereof we meet with an
Example Gal. 3. 25. where when it is said, After Faith is come, we are no longer
under a Schoolmaster: The plain meaning of it is only This, That after the
coming of the Gospel we are no longer under the Law. It is sometimes used to
signify a bare Assent; And such is that Faith which (6)
is called historical, and is common to men with believing Devils, James 2. 19.
But as sometimes an Assent, so at other times the (7)
Object assented to. And of this we have an Instance in the Epistle of St.
Jude, where to contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints,
is nothing else but to contend for the Creed it self, the Christian Doctrine,
which is the Ground, and the Rule of Faith.

7. Thus we find the word Faith in seven distinct significations; But none of
These will amount to a saving Faith, however some of These are Ingredients in
it. For saving Faith is not only an Habitus seu facultas quaedam Intellectus,
qua inevidenter quidem, sed firmiter assentimur iis omnibus quae tanquam a Deo
revelata proponuntur credenda in Ecclesia. Greg. de Valent. Tom. 3. Q. 1.
Punct. 1. p. 6.
Habit or Faculty of the Intellect, whereby we firmly and without fear, but yet
withal without evidence, assent to all things proposed to be believed in the
Church as revealed by God, (which is the Schoolmen's Definition of a justifying
Faith, or (as they rather love to speak) of the Faith which is infused in
Justification,) For This is but part of that Description, which the same men
afford to the Haec ipsa est Fides quae dicitur Fides Miraculorum, adjuncta
firma quadam fiducia circa eventum miraculosum. Id. ib. p. 7.
Faith of Miracles, whereby a man may move Mountains, and yet be damned; may
cast out Devils, and be himself possessed with them; as is evident from the
preaching both of our Savior and St. Paul, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 13. 2. Nor
is it only such a Relyance on the mercy of God, and the merits of a Savior, as
carrys with it a full Persuasion of the Remission of our Sins; (as some who are
Enemies to the Schoolmen are wont to teach;) for This may possibly be alone,
unattended with Repentance and change of Life; And being not the Mother of such
an offspring, it must by consequence be inferred to be but the Daughter of
Praesumption.

8. No, the saving Faith is That, which comprehends Both the former, and more
than Both. It is indeed the very Pandect of all that is requisite to Salvation,
by being the Substance and the Epitome even of all other Duties required of us.
In so much that we must learn how to expound it when alone, by what we find
spoken of it when it stands in conjunction with other Duties. For when our
Savior gave Commission for the preaching of the Gospel to every Creature, he
did not only say, He that believes shall be saved; But he that believes and
is Baptezed, He Is the man that shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. And so when He
preached first in Galilee, He did not only say, Believe; But, Repent, and
Believe the Gospel, ( Mark 1. 15.) And still by Repentance is meant amendment,
as St. Peter has explained it by his Preaching at Jerusalem in Solomon's
Porch. Where he did not only say, Repent and Believe; Nor only Repent, and be
Baptized, (as he had said a while Acts 2. 38.
before,) but Repent and be Converted, that your sins may be blotted out, (Acts
3. 19.) Again in other places of Scripture we find it coupl'd with Confession,
without the company of which it is Matthew. 10. 32, 33. Luke 12. 8, 9.
nothing worth. And of this I gave examples in the Division of the Text. Nay we
read in other Scriptures, touching the 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
work, and the Romans 3. 27.
Law, and the Romans 16. 26.
Obedience of Faith. Nay in one place especially, I observe the two phrases [
To Believe, and To Obey,] are clearly used as (...), in the very same breath
importing both the same Thing, and promiscuously expressing the one the other.
The Place I speak of is Romans 10. 16. But they have not obeyed the Gospel: For
Esaias says, who has Believed our Report? now if obeying in the first clause
did not signify Believing, it must have been in the second, [who has obeyed
our report?] because it is in the first, [But they have not obeyed the Gospel]
And if Believing in the second clause did not signify obeying, it must have
been in the first, [But they have not Believed the Gospel,] because it is in
the second, [who has Believed our report?] else what means the Causal For, by
which the second Clause is proved to give a reason of the first? for this is
evidently the Logic which our Apostle there uses. To Believe the report of
the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, is to Obey the holy Gospel which he
prophetically preached. But they have not Believed the former; Therefore they
have not obeyed the latter. But neither have we yet the utmost of saving Faith.
For as it signifies an obedience to all the Commandments of the Law, in that it
Gal. 5. 6.
works by Love, which is indeed the Romans 13. 10.
fulfilling of it, so it does many times imply a Perseverance (in Love, and in
Obedience,) unto the end. As when it is said by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, We are not of Them that draw back unto Perdition, Heb. 10. 39.
But of Them that Believe to the saving of the Soul. We read of some who had a
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, but such as was utterly overthrown by Hymenaeus
and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.
(whose words did eat into their Faith as does a Canker,) and so however for a
time it might have justified, yet for want of perseverance it could not save
them. For let the Nature of our Faith be what it can, still it is a Requisite to
Salvation, That we endure unto the End, Matthew. 24. 13.

9. Now when the Faith of a Believer is arrived at such a pitch as has been
described, by Repentance, and Conversion, and Perseverance unto the end, or (to
use St. Paul's words, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.) by his work of Faith, his labor of
Love, and his Patience of Hope, (that is to say in terms yet plainer,) by the
obedience which his Faith, and by the Industry which his Love, and by the
Constancy which his Hope in the Lord Jesus Christ has effected in him, so that
the Righteousness of God has been successfully revealed from Faith to Faith,
(as St. Paul expresses a Perseverance in Faith, Romans 1. 17.) It is then indeed
Heb. 11. 1.
the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen, and
virtually the Praesence of things yet future. A steady Dependence upon God for
the Performance of his Promise, and a confident expectation of the Glory to be
revealed. A being convinced that That is true by a mental Demonstration, which
does not fall under an ocular. And as, in other respects, Faith is said to be
the Hand, so in This is it the Eye of a pious Soul, wherewith looking up to
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, we may easily see our way through
any Night of Tribulation that can befall us. Thus we see how saving Faith does
carry Hope in its Importance, as well as Charity; as may appear by the
Duplicity of the Apostle's Definition, which seems to have a twofold Genus, and
a twofold Differentia. For first he says it is the Substance, and then the
Evidence. In as much as it is an evidence, it is objected on Things invisible;
But in as much as it is a Substance, so it is of Things which are hoped for. A
Definition very fitly against the Method and the Rules of Art and Nature,
because it is of such a Quality as is exceedingly above them. And yet it is a
Definition, whereof I think it will be easy to give a rational Account. For
this Faith being (an Act, or rather) an Habit of the Intellect, And yet
determined to its object by the Empire of the Will which is at last its Subject
too, ( That as expressed by the word Fides, and This as well by the word
Fiducia,) it is plain its object must be considered both as True, and as Good.
As the object of the Intellect, the Enjoyments of Heaven are still considered
by us as True, and so are properly contemplated as Things not seen whereof
there is yet no other Evidence, than that of Faith. But as the object of the
Will, they are considered by us as Good, and so are properly here expressed by
Things hoped for, and Faith of such may be called the Substantia solet dici
Prima Inchoatio cujuscunque rei, and maxim quando tota res sequens continetur
virtute in primo principio. Aquinas 22 ae. q. 4. Art. 1. p. 27. col. 2.
Substance. Though not in a logical, or physical, or metaphysical Sense, yet in
a moral, and metaphorical; as that which is first in every kind, and either
radically or vertually contains the rest in it, is said to be the Substance of
all the rest; as the Contents are the substance of the following Chapter; or as
Adam was the Substance of all Mankind; or as there is said to be a Substance
and Body of Sin, which very Body is also said to have a strength, and a sting.
And then with a greater force of reason may Faith be said to be the Substance
of things hoped for, because it has an amazing power of presentiating the
things which are wrapped up in Futurity, and represents them all at once, as well
to the Will, as the Understanding. It gives us (as I may say) a kind of Livery
and Seisin of all we hope and pray for, and even long to be united to, though
by the Help of a Dissolution. In so much that the Plenitude of this One Grace
in the sense I mentioned (which Plenitude is expressed by a (...) Heb. 10. 22.
(...), Heb. 6. 11. (...), Coloss. 2. 2.
threefold (...), and boldly rendered a full Assurance,) I say the Plenitude or
fullness of this one Grace, which is attainable by Christians whilst here below,
is worthily reckoned by St. Paul, The Inchoation of our Glory. This very Grace
is once affirmed to be a kind of beatifick (although an antedated) Vision of
the Glory of God. And for a man to leave This for a better world, with such a
cordial Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ as was here recommended by Paul and
Silas, (which I have hitherto explained by several passages of Scripture,) is
nothing else but to pass from a Paradise to a Heaven, or (to use St. Paul's
(...)) from one Glory to another. For we all with open Face beholding as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

10. But some may tacitly now object An Objection.
against Paul and Silas in the Text, (or at least against St. Luke, the Relator
of it, That if by Faith we must be justified, and also sanctified in part,
before we can expect it should ever save us, they should have told the Jailour
of it in Terms at large, and have showed in the Retail, how many Duties of a
Christian are succinctly comprehended in that expression; not have told him
only in Gross, (as Dutchmen make their dishonest Reckonings,) He must believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ. For how knew the Jailour he was to do any thing but
to Believe? or to believe in any other, than the second Person in the Trinity,
God manifest in the Flesh? for they seem to have made no mention to him of his
being to believe in God the Father, or in God the Holy Ghost, much less did
they add the other Articles of the Creed, which are Ingredients in the object
of Saving Faith.

11. To which I answer by two Degrees. Answered two ways.
And first of all by a concession, That if indeed Paul and Silas had said no
more to their Catechumenist, than that He must believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, not explaining what was meant by that Habit of Faith from which the Act
of his Believing was to proceed, nor yet explaining what was meant by the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is often put by a Synecdoche for the whole object of our
Belief, ( Faith in Christ being the Pandect of Christian Duties, which are all
shut up in Faith, as Homer's Iliads in a Nutshell,) Then indeed they might have
made him a Solifidian, or a Fiduciary, which had not been the way to his being
saved. But secondly I answer, That the objection is made of a false Hypothesis;
For Paul and Silas dealt honestly and discreetly with the Jailour; when having
told him he must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for his being saved, (it
presently follows after the Text,) they spoke unto him the Word of God; that
is, they expounded the Scriptures to him. And in the doing of That, they proved
the object of his Faith to be the Trinity in Unity; not solely and exclusively
the Lord Jesus Christ, but in conjunction with God the Father, and with God the
Holy Ghost too. Again in expounding the Scriptures to him, they could not but
tell him what was meant, by an effectual Belief in the Lord Jesus Christ;
importing such a kind of Faith, as is ever working; and such a kind of working,
as is by Love; and by such a kind of Love, as is the fulfilling of the Law; and
of such a Law too, as does consist of somewhat higher and more illustrious
Injunctions than those of Moses; and of such an obedience to those Injunctions,
as is attended and waited on by Perseverance unto the End. There is no doubt
but they acquainted him, (in their expounding of the Scriptures, and speaking
to him the Word of God,) how very highly it did concern him, not only to escape
the Corruption that is in the world through lust, and also to believe in the 2
Pet. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Lord Jesus Christ, but besides This, (as St. Peter speaks,) to give all
diligence, for the adding to his Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to
Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Patience; to Patience, Godliness; to
Godliness, Brotherly kindness; to Brotherly kindness, Charity. For that these
were all needful, and no redundant superadditions, is very clear from St. Verse
9.
Peter in the next verse but one. He that lacks these things is blind, and
cannot see a far off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
But if these Things be in you, and abound, Then indeed (as St. Peter Verse 8.
adds) ye shall not be barren in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. If ye
do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Now can we think that St.
Peter did not teach the same Doctrine with Paul and Silas? or can we think that
Paul and Silas would withhold from the Jailour that Train of Duties, for want
of which he had been Blind, and not in Case to see God? no, whatever might have
been wanting in their succinct and pithy Answer, whereby to give him a right
Understanding of it, was abundantly supplied by their following Sermon. And
though the Heads of their Sermon are not put upon Record, (but only the Text
upon which they made it;) yet St. Luke records This, That such a Sermon there
was preached, in that he says, They spoke to him the Word of God.

12. And truly This is such a Method, as I could wish were well observed by all
that are of their Function. I mean the Stewards of the Mysteries of the Living
God, Unto whom is committed the Word of Reconciliation, whose lips are made to
be the Treasuries and Conservatories of Knowledge, and which the People are
appointed to seek at their Mouths. For the Text we have in hand is often turned
to advance either Truth, or Falsehood, even according to the handle by which
it is held forth to the giddy People; And is made to be eventually either
venomous, or wholesome, just in proportion to the sense in which it is taken and
digested by them that hear it. If to Believe is only taken for an Assent unto
the Truth, or a Relyance on the Merits of Jesus Christ, or a confident
Application of all his Promises to our selves, And this in a kind of opposition
to the Necessity of Good works, (which ought to be in conjunction with it;)
Then it is apt to cause a wreck in the waters of Life; and through the Malignity
of a Digestion, a man may be killed by the Bread of Heaven. But if it is taken
for obedience to the Commandments of Christ, with Perseverance unto the End in
conjunction with it; Then the Answer of Paul and Silas is the short Summary of
the Gospel, and they might well promise Salvation to whosoever should
accomplish the purpose of it. That this indeed is the Importance, may appear by
the words of our blessed Savior; who having been asked by a Jew, as Paul and
Silas by a Gentile, [what Course was to be taken whereby to inherit Eternal
Life,] gave him an Answer which some may censure, as too much savouring of the
Law, but yet it seems not unsuitable to the economy of the Gospel, [ If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.] Now in as much as Paul and Silas
did not teach another Doctrine, but the same in other words with their Master
Christ, they must needs be understood to have given This Answer, That if the
Jailour should so believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, as to imitate his Example,
and yield obedience to his Commands, and continue so to do all the days of his
life, he should not fail (in that Case) of his being saved. And though the Rule
is very true, That nothing is wanting in Nihil deest quod necessario
subintelligitur.
any Sentence which is of necessity understood, which well might justify Paul
and Silas in the conciseness of their expression: Yet not contented with this
excuse, they rather chose not to want it, by speaking largely to the Jailour
the Word of God. After the very same manner,

13. That the People may not wrest the outward Letter of the Scripture to their
Damnation, we must carefully explain and disentangle it to their Safety. If any
of Us shall be consulted by either Believers or Unbelievers, about the means of
their being saved, we have two ways of Answer, and both exact; but both are to
be taken cum grano salis, and with a due Interpretation. We may answer with our
Savior, They are to keep the Commandments; or else with Paul and Silas, that
they are to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

But if the former, we must add, This is the chief of the Commandments, that we
believe on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23. And although we
must have an inherent righteousness in part, yet there is need that That of
Christ be imputed to us, if but to make up all the wants and the vacuities of
our own. For our own is no better than filthy Rags, if impartially compared
with our double Rule, to wit The Doctrine, and Life of Christ. We must negotiate
indeed with the Talents of Grace, that we may not be cast into outer Darkness;
yet so as to judge our selves at best to be unprofitable Servants, weighed with
the Greatness of our Redeemer, and with the Richness of our Reward.

Or if we give them the second Answer, we must also speak to them the Word of
God. We must explain what it is, to believe in Christ; and by the help of some
Distinctions (duly considered, and applied,) teach them to see through all the
Fallacies, and flatten the edge of all objections, which are opposed to the
Necessity of strict obedience and good works. When any Justifying Virtue is
given to Faith, we must tell them it is meant of Faith 1 Timothy 1. 5.
unfeigned. When we speak of the Sufficiency of Faith unfeigned, we must show
them how Gal. 5. 6. (...) passive sonat Syro, and Tertulliano adversus Mercion.
l. 5. Et eo redit, quo. (...) Jac. 2. 22.
Love is the Spirit of Faith. Whether because (in the Active) it works by Love,
or else because (in the Passive, in which the Syriac and Tertullian translate
the word) by works of Charity and Obedience Faith is wrought and made perfect.
When we celebrate the force of a 1 Pet. 1. 3.
lively Faith, we must season it with a Note, that Faith is Jam. 2. 17.
dead being alone. When it is said out of St. Paul, that we are justified by
Romans 3. 28.
Faith, without the Deeds of the Law, it is fit we add out of St James, that we
are justified by Jam. 2. 24.
Works, and not by Faith only. For (to show that St. James does not either
contradict or confute St. Paul,) The Works excluded by St. Paul, are no other
than the Deeds of the Ceremonial Law; And those included by St. James, are no
other than the Works of the Moral Law. So we are justified by Faith as the Root
of Works; and we are justified by Works, as the Fruit of Faith. Not by Faith
without Works, for then St. James would not be Orthodox; nor yet by Works
without Faith, for then we could not defend St. Paul; but by such a Faith as
works, and by such Works as are of Faith. By Both indeed improperly, as being
but necessary Conditions; But very properly by Christ, as being the sole
meritorious Cause. Again because it is very natural for Carnal Professors of
Christianity, so to enhaunce the Price of Faith, as to depretiate good Works,
and make obedience to pass at the cheaper Rate, They must be told that when our
Savior ascribes the moving of Mountains, and other Miracles to Faith, He does
not speak of That Faith, which is a Sanctifying Grace, Gal. 5. 22. but of that
Faith alone which is an Edifying Gift, 1 Cor. 12. 9. by which a man may do
wonders, and yet be damned, Matthew (...). 22, 23. So when he said unto the
Ruler, who had besought him to heal his bedridden Daughter, (...), Only Believe,
He only meant it was sufficient for the healing of her (...)ody, without
alluding in any measure unto the saving of her Soul. So far he was, in that
place, from giving any ground of hope to a Solifidian. And therefore briefly
let it suffice me to say once for all; That when we find men Believers without
good Life, we must show them how many ways a man may be a Believer without true
Faith, may be justified in the Praemisses, yet not saved in the Conclusion; may
get no more by his Knowledge, than to be beaten with many stripes; and have no
more of a Savior, than to be damned by. We must instruct them to distinguish
betwixt the Act, and the Habit of their Believing. But above all, betwixt a
Speculative, and a Practical Belief. A Belief in the Heads, and the Hearts of
men. A Belief which does consist with a drawing back unto Perdition, and That
by which a man believes unto the saving of the Soul.

14. Stand forth therefore Thou Antinomian, or Thou Fiduciary, or whosoever
else Thou art who art a sturdy Believer without true Faith, and ever namest the
Name of Christ without departing from Iniquity; Try thy self by this Touchstone
which lies before thee; and examine whether thy Heart be not as apt to be
deceiptful, as 'twas once said to be by the Prophet Jeremy. Let the Tempter
that is without, make thee as credulous as he can; And let the Traitor that is
within, make thee as confident as he will of thy Faith in Christ; yet Thou will
find, when all is done, there is exceeding great Truth in the Spanish Proverb,
That it is a very hard Thing to believe in God. And so very few there are who
attain unto it, that it may rationally be doubted, whether when the Son of Man
shall come a second time from Heaven, he will come with such success, as to
find Faith upon the Earth. Examine therefore whether Thy self may well be
reckoned to be one of that little Number. Examine whether thy Belief is really
such as Thou believ'st it; and try whether thy Confidence is not the Thing to
be distrusted the most of any. For

15. Of this I can convince thee by a mental Demonstration, which is more
cogent than an ocular, That if thou have not such respect unto the Recompense
of Reward, as to choose rather (with Moses) to spend thy short and dying life
in Mortisications and Selfdenials, and to suffer Tribulation with the People
Heb. 11. 25, 26.
of God, than with the brutish Sons of Belial, to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season; If thou do not esteem the Reproach of Christ to be much greater
Riches than all the Treasures of Egypt; Or if thou can basely fear Them that
can kill the Body only, (but are not able to hurt the Soul,) more than Him that
can cast both Soul and Body into Hell; And have often done more to escape the
former, than ever thou will do to eschew the latter; Thou have not yet the
first Degree of a Saving Faith. Thou do not (...), not so much as believe the
Lord Jesus Christ. Thou do not assent to his veracity, or look upon him as a
True Speaker. Thou do not so far confide in the Truth of his Promises and his
Threats, as to adventure any great matter upon the mere Reputation and Credit
of them. For most undoubtedly, if thou did, Thou would prefer that which
leads to all the Pleasures that he has promised, before the Things that will
betray thee to all the pains that he has Threatened. Thou would pursue with
more vehemence what will end in an eternal and exceeding weight of Glory, than
what will terminate in a worm which never dies, and in a Fire which is not
quenched. That thou do now affect to walk, rather in the broad than the
narrow way, is not so much that thou espousest a way which leads thee to
Destruction, or have Averseness unto That by which thou may enter into Life;
as that thou do not quite believe the Lord Jesus Christ, when he would fright
thee from the one, and allure thee to the other. That thou do now take the
Course to dwell with everlasting Burnings, rather than That which has a
tending to Ioys unspeakable, cannot possibly be from hence, that thou
preferr'st a very short to an endless Pleasure, but rather from hence that thou
preferr'st thy present experience of the first, to the uncertainty and the
doubtfulness which thou retainest of the second. Not at all that thou
preferrest the Miseries of Hell to the Ioys of Heaven, But that thou do not
believe what is said of either.

16. Again admit thou do (...), believe the Truth and the Veracity of the
Lord Jesus Christ; Yet if thou are destitute of the Faith which is consummated
by Love, and by such a Love too as does cast out Fear; nor only the fear of all
that may be inflicted, but so far also the Feeling of all that is, as to be
able to rejoice, and to leap for joy, Matthew. 5. 12.
when thou art persecuted and railed at for righteousness sake; If thou can
not say heartily, in the language of St. Paul, I take pleasure 1 Cor. 12. 10.
in Insirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, and in
Distresses for Christ his sake; If (in a word) Thou art not able to conquer all
thine own weakness by Ghostly strength, so as to hold fast thy Union and good
Intelligence with Christ, in spite of Nakedness, Romans 8. 35, 37, 38, 39.
or Famine, or Peril, or Sword, or Life, or Death, or Angels, or Devils, or
Principalities, or Powers, or things present, or things to come, And all by
virtue of that Faith which overcomes the World; (which is not only the 1 John
5. 4, 5.
means of Conquest, but the Victory it self;) Thou do not heartily believe
(...), (that is) In, or Upon the Lord Jesus Christ. It Is very evident that thou
doubtest either his Power, or his Propensity. Thou do not so depend, and rely
upon him, as that I can assure thee thou shall be saved.

17. Again if thou have not such a Faith, as does denominate thee a good and a
faithful servant, such a justifying Faith, as in the literal sense of it does
make thee Just, ( Just I mean in that notion, in which 'twas said of holy Job,
that he was a just and an Job 1.
upright Man,) If thou have not such a Faith as by which thou art qualified in
part, both with Holiness and Righteousness, with Godliness and Honesty, with
the Duties of the first and the second Table, whereby the Righteousness of
Christ may be so wholly imputed to thee, as to instate thee in the Pardon of
all thy Sins; (it being impossible that thy Savior should ever justify thy
Person, and not sanctify thy Nature in some proportionable degree;) If besides
thy Assent to the veracity of his Doctrine, and besides thy Dependence on the
Almightiness of his Power, Thou do not pay so great a Reverence unto the
Justice of his Will too, as to serve and obey him with godly fear; Thou do
not practically believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou do not own him in his
Authority, do not receive him in his Commands, do not embrace and entertain
him as he comes to thee a Legislator, as one who has a Name written both on
his Vesture and on his Thigh, King of Rev. 19. 16.
Kings, and Lord of Lords. And by consequence though thy Head may be as full as
it can hold of the Christian Science, or however thou may have Faith whereby
thou 1 Cor. 13. 2.
can remove Mountains; Yet thou do not so Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
as that I can assure thee thou shall be saved.

18. Again if thou have not such a Telescope, as by which thou art enabled to
look on the other side the Veil, such a Faith as, is the Evidence of things not
seen, and the substance of things that are hoped for; have not any
praepossession of things invisible, and future, nor any glimmerings and
foretasts of the Glory to be revealed; have no ground for an Assurance,
(whether of Faith, Hope, or Understanding,) that thy Pardon is sealed, and thy
Peace ratified; Art not inwardly sustained, in all thy Agonies and Conflicts,
with spiritual Joy in the Holy Ghost; have not any the least Intelligence,
(through the secret whispers of the Spirit) of a Ravishing Mansion praepared
for thee in the Land of the Living. And art not placed by that Intelligence
above the Level of Temptations, exempted from the Fear of what Men or Devils
can do unto thee; If thou can not reflect with comfort upon the Day of
Discrimination, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels, in flaming 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.
Fire, taking Vengeance on Them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of Jesus Christ; Or if thou can not think undauntedly Rev. 20. 12.
upon the opening of the Books out of which thou must be judged, and that from
this consideration, that the Father judges no Man, but has committed all
Judgment unto the Son; I John 5. 22.
say, if thou have not attained to This, Thou do not perfectly believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ: Do not fully lay hold on his golden Scepter: Do not
receive him as a Savior, by whose Blood thou art cleansed from all thy sins:
Do not look upon Christ as an Elder Brother, or behave thy self as one having
the spirit of Adoption: Do not behold him in his High Priesthood after the
Order of Melchisedech; and all for want of that Eye of Faith, by help of which
(with St. Stephen) Thou Acts 7. 55. Romans 8. 31.
might see the Heavens opened, and Jesus sitting at the right hand of God,
ever making Intercession with groanings not to be uttered, and Romans 8. 26.
rendering his Father propitious to thee.

19. I will not say, Thou shall be damned, if thou arrivest not exactly at this
Perfection, because I know there are Degrees of Salvisick Grace, in proportion
to the Degrees of the Beatisick Glory. And though thou art not of Their
Magnitude, who shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father,
(Matthew. 13. 43.) yet Thou may possibly be of Theirs, who are to shine as the
stars for ever and ever; (Dan. 12. 3.) But when I consider how great a stress
is laid by God in the New Testament, upon the Habit of Believing in the Lord
Jesus Christ, And weigh the stress of those things that are laid upon it, with
all the Requisites in Scripture that hold it up; I cannot in faithfulness to my
Text, or in Justice and Charity to my Readers, say less than This, That
whosoever they are amongst us, who are solicitous (with the Iailour) to know
the Minimum quod sic of a Christian's Duty, and how much they must do that they
may be saved; If they do not so assent to the veracity of a Savior, so depend
upon his Power and his Propensity to save them, so submit unto his Pleasure,
and so conform unto his Praecepts, and (on the Grounds before mentioned) so
apply unto Themselves their Savior's Merits and Mediation, as that in lieu of
forsaking Christ to serve The Flesh, and the Devil, They do forsake them both
at once, for the Service of Christ, And reckon their Happiness even on Earth to
consist in those Pleasures, which Minds the most uncorrupted do most approve
of, (such as are The Love of Christ, The Satisfaction of an unblameable and a
well-ordered life, The Testimonial of a Pure and so a Peaceable Conscience, The
finding out of God's Will revealed to them in his Word, The generous Pleasure
of abstaining from all sorts of false and forbidden Pleasures, A real
Carelessness and Contempt of all the Vanities of this World, and A well-grounded
Expectation of all the Glories in the next, so as no kind of outward or
temporal Sufferings can deprive them of their inward and spiritual Ioys; but
still they hold fast their Confidence and the Rejoicing of the Heb. 3. 6.
hope firm unto the End,) I say, if Christians rest satisfied with less than
This, I cannot say that their Election is yet so sure in it self, as the
Apostle St. Peter shows how to make it. Nor 2 Pet. 1. 5* 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
can I say They do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to answer the whole
Design of Paul and Silas in the Text, or so as that I can assure them they
shall be saved.

20. Why then should we suffer our Eyes Psalm. 132. 4.
to sleep, or the Temples of our Heads to take any rest, 'till we are owners of
such a Faith, as will infallibly serve our turn? That is, such a Faith as a man
may Habak. 2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 10. 38.
live by? such a Faith as by which we may be sure to please God, or at least
without which it is Heb. 11. 6.
impossible to please him? For however it is the free and the sole Gift of God,
yet it is for us not to resist it, but rather to give it a good Reception, and
to retain it when it is given, not to squander it away, or to keep it useless,
which is expressed by our receiving the Grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Nay
farther yet it is for us, (by diligent search into the Scriptures, and constant
practice of Self-denials, and Importunity added to Prayer, and by watching
thereunto with all Perseverance,) not only to receive, and to retain the Grace
of God; but over and above to abound more and more, (1 Thessalonians 4. 1.) That is to
say, we must employ, and improve our Talent, not hide it under a Bushel of
worldly Cares, or smother it in a Bed of unlawful Pleasures. And seeing it is
God that works in us both to will and to do of his good Pleasure, we (as
(...) 1 Cor. 3. 9. (...) 2 Cor. 6. 1. (...) Mark 16. 20. (...) 3 John 8.
Laborers with God) are bound to work out our Faith, in the very same sense,
in which we are to work out our own Salvation, (Philip. 2. 12.) never ceasing
to make a Progress from Faith to Faith, 'till we attain unto The Evidence of
Things not seen, and the Substance of Things hoped for, even a Practical, and a
Cordial, and an Habitual Belief in the Lord Jesus Christ: Not as a Prophet
only, to teach us; Nor as a Prince only, to rule us; But as an Advocate and a
Priest too, who is incessantly procuring, and pouring his Benefits upon us. To
whom accordingly, with the Father, in the Unity of the Spirit, let us evermore
ascribe, as is ever due, Blessing, Glory, Honor, and Power, from this Time
forwards for evermore.

AN IMPROVEMENT OF THE INQUIRY Taken from the Mouth of A Jewish Convert. AND
Containing, in its Parts, A Resolution unto it self.
AN IMPROVEMENT OF THE INQUIRY, etc.
MARK X. 17. And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running,
and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do, that I may
inherit Eternal Life?
BEHOLD the only great Scruple to be discussed and resolved; the only Necessary
Quaestion to be proposed and laid to heart, by all that live in these Skeptical
and Disputative Times. Wherein there is hardly perhaps a Family, much less a
Parish, much less a City, or a Town, in which the shape of men's Judgments (and
by consequence of their Souls) is not almost as various as that of Faces. For
though the most of men are traveling to the same Iourneys End, yet it is
(says Boethius) diverso tramite, they love to walk toward it in several
Paths. Happiness is a Thing which the worst men aim at; But they discover by
their Inquiries, what variety of ways they take to miss it; with how much
Industry, and Expense, with how much Carelessness, and Care too, they do not
only arrive at this, to have their Labor for their Pains; but also purchase to
themselves a most costly Ruin; at once a most pudendous, and most Unprofitable
Repentance.

Were we at leisure to survey the several Orders and Ranks of men, from Him
that whistles at the Plough, to Him that treads upon Crowns and Scepters, we
should find them all Byass't by Secular Interesses and Aims; most incessantly
pursuing their Carnal Projects and Designs. Poor Boots will needs be asking,
(so low and humble is his Ambition,) what He shall do to maintain a Teem? The
same Boots growing Rich, will as willingly be able to keep a Coach. Here a man
is ambitious of some great Office in the Court; whilst perhaps the great
Courtier is at least as ambitious of being Greatest. The only Subject of His
Inquiry, is what he shall do to wear a Crown. But having waded as far as That,
(through Blood and Rapine,) he thinks his Crown is too light, and his Territory
too narrow; and therefore makes it his next Inquiry, what he shall do for the
enlarging the straightened Borders of his Dominion. His next Project is, how to be
Monarch of the West. And if perhaps he climbs thither, his enlarged Ambition
does want more Room; from whence arises another Quaestion, What he shall do to
Subdue the World, that Kings and Princes may bow down to him, and that whole
Nations may do him service. Nay if he arrives at That too, his Unlimited
Desires are more imprisoned than before; And so his last* Quaestion is (like
That of the Great Unus Pellaeo Iuveni non sufficit Orbis. Juven. Sat. 13.
Macedonian Robber,) what he shall do for more Worlds wherewith to satisfy his
Hunger, and (not to quench, but) to exercise his cruel Thirst.

Thus is every man a scambler for some kind of Happiness here on Earth, (at
least for the shadow and picture of it;) But there is not the like solicitude
for the getting of a Kingdom and Crown in Heaven. Where shall we meet with a
man of Youth, who joins his Heart unto his Head; and asks about the great
Business for which he came into the World? where shall we meet with a man of
Riches, who makes it the great Contrivance and Design of his Life, to be
advised in what manner he ought to live? where shall we meet with a man of
Power, who will endure to be looking so far before him, as to consider and
contemplate his latter end? or who will look so far within him, as to examine
the state of things, betwixt his Savior and his Soul? as whether he has made
his Election sure? or whether he has not rather received the Grace of God in
vain? where is He that cries out with the frighted Iailour at Philippi, Acts 16.
30.
What must I do that I may be saved? that makes a strict and impartial search
after the Requisites of his Salvation? that sends as 'twere an Huy and Cry
after things future and invisible? and makes it the Burden of his Inquiry,
(with this young man, this Rich man, this Ruler in the Text,) Good Master, what
shall I do, that I may Inherit Eternal Life?

A Text as worthy to be considered, by every one who does believe an
Immortality of his Soul, and prepares for an Arrest at the hour of Death, and
expects to be tried at a Day of Judgment, perhaps as any one Text in all the
Scriptures. A Text so fruitful of Particulars, and of Particulars so pregnant
for Meditation, that it is not easy to resolve, with which of the many we should
begin. They do not come in such order, as the Creatures once did into Noah's
Ark, two by two; but they press in upon us all together in a Crowd, as it were
striving with one another, which shall have the first Place in our
consideration. Here is a Servant, a Master, work, and wages; Here is an
excellent Inquiry made by the Servant to the Master. And here are both their
Qualifications to make them pleasing to one another. For the Servant is
diligent, the Master good. Here is the manner also, and matter, and final cause
of the Enquiry. And here are diverse other particulars growing out of the Body
of these particulars, as the lesser Branches of a Tree are wont to grow out of
the greater. But dismissing all the rest until we meet them in the Division, I
here shall fasten upon the Servant as fit to direct and assist us in it. There
being nothing more proper to entertain us till we come thither, than the
several looser Circumstances both of his Person, and his Approach.

As for his Person; we may observe him so qualified in three respects, as one
would think should ill dispose him for such an Inquiry Matthew. 19. 20.
as here he makes. For in St. Matthew He is a Young man; A Rich man in St.
Mark; Mark 10. 22.
Luke 18. 18.
In St. Luke, a Ruler. And it may seem a thing strange (as the World now goes)
that being a young man, he should inquire after life; or that being a Rich man,
he should inquire after Heaven; that being also a Ruler, he should inquire
after Subjection. It is not easy to be believed, (so far it is from being
usual,) that he who lately began to live, should be solicitous for Aeternity;
that he who had purchased the present world, should pursue an Inheritance in
the next too; And that a Person of Command, should readily set himself to
Service. Yet thus he did, and did with vehemence. For whether we look upon his
motion, whilst he was hastening toward Christ; or on his Posture, when he was
at him; his Salutation, in the Entrance; or his Inquiry, in the end; we may by
his Running, guess his Readiness; by his Kneeling, his Humility; by his
Compellation, his Zeal; and by the manner of his asking, the great Resignedness
of Spirit wherewith he asked. For when Jesus (says the Text) was gone forth
into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good
Master, what shall I do, that I may inherit Eternal Life?

Words which are partly The Evangelists, and partly The Quaerist's of whom He
speaks. The Evangelist's own words have three Particulars of Remarque; First,
The Person who here inquires, Next, The Nature of his Inquiry, Thirdly, The
Oracle inquired of. The Quaerist's words at first View consist of Three general
Parts, which again at the second View do afford us Six more.

Here is first a Compellation, Secondly a Question, Thirdly the End, or the
Motive, or Cause of Both.

In the first we have to consider Not only the Subject of the Quaerist's
Compellation, [(...), Master,] But also the Adjunct or Qualification, [(...),
Good.]
Again in the second, we have two Things observable; to wit, The Matter of the
Inquiry, in the (...), And the Manner, in the (...); It Is [ what] and [ what
shall I do?]
In the third, we have also two; First the Object to be obtained; [(...),
Eternal Life;] And then the Manner of obtaining it; [(...) it is by Inheriting]

But this is not all. For I observe the Compellation has a twofold Aspect upon
the Question; and seems to give us a pregnant Reason at once for the Matter and
Manner of it.

First here is something to be done by every Follower of Christ, and that
because He is a Master. It is not, Master, what shall I say, or Master, what
shall I believe, but (...); Master, what shall I Do?

Here is Secondly observable in this Candidate of Heaven, a meek Resignedness
of mind to any Command of Christ imaginable, and that because he is a Good, or
a Gracious Master. The Servant presumes not to choose his work, He does not
bargain for Life Aeternal at such a Rate as he thinks fit, with a [Master, I
will do this, or that,] but indefinitely asks (with an humble kind of
Indifference,) (...); what shall I do?

These are Particulars more than enough, not only to exercise and entertain our
Attentions, but (perhaps) to distract them too. And therefore it cannot be
taken ill, if I shall gather their whole Result into Four Doctrinal
Propositions.

First that the Son of God Incarnate, who at present is our Advocate, and will
hereafter be our Judge, and who purposely came to save us from the Tyranny of
our Sins, is not only A Savior, to propose Promises to our Faith; But also A
Master, to challenge obedience to his Commands. We must not only believe him,
which is but to have him in our Brains; nor must we only confess him, which is
but to have him in our Mouths; no nor must we only love him, though That is to
have him in our Hearts; but farther yet we must obey him, and do him Service,
which is to have him in our Hands and our Actions too. (...); Master, what
shall I do? And yet

Secondly; Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is not any way a Severe or
Aegyptianlike Master, who looks to reap where he never sowed, and exacts store
of work without allowing any Materials; but a Master full of Mercy and
Lovingkindness. And this he is in two respects. To wit of the work which he
requires, which is not foesible only, but pleasant; and of the wages which he
promises, Aeternal Life. For each of these reasons, which do arise out of the
Text, he is (...), A good Master. And therefore

Thirdly, We must in gratitude unto so Good a Master as This, behold our selves
as obliged to two Returns; to wit a Readiness of Obedience, and a Resignedness
of Wills. First a Readiness of obedience, even because he is our Master; next a
Resignedness of wills, because he is our Good Master. Our Christian Tribute to
both together, [to wit his Authority, and his Goodness,] must not only be
Universal, but Unconstrained. (...); what shall I do? that is to say, I will do
any thing. I am ready to perform whatever Service thou shall appoint, be it
never so harsh, or be it never so difficult. Eternal Life is such a Prize, as
for which I can never do enough. I say not therefore what I will do, but humbly
ask what I shall. Yet

Fourthly and lastly; When we have done the most we can we are (...), Luke 17.
10.
Unprofitable Servants. Our Obedience is not the Cause, but the aequitable
Condition of our Reward. And we finally arrive at Eternal Life, not by way of
Purchase, as we are Servants; but of Vide Melanch. loc. com. p. 173.
Inheritance, as we are Sons. It is not here (...), but only (...) we seek not
to merit or to deserve, (as some gross Christians pretend to do,) but merely to
Inherit Eternal Life.

I now have done with the Introduction, wherein is included the Explication and
Division of the Text. But as it is easy for an Artist to design more work in a
little Time, than he is able to accomplish a long time after; so however I have
already drawn the Monogram or Scheme of my well-meant Project, yet to fill it
with the Zographesis, by making it practical, and easy, not only useful to the
most knowing, but also familiar to the most Ignorant of those that read me,
will be the Business not of one, but of several Essays. And this the rather,
because

Before I find Access to the four Doctrinal Propositions, I must direct to
several Lessons from Those three Preliminary Subjects the Text affords us. To
wit the Quality of the Person who here inquires, The excellent Nature of his
Inquiry, and The Condition of the Oracle inquired of.

First the Person here inquiring had three remarkable Qualifications; Youth,
Wealth, and Honor. And yet for all that, he did not ask as a young man, How
shall I purchase the sweetest Pleasures? nor yet as a Rich man, How shall I
compass the greatest wealth? no nor yet as a Ruler, How shall I climb to the
highest Pinnacle of Preferment: But notwithstanding his three Impediments
pulling him down toward the Earth, he seemed wholly to be solicitous, How he
might come by a place in Heaven. And therefore hence we are to take out a
threefold Lesson; one for Young men, another for Rich men, a third for Rulers.
(And I suppose of these three, this particular Congregation does now consist).

First our Young men must learn, from the example of this Inquirer, to remember
their Creator in the days of their youth, whilst the evil days come not, nor
the years draw nigh when they shall say, We have no pleasure in them, (Prove.
12. 1.) And that especially for these three Reasons.

First the younger any one is, he came the more lately out of the Hands of his
Creator; and has had the less time, to grow forgetful of the Rock out of which
he was hewn. It is with men's Souls as with their Bodies, and with their Bodies
as with their Clothes; The newer, commonly the better; and the older, so much
the worse. A little evil Communication is enough to ferment the greatest Mass
of good manners. And if the whole World does lie in wickedness, (as St. John
affirms it does,) how can we look to be the purer, by growing old and decrepit
in so much Dirt? no, the longer we converse with Pitch or Birdlime, (to which
the wickedness of the World may very happily be compared) It is by so much the
harder to make us clean. Besides, we ought to run after Christ, (like this
Inquirer in the Text,) not go to him like a Torpedo, as if we did not affect,
but fear him; or tanquam Bos ad Cer^ma, as if we were afraid to be baited by
him. But now the younger any man is, he can run so much the faster; whereas
grown old he will hardly go. It was therefore the Blessing of God to Enoch,
that he took him away speedily, and even hastened to cut him off, to the end
that wickedness might not alter his Understanding, nor deceit beguile his
Soul, (Wisd. 4. 11, 14.) This was That that gave occasion to the young man's
Inquiry which lies before us. For having heard our Savior say, Suffer little
Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of God, (v. 14.) And that
no man shall enter into the Kingdom of God, unless he receive it as a little
Child, (v. 15.) He immediately considered within himself, That notwithstanding
he was hitherto a young man, he had yet outlived his harmless Childhood; and
that the longer he should live, the farther off he should grow from a little
Child; and so it concerned him very nearly (even before he grew older, and
heap't up sins as well as years,) to address himself to Christ with this
Petition. For God's sake, Master, resolve me one Question. If it is true, what
thou say, That little Children are the Inhabitants of which the Kingdom of
God is more especially made up; what then shall I do, who am no little Child,
that I also may inherit Eternal Life? The consideration of which Example ought
to provoke us to aemulation, and to be prevalent also with Us, to remember our
Redeemer in the days of our youth, whilst we have had but a little Time, to be
infected with a sick and contagious World.

Again the younger any one is, the more capable he is of a deep Impression. As
when a new Vessel is seasoned with this or that Liquor, it will savor of it
the longer for being New. And a very young Tree, be it never so crooked, will
yet be made to grow straight; but if an old Tree is crooked, it is
incorrigible; neither Industry nor Artifice can then reform it. So if a man is
well principl'd and well disposed from his youth, or suck in good manners
almost as soon as he does his Milk, Virtue will cleave to him as close, as his
two Essentials; 'twill be his (...), (as Galen elegantly) that is, a kind of
acquired Nature. But he who is an old Sinner, or a Sinner in Grain, will find
it as difficult not to be so, as for a Leopard to change his spots, or a
Blackmore his skin, Jer. 13. 23. Aegrius ejicitur* And it is by much an easier
thing, at first to put on the Armor of Light, than at last to cast off the
Works of Darkness. As to preserve ones health is easier, than to recover it
when it is lost. Remember therefore thy Redeemer in the days of thy youth,
whilst yet thou have a Remembrance to hold him in; lest if thou wickedly put it
off to thy days of Dotage, thou forget (like fat Iesurun) the God that made
thee.

Lastly the younger any one is, he is a Sacrifie the fitter for God's
Acceptance. Of all the fruits of the Earth, before the Times of the Law, He did
require for his Portion, the first and choicest. Nor would he have any thing
under the Law, but what was clean and without Blemish. So he expects under the
Gospel, that we should give him still the best, of whatsoever we have, or are.
And to answer his expectation, of all the days in the week, we give him Sunday,
which is the First. Of all the Hours in the Day, we ought to give him the very
Morning; to converse with him betimes, before our spirits are taken up with his
two Grand Rivals, The choking Cares, and bewitching Pleasures of the World.
Thus we must consecrate our Youth and our Childhood to him; which we may call
the very Morning and Dawning of our Days. That is to say, we must serve him
with the Excellence of our strength; whilst we are fresh and florid, and so an
Oblation the worthier of him. What! spend the Flower of our Age on that base
Triumvirate, The World, the Flesh, and the Devil? and at last when we are
Withered, obtrude our selves upon our Maker? Shall we spend on God's Enemies
the Spring and April of our Lives, when our Memories and our Wits are fresh as
Rose-buds? And put off God with our December, when we have nothing to entertain
him, but Frost, and Snow? Nothing but Doatage and Forgetfulness, wherewith to
make an Oblation to him? will God accept of That putrid Carcass, whose Life and
Beauty has been bestowed upon the Devil? or when the World and the Flesh have
enjoyed our Kernel, How can we think that our Creator will be contented with
the Shell? Admit the Case were our own, and that the wife of a man's Bosom
should spend her youth and her verdure in the Love of strange men; would he be
willing to receive her when at last she comes to him both halt and blind? or
what would we think of that man, who having invited us to his Table, should
take the Marrow to himself, and humbly present us with the Bone? or give the
Victuals to his Dogs, and leave us to dine upon the Platters? If ye offer the
blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil (says God to Israel?) Or if ye offer the
lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy Person, says the Lord of Hosts? It Is an
important expostulation, in the First of Malachi, at the Eighth Verse. Now if
one man refuses such an offering from another, as the Offerer knows not what
to do with; why should not God refuse Us, when we refuse coming to him 'till
old and ugly? that is to say, 'till we our selves are grown such Burdens unto
our selves, as we know not what to do with? It is not likely He will have Us,
if we will not have Him, until we are not worth having. If we will not both
love him, and obey him whilst we are young, He has certainly no inducement to
be Amorous of us when we are old; when we are worm-eaten with years, and have
nothing to treat him with, but Catarrhs, and Tissicks; nothing but Rottenness
and Stench for his Entertainment. O let it never once depart out of our
Memories and our Minds, that Consule Epistolam Mariae Cassobelitae ad Ignatium,
ex edit. Usseriana, p. 76. post Append. Ignatianam.
Samuel was but a little Child, when yet he wore a Linen Ephod, and spent his
Time in the Temple; as being to his God such a perfect Votary, that even his
actual Living in, was a real forsaking of the World. Remember that Vide
Basilium (...), ubi proponit Danielem (...).
Daniel was but a Youth, and yet a Prophet of the most High. That David was but
a Stripling, when yet he had a mighty Zeal for the Lord of Hosts. That John the
Baptist, from his Cradle, was a most absolute Recluse. That John the Evangelist
and Divine was but a very young man, when Grave enough for an Apostleship, and
for the privilege to lean on his Savior's Bosom. That King Josias was but a
Child, ((...), says the Cassobelite in her Epistle to Ignatius,) when yet he
sought after the God of his Father David, 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. That Timothy was but
a Youth, and yet a Bishop; of whom St. Paul (his Ghostly Father) gave this
witness to the World, That he had known 2 Timothy 3. 15.
the Scriptures even from a Child. Inquire we therefore with the Psalmist,
Wherewithal shall Psalm. 119* 11.
a young man cleanse his way. And as the Votary in my Text went running to
Christ whilst he was young, so let us also go running to him, whilst we are
able to run apace. And let us kneel (as He did) before our Knees are grown
stiff. And having kneeled down to Christ, let us call him Good Master, with our
Inquirer. And let the Subject of our Inquiry be only This; What shall we do
that we may be saved? If no man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless it
be as a little Child; what then shall We do, who are stricken in years, and
have long since outlived our littlechildhood, that We also may Inherit Aeternal
Life?

This is the use we are to make of the first Qualification of our Inquirer, and
These are the Reasons on which it stands.

Next our Rich men must learn, from the example of this Inquirer, that the
greater their Riches are, the greater Necessity lies upon them to fly for
Sanctuary to Christ. It being as difficult for a Rich man to enter Heaven, as
for a Camel to find a passage through the Eye of a Needle. And so there is need
that they run to Christ, that Christ may show them the Danger of being Rich,
and by his Counsel defend them from it. That he may teach them the Christian
Method, whereby they may safely attain to Riches, or how they may honestly
possess them, or how they may usefully put them away. How they may profitably
be rid of those pleasant Enemies; unlade themselves of such heavy thick Clay,
(as the Prophet calls it;) and run to Christ so much the nimbler, for being
light; for being emptied and disburden'd of so much white and red Earth. How
they may reap the greater Harvest, by Eccles. 11. 1.
casting their Bread upon the waters; How they may make themselves Friends of
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and help to save themselves by That, which helps
to damn so many others. How they may lay up a Treasure in Heaven, and provide
themselves Bags which wax not old, where the Worm of Time does not corrupt, nor
the Thief of Sequestration break through and steal. If there are any amongst
our selves, who have Riches in possession, either dishonestly acquired, or
uncharitably kept; we ought to start away from them, like a man who unaware
has chanced to tread upon a Serpent; and to fling them far enough from us,
like the Emperor Sigismund; and to go running after Christ (like the Rich
Votary in my Text,) saying, What shall we do who are men of great Plenty, and
so are tempted more strongly than others are, and therefore every day walk in
greater Ieopardy of our Lives); We for whom it is so hard to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, even as hard as for a Camel to enter through a Needle's
Eye,) what shall such as We do, that We also may Inherit Aeternal Life?

This is the use we are to make of the second Qualification of our Inquirer,
and This is chiefly the reason on which it is built.

Lastly our Great men must learn, from the Example of This Inquirer, to lay
their Greatness at Christ's Feet, and to tread it under their own. Or (to
express it in the words of the Son of Sirach) the greater he is, to humble
himself so much the more, Ecclus. 3. 18. And the Reason There is, (though other
reasons are to be given,) because the Mysteries of God are only revealed unto
the Meek, (v. 19.) The humble Soul is God's Temple, if not his Heaven too. For
what was said heretofore by the Heathen Oracle in Hierocles,

(...), [ that God delights himself as much in a pious Soul, as to dwell
between The Cherubim in Heaven it self,] may be evinced to be True from out the
Oracles of Jehovah; who says by the Mouth of his Prophet Esa, that the man
upon whom he delights to look, and in whom he is pleased to dwell, is the man
of a poor and a contrite Spirit, who even trembles Isa. 66. 1, 2.
at his word. And what said St. Paul to his Corinthians? Ye see your Calling,
Brethren, how that not many Wise men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many
Noble men are called; But the foolish, and base, and despised 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27,
29.
things of the World, and the things which are not, are made choice of by God,
to bring to naught things that are: and that as for other, so for This reason
also, that no flesh may glory in His presence. This is That Nobleness indeed,
wherewith the Nobleness of the World cannot be worthy to be compared, unless as
the Child, or the Parent of it. For Secular Nobleness or Nobility, (considered
simply, and in it self,) has ever been reckoned to arise, from one or more of
These Three Grounds. It Is either merited by Prudence, (Secular Wisdom, and
Erudition,) or purchased by Wealth, or earned by Courage. I mean the Courage
which is exerted in a generous defense of ones King and Country* But He is a
man of the Noblest Courage, who is afraid of the fewest Things. Only afraid of
an impious Act; or indeed afraid of Nothing, unless of not fearing God. The
vicious Warrier or Dueller, who seems to breath nothing but Courage, (such
Courage as is common to the stout Horsman with his Horse, when carrying Thunder
in his Throat, he madly rusheth into the Battle,) I say a man of such an
Animal, or Brutal Courage, who will rather be Damned than be thought a Coward,
is yet, for all his brave Pretenses, most cowardly afraid of Reproach, and
Obloquie, and of Twenty other objects of carnal Fear. Whereas a man that fears
God, fears nothing else: fears not what man can do unto him, (Psalm. 56. 11.)
And He who does not fear God, is not a Valiant, but stupid Sinner. To meet with
Nobleness indeed, we must not consult the Herald's Book, unless we take along
with it the Book of The Acts of the Apostles, (Chap. 17. verse. 11.) where the
People of Beroea are said to be Nobler than those of Thessalonica, Not because
they were descended from greater Parents, nor because they were advanced to
greater Places, But because with greater readiness they heard the Word of God
preached; that is, because they were meeker, and of more Teachable
Dispositions. That alone is true Nobleness, which is sometimes The Daughter,
and still the Mother of Humility. That it is sometimes the Daughter, is very
evident: for 'Twas the Lowliness of Mary which made her the Mother of our Lord.
And so when Abigail made David That winning Complement from the heart, of her
being The humble Handmaid to wash the feet of the Servants of her Lord, Her
Humility did so advance her in David's Mind, that he made her his Queen, if not
his Mistress. The King was so captivated and charmed by the powerful Magic of
so much meekness, as he could not have been more by any Philtrum to be
imagined. Thence St. Peter thought fit to call it, The Ornament of a meek and a
quiet spirit; as being That that does dress and set off a Beauty, more than any
Recommendations of Art, or Nature.

Nor is True Nobleness more the Daughter, than it is the Mother of Humility. For
as the Lowliness of Mary made her the Mother of our Lord, so she was much the
more lowly for That Advancement. And so The Ruler in the Gospel, (who is
ennobl'd by Three Evangelists, tho named by neither,) the fuller he was of
worldly Greatness, the more he saw it did concern him to make himself little
before The Majesty of Christ, from whom he was to seek for an higher Birth and
Extraction; such as by which he might have claim to an Inheritance of
Aeternity, which is not competent to any who is not of an immortal Race; nor
can he be of such a Race, unless by being first Regenerate, and Born of God:
and to be qualified for That, he must humble himself as a little Child, apt to
learn, and to obey, meekly submitting unto the Rod, and even kissing the Hand
that holds it. Look of what temper an earthly Father is wont to find his little
Child, a Child that trembles at every Threat, and is easily kept in awe by an
angry Look, of the very same Temper ought Himself also to be, in respect of His
Father who is in Heaven.

But now, besides the single Reason which has been given by Siracides; There
are other Reasons assignable, why the greater any man is, he is to humble
himself the more. He must be humbler, being a Master, than whilst he was yet
but his Master's Man. Still the lower, for being High. And because to some
Persons This may seem an harsh Paradox, or at least an hard Saying; I shall
attempt to make it easy by Three Degrees.

First it is observable in Historians and Moral Writers, that such as are raised
out of the Dust are apt to prove the most ungrateful and cruel Tyrants. They
commonly take down the stairs by which Themselves were taken up; and, like a
man climbing upon a Ladder, love to be treading under their feet the chiefest
means of their Advancement* Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit ad altum. The
Fire out of the Bramble affects to devour the lofty Cedar. Thence it was that
Pausanias murdered King Philip, to be talked of. And 'twas Phocas his
Sensuality, of a pitiful common Soldier, to set his foot upon the Neck of the
Great Emperor Mauritius. So Charles the First of These Realms (of whom the
World was not worthy) was not only sent to Heaven by some of the vilest of all
his Subjects, But particularly by some Himself had raised out of the Mire. And
if these things are so, that They are aptest to be debauched by their worldly
Greatness, whose Greatness steams out of a Dunghill; (as every man's does if he
be traced far enough back,) it follows then that they have need of the greater
Care, and must be plied with the stricter Caveats, the Greater they are, to
humble themselves so much the more, because they are Then in the greatest
Danger. For the greater any one is, by so much the greater are his Temptations:
and to be safe from That Artillery, he stands in need of being armed with
greater Meekness. The more St. Paul was advanced by his Abundance of
Revelations, the more he was buffeted by Satan, and by Himself too. For he did
Therefore (...), beat his Body black and blue, (as the word imports,) that, by
Those profitable Severities, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
He might bring it into Subjection.

Again, the Greater any man is, the more Humility does become him. It sits upon
him so much the better, with the more loveliness, and congruity. It is not only
the more his Duty, but Honor and Ornament to be humble. It Is a Virtue which
should flow from a Man of Grandeur, with such a kind of Peculiarity, as
Munificence ought to do from a man of Wealth. For He who is flat upon the
Ground can no more prove that he is humble, than He who lives upon Alms, that
he is liberally-minded. We know the Taller any man is, by so much the lower he
has to stoop: whereas the Lowliness of a Dwarf, is not his Virtue, but Stature
only. We need not go far to find an Instance; for go we whither we will, it
will find out us. How many are there who do not scorn to beg their Bread from
door to door, not because they are humble, but shameless Creatures? who, were
they honorable, and potent, would quickly show themselves proud, and
oppressive too. Vices made almost invisible in the necessitous sort of men, not
for want of a Being, but of competent Materials, to set them forth. The
weaponless Serpent Epidaurus, though much more harmless, may yet be as
malicious as any other; nor is it a commendable Innocence, which only proceeds
from a want of Teeth. How many are there within our knowledge whose Backs are
clothed in course Russet, whilst yet their Bloody-minded Insides are lined
with Scarlet? And when a person of such a Frame shall be reduced by some
Extremity, to beg an Halfpenny through a Grate, (which is wont to be said of
the Great General Bellizarius,) That is only his (...), not his (...), his
lowness of Fortune, not his lowliness of Mind. It Is true indeed, an humiliation
may help dispose him for an Humility, (just as any Sinners Attrition may lead
the way to Contrition;) but sure I am that the Gymnosophists, who were
tormented by Antiochus, were no whit the meeker for being humbled. They who
think themselves humble, because they see themselves low, (and not for any
other more solid reason,) do not know their own Hearts; which are commonly so
hidden from human Eyes, as hardly ever to be discerned, till they are placed
upon a Mountain: Let that Mountain be what it will, whether of Riches, or
Renown, or of worldly Greatness. Almost all that were sick came to Christ for a
Cure; And (as They at least thought) with good devotion. But in that they did
not all return to thank him, they showed the Principle of their coming to have
been nothing but their Convenience. Had the Votary in my Text been very poor
and contemptible, had he been every body's Servant by being in every body's
Debt, or miserably haunted with some Disease, he had not done a strange Thing
in seeking Christ upon his Knees; But that being extremely Rich, and a Ruler
too, and in the Bravery of his Youth, he should consider Christ so much, and
himself so little, This was an evidence of his generous and noble Meekness. And
Therefore the greater thou art, my son, lessen thy self so much the more.

And do it for a Third Reason, which ought at least to be as prevalent as Both
the former. For the Greater any man is, the greater Account he is to give to
his one Great Master which is in Heaven; that is, to a Master, with whom there
is not Respect of Persons. In the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of men
by Jesus Christ, He who now sits in State and Jurisdiction upon the Bench,
shall stand at God's just and impartial Bar. He shall be called to a Reckoning,
a dreadful Reckoning, how his Talent of Authority has been employed, and what
Good he has done with his Jurisdiction. What poor Orphans he has righted; what
Widows Causes he has pleaded; what injured Innocence he has protected; what
Virtuous Persons he has encouraged with Rewards; what vile Offenders he has
discountenanced and punished; what Great men's oppressions he has resisted; what
Rising Mutinies and Rebellions He has endeavored to repress. For a man's
Honor, and Authority, his Power, and Greatness, as well as Wealth, are things
of which he must give Account. Tho for a King to be accomptable to any Tribunal
upon Earth, implies indeed a Contradiction, yet Kings Themselves do stand
accomptable to God, even for their high Privilege of unaccomptableness to Men.
And therefore the Greater any man is, he is to humble himself the more, and
then (as it follows in the Text) he will find favor of the Lord.

This is the use we are to make of the Third Qualification of our Inquirer; and
These especially are the Reasons inducing to it.

But now the Case in my Text is one of the strangest we ever heard of. For
would we not think it exceeding strange, if the chief Magistrate of a City
(forgetting the Mace that is born before him) should run to meet the poorest
Cottager, and throw himself down upon his Knees too, and lifting up his
trembling Hands, should entreat him so humbly as to call him Master, and so
earnestly entreat him as to call him Good Master? It Is true that Christ was no
Cottager, because according to his Manhood He was very much poorer, as having
not where to lay his Head. Matthew. 8. 20.
Yet the Man in my Text who had Great Possessions, and was a Ruler, in the
pride and glory of his Youth too, did thus come running after Christ; and
kneeled down to him, tho in the Form of a Servant; and called him Master, tho
born of Mary, Spouse to Joseph the Carpenter. As if through That Veil of the
Carpenter's Son, he had had an Eye of Faith to see The Wisdom of the Father,
The Son of That Almighty Architect, who indeed was The Builder of All the
World, Heb. 11. 10. This Jewish Convert without a Name has somewhat more
strange and more remarkable in his Conversion, than The Iailour of Philippi who
was but frighted into his wits, and sought for Salvation in that Fright only;
and rather in the negative, than positive sense of that word. For That which He
sought directly, was a Deliverance out of his Dangers; Not an Inheritance of
Aeternity, but only an Escape from the Wrath to come. So that the Quaerist we
are upon, is more Didactical than the former; as affording us many more, and
more Noble Lessons. Three whereof we have had already. And Three, if well
minded, are enough for One Lecture; as, if slighted, they are too many. And
therefore the Prospect of Life Aeternal, which is a very great Deep, (enough to
exercise the freshest and the most vigorous of our Thoughts,) is the fitter to
be reserved for another Opportunity.

THE Excellent Nature OF THE INQUIRY.
MARK X. 17. And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one Running,
and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do, that I may
Inherit Aeternal Life?
1. HAving done with the Person who here Inquires, and dismiss't the Three
Lessons arising thence, together with the Reasons on which those Lessons were
chiefly Grounded; I am in order to proceed to the second General observation,
The excellent Nature of his Inquiry; which was not carnal and temporal, but
wholly spiritual and eternal. He did not ask as an ordinary Youth, what he
should do that he might compass the greatest measure of Sensuality? nor as an
ordinary Worldling or man of Wealth, what he should do that he might purchase
the greatest Treasure of Gold and Silver? nor as an ordinary Ruler, what he
should do that he might climb to the highest Honor upon Earth? But casting
These Things as it were behind his Back, or treading them down under his Feet,
he was intent upon Inquiring, as no ordinary Christian, (even before
Christianity had got its Name,) what he should do to get an interest and share
in Heaven? How much soever he did abound in the things that are seen, which are
temporal; He wholly directed his Ambition to the things that are not seen,
which are Eternal. As the faster he ran to salute his Master, by so much the
better he was in Breath; so the Lower he kneeled down, he lifted his Thoughts
so much the Higher. Being mounted on the wings of an holy Zeal, His Soul had
now taken a nobler Flight, than to Perch upon any thing on this side Heaven.
As if he had lost the consideration of all his Secular Concernments, such as
Houses and Lands, Goods and good Name, Wife and Children, if he had any, and
other things here below, All the subject of his Inquiry was, what he should do
that he might be saved? not only saved in the negative, but in the positive
sense of that word. Not only so as to be rescued from a Bottomless Lake of Fire
and Brimstone; But also so as to be drowned or swallowed up, in a Boundless
Ocean of Bliss and Glory. Nothing would satisfy him but Life; and no other
Life than one Eternal. [Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inherit
Eternal Life?]

2. From him therefore let us learn, how to regulate our Ambitions, and where
to fasten our wild Desires. We ought to tread upon the Glories of such a World
as This is, (which besides that it is a perishing and fading World, is also the
Instrument of Satan whereby to betray us to our Destruction,) and level the
Gaspings of our Souls at Things Invisible and Future, Things expressed to us in
Scripture, by a City having Foundations, Heb. 11. 10. and by a Kingdom which
cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 28. and here in this Text, by Aeternal Life. (...)
was St. Paul's Precept to his Colossians, Set and settle your affections
Coloss. 3. 1* 2.
on things above; And that for this Reason, because your Christ is there
sitting at the right hand of God. Set them not upon the Earth, For Jesus Christ
is not here, but is long since Risen, (as the Angel once said to his weak
Disciples.) And if we are risen together with Christ, let us make it appear that
we are Risen, by our seeking those things that are above. Since we were born
out of due time to enjoy the wish of St. Austin, by seeing our Savior in the
Flesh; let us look for him where he is, and at least behold him in the Spirit.
Since (I say) we were not living when Christ was Conversant upon Earth, Let us
redeem the whole Time by a Ghostly Conversation with Christ in Heaven. He who
desires in Curiosity to see the Pope, or the King of Spain, and all the
Rarities to be met with throughout their Countries, will inquire (as he is
going) which is the ready way thither; and (Information being given) will be
sure to take the way which leads to Italy, or Castile; not that which will
carry him either to Muscovy, or Poland. After the very same manner, but with a
greater force of reason, if we desire either in kindness, or in a Religious
Curiosity, to have a sight of the New Jerusalem, praepared Rev. 21. 2.
as a Bride adorned for her Husband, of which we hear such strange things from
the Trance and Rapture of St. Paul, as well as Quam gloriosa dicta sunt de te
Civitas Dei! Psalm. 87. 3. De Qua quid dixerit S. Bernardus, videre est in
ipsius libro de Anima, c. 4. p. 1053. Rev. 21. 18, 19, 20, etc.
from St. John in his Revelations, where for want of a better and a more lively
way of Comparison, he is contented to express that holy City by things so cheap
and so homely, as Gold, and Crystal, and Pearl, and Saphir, and Emerald,
Chalcedony and Iaspar, Sardonyx and Chrysolite, Sardius and Topaz, Amethyst
Rev. 22. 1, 2, 17.
and Iacinth, A River of Life and Immortality, planted round and beset with
Trees of Health as well as Pleasure, and shined upon by the Luster (not of such
obscure things as Sun and Moon, but) of God and the Lamb, (in comparison with
whom the Sun and Moon are nothing more, than as a Couple of Black Spots in the
Face of Heaven,) which though the Richest hypotyposis St. John could make of
his Vision, and exceedingly beyond the goodliest Things that are visible in the
beautifullest parts of the nether world, are yet incomparably short of that
New Jerusalem which is above; If we long to be fulfilling our double Heat and
Curiosity, the one proceeding from our Youthfulness, and the other from our
Devotion, by an immediate conversation with Adam and Eve, and righteous Abel,
in a pleasanter Paradise than that of Eden; by keeping Company with Noah, in a
safer Ark; with Caleb and Joshua, in a better Canaan; with David and Samuel, in
a diviner Sion, than that wherein they delighted whilst they were sojourning
here below; If we desire to see Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, or in what kind of
Robes of Bliss and Glory that noble Army of Martyrs is now apparelled, of whom
the world was not worthy, when they wandered about in Sheepskins and
Goat Skins, in Dens and Deserts, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, not
because they could not reach, but would not accept of a Deliverance, to the end
they might obtain by so much a better Resurrection: Or if we desire to be
recovering what we so many years have lost, our dear deceased Friends and
Parents, or would converse with those Children, and Children's Children, which
(by a Succession of Generations) will descend from our Bodies when we shall be
gathered to our Fathers; If we do long to be acquainted with those obliging and
friendly Spirits, whom we deservedly revere as our Guardian Angels, (to whom
the Custody and Conduct of our particular Persons is peculiarly committed by
God Almighty;) and would receive their meanings whilst we communicate our own;
not by Language, but Intuition, without the deceitful and poor Assistance of
such articulate and successive Discourse as Ours; Or if we would be able to
read all Hearts without the detecting of any Secrets, because in a place not to
be habited by Shame, or Envy, or private Interest; If we think it a fine thing
to have the wings of a Cherub (not only of a Dove, which was the subject of
David's wish) and to be mounted by those wings to such an exalted kind of
Zenith, or height of Bliss, as shall lift up our Souls above our glorified
Bodies; whence looking down upon the Sun, as a thing exceedingly below us, we
shall discern the very Epicycle, by which he moves slowly from West to East,
even whilst he moves swiftly from East to West, and comprehend all Truths,
without the Motherhood, and Pregnancy of such a dull thing as Time, (which yet
is the swiftest-wing'd Flyer on this side Heaven,) by grasping all things at
once, not one thing first, and then another: In De Animarum Inebriatione, vid.
S. Bernard. de Deo Dilig. p. 953. 958. and super Cant. Sermon. 54. p. 728. and
Gillebertum super Cant. Sermon. 41. p. 1897. (...) Psalm. 36. 8. (...). LXX
Interpretes. Inebriabuntur ab ubertate Domus tuae. Vulg. Lat. -- e pinguedine
Domus tuae. Versio Interlin. Inebriabuntur quasi -- pinguedine Benedictionis
Domus tuae. Chald. Paraph.
a word (not to be endless in this beginning of my Discourse) if we inwardly do
pant and even gasp after a Day, when fulfilling at once the Appetites of Grace
and good Nature, we shall be able to conceive, and hear, and see, what neither
Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor has ever entered into the Heart of man to
conceive; when we shall not only see, but taste of Bliss; nor only taste, but be
filled with it; nor only filled, but overflown; nor only overflown, but
swallowed up too; when we shall drink, and drink deep of the Waters of Joy, and
of such pure Joy, as shall not be mingled with any Drop either of Sorrow, or
Interruption; when we shall be as 'twere inebriated with the plenteousness of
God's house (as the Psalmist in his Rapture was bold to speak) by drinking of
it as out of a River; Or (to express it in plainer Terms) when our Glory shall
be greater than the greatest Ambition of our Desires, and our Ioys far more
than our hearts can hold; when we shall be giddy (as 'twere) with happiness,
and drowned in pleasures; shall have Raptures, and Transports, and Exiliencies
of Spirit, more than David himself in his sacred Ecstasie, by which was drawn
from him that strange expression; And very much greater than that of Esa, when
being cast into a Trance, he did presentiate to himself the last and general
Resurrection, with an [ Awake and sing ye that dwell Isa. 26. 19.
in the Dust;] when we whose Heads do now ache in comprehending and grasping the
shallowest things, shall happily loose all our Doubtings into the clearest
Demonstration, our Conjectures into Assurance, our Expectations into Enjoyment,
and Faith it self into Experience; when the three Triads of holy Orders which
make up the Hierarchy of Heaven, of which it is said by the Prophet Daniel, A
fiery stream issued out, and came forth from before him, Thousand Thousands
ministered unto him, ten Thousand times ten Thousand stood before him, ( Dan. 7.
10.) shall open those Books whereout the Dead are to be judged (Rev. 20. 12.)
And when with them the holy Elders, casting their Crowns before the Throne of
him that lives for ever and ever, (Rev. 4. 10.) shall all salute us, and bid
us welcome into the Ravishing Converse of those Glorious Courtiers; when that
Life, and that Eternity, which in my Text are inquired after, shall not only
present themselves with their Retinue and Attendants unto the Faculties of our
Souls, but shall withal take up their Lodgings in our glorified Bodies: If, I
say, we are desirous to enjoy a great deal more than we are here ever able to
ask or think, even all that we can, and that we cannot imagine; And would meet
with all That in the very Life, whereof the Word of God has given us but a
very faint Picture: Then whilst others, like Martha, are busying themselves
about many things, let us apply our selves (with Mary) to the one thing that is
needful: Let us make it the very Center of all our Projects and Designs: Let
our Studies and Disputes, our Aims and Ambitions, our Controversies and
Questions end all in This, [ Which is the way to the New Jerusalem? And what
shall we do to be walking in it? Which is the way to escape a Hell? And what
must we do to obtain a Heaven?] For this is certainly the Scope of the young
man's Inquiry we have in hand, What shall I do, that I may Inherit Aeternal
Life?

. 3. All the Kingdoms of the Earth can neither satisfy, nor justify all our
Appetites and Desires. But the Kingdom of Heaven (expressed here by eternal
life) will be sure to do Both. For if we are Covetous, Here are Riches to make
it lawful. If we are Amorous, Here is Beauty to make it Virtuous. If we are
Ambitious, Here is Glory to make it Good. For we must know that our Affections
receive their Guilt, or Vitiosity, not from their strength, but from their
blindness, when they are either double-sighted, and look asquint; or else are
short-sighted, and cannot see a far off; they embrace those things for fair or
pleasant, which (like Ixion's watery Juno) do only mock them with their
Enjoyment. Whereas were our Affections so Eagle-sighted, as to see through the
Creatures, discerning Happiness in its Hypostasis, and flying at it where it
is, our only fault would then be This, That our Ambition is too low, and our
Avarice too little, and that we are not Amorous enough. For they are
poor-spirited persons, of thick Heads and narrow Hearts, whose thoughts are
grovelling upon the Creature, and aspiring to nothing but what is Finite. It is
an impotent Ambition, a feeble Avarice, and a very flat Love, which makes a
stoop at such low Trifles, as Crowns and Kingdoms here on Earth. He alone is of
a Noble and erected mind, who can say, and say heartily, (with Christ to
Pilate,) his Kingdom is not of this World. Alas the Kingdoms here Below are
less than Grass-Hoppers, to the very least Mansion in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Nor are they genuine, but degenerate and bastard Eagles, which will greedily
catch at such little Flies. The Soul of man was created for the highest
Purposes and Ends. And therefore we may not only be lawfully, but even
dutifully ambitious, provided our Ambitions are great enough, and every whit as
high as our Soul's Extraction: we are not only permitted, but even obliged to
be Covetous, upon condition that it be but of solid Riches, which are not
liable to Plunder, or to impairment. We ought in Conscience to be enamored, if
it be of real Beauty, and not of that which depends upon human Fancy; not of
handsome Dirt, or well-complexion'd Clay; not of Beauty so called, whose
Foundation is in the Dirt, which says to Corruption, Thou art my Father, and
to the Worm, Thou art my Mother. But if we choose a right object, like the
Spouse in the Canticles, we shall never be so well, as when (with that Spouse)
sick of Love. For our Bowels ought to yern after the Bridegroom of our Souls;
we ought to pant after Goodness, and (in the phrase of Espensaeus) to Inter
Amoris divini Fructus, liquefactio, and languor enumerantur. Vide Claud.
Espensaeum de triplici languore. c. 1. p. 976. Etiam Franco. Abbat.
Affligeniensem Tom. 2. de Gratia Dei. De Amore quo piae Animae Deum
prosequuntur, vide Plotin. Enn. 1. l. 6. p. 56.
languish after him who is the Fountain of that Goodness, and so to thirst
after that Fountain, as never to be satisfied 'till swallowed up. In this one
sense the Italian Proverb is to be verified, Bello fin fa chi ben amando muore.
He makes a good end that dies a Lover; to wit a Lover of Him, who is the great
Lover of Souls. We should not vouchsafe to love our selves, unless because we
love Him, or because he loves us, the only measure of loving whom is to love
him without measure.

4. Seeing therefore we have met with an easy way, whereby to bridle a Passion,
and at the same time to let it loose; how at once we may abjure, and yet enjoy
our Sensuality; or (to speak more exactly,) how it is the Duty of a Christian,
not to evacuate, not to invalidate, not to extenuate his Affections, but only
to regulate and to direct them, to place them there where true Enjoyment is to
be found; let no man say within himself, what shall I do to get a Fortune, to
raise a Family, to erect a Temple unto Fame? what shall I do to be a man of
this World of some Authority and Power, able to mischief or to oblige, to beat
down mine Enemies, and raise my Friends? what shall I do to be a man of great
Knowledge, a famous Chemist, an exact Mathematician, a remarkable Lawyer, or an
eminent Divine? (for the best of These Inquiries has something in it of
Carnality;) But let every man say within Himself, [what shall I do to get an
Interest in Jesus Christ? and to be sure I am a Member, not only of his
Visible, but of his Mystical Body? what shall I do for a Demonstration, that my
Faith is truly such as does work by Love? and that it does work by such a Love,
as does bring forth obedience to the Commandments of Christ? And such a kind of
obedience, as Christ will graciously accept? what shall I do that I may repent?
and repent in such a manner, as to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance? what
shall I do to see the secrets of my Heart? and to know by some Token which will
not fail me, whether the Good which I do is well enough done? (I mean well
enough to deserve Acceptance.) What shall I do whereby to work out mine own
Salvation, and yet for all that to serve my God without fear all the days of my
life? what shall I do whereby to make my Election sure, and to make my self
sure of my Election, so as to be able to say in Truth with St. Paul, Henceforth
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness? what shall I do, or what shall I
not do, or what shall I suffer either for doing or not doing, that by distress,
or persecution, by nakedness, or famine, by peril, or sword, by banishment, or
bonds, by sickness, or death, by any means whatsoever, (however troublesome, or
costly, or any way terrible to the Flesh,) I may but finally inherit eternal
Life?

5. But now how little there is to be found of real and solid Christianity,
even in that part of Christendom where Christ and his Gospel are always
preached, (least of all amongst Them who are the great Monopolizers of Life
Aeternal,) 'twill not be difficult to guess by the solemn Theme of their
Inquiries, what shall we eat? and what shall we drink? and wherewithal shall we
be clothed? which shows the Zeal and the Devotion wherewith they Sacrifice to
the Flesh. And therefore well said our Savior (to show the Religion such men
are of) After all these things do the Gentiles seek, (Matthew. 6. 25) Thereby
intimating unto us, That Christians must seek for diviner things, than such as
perish in the using; for in the seeking of such as these, they do not differ
from the Gentiles who know not God. And yet if we look upon those Professors
who do pretend to an Enclosure of all the good things in Heaven, we may observe
them still enclosing as many good things as they can on Earth too. It is enough
for poor Lazarus, to have his Good things hereafter; And enough for Rich Dives,
to have his proportion of Good things here; But the good men I speak of will
needs be happier than Lazarus, and yet much richer than Dives too. They will
have their good things, as well in this, as another World. All the subject of
their Inquiry, is not how to be better than other men, in Acts of Justice, and
Works of Mercy, But how to be greater and more regarded, which is called a
being better in point of Quality, and Degree. And after these very things do
the Gentiles seek; They of Iava and the Molucco's, They of Tartary, and China;
whether as greedily as Christians, I cannot tell. But our Savior spoke only of
Food and Raiment, as of things which the Gentiles are wont to seek. And well it
were for Real Christians, if Nominal Christians would seek no more. If Food and
Raiment would serve the turn, Christians then (like other Creatures) might
quietly live by one another. But it seems they have no more than the Name of
Christians, who chiefly seek (with the Gentiles) the low concernments of the
Flesh. For as many as are Christians in very good earnest, will bestow
themselves in seeking the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof,
supposing such things as These will be added to the rest as a good Appendix.
Man not living by Bread alone, as our Savior said to Satan, but by bread as it
is blessed by the good Word of God. Nor indeed is he worthy to live by Bread,
who is not able to live without it; who is not able to subsist upon better
things. When we reckon Food and Raiment among the Necessaries of Life, (which
we do with good reason) we only speak of such a painful and dying life, as is
not worthy our caring for, unless in order to life Aeternal. And for the
nourishing of That, the very famishing of the Body may pass for Iejunium animae
Alimentum est, leves ei Pennas producens. Bernard.
food unto the Soul. From all which together it seems to follow, That they who
arrogate to themselves, not only the greatest both Faith and Hope, but the
perfectest Assurance of life Aeternal, do prove themselves ( unaware) the
greatest Infidels in the World; whilst neglecting the grand Inquiry they ought
to make after Heaven, they let the Tide of their Affections run out wholly upon
the Earth. For did they really look for a Day of Judgment, as much as they do
for an Hour of Death, they would as certainly provide against the one, as
commonly they do against the other. They would take as much Care to be just,
and honest, as universally they do to be rich or healthful. And make as much of
their Souls by Mortification and Self-denial, as now they do of their Bodies by
a plentiful Enjoyment of Creature Comforts. It Is true indeed; Life Aeternal is
a thing which is quickly talked of; nor are there any so uncivil, as not to
afford it a friendly mention. It is no hard thing to be another man's flatterer,
much less is it difficult to be ones own. To be secure and praesumptuous, is
cheap, and easy. Yea, it is pleasant to flesh and blood, to be carnally set free
from that fear and trembling, wherewith a man is to work out his own Salvation.
Thence it is that we abound with such an Herd of Fiduciaries and Solifidians;
who having persuaded themselves to fancy, that Life Eternal is a thing which
cannot possibly escape them, and that all the next world is irresistibly their
own; They think they have nothing to do in This, but to make a Trial, whether
it has not been decreed, that all shall be theirs that they can get; and
whether it has not been decreed, that they shall get all they try for; and
whether it has not been decreed, that they shall try to get All. When men are
seasoned with such a Principle, they cannot think it concerns them to give all
Diligence, for the making of their Calling and Election sure, by ceasing to do
evil, and by learning to 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
do well; or by adding to Faith, Virtue, and one Virtue unto another. But
supposing their Election so sure already, as to be passed the possibility of
being miss't; It is natural for them to give all diligence, to make themselves
sure of somewhat else. For (let them say what they will, and let them think
what they please, and let them do what they can,) they cannot possibly give
diligence to seek a thing in their possession, or to secure what they believe
it is impossible for them to lose. No man living will light a Candle, to look
about for those Eyes which he believes are in his Head; nor will he search
after his head, which is (he doubts not) upon his shoulders. Our Savior's two
Parables of the lost Sheep and the lost Groat, cannot but seem an arrant Iargon
unto a man of such Principles as now I speak of. For will He send about the
Country, to find a Sheep which is in his Fold? or sweep the House for a Groat
which he praesumes is in his Pocket? No, being poisoned with an opinion, that
he was justified from Eternity, and has Grace irresistible, and therefore
cannot fall totally, much less finally from Grace; he will esteem it a thing
impertinent for a man of his Talents, to be so anxious as to Inquire, what Good
things he ought to do, that he may inherit Eternal Life.

6. The great unhappiness of it is, (what I am sorry I have reason to believe I
say truly,) That there are few Congregations, wherein there are not such
Professors as now I speak of; who as long as fermented with such a Leven,
cannot possibly be profited by all our Preaching. And therefore They (above
others) must be informed, That by the Nature of our Inquiries, we ought to try
(as by a Touchstone) of what sort we are; whether Silver, or Alchymy; whether
true and solid Gold, or but polished Iron with double Gilt. By this we may
explore, from whence we came, and whither it is that we are going; of whom we
are, and whom we are for. For that Saying of our Savior, Matthew. 24. 28. which
historically refers to the Roman Army, Wheresoever the Carcass is, there the
Eagles will be gathered together; must needs be applicable and true in This
sense also, which is our Savior's own Sense, Luke 12. 34. Where your Treasure
is, there your Heart will be also. From whence it follows unavoidably, That if
we are men of another world, and have our Treasure laid up in Heaven; we shall
behave our selves as Pilgrims and perfect Sojourners here on Earth. We shall be
commonly looking Upwards, with our Backs upon Egypt, and our Faces toward
Canaan. Our Souls will be athirst for God, ( Psalm. 42. 1, 2, 3.) our Hearts
will pant after Eternity, as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks; crying
out with holy David in an Exiliency of Spirit, O when shall we appear before
the Presence of God? How low soever both our Bodies and Fortunes are, our
Conversation will be above. (...), etc. Phil. 3. 20.
we shall behave our selves as men who are free of God's City. Our Hearts will
evermore be There, unless our Treasure is somewhere else. If the Kingdom of
Heaven is that Pearl of great Price, to which our Lord in his Parable thought
fit to liken it, And if we are those Merchants that traffic for it, we cannot
choose but be busy in our Inquiries after the Price; still resolving upon the
Purchase at any Rate that can be ask't; and ever asking what we shall give, or
(as here) what we shall do, that we may any ways inherit Eternal Life. So it
follows again on the other side, That if we are commonly looking downwards, and
behave our selves here as men at home, as if we did not intend any farther
Journey; If the Burden of our Inquiries is such as This, [What shall we do to
live long upon the Earth, and not see the Grave? or what shall we do to escape
going to Heaven, 'till such time as we are passed the pleasant Enjoyments of
the Earth? how shall we put the evil Day afar off? how shall we be saved
without Repentance, or repent without Amendment, or amend no more than will
serve our turn? what shall we do to be good enough, and yet no better than
needs we must? what shall we do to serve two Masters, and reconcile the two
Kingdoms of God and Mammon? and so confute what is said by our blessed Savior
in the Sixteenth of St. Luke? what for a Religion wherein to live with most
pleasure, and one to dye in with greatest safety? what shall we do to live the
Life of the sensual'st Epicure, and yet at last dye the Death of the strictest
Saint?] If, I say, our Affections are clinging thus unto the Earth, It is an
absolute Demonstration that all our Treasure is here below, and that we are men
of the present world, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds; For
our Savior's famous Rule is at once of universal and endless Truth,
Wheresoever the Carcass is, there the Eagles will be gathered together;
wheresoever our Treasure is, there our Hearts will be also. And whither our
Hearts are gone before, (the Case is evident and clear) our Tongues and our
Actions will follow after.

7. Now since these are the Inquiries of several Seekers; to wit of Them who do
affect to dwell here, and of them that look out for a better Country, that is
an heavenly; And since we may judge by their Inquiries, to which kind of Master
they do belong, to God, or Mammon; It Is plain the Lesson or the Use we are to
take from it is This, that when we find our selves beset with a twofold evil,
the one of Sin, and the other of Affliction, (in so much as we know not which
way to turn, there being on the right hand a fear of Beggary or Disgrace, and
on the left hand a fear of Hell,) when (I say) we are reduced to such an hard
pinch of our Affairs, we must not carnally cast about, and tacitly say within
our selves, [what shall we do to keep our Livelyhoods? or what shall we do to
hold fast our Lives?] But what shall we do to keep a good Conscience, and to
hold fast our Integrity? And since it is nobler to be led by the hope of a
Reward, than to be frighted into our Duties, by the fear of being punished if
we neglect them; let us not ask, like the Children of Hagar, (in the spirit of
Bondage which is unto fear,) what shall we do, that we may not inherit a Death
Aeternal; But as the Children of Sarah, (in the spirit of Adoption which is
unto hope,) what shall we do, that we may inherit Aeternal Life?

Which Life being hid with Christ in God, (as St. Paul speaks to the
Colossians,) for God's Coloss. 3. 3.
sake whither should we go, either to seek it when it is absent, or to find it
when it is hid, or to secure it when it is found, unless to Him who has the
words of Eternal Life? that John 6. 68.
is, the words which are the means by which alone we may attain to Eternal
Life. The words which teach us how to know it, the words which tell us where to
seek it, the words which show us how to find it, the words which afford us
those Rules and Precepts, by our conformity unto which we cannot but take it
into possession? There is no other Name to make us Inheritors of Eternity, but
only the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12. And considering what is
said by our blessed Savior, That This (and this only) is Life Eternal, to know
the only true God, [with a practical knowledge] and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, (John 17. 2.) we should religiously resolve, not to know any thing else.
Not (I mean) in comparison of Jesus Christ and him crucified; nor yet to any
other end, than to serve and assist us in that one knowledge. Look what carking
and caring any Covetous man uses to get his wealth; look what industry and
labor an Ambitious man uses to get his Honor; look what vigilance and
solicitude any Amorous man uses to get his Idol; the same solicitude and
diligence is each Religious man to use, for the getting of an Interest in Jesus
Christ.

Which gives me a passage from the second to the third Observable I proposed;
from the Nature and Quality of the young man's Inquiry, to the condition of the
Oracle inquired of. As he sought for nothing less than Eternal Life, so did he
seek it from Him alone, who is the way to that Life, and the Life it self.

He did not go to take Advice from the Witch of Endor; (for the madness of Saul
had made him wiser, or more at least in his wits, than to knock at Hell-door
for the way to Heaven;) Nor did he ask of Apollo Pythius, or go to Jupiter
Ammon to be informed about the way to Eternal Life; (for all the Oracles of the
Heathen were put to silence by our Messiah, (as Plutarch and others of their
own great Writers have well observed) and should they speak never so loudly, he
very well knew they could not teach him;) Nor did he go to Aaron's Ephod, to
ask the Urim and Thummim about the means of his Salvation; (for he knew that
That Oracle was now grown Dimm, and that in case it had been legible, it could
not help him;) Nor did he betake himself to Moses, the Jewish Lawgiver, much
less to the Scribes, the learned Interpreters of the Law; (for he found
Mysterious Moses had still a Veil upon his Face, which the Scribes and
Pharisees were not able to Remove;) much less durst he go to the Law it self
for a Relief; there being nothing more plain, than that the Law works wrath:
Romans 4. 15.
Those Tables of Stone are as the Hones or the Grindstones, at which the Sting
of Death is whetted, and made more sharp. For as the sting of Death is Sin, so
the strength of Sin is the Law, (1 Cor. 15. 56.) The Law does thunder out a
Curse, as well as a Rigid Obligation, (the one from Mount Ebal, as well as the
other from Mount Sinai,) upon every Soul of man who shall but fail in the least
Iota. For it is written (says St. Paul, who Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10.
only says it out of the Law,) Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. Or (to consider it
yet more distinctly) admit Aeternal Life had been expected from the Law by this
Inquirer, yet sure it may sooner be ask't than answered, To which of the Laws
he should have had recourse for it? Certainly not to the Ceremonial; for That
was but a shadow of things to come, whereof the Body is Christ, (Coloss. 2.
17.) The very Sacrifice of the Law was not able to expiate, but only to
commemorate the Peoples Sins, ( Heb. 10. 3.) Therefore in vain would he have
sought to the Ceremonial Law: And as vainly to the Judicial; For that was a
Politic Constitution peculiar only to the Jews, and reaching no farther than
to a Civil Jurisdiction. Much less yet could he seek to the Moral Law of Moses
for Life Eternal; For the Moral Law exacted so Universal an obedience, and also
denounced so great a Curse (as I said before) on the least omission, that he
could look for nothing thence but the justest matter of Despair. For first our
Nature is so corrupt, and our Persons so much corrupter, since our having found
out many Inventions, that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us, (1 John 1. 8.) And secondly if Righteousness come by
the Law, then is Christ dead in vain, (Gal. 2. 21.) What then remained to this
inquisitive Jew, but that the Law should be his Schoolmaster to bring him unto
Christ? (Gal. 3. 24.) The Law being adapted by the infinite Wisdom of God's
economy, either to lead or to drive him thither. For requiring more from him
than he was able to perform, and yet denouncing a Curse on his Nonperformance,
it could not but make him stand affrighted at the ugly Condition he was in; I
mean his desperate Impossibility of ever attaining to Life Eternal, by the mere
perfection of his obedience. Hence he saw it concerned him to seek somewhere
else. He found it clear by Demonstration, (and by the woeful Demonstration of
sad Experience,) he stood in need of a Savior, and of such a Savior too, as
might deliver him from the Curse and from the Rigor of the Law, by being made
both a Curse and a Ransom for him. Again he saw both by the Doctrins, and by
the Miracles of Christ, that He was most likely to be That Savior; to wit a
Savior from whom he was to look for such a Clue, as might be able to conduct
him out of the Labyrinth he was in. And therefore just as this Savior was gone
forth into the way, This kind of Neophyte in my Text came running to him, and
asked him, (meekly kneeling upon his Knees,) Good Master, what shall I do, that
I may inherit Eternal Life?

Now if Christ was His Oracle who only lived under the Law, How much more must
he be ours, who were born and bred under the Gospel? Shall men of our Dignity
and Profession, of our Proficiency and Growth in the School of Christ, (an holy
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Peculiar People,) shall such as We go in
Inquest of Life Eternal, to such deceivable Oracles, as either Zuinglius, or
Calvin, Piscator, or Erastus, or John of Leyden? to the Sepulchers of Martyrs,
to the Discipline of Monasteries, to daily Ave Mary's and Masses, to Papal
Indulgences or Bulls, or to the outward Scarrifications and Buffettings of the
Flesh? shall we lean upon such Reeds as will but run through our Elbows? or
shall we inlighten our selves by Candles, when behold the Sun of Righteousness
is long since Risen in our Horizon? or to fly for Refuge to the Saints, when
behold a Savior? Christ is called very fitly the Sun of Righteousness, (Mal.
4. 2.) to whom the Apostles are but as Stars in the Firmament of the Gospel,
which only shine forth with a borrowed light, and have no other brightness than
what He lends them. Now all the Stars in the Firmament cannot make up one Sun,
or afford us one Day without his Presence. Just so All the learned and the good
men on Earth, All the Angels and Saints in Heaven cannot make up one Savior,
(or but light us the way to Eternal Life) without the Influence and Luster of
Jesus Christ.

Iairus, a Ruler of the Synagogue, a man that wanted no worldly means whereby
to Cure his only Daughter, did yet despair of her Recovery, until he fell down
at the Feet of Christ, (Luke 8. 41.) And so the Woman who had been sick of a
bloody Flux no less than twelve years together, and had spent all she had in
Physicians Fees, was not the better but the worse, until she crowded toward
Christ, and touched the Hemm of his Garment, (Luke 8. 43.) That we are every
one sick of a bloody Flux too, appears by our scarlet and crimson Sins. Which
Flux and Fountain of our Sins can never possibly be cured, unless by Him who is
the Fountain for Sin and for Uncleanness, (Zach. 13. 1.) For as Red wine is
good for a bloody Flux in the Body, so is That which gushed out of our
Savior's Body, who called himself The True Vine, the only Good thing for this
Disease in the Soul. And of this Wine we drink in the Cup of Blessing which we
Bless, in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. To him alone must we
fly as to the Physician of our Souls; who says to us under the Gospel, as once
to Israel under the Law, I am the Lord God that heals thee, Exodus 15. 26. He
alone (says St. Peter) is the Head-stone of the Corner, nor is there Salvation
in any other, (Acts 4. 11, 12.) It pleased the Father, that in him should all
Fullness dwell, (Coloss. 1. 19) And of his Fullness have all we received Grace
for Grace, (John 1. 16.) All things necessary to life, and to life Eternal, are
delivered to him of the Father, (Matthew. 11. 27.) And this 'twill be easy out of
Scripture, (for I am speaking to Believers, I should not else produce a Text,)
to make apparent by an Induction. For first if we are hungry, He alone is the
Bread of Life, which whosoever eats shall live for ever, (John 6. 58.) Next if we
are thirsty, He alone is the living Water, which whosoever drinks shall never
thirst, (John 4. 13.) Thirdly if we are foul, He alone has that Blood by which
we may be cleansed from all our Sins, (1 John 1. 7.) Fourthly if we are
foolish, He is the Wisdom of the Father, who has laid up in Him all the
Treasures of Knowledge, (Coloss. 2. 3.) He is Doctor Catholicus, and only He.
For when he was transfigur'd upon Mount Tabor, a bright Cloud overshadow'd him,
and behold a voice out of the Cloud, This is my beloved Son, Hunc Audite, Hear
Him, (Matthew. 17. 15.) It is the Top of that Wisdom which we are capable of on
Earth, to sit with Mary at his Feet, and to hear his Word, (Luke 10. 39, 42.)
Fifthly if we inquire for the only true way, which leads unto life, and to
life Eternal, He alone is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, (John 14. 6.) Are
we affrighted at the Law? He alone has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us, (Gal. 3. 13.) In a word: He is the true Noah's Ark,
whereby to escape the Inundations of Sin and Hell. He has broken the Ice, and
made way for us, that we may enter into the Gate, (Micah 2. 13.) He is our
Jonathan after the Spirit, who first has scaled in his Person the heavenly
Mountain, that we the Bearers of his Armor may follow after, (1 Samuel 14. 1.)
The Ministration of his Word is the Spiritual Chariot, by which he carries us
with himself into the outward Court of the Temple, and thence at last within
the Veil into the Sanctum Sanctorum. He alone is the Gate both of Grace and
Salvation; None can go unto the Father, unless by Him, (John 14. 6.) He alone
is the Jacob's Ladder, whose Top reaches into the Heavens; that is to say the
True (...), by which as by a Bridge, or Isthmus, Heaven and Earth are tied
together; Angels and Men pass to and fro; Angels to Men, and Men to Angels. By
Him has the Father reconciled all things unto Himself, (Coloss. 1. 20.) He it
is that invites us, when we are weary and heavy laden, to come unto him for a
Refreshment, (Matthew. 11 28.) From Him the Spirit and the Bride say, Come: And
let him that hears say, Come. And let him that is athirst, Come. And
whosoever will, let him come and take freely of the water of life, (Rev. 22.
17.)

All which being considered, we thus may Argue within our selves. If the great
Queen of Shebah did choose to take so long a Journey as from Shebah to
Jerusalem, and all to hear a wise man speak, (Matthew. 12. 42.) Or if Socrates,
though an Heathen, was such a Lover of Wisdom, as to travel for his Improvement
through several Countries, and put himself to learn of every great Master that
he could hear of; with how much a greater force of reason should we travel far
and near to find out the Wisdom of the Father? to learn of that Good, as well
as Great Master, who alone has the words of Eternal Life?

But some perhaps may here object, That the Man in the Text met with Christ in
the way, whilst here on Earth. How shall we find him out since his Ascension
into Heaven? The Psalmist tells us He is in Heaven, and in Hell too. If we go
up into Heaven, he is there; And if we go down into Hell, he is there also. But
to Heaven we cannot, and to Hell we dare not go.

To which the Answer is very obvious. That if Christ is in Hell, because he is
every where, by the necessity of his Godhead; he is by consequence here on
Earth too, for the very same reason. And that we may not say with Seneca, [ Qui
ubique, nusquam,] that he who is every where is no where, for that he is every
where invisible, and so as difficultly found as if he were not; The
Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise, Say Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.
not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? ( that is to bring Christ
down from above) Or who shall descend into the Deep? ( that is to bring up
Christ again from the Dead,) For Christ in his word, is very nigh thee, even in
thy Mouth, and in thine Heart, that is, the word of Faith which we preach. We
need not go to Compostella, or travel in Pilgrimage to other places, where they
pretend at least to show us his Seamless Coat, and his Cross, and his Crown of
Thorns. We need go no farther than to his Word, and his Sacraments, his
Ministers, and his Members.

And having thus found him out, we must not content our selves, with Herod, to
gaze upon him in Curiosity; but, with Zachaeus, out of Devotion. Nor must we
grow old in our setting out, but rather hasten to him betimes, and as fast as
we can run too, And as humbly as it is possible we must go kneeling to him, and
ask him, Good Master, what shall we do? or with the Disciples upon the Sea,
Master, Master, we perish. That is, we Luke 8. 24.
perish of our selves, without thy stretched out Hand to support and save us.
And therefore lift we up our voices, with those Ten Lepers in the way, Jesus
Master, have Mercy on us. For Luke 17. 13.
indeed he will never have Mercy on us, unless we have mercy upon our selves,
that is to say, unless we take him upon his own most righteous Terms; not only
as a Jesus who came to save us, but withal as a Master, who does expect to be
served by us. And this does lead me to consider the Compellation of our
Inquirer, concerning which I shall discourse upon the next Opportunity.

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
the only wise God, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever.

THE Goodness of Christ AS A LEGISLATOR.
MARK X. 17. (...), etc. Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inherit
Aeternal Life?
1. HAving done with the Person who here inquires, and with the excellent
Nature of his Inquiry, and with the only true Oracle inquired of; It now
remains that I proceed to the significant Compellation, wherewith the Person
who here inquires, praepares the way to his Inquiry. The Compellation (as has
been said) does consist of two Parts; first the Subject, (...), Master; next
the Adjunct or Qualification, (...), Good.

2. From the first being compared with the matter of the Question, (that is to
say, with the (...)) it is very obvious to draw forth this Doctrinal Proposition.

That the Son of God Incarnate, who at present is our Advocate, and will
hereafter be our Judge, and who purposely came to save us from the Tyranny of
our Sins, is not only a Savior to offer Promises to our Faith, but also a
Master to exact Obedience to his Commands. We must not only believe him, which
is but to have him in our Brains; nor must we only confess him, which is but to
have him in our Mouths; no nor must we only love him, which (were it possible
to be done) were only to have him in our hearts; But farther yet we must Obey
him and do him Service, which is to have him in our Hands and our Actions too.
(...); Master, what shall I do? 3. A Proposition of such Importance to all that
are Candidates for Heaven, and solicitous for the way which will lead us
thither; that truly a Sermon on such a Subject should be as long as a man's
life. We cannot touch on that string either too often, or too much, by which we
are taught to bear a part in the Quire of Heaven. And therefore if at present I
only touch upon it in short, I would be known so to do for these two Reasons.
First because I must consider it in the second Doctrinal Proposition, (it being
impossible to consider that Christ is a Good Master, and not to consider at the
same time that he is a Master;) Next because I shall resume it upon a sitter
passage of Scripture, which I shall handle either in this, or in a Neighboring
Congregation.

4. It shall therefore suffice me to say at present, That almost All the
Appellatives which are any where given to Christ in Scripture, do either
express or imply his Empire. He is A Prince in the Prophet Esa, and has Isa. 9.
6.
a Government on his shoulders; A Ruler in Micah; A Sun of Righteousness in
Malachi. Mic. 5. 2.
In as much as we are Soldiers, he is the Captain of our Salvation; As the
Sheep of his Pasture, he is our Shepherd; As fellow Members of a Body, he is
our Head. He is a King and a Lord in the Revelations. Nor is he only as Rev.
19. 16.
other Kings, The Lord's Anointed, or The Lord's Christ; But by way of
Supereminence, Christ the Lord. Acts 3. 15.
The Lord of Life he is in one place; and The 1 Cor. 2. 8.
Lord of Glory in another. Every Tongue must confess that Jesus Christ is THE
Lord, (Phil. 2. 11.)

5. Farther yet, he is a Lawgiver, as well as a Lord. For so we read in two
Prophets, (who plainly speak it of our Messiah,) Out of Isa. 42. 21.
Zion shall go forth a Law, (Isa. 2. 3. Mic. 4. 2.) and our Apostle tells us
expressly, That however we are free from the Law of Moses, yet still we are
under the Law to Christ, (1 Cor. 9. 21.) To understand which the better, we
must know the Moral Law imports a threefold Obligation. One, as being the Law
of Nature; And so it is obliging to all Mankind. Another, as being the Law of
Moses; And so it is obliging in special manner unto the Jews. A third, as being
the Law of Christ; And so it is obliging unto as many, as do call upon the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who did not come to make the Law of none effect
through Faith, (As many thought in St. Paul's Days, and more in Ours,) but by
Faith to establish the Law, Romans 3. 31. That it is indeed the Law of Christ, and
the Law to be fulfilled, is very evident from the words of St. Paul to the
Galatians, Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, (Gal.
6. 2.)

6. Thus we see by (...), which here relates to the (...), is meant a Master to
Command, as well as Teach. For Moses himself was somewhat more than a Teaching
Master, who yet did humbly submit and do obeisance unto Christ; As when a King
enters a City, The Mayor of the Town yields up his Mace. Moses verily was
faithful in all his house as a Servant; But Christ as a Son, and as a Son over
his own house, whose house are we, (Heb. 3. 5, 6.) When I say that Master Moses
did submittere Fasces, as it were yield up his Mace to Christ, I speak as
prompted by Himself in the Eighteenth of Deuteronomy, at the Fifteenth Verse;
where says Moses to the People, (by a Divine and Prophetic Spirit,) The Lord
thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee of thy
Brethren like unto Me, unto Him shall thou hearken; that is, to Him shall thou
be obedient. A Text so plainly understood touching the Mastership of Christ, or
of his being a Legislator, that it is cited by St. Peter in the Third Chapter of
the Acts; and by St. Stephen, Acts the Seventh; and by both to the purpose at
which I drive. To which agrees this Observation, That as at the close of our
Savior's Sermon which he delivered upon the Mount, he is said to have taught
the astonished People, as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, (Matthew.
7. ult.) so in the close of that Commission with which he shut up all his
Sermons, and sent his Preachers into the world, he gave them charge to preach
his Gospel, as that in which was contained his Royal Law. [ All Power is given
unto me in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore, and teach all Nations to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, (Matthew. ult. ult.) In a due
discharge of which Commission, we find St. Paul, (Romans 13.) and St. James,
(Chap. 2.) and St. Peter and St. John, in several parts of their Epistles,
requiring absolute obedience to the Commandments of Christ, that is to Christ,
as a Legislator. The words of St. Paul are most remarkable, (1 Cor. 7. 19.)
Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments. As if the Apostle should have said, Let us not please our selves
too much with our being of This or That Religion, embracing such or such a
Sect. For no man living shall be saved for being of this or that Profession, a
Jew, or a Gentile, an Unbeliever, or a Believer, (a Papist or a Protestant, a
Presbyterian, or a Prelatist.) But men are better, or worse, and in a more
savable or unsavable Condition, as they are more or less obedient to the
Commandments of Christ. This I take to be the meaning of that Expression in St.
Paul, which is so far only difficult as it is spoken by an Ellipsis:
Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, Confer hunc locum cum
Gal. 5. 6.
but the keeping of the Commandments is all in all. That is it must do us good
in the Day of Wrath, because it is That that Christ requires, as the Condition
of the Covenant 'twixt Him and Us. And without which it is impossible that we
receive him as a Lord. But there is nothing more pertinent to prove the
Mastership of Christ, (as here we have it in the Text,) than his own resolution
of the young man's question, as we find it set down in St. Matthew's Gospel;
where no sooner was it ask't by our Inquirer, [ Good Master what good thing
shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life;] but straight the Master returned
this answer, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, (Matthew. 19.
17.) And being presently ask't which, our Savior passed by the first, and only
instanced in those of the second Table. To show, that Faith will not avail us
without Obedience; Nor Obedience to the first Table without Obedience unto the
second. Whereby it is intimated unto us, That They are desperately Erroneous who
think they are lovers of their God, whilst they are haters of their Neighbor;
And that because they do not worship more Gods than One, have no Images in
Churches, are no Swearers, or Sabbath Breakers, they have therefore discharged
their Duty toward God, notwithstanding their dishonouring of Public Parents,
their Killing, their Cousening, and their bearing False-witness. Such as these
must be taught by the Answer of this Master to this Inquiry, that their
chiefest Duty toward God is their Duty toward their Neighbor; and that their
Godliness is but Guile, whilst they acknowledge the true God, and yet disown
his Vicegerent; Abhor Idols, and yet commit Sacrilege; Scruple at vain or
common Swearing, but yet dissemble, and lie, and enter into Solemn Covenants
against their many most sacred and praevious Oaths; whilst they are strict
Sabbatizers, but disorderly walkers six days in the week; ever putting on the
Form, but ever denying the Power of Godliness. The Good Master in the Text will
not thus be served by us; for he expects good Servants too. And to our being
good Servants, there is nothing more needful, than that we be honest and
upright men. In this especially (says our Savior) consists the way to Eternal
Life. So that the Liberty and Freedom so much spoken of in the Gospel is a
Manumission from Satan, and not from Christ; who did not live our Example, that
we might not imitate him; or praescribe us Praecepts, that we might not obey
them. No, the Liberty of the Gospel does only make us the more his Servants.
And though his Service is perfect Freedom, yet does it not cease to be a
Service. For as he that is called in the Lord, being a Servant, is the Lord's
Freeman; so is He the Lord's Servant, who is called being free, 1 Cor. 7. 22.
We are not said with greater Truth to be infranchiz'd by the Gospel, than to
have made an exchange of Masters. We were before Servants to Sin, But now to
Righteousness. Before to Satan, but now to Christ. We did before serve an Hard
Master, but now a Good one. And this I come to show at large upon

My second Doctrinal Proposition.
That our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is not any severe Egyptian Master, But
a Master full of Mercy and Loving kindness. And this he is in two Respects, In
respect of the Work which he requires, which is not foesible only, but
pleasant; And of the Wages which he promises, Aeternal Life. He is, for each
of these Reasons, (...), A Good Master. 1. That he is a good Master, and a good
Master in perfection, we may discern by the particulars of which a perfect good
Master must be composed. For He who exacts no more Duty than we are able to
discharge, and yet affords a greater Recompense than we are able to deserve; He
who sets us such a Task, as is not only always possible, but most times (...).
Philo (...). p. 293.
easy; nor only easy to be performed, but also pleasant in the performance; He
who treats his Servants as Friends and Brethren, as if he were their
Fellow Servants, or indeed his Servants Servant; He who when he takes upon him
the most of Mastership and Empire, commands his Servants no meaner things, than
he Himself in his Person has done before them; He who when he is affronted, is
very easily reconciled, and even sues to his Servants for Reconcilement; He
whose work is worth the doing because to do it is a Reward, and yet rewards it
when it is done, above all that we are able to ask or think; He is sure a good
Master, and a good Master in perfection; even as good as we are able to wish,
or fancy. And just such a Master is Jesus Christ. He is the Master that makes
us Free, (Gal. 5. 1.) the Master whose Service is perfect Freedom. Romans 6. 18,
22. The Master that frees us from all other Masters besides Himself. The Master
that bids us call no man Master upon Earth, For one is our Master, and He in
Heaven, Matthew. 23. 10.

2. Indeed if Moses were our Master, and none but He; Our Case were then very
hard. For He requires more Service than we are able to perform, and
pronounces a Lex moralis datur Duris in flagellum, Proficientibus in
Paedagogiam, et perfectioribus in solatium.
Curse in case we do not perform it, and yet affords not any strength whereby
to adapt us for the performance. But yet however he is an hard Master, he is
not a Cruel or an Unjust one, because he is an hard Master in order to a just
and a gracious End. That is, he drives us from Himself, to make us look out for
a better Master. He gives us a Law by which we cannot be justified, (Gal. 2.
16.) that we may seek to be justified by somewhat else. He pronounces a Curse
to as many as are of the works of the Law, that he may fright us into His Arms,
who has redeemed us from the Curse by being made a Curse for us, (Gal. 3. 13.)
In a word, he is our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that being under
Christ we may be no longer under a Schoolmaster, (Gal. 3. 24, 25.) And thus
having ascended from Moses to Christ, from the hard Master to the mild One, we
are no longer under the Tyranny and Exactions of the Law, but under the Kingdom
and State of Grace, (Romans 6. 14.) no longer in bondage under the Elements of
the World, (Gal. 4. 3.) but have received the Adoption of Sons, (v. 5.) We are
no longer under a Master who can only forbid Sin, but we are now under a Master
who can forgive it. No longer under a hard Master, who the longer we serve him,
keeps us in bondage so much the more; But we are now under a Good one, who
turns our Service into Sonship, translating us into Heirs and Coheirs with
Himself, (v. 7.)

3. But here it cannot be denied, That if we look upon Christ as nothing more
than a Master, who came not to abrogate, but to fill up the Law, (Matthew. 5.
17.) our Condition is not better, but rather worse than it was before. For
Christ is stricter in his Precepts than Moses was; and seems to have set us an
harder Task. He commands us to forgive and to love our Enemies; Not to look
upon a Woman with the Adultery of the Eye; to rejoice in Persecutions; and to
leap for Joy when we are Mourners; He commands us to fight with all that is in
the World; and not to give over fighting until we conquer. I therefore say with
all that is in the World, because as the Sublunary World was divided of old
(before the Times of Columbus, and Americus Vesputius,) into these three parts,
Europe, Asia, and Africa, to wit the parts of That World which was created by
God alone; so St. John in his first Epistle has divided the World of Sin and
Wickedness, the World created by Men and Devils. For as he tells us in one
place, That the whole World lies in wickedness, (like a (...). Dionys. (...).
Net cast into the Sea,) so he tells us in another, That All that is in the
World 1 John 2. 16.
is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. And
methinks This Trichotomy has such an Analogy with the former, as that the one
may seem to have given occasion unto the other. Africa for its Heat, to the
lust of the Flesh; Europe for its Avarice, to the lust of the Eye; Asia for its
Bravery, to the pride of Life. Now to conquer a world of Temporal Enemies, is
more than any one man could yet Attain to; How much less can any conquer a
world of Sin? Such an Amorous man as Scipio might sooner conquer all Africa,
than the lust of the Flesh. Such a Ravenous man as Caesar might sooner conquer
all Europe, than the lust of the eye. Such an Ambitious man as Alexander might
sooner conquer all Asia, than the pride of life. All these Admirable Victors
were Slaves to Sin, which had subdued them from their Cradles, and led them
Captive into their Graves. Admit that Alexander had conquered the World without
him, (which yet we know he did not, and Livy tells us he could Vide Tit. Live.
l. 9. p. 332, 333, etc.
not do,) sure we are he was enslaved to the world within him; to the lust of
the flesh, by the Queen of the Amazons; to the lust of the eye, which nothing
could fill but another's Empire; and to the pride of life too, because by That
He affected an Apotheosis upon Earth. But now the Soldiers and Servants of
Jesus Christ are commanded to conquer this world of Sin. And that our Master
should command us to overcome that Triumvirate, to which the universe of men
has so long been tributary, may seem as unreasonable to flesh and blood, as to
flesh and blood it is impossible. So that it cannot be denied, but that if
Christ were nothing more than a Master to us, we should not only be in a
dangerous, but in a desperate condition. And the setting his Servants so hard a
Task, would loudly speak him as hard a Master.

4. But again we must confess on the other side, That if we look upon Christ as
more and better than a Master, to wit a Sacrifice, and a Priest, an Elder
Brother, and an Advocate, not only a Lawgiver, but a Propitiation, not only a
Acts 5. 31.
Prince, but a Acts 5. 31.
Savior too, who gives Acts 5. 31.
Repentance as well as Praecepts, and Acts 5. 31.
forgiveness of Sins; who requires no more of us than he enables us to perform,
and expects not to reap, but after the measure that he has sown; Our case is
infinitely better than under the Paedagogie of Moses, and we must needs be
concluded to serve a very good Master. For though he bids us have an Eye to the
Perfection of his Commands, yet is he pleased to have an Eye to the
Imperfection of our Nature, and looks not on the Imperfection, but on the mere
sincerity of our Obedience. Though we must fasten an Eye of Fear on the
exactness of his Injunctions, yet he does cast an Eye of favor upon our
weakness to undergo them. This is a Rule which will never fail us. (And be it
spoken to the comfort of whosoever has a wounded and broken Spirit;) Our Master
Christ is so good, as to put a great value upon the willingness of our minds;
Accepts the Tribute of our Obedience, even according to the Power and Ability
which we have, not according to what we have not, (2 Cor. 8. 12.) He either
enjoyneth no harder things than he gives us Ability to accomplish, or else he
satisfies his Justice with a great deal less than he injoyneth. In each of
which Cases he is a very good Master. For what we cannot perform for want of
strength, He himself has performed in our behalf, and still does take in good
part our hearty Endeavors of Performance. Be it so that he leads us upon very
hot Service; commands us to fight against all the world; and fight it out until
we conquer; (or at least until we are beaten into (...), that is to say, into
more-than-Conquerours, by being manfully overcome, and valiantly trodden under
foot;) yet if we equally consider, as well the proof of our Armor, as the
prowess of our Enemies, comparing the Armory of Grace with the Artillery of
Temptations; and the strength of Him that fights for us, with the strenth of
Him that fights against us; we cannot choose but confess (if we have any
Ingenuity abiding in us) That as there are lusts of the flesh, which war
against the Soul, so there are weapons of the Spirit, which are abundantly
sufficient to give them Battle. And though our Enemies are so urgent, that we
cannot expect to enjoy a Peace; yet when Christ is our Captain, we may
rationally hope to obtain a Victory. And sure a Victory over Sin, must needs be
very much better, than to be at Peace with it. If indeed we can do all things
through Christ that strengthens us, (as the Apostle tells us we can) How can we
dare to be afraid, whilst our Commander is our strength too, who whilst he
leads us by his Example, does also follow us by his Grace? It Is true indeed,
Had he commanded us to fight, where he knew we must be conquered; and only
promised an Eternity, upon the performance of things Impossible; It had not
been to encourage, but jear our weakness; to reproach our Endeavors, and not
reward them. But (to speak in the phrase of the Royal Psalmist) The Lord is
Righteous in all his ways, and perfectly holy in all his works. The
Fortifications of every Soul are so proportioned to the Besiegers, that
(excepting such as Pharaoh, who was finally given over,) God permits not a
Temptation to make a Battery, where he provides not a Grace to prevent a Breach.

-- Nec enim bone Ductor Prudentius in (...).
Magnarum virtutum inopes, nervisque carentes Christicolas vitiis populantibus
exposuisti. As by the Tenor of his Praecepts we must do any thing that we
ought, so by the Power of his Grace we can do any thing that we (...). Pyth. in
(...).
must. For 'twas very truly said by the Pythagoreans, That Ability does dwell
the next Door to Necessity. We can, if we will, shut out Adultery from the Eye,
and keep out Murder from the Heart. But then the utmost of their Assaults
requires the utmost of our Resistance. We cannot do it by sleeping, or sitting
still. It is required that we stir up the Gift of God that is in us, and exert
our very utmost of skill and strength. There is a Time when we must strive to
such a Degree against Sin, as to resist it even to Blood. As God on his part is
faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted beyond our strength, so must we
be faithful too, and persevere in our Resistance, although our Resistance may
cost us dear.

5. I cannot make this plainer than by Example, nor by a plainer Example than
what our own Good Master was pleased to give us, Matthew. 5. 28, 29, 30. where
first having forbidden us even to look upon a Woman with such an Eye, as is the
inlet of vanity, or the outlet of Lust, He immediately commands us, if our Eye
offend us, to pluck it out; if our Hand offend us, to cut it off; if our feet
offend us, to cast them from us. That if we cannot conquer one way, to wit by
way of Prevention, we may yet do it another, by way of Cure. Or that if we
cannot conquer our Ghostly Enemy, yet at least we may vex him by our Escape. If
we can do either, Amoris remedia, secundum Cratem Cynicum sunt (...). Diogen.
Laert. l. 6.
it will suffice. For if we are able to keep our Eye from offending us, then we
need not pluck it out; Or if we are able to pluck it out, then we can keep it
from offending us. And this is most certain, That if we fail of the one, we may
attain unto the other. If we cannot keep our Eye from offending or insnaring
us, or from making us to stumble and fall into Sin, (as the word (...) does
Tertull. Apolog. c. 46. p. 76.
there import) yet (like Democritus in Tertullian) we can pluck it out of our
Head, and cast it from us. Or if we cannot keep in our Tongue, yet (like Zeno
Eleates) we can chaw it between our Teeth, and so spit it out of our Mouths. If
not our Heart from Projice quaecunque Cor tuum laniant. Quae si aliter extrahi
nequeant, Cor ipsum cum illis evellendum. Seneca.
scandalizing us, yet (like Cato Vticensis,) we can tear it out of our Bosom.
Or we can take a more gentle and legal Course. For we can block up its Avenues,
and intercept its Provisions, and so compel it to a surrender for want of
Victuals. There is not any kind of Devil, no not the Devil of Concupiscence,
but may be cast our of the Heart, one way or other. Fervent Prayer peradventure
will exorcise it of it self; especially if we continue and persevere in that
Duty; if we pray without ceasing, and that in the sense of the Apostle. But if
to the stratagem of Prayer, we add the Engine of Fasting too; and of fasting
from the Occasion, as well as from the Food of that hungry Enemy; we shall
famish and enfeeble the strongest Lust; and so by famishing the Monster,
preserve the Man.

6. But some perhaps may here object, and silently expostulate within
themselves: Is the Case of us Christians so hard and tedious, as that we cannot
be Saints but at the price of being Monsters? Are we not fit to see God, 'till
we have plucked out our Eyes? or must we cut off our hands, for the working out
of our Salvation? Or must we cut off our feet and cast them from us, that we
may walk so much the better in the narrow way of the Commandments? Does not St.
John tell us of Christ, (to prove he is a good Master,) that his Commandments
are not grievous? But what more grievous, than to pluck out an Eye? And are we
not told by Christ Himself, (to prove he is a Good Master,) that his yoke is
easy, and his burden light? But what is more uneasy, than to cut off an hand?
what more burdensome to our Shoulders, than what we cannot stand under, unless
with the loss of our very feet? And how is Christ a good Master, whilst he
places his Servants in such great Exigences and Streights, that to preserve
our Integrity, we must be forced to be dismembered? If That which opens into
Life is such a very strait Gate, that to make our selves slender, we must cut
off our hands; and a Gate so very low, that to be short enough to enter, we
must cut off our feet; where is the easiness of the Service so often talked of?
This proves indeed he is a Master with a witness, But that he is a good one, it
does not prove. This indeed shows his work is possible; But 'twas affirmed it
should be easy, and pleasant too.

7. It Is true I did, and still I do. For though to one who should literally
pull his Eye out of his head, I might say with as good reason, as he in (...).
Antonius ad Didymum apud Cedrenum, p. 245.
Cedrenus did to Didymus, [ Be not troubled at the loss of those fleshly Eyes,
which are obnoxious to the Attempts of every petulant Fly; But let it rather be
thy comfort, that by being thus blinded, thou have such Eyes left thee, as by
which Angels themselves do see,] I say though this were an Answer which might
satisfy the Objection, and which would not with ease be replied unto, yet the
Answer I shall give will be far more welcome. For the words of our Master are
spoken only by a figure, and do signify in substance no more than This; That
we must rather part with any thing, than at once with the Purity and the
Salvation of our Souls. Be it Friend, or Profit, be it Pleasure, or Reputation,
whatsoever we love as we love our Eyes, or think as useful to our purpose as
hands and feet; yet if it entice us to any wickedness by which we Shipwreck our
Conscience, or fall from the favor of our God, we must rather cut it off, and
cast it from us, than endure to be captived by its Allurements. If before we
are aware we are surpised with a Temptation, so as Lust does conceive and is
impregn'd in the heart, we must destroy it in that Instant, e're it has time
to bring forth. Or if perhaps it has brought forth the Act of Sin, we then
must rob it of the all that may feed and nourish it, that so it may be no more
than an Act of Sin; and that, for want of Provision, it may not prosper into an
habit. It being better to suffer any thing, in hindering Lust from conceiving,
and from bringing forth Sin, than suffer Sin (by being finished,) to bring
forth Death. This I conceive to be the upshot of those hard sayings, If thine
Eye offend thee, pluck it out; If thine Hand offend thee, cut it off; if thy
Foot offend thee, cast it from thee. Nay in the Judgment of St. Chrysostom,
(upon the Place,) To pluck out our eyes, is but to turn them aside from their
Tempting objects. To cut off our hands, is only to lay them upon our hearts.
And to cast our feet from us, is no more than to direct them another way; to
abstain from the occasions and opportunities of evil; to turn aside from all
Incentives and Temptations unto Sin. And therefore hitherto there is nothing in
this very hardest of Christ's Commands, but what consists with his being a
very good Master. For since he commands what he commands us, both in order to
our gaining the greatest Good, and in order to our escape from the greatest
Evil; (a Lake which evermore burns with Fire and Brimstone;) The very hardest
and sharpest of his Commands, must be comparatively easy, and pleasant too.

Thus I have dwelt somewhat long upon this one Precept, [ if thine Eye offend
thee, pluck it out,] because it seems to be the hardest our Master Christ has
praescrib'd; And so by consequence to evince him a good Master here, is to
evidence his Goodness in all the rest.

8. If again it be objected, That our Master does praescribe us an impossible
Task, whilst he commands us to be perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect,
although the Mat. 5. ult.
righteous man falls seven times a day; James 2.
and in many things we offend all; and no Psalm. 143. 2.
flesh is righteous in the sight of God.

9. The Answer to it is briefly This: That it is not said by our Master, [ Be ye
as perfect as your Father in Heaven,] But, Be ye perfect as he is perfect.
Which is as if he should have said, Be ye perfect pro modulo, as He is perfect
sine modo. You after your measure, as He without it. It is meant of a Likeness,
and not at all of an Equality. Be ye perfect, as the word perfect is opposed to
unsincere, and only signifies Integrity; not as opposed to Infirm, and
signifies absolute perfection. Or to expound it more exactly, Our Master speaks
in that place touching the latitude of our Charity, which he would not have
confined within the limits of our Country, or our Acquaintance, our Friends,
and Brethren; But he would have us extend our Love, as our Father in Heaven
extends His, as well to our Enemies, as to our Friends. That this is the
meaning of the Text, is very evident from the Context, and from the parallel
place of Scripture, Luke 6. 36. where on the very same occasion of exhorting
his Disciples to love their Enemies, he concludes in these words, Be ye
merciful as your Father in Heaven is merciful. But now suppose that That Text
were to be literally expounded, and that our Master had commanded us, not only
an impartial, but an immaculate obedience; an obedience without Sin, as well as
without Unsincerity; yet by Aristotle's Rule, which may be a Rule amongst
Christians too, [ That what is possible by our Friends, is also (...). Aristot.
Eth.
possible to us,] our Obedience may be adequate to the very exactest of his
Commands. For our Master is our Friend; (as he himself has called himself,
John 13. 15.) And he has satisfied the Law, as well by his Active, as by his
Passive Obedience; And this he has done in our behalf too. And if by the
Friendship of our Master (imputing to us his own Obedience) his Commands are
foesible, and to be done; If we can do all things through Him that strengthens
us by his Grace, through Him that directs us by his Example, through him that
satisfies for our Rebellions by his perfection of Obedience in our Behalf; we
can never sure complain of an Egyptian Task-master, But may modestly rather
make him St. Austin's Augustine. l. 10. Confussionum, c. 28, 29, 30.
Challenge, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis. Do thou command us, o
Lord, even what thou will, whilst thou do give us both to will, and also to
do what thou command. Philip. 2.


10. Come we now from the first unto the following Ingredients, of which a
perfectly good Master must be composed. He sets his Servants such a Task, as is
not only possible, but easy too; nor only easy to be done, but pleasant
commonly in the doing. First so easy to be done, that Sincerity is imputed and
reckoned to us in stead of Innocence; and a well-meant Endeavor does pass with
Christ for a Performance. Himself has told us ( Matthew. 7. 7.) That as precious
as Heaven is, we may have it for the asking. As inaccessibly as God is placed,
we may find him for the seeking. And as fast as the Door is shut, we shall have
it opened for but the knocking. It Is true indeed our good Master has both a
Yoke, and a Burden, (Matthew. 11. 30.) But the one is so easy, and the other is
so light, that even his Yoke gives us freedom, and his Burden strength. It is
therefore a (...), or cold expression in St. John, to say His Commandments are
not grievous; for (to use the Physician's Language) they are cordial and
restaurative to such as faint, paregorical and anodynous to such as are in
great pain. Witness the Recipe which is given by the great Physician of our
Souls, Matthew. 11. 29. where first having praemised, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest; he presently adds this
Receipt, (...), Take my Yoke upon you, [that is, my Praecepts,] and ye shall
find Rest unto your Souls. He binds us, we see, But with silken Fetters. He
loads us indeed, But as the Poets loaded Atlas, when they placed that Heaven
upon his shoulders, without the Influence of which he could not have stood upon
his Feet. Thus our Lord (without a fiction) bids us bear our own Prop, and
undergo such a Burden as holds us up; yea such a Burden as mounts us upwards.
Nor could we soar as high as Heaven, if we were not thus laden.

11. Such is the easiness of our Service; And then for the pleasantness, we
have the Verdict of St. Chrysostom, (...). Virtue, without a Heaven, is so much
pleasanter than Vice, that all the School of the Gloria est Gratia consummata.
P. Ferius Specim. Schol. Orth. c. 13.
Peripateticks thought sit to call it their Summum Bonum. Nor is there any
thing more obvious in several parts of our Gospel, than for Grace to be
expressed by the Kingdom of Heaven. As if our present state of Grace were the
Inchoation of our Glory; and that by the newness of our Life, we did but
antedate our Resurrection. The greatest Happiness under Heaven, being as
Aristotle defines it, when (...). Aristot. Eth. l. 1. c. 7.
our Souls are ever working by the square and directions of the most exact and
consummate virtue. For what but this was the design of our own good Master, in
that Abridgment of all his Precepts, Be ye perfect as your Father in Heaven is
perfect?

12. That other Master of men's Souls, Christ's Competitor for our Service,
treats all his Vassals with greater Tyranny, than even the Malice of Zosimus
could describe in Constantine, or Suetonius in Vespasian. Not only puts excize
upon their offices of Nature, and makes them prostitute their Daughters to pay
their Tribute; But even tortures them with the moral of what the Poets could
but Invent. Uses the Proud man like Sisyphus, the Envious like Prometheus, the
Avaricious like Tantalus, and the Lustful like Ixion. But now with This let us
compare the most reasonable Service which Christ injoyns. He does not busy us
at once about many things. For Quae unquam brevior et efficacior Doctrina tua
Jesus bone? non suades nisi credere, et non praecipis nisi amare. Quid facilius
quam Deo credere? Quid dulcius quam ipsum amare? Quam suave est Iugum tuum,
quam leve onus! Nicol. de Cusa de visione Dei. cap. 24. p. 207.
his Commandments at the largest are but a Decalogue, and yet are shrunk to a
Dichotomie. The whole Duty of a Christian being only This, To love his God with
all his heart, and his Neighbor as himself. Now is there any thing in the
world, either more suitable to our Nature, or more agreeable to our desires, (I
mean to our desires either of profit, or reputation,) than to love God and our
Neighbor after the measure that he injoyns? Nothing sure is more noble, than
by the loving of our God, to become his Favorites and Friends; nothing more
profitable or gainful, than by the loving of our Neighbor, to lay up Treasure
upon use in the Bank of Heaven. Yet into these two Bottoms the several Duties
of a Christian are all wound up. Which if we unravel into Particulars, what a
lovely Rank of Graces may we observe to march forth? such as are Faith, and
Humility, Chastity, and Sobriety, Mercifulness, and Justice, and other Couples
of the like nature; Quae utique omnia non onerant nos, sed ornant, as somewhere
Salvian is pleased to word it. That is, our Duty is so much our ornament, our
Labor so much our ease, and our Burden so much our prop, That our good Master
in effect requires no more of us than This, That at least for his sake, if not
our own, we will do so much as be at Liberty; that we will gratisie him so far,
as to take our ease; and that in love to so good a Master, we will vouchsafe
but to be happy.

13. But, to pass a little farther to other Instances of a good Master; Our
Master Christ does command us no meaner things, than He Himself in his person
has done before us. He suffered a Birth, that he might be Gal. 4. 4.
under the Law; and- endured a Life, that he might fulfill it. Like the Emperor
Hadrian Hadrianus omnia ad Gregarij Militis modum fecit. Spartian.
in Spartianus, (who underwent as much Service as the meanest Soldier in his
Army,) our Master thought it not below him, to wash John 13. 5, 15.
and wipe his Disciples Feet: Called Judas Friend, in the same Instant that he
betrayed him. He emptied himself of Glory; became of no reputation; not only
prayed for his Persecutors, but laid down his Life even for them that took it
away. In every Action of his converse he set us a Copy of Obedience, as well to
facilitate our Transcript, as to commend it; that we might neither think it
much, nor find it difficult.

14. It is another great point of our Master's Goodness, That he does not break
with us for every fault. Although we run away from him, (as, God know's, we do
too often;) yet he does not in his displeasure presently turn us out of his
Service; but desires that his Goodness may lead us back unto Repentance. And as
he is not soon offended, so when he is, he is quickly pleased. We shall be sure
to find mercy, at the price of showing it. For Luke 6. 37. we are promised an
(...) for a cheap (...), It Is but forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Nay so
vehemently Good is our Master Christ, that he sends and sues to us for our
consent to be forgiven. We are Ambassadors for Christ, (says St. Paul by the
Spirit in his Epistle to the Corinthians,) as if God himself did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God, (2 Cor. 5. 20.)
Is not this a strange height of Condescension, That God in Christ should
beseech us, and that Christ by his Ambassadors should pray unto us for a
Pacification? That being neglected, He should court us? That being repulsed, He
should covet us? That being buffetted, He should bless? and most unworthily
affronted, he should entreat? Nay consider what it is, which he entreats to
have granted. Not that He may be invited to be reconciled to us, but that we
will be so gracious as to be reconciled to Him; implying God to be already
reconciled unto us. And so his Entreaty is only This, That having done him a
thousand wrongs, we will at last be friends with him. That how many Injuries
soever we have offered him for the time passed, we will not aggravate them All,
by our Contempt of that Pardon he offers to us. That having offended against
his Justice, we will not sin-away his Love, and his Mercy too. But that after
the many Breaches which we alone have made wide betwixt Him and Us, we will
finally admit of a Reconcilement. Thus it appears by the Ingredients of which a
perfect Good Master may be composed, that Jesus Christ is a Good Master, and a
Good Master in perfection.

15. Last of all, if to the work which our Lord requires, to wit obedience unto
his Praecepts, we add the wages which he promises, Eternal Life, we must
confess him as good a Master, as his Servants are able to wish, or fancy. Do
but compare him with the Masters of greatest Note amongst the Heathen. Diog.
Laert. in vita Epic.
Epicurus taught his Scholars, that the greatest Happiness they could aim at
was the Pleasure of the Mind. Aristippus and Eudoxus were Aristot. Eth. l. 10.
cap. 2.
for that of the Body. Diodorus went no higher, than to the Absence only of
Pain. Herillus thought rather the Perfection of knowledge. The Stoics gave the
preference to an Unpassionateness of Life. The Peripateticks made it of three
Ingredients. The first whereof was Virtue, which they call the (...), or great
Essential; The second Ingredient was a Compound, comprehending all the Goods
both of Body and Fortune, and those as the (...), not as Parts, but
Subservients to the Foelicity of Man; The third was Pleasure, and that they
were pleased to express by the (...), not as a part, or a subservient, but a
mere Consequent of Bliss. Thus the great Masters amongst the Heathen did direct
their Disciples by the Dimm light of Nature. But Christ alone is the good
Master, who has both taught us as his Disciples, and also promised us as his
Servants, Eternal Life.

16. And the least Measure of such Wages, as Life added to Eternity, and to
Both the Fruition of God himself, is transcendently greater than the greatest
measure of our Obedience. A Christian's Vails are more worth, than his Service
comes to. The very Earnest our Master gives, (if we compare it with our work,)
might very well suffice for our Wages too. But his final Reward (which is
expressed by Life Eternal) does amount to so huge and unconceivable a value,
that the Quanto diutius considero, tanto mihi Res videtur obscurior. Simonid.
ad Hieron.
Case stands with us, as heretofore with Simonides, when demanded by Hiero the
Definition of God; the longer we study to sum it up, the more we shall find it
unconceivable. And what we cannot conceive, we can much less utter. It is not
only the greatest that we can have, nor only the greatest that can be had, but
even the greatest we are able to ask or think, the greatest we are able to wish
or fancy. The very Hope and Expectation of Life Eternal, although at many years
distance, and wrapped up in Futurity, does carry with it the greatest Pleasure of
which we are capable whilst we are here; not to mention those Pleasures which
it will ravish us with hereafter. For That is sure the greatest wages, and
carries with it the greatest pleasure, whose very hope and expectation is apt
to soften the hardest work, and able to alleviate the heaviest Burden. But the
hope and expectation of Life Eternal, and the Glory to be revealed, is apt to
soften the hardest work, and to lighten the heaviest Burden; therefore That is
the greatest wages, and carries with it the greatest Pleasure. The Assumption
is to be proved by an Induction of particulars: I mean the admirable
Experiments which have been made in this life by Saints and Martyrs; whose very
Torments have been sweetened and made delicious, by nothing else but the
Foretasts of Life Eternal. Were Life Eternal (...). Callimachus in Hymn. ad
Apoll.
nothing better, than a kind of perpetual Youth, an unmovable station upon the
point of One-and-twenty, we may guess how much admired, and how much coveted it
would be, by the Care which People take of their Embonpoint. How many use their
Third of Life, as prudent Penelope did her Web? when being wound up to a Real
Age, they unravel it again to a seeming Youth? So very willing they are to
live, and yet so very unwilling to outlive Beauty, that they will needs court
Eternity by a Nursery of Colors. So that when fifty or threescore years begin
to be legible in their Faces, ( characters there dug by the Plough of Time,) A
Dash or two of their Pencil will strike off Twenty. And therefore the years
which they have lived, though scarce the Childhood of Life Eternal, may yet
assist them in its Discovery as far as a little imperfect Guess. They who fain
would never dye, can tell me best how sweet is life; And They who fain would
never be old, can best inform me of Eternity.

17. But I must not here make a Panegyric of Life Eternal; as well because I
insisted on it in considering the nature of the young man's Inquiry, as because
I must hasten to make Advantage of what already has been delivered.

Since therefore Christ is so much a Master, as to beget our greatest
Reverence; And yet a Master so full of goodness, as to merit our greatest Love;
a Master, to challenge our obedience; and a Good Master, to invite it; A
Master, to keep us from Contempt; and yet withal a good Master, whereby to give
us Familiarity; A Master, to set us on work; and a good Master, to reward us;
Since (I say) he is so good, as to be willing to Allure, what he is so much a
Master, as to be able to compel; Since our Employment is not only very
proportionable to our strength, but very conformable to our Nature; not only
tending to our Interest, but even agreeable to our Desires; Since our Master is
Goodness it self, our Service Freedom as well as Pleasure, and our Wages
Eternal Life; Let us not serve him only for fear, but let us fear him only for
love. Rather as a Good Master, who will Reward, than as a Master, who can
punish. Let not our obedience be merely servile, and only paid to the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, (Heb. 7. 16.) But filial rather and ingenuous, to the Law
that is Spiritual, (Romans 7. 14.) Job was objected against by Satan, that he
served God for something; and that the source of his obedience was but a
mercenary Devotion. Now though we cannot but have something for serving God,
yet (that Hell may not upbraid us) let us serve him for nothing more, than the
honor and happiness to serve him. Shall we serve our Good Master from the same
base Principle, from which the very worst Servants will serve an ill one? For
shame let us not serve him, as vanquished People do serve their Tyrants, or as
some poor Indians do serve the Devil, only to the end that he may not hurt us.
Will he accept of our Service (think ye) when we do make him our shelter, but
not our choice? a kind of (...), or a mere Plank after a shipwreck? He is
little beholding to such a Proselyte, whom only his Enemy has made his Friend;
and may rather thank Hell for our Obedience, when we come to him but in a
Fright. I would not (with the Woman who was met in the way by Bishop Ivo, with
a Firebrand in one hand, and a Bucket of Water in the other,) either burn up
the Joys of Heaven, or extinguish the Fire of Hell; But so much I am of that
Woman's mind, that (if I might have mine own wish,) I would have all Christian
Servants to love This Master a great deal more than the Ioys of Heaven; And I
would have them fear his Anger a great deal more than the Pains of Hell. If He
did empty himself of Glory, and as it were go out of Himself to give us Grace;
How should we empty our selves of all that is dear unto us, and even go out of
our selves too, by Self-denials, to advance his Glory? O let us therefore be
such generous and disinteressed Servants, as to vye Obedience with his
Commands. In an humble kind of Contention, let us endeavor to outdo, and (if
occasion ever serve) to outsuffer what he commands us. Since Heaven it self is
the Merchandise, which (in the Matthew. 13. 46.
Parable of our Lord) must be sold for sweat; let us more out-bid the
Pharisees, than the Pharisees did the Law. And that our Master may say to us in
his Kingdom of Glory, [ Well done good Servants,] Say we to him in this of
Grace, [ Good Master what shall we do?] Let us not admit of Ignobler Motives
for the present exciting us to our Duties, than the bare doing them in this
world, and an Inheritance in the next. A good life here, and hereafter an
Eternal. Now the Earnest of our Service, and then the Wages. The very Earnest
of such an Estimate, but so inestimable the Wages, that it is not so fit to be
described, as to be pressed and urged home on a Congregation. For the Knowledge
of This (unlike That of other things) dwells in the Matthew. 13. 15.
Heart, not in the Head. The way to understand the Joys of Heaven (with St.
Paul,) is (with St. Paul) to be rapt up thither. Rapt up in zeal, and
affection, not in fancy, and speculation. In the yerning of the Bowels, not in
the working of the Brains. Let the Scepticks therefore dispute themselves to
Heaven, whilst we in silence are walking thither. Let the Schoolmen take it in
subtilty, and we in deed. Let the Pelagians or Socinians try to purchase
Eternal Life, whilst we inherit it. Let the Sanguin Fiduciary possess himself
of Bliss, whilst we contend for it. Let the Philosopher enjoy it as well as he
can in his Contemplations; we shall best contemplate it in our Enjoyment.

Which God of his Mercy vouchsafe unto us, even for the Glory of his Name, and
for the worthiness of his Son, our great and good Master the Lord Jesus Christ.
To whom with the Father in the Unity of the Spirit, be Honor and Glory both
now and for ever.

THE INHERITANCE OF ETERNITY IS God's Free Gift After all our WORKING.
MARK X. 17. Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inherit Aeternal Life?
A Quaestion set forth in such happy Terms, that I conceive it will be easy to
resolve it out of it self. For the way to inherit Eternal Life, is to receive
and own Christ both as a Master, and as a Good Master; to obey him as the
first, and to love him as the second, and to revere him as both together; and
when All is done, still to ask what we shall do; to believe he will reward us
according to our Doings, and not only so, but above them too.

The Compellation having been handled in both its parts, I must proceed unto
the matter and the manner of the Quaestion, together with the manner of
attaining to the End, or the final Cause. The matter is implied in the (...),
and the manner in the (...). From both together there arises this Doctrinal
Proposition.

That in duty and gratitude to such a Good Master as This, we must account our
selves obliged to two Returns. To wit a Readiness of obedience, and a
Resignedness of Wills. First a Readiness of Obedience, even because he is our
Master: Next a Resignedness of Wills, because he is a Good Master. Our
Christian Tribute to both together, [to wit his Authority, and his Goodness,]
must be at once Universal and Unconstrained. (...); what shall I do? that is to
say, I will do any thing. I am ready to perform whatsoever thou shall appoint,
be it never so harsh, or be it never so difficult. For Life Eternal is such a
prize, as for which I can never do enough. I say not therefore what I will do,
but humbly ask what I shall. This I take to be the Scope of the (...); and by
consequence the ground of my Proposition.

When I contemplate on God Almighty as the (...), (to use the phrase of the
Pythagoreans,) both as a God, and as a Creator, In his Essence, and in his
Attributes, in the Unity of his Nature, and in the Variety of his Works; I know
not whether I should conclude him to be more simple in Himself, or else more
different in his Dispensations. And though this Difference does appear in the
whole economy of the Creation; yet is it no where so conspicuous, as it is
betwixt us, and our Fellow Creatures. Which if we have leisure but to compare,
we shall find in other Creatures so many Traces of God's Divinity, But withal
in our selves such great Remarques of his special Favor, that though to Them
he is a just and a gracious God, I may say that to us he is a Partial one. They
acknowledge him a Sovereign; But we have the honor to call him Father. They
are the objects of his Almightiness, But we of his Indulgence and tender Love.
Them indeed he created, But us he created in a Similitude with Himself. Them he
has confined unto the Dictates of an Appetite; (...). Philo (...). p. 234.
But has turned us loose unto the Liberty of a Will. Them he condemned to be
infallible, for want of reason; To us he gives the use of reason, and so the
privilege to be led into Truth or Error. As they are never unfaithful, so are
they ever pressed Soldiers in God's great Host. But we have the honor to be
capable either of Blame or Commendation, by our being either Rebels, or
Volunteers. And according to this Diversity of Endowments in the Creature, It Is
very just he should expect a like Diversity of Obedience. From Them a fatal
obedience; from us a filial. They are to suffer their Maker's will; But we
properly to do it. They to serve him out of necessity; But we from choice. They
are to submit to his Good Pleasure; But we to love it. Or (to sum up the
Difference with greater praeciseness as well as brevity,) The other Creatures
may be said not to resist his Commands; But we only to obey them. Obedience
properly being That, which proceeds from Option; And That the best of our
obedience, which is the Production of our Love.

But see how much the Scene is shifted, since first we entered upon the
Theater; and how oppositely we act to God's Great Design. For the Ox knows
his owner, and the Ass his Master's Isa. 1.
Crib; God's other Creatures will, but only his People will not obey him. The
Sun was not too high, nor the Matthew. 8. 27.
Sea too unruly; Hell was not too guilty, nor the Grave too strong. For we know
the very Devils obeyed our Savior in his Life; and Death it self at his
Resurrection. But as if the partiality of God to man, by which he made him as
the youngest, so the dearest Child of his Creation, had only given us that sad
and accursed Privilege, of becoming more obliged, and by consequence more
miserable, because more ungrateful than all the Rest; we, the (...) in St.
Chrysostom, even the Pride of his Workmanship, and the prime Business of his
Providence, are the sole Remnant of his Creation, who turn the Instances of his
Goodness into Unnatural Instruments of his Dishonor. The only sublunary
Creatures that Understand his will, And yet (the Devils alone excepted) the
only Creatures that dispute it.

Some there are who will obey him by all means possible, But with a tacit
Proviso that he will first obey Them. So far forth as they are pleased with the
condition of his Service, they are ready to serve him in what he pleases. If
Christ but once say the word, they will quickly follow him to Mount Tabor, or
Matthew. 17: 4.
(if need be) they will go before him. But when he goes to Mount Calvary, they
will be sure to stay behind; or they will follow him then too, that is, they
will not come near him. Move after him they will, but will think it good
manners, to do it at a great and an humble Distance, like the Catharists of
old, who of late are called Puritans, (the more Unclean in God's Eyes for being
so righteous in their own,) on a praesumption they shall dye the Death of the
righteous, they do not much scruple what life they lead. The Promises of their
good Master they swallow down very glibly; But his Praecepts they cannot
digest. They had rather idly gape after Life Eternal, than by a rigid obedience
take the pains to go toward it. Or if perhaps they are content with the
working out of their Salvation, yet their Assurance of their Election will not
suffer them to do it with fear and trembling. They so abominate the Popery of
coming thither ex condigno, and so hate the Pelagianism of seeming worthy, as
not to take any care of becoming fit. It Is most agreeable with the privilege
which they pretend to, to be with Christ at his Ascension; from whence they
leave him all his life to converse with Publicans; and look upon him at his
Death as fit to be companied only by Thieves.

There are others of a less Sanguin, and so a less credulous constitution; who
do not throw themselves so wholly, or rather so supinely, into the Arms of
Christ Jesus, or so expect to be carried upon his shoulders, as not to make use
of their Eyes and Feet too. Only the worst of it is this, that having
cheerfully followed him through all the passages of his Life, they at last
forsake him at his Cross; And if they betray him not, like Judas, yet like
Peter, they will not own him. Keep him company they will to the Brink of
Happiness, But there affrightedly start back like their Brother Demas. Or else
like Agrippa, (...), they are within a very little of being good Christians; as
having made a fair shift to pass the narrowness of the way, but only sticking
as 'twere at last at the straitness of the Gate. As if when after a tedious
march they are advanced as far as the Door of Heaven, they would not be at the
pains to enter in. I cannot exemplify what I say with so much pertinence to my
Text, as by the young and wealthy Ruler concerned in it. It appears by the
Question which here he makes, and by his Care of the Commandments, (v. 20.) and
by our Savior's Love to him, (v. 21.) that he was one of some growth in his
Master's School. But withal it appears, (v. 22.) that he shrunk at the thought
of an harder Lesson. He had observed the Commandments even from his youth. That
was well, but not enough. For one thing he lacked, (as his own Good Master told
him,) even the selling all he had, and giving it to the Poor. But as if he had
forgotten the generosity of his Quaestion, [(...); what shall I do?] whereby he
evidently implied he would stick at nothing, which by this his Good Master
should be enjoined; he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved. And the
reason of it was, He had great Possessions, (v. 23.)

It seems a Treasure here on Earth is so commonly inconsistent with one in
Heaven, that we must part with the one, to enjoy the other. And agreably our
Savior Matthew. 13. 46. compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Pearl of great
price, which a Merchant sold all he had to purchase. Great Possessions do so
incumber a spiritual Traveller in his Journey, that the Door of Heaven to a
Dives, is (in the Judgment of our Master who cannot err) as the Eye of a Needle
to a Camel, (v. 25.) which it is impossible he should enter, or be able to pass
through, unless by crumbling his Possessions into as many small parts, as there
are objects of his Charity to assist him in the Division. I do not say as many
parts, as there are poor men and women who crave for Alms, (the parts would
then be too little, and instead of entering the Needles Eye, would fall beside
it,) But I say as many parts, as there are objects of his Charity; which all
are not, who are very poor, because their Poverty may be their Sin, (by an
obvious Metonymy of the efficient for the effect,) unjustly gotten, for want of
labor; and for the same want of labor, unjustly kept. Else our Laws had been
unchristian in providing a Bridewell and a Beadle for such as beg; nay St. Paul
had been cruel in condemning some of them to dye by Famine. For he commanded his
Thessalonians, that if any would not labor, they should not eat, (2 Thessalonians. 3.
10.) But (to resume my Discourse, where this Parenthesis made me leave it;) we
see the Camel, or the Rich man, may not only be enabled to pass the Eye of a
Needle, (that is to say, the Door of Heaven,) by giving the Bunch upon his
Back, that is, his Riches to the Poor; but he may do it and still be rich; nor
can be rich in good works, until it is done. For though by having great
Possessions he is in a capacity of being rich, yet truly His they cannot be,
until he has mercifully employed them.

Quas dederis solas semper habebis Opes. But however this is pertinent to as
much of my Text as I am upon, if the wealthy man's Quaestion be duly compared
with the following Answers; yet it seems it is so sublime and so untrodden a
piece of our Lord's Philosophy, so very heterodox and strange to the
conceptions of Carnality, that it either transcendeth our Capacities, or is too
opposite to our Desires. Such incompatible Masters are God and Mammon, that as
Conscience by a Proverb is the poor man's Virtue, so Life Eternal by a Promise
is the poor man's Reward. For though to have life wedded to Eternity, is a
Match we like well; yet unwilling we are often to pay the Dowry. We are
commonly more inclinable to part with our Sweat, than with our Money; and are
readier, of the two, to earn Heaven, than to buy it. And yet this Earning of it
also, as it does too much exceed our strength, so it too much crosses our
Inclinations. We are contented to serve our Master, but so as it may stand with
our ease, and leisure. Like that Disciple in St. Matthew, who was willing and
Matthew. 8. 21.
ready to follow Christ, but so as in the first place to bury his Father. Or
like them that were bid to the wedding Feast, if we have nothing else to do, we
are forsooth his humble Servants. But if we have either a Field to prove, a
yoke of Oxen to try, or a Wife to marry, we receive and return his Invitation,
with an [ I pray you have me excus'd] If he invites us to the Miracle of Loaves
and Fishes, then indeed the Case is altered, and we shall flock to him by
thousands. But if we are bid to sup with him upon a Mess of sour Herbs, Matthew.
14. 21.
(as at the Passover,) or to partake of an Oleo made of Vinegar and Gall; (as
at the time of his Crucifixion,) then we affect being abstemious, we lay our
hand upon our mouth, and thank him as much as if we did. That is to say, in all
such Cases, either we are not at leisure, or else we do not like our Fare.

Whereas when the Master is so transcendently Good, that for the work of a few
Minutes he gives an Eternity of Reward, we should prevent his Commands with a
(...), what kind of Service will thou command us? we should afford him (for
shame) as great a Resignedness of Wills, as that Heathen man Cleanthes gave to
his Jupiter, and his Fate. (...). Since on condition that he saves us, we care
not how; we should invite him to command us, we care not what; and to lead us,
we care not whither. We should give him up our Souls as so many Blanks, or
unwritten Tables, aequally susceptible of all, which our Master shall be
pleased to imprint upon us. For in the Eighteenth Chapter of St. Luke, (v. 17.)
Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, (that is, the Praecepts of the
Gospel,) (...), as a little Child, (that is, as one who is passive, and of a
teachable Disposition, impartially receptive of all impressions, which the
Tenor of the Gospel shall stamp upon him;) (...) says our Savior, Matthew. 26.
42.
he shall in no wise enter therein. And this, no doubt, is the meaning of that
Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Which notes a sufferance (says Tertullian) to which, when we pray,
Sufferentiam notat ad quam nos ipsos admonemus. Tertull.
we excite our selves. But certainly That cannot be all. For we pray in that
Petition, as well for the doing of what he commands, as for the suffering of
what he inflicts. Thy will be done, not only upon us, but by us too. Let it be
done here on Earth, with the same Alacrity as in Heaven; Let it be done by thy
Children, with as much Impartiality as by thy Servants; Let it be done by us
Men, as unconstrainedly as by Angels. If thou will have us to buy Salvation,
let us not choose our own Price. If thou will have us to work it out, let us
not choose our own Task. If thou will have us to do it presently, let us not
choose our own Time. Give us Resignedness of Spirits, and with That, what thou
please. Be thy Injunctions never so hard, or thy Cross never so heavy; be it
the giving up our Livelyhoods, or be it the parting with our Lives, (...), Thy
will be done. It Is true we may pray with our Blessed Savior, Father if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from us. But then we must pray with our Savior
too, Nevertheless not our will, but thy will be done.

I remember Herodian reports of Alexander, Herodian. l. 6. p. 129.
(the Cousin German to Pseud Antonine,) He was so perfectly at the Devotion of
his Mother Mammaea, as to obey her in those things (...), in which he was most
of all displeased. Not disobeying her even in those, in which Disobedience had
been a Duty. And 'twas Pythagoras his Theology, not only (...), in Iamblicus,
but (...) in Hierocles; not only not to repine at God's economy, but with all
gentleness to embrace it. Nor only to observe, and to do his will, even then
when it thwarted theirs; but to accommodate and conform their will to His. I am
sorry I must say, (what yet I must,) that were Pythagoras his Metempsychosis
now to be verified in Himself, and He again to teach Philosophy in these our
days; I know not which were the more probable, either for us to be the better
for his Christian-like Principles, or for Him to be the worse for our
Heathen-Practice. And because Reason, by many Auditors, is more attended to
than Scripture; let me bespeak you in the Person, not so much of a Christian,
as of a Philsopher.

Is there any thing in the World (I do not say more impious, but) more
unpolitick, than for a Lump of Infirmities to enter the Lists with the
Almighty? or for a thing of a Span long to resist Immensity? Our Disobedience
to such a Master will be found aequally ridiculous, whether we hope to thrive
in it by Opposition, or Avoidance. For dare we stand against Him who is
Omnipotent? Or can we fly from Him that is every where? Do we live in fear of
Them that can hurt the Luke 12. 4, 5.
Body? and are we undaunted only at Him who can kill the Soul? Jacob could not
wrestle with him, though he did it for a Blessing, without the Disjoynting of
his Thigh; and shall we struggle for a Curse, even at the price Non tutum est
in illum scribere qui potest proscribere. Auson.
of a Damnation? If Ausonius could say of the Roman Emperor, That 'twas not
safe scribbling against a Man, who had the Power Non recte suadetis, Familiares,
qui non patimini me illum doctiorem omnibus esse credere, qui 30. habet
Legiones. Spartian. in vita Hadr. p. 14.
to proscribe; And Phavorinus of Hadrian, That 'twas not good to dispute with
such a Person, as had the command of thirty Legions; Then with a greater force
of reason, Is it not Wisdom, as well as Duty, to yield obedience unto a Master,
who is infinitely Great as well as Good, and has the power to compel, as well
as the sweetness to invite, and that not only our Obedience, but our Assent
too? We count it prudence in other things, to make a virtue of Necessity. And
being convinced we are unable to prevail against our Master; why do we not
strive to be unwilling, and at least make a virtue of so much weakness? If we
duly contemplate Inferior Nature, we shall find but too much reason even to
aemulate and strive with the things below us. Which yet, in this respect at
least, are so much higher than our selves, by how much the more they are
conformable to the Blessed Will and Pleasure of him that made them. Not only
the Beasts, which have no Understanding, but the Elements, which have no Sense,
do silently preach to the Christian World, at once Obedience, and Self-denial.
For what more contrary to Nature, than for the Earth to give Rain? or what are
the Clouds more unwilling to, than Live. l. 28. p. 678.
they are to rain Earth? And yet Obedience to their Maker is a thing so
natural, as that they obey him against their Nature. What is the Sun more
averse to, than either going back, or standing still? And yet in obedience to
God's Command, He did not only stand still in Gibeon, but withal went back upon
the Dial of Ahaz.

Hereupon it will be useful thus to reason within our selves. Are God's Drudges
so inclinable to his Commands? and shall we his Darlings be so averse? They are
only obliged to their Creator for being made; Our Obligation is far greater, by
our being made men; and greater yet by our being remade. We are not only the
Work, but Non modo Dei opus, sed Dei Flatus. Tertull. de Anima, c. 19.
the Breath of God, says Tertullian. Nay farther yet, whereas he spoke only
for Them, for Us he died. And if they are so thankful for being the work of his
Hands, shall not we be much more, for being the price of his Blood? yes sure.
As it is our privilege, above them, to have a Savior, and a will, so our
obedience must be more, and it must be more willing. It must not only be
Universal, (for so is Theirs,) but also free, and unconstrained. As other
Creatures are obedient, because they cannot resist, so ought we, because we
will not. We must not obey him only in fear, because he is a great Judge; but
because he is a Savior, we must take Pleasure in our Obedience. We ought to
look upon his Praecepts, with as kind eyes as on his Promises; and the
employment of such a Master, should as much encourage us as our pay. We ought
to think the Day lost which is not spent in his Service; and execute his
Precepts with so much readiness, as wishing at least we could prevent them. We
should not only be (...), but (...): not only ready with the Praescriptions,
but Freewill-Offerings of our Obedience. It being a Gallantry of Devotion, and
most worthy of a Christian, to be most of all afraid of offending Him, (not
whom we find a mere Master very inclinable to punish, But) whom we find a good
Master, most apt to pardon.

Let us hasten to him therefore preaching to us from the Mount, and let us give
him our Attention in the spirit of the two Emblemes of the Law and the
Prophets, which had the honor to attend him upon Mount Tabor. Undergoing his
meanest Offices in the humility of a Moses, and with the greatest earnestness
performing them in the zeal of an Elias. Let us render him every Faculty both
of our Souls and of our Bodies; our Mouths to confess him, our Heads to believe
him, our Hands and Feet to serve him, our Wills to be ruled, and our Wits to be
captivated by him, our Hearts to love him, and our Lives to dye for him. All
which, though it is All, is still too little, if we impartially consider the
Disproportion of our Reward, that blessed Parallel drawn out for us by God's
own Compass, Life, and Aeternity. A man (you know) would do any thing whereby
to find Life, though (in our Savior's Oxymoron) it is by losing it, Matthew. 10.
39. And as a man will part with any thing, to save his life; so with life too,
to eternize it. If therefore our Savior does bid us follow him, let us not
venture to choose our way. And if we can but arrive at Heaven, it matters not
much though we go by Hell. For comparing his Goodness with his Mastership, his
Promises with his Precepts, and the Scantling of our Obedience with the
Immenfity of our Reward; we shall find that our work has no proportion with
our wages; but that we may inquire, when all is done, Good Master what shall we
do?

And this does prompt me to proceed to my last Doctrinal Proposition.

That when all is done that can be, we are unprofitable Servants; Our Obedience
is not Luke 17. 10.
the Cause, but the mere Condition of our Reward. And we arrive at Eternal
Life, not by way of Purchase, as we are Servants; but of Inheritance, as we are
Sons. It is not here (...), but only (...), not to deserve, but to inherit
Eternal Life.

As Christianity, like Manhood, has its several steps and degrees of growth;
so the Soul, as well as the Body, does stand in need of Food, and Raiment. And
agreeable to the Complexion of immaterial Beings, she is not only bedeck't, but
sustained with Righteousness. Now as none can inherit Eternal Life, but He that
is born of the Spirit; And as he that is born of the Spirit, must also be
nourished with the Spirit, before he can possibly live an holy, and spiritual
Life; so it is only God the Spirit that gives us Birth, God the Son that gives
us Breeding, and God the Father that gives us the privilege of Adoption. The
Spirit feeds us as his Babes; the Son instructs us as his Disciples; the
Father indows us as his Heirs. It is the Spirit that fits us for our
Inheritance, the Son that gives us a Title to it, And it is especially the
Father who does invest us with the Possession.

But now of all God's External and Temporal Blessings which have any
Resemblance unto his Spiritual, methinks the Manna that fell from Heaven is the
liveliest Emblem of his Grace. Of which though some did gather more, and some
less; yet they that Exodus 16. 17, 18.
gathered most, had nothing over, and they that gathered least, had no lack.
Thus as Manna, like Grace, is the Bread of Heaven; John 6. 31.
so Grace, like Manna, is also measured out by Omers. For even they that have
least of the Grace of God, have enough (if well used) to inherit Heaven; and
even they that have most, have not enough to deserve it.

But still the Parallel goes on. For the reason why the Manna which God sent
down to the People Israel, would not endure above a Exodus 16. 21.
Day, was (says Philo upon the Place) lest considering the Care by which
(...). Philo.
their Manna was preserved, more than the Bounty by which 'twas given, they
might be tempted to applaud, not God's Providence, but their own. Thus if God
had bestowed so full a measure of his Grace, as to have left us altogether
without our Frailties, perhaps our very Innocence might have been our
Temptation. We might have found it an Inconvenience to have been dangerously
Good. Like those once happy, but ever-since unhappy Eadem est Causa nostri
Infortunij, quae omnium, nimia foelicitas. Florus.
Angels, whose very excellency of Nature did prove a kind of Snare to them;
even the purity of their Essence did give occasion to their defilement; Their
very Height and Eminence was that that helped to pull them down; and one reason
of their falling was, that they stood so firmly. For though they were free from
that Lust, which is the Pollution of the Flesh; yet they were liable to
Ambition, which is the Filthiness of the Spirit. As if their Plethory of
Goodness had made them Wantons, or the Unweildiness of their Glory had made
them Proud; 'twas from a likeness to their Creator, that they aspired to an
Equality; and so they were the first of all the Creatures, as well in their
Fall, as their Perfections.

Now adding to this the consideration, that Ingratitude does gather Increase of
Guilt, from a greater abundance of Obligations, (so as the Angels falling from
Heaven, could not fall less than as low as Hell,) we may perhaps find a reason,
for which to congratulate to our selves, that Dimensum or Pittance of God's
free Grace, which has left us our Infirmities as fit Remembrancers to
Humility. That being placed in a condition, rather of Trembling, than of
Security, every Instance of our defect may send us to God for a Supply. God
has given us our Proportion, that we may not grumble, or despair; but not such
a Perfection, as once to Adam and the Angels before their Fall, that we may not
(like Them) be either careless, or presume. So that making a due comparison, of
that faint measure of Goodness which now we possibly may have by the Grace of
God, with that full measure Indignum est ad futurae gloriae Comparationem omne
opus humanum. Salvian.
of Glory which now at least we hope for, we must be fain to acknowledge, when
all is done, that the greatest measure of our obedience is far from deserving
the least of Bliss. For as the Sun appears to us a most glorious Body, and yet
is looked upon by God, as a spot of Ink; so though the Righteousness of men
does seem to men to be truly such, yet compared with our Reward, it is no more
than as filthy Rags. That other promise of our Lord, Never to see or to taste
of Death, had John 8. 52.
been sufficiently above our merits; But to inherit Eternal Life too, though I
cannot affirm it above our wishes, yet sure it is often above our Faith. Had we
no more than we deserved, we should not have so great Blessings as Rain and
Sunshine; and God had still been Just to us, had he made our best wages to be
as negative as our work. For as the best of us all can boast no more, than of
being less guilty than other men; so we can claim no other Reward, than to be
somewat less punished; (that is, to be beaten with fewer stripes.) As the Ox
amongst the Jews being unmuzzl'd upon the Mow (by the special appointment of
God himself,) at once did eat, and tread the Corn, whereby he received his
Reward, at the very same Instant in which he earned it; so the Protection of
such a Sovereign is Reward enough for our Allegiance; and the present
Maintenance of a Servant is the usual Recompense of his labor. Whatsoever God
affords us besides our Being, is to be reckoned supra Computum. Life at least
is our stipend, and Aeternity but our Donative.

Nay if we seriously consider, that we are properly the Authors of all that is
evil in our selves, and nothing more than the Instruments of what is good; that
when we pray very devoutly, it is God that sets our lips a going; and whenever
we give Alms, it is God that mollifies our hearts, and that stretches 1 Cor. 4.
7.
out our hands too; He abundantly requites us for our obedience, by his
enabling us to obey. For that the Goodness of a man's life is (...). Plato in
Menone.
neither infused by Nature, nor acquired by Industry, but a special Benefaction
of God's free Grace, Plato himself, though an Heathen, had yet Discretion
enough to say. Si a Deo confertur Continentiae virtus, Quid gloriaris quasi non
acceperis? Tertull. de Virginibus velandis, c. 13.
Why then do the Hebrew or Roman Pharisees take a pride in the doing of this or
that Duty, or boast the giving of this or that Alms, as if they had any thing
to give, which they themselves had not received? (...). Clemens Romans in Ep. ad
Cor. p. 50.
Why do they glory in their Widowhood, or Single life, when it is only from God
that they have their Continence? or why do they think to merit Heaven by being
Rich in Good works, when even the Goodness of their works does but increase
their obligation? Can they expect to be rewarded for their Acceptance? or think
that ought is due to them, for their having been already so much obliged? If
from the liberty of their Wills they argue the merit of their Obedience, they
must know they do impose a double fallacy on themselves. For neither can the
Wills of men incline to good without Grace, nor is the Liberty of their Wills
any whit less of God's giving, than all the rest. It Is God that makes us, not
only able, but willing too to be obedient; So that the privilege of our choice
does not only not lessen, but greatly heighten our Obligation. And since to
perform our whole Duty, is but to pay our whole Debt, our Lord might legally
have awarded us, not a Recompense, but a Discharge.

Nay let me say a little farther, That had our Master proposed to us neither an
Heaven to encourage, nor an Hell to fright us to our Obedience, it had been yet
Reward sufficient, to have but our Labor for our Pains; And Christ were still
a Good Master, in crowning our Foreheads with their own Sweat; in making it the
Reward of our Christian Race, to enjoy the Satisfaction of having run it. For
the Commandments of God are so extremely for our Interest, and so conformable
to our Reason, that even in keeping them (says the Psalmist) there is great
Reward, (Psalm. 19. 9, 10, 11.) This I endeavored to make appear in the last
days Subject of my Discourse, showing the Goodness of our Master from the Work
about which he employs his Servants; (As I shall also make it appear upon some
other opportunity.) And indeed it is so impossible, that any Arrears of Bliss
and Glory should be due to us in Heaven, for our having been obedient (that is
happy) here on Earth, that (in the Nineteenth Chapter of St. Matthew at the
Nine and twentieth Verse,) Whosoever has forsaken either Father, or Mother, or
Brethren, or Sisters, or Wife, or Children, or Houses, or Lands, for the Name
of Christ and his Gospel; although he shall receive an hundred fold, and that
perhaps in this present World, yet it is only (...), He shall not purchase, but
inherit Eternal Life.

It Is true indeed that our Obedience is the Causa-sine-qua-non, (that is) the
Necessary Condition, which is required by God to our being there; But it
follows not thence that it is the Causa Energetica, the effectual Cause of our
coming thither. For we cannot duly say, A man does walk with his Hands, or eat
with his Ears, because he neither eats nor walks without them. And it is as
illogical to affirm that we can climb Heaven by our Good works, because without
them we fall to Hell. They keep us company indeed, but they do not carry us.
Thus if a Patron gives me a Manor, and only covenants for the payment of some
small Quit-Rent; or else bestows upon me an ample Field, upon condition that
once a year I shall present him with a Turf; I cannot say that that Turf is a
Recompense for the Field, but an acknowledgment of the Favor: Not the paying
him for a Bargain, but the thanking him for a Benevolence. And such is the
infinite Disproportion betwixt the best of our Obedience, and our least Degree
of Bliss, that it is but a Token of our Homage, not an earning of our Reward.
And therefore it is aptly observed by Grotius, that the word in the Hebrew Text
which answers to the (...) Matthew. 6. 1.
in the Sixth Chapter of St. Matthew, (v. 1.) does promiscuously signify both
a Gift, and a Reward. Thus Life Eternal is a Reward, because it is given upon
Condition; but withal it is a Gift, because it is given us.

Say we therefore with holy Job, If we are wicked, woe unto us; And if we are
righteous, we will not lift up our Heads, Job 10. 15. Or let us say rather with
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any
thing as of our selves, but that our sufficiency is of God. That though indeed
we can work out our own Salvation; yet it is upon this account, that God
Himself works in us, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. That though
perhaps we can do all things; yet it is only through Christ that strengthens
us. That neither our Duty, nor our Happiness, are any way Necessary to God;
who, as he needs not the sinful, so neither has he need of the righteous
man. And therefore (to pass out of this Point, at the same Door where I came
in,) let us confess, that at our best, we are but Unprofitable Servants; that
our Obedience is not the Cause, but merely the Condition of our Reward; And
that if ever we arrive at Eternal Life, it will not be by way of Purchase, as
we are Servants; but by way of Inheritance, as we are Sons.

Which God of his Mercy prepare us for, not for our Faith, or for our Works,
but for the worthiness of his Son. To him be Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A SCRIPTURAL PROGNOSTIC OF JESUS CHRIST's Second Advent TO Judge the World.
A PROGNOSTIC OF THE Coming of Christ TO JUDGMENT.
LUKE XVIII. 8. But when The Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith upon the
Earth?
That is to say, He shall not. (According to the Rule of all Grammarians and
Rhetoricians, that an Affirmative Interrogation is the most forcible way of
expressing a flat and positive Denial.)

1. THE Cohaerence 'twixt These, and the words foregoing, is so hard to be
discerned at first appearance, that some have thought there is none at all. For
if God will come speedily to the Avenging of his Elect, (as our Savior says
he will, in the two next Verses before my Text,) who were not Elected without a
Praescience, as well of their Faithfulness, as of their Faith; How can it be
that when He comes, He shall not find Faith upon the Earth? But if we
attentively consider the Text before us, as it stands in relation to all the
Verses going before, and more especially to the first, This Objection will
quickly vanish, and we shall find a good Connection, between the praecedent, and
praesent words. For our Lord having exhorted The Neophyte-Disciples to whom he
spoke, Not to faint in their Prayers, but to pray-on with Perseverance, (v. 1.)
excites them to it with an Assurance, that their Prayers shall not be
fruitless. And that their Prayers shall not be fruitless, He convinces them by
an Argument a minori ad majus. This appears by his whole Parable touching the
Widows Importunity, praevailing over the Heart of an hardened Judge. From whence
the Argument is as natural, as it is logical, and convincing. For if the Prayer
of the distressed and importunate Widow returned at last into her Bosom with
good Success, tho from a most corrupt Judge, who had no fear of God, nor regard
of Man, (v. 2.) (...), with how much a greater force of reason shall all the
Prayers of The Faithful receive an acceptable Return, from the Father of
Mercies, and God of all Consolation, who is (not only no unjust or obdurate
Judge, but) (...), The Rewarder by way of Eminence of them that diligently seek
Hebr. 11. 6.
him, either sooner, or later, as he sees fit? Yes the time is now coming, when
They shall be freed from their Afflictions, and when the Vengeance due from God
shall speedily fall on the Authors of them. To which He adds by way of
complaint, and by a Compassionate Erotesis, or Expostulation, (cohaering with
what he said before, by a Conjunction Adversative,) that when He shall come in
the later Days to be an Avenger of his Elect, The Apostasy will be so general,
He will find but Few of them. Of the many who are Called, He will find but few
Chosen. Amongst a Multitude of Flatterers, he will find but few Friends. In a
world of Praetenders, He will find but Few Faithful; and with very much
Profession, very little True Faith; They alone being Elect, who persevere unto
the End in The Faith of Christ; and whose Faith is efficacious, as well as
sufficient to make them Faithful.

2. We see The Cohaerence of the Text, which will help us not to err in the
Meaning of it. For in that our Lord asks, When the Son of Man comes, shall He
find Faith upon the Earth? It is as if he should have said in plain and
peremptory Terms, That at his second Coming from Heaven to judge the
Inhabitants of the Earth, He shall not find Many Christians, who will pray with
that Faith, which alone can enable them to pray without ceasing, and not to
faint. When He shall come to save Believers, He will find but few such in the
Gospel-sense. Not none simpliciter, but none secundum quid. Comparatively none,
or none to speak of. The greatest part of men will perish, even for want of
That Faith, whereby men's Prayers become effectual. It Is not through any defect
of Goodness, and longanimity in God, that so few will be safe in the Day of
Judgment; But through a miserable defect of Christian Faithfulness, and Faith,
The great Condition of the Covenant, which God in Christ (the only true
Shechinah) was pleased to make with the Sons of Men. Historical Faith there is
in many, such as is common to men with Devils, who are said by St. James, to
believe, and tremble. A sturdy Praesumption there is in Many, which they
mistake for the perfection and strength of Faith. A Carnal Security is in Many,
which they take to be the Product and Fruit of Faith. There is in many such a
Carnal and Human Faith, concerning the Being of Heaven and Hell, a Life after
Death, and a Day of Judgment, as that there is such a Place as Constantinople,
or Eutopia; whereof tho This is as fictitious, as That is real, yet by Ignaroes
in Geography they are believed Both alike. Thus in one sense or other, Faith is
as common as Infidelity: a Weed which grows in most men's Gardens. But very few
have That Faith, of which our Lord does here speak; to wit a Faith which is
attended with Hope, and Charity; a Faith coupl'd with Fear to offend our Maker;
a Faith productive of obedience unto That which is called The Romans 3. 27.
Law of Faith; a Faith importing all faithfulness in the discharge of that
Service we owe our Master; a Faith expressed by a submission, first to God
rather than Man, and then to Man for God's sake; lastly a Faith joined with
Patience, Rev. 13. 10.
and Perseverance unto the End in the work of Prayer; to which our Savior had
exhorted in the first Verse of This Chapter, and which indeed is the Scope of
this whole Paragraph.

3. Thus we have clearly a Praediction, that the last Times will be the worst;
or that the World, toward its End, will be most dissolute, and debauched; that
'twill not be only an Iron-age, but that the Iron will be corrupted with Rust
and Canker. This is the Doctrine of the Text, and this must be divided into two
distinct Branches, as the word Faith may here be taken in two distinct
Considerations. For in which sense soever we understand the word Faith in the
Text before us, whether for a firm Adhaerence unto the Truth of Christ's Gospel
in all its Doctrines; or for a faithful punctuality in All Commerce and
Transaction 'twixt Man and Man; whether in That as the Cause of This, or in
This as the Fruit of That; (for it is not pertinent now to mention all the other
acceptions of Faith in Scripture,) we shall have reason to suspect, The World
is drawing toward its End, in that the Praediction of our Savior is drawing
so near its Completion. Before I come to prove or apply the Doctrine, it will
perhaps be worth while, to take a view of the Description of the last and worst
Days, as St. Peter and St. Paul have drawn it up for us in their Epistles: the
one in Gross, and the other in the Retail. First St. Peter tells us in general,
There shall come in 2 Pet. 3. 3.
the last days Scoffers, walking after their own own Lusts. St. Paul acquaints
us in particular, 2 Timothy 3.
what the several Lusts are: This know also (says he to Timothy,) that in the
last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be Lovers of their own
selves; covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
unthankful, unholy; without natural affection, truce breakers, make-bates,
(otherwise called false Accusers,) incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good; Traitors, heady, highminded, Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of
God; having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. From These
(says He) turn away. And presently after he gives his Reason. For of this sort
are they who creep into Houses, and lead captive silly women laden with Sins,
and led away with diverse lusts; Ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth. After this they are compared to Iannes and Iambres
withstanding Moses, men of corrupt minds, or men of no (...).
judgment, and Reprobate concerning the Faith, (2 Timothy 3. from the first verse
unto the ninth.) This is St. Paul's Exact Description of wicked Doers in the
last Days, and that in the Bosom Non est credendum Ecclesiam aliquam in hoc
Seculo incorruptam, sed fore potius magnum perditissimorum proventum, in ipso
etiam Ecclesiae sinu, qui tamen summam pietatem prae se ferent. Beza in locum.
of The Church too, as learned Beza expressly words it. Now whether the last
Days refer to the Destruction of Jerusalem, or to the End of the World, or have
an Aspect upon Both, (which I conceive to be the Best of the Three Opinions,)
we cannot but say it suits well (a great deal too well,) with the Days we live
in. For

4. If we consider the Faith of Christ in the first general sense I lately
mentioned, How is it totally rejected, or most wretchedly depraved, by the
Mahomedans in the Eastern, and by the Multitude of Fanatics, in the Western
parts of the World? what with Heathens, and Jews, arrant Atheists, and empty
Theists, modern Arrians or Socinians, what with Dogmatists, and Scepticks, and
the more brutish Acatalepticks, and damnable Hypocrites in Religion, who (if it
is possible) may be thought worse than the worst of These; How few in
Christendom are Christians, or more than Professors of Christianity? And even
of Professors how many are there, who in their words do own Christ, whilst in
their works they quite deny him? like Those concerning whom St. Paul says to
Titus, Tit. 1. 16.
They are Abominable, Disobedient, and to every good work Reprobate. Do not the
Turks use our Savior with much more reverence and respect, tho they believe
him but a mere Prophet, than many Thousands of Verbal Christians who do profess
him to be a God? The Turks chastize their Christian Slaves, whenever their
Anger or Impatience moves them to swear, or to blaspheme. A Turkish Sultan
could afford Curopalates apud Baronium ad An. Chapter 1071.
a good Admonition to a Pope, and a Christian Emperor, that Jesus Christ had
commanded them to put up Injuries and Affronts, but not to offer, or to revenge
them. How like an Heathen did Coelij August. Curionis Hist. Saracen. l. 1. p.
62, 63, 64. lib. 2. p. 136, 137. l. 2. p. 150.
Justinian break his Contract with the Mahomedans? and how sadly did they make
an Example of him? How did Nicephorus do the like with the Turkish Aaron? and
how was he made a like Example? A whole victorious Christian Army, dead in
Drunkenness and Sleep, was so cut off by the Saracens during the Reign of
Michael Ducas, that only a man was left alive to carry home Tidings of that
Calamity. The Christian Emperor Diogenes found as much Faithfulness and
Humanity from the most admirable Axan, (a Turkish Sultan and an L. 3. p. 202,
203 confer Spondanum ad A. D. 1071.
Enemy,) who took him Prisoner, as he found Falsness, and Barbarity from his
own Christian Subjects at his Enlargement. Lord! the wonderful difference
between these Two! His Turkish Enemy saved his life, his Christian Subjects
took it away. And the most Wolf. Dreschs. de rebus Turcicis A. D. 1444.
Scandalous * Violation of Christian Faith with the Mahomedans, to which the
impious Pope Eugenius had most unchristianly exhorted the King of Poland, cost
Ladislaus the signal loss of more than Thirty thousand Soldiers, whom their
good Father of the Papacy may well be esteemed to have slain. To deal
impartially with our selves, as well as honestly with our Enemies, and
religiously with our Savior, (whose Praediction in my Text I am now justifying
and proving;) what Encouragement have the Turks to join themselves with the
Christians, whilst they observe so many Christians wearing Religion as a Cloak?
a Cloak to cover Irreligion? a Cloak of Maliciousness and Hypocrisy, to be put
off and on as occasion serves? a Cloak for Knavery, and Sedition, and Violation
of Oaths? What Invitations or Inducements have the Worshippers of Mahomed to be
converted to Christianity, whilst for one Drunkard in Turkey, They see there are
Multitudes in Christendom? or whilst they fear, by turning Christians, they
shall be under the Persecution of Fellow Christians? whereas continuing to be
Turks, the Christians can do them but little Hurt? or whilst they find
Christian Princes buying Peace of the Great Turk, that they may break it with
one another; or whilst they hear that Prosperity is avowed by many Christians,
to be a Mark of the True Religion? or whilst they read that a most gracious and
religious Christian King, Charles the First of Great Britain, was cruelly
killed in cold Blood by his Christian Subjects, and by the best sort of
Christians (as some esteem them, at least as They esteem Themselves,)
Dissenting Protestants, and Reformers, Refiners of The Reformation, and even
Menders of the Magnificat? Now what says The Mahomedan, within himself, and to
others on this occasion? If such as These are the Characters whereby Christians
are to be known, and Christians of the purer sort too, Christians tenderer in
Conscience than others are, Christians scrupling at a Surplice, or Cross in
Baptism, sit Anima mea cum paganis, (The Turkish Musulman will say,) Let my
Soul be with Theirs, who never once heard of the Christian Creed. O my Soul,
(says the Infidel,) come not Thou into their Secret; to their Assembly, mine
Honor, be not Thou united. For in their Anger they slew a Man; and in their
self-will they dug down a strong Wall; (Him who was to His People for Walls
and Bulwarks.) Cursed be their Anger, Genesis 49. 6, 7.
for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel. Such is the Infidel's
Indignation, tho expressed in the words of a most Faithful dying Jacob,
concerning two of his own Genesis 49. 6, 7.
Sons. Unto which may be added That other Prophecy of the same Jacob, touching
the same combining Sons, as Sons of Violence and Bloodshed, (that sooner, or
later,) God will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

5. But let us consider whether The Jews have greater encouragement than The
Turks, to unite with Those Christians in point of Faith, who hold that None is
to be kept with their Fellow Christians, if (forsooth) they are not fully of
their Persuasion, and for That reason only are called Heretics. The Italian
Jews at this day do hate Adultery to the Death; whilst they observe Italian
Christians do hardly account it a greater Crime, than to eat Flesh upon a
Friday. The Jews are so much at unity within themselves, that (as covetous as
they are, and how much soever scattered abroad,) they have a kind of Community
of Goods and Fortunes, in that they leave not their Poor ones without Relief,
nor their Captives without a Ransom. Whereas the Christians, (they observe,)
and as well Protestants, as Papists, are full of Enmity, and Strife, and
perhaps of somewhat more than Vatinian Hatreds, from whence arise their
Departures and Separations from one another. They will not meet to serve God
under one and the same Roof with their Christian Brethren, for fear they should
obey Man, and the Laws in force. Now the Jews cannot believe The Spirit of
Truth is in our Dwellings, because He is also The Spirit of Unity; and They
conceive we could not be liable to such Dissentions and Divisions as are
amongst us, had we The unity of Truth in our Fundamentals. How many Fractions
of Religion have been observed to be in Poland? How many in England, and in
Holland, and in other Christian Countries, it is hard to say. I will say a
strange thing, no whit stranger than it is true. There is not a Christian in
all the World, who is not an Haeretick, or a Schismatic, in the account of
other Christians, perhaps no better than Himself. How full are all Parties of
hot Disputes, whereof the End commonly is rather Victory, than Truth? And what
a Disgrace must it needs be to the Christian Name, that in all the bitter
Contests between the Jesuits, and the Iansenists, the Dominicans, and the
Franciscans, the Gallican Church, and the Church of Rome, the Popish Churches,
and the Reformed, the Regular Protestants, and the Irregular, the Prote stants
by and for, and Those against the Law established, the Constant Protestants,
and the Protestants given to change, the Remonstrants, and Antiremonstrants,
the Sub, and Supralapsarians, and many other opposite Parties, (too many to be
now reckoned,) a greater Care is commonly taken to keep up the Credit of a
Syllogism, or Reputation of a Side, than the Unity and Peace of The Church of
God? If an Erasmus, or a Modrerius, if a Melancthon, or a Wicelius, if a
Cassander, or a Thuanus, a Spalatensis, or a Grotius, does but endeavor to
make up Breaches, or persuade men to meet in the Middle way, (such as is the
way of the Church of England, or That of the Augustan Confession,) how is he
hanged, drawn, and quartered by the Implacable Professors of both Extremes? as
if the Unity of Christians, and the Peace of The Church, were to be, of all
Things, the most avoided; or, if not to be avoided, at least despaired of, as
the most vain and the most fruitless, (if not the most odious) of any project
in the World. So that if there was Truth, as well as sharpness, (which God
forbid) in what was said by the Spanish Friar, that few Sovereign Princes shall
go to Hell, because in All they are but few; it may perhaps be said as truly in
This case also, that few True Christians shall go to Heaven, because True
Christians (comparatively speaking) are very few.

6. There are Multitudes indeed who are called Christians; and so are Those of
The Marrani, Arabians and Moors in the South of Spain, a kind of Baptized
Jews, and circumcised Christians, Men as bad as the ancient Gnostics, of one
Religion in their Mouths, and of another in their Hearts; or like that far more
ancient People, the People of Sepharvaim, who feared the Lord, and served their
own Gods. If not Both at once, yet at least Both by Turns. It being the common
Custom and Policy of the very worst men, to be Professors of the Religion the
most in fashion, the easiest, and cheapest, most for their Secular Ends and
Interests, and where their wickednesses may pass with the greatest freedom. But
our Savior in the Text which is now before us, did only speak of a Divine, and
a Saving Faith, which is peculiar to unfeigned and real Christians; not at all
of That Human or Historical Faith, which is common to every titular or nominal
Christian, or hypocritical Professor of Christ's Religion. So that the meaning
of the Text does seem to be evidently This: [When the Son of Man comes to be
The Judge of the Quick and Dead, shall He find Faith, shall He find Charity,
shall He find Justice upon the Earth?] For Saving Faith infers Charity, and
Charity Justice. Where Justice is wanting, there can be no Christian Charity;
and where there is not such Charity, there can be no Christian Faith. Now what
Corner is there in Christendom, which does not live out of Charity with one
sort or other of Christian People? and commonly the most with their nearest
Neighbors, whom Christians should love as they do Themselves? How universally
do the Italians despise the Germans, if not abhor them? and again how do the
Germans pay them back with Detestation? How do the Little States of Italy
malign the four Great ones? and how do they all detest the Protestants who are
of Piemont, and Saluzzo? What Disaffections are there in Swisserland, between
the Wealthy sort of Protestants, and Warlike Papists? Those for France against
Spain, and These for Spain against France? and what Antipodes unto each other
are these Next Neighbors? parted more by their Animosities, than by their
Pyrenaean Hills? If we look but as far back, as the last Civil Wars of France,
what mutual Hatreds may we observe betwixt the Hugonots, and the Leaguers? even
as great as Those in Spain between the Castilians, and the Portugais; or as
great as Those in Italy, 'twixt Guelphs, and Gibelines; or the Bianchi, and the
Neri. How do the Lutherans hate the Papalins? and the Papalins Them? How do
they Both hate the Calvinists? and the Calvinists Both? and what a Pique have
All Three, at the most sober and the most moderate of All the Protestants upon
Earth in The Church of England? Even the Great House of Austria is hardly in
charity with it self. For how often have the Spaniards diverted the Turks upon
the Emperor? and to shift clear Themselves, how have they bribed the Bashaes,
to put their Master upon Germany? How many Churches are there in Christendom,
whereof each has its different Government, its different Ceremonies and Rites,
its different Method or Manner of Public Worship, its different Opinions from
all the rest? And tho their Differences are innocent when about things
Indifferent, yet what reciprocal Disaffections are wont to arise from That
Variety? What wants of Charity there have been, between the principal
Christians of Note, (the most considerable I mean, both for Power, and Number,
if not for Name too,) we may judge but too easily, by Inquisitions upon one
hand, and by Rebellions upon another, by the Massacres, and Libels, and
Conspiracies upon Both. And that the stronger Parts of Christendom have not yet
swallowed up the weaker, They are beholden to the Great Turk, (next and
immediately under God) for having found them other Employment.

7. Now such as is the Cause, a want of Faith in the first sense, such is also
The Effect, a want of Faith in the second. For, besides the wants of Charity,
whereby I have proved the wants of Faith, there are as notorious wants of
Justice, whereby to demonstrate the wants of Both. Men are so generally
deceitful, in all their Promises, and Contracts, in their Alliances, and
Leagues, in their Covenants, and Engagements, in Matters of Traffic, and
Commerce, and as well between Public, as Private Parties; Obligations first
meant as a Restraint unto the Guilty, are so turned into a Gin to ensnare the
Innocent; and They who have dispensed with other men's Oaths, have so taught
them by That Example to dispense easily with their own, that if the Jews are
ask't the Reason why the Mahomedans are permitted by God Almighty to prevail
against Christendom, for more than a Thousand years together without Control,
and to boast of their Prosperity as a notable mark of the True Religion (an
Argument ad homines, I mean to the Romanists and the Fanatics, not easily to
be Answered) They will ascribe it to the Blasphemies, Execrations, and
Violations of Oaths, (Those of Allegiance more especially,) which have
abounded, and do abound, more amongst Christians than amongst Them. For the End
of Temporal Blessings, are Spiritual. If God gave the Lands of the Heathen to
the Israelites, to this end he gave them, that they might observe his Statutes,
Psalm. 105. 44. And therefore when we forfeit our Spiritual Blessings, we cannot
rationally expect to enjoy our Temporal. Should we pass through all Orders and
Ranks of men, (which might be done with ease enough, but that the Time will not
permit it,) Lord! for how little Christian Faith, how much faithlesness, and
falsness, and praevarication should we discover? Excepting only These Nations
wherein we live, Sovereigns mind nothing more, than the exhausting of their
Subjects; and (not excepting These Nations wherein we live,) Subjects mind
little less than the enfeebling of their Sovereigns. If the People here in
England would either All travel a broad, or at least take the pains to be
taught at home, how like Princes, rather than Subjects, (in point of Liberty,
and Propriety,) they live at home, (being compared with other Subjects
throughout the habitable World,) They would be certainly more contented, than
now they are, with their Condition. They would be certainly so far from being
given to change, and such passionate Abhorrers of All Sedition, as not to
suffer themselves for ever, to be undone by their Foelicities. Men of all Ranks
and Qualities would acquiesce in their great happiness, and learn to know when
they are well. Men of Trade would be contented to part with the paring of their
Nails, to secure their Fingers. Men of Land would be contented to pay little
Taxes; and Men of Money would not grumble to pay None at all. Dissenting
Clergymen would not study to please the People for their own profit, more than
to profit them for their own pleasure. Nor would the People on the other side
be so addicted as they are commonly, both to envy, and defraud, and defame the
Clergy. Men of Law would be contented to raise up great Fortunes to Them and
Theirs, out of the Ruins of other men's; and to enjoy in full Peace, All the
Profits and Effects of Dire Contention. Physicians would be contented to
dispose of men's Lives, not only at a safe, but at a profitable rate; and with
Tentimes greater Fees, than were ever yet heard of in Foreign Parts. All sorts
of People (in a word) would most thankfully acquiesce in their several
Stations. Whereas for want of due knowledge, or of an ingenuous Consideration,
how much better even Artificers and common Mechanics do live in England, than
men of the noblest blood and breeding under All foreign Governments without
Exception, (I say for want of due Reflection on This great Truth,) All the
Foundations of our Earth do seem to be utterly out of Course. Men are so drunk
with their Prosperities, so tired out with Tranquillity, grown so restive with
sitting still in the Scorner's Chair; In contradiction to The 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
Apostle, and His Advice, They do so study to be unquiet, and not to do their
own business, (but the business of other men;) they are so sharp and
quicksighted in ordering other men's Affairs, though most commonly blind as
Beetles in all the Managements of their own; are so perplexed and dissatisfied
with they-cannot-tell-what; are so restless in their Endeavors to prevent
things unavoidable, to bring about things impossible, and to provide against
things which never are likely to ensue; they do so mutiny and repine at the
good Providence of God, and are so unwilling to permit him to rule the World
his own way; (being bewitch't with an Opinion that They are able to do it
better by quaint Contrivances of their own;) are so unwilling that their
Governors may be enabled to Protect, for fear they should be tempted by such
an Ability to oppress them; I say by All these Infelicities which too much
Felicity has occasioned, The World is now grown to so ill a pass, that we may
take up the words of the Prophet Jeremy, and apply them to the Places and Times
we live in. Run to and fro through the Streets, and seek into all the broad
Places thereof, if ye can find Jer. 5. 1.
a man, if there be any that executes Judgment, that seeks the Truth, and I
will pardon it.

8. I know it may easily be objected An Objection Answered.
against the Argument I have used, That no wants of Faith in the second Notion
of the word can prove it is wanted in the first. For let the Practice of men
amongst us be what it will, yet their Principles (they will say) may be as
Orthodox as their Professions; and they have still a firm Assent unto the Truth
of Christ's Gospel in All its Doctrines. But to This Objection it may as easily
be Answered, that as a Practical Infidel or Atheist is a worse Monster than a
Speculative, so there is no better way to prove the first, than by the second.
Men may believe the Word of God with an Human Faith, when yet it is easy to
demonstrate, They do not believe it with a Divine one. Nor is there any greater
Instance of the Deceitfulness of a man's Heart, than is his Treacherous Belief
that he does Believe, and that with a truly-Christian Faith; when yet he proves
by All his Practice, that he is either no Believer, or such a Believer of the
Gospel, as he is of Julius Caesar's, or Cicero's Works, and no whit better. For
why should men be more forcibly, and more effectually restrained, (as we see
they are,) from committing a lesser Evil, which is forbidden under the Poenalty
of a merely human Law, and where the Poenalty is no greater, than the loss of a
man's Ears, or the forfeiture of his Estate, than from committing a greater
Evil, which is forbidden by God himself, under the Poenalty of their missing
the Ioys of Heaven, and also of abiding the Pains of Hell, but that they do
more believe the one, than they do the other? It cannot be for This reason,
that men do think it a greater Misery, to suffer a little for a short Time,
than all imaginable Torments to all Eternity. It cannot be, that they had
rather fry in Hell without ceasing, than endure the short loss of Life and
Fortune. But the true Reason must needs be This, that men are as Confident of
the one, as they are Diffident of the other. They have a manifold Experience of
Temporal Punishments, But the Tempter makes them hope there are none Eternal.
They are strong in the faith of what concerns the praesent world, but they
stagger in the faith of a world to come. They have an ordinary relish of
sensual Pleasure, But ghostly Pleasure is a Iargon they know not how to make
sense of: They think it merely a piece of gibbrish of Ecclesiastical
Investigation. They make no doubt but they shall dye, and that their Bodies
being buried, shall all be moulder'd into Dust. But they secretly suspect they
shall never Rise; they are Infidels in the point of a Resurrection. They either
doubt, and make a Quaestion, or else they utterly disbelieve, both a Life after
Death, and a Day of Judgment. This is the only reason assignable, why men are
more afraid of Them who can kill the Body only, (but are not able to hurt the
Soul,) than of Him who can cast both Soul and Body into Hell. No other reason
can I imagine, why men do commonly run counter to that known Maxim, (...) why
when it is every man's wisdom to choose the least of two Evils, men (in
avoidance of the least) do choose the greatest, even to dwell with Eternal
Burnings. And therefore well may it be said, as here it is in my Text, that
when the Son of Man comes, he shall not find Faith upon the Earth: He shall
not find Evangelical and Saving Faith; He shall not find it at least in many;
nay he shall find it in few or none; in comparatively None, or None to speak
of. Let men pretend what they will, and let them will what they please, ye
shall know them by their Fruits, says our Blessed Savior. And the Fruits of
True Faith, whereof the Professors are True Believers, are no where better to
be seen, than in the Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews: wherein we
have Faith commended to us in four principal Respects; and all within the
narrow compass of the Six first Verses. First in respect of its Definition,
which is to be the Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things
not seen. Secondly in respect of its great and wonderful Effects, whereof we
have there Two choice Examples; the one in Abel, the other in Enoch. Thirdly in
respect of its greatest Benefit, as being That Qualification by which we please
God. Lastly in respect of its indispensable Necessity, as being That without
which, it is impossible to please him. How could so many in the old Testament
(of whom we have an account in the later parts of That Chapter,) have chosen
Poverty rather than Wealth, and Disgrace rather than Glory, and Pain it self
rather than Pleasure, if they had not had Heb. 11. 26.
Respect (and that a strange respect too,) unto the Recompense of Reward? if by
the Telescope of Faith, (as it is the Evidence of Things not seen,) they had not
Verse 27.
seen Him who is Invisible? if they had not been enabled to spy Reward Verse 13.
afar off? and to look clearly through the Veil, which interposed as a Skreen
'twixt It and Them? if they had not had a Prospect of the several blessed
Mansions prepared for them, in the City of God whereof they had been made
Denisons, and in the House of That Father of whom they were the adopted Sons?
if they had not had an Eye upon their particular Resurrections? and such an Eye
too, (so full, so clear, so more than Lyncean or Eagle-sighted,) that even Then
when they were tortured, they would not accept of a Deliverance, to the end
Verse 35.
they might enjoy by so much a better Resurrection?

9. This is a truly Salvisick Faith, and such as necessarily signifies (amongst
other Virtues) a firmer Adhaerence and Assent unto the Truth of Christ's Gospel
in all its Doctrines, than any man can ever have, by any human means possible,
either to Seneca's, or Cicero's, or Caesar's Works. This is That for want of
which, men will do and suffer more, to save their Bodies, or Estates, and that
for a little space of Time; than they will either do or suffer, to save their
more precious Souls, and that for ever. It was for want of This Faith, that the
Jews were broken off; Romans 11. 20.
and by This only we Gentiles stand. This is That Faith the Just shall live by.
This is That Hebr. 10. 38.
on which depends our Bliss, or Misery for ever; according to the words of our
Blessed Savior, whereof it is an Explication, Mark 16. 16. He that believes,
shall be saved; but He that believes not, shall be damned. Here is short work
indeed; and such as might have saved the labor of many Controversial Volumes,
which have been written, and made public, between the Molinists and the
Iansenians; the Franciscans and the Dominicans, or the Scotists and the
Thomists, between the Lutherans and the Calvinists, the Arminians and the
Gomarists, the Remonstrants and Antiremonstrants, concerning the Nature of
God's Decrees, and Quaestions depending thereupon. Our Savior tells us very
succinctly, in words most plain, and most univocal, who are Vessels of
Election, and who of Wrath: Who were decreed from All Aeternity to Heaven, and
Hell; even Believers, and Unbelievers. No more but so: He that believes, shall
be saved, and He that believes not, shall be damned. Which cannot possibly be
meant concerning every human Faith, whereof the World is too full. It cannot be
meant of such a Faith, as makes a man abhor Idols, but not abstain from
committing Sacrilege. Nor can it be meant of such a Faith, as is strong enough
to remove Mountains, (to wit The Laws and the Landmarks of Church and State,)
to pull down Kings, and unsettle Kingdoms; But not strong enough to bring forth
Obedience to Christ's Commands, and (by a consequence unavoidable) to God's
Vicegerents upon Earth. It cannot be meant of the Antinomian, or the
Fiduciarie's Faith, which sets it self into a kind of opposition unto Good
works; and so by consequence is the Parent of nothing but practical Infidelity.
But it is meant of That sanctifying and saving Faith, which whosoever has,
overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 5. It Is meant of Justifying Faith, not only in
the mystical, but literal notion of the word; a Faith which so justifies, that
(in a competent degree) It does evermore make its Possessor Just. It makes him
an upright and honest man. Saving Faith being a Grace, which, as it is the most
commonly talked of, so it is (I am afraid) the least commonly understood, of
any one thing in the Christian Code. We could not else so much abound with
Knaves and Hypocrites as we do in the Christian World. That which we call
Divine Faith, which is a justifying and sanctifying and saving Faith, and upon
which The Word of God does every where lay so great a stress, must be an Habit
of the Will, as well as of the Understanding; not only flourishing in the Head,
but deeply rooted in the Heart. It must be such as does contain a full and
generous Belief he dares to dye for; a full and Practical Belief that Jesus
Christ is the Messiah; a (...), a full and absolute Heb. 10. 22.
Belief, both in his words, and in his works; both in his Counsels, and his
Commands; both in his Promises, and his Threats. For He who Thus is believing,
is ipso facto, and eo ipso, at once an Obedient and Loving Christian. A
Christian so loving, that the longer he lives, the more he lives the Life of
Faith; the more he is weaned and sequestered from the things here below; the
more he is wedded and betrothed unto those things that are above. His
Affections are taken off from the beggarly Elements of the World, and fixed
entirely upon God, as his sovereign Good. I mean they are set upon God in
Christ, reconciling the World unto Himself. And overcome The world he does, (as
St. John must needs mean,) by overcoming its Temptations; its Pomps, and
Vanities; its Smiles, and Flatteries; nor only the Pleasures, but Terrors of
it. He overcomes That world, which St. John has comprised under three general
Heads, to wit the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of
Life. For a sincere Faith in Christ, in his Death, and Resurrection, and in the
Consequences of Both, gives us a much greater Bias, a stronger Bent and
Inclination to all good Things, than the whole World can to the contrary, by
all its flatteries, or its frights. It possesses us immediately with Inward
Joy in the Holy Ghost, and praepossesseth us with an Antepast of The Glory to
be revealed. It praesentiates unto us such Joys to come, as do exceedingly
over-weigh the frowns and favors of the world. It is expressed by St. John (in
the place before-cited) not only as the means whereby we grow Victors, But as
the Victory it self. This (says he) is The Victory which overcomes the Verse
4.
world, even our Faith: As if it were not only the Instrument, but Essence of
it.

10. It follows then that we must distinguish, with exceeding great Care, and
every minute of our Lives, between two things which do extremely much differ,
(like Heaven, and Hell,) and yet are commonly confounded to admiration. I say
we must carefully distinguish, not only between an Idle, and an Operative
Faith, a Faith which works, and a Faith which works not; But withal between a
working, and working Faith; between a Faith which only works by the Love of a
man's self, and a Faith which duly works by the Love of others. For when the
Son of Man shall come with his holy Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance of
them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, He will find
enough idle, unactive Faith, which either works not at all, or not at all by
Love, or else by none but Self-love, which is the worst and greatest Evil that
can possibly come to pass in the last and worst Times. St. Paul sets it down,
in his long Catalogue of Impieties which shall be in the last Days, as The
Ringleader and Head of All the Villainies which ensue: as the first and greatest
Link of that Chain of Darkness, which draws the other Links after it, and
reaches as far as from Hence to Hell. In the last days (says he to Timothy)
perilous Times shall come; For men shall be Lovers of their own selves, and (in
consequence of That,) All the Devilish Things that follow, from the First Verse
unto the Ninth, of that Third Chapter of the Second Epistle to Timothy. A Chain
of Darkness almost as long, as That the Devils themselves are held in, and
reserved (says St. Jude) until the Judgment of the Great Day. Nor is it my
opinion only, But that of Estius, Hoc vitium primo loco ponit, quia caeterorum
fons est.
Simplicius, and Strigelius, that the Sin of Self-love is set down First in The
Black List, as The Head-spring and Fountain of all the Rest. For I think I may
challenge any man living (without immodesty) to Name any one Actual and Damning
Sin, which has not the Sin of Self-love for its most execrable Original. It was
merely Self-love, which turned Luciser into a Devil, and made the Son of the
Morning The Prince of Darkness. It was the Sin of Self-love which turned those
Protoplasts Adam and Eve out of their Innocence, and by consequence out of
their Paradise, which they held and possessed by That one Tenure. It was at
first the Love of Self, and of Self-preservation, which moved Peter to renounce
and abjure his Master. And it was first a Self-love, which produced in Judas a
love of Money, wherewith he was tempted to betray, and to slay his Master.
Thence it was that Self-denial, or Self-abnegation, was the very first Lesson
our Savior taught his first Disciples. And it is the first we are to learn, in
the School of our Master Jesus Christ. It being the Causa-sine-quanon of all
other Duties in a Christian. For whosoever has once attained a good Degree of
Self-denial, or of Self-hatred for Sins committed, can fast from eating, when
he is hungry; and even from drinking, when he is dry; from stealing, when he is
Poor; and from coveting, when he is Rich; from repining, when he is low; and
from oppressing, when he is lofty; and so from every thing else, which either
is sinful in it self, or so much as a Temptation inducing to it. How did St.
Peter, when he repented, revenge himself upon himself, for his having so basely
(out of Self-love) not only disowned, but forsworn his Lord? He did not only
deny Himself, in opposition to his Denial of Jesus Christ, But abhorred himself
too, in opposition to his Self-love, which betrayed him to it. How triumphant
was his Faith, and his Selfdenial? how triumphant over Himself, and his former
Cowardice? how did he preach up Christ Crucified, for which he was Crucified
with his Head downwards? and in All he did, or suffered, how did he bear down
all before him, (not only all the World, but the Flesh, and the Devil too,) as
mighty Cataracts and Torrents do sticks and straws? So did Peter, as well as
Paul, courageously sight the good sight of Faith. Such in Him was That Faith
which overcomes the World. And when the Son of Man comes to be the Judge of
Quick and Dead, (Lord!) how much (or rather how little,) shall he find of such
fighting and conquering Faith upon the Earth?

11. This is infinitely far from That Carnal Faith, which only works ( by
Self-love) All the Degrees of Disobedience to Christ's Commands. No, The Faith
which He shall find in comparatively None (that is to say in very few) at his
second Coming, is such a Faith as strongly works by a Love of others; which is
said with great reason to be The fulfilling of the Law in Both the Tables of
The Decalogue, (which our Blessed Lord came to fulfill and perfect, not to
abrogate, or to destroy;) because it is hard, if not impossible, for us to name
any one Duty, incumbent on us as Men, or Christians, which is not the Necessary
Production of such a Love as Faith works by. For as immoderate Selflove, which
consists with an human and worthless Faith, is the Root of All Evil without
Exception; so a truly Christian Faith, which is operative, and works by a due
love of others, (a love of God with all our hearts, and of our Neighbor as our
selves,) cannot choose but be the Root of all the Good fruits to be imagined.
For how can any man endure to be rebelling against his God, whom he does love
with all his Soul, and above Himself? And how can any man ( knowingly) suffer
himself to be induced to wrong his Neighbor, whom he does love without
hypocrisy, and As Himself? that is, as sincerely, tho not as well; or as well,
(if you please,) tho not as much. With a sicut similitudinis, tho not
aequalitatis. In which sense it is said by our Lord Himself, Be ye perfect, As
your Father in Matthew. 5. ult.
Heaven is perfect. He does not there say, Be ye as perfect as he is perfect;
But be ye perfect as sincerely, as he is perfect consummately. Be ye That in
your measure, which He is without measure. Be ye perfect comparatively, as He
is absolutely perfect. For as God is said in Scripture to have made Man in his
own Likeness, so we may say by the same reason, that he makes a Man's
perfection, (tho at a vast and humble distance) in the Similitude of his own.
Now if what I have said of a True Christian Faith as it works by Love, and as
it is the Substance of Things hoped for, and as it is the Evidence of Things
not seen, and as it is that whereby a Believer overcomes the world, be duly
compared with all before it, touching the faithlesness, and malignity, the
wants of love, and common honesty, wherewith the world is overcome; 'Twill not
be difficult to conclude, That when the Son of Man comes, (let his coming be
when it will,) He will find his own Prophecy fulfilled amongst us.

12. Perhaps it is too little a thing to mention either Cotterus, or Dabricius,
or Christina Poniatovia, however their Praedictions touching Christendom in
general, and particularly touching the whole House of Austria, and That of
Bourbon, (long Revelationum Divinarum Christofero Kottero, Christinae
Poniatoviae, Nicolao Dabricio factarum Epitome, Excusa A. D. 1663.
and long ago printed,) are coming to pass in These our Days. Nor will I apply
That of David touching Absolom's Rebellion, and the general Revolt occasioned
by it, stigmatized in the Fourteenth and in the Three and fiftieth Psalm: The
Fool has said in his Heart There is no God. Where by the Fool he means a
Multitude, as appears by his next words. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon
the Children of Men, to see if there were any that would understand, and seek
after God. But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
Abominable, There is none that does good, no not one. Nor will I descant upon
That of the Prophet Micah, The Good man is perished out of the Earth. There is
none upright among men. They all lie in wait for Blood. They hunt every man his
Brother with a Net. They do evil earnestly, and that with Both hands. The Judge
asks for Reward. Micah 7. 2, 3, 4.
The Great man utters his Mischievous Desire. The Best of them is a Briar:
and the most Upright of them is sharper than any Thorn Hedge. (I do not speak
of These things in this unlimited universality, unless it be by a Paralipsis.)
But This I think I may say with every man's suffrage and consent, There is so
eminent a Defection from God and Goodness throughout the World, that Most do
seem to have renounced, and to have utterly cast off, All Fear, and Care, if
not Acknowledgment of the most High. The Tongues of men are their own; their
Thoughts are free; their Wills invisible; and the secrets of their Hearts are
known to God only, The Searcher of them. But yet as far as men's Actions are the
Interpreters of their Hearts, and as far as they discover an Epidemical Decay
of Christian strictness, a Decay of That Seriousness in Reality and Substance,
which some poor Quakers retain in Show, a Decay of all Duties to God and Man, a
Decay of Moral Honesty, and Humanity it self, and (which is the Top of all
Impiety) a devilish blending and confounding the very Natures of Right and
Wrong, a turning Religion Topsy Turvy, calling Evil Good, and Good Evil,
putting Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light, holding Perjury, and Parricide, Killing of Kings, and
Subverting of Kingdoms, not only Innocent, but Pious, not only Laudable and
Virtuous, but the most highly Meritorious, and Supererogating Works of the
purest Christians, nor only of the purest, but of the only true Christians in
all the World, the Only Members of the true Church, and Only Heirs of
Salvation, whilst they who dare not break Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
dare not rail at and libel the Laws in force, dare not rebel against their
Governors, dare not fall down and worship the Jesuits Idol, even for This
very Reason are Damned for ever; I say as far as men's Actions are Thus the
Indices of their Hearts, we may conclude there is a Principle of downright
Atheism within them; at least an Heathenish Belief that their Souls are not
Immortal; and that for what they do in This, they shall not be brought to give
Account in Another World.

13. I am far from undertaking (what yet some have done) to name the last Days
of the Son of Man, or the Time of his coming to the avenging of His Elect, and
to judge the World. But of This I am certain, (because I have it from his own
Mouth, as well as from the Mouths of Three at least of his Apostles,) that we
must not infer the Day of Doom is far off, because there are few prepare for
it, and even the wisest do not expect it; No, It Is seeming very far off, is
rather a Sign of its Approach. For The Scriptures tell us 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 4. 2
Pet. 3. 10. ^ Rev. 3. 3. and 16. 15.
expressly, That Christ at his Coming will surprise us as a Thief in the Night.
His Coming, for Quickness, will be like Luke 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
lightning. It shall be as sudden (says our Lord) as Noah's Deluge was to
All, Noah himself being excepted. They did eat, they drank, they married wives,
even until the very day of Noah's entering into the Ark, when behold the Flood
came, and destroyed them All. It shall at least be as surprising, as was the
shooting of Hell from Heaven in the Days of Lot. And how surprising That was,
our Savior tells us in the next words: They did eat, they drank, they bought,
they sold, they planted, they builded, (unto which it may be added, they
played, they sported, they were indulging all their Lusts,) when behold the
same day wherein Lot went out of Sodom, The Fire and Brimstone rained down, and
destroyed them All. So swift, so sudden, so surprising shall be The Day, of
The Son of Man's Coming to judge the World. Watch therefore (says our Savior)
for ye Matthew. 24. 36, 42, 44, etc.
know not what hour your Lord will come. Heaven and Earth shall pass away; But
of That day and hour knows no man (says he again,) no not the Angels of
Heaven. Again (says he) be ye ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, The
Son of Man comes. All which that it is meant of the Day of Judgment, and the
Consummation of all things, not only or chiefly of the Jews (...), and the
Destruction of Jerusalem, seems to be evident from the Conclusion of That whole
Prophecy of our Savior: For if That Evil Servant Verse 48, 49, 50, 51.
[ That Man of Sin by way of Eminence, whether without Christendom, or within
it, whether in Asia, or in Italy, in Germany, or in Spain, in France, or
England,] shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his Coming, whereupon He
shall praesume to smite his fellow Servants, and to riot it with the Drunken,
The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and
in an hour he is not aware of; and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his
Portion with the Hypocrites; There shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth.

14. What now is to be done, by us who live in These Times, wherein I have
shown there is so Common, so Universal, so Epidemical a state of Depravation,
but that every one in his station do labor hard to mend one: That we all watch
and pray, lest we enter into Temptation? or that if we cannot escape the
Temptations of the World, yet by the powerful Grace of God, well cooperated
with, we may be able to overcome them? In order whereunto, we must not only
watch and pray for a Time, and Gal. 1. 5.
examine our selves duly, whether we be in the Faith of Christ; But we must not
faint in it. We must quit our selves like Men. We must be strong in the Faith.
1 Cor. 16. 13, 14.
We must stand fast in it. Our watching must be constant; our praying always.
So expressly says our Savior in the first Verse of That Paragraph, whereof my
Text is the Conclusion. For The Parable which he spoke, was (says St. Luke) to
This End, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. We ought to pray
without ceasing, as St. Paul bids his Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
(...) says the first, (...) says the second, we must be a kind of Euchites,
(be it spoken cum grano Salis,) we must pray without End, or Intermission. And
that for This reason, as well as for This end and purpose, that our Lord at his
Coming may find us praying. A work of so very great importance, and so
conducible to Salvation, that even Then when Simon Magus was in the Acts 8. 22,
23.
Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, St. Peter bid him Pray to
God, if perhaps the Thought of his heart might be forgiven him. Pray therefore
we must, that we may not fall. And if at any time we are fallen, still we must
pray, that we may rise. And still for fear of relapsing, we must Ephesians. 6. 18.
watch unto Prayer, and we must watch thereunto with all Ephesians. 6. 18.
perseverance. That so at what time soever The Master of the House shall come,
whether at Evening, or at Midnight, or in the Morning, we may be Matthew. 24. 45.
found like wise Virgins with Oil in our Lamps, or in the Number of the few
Faithful and blessed Servants, whom our Lord when he comes shall find so Doing:
and that finding us so doing, He may receive us with an Euge, Well done good
and faithful Servants, Enter ye Matthew. 25. 21, 23.
into the Joy of your Lord.

Which God The Father of his Mercy prepare and qualify us for, even for the
Merits of God The Son, and by the powerful operation of God The Holy Ghost. To
whom be Glory for ever and ever.

AN ANTIDOTE OR PRAESERVATIVE Against the Prurigo of Ambition.
Satan's Masterpiece AS A TEMPTER TO WORLDLY GREATNESS.
MATTHEW. IV. 9. All these Things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me.
Or (as St. Luke sets down the words,) LUKE IV. 6, 7. All this Power will I
give thee, and the Glory of them; for That is delivered unto me, And to
whomsoever I will, I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship me, All shall be
Thine.

1. THere is a Time when in Scripture God is said to tempt Man. And again there
is a Time when Man is said to tempt God. Last of all there is a Time when the
Devil is said to tempt Both; and Both at once in this Text, in which are met
the two Natures of God and Man. Now though to Tempt in each Case is still a
phrase of one sound, yet is it often found to be of very different
significations. Indeed so different, that they may seem to contradict. For
Moses says, God tempted Abraham; And yet St. Paul says, God tempts no man.
It is employed by our Savior, that God is tempted at least by some; And yet
it is said by St. James, He is not tempted of any. Now the way to reconcile them
is briefly This. When God is said to tempt Man, it signifies nothing but a
Trial, a kind of Search which God makes in the Heart of man. Not that God can
be in doubt, or stand in need of an Inquiry, how any man's heart is affected
toward him; But it is to admonish him of his weakness, or to convince him of
his hypocrisy, or else to evidence his Faith, or to exercise his Patience, or
to make his Integrity the more conspicuous, and rewardable, that God is pleased
to explore and to search his Heart. Thus in Genesis, and Exodus, and in the
Thirteenth of Deuteronomy, our Father Abraham and the Israelites are said to
have been tempted by God himself.

2. Man (in the second place) is said to tempt God, when without any Necessity,
or Assurance of Success, he rashly goes out of his Calling to meet with Danger.
Or when without any Warrant, whether from the Spirit, or Word of God, he gladly
falls Historiam de falso Messia Eldavid, A. D. 1135. ex libro Schevet Iehuda
sumptam, apud Buxtorphum videre est in suo Linguae Sanctae Thesauro, p. 683.
into Distress, (like Eldavid the false Messiah, of whom we read in learned
Buxtorf,) supposing God, by some Miracle, will help him out. For what is this
but to explore, or to make a Trial, both of the Power, and Goodness, and Truth
of God? not at all out of Faith in his Word and Promise, but out of a wanton
Curiosity, or bold Praesumption.

3. But now the Devil is said to tempt either God, or Man, and Both together in
the Text, when not only without, but against the Word, he does solicit and
entice to something or other which is Evil. And thus our Lord is said in
Scripture to have been tempted, even as We. Not by Hunger only and Thirst, by
Cold and Nakedness, by Slander and Disgrace, by Pangs and Torments, and all
Degrees of Affliction to which the Name of Temptations is justly fixed; But to
the worst of Afflictions, that is, to Sin; and to the worst even of Sins, to
wit Idolatry; And to the worst of Idolatries, even the worshipping of the
Devil. Who being permitted to take him up to an exceeding high Mountain, did
show him from thence, as in a Landscape, All the Kingdoms of the World and the
Glory of them; And thereupon made him this glorious Offer, All these things
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: Or (...), If, falling
down, Thou will worship me.

4. Which words do present us with Satan's Masterpiece; And the Motto on his
Ensign, is [ Now, or Never.] For as the Roman Triarij, when their two first
Squadrons T. Live. Dec. 1. l. 8.
had fought in vain, were depended upon at last as their only Refuge; So when
the Devil had been improsperous in his two first Onsets upon our Savior, He
comes at last to make use of All the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of
them; clearly looking upon This, as his most formidable Reserve; And even
against the Fortifications, not only of the Innocence, but the Divinity of our
Lord, (who was no less the Lord of Armies, than Prince of Peace,) his most
ingenious, most powerful, most hopeful Stratagem.

The Text, at first view, affords no more than two Generals. To wit the Devil's
vast Offer, And the unreasonable Condition with which it is clogged. But out of
these Generals put together, we may (by the help of a little Logic) draw four
Particulars. Each of which will be a Doctrine, whereof it will be easy to make
good Use.

1. The First particular Doctrine is, That the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the
Glory of them, being all met together (as here they are,) do amount to nothing
more, than so many glittering Temptations. 2. The Second is, That all the Goods
of this World, however lovely they may appear to Carnal Reason, or Common
Sense, are yet by God's Patience, and wise Permission, in the Devil's Proffer,
and Disposal. I say They are so by God's Permission, because the Devil can give
nothing, till God gives leave; which, for wise and just Ends, it often pleases
him to afford. 3. The Third Doctrine is, That the utmost Scope and Drift of all
the Donatives of the Tempter, is to steal our Hearts from God, and to turn them
wholly upon Himself. He never Proffers, but with a dangerous Proviso. He does
it liberally indeed, [ All these things will I give thee,] But with a covetous
Supposition, [ if, falling down, thou will worship me.] 4. From whence it
follows in the fourth Place, That how incessantly soever some men do labor,
whereby to purchase these Gifts of Satan, yet there is nothing in the World
with greater easiness to be compassed; if the Devil may be tried by his own
Confession. Who, though the things here spoken of are great, and goodly, ( even
the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them,) is yet most ready to part
with All, in exchange for an Act of our Adoration. To attain the (...), The All
that our Tempter can give, or offer, nothing more needs be done, than to fall
down to him and worship him.
1. To prove the First of these Four, [That the Kingdoms of the Earth, when
they are All put together, make but a glittering Temptation, or handsome Snare,]
we need not argue or dispute from a fitter Topic, than the very signal Method
the Devil here uses. Who, when he could not corrupt our Savior by all the
Miseries of Want, did now at last attempt to do it by the bountiful Overtures
of Plenty. Nor can we think he was so silly, as not to rise in his Temptations,
from the less unto the greater. It being for nothing but his Subtilty, in
conjunction with his Malice, that He is called The Old Serpent; And is said by
St. John, to Rev. 12. 9.
have deceived the whole World. And if the Children of this World are wiser in
their kind Luke 16. 8.
(as our Savior says they are) than the Children of Light, How much more is
their John 8. 44.
Father, who for the Power of his working, and Success of his Policy, is called
sometimes The John 14. 30. John 16. 11.
Prince, and once 2 Cor. 4. 4.
The God of this World? Nor is it certainly for Nothing, that The Devil has in
Scripture such glorious Titles. For if we consider the world of men, who are
divided in their Affections 'twixt Christ and Satan, we shall find by their
Actions, (the best Interpreters of their Hearts) that the Territories of Satan
are much the greater. Our Savior tells us of a Broad way which leads to
Destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; whereas (in comparison,) the
way to Life is but Narrow, and They that go thither (he says) are few. And
therefore Those unclean Spirits which are expressed by St. Paul to be the
Spirits now working Ephesians. 2. 2.
in the Children of Disobedience, are but little after called by the same
Apostle, The Principalities, and the Powers, and (which is more) (...), the
Rulers of this Ephesians. 6. 12.
World.

2. That thus it is, the Scripture tells us. But some may wonder that thus it
should be. What may therefore be the reason, why so few should fight manfully
under the Banner of our Savior, who therefore said truly, His Kingdom is not
of this World, And so many under Satan's, who thence is said to be the Ruler,
and the God of this world? It cannot be because God is more unwilling to be
obeyed, and beloved by his People, than Satan is. Nor can it be because God did
make it necessary for Satan, to have a greater success in the World than
Christ. Nor can it be because God is more delighted in the Damnation, than the
Salvation of his Creatures. (He would not fo gratify the Prince of Darkness;
nor could his Mercy have been then over all his Works.) Nor can it be because
Satan is of more strength than the Almighty, or more powerful to corrupt, than
God to purify. For could it consist with God's economy, to work on our Wills
by That Omnipotence, by which the Wind and the Fire and the Sea obey him, we
should not be in a capacity to break his Praecepts; we should act only as
natural, spontaneous Agents; and do our Duties as the Stones do, in tending
downwards. Whereas having made us an other Thing, to wit a rational sort of
Creatures, and that in via; not yet arrived at our Journeys end, but in a
Tendency from Earth, either to Heaven, or to Hell; not indefectibly good, like
the Spirits in Heaven, nor consummately evil, like those in Hell, but as it
were (...), in the Skirts, or the Confines betwixt them Both; to wit inclinable
to evil, and also capable of good; does therefore work upon our Wills in a
congruous manner; in such a manner as is agreeable with the nature we are of,
and with the condition we are in. Does not press us by any force to list our
selves in his Army; But freely leaves us our option, either to be Royalists, or
Rebels to him. Nor can it derogate from his Goodness, that he leaves it in our
power to be rebellious; because he gives us sufficient Grace, whereby he
enables us to obey. It is not therefore by a Fatality that Satan has got so
many Soldiers; but by the voluntary Defection of such as serve him. Who cannot
say that the Tempter does irresistibly debauch them, though with the Vanities
of the World he does assault them from without, and with the Treacheries of the
Flesh he does surprise them from within. For the Devil's very utmost is but to
tempt us. And let the matter of Temptation be what it will, whether Honor, or
Disgrace, whether Pain, or Pleasure, whether Frights, or Flatteries, whether
want, or superfluity, or even the same in the Text wherewith he tempted our
Blessed Savior, [ All the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them;] Yet
because by all These he can but solicit, and entice us, we cannot say he does
ravish, but court our Wills. It Is true, the Devil is represented by many
terrible Appellations throughout the Scriptures; as that of Abaddon, and
Apollyon, a Murderer from the Beginning, a Lion, and a Red Dragon, a Roaring
Lion, and a Serpent. And in one respect or other he is indeed each of These.
But yet he carrys away the Wills and Assents of men, not as a Lion, only by
Strength; nor as a Roaring one, by Rapacity; but rather as a Serpent, by
Circumvention.

3. Now then let us return to see how the Argument will go on; (having seen
enough already, upon what foot it stands, and put a Block out of the way too,
at which too many are wont to stumble;) can we imagine it to be likely, that the
old experienced Serpent, the subtlest Creature under Heaven, could be so stupid
and obtuse in the Art of Mischief, as to employ his chief strength upon a
Design of less importance, and to reserve his weakest force for his very last
Onset, or Assault? At first he tempted our Blessed Savior to nothing else but
Distrust; and therefore only made use of his being hungry, (v. 3.) Next he
tempted him to Praesumption, which is the opposite Provocation; and thought it
enough for that Effect, to put him in mind of his Praerogative, (v. 6.) But now
at last he runs higher, and seeks to bribe the most righteous Judge to the
greatest unworthiness in the World, an Idolizing the unworthiest of all his
Creatures. He knew that Christ was the Son of God, because he heard him so
declared by God the Father, (Chap. 3. v. 17.) He also knew the Son of God to be
God the Son too. And he knew that God the Son was even the Wisdom of the
Father. And when he would tempt Wisdom it self to Idolize the very Tempter, he
could not but know he was to use the highest Allective to be imagined. Which by
what other means should he hope to do, than by taking up our Lord to an
exceeding high Mountain, showing him there, as in a Synopsis, All the Kingdoms
of the World, with the Glory of them, and then by making this lusty Proffer,
All These will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me?

4. This then does lead us to see the reason, why it is said by St. Paul, That
the 1 Timothy 6. 10.
love of money is the Root of all Evil. And why by St. James, Go to now ye rich
men, weep and James 5. 1.
howl for the Miseries that shall come upon you. And why it is said by our
Savior (of whom we believe that he shall come to be our Judge,) Woe to you that
are Rich, for ye have Luke 6. 24, 25.
received your Consolation. Woe to you that are full, for ye shall hunger. Woe to
you that laugh, for ye shall mourn and weep. And why 'twas said by the Spanish
Friar, That Few Potentates go to Hell, because (comparatively speaking,) they
All are but Few. And why we vowed in our Baptism to fight manfully under
Christ's Banner, as well against the World, as the Flesh, and the Devil. And
why we pray in our public Litany, not only In all Time of our Tribulation, of
Lightning and Tempest, of Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, of Battle, and
Murder, and sudden Death; But (as a Danger, if not a Mischief, as great as
either,) In all Time of our WEALTH, Good Lord deliver us. Nor can we render a
better reason, (as long as Charity sits as Judge,) why so many who have been
placed upon exceeding high Mountains, (a great deal higher even than That on
which the Devil here placed our Blessed Savior,) from whence they could not
only see, but enjoy the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, have
gladly laid down those Kingdoms, and divorced themselves from those Glories, as
having known them by sad experience, to be but exquisite Temptations, and
pleasant Snares.

5. But here I would not be so mistaken, as our Lord was by his Disciples, when
he pronounced it impossible for a rich man to Matthew. 19. 24.
enter into the Kingdom of God. For when I say that worldly Greatness is one of
the Devil's most cogent Engines, whereby to batter down the Castle or Soul of
Man, I am far from implying it is irresistible. Though I argue that the Devil is
then the greatest Poliorxetick, (as Soldiers word it) when he lays Siege to a
man's Soul with All the Kingdoms of the Earth; yet can it not therefore be
denied, but that we may beat him out of his Trenches, through him that
strengthens us; and that (as He did,) with an (...), get thee hence Satan.
Honor and Riches are but Temptations; and Temptations in Themselves are but
Things Indifferent; which, accordingly as they are used, do administer a
Nourishment to Vice, or Virtue. Just as the very same Sword is of it self apt
to serve to the most contrary Effects; as well to punish, as to protect the
Guilty; and either to defend, or to kill the Innocent. And thus the same Meat
and Drink, as it meets with an immoderate, or sober Appetite, serves for the
Mischief of a Surfeit, or for a necessary Refection. The strength of a
Temptation, as it does in part lessen the Sinner's Guilt, when yielded to, and
complied with; so does it heighten the virtue too, when victoriously resisted.
And as the Angels who fell from a state of Innocence and Bliss, were the less
capable of rising, in that they fell without a Tempter; so the Angels who never
fell, are the less capable of the Coronets which Virgins and Martyrs shall wear
in Heaven, because they are pure, and impassive, and so exempted by God
Almighty from the Dignity and Privilege of suffering for him. This then (we
must confess) is the great Benefit of Temptations, (to give our Enemies their
Due,) that by resisting them to the end, we manfully fight under Christ's
Banner, conform our selves to his Example, and suffer for his sake, as He for
ours. In which respect (no doubt) it was, (as before I noted) that St. James
began his Epistle with this remarkable Exhortation, Brethren count it all Joy
when ye fall into diverse Temptations. Some may wonder at the Expression, and
think it impious, that at the instant in which we pray, lead us not into
Temptation, we should be glad of those things we daily deprecate. But St. James
does there speak touching proportionable Temptations, such as are not above our
strength; and are not for the staggering, but for the trial of our Faith. Now
the Trial of our Faith works James 1. 3.
Patience, and Patience breeds Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed. Again, The
Trial of our Faith shall be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the
blessed Appearance of Jesus Christ. If Christ himself had not been tempted with
all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, yea and afterward too
with Disgrace, and Torment, and Death it self, How then could he have led
Captivity Captive? but for Injuries, and Pains, where were our Fortitude, and
Patience? were it not for all sorts of forbidden Fruit, where were Continence,
and Sobriety, and all other Abstinencies from Evil? were it not for Wealth and
Plenty, where were Munificence, and Works of Mercy? where the Victories of
Meekness, and Moderation, if there were no such thing as Glory, and worldly
Greatness? Yea but for Danger, Destruction, and Death it self, how should we
come by our Immortality? Our Savior therefore, when he compared a rich man's
Entrance into Heaven, with the Entrance of a Camel through Matthew 19. 24.
the Eye of a Needle, did not speak of a natural, but of a moral Impossibility.
For wealthy Abraham went to Heaven, as well as poor forsaken Lazarus. And
therefore St. Mark does very fitly, (not only translate, but) explain St.
Matthew; saying, How hard; not, how Impossible; Mark 10. 24.
Nor for them that have Riches, but for them that trust in them, to enter into
the Kingdom of God? And this may competently serve to keep the Richest out of
Despair.

6. Yet even This Alleviation may serve to keep them from Praesumption, and
make them humble; because it is hard to have Riches, and not to trust in them.
Nor is there any one Thing (that I am able at least to think of) throughout the
Gospel, against which we are admonished, praepar'd, and armed, with greater
store either of explicit, or implicit warnings. When an ingenuous young Ruler,
whom Jesus Mark 10. 21.
loved, came to inquire after Eternity, and after the Means of its Attainment,
there was not any thing but his Luke 18. 22.
Possessions, which seemed to stand betwixt Him, and Heaven. For when his
Oracle had told him, He must sell all he had, and distribute unto the Poor, he
was sad at Ibid. Qui omnia se fecisse dicebat, in primo certamine divitias
vincere non potest. Hieron. ad Julianum. l. 2. Epist. 21.
that saying, and went away grieved. So great and real is the misery of too
much Happiness upon Earth. Had he been worth but two Mites, he would (no doubt)
have parted with them (as the poor Widow did) for a Treasure in Heaven. And
That was promised by our Savior, in the very same Breath, in which he was
exhorted to sell all he had. But, however such a Praecept could not be possibly
so heavy, as not to be made exceeding light by such a Promise as was annexed;
Yet such a dangerous thing it is to have the Friendship of this World, by
enjoying all the Pleasures which Power and Plenty can purchase for us, that the
Treasure in Heaven was but of cold signification, and he was sad at That
Saying, that he must sell all he had. Eternal Happiness in Reversion was but a
Melancholic thing, when only promised on condition of being merciful to the
Poor. The Expression of St. Luke is short and pithy on that Occasion; He was
very sorrowful, for Luke 18. 23.
he was very Rich. And from That Single Instance our Lord took occasion to say
in General, and of All, How hardly shall they Verse 24.
that have Riches, enter into the Kingdom of God? Let the Persons be who they
will, Great and Rich, or Rich only, Rich and Prodigal, or Covetous, yet in case
they Have Riches, their Case is difficult. They may be saved, but very hardly.
Possibly they may, but with much ado: With very much struggling and striving to
enter in at the strait Gate. A man of great Bulk may possibly (though hardly)
be able to pass at a little Door, by a great deal of squeezing, and
compression, and coarctation of himself, perhaps by rubbing off his Flesh, and
by bruising some of his Bones. And so a Camel may enter through the Eye of a
Needle; But then the Beast must be burnt to Ashes, or cut at least into shreds
and fitters, that one shred may enter before another, and all may pass in the
Conclusion. A very cold degree of Comfort, not to be in any likelihood, but in
a bare Possibility of being saved.

8. It is enough to deterr us from being grieved at the loss, or overglad in
the Enjoyment of worldly Goods, That the good things of this World are apt to
be Enemies to all that is Good. They are often Enemies to Preaching; for the
Deceitfulness of Riches choaks the Word, and makes the Hearer become
unfruitful, (Matthew. 13. 22.) They are usual Enemies to Praying; for you ask,
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts,
(James 4. 2.) They are common Enemies to Loyalty, and upright dealing; for
Judas being Christ's Cash-keeper did quickly find his very Office became his
Tempter. He did not stab, but sell his Master. Nor that out of malice, but love
of money. And when the Husbandmen of the Vineyard conspired to murder their
Landlord's Heir, It was to this end alone, That the Inheritance might be
Theirs, (Mark 12. 7.) Again the things of this World are general Enemies to
Religion; to Religion in its practical and chiefest part; whose Truth and
Purity does stand in This, That we keep our selves unspotted from the World;
that is to say, from the Wealth, and Friendship, from the Luxuries, and the
Lusts, and the Glories of it, ( James 1. 27.) Briefly, they are Enemies to the
Eternal Salvation of Soul and Body. For they that will be rich, fall into
Temptation, and a Snare; into very many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown
the Soul in Destruction and Perdition, (1 Timothy 6. 9.) Nor was it sure without
Cause, that our Savior made Dives the Repraesentative of the Damned. A man of
Quality, and Fortune, highly befriended by the World, clothed in Purple and
fine Luke 16. 19.
Linen, and faring sumptuously every day. Which was so far from being a
Narrative of any Particular man's Case, that I could never read of any whose
name was Dives, much less that there was such in the time of Lazarus. Nor was
Lazarus there meant of any Beggar in particular, who lay full of Sores at the
Rich man's Gate. But all was spoken in a Parable, And that as 'twere on purpose
to let us know, what kind of Voiagers more especially are bound for Heaven, and
for Hell; and with what sorts of People they Both are aptest to be stock't: to
wit with poor Lazars, and wealthy Gluttons. Those Inhabitants of Heaven, as
These of Difficile, immo impossible est, ut et praesentibus quis et futuris
fruatur Bonis: ut et hic ventrem, et ibi mentem impleat; ut de deliciis
transeat ad delicias; ut in utroque seculo primus sit; ut et in Coelo, et in
Terra appareat gloriosus. Hieron ad Julianum, l. 2. Epist. 21. p. 266. col. 2.
Hell. Again it teaches us how frequent and usual it is, for every man to have
his Portion of Pain, and Pleasure; either in This, or another Life. His good
things here, and his evil things hereafter; or his evil things now, and his
good things then. For so said Abraham out of Heaven to the Rich man in Hell;
Verse 25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things; But now he is comforted, and Thou art tormented.
And when (agreably to this) our Blessed Lord denounced a Woe unto Them that
were Rich, He gave this Reason, Because they had received their Luke 6. 24.
Consolation. They had already been possessed of their Lot and Portion of
Felicity. The Scales hereafter would be turned, and the Scene quite changed,
when They should have their full Share of Afflictions too. And in this respect
at least 'twas fitly said by those Voluptuaries, the Hectors of their Times in
the Book of Wisdom; Let none of us go Wisd. 2. 6, 9.
without his Part of Voluptuousness. Let us leave Tokens of our Ioyfulness in
every Place: For this is our Portion, our Lot is This.

9. Now the Reasons of this unhappiness, That the good things of this World are
the goodliest Snares and Temptations, and such as our Adversary the Devil does
put his chiefest Trust in, are these that follow.

First it is hard, in the use of Riches, to steer a safe and equal Course
betwixt the Rock, and the Whirl-pool; Avarice on the one side, and Prodigality
on the other. Very hard not to offend, either in laying up Riches, or at least
in laying them out.

10. As for the former, He whose Treasure is not his Slave, is clearly made a
Slave by it; and is extremely more stupid than the Beast on which he rides,
because he is ridden by a Beast, (that is to say,) by The (...), or Fourfooted
Beast which reigns within him. He does not more possess his Riches, than he is
possessed by them; and may be called not improperly his Mammon's Mule. Our Lord
ingeminated his Caveat against the Daughters of the Horse-Leech, as if 'twere
That against which a Man could never be too much warned. Take heed (says He)
and beware of Covetousness: Luke 12. 15.
(...), See, and be kept safe. Take heed, and take heed. A thing which looks
like a Battology, But is indeed nothing less; a Caution purposely redoubled,
for the securing us from an Affection which is the Root of all Evil. So very
far is a man's life from consisting in the Abundance of the Verse 15.
things which he possesses, so very far from being able to add a Cubit to his
Stature, Verse 25.
a Minute to his Duration, or a Grain to his Contentment, that they give him a
Poverty to be pitied, in that they make him not rich, toward God, or Himself.
Rich toward God he cannot be, who lays up Treasure for himself. Verse 23.
No nor Rich toward Himself, who lays it up for he-knows-net-whom; whether
his Son, or his Son's Guardian, or for One who will be able to squeeze them
Both. There being commonly one or other to whom the rest are but Spunges; nor
can they tell either how soon, or by what kind of Hand they may all be
squeezed. Now it is a very great Punishment, as well as Sin, for a man to
bereave himself of Good, that no-body-knowswho may fare the better, and as
likely his Enemies, as his Friends. It was the Character of a Fool, which David
gave of the Niggard, He heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell who Psalm. 39. 6.
shall gather them. And the Niggard (as I think) is the only man, on whom our
Lord fastens the name of Luke 12. 20.
Fool. Do thou talk of pulling down, and of building up, and of making
provision for time to come? Thou fool! this Night thy Soul shall be required of
thee. Then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? Not thy
Childrens perhaps, but thy Children's Tyrants. Thy Riches are not in Their
power, who are Themselves in the Power of somewhat else, either without them,
or within them. They have lost their Propriety in all their Legacies and
Estates, if a Vespasian or a Copronymus shall chance to Rule them; much more,
if they shall live under the Tyranny of their Lusts. For if they pay Tribute to
their Ambition, and Contributions to their Gluttony, and large Excise to their
other Vices, such as is their childish dotage upon the Vanities and the Pomps
and chargeable Customs of the World, (alas!) the main of their Revenue goes out
in Taxes. For a man's own Lusts are the greatest Oppressors to be imagined.
Besides, A man's * Enemies commonly are they of his own House. Micah 7. 6.
Even the Fruit of his Body is the fullest of bitterness to his Soul. The more
he heapeth up Treasure, in Intuition of his Children, the more he tempts them
to be his Enemies, if They at least may be thought Enemies, who do not only
wish his Death, but many times contrive it too. A poor man's Child will love
the life of his Parents, because he lives by their labor; whilst the wealthier
sort of Parents are apt to be troublesome to their Children, because they stand
betwixt them and Plenty; 'twixt them and their Liberty to live as deliciously
as they list. But because a Man is ignorant, who or what shall be after him,
his heaping up is nothing else but being prodigal to his Purse; all his carking
and caring is, that his Purse may never be in want. He is content for his own
part to fare very hardly, and to eat the Bread of Scarceness, so that his
dearly beloved Purse may be but plentifully fed. So great a friendship there is
betwixt Him and It. And thus it was with the wealthy Niggard in the Gospel; who
wanting Room enough wherein to lay up his Crop in a plenteous Harvest, did not
rationally say, I will sell away my Overplus, and bestow it upon my Friends, in
Hospitality; upon my Beadsmen, in Alms; upon my Self, or my Family, in Food and
Raiment; but I will pull down my Barns, and build greater, and There will I
bestow all my Luke 12. 18.
fruits and my goods. The English word in the Translation proves very
emphatical, and seems to import the Niggard's Largess. It is not translated, I
will gather my Goods together, or lay them up, (as the word (...) might well
have been,) but I will bestow them, or lay them out. Although he was sordid to
himself, and as close-fisted to his Family, and to all other Persons an arrant
Churl, yet to his Storehouses and Barns he was very free-hearted; he gladly
bestowed upon Them, even as much as they could hold. To those his Favorites and
Darlings he could not be liberal enough; and therefore widen'd their Vacuities,
that he might fill them. The Reason of which is very obvious. For as where a
man's Treasure is, there Luke 12. 34.
is his Heart; so wherever his Heart is, there he loves to lay his Treasure.
Had the Rich man's heart been either in Heaven, or upon Christ, he had bestowed
all his Goods upon Heavenly things; had fed Christ in his hungry Members, or
clothed him in his naked ones, or redeemed him in his Captive imprisoned
Members. He had erected, or endowed, either a College, or a Church, an
Hospital, or an Almshouse. But his Heart ('it is plain enough) was wholly set
upon his Barns; They had drawn out his Bowels; Thither went his Affections.
Though a little was too much to be bestowed upon Himself, yet All was little
enough for Them; He was so passionately kind, and partial to them. One spends
all upon his Back; another upon his Belly; a third upon his Titles, and Styles
of Honor; a fourth upon his Sports and Recreations; And there are (as That
Parable does plainly show,) who spend and lavish out all they have, on their
Barns or Purses.

11. Thus it is difficult not to offend in the laying up Riches; And it is as
difficult to be innocent in the laying of them out too. For we may borrow from
our Avarice, for the maintaining of our Pride; and what we spend on our
Ambition, is at least as ill laid out, as what we bestow on our Barns or Baggs.
To keep an open Cellar, and a very large Table, is not the Virtue opposed to
Avarice. For we may lavish out our All, in dishonor of God's Name, as well as
treasure all up, in distrust of his Providence. Our hearts will be (as I said
before) in what place soever our Treasure is; and as good in our Coffers, as in
our Kitchens. A Talent wrapped in a Napkin will be no more imputed to us, than
one consumed upon our Lusts. We know a man of great Fortune has wherewithal to
entertain and to cherish Vice. Has abundance of Fuel to feed his Fire. Is able
to purchase (at any rate) whatever is acceptable and pleasing to the greedy
Appetite of the Flesh. Whereas a man that is poor, cannot go to the price of
many chargeable Sins. His Lamp burns faintly, for want of Oil. Ezekiel. 16. 49.
Fullness of Bread is such a thing, as was reckoned for one of the Sins of
Sodom, and commonly follows a Great Estate. So that That which the rich man
esteems his blessing, may prove the subject of a very great Curse. For thus we
read in the Psalmist, Let their Table be made a Snare to take them withal. And
that which should have been for their welfare, let it be to them an occasion of
falling, Psalm. 69. 22.

Thus we have the two Branches of the first and chief Reason, why the Worlds
Good things are the goodliest Snares and Temptations; and such as our Adversary
the Devil does most rely on.

12. Again the Goods of this World are apt to breed and nourish Pride; which
was another great Sin in the men of Sodom. Plenty makes men contemptuous, and
superciliously looking down on such as are poorer than Themselves. Thence is
the Latin word Superbia, a superhabendo. Pride does take its Derivation from
having Wealth above others. Does not breed that Respect which is due to others,
But that undue Respect of Persons which is expressed by Partiality, and
declared against as an heinous Sin, James 2. 1, 9. It is a Custom whose Tyranny
has invaded most parts of the World we live in, to have respect unto Him who
wears gay Clothing, and to make him sit down in the upper place; whilst it is
said to the poor man, stand Thou there, or sit here under my Footstool, (James
2. 3.) Not at all laying to heart, (as St. James goes on,) That God has chosen
the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has
promised to them that love him, (V.5.) This is one of the main Branches of That
most fatal and fruitful Tree, whereof the Love of this Worlds Goods must needs
be granted to be the Root.

13. Again the Goods of this World are very apt to breed Sloth; And this was
the Third great Sin of Sodom. Not only Pride, and Fullness of Bread, but
Abundance of Idleness was in her. A man who lives by his labor has not Time
and Opportunity to commit many Sins, to which abundance of leisure would have
betrayed him. He whose Ambition leads him no higher than to the foddering of
his Cattle, or the Government of his Plough, will have the least Cause of
Scruple, (in all probability,) as well in his Conscience, as in his Stomach.
Whereas a Man of great Plenty is not so apt to have Employment to keep him*
safe; and so much the less, by how much the less he has need of working. He is
not only able to buy the various Nourishments of Vice, but is at leisure to be
hurt, and debauched by them. He is not fortified with Labor; is not fenced and
barricado'd with store of Business; the Avenues of his Soul lie always open; so
as the Tempter needs not besiege him, But may take him by a Surprise. Whilst
David lived at Bethleem with his poor Father, Goodman Iesse, where his Thoughts
were taken up with his Attendance upon the Cattle, his following the Ewes great
with young, in the Spring, his washing and sheering them, in the Summer, his
giving them Fodder, in the Winter, and his keeping them from the Wolf, at every
season of the year; whilst he was thus keeping Sheep, He was able to keep
Himself too, as Chaste, and Harmless. But when he was placed as a King, upon a
very high Mountain of worldly Greatness, although he was placed there by God,
he was so tempted there by Satan, (and that like Christ, the Son of David, with
the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them,) as to have fallen into
diverse most deadly Sins. When 2 Samuel 11. 1.
he lived at his Ease, and tarri'd still at Jerusalem, stretched himself upon
his Bed, and that at Noon too, and had nothing else to do, (when he rose from
it in the Evening,) but to walk up and down upon the Roof of his Palace, where
his Employment was nothing greater, than the feasting of his Eyes with all the
Varieties of the City; none is Verse 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
so ignorant of his History, as not to know what did ensue. Had he been with
his Army, as by right he should have been, (for the Text tells us 'twas at the
Time when Kings go forth to Battle,) He had been probably too busy, to have
been tempted, as he was, whilst he lay at Ease. In the Time of his Hardship and
Afflictions, we know he had somewhat else to do, than to admit of what he did
at a Time of Idleness and Plenty, when he wallowed in the Mire of the Good
Things of This World. Thus the Earth, which lies Idle, is presently overrun
with Weeds; whilst the Heavens, which ever move, still keep their Purity. Just
as Waters, standing still, are very easily corrupted; whilst Those that run,
and run swiftly, keep themselves pure and unpolluted.

14. Again the Goods of this World, the more they labor to fill the Appetite,
the more they dilate it, and make it empty. They are apt to make a thirsty,
hydropick Soul. As the Poor man does labor, to grow less poor; so the Rich
does lay up, to grow more rich. And though it is hard to make a Rule which will
not admit of some Exceptions, yet it is generally observable, that a poor man's
care is how to keep out of want; whereas the care of the Rich is how to get
into Superfluity. A man of mediocrity, who is but well enough to live, is
aptest to think himself well enough; nor aims so much at the Increase, as at
the mere Praeservation of his Possessions. Whereas Abundance of Riches makes a
Plethory in the Heart, which breaks out into an Itch, without due Purgings, and
Evacuations. By how much the fuller he is of Wealth, by so much the more his
Heart is set upon the raising of his Family, and the leaving to his Children a
great deal more than he was left. He loves to be joining House to House, and to
be laying Isa. 5. 8.
Field to Field, and to be placed alone in the midst of the Earth; supposing
that his dwelling place shall endure for ever, and his Land be called by his
Name from Generation to Generation: Psalm. 49. 12.
Thus do the Riches of men conduce to many Diseases in the Soul; a Plethory, an
Itch, a Lientery, a Dropsy, a Boulimia. These are the Maladies of the mind,
which abundance of Riches do breed and cherish. The reason of it is chiefly
This; That what appears very Great to them who want and desire it, does, to
them who do embrace it, almost totally disappear. What Hope and Hunger present
as bigg, Possession makes to seem little, even because it does not stand at a
due Distance from the Appetite. For an Object may be too near (as well as too
far) to be truly seen; witness the Letters of any Book, which if we place too
near our Eyes, we are as little able to read, as if they stood a mile off. For
which reason it is, we overlook what we possess, and even want what we have,
whilst we covet more.

15. Other Reasons may be given, but these I take to be the chief. And as I
think they are enough, so I am not at leisure to point at more. For now it is
time that I apply, and so improve what I have said, by adding several
Considerations, whereof the one will very fitly become a step unto the other.
And until we grasp All, the Application will not be perfect.

16. First then let us consider; That if the World's Good things are commonly
made the Devil's Lime-twigs, laid before us as our Food, but only intended for
our Fetters; It concerns us that our Souls be night and day kept on wing, and
incessantly flying over these Snares of Satan. Which to accomplish the more
effectually, we must be careful not to stand upon exceeding high Mountains, nor
take too much of this World within our Prospect. The Bowels of St. Paul Philip.
3.
were so turned within him, when he consi der'd the Earthy-mindedness of many
Professors in his time, as that he could not hold from weeping, in reflecting
on the Miseries he saw them in. Whilst he was writing to his Philippians, in a
very cheerful style, touching the Glory to be revealed, and of his pressing
toward the Mark, for the price of the Verse 14.
high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, his Soul was suddenly overcast with a
gloomy Cloud, and his cheerfulness in a moment was done away with a fit of
mourning. For toward the midst of his Epistle, his thoughts were occasionally
diverted by such a melancholy remembrance, as put a sudden stop to his
Meditations, and made him break out into a Parenthesis of Tears. Many walk
(says the Apostle) of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory Verse 18. 19.
is their Shame, who mind Earthly things. They lived in Plenty and Prosperity,
complied with the Persecuting Jews, were very indulgent to their Appetites, and
even boasted of their Lusts; that is, their Happiness was as great as this
World could make it, and for this, which is the object of most men's Envy, or
Ambition, they were exceedingly bemoaned by that compassionate Apostle. That
their Souls, like silly Birds, should be so caught and intangl'd with Satan's
Lime-twigs, as to be grovelling on the Earth, and rendered utterly unable to
give a Spring toward Heaven, This was his Corrosive and Cordolium. 'Twas this
that turned his Head into a Fountain of Tears, and made him to mingle his Ink
with weeping. This was That that made him write with an Ellipsis in a
Parenthesis, and one Parenthesis in another; No sooner had he said [ for many
walk] but there he presently brake off; as if the rest of his words had been
suddenly swallowed up with his Commiseration. The Royal Prophet had been
caught, but had been happily disintangl'd, and was so very much afraid to be
caught again, that he earnestly fell a wishing for the wings of a Dove, whereby
to be able to fly away, not only from the Injuries, but from the Vanities of
the World. One would have thought that such a Potentate might have been
satisfied with the World, who had its Glories at his Devotion; yet even Those
were some of the things which made King David so weary of it; And drew upon him
That Envy, with those malicious Calumniators, which made his Life to seem long,
and his Kingdom tedious: Woe is me (says he in pity to himself) that I am
constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have mine habitation in the Tents of
Kedar. So when Moses was but a youth, he towred up like an Eagle above the
stratagems of the Fowler, and could securely look down with an holy derision
upon his Nets. He was so far from desiring, that he refused to be a Prince. So
far from courting the Top of Honor, as to have turned his back upon it, when
strongly courted to its Acceptance: Choosing rather to suffer Affliction Heb.
11. 24, 25.
with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. Such
Eagles, now a days, are grown a rare sort of Creatures; there being few who
(like Moses) do so value and revere the reproach of Christ, as to esteem it
greater Riches than all the Treasures Verse 26.
of Egypt. It is ordinarily counted a spice of Madness, for men to suffer any
great Hardships in point of Conscience. So long as thou do well unto thy
self, men will speak good of thee, Psalm. 49. 18. But He who will not be caught
in the Devil's Net, and flies the Favors of the World which cannot honestly be
enjoyed, However the greatness of his Soul does speak him no less than a lofty
Eagle, yet he shall commonly be contemned as an arrant Goose. But this should
teach us to loath the World so much the more, and the wisdom of the World,
which is not Earthy only, and Sensual, but Devilish too, James* 3. 15.
James 3. 15. Alas the Wisdom of the Serpent is a very foolish thing,
wheresoever there is the Sting, and the Poison too. And to have the Dove's
Innocence, we need the Wings also. For as whilst we are glued in our Affections
to the things here below, we think the World to be a Great, and a Glorious
thing, so the higher we fly above it, the more contemptibly Little it is natural
for it to appear. And therefore

17. Secondly let us consider, That as the way whereby to escape the glorious
Dangers of which I speak, is to sequester our Affections from the Things of
this World, and to take wing toward a Better; so, that our Flight may be the
higher, we are to take some ready Course whereby to make our selves light. For
however it is natural for Birds to fly, yet the most they can do is but to
flutter, if they are laden with thick Clay; a Phrase by which the Prophet
Habakkuk describes Money, and denounces a Woe to them that Habak. 2. 6.
load themselves with it. The reason of which is very obvious. For
notwithstanding it is natural for the spirit of man to fly upwards, yet what in
one Case is natural, may be impossible in an other. A man may fly just as soon
with a weight of Lead at his Feet, as with a Burden of Silver upon his Back.
The lightest Birds commonly do fly the highest. And considering it is a Duty,
for a man so to buy, as if he were never to possess; To deny his dear self, and
to take up Christ's Cross, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
and to follow Him; it seems to follow thereupon, that He who has least of
this World, and the least to do in it, is probably the fittest for That great
Duty. Though 'twas not merely for being poor, that Lazarus was carried to
Abraham's Bosom, yet 'twas That that his Poverty disposed him for. And St.
Peter said fitly (touching Himself and his Condisciples,) Lo we have left All,
and followed Luke 18. 28.
Thee. Because they could not follow Christ, and carry all they had with them.
For every Follower of Christ has a very narrow way wherein to walk, and a very
strait Gate whereat to enter. So that the Body of a Christian is Load enough
unto the Soul; and therefore many more Impediments may well be spared. Our
Bodies (says St. Paul) are but Earthen Vessels; but 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Dust and Ashes, (says Abraham) Genesis 20. 27. And sure the way to keep our
selves unspotted from the World, is not to bury our selves alive, even by
adding Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust. That being the way of our
being buried, not in sure and certain Hope, but in sure and certain Fear of a
Resurrection. For when the Minions of this World who are dead whilst they live,
shall (by the just Judgment of God) live again when they are dead too, and
shall be summoned out of their Graves, as Malefactors out of a Dungeon; they
will say to the Mountains fall on us, and to the Hills, cover us; that is, they
will desire to be once more buried. Now to prevent so sad a Rising, we are to
Rise whilst we are here; from the Death (I mean) of Sin, and from the Grave of
Carnality. And that we may rise the more nimbly, we must be Levis Armaturae;
must not lay upon our selves too great a load of thick Clay, which commonly
brings with it another load, whether it be of worldly Cares, or of Carnal
Pleasures. Whatsoever most Christians may think of This, 'twas sadly considered
by many Heathens, of which I shall but instance in four or five. (...), etc.
Maxim. Tyr. Dissert. 20. p. 197.
Diogenes was a poor, but yet a very great Man, because his Poverty was his
choice; and he was one who did not want, but contemn the Gayeties of the World.
How did he fly above the Vices and Follies of it, by stripping himself of its
Impediments, and by imping the wings of his brave Ambition? 'Twas his Ambition
to be at Liberty, not to give Hostages to Fortune, to live a life disingaged
from things below him. He found that one Tub was enough to lie in, and one
wooden. Dish enough to drink in, and was resolved that his Housholdstuff should
hold proportion with his House. Yea even That he thought too much, for its
being somewhat more than was strictly needful. And therefore -- (...), etc. Id.
ibid. p. 201.
he brake his wooden Dish, upon his first consideration, That the Hollow of his
Hand had made it needless. Now I the rather choose to instance in this
remarkable Philosopher, because I know him very much censured, and think him as
little -- (...). Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. 22.
understood. For that which is taken by a Proverb to be the Cynicalness and
sowrness, was thought by diverse ancient Authors the lovely Nobleness of his
Temper. His choice of Poverty was the result of his very deep Knowledge, and
Contemplation. Nature and Industry had both conspired to his Perfections; of
which it was not the least, that he knew the whole World, and always had it
under his Feet too; as having weighed it in a Balance, and found its
lightness. He Qualis fuerit Diogenes, Quantusque, quanto homine major, quam Dei
similis, constat apud Ariani Epictetum (...), a capite ad calcem istius
Dissertationis. Etiam apud Senec. de Tranquil. animi c. 7.
had been sued to, and courted, by the Great Potentates of the Earth, whose
Prosperities stoop't down to receive the Honor of his Acceptance. But what
Solomon, out of his Wisdom, both infused, and acquired, (acquired both by
joious and sad experience,) the same Diogenes concluded, (I shall not dare to
say how,) That All is vanity under the Sun. Now we all know that Vanity is of
extremely little weight, if put in the Balance of Diseretion; and in the
Balance of the Sanctuary, of Psalm. 39. 11.
none at all. Nay the Psalmist concludes, that Man himself is but Vanity, who
yet is very much the noblest of any Creature under the Sun. And sure if every
man is Vanity, and the greater he is, the greater Vanity, and Eccles. 1. 14.
not only Vanity, but Vexation of Spirit; how could Godfrey Duke of Bulloin
have done more prudently for himself, than in refusing to accept a Crown of
Gold, where Christ Himself wore one of Thorns? or why should any of Christ's
Followers buy the Friendship of a Prince, when Xenocrates an Heathen would Rex
Philosophi Amicitiam emere voluit; Philosophus Regi fuam vendere noluit. Val.
Max. l. 4. c. 3.
not deign to sell His, no not to Alexander Himself who would fain have bought
it? Why should a Christian affect Dominion, when Rubori non fuit, eburneo
scipione deposito, agrestem stivam aratri repetere. Id. ib. c. 4. Cic. Offic.
l. 3.
Atilius an Heathen made choice to leave it? why should one of Christ's
Disciples court and covet That Plenty, which was despised by Fabricius, an
arrant Heathen? Why should a Christian set his Heart upon the getting and
leaving a vast Revenue to his Posterity, when the Heathen man Socrates thought
it a Charity to his Children, to leave them none? Not that he thought it a
Breach of Charity, to make Provision for his Family; but that he durst not
betray them to great Temptations. As He himself had refused half the Kingdom of
Samos when offered to him, so was he willing that his Children should inherit
his Temper, and Frame of Mind. He knew the Providence of God was the surest
Patrimony; And had been taught by his experience, that Friends well got were
the next great Treasure. 'Twas his Duty, as a Father, to leave his Children
very well, and by consequence in a condition (not the richest, but) the most
suitable, and safest for them; and therefore under a Necessity of taking pains.
Conceiving it infinitely difficult for any man to live a strict and a virtuous
life, who is not blessed with some Calling wherein to labor. Ask't he was
indeed by Xenophon, and other Friends, why of so many great Offers he would not
accept at least of some; if not in his own, yet in his Childrens consideration.
But still He answered, [ Objicienti, (...), respondet Socrates, (...), etc.
Socrat. Epist. 2. ex Edit. Leon. Allat. p. 15, 16, 17, etc. Confer Arrian.
Epict. l. 3. c. ult. p. 433.
If they live as they ought, they cannot want Blessings; and if they live
otherwise, I cannot wish that they may have them. If they are dutiful to their
God, they will find him an indulgent and loving Father. And if they rebel
against their Maker, what have I to do with them?] Now consider how these
Heathens who lived before Christ, had more of Christian Self-denial, than most
of Them that come after. They were many of them placed upon exceeding high
Mountains; showed the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory of them; Yea though
they were proffered those Enjoyments, and strongly tempted to accept them; yet
so great was their courage, they did not yield. Men, who if they are not fit
for our imitation, are fit to shame us at least for our imitating no more of
the Life of Christ. Who, as it were in opposition to this Temptation of the
Devil, drawn from the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, made choice
of Matthew. 8. 20.
Poverty and Despisedness for his external Qualifications. For though, by
reason of his Divinity, he could not possibly be obnoxious to the unworthiness
of Sin, yet by reason of his Humanity, he was capable of suffering the most
unworthy Solicitations. And even those Solicitations disturbed his Ease,
although they had not the power to hurt his Safety. Something therefore there
was in it for our Edification, That when it pleased the God of Heaven to take
upon him our Nature, who had it in his own choice, both of whom he would be
born, and in what Quality he would live, He did not choose the greatest, but
rather the meanest and the most abject of all Conditions. Now whoever he is
that chooses, (be he wise, or foolish,) ever chooses what is Best, either
really, or in show; either best in it self, or best to his imagina tion. From
whence it follows that our Savior, being the Wisdom of the Father, (as God the
Son,) could not choose but choose wisely, and what was really the best, when he
made choice to be so meanly both born, and bred. As for his Birth, sure a
Carpenter's Spouse was a very mean Parent; The Stable of an Inn was an
exceeding mean Place; wherein an Ox and an Ass were as mean Attendants. And
then for his Breeding, It was in Galilee, yea in Nazareth, the meanest part of
all Palestine; In the House of Goodman Joseph, one of the meanest men of
Nazareth; And in the way of a Carpenter, as mean a Trade as could well be
chosen.

Our Savior shall not choose for us, if he chooses no better for Himself,
(will the men of this World be apt to say.) We would choose (had we our choice)
to be born of Princes; to be bred in stately Palaces, and brought up at Court.
None should be greater, if we could help it, nor any richer than our selves. We
would choose the very Things, wherewith the Devil here tempted Christ, All the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them. Would not be so poorly spirited,
as to refuse a frank offer for want of a little Complaisance, an act of
Worship, and Veneration. A Beast indeed will rest contented, when his Belly is
full; and looks no higher, when he is Empty, than to That which grows up from
the Ground he treads on. But Man is made of another Metal, and He is scarce fit
to live who has no Ambition, but sits him down (like a Beast) completely
satisfied with a sufficience. Conscience and Contentment are fit for persecuted
Churchmen, (or well-bred Quakers,) or else for men whose Wits are lost in their
Studies, and whose overmuch Learning has made them as mad as any Paul; a Man
who talks of Contentment in All Conditions; and would have us look no farther
(as to the Goods of this World) than Food and Raiment.

Is it not Pity that such as These should be the Reasonings of the Followers
and Friends of Christ, who followed the things which They eschew, and eschewed
those things which They contend for? His choice (I say) was to be poorer, and
more despised than other men. And because, being a Man, he was to be of some
Calling, he pitched on That that was liable to least Temptations; and so was
registered at Nazareth, not in the Quality of a Freeholder, but of an
Handicraft-Man. He was but Faber Lignarius, a Wooden Smith. Had he been a
Freeholder, he had had (though not a Kingdom, yet) a small Pittance of this
World. He might have trod his own Ground, and have breathed his own Air, and
have eaten his own Bread, without depending upon the Charity of any other man's
hands, or on the Labor of his own. But he was on the contrary so poor and
destitute, that he had neither Food, nor Raiment, but what he earned, or had
given him, or got by Miracle. As long as from his Twelfth to his Thirtieth year
of Age, diverse Fathers are of opinion, that he wrought for his Living in his
Father in Law's Shop. Nor is there any Church-Writer who gives another Account
of him. And from thence until his Death he obtained his Bread, either by
Teaching, as a Prophet, or doing good, as a Physician; Both gratuitously, and
freely, Luke 8. 3.
although by some he was rewarded. Now that our Savior's way of choosing may
have some Influence upon ours, and this our second Consideration may be as
useful, as it is long,

18. Let us consider, in the Third place, how God and Satan are two Competitors
for our choice. Satan tempts us to join with Him, in his Attempts against God;
God solicits us on the contrary, to side with Him against Satan. Satan tempts
us to Rebellion, with the Things that are seen, which are but Temporal; God
solicits us to Obedience, with the Things that are not seen, which are Eternal.
Satan's Proposals are to the Flesh; God's especially to the Spirit. Satan takes
us up to an exceeding high Mountain, and discovers to us from thence, all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them; God, on the other side, takes us
up to Mount Sion, or at least takes us down to the Valley of Achor, and
discovers to us from thence, the Kingdom of Heaven, and Glory of it, and says
to us in effect, (as the Devil to Christ,) All This will I give you, if falling
down ye will worship me. Now it remains that we consider, to which Proposal of
the two our Affections and Appetites have the most reason to incline. Let Us put
them Both into the Scales, and then choose That that shall weigh the heaviest.

As for the Things of this present World, the best we can say of them is This,
They all are to perish in the using. The World it self is but a Thing, whose
Fashion passes away. But it is the saddest consideration, that the World's Good
things are much more dangerous than they are frail. It being a Duty extremely
difficult, to use this World as not abusing it; And yet if we omit to perform
this Duty, The richest Possessions upon Earth will but serve to purchase for us
the largest Interest in Hell. So that the Devil's Liberality amounts to This
only, That if we will but Idolize him, he will give us whatsoever may do us
Harm. He will supply us with the means of being damned so much the deeper. Was
it (think we) for nothing, or a thing by mere chance, that as our Savior chose
Poverty (rather than Plenty) for himself, so he chose such as were poor, (as
well in Fortune, as in Spirit,) to be enriched by his Grace, and made
Inheritors of his Kingdom? Was there not (think we) something in it, that the
Primitive Excellency consisted in selling all that they had, and laying it down
at the Apostles Feet? The least we can gather from it is This, (And be it
spoken as impartially to the due comfort of the Poor, as to the needful
Humiliation of such amongst us as are Rich,) That Poverty, though it is not
exempt from All, is yet obnoxious unto fewer, and lesser Dangers. For Riches
commonly do enable us to do things to be repented; whereas Poverty helps to fit
us to repent of things done. Indeed it is best of the two, to have Food
convenient, (as Agur words it;) to be in such a mediocrity 'twixt Poverty, and
Plenty, as not to be pinched with the former, nor too much loaded with the
later. Agur prayed against Both; but for different reasons. He prayed against
Poverty, as apt to make him turn Thief; But he prayed against Riches, as apt to
make him turn Atheist. Now by how much it is worse to be an Atheist, than a
Thief, by so much Riches should make a sadder, and a more formidable Condition.
And 'twas perhaps for this reason, (amongst some others,) that the most Learned
of all our Kings thought Him the happiest man in England, who by his Quality
and Estate had a middle Station, betwixt an High Constable, and a Justice of
Peace. For such a man is neither held to be Poor nor Rich. He has not the
Indigence of the one, nor the Vexation of the other. Is freer from Contempt,
and from Envy too. Has weaker Temptations, and fewer Troubles. This is to be
fed with Food convenient. And This is the Condition which Agur prayed for. But
that Scarceness in it self is safer for us (of the two) than Superfluity, we
may infer from That Method which the Devil here used against our Savior: who,
according as his Prosperities did fall, or rise, did ever find his Temptations
to ebb, or flow. And we know the lowest ebb can but leave us dry, whereas the
Tide of Prosperity is apt to drown us. So frail, and so worthless, yea and so
dangerous are the Things, by which the Rival of our Maker most strongly tempts
us.

Weigh we next the Good Things, not only of This, but a better World, wherewith
the God who may despise, vouchsafes to court us. He does not only court us with
the Promise of a Deliverance, from a Bottomless Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
where the Worm dies not, and where the Fire is not quenched; Nor seek to win
us only by Promises of a Crown immarcescible, of Ioys unspeakable, and endless,
such as our Hearts cannot hold, nor our Tongues utter, nor our Reasons
comprehend, nor our Fancies reach; But farther obliges and indears us with a
world of Bounties whilst we are Here. For Every man in the World has all the
World in Epitome; and that not only as to the sight, but enjoyment also, until
he forfeits his Birthright by the High Treason of his Debauches. Till then (I
say) he has a world, both to possess, and to enjoy, not only within, but
without him also. The world within him is so evident, and so very much
resembling the world without him, (far beyond what the Romans had made its
Hieroglyphick, or Emblem,) that there is hardly any thing namable, either in
Heaven, or in Earth, to which there is not something analogous, either in the
Body, or Soul of Man. The Truth of which saying will soon appear, to whosoever
will take the pains (as Augustine Mascardus has somewhere done) to draw a
Parallel of Particulars. And then for the world without his Person, it is plain
that That is within his Power. For all the Earth is his walk, if he please to
use it. He has Regions of Air wherein to Breathe: Many Rivers of Water to
quench his Thirst: And an Element of Fire to keep him warm. So that if he has
an House which will but hold him, and Meat as much as he can hold, and as much
Raiment as he can carry, he has certainly as much as a man undebauch't knows
what to do with; and what a madness is it for him to covet more? For how much
worse than a Brutality must we needs have exchanged our human Nature, when
nothing can please us but what is forbidden? and when nothing is forbidden, but
what 'twill mischief us to enjoy? How many Pleasures and Recreations has God
been bountifully pleased to make lawful for us? freely giving us the Liberty,
to choose as much as will do us good? Music is allowed us to please our Ears;
Perfumes to gratify our Smelling; the beautiful Structure of the Universe to
feed our Eyes with Admiration. Rich Variety of Meats to treat our Palates with,
when we are hungry; the most desirable Felicity of quenching our Thirst, when
we are dry; the great and innocent Sensuality of warming our Selves when we are
cold. And seeing the old Rule in Logic is indisputably True, That the whole
Nature of every Species is in each single Individual: God has made it both a
needless and senseless Thing, for any man to covet his Neighbor's Wife, by
having graciously allowed him the happy Society of his own. Now since Every man
in particular does as really enjoy the whole Influence of the Heavens, as if It
were shed upon Him alone, in so much that his enjoyment of Heat and Light would
be no greater, in case he were Monarch of all the world; Can it be other than
an irrational and an absurd kind of wickedness, if, whilst we lawfully enjoy
the whole benefit of the Sun, we shall esteem it a want of Happiness, that
another man injoys it as well as we? if, whilst our own Cisterns are running
over, we shall not be able to be satisfied, unless with stolen Waters? Is there
nothing will stay our Stomachs, but the Bread of Dishonesty? Will nothing
content us throughout our Journey, (for which God has given us so plain an
Highway wherein to walk,) but the removing of signal Landmarks, and the
breaking up of Hedges, and leaping over God's Mounds? and this at a time whilst
we are told, that as our Journey is long, so our Time is little, and yet
Eternity depends on the usage of it? Must we needs be still coveting another's
House, another's Land, another's Servant, another's Wife, or somewhat else
which is another, and that at the Instant of our abounding in two whole worlds
which are our own? No, let us rather bespeak our Tempter, as Joseph did his
kind Mistress, How can we do so great a wickedness? which way shall Genesis 39. 8,
9.
we be able to set about it? Had Potiphar been a jealous man, or a cruel
Master, Joseph might have done much, at the frequent Entreaties of a Mistress.
But He, considering how his Master had withheld nothing from him, besides his
Wife, and entrusted him too with Her, as well as with his whole Substance,
could not in Gratitude to his Master accept the Favor of his Mistress. He
could not sin against so manifold and great a Trust. So, if God had been a
Wilderness to any of us, tied us up from All Comforts, or left but few things
lawful for us, we might then have sinned against him with more excuse. But
considering his Bounty, and Goodness toward us, his leaving it in our power to
pick and choose our Contentments in great Variety, and his withholding nothing
from us, but what will hurt us in the Possession; we ought to stir up his
Grace, as well as our own good Nature in us, to an effectual Resistance of the
most powerful Temptations, which shall at any time endeavor to debauch us into
Rebellion; and say with Joseph, How can we do so great a wickedness against a
Deity so obliging? How can we possibly be so ungrateful?

19. Having therefore briefly weighed the Rival-objects of our choice; and seen
the very vast Difference between the Things of this praesent, and future world;
yea between the same Things of this present world, as they are differently
offered, by God, and Satan; by God on the one side, as they are sanctified into
Blessings; and on the other side by Satan, as they are turned into a Curse; by
God, as of Right, and by Satan, as of Sufferance; by God in such a Measure, as
has a Tendency to our Good, and by Satan in such an extravagance, as is in
order to our undoing; by God, to satisfy our Appetites, and by Satan, to
enlarge them; by God, as obligations to Love and Gratitude, and by Satan, as
excitements to Pride and Luxury; By God, as Directives to the great End of our
Creation, and by Satan, as Amusements to keep us from it; we cannot take a
better course, when Satan tempts us (as he did Christ) with the Greatness of
the World, and the Glory of it, than to reflect upon our Solemn Baptismal Vow,
and by consequence to fight against the Prince of this World, and utterly to
forsake its Pomps and Vanities; Not to walk according to the Course of this
world; to fear its Friendship; to hate its Wisdom; to suspect its Power, and to
scorn its Glory; to crucify the world unto our selves, and our selves unto the
world; to keep our selves unspotted and undefiled from the world; And, whilst
our vile Bodies are here on Earth, to have our Conversations at least in Heaven.

20. These are the Lessons we are to learn, from the First observable in the
Text, and such as prompt me to proceed to the consideration of the Second. For
of the many and cogent Arguments whereby to make our selves think meanly of the
Things which we admire, This is none of the least, That they are not only in
God's Gift, (by a natural Right,) But many times (by His leave) in the Devil's
also. For thus rnn the words of The next Particular in the Division,

That all the Goods of This world, however The second Proposition.
lovely they may appear to the misty Eye of Carnality, are yet by God's
Patience, and wise Permission, (at least successively, though not at once,) in
the Devil's Proffer, and Disposal.

First I must evidence that so it Is. Next I must guess at the Reasons why. And
last of all I must proceed, to show the manifold Advantage and Use of Both.

1. That so it is may be evinced more Its Truth proved.
ways than one; From Scripture, from Reason, and from Experience. It is so
evident from Scripture, (wherein our Savior calls Satan John 12. 31. and Chapter
16. V. 11. Ephesians. 6. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
The Prince of this World, St. Paul the Ruler, and the God too,) that the Devil
in one sense said not amiss unto our Savior, (...), the power of this world is
delivered Luke 4. 6.
to me, as That does signify by an Hebraism, that God does suffer or permit
him to rob the Innocent, and to heap Riches upon the Guilty, and so to dispose
of whole Kingdoms to the Sons of Violence and Oppression, who call their
strength the Law of Justice. Wisd. 1. 11.
It Is true, the words of the Devil, (as St. Luke sets them down) are clearly
spoken as by a Sophister; who, (according to his Custom) being aequivocal or
homonymous in what he says, does cunningly mix a little Truth with the greatest
falsehood to be imagined. For if he means that God Almighty has put the world
into his hands, and entrusted him, (as a Deputy) to pass a Right of Possession
on whom He pleases, there is nothing more false than his (...); (which will be
made to appear in its proper place.) But if his meaning is only This, That God
is pleased to let him alone in his Course of wickedness for a Time, and permits
him to be mischievous as far as his Fetters and Chain will reach, nothing is
truer than That Assertion from the Father of Lies. And nothing can show its
Truth better, than such a Scriptural Example as That of Job.

2. He (we know) was a perfect, and upright Job 1. 1.
man: A man fearing God, and eschewing Evil. As to the purity of his Life, he
had not his Equal in all the Earth. In so much Verse 8.
that God upbraided and vexed Satan with his Integrity. Yet even All that Job
had (and we know he had a world) was left by God in the Devil's Power. For no
sooner had Satan said, Put forth thine Hand now, and Verse 11.
touch all he has, And he will curse thee to thy face; but God returned him
this Answer, All that he has is in thy Power: only upon Verse 12.
Himself do not put thine Hand forth. It Is plain the Devil is God's Prisoner;
for there we have the length of the Chain that holds him. It did not reach to
Job's Person, but only to his Possessions. And to Them so universally, that the
Devil disposed of All to his prime Instruments upon Earth; The Sabaeans, the
Chaldaeans, the Fire, and the Whirlwind. He sent his Journey-men, the Sabaeans,
to plunder Job of his Oxen, to take his Verse. 14, 15.
Asses into Possession, and slay his Servants with the edge of the Sword.
Employed the Verse 16.
Fire to kill his Sheep and his Shepherds. To the Chaldaeans he bequeathed
Job's stock of Verse 17.
Camels, together with the Lives of those that kept them. And then for his
Children, both Sons and Daughters, the Devil gave Verse 19.
them all up unto the Wind out of the Wilderness, which blew down the House
(wherein they were met) upon their Heads. After This the bassl'd Tempter was
thus insulted over by God; Have thou considered my Servant Job, Chap. 2. v. 3.
who holds fast his Integrity, although thou movedst me against him to
swallow him up without a Cause? Satan therefore ask't Sufferance 5.
to tempt him farther; to smite the Body of Job with Byles; and to smite him 6.
Cap a Pe too, from Head to Foot. His chain, Verse 7.
Before, was very long; It reached as far as Job's All, besides his Person. In
so much that of the Richest, he became the very Poorest of all the People: For
it is a Proverb, and an Hyperbole, to say a man is as poor as Job. But now the
Chain is made longer by one considerable Link. For having nothing left to him,
except a Body and a Soul, and (what was much worse than nothing) a vexing Wife,
(a Wife whom the Devil had leave enough to take from him, but would not use
it,) now at last his Body too is in the power of the Destroyer, who disposed of
his Flesh to the very Bone; Nor is there any thing exempted, besides his Soul.

3. Thus we see by Example, how great a stroke the Devil carrys, (by God's long
Sufferance, and Permission,) in the outward management of the World. That is to
say, in the Disposal of all Those Things, which do pass amongst men for great
and glorious. How was Satan permitted to harden Pharaoh, to inrage Sennacherib,
to excite Nebuchadnezzar, against the Israel of God? and to dispose of all they
had, according to his own Lust? Should I produce as many Examples as are
producible out of Scripture, and dwell on each as I have done in the Case of
Job, I should be in some danger of being Endless. It shall therefore suffice me
to say in brief, That whenever one man invades another man's Right, or
whenever one Nation usurps Dominion over another, against that Precept of God
and Nature writ in every man's Heart, [ What thou*wouldest that no man should
do to thee, do Thou to no man,] or against those other Precepts, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not covet, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's House, (much
less his House with all his Land too,) nay Thou shall not covet any thing (much
less All) that is thy Neighbors; it is not God, but the Devil, who is the
Author of That Injustice. God does patiently permit, and invisibly overruled,
and wisely order such Perpetrations, to many most worthy and righteous Ends,
which in part we well know, and in part we know not, (touching which I shall
speak in their proper place;) But still the Robberies and Invasions are the
Contrivances of the Devil. Now in every such Invasion there are two Parties
tempted; one with loss, and another with Acquisition. They that suffer the
Injustice are strongly tempted with Affliction; And They that do it are tempted
worse, because with the Bait of a Prosperity which in such case is
irresistible. The Devil trys with one Action to murder two Souls at once. Two
at once, in case the Robbery does only lie betwixt Man and Man. But many
Thousands of them at once, when betwixt the two Parts of an Armed Nation. For
then the Devil at the same time provokes the stronger Party to Pride, as well
as the weaker to Impatience; The Injurious side to Insolence, and the oppressed
to Despair. This I take to be the Reason, why when the Devil will do a Mischief
of most considerable Importance, he does not content himself with Brutish or
Inanimate Instruments; but rather prefers the use of such, as ought to be
rational, and religious, and so are to render a sad Account of what is done in
the Body; That by dashing many Thousands (as when whole Armies meet) against
each other, and getting Victory for the Oppressors, he may (in one kind or
other) destroy them All. To wit the Bodies of some, and the Souls of others.
Had the Devil (for Example) infested Job with nothing worse than the Fire, and
Whirlwind, or only tormented his Flesh with Byles, he had in vain spread his
Net to catch no more than one Bird, (for though Job was a Job 2. 3.
Phoenix, he was but one;) Had fought to plunder Job alone of his Faith and
Patience. Whereas by stirring up the Sabaeans and the Chaldaeans to do him
Mischief, he cunningly caught at one Draught as great a Multitude of Souls, as
he had prosperously employed in so foul a Riot.

4. Now it is plain by this Instance of Satan's Power to take away, He has a
power to bestow too, by God's permission; and that in order to an end, not as
bad only, but worse, proposed by Satan unto Himself. For when he takes from the
Innocent, how liberal is he to the Guilty? It may be said of his Instruments,
They do not always serve him for naught. He often caresses them whilst they are
here, that so hereafter he may have liberty to glut his Malice on them the
more. What he snatches (as 'twere with one hand) from the Innocent Party, he
commonly gives (as with the other) to the Kennel of Robbers whom He employs.
Look what Camels and other Cattle he deprived Job of, he did confer at the same
Instant on Such as drove them out of his Fields. And thus I hope my Proposition
is clear from Scripture.

5. Secondly from Reason 'twill be as easy to evince it. For if the Goods of
this world were not suffered by God to be disposed of by the Devil, our
Leviathan would have had reason for his Denial of any Difference 'twixt Right
and Wrong. If God alone does still dispose of all Possessions under the Sun,
(as prosperous Rebels and Usurpers are wont to urge,) and the Devil of none at
all by God's permission, All things then must needs be right, except the Laws
and the Statutes which forbid men to steal upon pain of Death. They would not
only be irrational, but cruel things. For why should any man be censured, (much
less certainly should he be punished,) for taking That which God gives him?
Shall not God, without offense, dispose of things as He pleases? why then are
we so wicked, so void of all Ingenuity, as to prosecute a Man who is called a
Thief, in case he breaks up our Houses, takes our Cash out of our Coffers,
drives our Cattle out of our Grounds, or carries our Corn out of our Barns, if
God has made him His Messenger, and (by his absolute Decree, or by his
All-working Providence,) disposed of our Substance to That man's use? Or why
did God himself say, Thou shall not steal, if a man can have nothing, but what
God gives him? For whatsoever God gives him, becomes his own. No propriety of
man can exclude that of God, or be equal to it. And in Conveyances of Title
amongst our selves, still (we know) a Deed of Gift, confers as absolute a
Right, as a Deed of Purchase. If then we may have any thing which by right is
not ours, we have it certainly from Satan, and not from God. For one of These
Members following (that I may make my work short) must needs be granted. Either
that Robbery, and Theft, Extorsion, and Oppression, and all sorts of Cousenage,
are names, and words, and nothing else; (invented only by Politicians,
Ecclesiastical and Civil,) or that if they are Things, they are very Good, as
being derived from God the Author; or that God is the Author of what is morally
evil; or that at least they are the works, not of God, but of the Devil. The
First of these cannot be; for then it would follow, That Theft is no Sin. Much
less the Second; for then it would follow, that Sin is Good. Much less the
Third; for then it would follow, that God is Evil. Each of which being false,
and blasphemous too; It Is plain the Fourth, by way of Refuge, must needs be
granted, (seeing no fifth Member can either be, or be imagined,) That All our
Robberies and Frauds are not of God, but of the Devil.

6. Now this becomes a sure Medium to prove the Point we have in hand; because
the Things of this world (I mean the Wealth and Glory of it) are wont to be
bandied up and down, from one Possessor to another, by secret Fraud, or by open
Force. How very few (in comparison) are contented with the Portion which God
has given them? and have no more in their Possession than can be properly
called Theirs? How much is gotten by daily cousenage, in Fairs, or Markets? How
much by filtching, and purloyning, in private Families, and Common Fields? How
much by Bribery, and Corruption, in Courts of Justice, (as we call them,) and
Jurisdiction? (I do not mean so much in This, as in foreign Kingdoms and
Commonwealths.) How much by Cutpurses and Cutthroats, in public Meetings, and
Highways? How much by Preaching, and length of Praying, when Pharisaical
Negotiators do pray and preach for a Pretense, that they may swallow down
Orphans and Widows Houses? How much by Riots and Depredations of undisciplined
Armies, through the Spirit which Ephesians. 2. 2.
is still working in the Children of Disobedience? In a word, I am not
qualified to name the several ways and methods, by which Injustice is promoted,
and Equity trodden into the Dust. Now whatsoever is ill-acquired cannot
possibly be our own, however called by our Names. For Right and Possession are
many times at such Distance, that they can never once meet, or be reconciled.
Yea by how much the nearer Possession is, Right may stand the farther off. Ill
got Possession gives right to nothing, unless to Hell, and the Gibbet; or to
Repentance, and Restitution. Ahab got a full Possession of Naboth's Vineyard;
But 'twas by Murder, and Perjury, and Suborning Sons of Belial to bear false
witness, And so by doing That to Satan which Satan tempted our Savior to.
Things so far from giving him Right unto another man's Goods, that they
betrayed him into a Forfeiture of what had otherwise been his own. For by a
complicated Treason against the Majesty of God, his very Soul (as well as Body)
became consiscate to the Devil. Indeed it implys a Contradiction, that a man
should get Right, by doing Wrong. There is a Man in the world (says the
inspired Prophet Habakkuk) Habak. 2. 6, 7, etc.
who does enlarge his Desire as Hell, and is as greedy as the Grave, and cannot
be satisfied; But gathers together all Nations, and heapeth to himself all
People. But mark what follows. Woe to him who increases what is not Verse 7.
His. Woe to him who coveteth an evil Covetousness Verse 9.
to his House, that he may set his Nest on high, that he may be delivered from
the Power of Evil. For the Stone shall cry out of the Wall, Verse 11.
and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it. Woe to him that builds a
Town with Blood, and Verse 12.
stablisheth a City by Iniquity. Now what is the Reason of all These Woes, but
that he increases what is not His? If it is His, let him show how. Did he buy
it? or was it given him? Or did he inherit it by Nature? Or was it so made over
to him, as Canaan by God to the People Israel? If this later, Let us hear it
made good by a Voice from Heaven; and that attested too by Miracle. So as Moses
and Aaron did prove the Principle and Power by which They acted. If he cannot
do This, it is not His. Therefore he hadit not from God; Therefore he had it
from the Devil. And thus we have the Proposition made good by Reason. Nor by
solitary Reason, but in conjunction with Scripture, and grounded on it.

7. Thirdly we may prove it by known Experience. By other men's Experience, and
by our own. First by other men's Experience, and that attested as well by
Sacred, as by Secular Story. David was taught by his Experience, that
Prosperity was Then the usual Portion of the ungodly. For so he tells us at
large in the Seventy third Psalm; I was grieved Psalm. 73. from v. 3. to v. 14.
at the wicked, I saw the ungodly in such Prosperity. They are in no peril of
Death, but are lusty and strong. Their Eyes swell with Fatness, and they do
even what they list. They come in no misfortune like other folk, neither are
they plagued like other men. Therefore fall the People unto them, and thereout
suck they no small advantage. Tush, say they, how shall God see? Is there
knowledge in the most High? Lo these are the ungodly, these prosper in the
Land, these have Riches in Possession. But I, on the contrary, Who have
cleansed my heart, Verse 12.
and have washed mine hands in Innocence; I who have lived in the fear of God,
and made a conscience of my ways, All the day long have I been punished, and
been chastened 13.
every Morning. The Prophet Jeremy tells us Jer. 12. 1, 2, 3.
too, from his own Experience, That the way of the wicked was wont to prosper;
and that they who dealt treacherously were happy men. They were planted, took
root, they grew, they multiplied; yet God was not near in their Mouth, and far
from their Reins. The Prophet Malachi, after Him, had the like Experience, That
the Proud were happy, and the Workers of Mal. 3. 15.
wickedness were set up; yea they who tempted God were even delivered. So as it
seemed (to the Eye of Flesh) a very vain thing to serve the Lord. And the same
was observed by the Prophet Habakkuk. That the wicked (in Habak. 1. 4, 15, 16.
his Time) did even compass about the Righteous; they gathered them in their
Net; their Portion was fat, and their Meat plenteous.

8. If we pass out of Sacred into Secular Story, we may discover the same
Experience running through every Age of Man, from the one end unto the other.
(Although my little time allowed will not permit me to exemplify, unless in
here and there one.) That will certify how Ninus first founded Empire in
Iniquity. How the Assyrians and Chaldaeans continued That. How the Medes and
the Persians invaded These. How Philip of Macedon usurped All Greece; And his
insatiable Son the Eastern Empire. How the Romans made All bow down to Italy.
How the Goths and the Vandals subdued the Romans; and ravaged the greatest part
of Christendom, as far as from Poland to Mauritania. How Mahomed the First
subdued the Saracens, And Profaneness became possess't of the Holy Land. How
the Ottoman Empire prospers against the Purity of the Gospel, and the
Profession of Christianity, and so has done from Age to Age, and that by the
Practice of all Impiety. How very clear a thing is it, (a thing of which the
world is witness,) that the Great Sultan (as they call him) is the greatest
Monarch under Heaven? the greatest Enemy to Christ, the most abandoned and
given up to work Iniquity even with Greediness, the most incapable of Mercy,
either to Men in his Rage, or to Women in his Lust, and yet the fullest of
Prosperity of any Potentate upon Earth. How many Millions of Christian Souls
are there now groaning under his Tyranny? How many Princes within our
Christendom are fain to buy their Peace of him, or pay him Tribute? How many
Centuries of years have those Mahomedans still prosper'd, more than any sort of
Christians that can be named? Shall we now join in consort with all those
Infidels, and aver, that though Christ was a great Prophet indeed, yet Mahomed
was a Greater? Shall we infer that Those Turks are the special Favorites of
Heaven? That God, in love to their Alchoran, has signally favored them with
the greatest and fairest Quarters of the World? has made a Decision of the
Controversy betwixt the Worshippers of Mahomed, and Those of Christ, even by
yielding to the former his Approbation? There are who talk at this rate, and
know not how to talk otherwise, whilst they reason from the Principles which
They are led by. But God be thanked we are led by a clearer light. As having
learnt from St. Paul to say of such Thrivers in their Impiety, (not that God
has endowed, with much delight, but) That God has endured, with much
long-suffering, the Romans 9. 22.
Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. And again with St. Paul we have
learnt to say, That God did SUFFER those Nations to walk Acts 14. 18.
in their own ways. Had they walked in God's ways, God had been said to have
made them do it. But as they walked in their own, God only suffered them. We
say (as Abraham Luke 16.
to Dives) God permits them to have their Good things, Here. And Here the Devil
is permitted to have a very wide Scope; to use a large kind of Freedom. For
however he is held in Chains of Darkness, yet his Chains Jude.
are so long, and many times so much enlarged, as that he goes to and fro upon
the face of Job 2. 2.
the Earth. And not only so; but, by the Patience of which I spoke, and the
long-suffering of the Almighty, bestows the Kingdoms of the World on such as
serve him. ( All the Kingdoms, I do not say, but as many as God permits, who
yet at one time or other, though not at once, may be said with great Truth to
permit them All.) The Ottoman Emperors in their Successions have been placed
by the Devil upon exceeding high Mountains; have seen the Kingdoms of the
world, and the Glory of them; And the Devil in effect has said to Them, as here
to Christ, All these things will I give you, if ye will fall down and worship
me. Those Emperors have been suffered to do the one, And the Devil has been
permitted to give the other. I shall but name the wicked Phocas, who (of a very
mean Soldier) did by his complicated Impieties usurp the Empire of Mauritius, a
pious Prince. And then for Him nearer Home, who by his Practice and his Success
drew That Phocas to the Life, I think I need not so much as name him. Nor is
there any thing more acknowledged, (at least by the sober Rank of Men, who are
not yet ashamed to believe the Scriptures,) than that Witches, and Wizards,
Magicians, and Sorcerers, have made their Contracts with the Devil, as with a
Bountiful Disposer of worldly Goods.

9. So that if we consult our own Experience, if we ask our own Eyes, and call
our Memories to Account, how very frequent a thing it is for the hand of
wickedness to prevail, for the stool of wickedness to prosper, in devouring the
man that is more righteous than Habak. 1. 13.
He; And if we consider at the same time, That (excepting some few, and
extraordinary Examples, such as the Israelites of old who were commanded by God
himself to spoil Exodus 12. 35.
the Egyptians of their Jewels, and take the Canaanites Land for their own
Possession,) Chap. 13. 5.
It has been merely the Sin of Robbery, in all the Ages of the World, for any
one or more men to seize upon That which is another, by private Fraud, or by
public Violence; we cannot choose but subscribe to the Sense of our Savior
and St. Paul, That the Devil (under God, and by God's permission,) is One
Dispenser of Preferment, if not the Chiefest. And therefore not without Reason
is said by our Lord, and his Apostle, to be the Ruler, and the Prince, and even
the God of this World. Experience has made it a kind of Proverb, That He who
cannot dissemble, can hardly live. And Conscience is so commonly the Beggar's
Virtue, that That is grown too to a kind of Proverb. As if the high way to
Wealth, were to serve Mammon, rather than God, Pluto was made the proper Name
for the God of Wealth. And 'twas an Aphorism of State in the late ill Times, He
who will have something, must do any thing to acquire it. Like that of the Poet
in Time of Yore, Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, and Carcere dignum, Sivis esse
aliquid --

He who will rise to high Promotion, and purchase the Friendship of the World,
must bravely dare to do something, worthy the Gibbet, or the Iayl. But if a man
will serve God, he is to do it at his Peril, of being a Confessor perhaps,
perhaps a Martyr. 'Twas from the Topic of this Experience, that the Devil here
argued against our Savior. (And my Text, as I conceive, does well admit of
This Paraphrase.) If thou will violate God' s Law, in an adhaerence unto mine;
If thou will lay aside thy Conscience, and stick at nothing which I command
thee; (...), etc. I will give thee whatsoever thine Eye can see, or thine Heart
desire. Thou may arrive a great deal sooner at Wealth and Greatness, by
taking those Courses which I suggest, than by relying upon the Providence, or
on the Promises of God. For do but look round about thee, and trust thine Eyes.
Thou see it goes best with the worst of men; and that the men of nice
Conscience are quite undone by their Integrity. Weigh the Successes of Evil
doers with the Calamities of the Righteous, and thou will find Them the wisest
who worship Me. This does seem to be the Scope of the Devil's reasoning to our
Savior. And my Discourse added to His may serve to evince the Proposition
which lies before us, That all the Goods of this World (at least successively,
though not at once,) are, by the Sufferance of the Almighty, in the Devil's
Proffer and Disposal.

10. I have but one Topic left from whence to make it yet clearer, or past
Dispute; And that must needs be by way of Answer to an Objection. For if These
Things are so, (some may say within Themselves, Men will be in great danger of
becoming Epicuraeans; An Objection.
looking on God as without regard of what is done upon the Earth, and as
consining his Providence to things transacted within the Heavens. And if they
once come to That, they will Sin securely, and tumble down with great merriment
into the Bottomless Asphaltites which gapes to have them. So far from Scruple
or Regret in their words or actions, that they will rather use the language of
those Contemners in the Psalmist; Tush, how shall God see? Is there knowledge
Psalm. 73. 10.
in the most high? Or say with Eliphaz unjustly accusing Job, How does God
know? can Job 22. 13.
he judge through the dark Cloud? Or else with the Braves in the Book of
Wisdom; Let us lie Wisd. 2: 12. and 18.
in wait for the righteous man. If he is the Son of God, He will help him, and
deliver him from the hand of his Enemies. Besides, the Doctrine we have in hand
does seem to clash with those Scriptures, wherein God is said to Rule in the
Kingdoms of men. He gives it (says Daniel) to whomsoever he pleases, and
Dan. 4. 17.
sets up over it the basest of men. And Christ is said to be the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1. 5. How then comes the Devil to have the very
same Titles bestowed upon him?

11. To this Objection I answer, and Answered.
to the later part first, as being That that admits of most Dispatch. What
God and Christ are called properly, in regard of their Natural and Sovereign
Right, The Devil is tropically Intitl'd, and by an usual Catachresis, in regard
of That Possession which God permits him to usurp. The Vineyard which was
Ahab's, was Naboth's too; de facto That, and de jure This. (That is,) the one
was possess't of what the other had a right to. So when we speak of Laban's
Teraphims, we mean the Teraphims belonging of right to Laban. But when we call
them Rebecca's Teraphims, we mean the Teraphims which she hid, and had stolen
from Laban. The Kings of Spain are called by Thousands, Kings of Portugal; The
Kings of France, of Navarr^; the Kings of England, of France; All pretending to
have a Right, where others have gotten the whole Possession. But now with a
greater force of reason may the Devil be called the Ruler, and the God of this
world; not only because the world does (for the greatest part) adore him, and
do him service, but because they do it too by His forbearance and permission,
whose Creatures they are, and whose right It is; and who, in respect of his
Omnipotence, cannot possibly be resisted. For (that I may pass from the later
to the former part of the Objection:)

12. So far is God from forsaking or slighting the Government of the World,
that (as I said once before, but did not so prove it as now I must,) Satan
himself is but his Prisoner, however his Prison is somewhat wide. Not at all
his Vicegerent, to rule the World in his stead, or with any degree of his
Approbation. In the Twentieth Chapter of the Apocalypse, we find the Devil laid
Rev. 20. 2, 3.
hold on, and bound in a Chain, and cast into a Pit, shut up and sealed for a
thousand years, and again let loose for a little season. And what is all This,
but the Hypotyposis of a Prisoner? And though his Chain, for a time, is left by
God very long (as I said before) yet all the while it is but a Chain, yea and
such a Chain too, as is not loose, any more than endless. We know the Sea is
God's Prisoner, though not a very close Prisoner, as others are. The Wind it
self is not at Liberty, however we cannot discern its Bounds. It seems indeed
to be the freest of all God's Prisoners; And therefore God is said to ride upon
the wings of the Wind, by the high flown Psalm. 18. 10. and 104. 3.
Wit of the Royal Poet. Yet, as He said unto the Sea, Thus far, and no farther,
shall Job 38. 10.
thy proud Waves go; so he checks the very Wind too, as with a Bridle, and
says unto it, Peace, Mark 4. 39.
be still. Now we find that when our Savior was but pleased to say the word,
not the Wind, and Sea only, but the Devils also obeyed him. When he bid them
come out of the poor Daemoniack, They durst not stay (or they could not) one
minute longer. Yea they were forced to petition him, and ask his leave, before
they could enter an Herd of Swine. It was indeed a great power which Satan had
over Job, as I showed before; but I showed too how it was limited. First to his
Goods, with an exemption of his Body; and then at last to his Body, with an
exemption of his Soul. It was indeed a great power which Satan had over the
Christians in the purest Ages of Christianity, for no less than Three hundred
and thirty years, inflicting Ten Persecutions, from Christ to Constantine the
Great. And another great power during the Arian Persecution, under the Tyranny
of Constantius. Another great power, although a short one, in Iulian's Time.
Another in the Time of the Emperor Valens. Another more universal, in the
fifth Century after Christ, when (at the very same Instant) Anastasius the
Emperor was an Eutychian; the Kings of Italy, Spain, and Africa, Arians; The
Kings of England, France, and Germany, Heathens. A greater power than all these
the Devil seems to have had in the Tenth Century after Christ, when Hell is
said to have broken loose, and the Prosperity of the Church did much more
threaten her utter Ruin, than all her Persecutions, when put together. Yet all
this while it was a limited, and stinted power. Christianity thrived under its
Sufferings, and had a Being (though a poor one) in the Excesses of its
Enjoyments. The Gates of Hell did not Then so fully prevail against the Church,
as not to confess it to be a Truth, That she was founded upon a Rock. What our
Lord said to Pilate, Thou could have no power against me, were it not given
thee from above, John 19. 11.
we (with a little alteration) may say as properly to the Devil, and
religiously defy him to do his worst. Or we may say in some sense upon this
occasion, (as St. Paul to the Romans upon another,) There is no power but Romans
13. 1.
of God. God ordaining it, if it is right; or God permitting it, if it is
wrong. Here then lies our Comfort, as Men, and Christians, that the Devil can
no longer continue powerful, than God is pleased to be patient of him. The
roaring Lion can no more hurt us, without God's leave, than the hungry Lions
could hurt Daniel, or than hunger it self could hurt Elias, or than the burning
fiery Furnace could Dan. 3. 27.
hurt the Three Loyal Jews who were cast into it. Nay upon such as serve God,
the second Rev. 20. 6.
Death has no power; which yet is known to be so strong, as to have power over
the Devil. For the time will one day come, when God will tie him up close in
his Chains of Darkness, and will not suffer him any longer to dispose of any
thing in the World, (much less of the Kingdoms, and Glories of it,) But will
sink him into the Depth (for I cannot say the Bottom) of the Lake which burns
with Fire and Brimstone. Nay though the Devil was so impudent, as to tempt our
blessed Lord to the committing of Idolatry, yet in saying [ All things are
delivered to me] he was seemingly Luke 4. 16.
so modest, (or else so weak,) as to confess that he has nothing; which he has
not received; And that as great as he is, he has one above him; one to whom he
is a Prisoner; one who, as he can freely give, so he can easily take away too;
one who does suffer but for a time, what he will certainly revenge unto all
Eternity. In a word he does confess, that all he has to dispose of is but
derivative, and precarious. It Is at the most but (...), (if his own word were
to be taken,) delivered to him by his Judge, the proper Owner of all the World,
to whom at last he is to render a sad and terrible Account.

13. Thus we see the Devil's words ( Luke 4. 6.) have but a little Truth mixed
with a world of Falsehood. Nothing is True in them but This, That God does
suffer or permit him to be many times liberal to such as serve him. But now
with This little Truth which is but sufficiently implied, we have Three or Four
Falsehoods which are sufficiently expressed. For first it is false what he says,
(if it be literally taken,) That the Things of this World are Delivered to him.
For not to hinder or to permit, or to suffer him to take and dispose of Things,
is very much less than to deliver, or put them to him to dispose of; even as
much as to be passive, must needs be less than to be active, in whatsoever
thing it is which is brought to pass. It Is true, the Devil was permitted to
Matthew. 4. 5, 8.
take our Savior, not only once, but again; and to carry him whither he
pleased too; as first into The City, and after That unto The Mountain. But it is
false to say, our Savior was delivered up to Satan by God the Father. Next
it is but figuratively true, and therefore literally false, That he gives the
World's Kingdoms to such as serve him. For being no more than an Usurper, and
therefore void of all right, he is not properly said to Give, but rather to
procure them to all Usurpers. Thirdly it is false that he procures them to
whomsoever he pleases, (which yet he confidently adds,) for he procures them
no farther, than God sees good to permit, or suffer. Last of all he says
falsely, That ALL the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them are so much as
permitted to his Disposal, (if he means all at once.) For God disposes of many
Kingdoms, wherein he suffers not the Devil to have the least thing to do. 'Twas
God alone who gave his People the Land of Canaan, although the Devil took it
from Them, and helped to procure it for the Assyrians. 'Twas God alone who gave
Job his store of Cattle, although the Devil prompted his Laborers, (the
Chaldaeans and Sabaeans,) to take them from him. 'Twas God alone who gave
Naboth a pleasant Vineyard, although the Devil (by God's permission) helped Ahab
to it. 'Twas God alone who gave a Kingdom, (or rather Three Kingdoms which made
a World,) together with all the Glory of it, to our late Martyred Sovereign of
Glorious Memory, although the Devil was permitted (by the help of his Tools) to
bereave him of it. In a word, if it is true, what is proverbially asserted,
(and upon very good Grounds,) That half the World, at the least, does live by
cheating all the rest, and by imposing on one another; Then is it easy to
discern and to state the Difference, betwixt the Right, and the Possession of
things on Earth; betwixt the Blessings, and the Curses conveyed to men by their
Prosperities; betwixt the Instruments, or Bounties, of God, and Satan.

14. Having hitherto showed the Truth Some Reasons offered.
of my Proposition, and withal cleared it from the Objection; I am next to give
the Reasons, (at least as many as I can think of, or can fairly conjecture at,)
why God is pleased, in this World, to endure with so much patience so great a
confusion upon the Earth, and leaves to the Devil so great a power in the
perverting and debauching the ways of men. For whilst we look at nothing else
but what is present, and before us, we seem to see nothing but Disorder, in
most Events under the Sun. If none but good men did prosper, and none but evil
men miscarry, A method then would be acknowledged, and men would probably be
better than now they are. Of if all that are good were in Affliction, and all
that are evil in Prosperity, still there would be some method, however men in
probability would be very much the worse for the knowledge of it. But as now
the world goes, There seems to be no method at all. Things fall out in such a
blended promiscuous manner. For though the wicked are found to prosper a great
deal more than the righteous, (as has been showed,) yet it is as clear that many
righteous do also prosper with the wicked, and many wicked ones, even here, are
as much afflicted as the righteous. In which respect it was said by the Royal
Preacher, That all things come alike Eccles. 9. 2, 3, 11.
to all. There is one event to the wicked, and to the righteous; to the clean,
and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and him that sacrifices not. As
is the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an
Oath. The Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, neither Bread
to the Wise, nor Riches to men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to men of
Skill, but Time and Chance happens to them all. In so much that some are
tempted by the seeming Confusion of Events, the Prosperities of the worst men,
and the Calamities of the Best, to distrust the very Providence, yea to suspect
the very Justice, yea to deny the very Being of God Himself. They think they,
are born at all adventure, and that they shall dye as they are born. That their
spirits shall vanish into the Air, and be as if they Wisd. 2. 23.
had never been.

15. Now to preserve our selves from falling into the very same Snare, let us
reflect upon the Reasons of this Confusion, at which so many are falling
headlong into the bottomless Abyss of Eternal Misery. Not insisting upon the
Reasons in such a measure as they deserve, But rather pointing at the chief
Topics from which the Reasons are to be fetched. One chief Reason is to be
taken from the natural Freedom of the Will, in every rational Agent which is
subjected to a Law, and by consequence made worthy either of Punishment or
Reward. God's way of working upon the Will is exactly suitable to its Nature,
and therefore agreeable to its Freedom; tending to rectify, but not destroy
it; and by consequence to incline, but not compel it. Were All the workings of
the Almighty in full proportion to his Almightiness, and therefore always, on
all occasions, as irresistible, as they are Good, I cannot see how it were
possible for any Creature to do amiss; or how an Action could be otherwise,
than God would have it. Nor can I see how 'twould be possible to give a
tolerable reason, why several men at the same time, and the same men at several
times, are either better, or worse, than Themselves, or others. Why John was
better than Judas, or Paul better than Himself. Better (I mean) when he
asserted, than when he persecuted the Church. It follows therefore that the
manner of God's Impression upon the Will cannot be cogent, and irresistible,
but so congruous rather and suitable, as still to let it remain a Will. And
therefore he works upon it otherwise, than he works upon irrational and
senseless Creatures; to wit by Promises, and Threats, by Exhortations, and
Praecepts, and these in conjunction with a competent measure of his Grace;
which Agents natural, and involuntary (such as Vegetables, and Brutes,) are not
susceptible of. Now God determined from all Eternity not to hinder from being
done, what he eternally foreknew the congruous means I now mentioned would not
prevail with wilful Creatures, so as to hinder them from doing. For why should
He by his Omnipotence control the Wills of those Creatures, whom both his
Promises, and his Threats, his Miracles, and his Laws, and a competent measure
of his Grace, have been so thanklesly and vainly bestowed upon? When he cannot
restrain our Wills by means agreeable to our Natures, or by any lesser means
than what are destructive to our Wills, and by consequence to our Natures,
(which he eternally determined he would not violate,) How very justly must he
needs suffer the worst of Actions, which withal he does direct to the best of
Ends?

16. Another Reason is to be taken from the corrigible Condition of some Evil
Doers, whom God is pleased to bless and prosper with many Temporal Enjoyments,
thereby to mollify, and indear, and as it were overcome them with so much
kindness. A great deal of Love and Longanimity will be enough to melt the Heart
of the hardest Enemy, if there is any Wax left in his Composition; if there is
any good nature abiding in him. And such was the Method touching which St. Paul
speaks in his Epistle to the Romans; Despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness
and Forbearance and Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God
leads thee to Repentance? When God is pleased to plant Isa. 5. 2, 4.
his Vineyard upon a very fruitful Hill, to make a strong fence about it, to
gather out the stones, to build a Tower in the midst, and to make a Wine Press,
what can he mean but to engage it, to yield him Grapes in proportion to all his
Culture? And he appeals to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judah, whether more
could be done than he had done unto his Vineyard, what could he signify but
his Endeavors, to overcome evil with doing good? Thus God draws near to us in
Mercies, that we may also draw near to Him, in the Amendment of our Lives and
our Conversations.

17. A Third Reason is to be taken from the Incorrigible Condition of another
sort of Evil Doers, whom God is pleased to give over, as Physicians use to do
their desperate Patients. They being a sort of People, who are in love with
their Diseases, and cannot endure to be reformed, and therefore kick at the
means of Cure. God leaves such as these to their own Hearts Lust, and lets them
wallow (like so many Swine) in the Mire of Temporal Felicities. For as Those
very Swine are ever suffered to fare the best, that is, to enjoy the richest
feeding, which are most of all designed for Sale and Slaughter; so God indures
with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath, to wax fat with all their
Contentments and Sensualities, because by such their Enjoyments they fit
themselves for Destruction. To allow them the benefit of his Rod, were to deal
with them as Sons; which why should he do, whilst they only deal with him as
rebellious Servants? Suppose our Sheep and our Oxen were able to reason amongst
themselves, and understood the real End for which they are turned into their
Pastures, would they not macerate their Bodies, and bring their Flesh into
Subjection, by a great deal of Fasting and Self-denial, and be afraid of faring
well, at least in this consideration, that the fatter they grow, they grow the
fitter for the Shambles, and that the leaner they are, they are suffered to
live so much the longer? Much the same is Their Case, who defile themselves as
brute Beasts, (to use the Comparison of St. Jude.) A Comparison not odious,
because it is made by the Holy Ghost: who says of Them that are permitted to
live and prosper in their Impieties, That they are Romans 9. 22.
fitted for Destruction; and prepared, like Jer. 12. 3.
Sheep, for the day of slaughter. Like Sheep the rather, because as void of
understanding, (in respect of those things which must be spiritually
discerned,) as little moved as any Sheep with the Sense of Duty, and as far
from considering their later end. The terriblest Speeches in all the Scriptures
are such as These; Let him that Rev. 22. 11.
will be filthy be filthy still. Ye shall not be Ezekiel. 24. 13.
purged from your filthiness any more. Make the Heart of this People fat, and
their Ears heavy, Isa. 6. 10.
and shut up their Eyes, left they convert and be healed. Why should ye be
smitten any more? Chap. 1. verse. 5.
ye will revolt more and more. Why should I cast away my kindness in Chastising
you any longer, when ye still grow the worse by all that is done to make you
better? In vain have I smitten your Children; they have received Jer. 2. 30.
no Correction. From all which Scriptures we may infer, That God is never so
angry, as when he leaves the Reins loose upon the Neck of a Brutish People.
When he lets them grow wealthy to their undoing, and ruin themselves with their
Enjoyments. When he permits them to be as happy as the Devil himself would have
them; to have as much of this World, as the Serpent is able to tempt them with.
What Solomon says of a Temporal Father, [ He that spares his Rod, hates his
Child,] is often true of the Eternal; who intends to disinherit those
Incorrigible Children, whom he does not in mercy vouchsafe to strike. And in
consequence of This,

18. A Fourth Reason is to be taken from the obligingness of the Severity of
the Heavenly Father toward his Children, whom he disciplines in This World,
that he may not condemn them in the Next. For whom he Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. We have had
Fathers of our Flesh who corrected us, and we gave them Reverence, (says the
same Holy Author of Verse 9, and 10.
the Epistle to the Hebrews,) though they chastised us for their pleasure.
Whereas the Father of Spirits does only chastise us for our profit: And for our
profit many ways; To wit for the exercise of our Faith; for the proof of our
Patience; for the Improvement of our Humility; for the begetting in all our
Hearts both a Contempt of This World, and a Desire of That to come; for the
convincing us of his Justice, which is so far from partiality, that he does
hate and punish Sin where e're he finds it, as well in his Friends, as in his
Enemies. As he causes the Sun to shine, so he lays his Rod too, both on the
just and the unjust. For even they that are poenitent do feel its smart for a
Time And They that abide in their Impoenitence, shall feel it infinitely more
to all Eternity Again* He chastises us for our Profit, because for the
hight'ning of our Reward; perhaps in This present life; perhaps in That which
is to come; perhaps in This and That too. And of This we have Job for a new
Example. For had not He been more Afflicted, as well as more Righteous than
other men, He had not been so Proverbial, as now he is, as well for his
Patience, as his Integrity. In the first Chapter of Job, God permitted the
Devil to take all from him. But in the last Chapter of Job, God gave him twice
as Job 42. 10.
much as he had before. Nay the Almighty had so mollified the Marble-hearts of
his Acquaintance, that every man gave him a piece of money, and every one an
ear-ring of Gold. His later end (says the Text) was more blessed Verse. 11. 12.
13. 15.
than his beginning. He regained his seven Sons, and his Daughters were the
fairest amongst the Children of men. Yea that nothing might be wanting to make
him amends for his Adversity, He lived and prosper'd after This, no less than
an hundred and forty years; Verse. 16.
seeing his Sons, and Son's Sons, even to four Generations. Such was his Reward
in the present life. But infinitely more in the life to come. Such as none can
conceive, much less describe, but He who is himself as Infinite, as That Reward
is Inexpressible. To sum up all in a word, (and in the word of the same
Apostle,) God corrects us for our profit, to make us partakers with him in
Holiness, and that to no lesser end, than to make us also sharers with Him in
Heaven.

19. The very mention of which does prompt me to give a fifth and last Reason.
A Reason to be fetched from the Life after Death, and the Day of Judgment:
Without which Topic, all the rest are worth nothing; and were there no other
than This, it would be equal to a Thousand. If in this life only we had hope,
we should be (says St. Paul) of all men the most miserable. From whence I
gather, That having an Hope in the life to come, we are of All sorts of men by
much the happiest. The Psalmist sweetened all his Sorrows with this single
Consideration, That the Rod of the wicked shall not evermore rest upon the Back
of the Righteous. For verily (says He) there is a Reward for the Righteous,
doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth. The Devils may very well be
said to believe and tremble. For they do tacitly acknowledge, by that their
Question put to Christ, [ Art thou come to torment us before the Time?] That
however they are permitted their time of Pleasure, yet they tremblingly expect
their time of pain too. Whatsoever things are taken from Good men here, St.
Peter tells us, There is a Time of Restitution. Acts 3. 21.
Whatsoever Good men do suffer here in the Body, the Prophet Hosea puts our
thoughts Hos. 9. 7.
upon Days of Recompense. Isaiah calls it The Isa. 34. 8.
year of Recompense, and the Day of the Lord's Vengeance. How could Moses have
preferred the Reproach of Christ, as much greater Riches than the Treasures in
Egypt, if he had not had respect unto the Recompense of Reward? How Heb. 11. 26.
could David himself have been kept from Psalm.
fainting, if he had not thus expected to see the Goodness of the Lord in the
Land of the Living? Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, Heb. 12. 12, 13.
and the feeble knees. In every shock of Temptation from suffering wrongs, let
us take up the words of the Prophet Jeremy for our support; Jer. 51. 56.
The Lord God of Recompenses shall surely requite. Words most worthy of our
daily, if not of hourly Consideration, that we may not faint in well-doing, or
in suffering: for doing well. It is indeed a great Temptation, and apt to make
ones feet slip* to see the Possessions of the World in the Devil's Power and
Disposal. But our Remedy is at hand, if we shall constantly bear in mind the
other part of my Proposition, That it is All by God's Patience and wise
Permission; And that there will a Day come, when God will make up his Jewels,
putting a very signal Mal. 3. 17, 18.
difference between the wicked and the righteous; between the men that serve
God, and Them that persecute their Brethren for having served him. Here the
Tares and the Wheat grow up together till the Harvest: yea the Tares do
overgrow and bear down the Wheat; and many times do choke it up too. That grand
Leviathan, the Devil, is suffered here even to swim in the Tears of the
Righteous; to bathe himself in That Brine; and many times in their very Blood
too. But it is a Corrosive to the former, no less than a Cordial to the later,
That God is said to have a Book of Remembrance; Mal. 3. 16.
That the Devourers of the Righteous Habak. 1. 13.
are established for Judgment. And that they who wax fat with the Spoils of
Innocence, Jer. 12. 4.
are prepared like Sheep for the day of slaughter. And that He who at present
goes on Psalm. 126. 7.
his way weeping, whilst he bears forth good Seed, shall doubtless come again
with Joy, and bring his Sheafs with him. And that in due Gal. 6. 9.
time we shall reap, if we faint not. Add we to this our due Reflections, on the
Patience of Job, and the Afflictions of Joseph. Take we the Prophets for an
Example; and Him James 5. 11.
expecially who endured such Contradictions of Heb. 12. 3.
Sinners against himself, lest we be wearied and faint in our minds. I say, let
us but read such parts of Scripture, and but remember what we read, and but
believe what we remember, And then we shall not be in danger to fret our selves
at the ungodly, or to be envious against the Evil doers.

20. But now, besides these several Reasons of the seeming Disorder and
Confusion in the promiscuous Distribution of all Possessions under the Sun,
There may be other Reasons given by considering men, and there are doubtless
many others which are known to God only: and which cannot be better collected
than from the Example of our Savior, on whom the Devil and his Instruments
were permitted to have so great a Power. We know they put him to a painful and
shameful Death. And why were they suffered by God to do it? Even for quite
other reasons than They were able to conceive, and for contrary ends to what
They were led by: To wit, the Satisfying his Justice; the Exhibition of his
Mercy; the Declaration of his Wisdom; the Manifestation of his Holiness; the
Illustration of his Power; the Exaltation of his Glory; And (as worthily
subordinate to each of These,) the Reformation and the Safety of all our Souls.
All which if we compare with the five Reasons going before, we shall not wonder
at the Truth of This Proposition, That all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
Glory of them, (at least successively, though not at once,) are by God's
Patience, and wise Permission, in the Devil's Power and Disposal.

21. After the Truth, and the Reason, The Application.
let us observe the special Uses which may be made of his Doctrine. First it
teaches us how to value the beggarly Greatness of this World. Overvalue it we
may, and very commonly we do too; but undervalue it we cannot, do what we can.
For what more despicable than That, which the Devil can both procure, and
deprive us of? What more worthy of our Contempt, than what is so undervalued by
Him that made it, as by Him to be often left in the Devil's Power and Disposal?
The Devil can give us great Possessions, just as he gave them to the
Chaldaeans; And can take them away, as he did from Job. For both which reasons
we ought to scorn them, and to behave our selves toward them as things below
us; fit for nothing but to be matter, whereby to exercise a Bounty to such as
want them.

First (I say) it is a disparagement to the Wealth and Glory of the World, that
they are left so much by God in the Devil's Power, that Satan is suffered to
bestow them on such as serve him. For the Gifts of the Devil are never Good,
nor consistent with Goodness in such as have them. They are dishonorable, and
dangerous, and Hostages given to Destruction. The Devil can give Riches, (in
the sense before mentioned,) but not Contentment, and a right use, which are
the ends for which we crave them. And for want of which ends, they increase our
Poverty. For as, when the Body of man is Aguish, no Addition of Clothes can
make him warm; So when the Soul of man is vicious, no Addition of Treasure can
make him rich. The reason of which Paradox may thus be illustrated, and
cleared. We know that though the Clothes defend the Body from outward Cold, yet
it is the Body's inward Heat which does warm the Clothes: For else a Coffin and
a Coverlid would warm a man when he is dead. Which being evidently impossible,
It Is plain that the Body must warm the Clothes, before the Clothes can warm the
Body. And thence a Child is much warmer in a very thin Suit, than his old
decrepit Father when wrapped about with a Wardrope. In like manner it is the Soul
which makes the Possession become sufficient, not at all the Possession which
gives contentment unto the Soul. And as the way whereby to cure the cold Access
of an Ague, is to cleanse the Body from peccant humors, not to bring it to a
great Fire; so the way to be happy as well as full, is to purge an over
passionate and sickly Soul, not to rake up a great Estate. There are indeed who
have Abundance in conjunction with Satisfaction; But it is clear their
Satisfaction does not arise from That Abundance. For if Contentment could grow
from Plenty, The Man of Macedon had been satisfied in his Acquist of all Asia;
and had not wept for another World. Nor would They who at first do take up Arms
for mere Liberty* continue the keeping of them up for mere Dominion, (when they
have got their own Liberty, they would not take it from other men.) From whence
it follows, That no man living is contented, merely because he has enough, But
that many men have enough, merely because they are contented. And as a man in a
Boat, when he would pull the Bank to him, finds it impossible for him to do it,
but by pulling Himself upon the Bank; so the only way possible to fit our
Condition to our minds, is by bringing our minds to our Condition. For if a man
shall enlarge his Desires as Hell, and is as greedy as the Grave, All the
Possessions in the World will not fill one of his Eyes. 'Twas very shrewdly
said by Socrates to Archelaus, Socrat. Epist. 1. p. 6.
That the Cities of Greece were found to prosper, which asked Counsel of the
Devil (in his Oracle at Delphi,) whilst Those that did not, were still
afflicted. But though mad men and fools inferred the Devil (from That Success)
to be the only true God, yet wise men knew him to be no better, than the most
bountiful kind of Cheat, and that he made men to prosper to their undoing.
(...). Id. Epist. 6. p. 19.
Socrates challenged all Historians from the beginning of the World to the day
he writ in, to name a man who had been the better for any Possessions of
Satan's giving. Meaning that none had profited by them in the Day of their
Prosperity; And so little can they profit in the Great Day of Wrath, (as the
Wise man calls it) that then they disprofit in extremity, because they purchase
for their Owners a place in Hell. So little reason have we to boast, that we
abound in those things, which the Devil (by God's Sufferance) can help us to,
who neither can nor will help us, to use them wisely to our Advantage.

Much less reason have we to boast, in what the Devil can take away too; in
being Tenants at Will to so vile a Landlord. There is nothing more usual with
the Prince of this World, than to set Pilate against Herod, as well as Both
against Christ. He employs one Robber in offering violence to another. And who
would care for those Riches which only make him the Devil's Sumpter? Can we
think it a noble thing, to be laden with thick Clay at the Devil's Pleasure,
and again unladen at his Command? To have Wealth bestowed on us by our
Compliance with the Tempter, and taken from us by other men's? 'Twas wisely
done of Aristippus, the learned Socrat. Epist. 27. p. 58.
Stoic, when he commanded his Daughter Areta, to give her Son Wisdom for his
Patrimony, in stead of Wealth; because the Tyrants of Cyrene could never
plunder him of his Philosophy, That Inaccessible Treasure which was within him;
who yet would be the sole Masters of all his Wealth, those obnoxious
Possessions which were without him* Which Advice of Aristippus was much like
That of our Lord himself, Lay not up for your selves Treasure on Earth, where
Plunderers and Thieves break through and steal. From whence it is obvious to
collect, that we are not so much obliged to Them who give us our Estates, as to
Them who do teach us to use them safely. The Devil and his Agents, are often
permitted to do the former; But God alone, and his Ambassadors, will oblige us
so far as to do the later.

22. Secondly let us consider, That since we find God Himself bestowing Riches
upon some, as upon Abraham, and Job, or whosoever has a right to the several
things which he possesses; whilst the Devil gives to others, (by God's
Permission) as to the Sabaeans, and the Chaldaeans, who plundered Job of his
Substance; to Achan, and Ahab, or whosoever has Possession without a right; It
concerns us to examine the exact Derivation of our Estates; and to have it well
stated, whether we receive them from God, or Satan. For if honestly acquired,
and so from God, (by his Appointment, and Approbation,) Then we may honestly
enjoy them, to the Glory of God, and our private Comfort. Always bearing This
in mind, That we are but God's Almoners, or Usufructuaries; and must dispense
to His Members who is Proprietary in chief. But if dishonestly attained to, and
so from Satan, (by God's permission only, and sufferance,) we cannot honestly
possess, much less enjoy them, and therefore ought to do neither to God's
Dishonor, and our Damnation. But as our Savior has said of the Eye, and
Hand, That if at any time they offend us, we must pluck out the one, and cut
off the other; so must we say of our Possessions, That if they offend us in the
like sense, by making us stumble into Sin, we must pluck them out of our
Treasury, (like the Emperor Sigismund,) and (like Him too) cast them from us;
because it is better for us to enter as Poor as Lazarus into Heaven, than
remaining Rich as Dives, to be cast into Hell. Always keeping This in memory,
That Ill-gotten Goods may purchase matter for Repentance, But Repentance it
self they can never purchase.

23. Thirdly let us consider, That if the Devil himself is suffered to have
more of This world at his Devotion and Disposal, than The Great Cham, or the
Great Mogul, or whosoever of earthly Potentates is worthily thought to be the
Greatest; Then are our Shares of this world the things the most to be
suspected, and of which we should least be proud. Nor should we rashly take it
for granted, that they are evermore the Blessings and Gifts of God, because we
learn by sad Experience, that they are many times the Curses and Snares of
Satan. If to have Riches in Possession were still a sign of God's Favor; This
great Absurdity would follow, That the Devil himself would be God's chief
Favorite. The Apostle's Rule is, That whom Heb. 12.
he loves he chasteneth; not that whom he loves, he makes Rich. That He
scourges every Son whom he receives; not that every one whom he receives, he
makes to wallow in Prosperity. And 'twas a thing so very rare, when Times were
better than now they are, to see the same man both Good and Prosperous, That
men did scandalously complain in the Days of Malachi, It is vain to serve God;
Mal. 3. 14, 15.
And what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances? and that we have
walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? when the Proud are happy, and the
Workers of wickedness are set up? Nor was it otherwise in the Days of the
Prophet Jeremy; They are waxen fat, Jer. 5. 28.
they shine, They overpass the Deeds of the wicked; They judge not the Cause of
the Fatherless, yet They prosper. See and consider how the Devil inrich't and
prosper'd those Idolaters, whom he made to burn Incense unto the Moon, Jer. 44.
17, 18, 19.
which they commonly then called The Queen of Heaven, in the Four and fourtieth
Chapter of Jeremy. Whilst they committed That Idol-worship, [Their women lying
with strange men in their Husbands Presence, v. 19.] All was well with them,
they saw no evil. But when they ceased from that Idolatry, they were consumed
with Sword and Famine, (v. 18.) Whence we see the great Folly of those men's
reasonings, who reckon Prosperity as a mark of the best Religion, and Adversity
of the worst. Inferring Herod and Pontius Pilate to be more the Favorites of
God, than the Innocent Jesus whom they slew, and hanged on a Tree. For the
former still lived in Peace, and Plenty, in Ease, and Honor; whereas the later
was Vir Dolorum, a Man whose life was full of Sorrows. Let not any man
therefore say, (in pretense of Gratitude,) when he has gotten an Estate by
Fraud or Violence, [ I thank God for it, I have a competent Fortune; These are
the Blessings of the Lord upon my Labors; or God has given these things unto
me;] for what is this but a fairspoken Blasphemy, intitling God to the
Injustice, by which a man is made Rich? Whereas to ascribe it to the Devil, and
his own heart's Lust, is to lay the ugly Brat at its Father's Door; And to
justify God, whilst he dishonours and disobeys him. We must accordingly
distinguish between the things that we possess, by distinguishing the Means
whereby we have them, and proportionably resolve on our usage of them. What is
honestly come by, and we can prove so to be, we must not fail to be thankful
for, and may enjoy them as well with Gladness, as with Singleness of Heart. But
for our ill-gotten Goods, (the Gifts of Satan, and not of God,) we must part
with them as greedily into their true Master's Hands, as ever we got them into
our own.

24. Last of all let us consider, That if the Things of this world (commonly
called the Goods of Fortune,) are often suffered by God to be in the power of
the Devil, and often given by the Devil to such as serve him; And if Both must
give account at the Day of Judgment, for whatsoever is so given, and so
received; we learn from hence not to repine at the Prosperities of the wicked,
(...). Plotin. Enn. 1. l. 4. p. 38.
but together with their ways, to have respect unto their End. For why should
any man be envied for being the Favorite of Hell? for accepting that Proffer
which here the Devil made our Savior, (upon condition of Idolatry,) and which,
for that very reason, our Savior rejected with great Disdain? Again we learn
not to be sorry as men without hope, when we find it goes worst with the best
of men. It being enough to reconcile the greatest Prosperity of the Unjust, and
the greatest Adversity of the Righteous, both with the Mercy and the Justice of
God Almighty, That the Lord of the Harvest, when the Harvest-Time is come, will
gather the Wheat into his Garner, and burn up the Chaff with Fire unquenchable.
If the Flesh asks the Quaestion, Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why
are they happy who deal treacherously? Why has the Devil so great a Power upon
Earth? Why does the wicked devour the man who is more righteous than He? Let
the Spirit make Answer in the 2 Cor. 4. 17.
words of the Apostle, That this light Affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us (afterward) a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.
Whenever we are tempted by either effect of the Devil's Power, (be it
Prosperity, or Affliction,) let us look up unto our Savior upon the Top of two
Mountains; to wit the Mountain we are upon, where he was tempted by the Devil,
with all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them; And the famous Mount
Calvary, whereon he was tempted by the Devil, with all the Torments in the
Earth, and Disgraces of them. Thence we may see the perfect Purity of that
Immaculate Lamb, who rather would suffer Those Torments, than accept That
Offer. He had refused so many Kingdoms, but would not refuse to receive a
Cross: Refused the Glory of the world, but not The Shame too. He had refused
long before to be made a King, But would not afterward refuse to be vex't and
disgraced with a Crown of Thorns. The meanest things in this world he would by
no means despise, But he despised the Pomps and Vanities, which ordinarily pass
for the Greatness of it. And therefore as often as the Devil shall use his
Power against us, as here he did against Christ, let us relieve our selves with
the memory of This one Thing, That the Servant is not above his Lord. And that
we are foolishly unreasonable, if we expect to fare better than an Innocent
Jesus, in the midst of our manifold and heinous Guilts. And that as He, so we
too, may easily suffer many things, by duly weighing how they dispose us for an
Entrance into his Glory.

25. Now having evidenced the Truth of my second Doctrine, (with greater care of
Perspicuity, than of not being tedious,) both from Scripture, from Reason, and
from Experience; from Aphorisms of Scripture, and from Scriptural Examples;
from Solitary Reason, and Reason grounded upon Scripture; from other men's
Experience, and from our own; and all attested as well by Sacred, as by Secular
Story; And having cleared it yet farther by way of Answer to an Objection;
offered also at the Causes of this seemingly-strange economy in God's disposal
of Affairs; and directed to the Lessons it ought to teach us; I think it Time
to pass forwards to the Third Observable I proposed; To wit,

That the whole Scope and Drift of all the Donatives The third Proposition.
of the Tempter, is to turn our Adoration out of its true and proper Channel;
to steal it from God, and to divert it upon Himself. He seldom or never
Proffers, but with a Treacherous Proviso. He does it liberally indeed, [All
these things will I give thee,] But with this covetous Reserve, [If thou will
fall down and worship me.].

1. To demonstrate the Proposition with the greater Force and Perspicuity, I am
to imitate those men, who go a step or two back that they may leap so much the
farther. And premise two or three words concerning the Bounty of God and Man,
before I come to That of Satan.

It was a very smart saying of Learned (...) Philo (...). etc. p. 99.
Philo, (and as true, as it was smart,) (...). God alone does give freely to
all his Creatures, whilst all his Creatures to one another are no better at the
best than Ingenuous Hucksters. The best of his Creatures under Heaven, which
are confessedly Men and Women, yea the best of those best, which are the
liberal and the munificent, when they do most seem to give, they do but seem
so. For if they sell not their courtesies for Land, or Money, yet commonly they
sell (...). Idem ubi supra.
them for praise, and honor, or at least for acknowledgments, and humble
thanks; or if for nothing in the Earth, yet at least for the hope of being
rewarded for them in Heaven. It is but a generous way of Trading, for one rich
man to send Presents unto another, because there is commonly on the one side
some expectation of Requital, arising from the knowledge of Wealth and
Gratitude on the other. And this I take to be the reason, why the most Covetous
even of Worldlings will be liberal to a Person of Power, and Plenty; because
they hope He will do them as good a Turn. Nor can it truly and properly be
called a Gift, which is meant for a Decoy to some great Advantage, whether a
step to Preferment in Times of Safety, or else a Bribe for Protection in Times
of Danger. The very clearest of our Gifts are those we give to Men in want, and
who for that very reason are the least able to requite us; And yet even Those
are a kind of Bargains. For whilst we make a fair show of giving any thing to
the Poor, the Scripture tells us that (in Reality) we are but* lending to the
Lord. And farther Prove. 19. 17.
adds (for our Encouragement,) that whatsoever we thus impart, shall be repaid
to us again. So true is that which I noted from learned Philo, That God alone
is a perfect Giver, whilst the freest of Men are but liberal Hucksters. Our
profusest favors to one another are but a Mercenary Munificence, as our
largest Offertories to God are but a Mercenary Devotion.

2. Hereupon we are to argue a minori ad majus. If the best Men's Gifts are so
Imperfect, what then are Satan's, who (besides that He has not a right to
give,) does sell his Gifts for Men's Souls? Things so infinitely precious, that
Christ Himself could not buy them, but with his Blood. When our Souls were to
be purchas't from Sin and Hell, the Son of God being Incarnate could not have
given enough for them, if He had not vouchsafed to give Himself. Now it is the
Avarice of Satan, (and his Ambition at the same instant,) to buy our Souls back
unto Sin and Misery, although he bids no more for them, than the pitiful
Allectives of Wealth, and Greatness; The Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory
of them. And well it were, if it were no worse. For, besides that he offers a
great deal more than he can give, (he being ever God's Prisoner, as has been
shown,) the saddest part of it is, that however his biddings are on the Earth,
his general Payments are still in Hell. All his Gifts do still flow from his
Desire of such Gain. He reaches his offers to us with one hand, that he may
plunder us with the other. His liberality to us, is like the Fisherman's to the
River; who in Case he does cast in a worthless Fly, it is that the River may
requite Him with some good Fish. When Satan offers us any favors, we must
immediately consider he is but Angling after our Souls. He baits his Hook with
worldly Greatness, that whilst we catch at the one, we may be caught with the
other; and, like silly Fishes indeed, may greedily swallow our own Destruction.

3. Thus the Things which we call the Gifts of Satan, we find by experience we
do but call so. They are (...), Gifts and no Gifts. Munera inescata, Baits of
Bounty. Such a Condition is interposed betwixt the Proffer, and the
Performance, as makes the Donative far worse than Nothing. His Condition does
evacuate and null his Offer. For what he said unto our Savior, (without a
Proxy,) he says (by his Instruments) to each of us, All these things will I
give thee, if falling down thou will worship me. Which is as much as to say,
all shall be thine with this Proviso, that thou will take a sure Course to be
no whit the better, but much the worse for their Enjoyment. Thou shall be Rich
at this present, if for the future thou will be ruined. Thou shall have all the
World at will, but thou shall have it upon Condition, that thou turn Idolater,
and be damned. And what is this better than to say, I will give Thee very
freely a great Estate, upon Condition thou will pay me a thousand times more
than it is worth, and also make thy self incapable of its Enjoyment. I will
show thee the ready way, not to Liberty only, but Empire, upon Condition thou will serve me, and be a Slave. I will lift thee up, if thou will cast thy self
down. Thus does the Devil speak Contradictions; And the Proviso with which he
proffers does make the proffer of none effect. Like those Beasts in the
Apologue, which offered the Lion to be their King, if he would but permit them
to cut his Claws. They would admit Him to Reign, and to triumph over them, if
he would do them the favor to disable himself for the Preferment. Thus the
Devil either presents us with empty Proffers rather than Gifts, with flattering
Hopes, not true Possessions; or if He really indows us, he does it only to our
undoing. If he helps us to Wit, it is that we may wickedly lay it out in
speaking jestingly Matthew. 4. 9.
of Scripture, and merrily drolling upon Religion to make Men laugh. If he
helps us to Beauty, it is to raise up Self-love; that we may use it, like
wanton Iezebel, for a Snare, and a Temptation, and that to diverse most foolish
and hurtful Lusts, which drown the Soul in Misery and Perdition. If to Secular
Greatness, it is to betray us to Self-Relyance; and break our Necks from that
Ladder by which we mounted* If he helps us with Money by any means, it is but
just as old Gamesters do lend their cash to young Heirs, that they may lose it
with them at play. Or as Harlots lend Money unto their prodigal Gallants, that
when they have spent it upon their Lusts, They with whom they have spent it,
may Sue the Bond. Or as some supply Madmen with Knives and Halters, that either
they may strangle, or stab themselves. How sweet soever the Gifts of Satan may
seem to be at the beginning, yet their end and designment is still as bitter as
Destruction. When he carried up our Savior unto a Pinnacle of the Temple, (an
high Preferment,) v. 5. it was to this end, that he might cast himself
headlong, ( v. 6.) When he took him up again unto a very high Mountain, ( v.
8.) it was to this end, that he might presently fall down, ( v. 9.) Just as
when an Eagle has found an Oyster, he takes it up into the Clouds, that he may
give it by so much the greater fall, and that by breaking the Shell, he may eat
the Fish. In a word, we may resemble the Gifts of Satan, to the monstrous
Locusts from out the bottomless Pit; which though Rev. 9. 2, 7, 8, 18.
they had on their Heads (as it were) Crowns of Gold, and Faces like those of
Men, and goodly Hair like that of Women, yet their Teeth all the while were as
the Teeth of Lions, and the Stings in their Tails like those of Scorpions.

4. Mark now the Lessons which This The Application.
does teach us. First it teaches us to beware of the treacherous Bounty of all
our Tempters, whether those Tempters are Men, or Devils. Whose very profusest
Liberality is an effect of base Avarice; and who do therefore only give,
because they covet. If the Men of the Sanedrim do offer Judas a Matthew. 26. 15.
Sum of Money, it is not out of any goodwill to Judas, (for they that most love
the Treason, do hate the Traitor,) but because they do covet the Blood of
Christ. They were not true and real Givers of their Thirty pieces of Silver,
but only parted with them to Judas to buy his Loyalty; that having once sold
That, he might sell his Lord too. Again, after this, they gave large Matthew. 28.
12.
money unto the Soldiers, whom they had set on full purpose to watch the
Sepulcher of Christ. Yet did they not do it in generosity, or with any design
of the Soldiers good, but only bribed them to tell a Lie: To wit that Verse 18.
whilst they were sleeping, Christ was stolen out of his Grave. Queen Iezebel
(no doubt) did send a Present very considerable to the two Sons of Belial; but
it does not thence follow that she was liberally-minded; for she only meant to
hire them to bear false witness, and thereby to requite her with Naboth's 1
Kings 21. 18.
Vineyard. So we know that Simon Magus was very free of his Money, but 'twas to
buy the famous Gift of the Holy Ghost; and this Acts 8. 18, 19, 20.
to the end that he might sell it to whomsoever he should please. We must be
therefore very wary, when any offers are made us by any Emissaries of Satan,
both what is offered, and by whom, and to what Intent it is directed. We must
beware of their offers, who shall offer us That which is none of Theirs, (as
the Devil here did,) and we must mark the Condition on which the offer is made.
As whether it is not to engage us in Schism, or Sacrilege; whether it is not to
make us Partners in any Conspiracy, or Faction, that we may worship and fall
down to something else besides God. Suppose a Man shall take thee up (whosoever
thou art who now do read what I am writing) unto some Pinnacle of the Temple,
or some exceeding high Mountain, and shall discover to thee (from thence) some
very excellent Seat which is none of his, to wit a noble Pile of Building, with
a great deal of Land round about it, beautiful Gardens, and Fish Ponds, and as
well wooded as thou can wish, and shall say unto thee, as Satan here unto our
Savior, All this will I give thee; or thou shall have it for a Song; (thou
shall not pay above half the value,) if thou will promise me to keep out the
proper Owner. What will thou do in such a Case? If thou acceptest of the
proffer, thou do rebel against God, and worship Satan. For if thou do but
covet thy Neighbor's Goods, (which is less than to seize upon them,) thou
transgressest God's Law; and in transgressing God's Law, thou keep Satan's;
And to keep Satan's Law, is to fall down to him, and worship him. And if thou will not do This, thou must refuse the man's Proffer, as Christ did Satan's;
and that with the like indignation, expressed by an (...), Get thee behind me.
Get thee behind me, as for other, so for this great Reason, because thou
offerest to me That, which is none of Thine. We must carefully distinguish
'twixt Power, and Right. It may be much in thy Power, though more in Satan's.
But neither Satan nor thy self can have a color of Right to it. Were thou as
liberal of thine own, as of another man's Goods, thou would have offered me
the one at as cheap a Rate as the other. Something therefore there must be in
it, that being a Great Lover of Wealth, thou yet can part with it so easily.
It plainly shows that thou take it for none of Thine; for else thou had
stood upon other Terms. And therefore (...), Get thee behind me. Which, as it
ends the first Lesson we are to take from This Doctrine, so at the very same
instant it prompts us also to a second. And therefore

5. Secondly let us consider, what kind of Recompense, or Return, we are to
make unto the Devil for all his offers. What David said in another case, to the
end he might not be unthankful, [ Quid retribuam, What Psalm. 116. 12.
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon me,] we are as
well to say here, to the end we may not be unrevenged; Quid retribuemus, What
shall we render unto the Devil for all his mischievous Bounties bestowed upon
us? The fittest Requital we can make him, is to fling back his Favors into his
Face; and to bespeak him in such a style, as was used by St. Peter to Simon
Magus, (...), Thy money perish with thee. Acts 8. 20.
When any Tempter shall make us dishonest Proffers, as Potiphar's Wife did once
to Joseph, And shall press us to an Acceptance, as She did Him; we must repel
such a Tempter, as He did Her; who knew she did but offer, what she had no
right to give. And certainly all of that Nature we ought to look upon, as
forbidden Fruit. For such God made it by the last Praecept in the Decalogue,
Non concupisces, Thou shall not covet. And therefore as often as the Devil (by
what Instrument soever,) shall frankly offer us a Portion of Wealth, or
Greatness, which he may easily have a power, but not a right to bestow upon us,
Let us rebuke him with such an Answer, as Joseph made unto his Mistress. Or let
us expostulate with our selves, as Moses Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
did with the People Israel, Do we thus requite the Lord, O foolish People, and
unwise? Is not He our Father which bought us? Has not he made us, and
established us? Shall we kick at him like Iesurun, and quite forget the Verse.
15. and 18.
Rock out of which we were hewn? Or let us say with our Savior, (whose words
are writ for our learning,) (...), Get thee hence Satan. For it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve. Again it is
written, Thou shall not covet or desire thy Neighbor's Goods, much less, by
Violence, or by Fraud, shall thou take them into Possession.

6. Again we learn from this Doctrine, to suspect our own Treasures, as well as
to be spotless from other men's. For Satan tempts us to Idolize him, as well by
making us abusive of what we have, as by making us covetous of what we have
not. Agur prayed against Prove. 30. 8.
Riches of God's own giving, not against such alone as are given by Satan. For
he did not say thus, Suffer not the Devil to give me Riches; But Give me not
Riches, lest I be full and deny thee. Thereby intimating unto us, That Riches
are Temptations, though never so honestly acquired. And however they are
Blessings, as given by God; yet, considered even as such, they are dangerous
Blessings; for by the artifice of Satan, and the suggestions of the Flesh, they
may be easily perverted to God's Dishonor, and so prove matter of Execration.
Indeed it is not our Fault, to be as rich as God made us. But to sacrifice our
Thoughts, and to devote our Affections to what we have, is flatly and plainly
to Idolize it. To bestow the very Riches which God has given us, upon our
Coffers, by Avarice, or on our Pride, by Prodigality, (which is another kind of
Avarice, to wit a coveting of Fame,) is neither better, nor worse, than to fall
down to them, and worship them. All the wickedness in the World does seem to
have entered at these Three Doors, Beauty, Riches, and Reputation. The first of
which does give Fodder to the Lust of the Flesh, as does the second to the Lust
of the Eye, and the third to the Pride of Life. Now what Danger soever there is
in Beauty* will be found to be in Riches, and Reputation. They are Idols all
Three, very eminently great; But Riches, if either, are much the greatest. Te
facimus Fortuna Deam, was said by the Poet (...). The Greatest Fortunes have
more Adorers, than the greatest Beauties in all the World. Besides that Those
are the most constant, as well as the fondest, and the most passionate. And
it is a rational Conjecture, that there is more sleep broken for love of Riches,
in a year, than there is in many Ages, for love of Beauty. We may judge by one
Sigismund how it fares with all worldlings. When the worldly man should sleep,
he will be thinking upon his Treasure; But when he should pray, he will fall
asleep. And which is likeliest to be his Deity? That God of Heaven, on whom he
cannot think for sleeping, or That white and red Earth, for his thinking upon
which he can seldom sleep? We see how Avarice is Idolatry, and so a spiritual
Fornication, and so an absolute Divorce of our Souls from God. Nor can the Sin
of Prodigality be one whit less, as being a Sacrifice to the Lust of the Flesh,
perhaps to many of those Lusts, perhaps to all. And look how many Lusts he trys
to satisfy, so many Idols he does adore. Admit the Prodigal spends nothing but
what is properly his own, and does some Good with it by accident; yet it is but
by accident that good is done; for which not He himself, but his Ambition is to
be thank't. Let the man be what he will who abounds in Riches, whether a
Prodigal, or a Niggard, or hardly Either, they are apt to engender a flat
forgetfulness of God, (as before I noted,) which in Iesurun, and Nabal, and in
David himself may be clearly seen. The first, waxing fat, did even kick against
his Maker. When the second was drunk, he valued not God, any more than David.
The third has humbly recorded his own Experience, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. And also That
of the Generality of God's own People: Psalm. 78. from v. 24. to v. 35. When God
rained Manna, and sent them meat to the full, and gave them all that they
desired, Then (says he) they were not estranged from their Lusts. But when he
slew them, they sought him, and inquired early after God. Then they remembered
that God was their strength, and that the high God was their Redeemer. So that
Prosperity was the thing which made them forgetful of their God, and heavy
Affliction was the Instrument which brought him back to their Remembrance. When
Riches do interpose between God and the Soul, they are apt to intercept the
Attractive Virtue, whereby God is wont to draw the Soul unto Himself; As an
Adamant intervening between the Iron and the Loadstone, does intercept the
magnetique force, wherewith the Loadstone allures the Iron. But as, if we take
away the Adamant, the Iron will leap unto the Loadstone; so take away Riches
(as in the abovenam'd Experiment;) and the Soul will be the apter to fly
toward God. It is so natural for Mortals to be transported with Prosperity,
that it extorted from Moses an extraordinary Caveat, before he Deuteronomy. 8. 10. to
v. 18.
thought he could with safety admit the Israelites to taste of the Sweets of
Canaan. Now if Prosperity is so dangerous, even when God Himself gives it, how
great a Curse must it be, when the Gift of Satan? If Riches honestly gotten are
such a Clog unto the Soul, as does oftentimes hinder her flight to Heaven; How
shall she hope to mount thither, when both her Wings and her Vide Plotin. Enn.
5. l. 9.
Talons are full of Prey? Prosperity sure is such a Weapon, as none but They
who can contemn it, can safely use. And too much Ease to which it tempts us is
wont to prove a sadder Curse, than what at first was denounced by God to Adam,
That in the sweat of his Brows he should eat his Bread.

7. Again we learn from this Doctrine, as to suspect our own Treasures when
present with us, so not to seek them being absent with too much fervor. For
the Son of Sirach Ecclus. 3. 26.
tells us, that He who seeks Danger shall perish in it. And that Riches are
Dangers, has not only already been made apparent, but may be farther made clear
by our common Experience of its Effects. For notwithstanding there are some who
do make themselves Friends with the unrighteous Mammon, (that is, by giving it
to the Poor, do truly lend it unto the Lord, and lay it out upon Life Eternal,)
yet we find it too general, that the greater men's Qualities and Fortunes are,
by so much the greater are their Vanities, and Vices too. And That War of their
Lusts, which is a very great Plague, they are so strongly wedded to, as to call
it Peace, Wisd. 14. 22. And I suppose it was Experience which taught the
Italians to use those Proverbs, Alta Fortuna alto travaglio apporta.
That a great deal of Wealth brings a great deal of Woe, And the greater the
Happiness, A maggior felicita, minor feed.
it is to be trusted so much the less. Proverbs so wholesome, as well as True,
(were they as diligently considered, as they are easily understood,) that they
deserve the next place to those of Solomon. For if our Riches are from God, we
are by so much the more obliged; And if from Satan, the more endangered. If
from God, they are entrusted with us as Talents, of which we must give an exact
account. And he that sits at the highest Rent, has by so much an higher Account
to render. If from Satan, they are but wellbaited Hooks, wherewith to catch our
Hearts from us; and, with Them, our Adoration. How apt they are to prove
mischievous, the Devil himself discovers to us by his parting with them so
easily. We may have them for no more than an Act of Worship; And, that
Condition being premised, they go a begging for our Acceptance. Thus at once
they are the cheapest and dearest things to be imagined: The cheapest, in
regard they are so easily come by, (for a man may be damned with a wet finger;)
and the dearest, in regard we part with our Innocence to acquire them. Adam did
not eat gratis of the fruit that was forbidden, though the Serpent asked
nothing, but let him have it for taking up. It Is easy to steal, and to be
caught, And as easy to be hanged, as it is to turn round, and to make Grimaces.
But sure the man would not be thanked, who should commend the thing to us for
its Facility. This I know to be the subject of the last Observable in the Text,
of which I shall take no further notice, than by showing how it is useful to
poor, and rich. It Is matter of comfort to the Poor, (such I mean as God himself
has made such,) that they want not the Riches they are without; and that their
Poverty is their Option, as well as Lot. For it is evident, if they would, they
might be easily as rich as the Devil can make them. It Is matter of sorrow to
the Rich, and of great reproach too, that they should take so vast pains for
things so easily to be compassed: Or think they get by those things, which are
purchased at the price of so rich a Jewel as a man's Soul: Or put their Trust
in those things, to which the Title of uncertain is fixed in Scripture: (As
when St. Paul exhorts Timothy to charge the Rich, not to trust 1 Timothy 6. 17.
in uncertain Riches) Or make their Boast of those things, which it is in every
Fool's power, to get, or part with; But not in the power of one in a Thousand,
rightly to use, or to enjoy. To find Darius dying with Thirst, whilst he was
owner of many Rivers; and Alexander frozen up with cold, even then when he had
mastered the Eastern Sun; and Midas beggared by his Wealth, when every finger
of his was turned to a Philosopher's Stone; is of it self enough to teach us,
that none have ever been more in want, than They into whose Bosoms the Tempter
has emptied his Cormicopiae.

8. But now besides these several Lessons which the Devil's large offer is apt
to teach us, there is a Lesson to be drawn out of all these Lessons; and such
as the whole Discourse premised has an aptness in it self to dispose us for.
This is a Season not more proper for private Austerities to the Rich, than for
a bountiful Contribution to the Necessities of the Poor. These should Enjoy our
Self-denials, and be filled by our Fastings in Time of Lent. Nor can we better
be exhorted, (seeing the Tenor of the Text does suggest it to us,) than to beat
the Devil with his own Weapon. To make our selves Friends Luke 16. 9.
of the Mammon of Unrighteousness. To worship God with those things, for which
we are tempted to worship Satan. Not to be honest only and just, but also
merciful and munificent, even in spite to That Devil, who is so earnestly
desirous to make us Worldlings. If the Devil shall say to us, [ All this will I
give you, if falling down ye will worship me,] lay we back again to the Devil,
[ This we give unto the Poor, because we fall down to, and worship God.] We do
not sanctify the Day, though we do never so much observe it, if to all our
Acts of Sacrifice (in Prayer and Sermon,) we add not Works of Mercy too. As we
hope that our Prayers shall fly to Heaven, we must lend them our Charity to imp
their Wings. For what said the Angel to Cornelius, though but a Proselyte of
the Gates, (half a Gentile, and half a Jew,) Thy Prayers and thine Alms are
come up for a memorial before Acts 10. 4.
the Lord. Mark the Copulative [ And] betwixt Prayers and Alms, implying the
Energy of the former, by help and virtue of the later. Not his Prayers without
his Alms. For God hears not Sinners, who draw near with their Lips, when
their Hearts are far from him. And such are their Hearts which break not out
into their Hands. There are but Three Courses imaginable to be taken with our
Riches, in case we have them. Our being liberal to our Coffers, in the laying
up Riches, and this for no-body-knowswhom; or very bountiful to our Lusts, in
laying them out upon our Vanities, and costly Vices, which we solemnly have
vowed the forsaking of; or being merciful to our Savior, who takes our Charity
to his Members, as freely bestowed upon Himself. In Matthew. 25. 40.
so much that the Question is now but This, Whether we choose to be the
Children of God, or Belial. I make no doubt but I am speaking to an intelligent
sort of People, and that rightly understanding our greatest Interest, we need
the less to be persuaded that we will do our selves Good, by making others to
partake of the good we do. Should any here be full as sinful as was
Nebuchadnezzar, I might adventure That to Them, which Daniel said unto the
King, [ Let my Counsel be acceptable to you; Break off Dan. 4. 27.
your sins by righteousness, and your Iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor.
If we desire a good Provision against the Winter of Adversity, and to find out
our Bread after many days, Let us cast it (with Solomon) upon the Waters. If we
will settle our Estates, either in whole, or in part, so as to free them from
Plunder, or Sequestration, Let us put them into Bags which wax not old, into
the Treasury of Heaven which fails not, where neither Moths can corrupt, nor
any Thieves break through and steal. The poor righteous man must needs be one
of God's Treasuries; wherein whatsoever is laid up by us, shall be repaid to us
again with immense advantage. Especially when the Worms which feed on the Body
after Death, shall give it all up at the Day of Judgment.

This is a pious Frand indeed, without either Ironie, or Oxymoron. For it is
honestly to beguile the Grand Deceiver of Mankind; and to make the Devil's
Malice propitious to us. It Is to extract the greatest Good out of the Evil of
his Temptations; (to wit a Sovereign Praeservative from the great Instrument of
Death;) as skilful Chemists are wont to draw the most healthful Medicines, out
of those which in themselves are the hurtfull'st Minerals. Thus the skin of a
Scorpion becomes an Antidote to his Teeth. And thus the Block at which we
stumble, may be used as a step for our Rise to Heaven.. Thus the Ocean may be
as modest, in the keeping of its Bounds, as the smallest Rivulet. And the man
of greatest Wealth, as poor in Spirit as any Lazar. Thus a Joseph and a Moses
may be Favorites of God in the Court of Pharaoh. And thus, if the more we have
of lading to press our Vessel into the Sea, the more we also have of Sails to
give it motion; or if the larger our Revenues and Fortunes are, we have the
larger Elevation of Heart and Soul to Liberality, and pay the larger Taxes of
Charity, laid upon us by a Law from the King of Kings; we convert our poorest
Beadsmen into our richest Benefactors, and reap by far the greater good from
the good we do them. Yea we make our selves such Friends of our greatest
Enemies, (which our Savior expresses fitly by the Mammon of Unrighteousness,)
Luke 16. 9.
as will receive us, when we fail, into eternal Habitations. Whither God of his
Mercy conduct us All, for the Glory of his Name, and for the Worthiness of his
Son, to whom be Glory, both now, and for ever.

AN AMULET OR PRAESERVATIVE Against the Prurigo of Ambition.
THE DANGER Of Seeking Great Things FOR ONES SELF.
JER. XLV. 5. And seek Thou Great Things for thy self? Seek them not.
1. BEtween the Prophecies of Jeremy in all the Chapters going before, (All
belonging to the Jews,) And other Prophecies coming after, (concerning Nine
other Nations,) from hence-forwards unto the end, This before us appertains
unto Baruch only. Baruch the Scribe of Jeremiah, and a Servant of the most
High, one who had faithfully served Both at the utmost peril of his Life, and
yet at last became liable to great Exception. Therefore God by Jeremiah rebukes
the man for his Anxiety, for the disquietness of his Spirit, and
discontentedness in his Condition; for his distrust of God's Providence, and
his dissatisfaction in God's economy; for being querulous and complaining,
that Grief was added to his Verse 3.
Sorrow, and Tears to Sighing, and that after all his labor, (when he thought
to be rewarded,) he found no Rest; for being afflicted, and perplex't, he could
not reach to those Talents his Master had, as Joshua did to those of Moses, and
Elisha to those of the Great Elijah; last of all God rebukes him, for not
sufficiently resenting the most deplorable Estate of the King and Kingdom, with
the Calamities then impendent on God's own House, and the Public Worship; and
for having no prospect beyond Himself, his private Liberty and Safety, his
Ability like Jonas to sleep securely in a Tempest, and senseless of Danger in a
Shipwreck; his getting a quiet Habitation in Peace, and Plenty, when he saw All
round about him, as it were upon the Borders and Brink of Ruin.

2. Now to Baruch thus flinching in Times of Trial and Temptation, reserving an
Angle in his Heart for secret Avarice, and Ambition, and a particular design on
his private Interest, (as if he thought it not sufficient, to have his Life for
a Prey in all Verse 5.
places whither he went, or not an Happiness great enough, to serve and suffer
for his Creator, to fare no worse than his Sovereign, to live in Loyalty and
Honor, and dye in Innocence;) God sends his Prophet Jeremiah with a most
vehement Dehortation, or (to speak more exactly) with a most forcible
Prohibition, sitting close upon the Neck of a sharp Reproof; And seek Thou
(Baruch) Great Things for thy self? Seek them not. An Exprobration, and a
Reproof, enough to stab him into the Heart, as being very sharply pointed in
four respects. In respect of the Person, vexed and disquieted with his
Condition; In respect of the Things, he seeks to mend his Condition by; In
respect of the Selfishness, wherewith the Things are sought after by such a
Person; and in respect of the Times, wherein to be Selfish, is most absurd; yea
wherein to be Selfish, is little less than Sacrilegious. I shall but touch on
these four, and dwell on that which I take to be most material.

3. Who should the Seeker be but Baruch? a man professing the true Religion,
yes and a zealous Assertor of it; The Prophet Ieremy's own Disciple, and his
exact Amanuensis; his individual Companion, his faithful Friend and
Fellow Laborer, who writ and read the Roll of Prophecies against Jerusalem
Jer. 36. 10, 15.
and Judah, in the Ears of all the People, and all the Great men at Court, and
that with the most apparent hazard both of his Liberty and his Life. And yet,
as good a man as he was, (or had been once in his Time,) the Things he now did
seek after were not spiritual, but carnal; not belonging to the future, but
present life; not Great in themselves, but (...), and (...), Great in the
Speakers Phraseology, or the rude Vulgar's Estimation; or only Great by way of
comparison with things much less; or Great in reference to the Season, wherein
it was a Great thing, for any Servant of God to have Food and Raiment; for a
Jeremy, or a Baruch, not to be cast into the Jer. 38. 6, 7, 26.
Dungeon; not to be cut with the same Jer. 36. 23.
Penknife, or not to perish in the same Fire, together with the dreadful Roll,
or Book of Prophecies which They had written. Nor was it a little aggravation
of Baruch's Guilt, that he became a Self-seeker; when being a man of a public
Character, he should have been of a public Mind; he should have sacrificed his
Private to Public Interesses and Ends. When he foresaw that King Iehoiakim
(the Son of Good King Josiah) was not only to be killed, but cruelly cast into
the Streets, exposed Verse 30.
there as a Prey to Birds and Beasts without Burial; when he foresaw that
Zedekiah (another Son of Good Josiah) should shortly after become the last King
of Judah; That the Conquering King of Babylon should butcher his Sons before
his Eyes, and Jer. 39.
pluck his Eyes out of his Head, and lastly binding him in Chains, should carry
him captive out of Jerusalem, as an Hissing to his Enemies, and an Astonishment
to his Friends; Then for Baruch to be seeking, and to be seeking Great Things,
and to be seeking them for Himself too; not for his Countrymen, or Country,
not for the Worship and House of God, but for his despicable diminutive
inconsiderable Self, (a little Drop of the Bucket) a single Atom of the great
Heap of Dust and Ashes in Iudaea, (for Men we know are no better,) This was the
Acme and the Top of the Prophet Ieremy's Exprobration. The Heathen Cato in
Lucan was much more generous, in his

Sidera quis Mundumq, velit spectare cadentem, Expers Ipse Metus? -- The
Turkish Caab of Arabia, who rather chose to dye of Thirst, than to drink of
That Water which his Compatriots all wanted, was of much a more brave, and a
more noble Disposition. Such were the gallant (...), in Alexander ab Alexandro,
who would never once endure to fare any better than their King. Had the King
lost a Limb by any accident whatsoever? They would resolvedly lose the same.
Did the King happen to want an Eye? They would pluck out one of their own. And
when the King came to dye, They scorned to live; but at the time of his
Funeral, threw themselves into the Fire. Baruch in reason should have argued,
like brave Uriah, and Eleazar, who did abhor being at rest, when better men
than themselves were exposed to Hardships; They hated Self-praeservation in a
kind of universal and general Deluge of Afflictions. Shall such a man as I
Baruch, and in such a Season as This, be seeking any thing for myself? Shall I
be guilty of being safe, when it is disloyalty to prosper? Shall I be seeking
Great Things, when to be Great, is a Dishonor? a shameful thing, to live at
Ease? and little less than a Sin, to live? Thus he ought to have reasoned, tho
thus he did not. And see how God (by way of Sarcasm) does as good as bid Baruch
put Himself into one Scale, and all the public Concerns of King and Kingdom
into the other, as it were asking if he looks to outweigh them All; if his Life
is more precious, than Church and State; if he expects as great a Privilege as
was granted only by Miracle to Gideon's Fleece; to be blessed and enrich't with
the Dew of Heaven, when all round about lies dry, and barren. If he alone will
be exempt from a complete (...), from a National, a Public, a Common
Destruction and Desolation. Behold (says God to Baruch) I will bring evil upon
all Flesh, even upon this whole Land. And seek Thou Great Things for thy
self? Seek them not.

4. Thus we see how the Reproof or the Exprobration (being whetted into a
Sharpness by four Respects) does give a Vehemence and Force to the Prohibition.
I shall not add any thing more to what I have said touching the First; but
apply my self wholly to the Consideration of the Second; which of it self will
be sufficient to take up more Time than is now allowed. And in the Prosecuting
of This, it is not my purpose to reflect upon any men's Persons of either Sort.
Not on Them who seek Greatness they cannot find; much less on Them, who have
been raised up to Greatness they never sought; least of all upon Them, who do
inherit that Greatness they cannot help; (such as They never could have
prevented, nor can easily escape.) All I intend is a Dissuasive from That which
I take to be the Ground of all our Seditions, and Separations, and
Fermentations of Blood in the Body Politic; from that Malignity and Envy,
wherewith the Men of low degree are wont to prosecute those above them: from
the Selfseeking, and the Self-love, attended commonly with the love of Revenge
on others, which makes a world of men careless of Public Safety: Careless of
perishing Themselves, (like Nero with his (...)) if all the Objects of their
Envy may perish with them: from that Avarice and Ambition, and
Malecontentedness in their Stations, wherein Divine Providence is pleased to
fix them. From every one of These Plagues my present Dehortative or Dissuasive
(suggested to me by the Text) is now intended; tho most especially from the
last, as from the Root of those Factions, and Schisms, and Heresies, which do
at any time endanger the Common Peace; yes and occasion the greatest Miseries
which can possibly ever fall upon Church or State. In order to the framing of
This Dissuasive, and for the making it effectual to such as need it, I must
consider those things which the World calls Great (and are in one word
expressed by Worldly Greatness) in their genuine, or native, and proper
Colors; stripped of that Vizard and Disguise, which the Fantasies of People
(by a too vulgar Error) have put upon them. For hence will arise as many
Reasons, why in every State or Station, it is every man's Advantage, as well as
Duty, to study and con St. Paul's Lesson, How to want and to abound. How to
Phil. 4. 11, 12.
want without Envy, and how to abound without Arrogance; how to want without
Stealth, and how to abound without Oppression; how to want with Submission, and
how to abound with Self-denial; how to want with real Comfort, and how to
abound with Moderation; how to want with Thanksgiving, as it is an Act of
Sacrifice; and how to abound with Liberality, as it is a Work of Mercy. In a
word, how it is his Interest, to rest contented with his Condition of either
sort; and not to disquiet himself in vain, by solicitously seeking Greater
Things for himself than his God allows him. A point of Doctrine so momentous, of
such Necessity to be taught, and as well of such Public, as Private
Consequence to be learned; that it is not easy to be imagined, how such a
monstrous Sin as Schism, Contempt of Government and Order, and the
Voluptuousness of heading or leading Parties, should continue one day in the
Christian World, if every man were convinced of This Great Truth, (a Truth as
legible, and as bright, as if 'twere written with a Sunbeam,) that God allows
not of his Ambition, but disapproves of his Avarice, strictly prohibits and
forbids the Carnality of his seeking Great Things for himself; has made
Obedience to Authority to be of the Essence of Christianity; one of the Two
special Vitals of all Religion; The Blood and Life of the Second Table, clearly
running in a Great Vein throughout the Body of the Gospel. Nor only so, But
that (in reference to the present, as well as to the future, and better life,)
it is every man's Interest, and special Advantage, not to be Great; that He is
the happiest Man on Earth, whom Horace has seated in the middle, betwixt his
Maenius, and Nomentanus: that it is easier to be satisfied with what is but
competent and enough, than with any thing beyond it, whether inherited, or
acquired: and that it is better to have a little with God's Allowance and
Approbation, than the Greatest Things on Earth by his bare Permission.

The World is now at such a pass, (and it is a Duty not to forget it on This
Occasion,) that we do sometimes stand in need to make Apologies for God; to
assert and justify his Methods; to allege sufficient Reasons for some of his
Precepts and Prohibitions; especially for such as now we have under
Consideration. Nor can we expect to be believed in such a Paradox as This,
[That ' it is a man's Interest not to be Great in this loathsome World,] any
farther than our Reasons shall force Assent. I shall but urge four or five,
whereof the one will rise in order above the other: That if the former cannot
affect us, the later may.

5. The first of the Reasons I pretend to, for the Dissuasive I am upon, from
any man's seeking Great Things for Himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek
them not, may be derived from the Fickleness of all Great Things on This side
Heaven. Their having nothing in them of Permanence, nothing of Certainty, or
Firmness, which a man of any Prudence knows how to trust. From whence it
follows ex abundanti, that they have nothing in them of lovely, for which they
should be coveted or courted by us. And This is a Reason suggested to me from
the very next words before my Text. Behold (says God to Baruch by the Mouth of
Jeremiah) That which I have built will I break down, and that which I have
planted I will pluck up, even This whole Land. He does not Thus argue, There is
a Flaw in the Building, which I will Therefore break down; or a Barrenness in
the Plant, which I will Therefore pluck up. But I will do it pro Imperio,
because I will. For I have built, and I have planted. The whole Land is mine,
and I will order it as I please. He needs not argue from its Inhabitants
whereby to justify its Destruction, because He is not only the Owner, but the
Author of it. His having once built, is reason enough for his breaking down.
And his having once planted, is reason enough for his plucking up. Nor may the
Isa. 45. 9.
Clay say to the Potter, Why have Thou made, or unmade me? why have Thou used
me Thus, or Thus? It Is true in God's distribution of endless Punishments and
Rewards to the Sons of Men, He declares Himself to act as a Righteous Judge, a
Judge with whom there is not Respect of Persons, a Judge who renders unto every
man according to his Deeds, and according to the Law He is bound to live by.
But the Case is quite Another, (and stands upon quite another Ground,) in his
dealing out the Things of This dying life, the Things which perish in the
using, the Things whose Fashion passes away, such as All the things are which
the World calls Great. In things of Temporary Concernment, (such as those I now
speak of,) it pleases God to act and argue as an Absolute Sovereign; to make
his peremptory Will his sufficient Reason; to prove the Rectitude of his
Actions from his right of Dominion, and his Omnipotence. Not only Mary in her
Magnificat observes and celebrates God's Pleasure, in his putting down the
Mighty, and in his raising up the Meek, But even Hesiod does the same as an
Heathen Poet.

(...). --

We may English it out of our Bibles from Daniel's words to Nebuchadnezzar;
It Is the Dan. 2. 21. and Chap. 4. v. 17.
most High alone that rules in the Kingdom of Men: It Is he that gives it at
his pleasure to whomsoever he will; and that sets up over It (either the
Best, or) the Basest of Men. There can be nothing more pleasant to a man of low
Station, or more profitable and useful to men of Grandeur, than to contemplate
as well as read the wise economy of God in the words of David; and the Truth
of those words in their own Experience: To wit, that Promotion comes neither
from the East, Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
nor from the West, not from the North, nor from the South; But God is the
Judge, who puts down one, and sets up Another; or permits the (...), The
Prince of This World, The Devil to do it. For so we needs must distinguish, if
we intend to speak Sense touching the Providence of God in the present Case.
The taking away what he has given, the breaking in pieces what he has built,
the rooting up what he has planted, is That which happens many times by his
blessed Order; but many times too by his bare Permission. To mention Joseph,
and Job, the good King Iofiah, the glorious Emperor Mauritius, and the more
glorious Martyr Charles the First of these Realms, and to parallel in our minds
the Events of those Best with the Worst of men, is the shortest way imaginable
(the shortest at least I can imagine,) to give a satisfactory Reason for That
Distinction; and to discourage men from seeking Great Things for Themselves.
For thus I argue: If it happens so ill to Them who are born to Greatness, and
are Above it, who have a Right to great Things by God's Appointment, and yet
are deprived of them All by God's Permission; (yet one step farther,) If it
happens so ill to Them who are as Good as they are Great, and whose Greatness
coupl'd with Grace is the least thing in them, far surpassed by their Humility,
and generous Meekness, by their Compassion toward others, and by their Empire
over Themselves; what then shall we say of those wretched Great ones, who owe
their Greatness to the Great Dragon? who owe it (next under Satan) to their own
Avarice, and Ambition, their Oppression, and Extortion, their Fraud, and
Rapine? who possess their Great Things by God's mere Sufferance, and at last
are stripped of them by his Appointment? Such Usurpers of Greatness, as do at
their best but enjoy God's Anger, who only sacrifice to their Net, (as the
Prophet speaks,) and wholly rely upon Themselves, upon their Industry, or their
Wit, their Strength, or Prowess, or their any thing besides which they are wont
to call Theirs, God does oftentimes crush by the chief means of their support;
whilst he makes their very Anchor become their Rock, and turns their Harbor
into a Quicksand; sometimes splits them upon their Pollcy, and sometimes upon
their Power. And This the Royal Psalmist does seem to mean, when he speaks of
Gods laughing such men to scorn, and of his having them in derision, (Psalm. 2.
4.) Much what Solomon says of Wisdom, That she will laugh at their Calamity,
and will mock when their fear comes, (Prove. 1. 26.) Thus my First Reason
arises from the Fickleness of the Things which the World calls Great, whether
as righteously attained by God's Appointment, or as injuriously invaded by
God's mere Sufferance.

6. A Second Reason for my Dissuasive from any man's seeking Great Things for
Himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them not, is to be taken from the yet
sadder and more important Consideration, That the Worlds Great Things are not
fickle only, but treacherous; not only transitory, but false, and fallacious
things. Such arrant Snares to their Possessors, as are not more courted by men
of Folly and Unadvisedness, than they are feared and suspected by men of mature
Deliberation. For the more like a Meteor a Man is raised out of the Earth, the
apter he is to return in Tears. The higher any one is exalted, his Head becomes
so much the giddier, and the sooner his Feet will fail him, and the lower his
Fall will be. 'Twas Apuleius his Conceit, that an over-large Fortune is like
an overlong Coat, ever tripping up the Heels of him that wears It. Briefly,
The greater any Man is, the more he is exposed as the Butt of Envy; he is by so
much the fairer Mark, to be singled out and shot at, with Darts of
Mischievousness, and Malice, as well as Envy. A Truth so experimented and known
throughout the Annals of all the World, that the Great Emperors of the East
were almost All murdered; nor were there many of the West, who were not cut off
by Fraud, or Fury. A Flayl, against which it is so almost impossible to get a
Fence, that tho Henry the Great of France had as fair warning from the young
Merchant, as ever any Prince had to secure himself, yet it was not long after,
when Ravilliac did convince him by plain Experience, that the basest Creature
living who can despise his own life, can make himself Master of other men's. In
This and other Considerations, How many born to Great Things have not been able
to endure them? How many have rejected the offers of them? How many have been
courted, and even compelled to an Acceptance? How many have cast away their
Crowns, for sitting too heavy upon their Heads, and for the overplus of Cares
they were lined with? 'Twere easy to prove by an Induction, (were This a Time,
or Place for it,) that Worldly Greatness has something in it extremely dreadful
to a wise and considering man. That there are great Diseases in it, and the
greatest of all in the greatest Governments, (even there where the Governors
are the most Absolute and Successful,) is clearly seen by the Complaints of the
greatest men living when most Arrian. Epict. l. 3 c. 22. p. 342. Sen. de
Brevit. vitae c. 4. and 5.
at ease. It is not only Arrian's, but also Seneca's Observation, and best
expressed in his own words. Potentissimis and in altum sublatis hominibus
excidere voces videbis, quibus otium optant, laudant, omnibus bonis suis
praeferunt. Cupiunt interim ex illo fastigio suo, si tuto liceat, descendere.
Nam ut nihil lacessat autquatiat, in se ipsa fortuna ruet. It was a thing
Augustus Caesar did often wish, but could never reach, that he might one day be
so happy, as to be freed from his Cares and his Crown of Thorns; that he might
put off his Greatness, and live at last unto himself, which in the Top of all
his Glories he had never yet done. Certainly His, if ever any, was a prosperous
Reign; and yet his very Conquests were bitter to him. For when from all parts
abroad he had perfect Peace, he had none at home. In his own City, in his own
Court, and if not in his own Bosom, yet at least in his own Sueton. l. 2. c. 19.
Bedchamber, there were Plots, and Conspiracies, and Designs upon his Life,
carried on by some of the basest, and the most profligate of his Subjects. Not
the Swords only of Caepio, Murena, of Lepidus, and Egnatius, and Plautius Rufus
were whet against him; But even Telephus, and Audasius, and a vile Skullion out
of his Kitchen, with Knives and Daggers conspired his Ruin. And he would many
times have left his Imperial Dignity, had not his Enemies been such, and of
such a frame, as that he could not descend, but by falling headlong. Yet he
descended in his Desires, (says Lucius Ubi supra p. 563. Hoc votum erat ejus,
qui voti compotes facere poterat.
Seneca,) and was a private Person in wish, employing still his chief Labors
and Thoughts about it; tho still his Circumstances were such, as to confine him
to the Majesty, and by consequence to the Thraldom, in which he dyed. But This
is certain, That as if Greatness had oppressed him, and cast him down, He would
never once admit of the least Increase. So far was he Sueton. in vit. Octav. c.
52, 53. p. 87, 88.
from suffering Temples, that he would not have Statues erected to him. To call
him Master, was as the breaking of his Head. And how did he deprecate A
Dictatorship, the highest Honor upon Earth, (when his People by force would
have cast it on him,) as one would deprecate a shameful and painful Death, with
a naked Breast, and a bended Knee? If ever any crowned Head exceeded Augustus
in Prosperity, Polycrates of Horodot. in Thalia. c. 39, 40, etc. p. 177.
Samos was sure the man. Who yet was so far from being the happier for his
felicities, that his felicities did afflict him, more than any thing else
could. It did not trouble him a little, That he had nothing to vex him; and
that the Goods he would part with, he could not lose. Nor was it strange, or
without reason, that his Felicities were so irksom and grievous to him; For his
Friend Amasis King of Egypt had told him the danger of his Successes, and that
he took them for the Prognostics of he-knew-not-what- Miseries in time to
come. He told Polycrates in Effect, the same that Solon told Croesus, (and what
is now a Byword in our Ethick Systemes,) Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera
felix, None can be certain of his Happiness, before his Death. He said, he
never knew any so over-fortunate in his life, who did not come to some dismal
End. And as he chose for himself an wholesome Mixture of Adversity with good
Success, so he durst not continue Friendship with one condemned to have his
Portion of Good things Here; with one who was doomed to a praeproperous,
untimely Bliss. (...). Ib. p. 178.
He having a dread, and an abhorrence of too much Happiness upon Earth, as that
which he thought provoked the Anger, and the Iealousy of Heaven, if not the
Envy. Now it is observable in Herodotus (who gives us the History of it at
large,) That what was prophesied by Amasis, was by Oraetes made good. For all
the Felicities of Polycrates did justly end in his Cap. 125. p. 210.
Crucifixion. So true is That of the Philosopher (however most persons may
think it strange,) Res inquieta felicitas est, ipsa se exagitat, movet Cerebrum
non uno genere, alios in Cultum irritat, alios in potentiam, alios inflat,
alios mollit. If English can express it, perhaps it may be thus rendered.
Worldly Greatness is a restless, unquiet thing; a Plague and Affliction unto it
self, and to all that own it; It exagitates the Heads and Hearts of men several
ways; some it intoxicates with Cruelty, and some with Pride; some it stirs up
to Luxury, and some to Lust; some it swells up, and some it softens. As the Sun
at the same time does harden Clay, and melt Wax, some it makes so obdurate as
to turn them into a Rock, and some it dissolves into arrant looseness.

7. Which by the way suggests to us a Third Reason for the Dissuasive from any
man's seeking Great Things for himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them
not. They being treacherous, and deceiptful, not only to the outward, but
inward man; not only in a Secular, but moral Sense; not only to the Bodies, but
Souls of men. They are corruptive even of Principles; as making their owners to
imagine, that Honor Intitles them to Ambition; that Pride belongs to men of
Power; that Greatness gives them a Right to Arrogance. From which Corruption of
Judgment it comes to pass, that many others, as well as Baldwin, (That most
famously* devout Cistercian Monk,) have been observed by Historians to lose
their Sanctity with their Obscureness, and after the measure of growing
Greater, to grow in all kinds the worse. In so much that Pope Urban directed
his Letters very fitly to Baldwin Thus: Monacho ferventissimo, Abbati calido,
Episcopo tepido, Archiepiscopo remisso, Salutem plurimam impertimus. It is so
common for men to change from good to bad, or from bad to worse, with the
change of their Conditions from bad to good, or from good to better, and when
they are lifted up in Honor, to be elevated in Mind too, that Titus Vespasian
is the one Emperor (at least within my present memory) who was molded by his
Empire from bad to better; from having been both a proud and a cruel Subject,
to his being both a mild and an humble Sovereign. Of most other Emperors it
may be said, (as 'twas by Tacitus but of one,) Imperio digni, nisi imperassent.
They might have been worthy of their Empires, if they never had been Emperors.
Temporal Happiness having This of malignant in it, (in the Judgment of Agur the
Son of Iakeh, that it makes men forgetful of Him that made them, (Deuteronomy. 32. 15,
18.) It breeds ingratitude, disaffection, and at last a disbelief of their
Sovereign Good, ( Prove. 30. 8, 9.) 'Twas the Opinion of St. Chrysostom, (upon
(...). Chrysostom. in c. 4. ad Ephesians. Hom. 11. p. 960.
St. Paul to the Ephesians,) that as nothing can so highly provoke the Wrath of
the Almighty, as the Sin of breeding Factions in Church and State, So there is
nothing that can so easily beget such Factions in either of them, as the
Seeking of Preferments and Greatness in it. For where the most of men are
seeking Great Things for Themselves, there are Few to take care of the Common
Good, either in relation to Church, or State. And the way to Advancement,
through such an excess of Self-seeking, becomes too Narrow, which it is the
Interest of the Public to make as Broad as it is possible; that so the
Candidates going toward it may not tread on one another, for want of Room to
go by; or at least for want of Room to go by quietly, and without jostling.
Lord, what Armies have been defeated, if not destroyed too, by the chief
Officers great Envy and malignant Aemulations of one another? We need not go
far abroad for Examples of it, if we are not utter Strangers to things which
have happened here at Home. And Christians (one would think) should All take
warning by Christ's Disciples, who were impertinently disputing which of Them
should be the greatest, when nothing but Pains, and Persecutions and Death it
self did await them All. There was a Time when great Numbers did take fair
warning by That Example. But not to spend time in the Enumeration of
Particulars, (for the enumerating of which my time would fail me,) it shall
suffice me to say in general, and by the Authority of St. Austin, that most of
the better sort of men Aug. Ep. 204.
who had the Happiness to live in those better Times, did suffer violence and
force in S. Ambros. Ep. 82.
their vast Promotions. For being exceedingly afraid of the great Dignities
they were offered, and much more ready to quit their Country, than to run the
great risque of Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 30.
Advancement in it, they were fain to be pressed and kept in Prison, 'till they
could Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 18.
bring their Wills down to admit of Greatness. Thus the most Modern of our
Great Greg. Presb. in vita Nazianzeni.
Doctors, of the most Primitive Simplicity, a man as wise, as he was learned,
and as good as good Nature by Grace could make him, was truly afraid to live so
long, as to see the happy Day he had daily prayed for; partly for his own sake,
lest the bettering of the Times should possibly make him grow worse than he was
before; and lest Advancement should corrupt him, whom the contrary Condition
had kept Entire; partly for the sake of the Public also, lest a Deluge of
Prosperity, overflowing all the Borders of Church and State, might beget as
great a Deluge of Epidemical Provocations; to wit of downright Irreligion, and
Immoralities of Life. Thence came his Censure of the bold Hermites in the Time
of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, who left their Privacies and
Retirements, to study Perfection in the King's Palace, because (forsooth) there
were stronger and more Temptations to be subdued. For what was This but to
presume (as St. Peter once did) on their Ghostly strength? and so to tempt God
himself to withdraw his Grace from them, (as he did for a time from St. Peter
also,) to make them know their own Weakness without his Succors? The greatest
Luminaries on Earth being fitly by him compared to those famous Lamps, of which
it is said by Licetus, that they continued under Ground no less than Sixteen
Hundred years, but went out, and were extinguish't, as soon as brought into the
Air. And truly considering what Examples we have in History of men, who by the
Tenure of their Privacy did hold their Innocence, but becoming Public Persons
were straight undone by their Advancements, and had their former light of
Conscience extinguish't in them; we have as little reason as Baruch, to be
anxiously seeking Great Things for our selves, but as great reason as Dr.
Hammond, to be religiously afraid of being taken out of our Privacies, and
drawn too far into Public Air, lest (like the Lamps before mentioned) our
present Light should be darkened with too much Luster.

8. There is yet a fourth Reason for the Dissuasive I am upon, from any man's
seeking Great Things for himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them not,
which is to be taken from a less obvious, and more surprising Consideration; to
wit that the greater any man is, the greater is his obligation to the discharge
of one duty, which, tho it is not quite impossible, is yet extremely difficult,
and most uneasy to be performed. For still the more a man abounds in the Worlds
Great Things, (such as Riches, and Honor, and Reputation,) the more he is
bound upon all Accounts, to lay Himself and Them too at the Feet of Christ.
Still the more Talents he has received, the more he has to reckon for, at the
General Audit; and it is still the harder for him, to make up a satisfactory
Account; and still the Sense of This Burden both of Difficulty and Danger,
should cast him down under That Greatness, which is the aptest to puff him up.
And why should any man be seeking Those things for Himself, which do but
aggrandize his Duty, and lessen his Faculty to discharge it? It Is (I suppose)
from a Conjunction of These two things, that The Friendship of the World is
said to be Enmity with God. That it is hard (if not impossible) for a Rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That it is a thing extremely difficult, for
a man to have his portion of Good Things Twice; Here, with Dives; and with
Lazarus, hereafter. Nor can I imagine a better reason, why The Rich (rather than
others) should be forewarned by St. James, to weep and howl, James 5. 1.
for the miseries that shall come upon them, than that the same Talents of
Greatness which are but lent and entrusted by God to men, to make them more and
more affectionate and thankful to him, are wont to make them most forgetful and
careless of him. That which obliges them to Humility, is made to extimulate
their Pride. Why then should we be seeking Greater Things for our selves than
will do us Good? Great enough to make it necessary to do a very important Duty,
which at the very same Time (speaking in a Moral sense) they make impossible to
be done? There can be no sadder Case for any poor Creature to be in, than when
he is loaded with Obligations which serve but to aggravate his Guilt. Yet This
is commonly the upshot of as many Great Things as are got by Seeking.

Lord, what Comfort should This administer to men of mean and low Stations, to
men of slender and small Estates? How should they learn from These Reasons for
this Reproof and Prohibition of God to Baruch, not to Envy any man's Greatness,
and not to covet it for Themselves? Not to wish it were their own, much less to
seek it, much less yet to seize upon it? Is there any man here present at what
has hitherto been delivered, as Poor as Job upon the Dunghill, or as miserable
as Lazarus at Dives his Door, as ambitious of the Crumbs which happen to fall
under his Table, (and perhaps as full of Sores too?) Let him lift up the Hands
that hang down, and the feeble Knees. Let him cheer himself up with this most
rational, most useful, and most obvious Consideration, That the less it
pleases God to let him have his Proportion of Good Things Luke 16. 20, 21, 25.
here, the likelier he is to have his Good Things hereafter. The less a man is
overflowing with Wealth and Honor, or with any thing else which the World
calls Great, by so much the less he is exposed as the Butt of Envy; by so much
the less he has to lose; the less he has to leave behind him, the less he is in
danger to stand amazed and confounded, and to tremble for fear in the Day of
Wrath. The fewer Talents he has received of Worldly Greatness, the fewer he has
to answer for, in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of men by Jesus
Christ. Besides that for the present, by so much the fewer are his Temptations
to Pride and Arrogance, to Cruelty and Oppression, to Lust and Luxury. Or (to
express it with St. Paul,) by so much the fewer are his Temptations unto
Rioting, and Drunkenness, to Chambering, and Wantonness, to Strife, and Envy.
To sum up all in a word, the more a Christian is obnoxious to the
Ridiculousness of Poverty, and the Contempt of Great men, the more conformable
he is to the Life of Christ, in whom the LInes of human Misery did All
concenter. We see how many and great Comforts a man may raise out of his
Misery, if he can make a truly Christian and Philosophical use of it. And if
These Considerations cannot induce a Poor man even to pity and compassionate
any Great man's Condition, yet at least they should be sufficient to make him
contented with his own. Which is all I aim at in my present Reasoning.

But before I am aware, (for want of due heed to my General Method, tho not for
want of good will to the most Destitute and Dissatisfied of Those that hear
me,) I anticipate one of The Uses I am to make of that Doctrine this Text
affords, although I have not quite done with the Reasons of it. And yet I cannot
well proceed, without occurring to an objection; first by owning its Force, (so
far forth as it has reason,) and then by showing its Insufficience.

It Is true I cannot but acknowledge, (nor am I willing to stretch a Doctrine,
how True soever, beyond the just Line of its due Extension, which yet we all
are apt to do, through the hatred we use to have of any Error which we oppose,
the (...), as St. Basil calls it; I therefore say I must acknowledge,) and I do
it without Regret, that what an old Author has said of Phidias, Seneca Epist.
85. sub finem.
may be truly enough applied to every wise and good man in a Moral sense. If
Phidias wanted Ivory out of which to make a Statue, he could make one of Brass.
If Marble were wanting, he could make one of Wood. If the best Wood were
wanting, he could make one of the worst. And still how course soever his
Materials happened to be, the Statue should be as good, as the Stuff would
bear. Just so a wise and good man will make the best use he can of any
Condition he can be in. All his wants will be with Comfort; All his
Advancements with Humility; All his Enjoyments with Moderation. He will equally
stand affected to Death, and Honor; neither of which is to be courted, tho
they are Both to be endured (when laid upon him unsought) without impatience.
But yet, as Phidias could work the better, the fitter Materials were allowed
him, and some were fitter for his purpose than others were; so a wise and good
man is able to make a better use, of one Condition, than of another; and
therefore ought to choose That, which he can manage with the most ease, to the
best Advantage. Now what Condition That is, has been sufficiently implied in
the four Reasons going before, [of God's severe Prohibition, Seek them not;]
and may yet more expressly be made out to us in That which follows. For

9. If all Secular Greatness is less conducible to a man's Happiness, or his
Contentment here on Earth, and carries with it more Impediments in the Narrow
way to Heaven, (which our Lord and his Apostles affirm expressly,) than That
other State of life which is low, and little; It cannot but follow on the
contrary, (for Contrariorum contraria est ratio,) that the inferior State of
life is much the Best, and the most Retired the most desirable Condition.
Indeed it is pity that Superfluities should enlarge a man's Appetite, yet so
they do. Pity it is that a man's Avarice should ever be widened by his
Possessions, yet so it is. And therefore the Scythians did very fitly thus
expostulate with the Great Emperor, who conquered all he ever fought with,
except Himself; Quid tibi divitiis opus est, quae Te cogunt esurire? What have
Thou to do with Meat, which does but serve to increase thy hunger? or what need
have Thou of Riches, which make thee still the more needy? for they observed
the more he had, the more he wanted what he had not. And the degrees of a man's
Want do (by very sound Ethics) define his Poverty. We know it is customary for
Parents, to make and leave (if they can) a great Provision for their Children,
(or for their Nephews, if they have none.) And still the greater Estate they
leave them, the better they think they have done their Duty; because they take
it for a thing granted, that men are as Happy, as they are Rich. But when we
reflect upon the Character and the Choice of those men, who either were sick of
great Plenty, and therefore left it as a Disease; or were afraid of its
Infection, and therefore refused the Offers of it, it is plain Experience, and
Practice, and the Best men's Examples, as well as Reason, yes and abundance of
Scripture too, will make us quite of another mind. For though Contentment
cannot arise from any Proportion of Estate, be it great, or little, (because it
grows to us from within, and not from any thing without us;) yet I conceive a
mean Estate does most contribute to its Attainment; and with the men who have
but Little, the Greatest Contentments are seen to dwell. The reason of which is
very evident; For it is easy to have a little, and to be below Envy; whilst it is
absolutely impossible to be above it. And therefore That of Claudian has
apparent Truth in it, Est ubi despectus nimius juvat: There is a Time when a
man prospers by being slighted. When a man's Poverty is his Protection: when
too much contempt secures his liberty and his life. It Is ever best, because
safest, because least troublesome, least perilous, least invidious, Not to be
Great. Again, Ad manum est quod satis est; As it is easy to have a little, so a
little is sufficient for Food and Raiment: and St. Paul infers strongly, that
Food and Raiment are enough: (the upshot of all we can want or pray for:) and
it is enough that breeds Happiness, because Contentment, meeting with a Mind
that is fitted for it: And a man's Mind is sooner fitted to find enough in a
Little, than to meet with it in great Abundance. For, Sudatur ad Supervacua,
(says the Roman Philosopher,) what is more than just enough, begins to have
somewhat of Excess; and All excess is superfluous, which for that very reason
will cost us sweat; if not the Sweat of the Brow, yet the Anxiety of the Brain;
not only in the Solicitude how to get, or to improve, but in that easier
Concernment, How to manage, and to praeserve it. In each of which Cases,
Sudatur ad Supervacua. The meaner man even in This is so much happier than the
greater, by how much it is better not to have, than to lose Abundance: which,
sooner or later, the Great man must, and the Mean man cannot. Angustanda certe
sunt Patrimonia, ut minus ad injurias Fortunae simus expositi. Sen.
Still the Greater any one is, the more he is obnoxious to Chance, and Fortune,
by which it is better not to be favored, than forsaken at last. And therefore
the Baleares (of whom we read in Diodorus) did so reflect upon the Diod. Sic.
l. 5.
Misery which Geryon's great Treasures betrayed him to, (for he had never else
been visited and killed by Hercules,) that they durst not have Plenty, for fear
of Thieves; for fear of providing for their Enemies, as Geryon did. Which
comparing with That of David, [ He heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them,] and with the Counsel of Christ himself, Take no thought for the
Morrow, and lay not up Treasure upon Earth, ( Matthew. 6.) I do the less think it
strange, tho strange enough, that Maximus Tyrius and other Ancients admired the
Wisdom of Diogenes, in that he made it his choice, to Max. Tyr. Dissert. 20. p.
192. ad finem.
be as unfurnished as an Angel; as free from all Earthly Goods, as the Spirits
of Heaven. Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. 22. p. 346. etc. Sen. de Tranquil. animi c.
8. Res cogendae sunt in arctum; ut tela Invidiae in vanum cadunt.
For they considered within Themselves, that to have Riches, and Honors, as
well as Children, is to give Hostages to Fortune. And that it is here, as in an
Army; the greater the Bulk, the more it is exposed to Wounds and Slaughter.

10. But tho the Saying of Epicurus is most evidently true, Honesta res est
Paupertas laeta, that he who does not only bear, but enjoy his Poverty, is not
only an happy, but an honorable man, and in this respect a rich one, that what
he has not, he does not want, whilst he regulates his Appetite, and makes it
adequate to his Condition; yet because it is not so easy, for a man and his
Poverty to be agreed, in case his Poverty is so importunate, as incessantly to
pinch him with Cold and Hunger; I therefore put a wide difference between not
seeking Great Things for our selves, and not providing what is enough. It Is not
absolute Poverty I recommend from This Text, (such as Discalceats and
Mendicants pretend to love,) but only Poverty in comparison; That which either
borders on, or dwells within some few Doors of It. I speak of Poverty as
opposed to those Great Things, from the Seeking of which we are here dehorted.
For This does seem a more safe, and more secure way to Happiness, than Great
Abundance; because the less any one has above Food and Raiment, the less he
roves beyond the limits of what is competent, and enough, (as I said before;)
the less he has to care for, and to give account of at the general Audit;
briefly the less he has to lose, and to leave behind him; not infallibly to his
Friends, but peradventure to his worst Enemies; Not certainly to his Sons, but
perhaps to his Sequestrators; nor for certain to his Daughters, but possibly to
the Artificers, who shall make a Prey of them. I say it is a state of
Mediocrity, A Competency of Fortune, attended still with a decent Thriftiness,
and Frugality, (as being That without which no Riches can be Great, or if
Great, not sufficient,) which I commend from this Text, as a Sovereign Medicine
against the Itch. And that the worst kind of Itch to be imagined; to wit the
Itch of a man's Seeking Great Things for himself; or very much Greater than are
allotted him by the wise Providence of his Creator.

Auream quisquis Mediocritatem
Diligit tutus, caret obsoleti Hor. Carm. 2. 10.

Sordibus Tecti, caret invidenda
Sobrius Aula.
Of all the Secular Great Things from the Seeking of which we are here
dehorted, the least desirable I am sure, if not the most tremendous, are the
Great and Rich Offices of Public Government and Trust; because They are the
greatest Obstacles to That which does the most import us, to wit The Government
of our selves. A Work so incumbent upon our selves, (next and immediately under
God,) as that it cannot be wholly managed by any other man's Prudence, how much
soever it may be greater, and more to be trusted than our own. Besides that the
Government of a man's Family, although not Great, and the Government of his
Estate, although but Little, will take up more of his Time (on which his Eternity
does depend) than he can very well part with from better Objects. And for the
governing of a man's Self, All his Time is too little; whether we look upon the
hardness or profit of it. To keep our Thoughts, and our Affections, our
Appetites, and our Wills, within their due Bounds and Compass, and well
employed on those Objects to which of right they do belong, is so difficult in
the doing, and yet so pleasant when it is done, that I know not whether the
Work, or the Reward it brings with It is more important. Hence an Overplus of
Advancement is as distastful and as surfeiting to a moderate Mind, as is an
Excess of Meat and Drink, either to a well-satisfi'd, or tender Stomach. And
therefore as a man of a sober Appetite will expect to be excused by abler
Drinkers than himself, from taking in more than will do him good, or more than
his Body can well abide; so we must pray to be excused, (or be contented if we
are not) by men of larger Appetites and stronger Ambitions than our own, if we
shall choose to be no greater, in Wealth, and Honor, than in Desires; to
lessen our Burden (if already lying upon us) in proportion to the strength we
have to bear it; to have our Meat and our Drink, as well as our Hunger, and our
Thirst, exactly fitted to our Digestions.

11. It Is true indeed there is a time, when the Worlds Great Things (such as
Riches and Honor) come uninvited, and even grow upon their owners, who neither
seek, nor care for them. In which case it is to be said, Non in rebus vitium
est, sed in animis Possidentium. Riches are innocent in their Increase, if we
set not our hearts upon them; if we look upon them as things which are false
and flying; if we carry our selves toward them with so much Carelessness and
Contempt, as to be really poor in Spirit; reaping the Benefit and the Blessing
which any Lazarus can enjoy, without the Sting, and the Disgrace, without the
Leprosy, and the Ridiculousness, which an ugly French Proverb, and vicious men
have found in it, and none but They. It was a very gross Error in the ancient
Apostolici, (as they were (...). Epipha. Haer. 60. 507.
pleased to call Themselves) to think it utterly unlawful for men to have
Estates peculiar to them, and that forsooth for this Reason, because the
Apostles, and their first Followers had all things in common, except their
Wives. 'Twas to put Virtue upon the Rack, and stretch her out (like Procrustes)
beyond her just and full Stature, to wit, the Extremity of her Mean; and
therefore 'twas with good reason, that Epiphanius and others esteemed Them
Heretics. For as a man of great Age may receive the Kingdom of God, as a
little Child; so may one of great Wealth, as a very poor one. It being the
inward Disposition, not the want of outward Affluence, which makes a man poor
enough to be regarded (like The Virgin) by God Himself. Our Self-denials, if we
are Rich, will make us voluntarily Poor, and still the Richer for being such.
Nor only the Richer, but Greater too. For Magnus Ille est qui in divitiis est
pauper, says Lucius Seneca. He is generous, and great, who keeps the Modesty
and the Meekness of a very poor man in the midst of Plenty. The like to which
may be said on the other side. He is indeed a great man, who is as if he were
Rich in the deepest Poverty: as Rich in Comforts and Contentments, and
Serenities of Mind, as if he were Owner of Both the Indies. If our Riches
decrease, and our Desires decrease too, still our Condition is the same, and we
must needs be as well as ever. For Beatus est Ille qui vivit ut vult; He who
has all that he desires, cannot be happier than he is, whatever else may be
added to him. And This is that frame of Mind which the Text suggests to us;
This we are all to pant after, and labor for, with a comparative Contempt of
the World without us. And to This the smallest things are more conducible than
the Greatest. A little with acquiescence, which was the Portion of Aglaus the
poor Arcadian, will not only make us happier, but even Richer than * Umidius
Hor. ^. 1. Sermon. Sat. 1.
with all his Plenty. For tho it is a Postulate, or a Principle, not to be
questioned in Geometry, That the Whole must needs be more than any Part of it
self, yet in Morality it is to be questioned for several Reasons. For such may
be the blessed Frame and Constitution of a man's mind, as may enable him to
confute, or elude the Maxim. And That difficult Hemistichion which Hesiod sent
his Brother Perses, (by whom it seems he had been cheated of the one half of
his Estate,) (...), Half is more than the whole, may have its Proof and
Exposition from the Experience of a moderate and prudent man. For the one half
of his Possessions may be more to him than the whole, five or six several ways;
in that it may (without a Miracle) be more conducing unto his Happiness, and
more in order to his Designs, and even in reference unto the present, as well
as to the future and better Life; and that by being (for Example) more
consistent with his Privacy, and more conservative of his Time; more propitious
to his Sobriety, and more agreeable to his Vocation; more in a tendency to his
Contentment, and more by consequence to his Health. Many ways it may be more,
both in a Moral, and Theological, (which is the best,) although it cannot in a
Physical, or Mathematical Acception, (which is the worst.) For sure the former
signification of the word More, is as much better than the later, as Quality
and Goodness is better than Quantity and Bulk; or as the Enjoyment of worldly
things, than the bare Possession. For the happiest man living, and the most
noble Apolaustick, cannot possibly be He who does own the most things, but
evidently He who does want the fewest. And as the strengthening of a man's Back
is of greater use to him, than the mere lessening of his Burden, so is the
shortning of his Appetite of more advantage to his well-being, Quid mihi
voluptatem nominas? Hominis Bonum quaero, non Ventris, qui pecudibus ac belluis
laxior est. Seneca.
than any lengthning of his Titles, or any enlarging of his Estate. Else a
Cormorant, or a Gulon, (supposing them to have Food in full Proportion to their
Appetites) would be much happier than a Man. And a man with such a Disease as
Physicians call a Boulimis, or Boulimia, (supposing him also to have Food in
full Proportion to his Appetite,) would be happier than a man of the soundest
Health. A thing so void of all reason, and so impossible to be True, that the
Belly-Gods of the Earth who still are satisfying their Appetites, and the
Glorified Saints of Heaven who have the Happiness to have None, do so far
differ, (as to the Comforts and Satisfactions which they enjoy,) that the
Pleasures of the first are much the lesser, but the more gross; whilst the
Pleasures of the second are vastly greater, but more refined.

12. From All that has hitherto been delivered, that is from the Doctrine which
has been laid, and from the Reasons which have been given, why men should not
be Seekers of Great Things for themselves, (a Doctrine drawn from the Reproof,
and from the strict Prohibition of God himself, and Reasons arising from as
good Topics as I have been able to argue from,) some good Lessons are to be
taken, some good Uses to be made, some good Means to be suggested, and some
good Motives to be considered, as well by Private, as Public Persons; by Poor,
and Rich; by the Least and by the Greatest, without Exception.

13. First, Inferior men must learn from this whole Message of God to Baruch,
Not to advance themselves by levelling; not to seek Greatness for It self, nor
yet to seek it for Themselves, much less for Themselves by lessening others;
Not to be Troublers of the Waters wherein they are desirous to fish for
Greatness; Not to aim at Great Things by heading Parties, and Factions, by
nourishing Schisms and Separations, and (what of it self is a great thing,) by
having the Managements of Sedition in Church and State; Not to promote a Fifth
Monarchy, by pretending nothing more than a Commonwealth; Not to imagine that
Dominion must needs be founded only in Grace; and that the use of the Creature
belongs to none but The Elect; to many others indeed de facto, but de jure only
to Them; They must learn not to be Selfish under color of Self-denial, merely
forsooth in Zeal to the Public Good, and that Right may take place; (not
forsooth that they care for Wealth, or Honor, or have any true love to the
Creature Comforts, as they are such, but) that Goodness (as they call it) may
be rewarded, and that Religion may have its due, and that the blessed Apostle
Paul (whose words they take by the wrong handle) may be justified in his
Saying, whilst Godliness is found to be profitable for All things, having
Promise as well of 1 Timothy 4. 8.
the Life that now is, as of that which is to come. This is the first and prime
Lesson which every private Poor man, and every man under Authority, although not
poor, is to learn from the Dehortative, and from the bitter Exprobration of God
to Baruch. He must not make himself the Moral of Aesop's Toad, which had an
Ambition to swell it self into the Bigness of an Ox. He must not make himself
obnoxious to the reproach of That Proverb, Scarabaeus contra Aquilam; being but
a Beetle, or but a Butterfly, he must not aemulate an Eagle, much less
endeavor, either to lure her, or pluck her down. He must not make himself
liable to the Woe, which God denounced heretofore by his Prophet Isaiah; must
not say tacitly to his Isa. 45. 9, 10.
Father, what begettest thou? or to the Woman, what have Thou brought forth? He
must not mutiny and grumble against God's Providence and his Will, or seek to
aggrandize himself, whether his Maker will or no. Being (as He is) but an
Earthern Pitcher, he must not contend with a Brass Pot, or strive to equal
(much less to master) the Golden Cistern. But he must labor on the contrary to
reckon himself ( as he is) in his proper Element, and by consequence not to be
capable of Gravitation or Levitation, from which the Elements are exempt in
their native places. He must make it his whole Endeavor, his whole Ambition,
and Delight, to acquiesce as Things do which attain their Center. Not to turn
Seeker how he may raise, or disturb himself; But to esteem it his private
Interest, to contribute all he can to the Public Good; to prove he loves the
public Peace, by his following after the things that do make for Peace; as by
making his Reason to reign within him over his Passions; and his Will over his
Appetite; by submitting his more deceivable and private Judgment, unto the less
erring Judgment of Public Reason; by seeking one great thing for himself,
which is the Glory of Obedience (as Tacitus calls it) to human Laws and
Lawgivers, to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; and by esteeming it
as glorious for a Subject to be loyal, and obedient unto his Sovereign, as for
a Sovereign to command, and protect his Subject. It is every man's Duty, as
well as Honor, and every man's Advantage, as well as Duty, to do in this case
as he would be done by; to pay as much Reverence and Submission to such as are
over him in Authority, as he expects from his own Servants, his Wife, and
Children. It being pity that any Subject who is a Rebel to his Prince, should
meet with any thing but Rebellion, from All that owe Service or Duty to him.
For why should any man expect to have a dutiful Wife, an obedient Son, or a
faithful Servant, who is neither of the Three to his Native Sovereign? but is
undutiful and false to his Public Parent? not to the People's, but God's
Vicegerent? There can be nothing more apposite, than that a Boutefeux, a
Kindle-coal, a Makebate in the City, should have his House full of Tumults:
that He who is hissing at public Government, should carry a Serpent in his own
Bosom: that as he Sows, so he should Reap: Gal. 6. 6. 7.
that his own Wickedness should correct him: that he should suffer what he has
done: and that with the measure he metes to others who are exceedingly above
him, others exceedingly below him should duly measure to him again. Nor should
it otherwise be of pleasant, but as it is of profitable Remarque, that Women did
never here in England so affect Mastery over their Husbands; Never were
Children here in England so disaffected, so disobedient, so quite unnatural
toward their Parents; Never were Servants here in England so false and
treacherous toward their Masters, as since our English-mens Revolt from The
God of Order; since their being too proud to be under God: or at least no
farther willing that God himself should reign over them, than upon This
Condition only, that he will do it Their way: either without any Vicegerent, or
with one of Their choosing.

What I now have said last, I should have taken for a Digression, had not the
Evils now mentioned been all the Fruit of the same Plant, which had taken some
Root in the Heart of Baruch; I mean The Itch of a man's seeking Greater Things
for himself, than God sees fit, or has been pleased to allow to such as seek
them.

14. Now in order to the learning so great and good a Lesson as This, which I
have been hitherto describing, we must attend to those Things which are the
Means of, and the Motives to it. In order to the former, we must not only
addict our selves to all the usual Means of Grace, such as Prayer, and Giving
of Alms, Reading, and Hearing the Word of God, frequent Perceptions of the
Lord's Supper, private Conferences with Casuists, or Ghostly Fathers, and the
like; But we must use our best Wit, and our soundest Reason, and (as St. Paul
exhorts Timothy) we must duly stir up the Gift of God which is in us, whereby
to find out such Means as are perhaps the least thought of, tho perhaps the
most effectual to reach the End we aim at. We know an Archer, not to be short
of the Mark before him, will use his endeavor to shoot beyond it. As
Demosthenes, of a Stammerer, attained to an excellent Pronunciation, by
speaking with Pebbles in his Mouth; and so He facilitated his Conquest of a
Natural Impediment, by adding and subduing an Artificial one. Have we sincerely
a Desire to be the better for being Rational? to make a right use of the Light
within us? to free our selves from a Disease the most tormenting in all the
World? to be as happy as is possible in a Valley of Tears? we must not only not
seek Great Things for our selves, but must not suffer Great Things to grow upon
us in Excess. We must never once endure to have as much of this World, as we
are able; nor yet as much as is lawful for us; but only as much as is
expedient. We must not dare to make Trials (as too many are wont to do, through
a most sinful Curiosity,) what store of Riches may be attained to within the
Compass of one Man's Life. There being nothing more inhuman, more unbecoming,
or more unworthy of a Rational Agent, than for a man to be condemned, by his
own Consent, to be digging all his days in the Mine, or Quarry; to be so much
below a Bruit, as not to know when he has enough. Enough to make use of, enough
to keep, enough to care for, enough to lose, enough to leave behind him, enough
to give account of in the day of Judgment. There can be nothing more
disgraceful to a man's Reason and Understanding, than not to know when he has
enough in these six Points I now have mentioned. Not only Christ, and his
Apostles, but Horace himself, and his Oppidius, and many other Heathen Writers,
have taught us a Lesson of human Prudence, which men as men must needs confess
it is a Shame and Misery not to learn. Tu cave, ne majus facias id quod satis
esse putat Pater, and Natura coercet. Servius Oppidius apud Horat. l. 2. Sat. 3.


Denique sit finis quaerendi. -- and finite Laborem Incipias, parto quod
avebas. -- We ought to fix on a Proportion of Worldly Goods, to which our
Industry and Prudence (with due regard to our Quality, and the Necessities of
our Family) may safely and innocently reach. And having once attained That,
must say as resolvedly to our Appetites, and by consequence to our Endeavors,
as God once said to the Swelling Waters of the Sea; Thus far shall ye go, and
no farther: We are at an end of our Desires. We will not be troubled with any
more. We will not be evermore adding to the dead weight of our Possessions, but
only to the right use and enjoyment of Them. As for Surplasages of Fortune, if
any happen, we will employ them in Christian Projects, and (not in
Philosophical, but) Theological Experiments, (suggested to us by God himself in
several parts of his holy Word, as) How we may draw Bills of Credit upon Him,
who inhabits the New Jerusalem. How we may Prove. 19. 7.
lend unto The Lord, tho The Proprietary of All; and be paid by Him again an
Matthew. 19. 29.
hundred sold for the forbearance. How we may Matthew. 25. 37, 38.
feed and cloth our Savior, tho in his State of Glorification; How redeem our
very Redeemer, by contributing what we can to the Redemption of Christian
Captives from the Tyranny of the Turks; and lay up in store a good Foundation
for our selves, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.
upon a Project of attaining Eternal Life. Thus to stint all our Appetites, and
to limit our Desires, is to antedate the Happiness we hope and pray for. It Is
to create unto our selves (by the help of God's Grace) an humble Degree of
Self-sufficience on this side Heaven. It was the Saying of a wise Heathen,
which no wise Christian will scorn to learn, Nihil Nos magis ab animi fluctibus
vindicaverit, quam aliquem semper figere incrementis Terminum. There is nothing
can more exempt us from all inquietudes of Mind, (from the Rack of Expectation,
and the Strappado of Disappointments,) than our putting a certain period to our
Increase; a certain Boundary or Butt to our Acquisitions. Our best Successes
being so slippery, and our Appetites so strong, that for Both we need Bridles
to hold them fast.

15. It may perhaps be one Motive to moderation of Mind, and to a Christian's
not seeking Great Things for himself, that Jesus Christ, our great Exemplar,
did for Himself seek the least; was pleased to empty himself of Glory, became
of no Reputation; made it his choice to be so poor, as Matthew. 8. 20.
not to have where to lay his head; and tho he was born of the Blood Royal, the
House of David, did choose to take upon him the Form of a very mean Subject,
and to live on Their Charity who administered to him of their Substance, Luke 8.
3. Nor was This only the option of God Incarnate, the blessed Redeemer of the
World, our Lord Jesus Christ, whose coming was to destroy the Works of the
Devil, the Pomps and Vanities of the World, with the sinful Lusts of the Flesh,
as well by his Practice and Example, as by his Praecepts; But All the Wisest
and the Best even of mere moral men, tho they had no Light to go by, but that
of Nature and Education, had yet such a Mastery over themselves, such a right
Apprehension of human Conditions and Affairs, had such an Insight into the
Things which the World calls Great, and did so seriously depretiate the Pomps
and Vanities of the World, ( coveting Poverty rather than Wealth, and courting
obscurity rather than Honor,) that most Professors of Christianity may be
provoked by them to jealousy, if not prevailed upon effectually unto a generous
aemulation. Such as the famous Abdolonymus, who, however he was Q. Curt. l. 4.
Justin. l. 11.
by Birth of Royal Family and Extraction, was yet by Breeding but a poor
Gardener in the Suburbs of Sidon, where he work't out all his Bread at his
fingers ends, and so accordingly did eat it in the Sweat of his Brows. A
Condition so duly fitted to the Humility of his Desires, that when, created
King of Sidon, by Alexander the Great, he was ask't with what Patience he could
endure his late Poverty; I would to God (answered He) I could as well endure a
Kingdom. Hae manus suffecere desiderio meo; nihil habui, nihil defuit. He said
his Hands had been sufficient to administer to his Necessities; and that the
Things which he had not, he did not want. The choice he made of his Employment,
brings Democritus into my memory, who made the same. For having traveled
through the World, whereby to gain a full Experience and Knowledge of it, he
chose at last a deep Poverty, and a confinement to his Garden; wherein he
satisfied his Body with the Productions of the Earth, and feasted his Soul with
Contemplation. The Pomps and Vanities of the World (at the Miseries of which
Heraclitus wept) He daily laugh't at. And tho the Vulgar thought him a Madman
for his Recess from all Company, yet Hippocrates, who was sent to cure him of
it as a Physician, was compelled by his Discourse to admire his Wisdom; and
pronounced Them mad who had so esteemed him. And truly Crates of Thebes may
with Somebody's profit be here remembered; who being both Rich, and a
Philosopher, turned his Land into Money, and put his Money to the Banker on this
Condition, That if his Sons did prove Fools, he should supply their Wants with
it; but if Philosophers, he should deal out all his Treasure to the most
indigent of the City. It having been really his opinion, that Fools want Money,
however Rich; whilst Wisemen, tho Poor, are in need of nothing. Now whether
This is the true History, or That which is told us by Philostratus, [ That
Crates threw his whole Estate into the Sea, as having found it a great
Impediment to the Prosperity of his Studies, and the Tranquillity of his Life,]
it matters not much; because his Judgment does appear by Both Accounts of his
Practice to have been This, that in very much of the World, there is very much
Trouble, and Solicitude; and that the more any man has, the more he has of
disturbance and interruption; the more he has to be carking and caring for;
whether as to its Use, or its Conservation. The Emperor Sigismund (I am sure)
did find it so to some purpose, when having brought him out of Hungary a Chest
of Gold ready coined, he could never sleep well till he parted with it. For he
could not (says Cuspinian) but still be thinking, either where Ecce
crudelissimi hi hosts ac Carnifices, Tortores illi qui me misere
flagellaverunt. Accipite, ac inter vos dividite, ut mihi tranquille dormire
liceat. Cusp. in vita Sigism. p. 4^^.
he might keep it with greatest safety, or how lay it out to the most
Advantage. Therefore calling to him his Counselors, with the chief Officers of
his Army, and all his Lifeguard more especially, he caused his Chest to be laid
open, and his Forty thousand Pieces (a great Treasure Then,) thrown out amongst
them. Those he called his Tormentors, his Murderers, his cruell'st Enemies, and
his Lictors, which would not suffer him to rest, by reason of the lashes they
laid upon him all Night, without remorse, or intermission. This ('it is plain) is
not impertinent to the Discourse I am upon, tho impertinent in comparison with
all those Emperors and Kings, and other Persons more signal, whom I might
reckon (if I had Time) upon This occasion. But desirous to comply with the Time
allowed, I shall not Instance in as many, but in as few as I am able of most
Remarque. Such as are the Three Scipio's, in whom the Roman Historians (and the
best of the Greek ones) do justly triumph. The chief of These was Africanus,
the glorious Downfall of Carthage, and Staff of Rome, as his Paternal Name
Scipio does well import. One who grew to such an Highth of Worldly Happiness
and Renown, that there was nothing now left to make him Higher, but his
Humility. He did not only refuse the Offer, of having his Statue Val. Max. l.
4. c. ^.
signalized in the highest Places, but that of Consulship during Life, and that
of perpetual (...). Polyb. l. 10. p. 110, 111.
Dictator also. Yea if Polybius may be credited, (who had most reason to know,)
both in Asia, and Europe, as well as Africa, he did many times refuse to be
made a King. And This Polybius calls often, not the Poverty, or the Lowness,
(as the men of this Age would be apt to call it,) but, as it was in good
earnest, the Highth and Greatness of Scipio's Spirit. I am persuaded (says
Lucius Sen. in Epist. 86.
Seneca) that Scipio' s Soul went up to Heaven, not because as a Commander he
led so many and great Armies, but because of That Piety by which he triumph't
over Himself. Not so much because he saved, as because having saved, he LEFT
his Country. Nor because he left the Service, but the Honors, and the Wealth,
and Enjoyments of it. It was the Littleness and Obscurity of his House at
Linternum, which made that Philosopher admire his Greatness. It was his lying
close hid in a little Corner, turning his Spear into a Plough-share, and his
Sword into a Pruninghook, and laboring with his own hands in dressing and
cultivating the Earth, which made this Great man who transcended All others, at
the last to exceed and transcend Himself. 'Twas in his Cloud he shined
brightest. 'Twas the Foil of a Retirement, by which This Jewel was most set
off. 'Twas his Contempt of This World, which made him able to command it;

Et Rerum Dominus Nil cupiendo fuit. Such an Example of Self-denial, or (to
speak more exactly) Moderation of Mind, (it being no Self-denial, for any Great
man to enjoy his Wish, and to be as 'twere preferred to a private Life,) was
the most excellent Cassiodorus; A man of so very great Authority with the
Gothic Kings of Italy, (whom he had blessed a long time as their Principal
Minister of State,) that he was reckoned the very Soul of their Public
Business, and one who ever gave Life to their Great Affairs. Yet being humbled
by all his Honors, and so quite tired out with his Secular Greatness, as to
betake himself for Refuge unto a Contrary Franciscus Baconus in Hist. Vitae and
Mortis, p. 267.
condition, he spent the Residue of his Time in such Monastical Contentments
and Contemplations, as drew out his Life to the Hundredth year.

16. These and very many others, as well in Ancient as Modern Story, may be
Val. Max. l. 7. c. 3. n. 3. extern.
sufficient to persuade us to be of Bias his opinion: That a man's Riches are
to be carried, not on his Shoulders, but in his Breast; (and by consequence to
be kept, not in his Coffers, but in his Brain;) They are to be such aswill
attend him to what place soever he takes his Flight; and such as will stick to
him at last in the day of Wrath. These men knew as well, as Apollo's Oracle
could tell them; that Aglaus was happier in his Cottage, than King Gyges upon
his Throne. Id. ib. n. 9. (...). Cic. Paradox.
And were convinced with Anaxagoras, that public Honors and vast Revenues can
very hardly and very seldom consist with Bliss: but that every man's Happiness
is to be sought for in his Recess.

17. If it shall now be imputed to me, that I have spent too much time in
seconding Reason with Example, I have This to allege in my justification; That
Example upon many works more than Reason. Sure I am that it did upon The
Emperor Charles Strad. de Bell. Belgic. l. 1. p. 22. Nec deerant Exempla --
quae in ea deliberatione haerenti occurrebant. Thuan. l. 10 p. 506, 507.
the Fifth, if either Strada, or Thuanus, or Both together may be believed. For
their Account of him is This: That as one man's Example taught him to make his
Resolution of laying all his Crowns down at the Feet of Christ, so the Examples
of many more did His and aliis exemplis confirmatus Caesar, se Imperio ac
omnibus Regnis abdicavit, tranquille and pacate quod vitae supererat
transacturiis. Idem. ibid.
confirm him in it: But with this great and signal Difference, that the Example
which suggested his Purpose to him, was taken from a Poor and a Private man;
whereas the many more Examples which brought That Purpose to Execution, were of
those Emperors and Monarchs of equal Dignity with Himself: To wit the Emperor
Dioclesian amongst the Heathen; and amongst our Christian Emperors, Anastasius
the Second, Theodosius the Third, Isacius Comnenus, Michael Rangabe, Michael
the Son of Ducas, Nicephorus Botoniates, Manuel Comnenus, Johannes
Cantacuzenus, and the no less Religious than Great Lotharius. Some of which
Emperors (he observed) had beaten their Scepters into Spades, wherewith they
dug their own Graves in their several Gardens. Others thought it their safest
course, to leave the Pleasures of the Court for the Severities of the Cloister.
All preferring an obscure and a silent Life, before the splendid'st Enjoyments
this World could yield them. Now All I pretend to in This first Lesson I am
upon, and in arguing as I have argued a majori ad minus, is not immodestly to
contend with any Great man, to seek his lessening; especially if his Case is
such, as that he cannot descend at all, without his falling quite headlong; But
I pretend unto a Prevalence with men of inferior and low Degree, to acquiesce
in that Station which God does see is best for them; to acquiesce in His Will,
whose Will is Wisdom; and not to be so excentrical in the Motions of their
Souls, as to be crossing God's Providence with their Endeavors or Designs; Nor
to oppose their Will to His, by the Carnality of their seeking Greater Things
for themselves than their God allows. I aim at teaching inferior men who do
not exceed mine own Size, to reason and argue within themselves a majori ad
minus. For why should little men be seeking Great Things for themselves, when
many Inheritors of Greatness have been exceedingly sick of it, and therefore
have left it as a Disease; whilst others, afraid of its Infection, have
perseveringly rejected the offers of it?

18. But there is another Lesson for Great men also; who may learn (if they
please) as well from the Reproof, as from the Prohibition of God to Baruch, if
not to part with their Greatness, (as the best of the greatest have often
done,) at least to know when they are well; or if they patiently accept, yet at
least not to seek an Increase of Greatness; much less to seek it for
themselves, their private Interest and Advantage, without a due respect to the
Public Good; Not to be guilty of so much Levity, as still to soar higher and
higher, (as all light things are wont to do,) but to prescribe unto themselves
a Ne plus ultra; a certain Term beyond which they will never tend. The Emperor
Pertinax, of a Grammarian, was (...). Herodian. l. 3. p. 34.
well enough contented to become a Great man; and to endure as much Envy as he
knew what to do with, or how to bear: But did not like to be the Object of All
men's Envy: and therefore 'twas with great Reluctance that He accepted of the
Empire; or rather he did not so much accept it, as 'twas by Force imposed upon
him. Glabrio was not discontented with his being at the Top of the Roman
Senate; But knowing That to be enough, he durst not rise a Step higher, and so
refused the same Empire with the same earnestness and vehemence, wherewith
Pertinax Id. ibid.
Himself would have thrown it on him. Maximinus was not unwilling, from a very
low Birth, and from the Breeding of a Shepherd, to be advanced by degrees to be
the General of an Army: But yet he knew his full measure; and was really so
afraid of being raised a step higher, that he did obstinately (...), is
Herodian's Expression of it. L. 6. p. 140, 141
refuse to accept the Empire, till being compelled by a Great Army with their
Swords drawn about him, he was fain to take it up in his own Defense, and only
as somewhat a lesser Evil, than to be murdered for his Humility. The like
judicious apprehension had the incomparable Decius of Worldly Greatness. An
(...). Zosimus l. 1. p. 12.
Emperor could no more persuade him to take the Government of the Army, than
the Army could make him willing to take the Government of the Empire. And tho
at last he discharged Both, yet he did Both against his Will, and by mere
Coaction. For Zosimus tells of him expressly, (...). Ib. p. 13.
Such an Aversion to Advancement (above what was enough) had the Emperor
Vopiscus in vita Taciti. p. 409. ad p. 412.
Tacitus; who to escape the Danger of it, hid Himself for two Months from all
Discovery. Out of which Hiding-hole when he was drawn, as out of a Dungeon into
a Throne, how did he plead against Himself his Inability to ascend it? How many
Infirmities did he pretend to, (which in truth and by right he could never
own,) to excuse his rejection of so much Glory? Nor* was it any fault of His,
that his Rejection was rejected. The Noble Perdiccas had an Ambition to be a
Great man at Court, but not the Greatest. He extended it as far as was
agreeable with his Subjection; But there it left him. For Curtius tells us, He
refused the Q. Curt. l. 10. c. 6.
absolute Empire of the World, when after Alexander's Death it was offered to
him. So did Xenophon more than once the Honor of Xenoph. in Exped. Cyri. l. 6.
p. 291, 292*
being Generalissimo, when all the Army of the Greeks would have cast it on
him. So did Quintus Fabius Maximus the highest Magistracy Live. l. 10. c. 12. p.
368.
in Rome, alleging his Age, and his Infirmities, till both the Senators and
the People were fain to compel him to an Acceptance. So did Manlius Torquatus
object Idem l. 26. c. 22. p. 603.
the Illness of his Eyes against his being created Consul. And when That could
not excuse him, his chiding did. Nec vestros mores Consul far potero, nec vos
Imperium meum. Were I Consul (said He) I should no more endure your looser
lives, than you my strict and severer Discipline. They were obstinate in their
Choice, But so was He in his Refusal. Thus the Consulship of Rome was ambitious
of him; That which other men Coveted, to Him went begging. And Honor it self
had a Repulse in being the Candidate of Manlius; whom Greatness earnestly, and
with Zeal, but vainly courted for his Consent. So Vipsanius Agrippa, to whom
Augustus owed the most for the full Settlement of his Empire, refused a Triumph
which was decreed him for his conquering and quieting the Asian Rebels. So
Fabricius once refused to F lor. l. 1. c. 18.
have his Partnership in a Kingdom, when by a King it was offered to him.
Marcius Rutilus Censorinus, and Fabius Maximus, did Val. Max. l. 4. c. 1 n. 3,
4, etc.
not only content themselves with a Refusal of the Honors conferred upon them,
but chid the Romans very severely for the Excess of such Favors so misapplied.
So Marcus Marcellus, tho the first who made it evident that Syracuse might be
taken, and even Hanibal subdued, refused the Government of Sicily, and shifted
it off on his Colleague. So the Seven Wise men of Greece were in nothing more
thought to have shown their Wisdom, than in shifting off a Treasure from the
one unto the other, as men are wont to do Burdens they hate to bear. Cn. Marcus
Coriolanus, tho of Princely Family and Descent, affected rather to fall, than
rise; and rather Poverty, than Wealth. In so much that in reward of all his
Services in the Wars, (which were vastly great,) he would not accept of Land,
or Money, (when Land and Id. l. 4. c. 3. n. 4. etc.
Money were offered to him,) as thinking it Happiness enough to have deserved
them. Curious also, tho a Commander who conquered Kings, and subdued Kingdoms,
was yet so delighted to live a frugal and private Life, that neither the
Samnites, nor the Senate could by any Offers shake, much less alter his
Resolution. Exactly such another was Fabricius Luscinus, the Noblest Roman of
his time in point of Honor, and Authority, and yet by choice one of the
Poorest, in point of Fortune: His desiring very little, did pass with him for a
Great Possession: His Contempt of all Riches He did esteem the Noblest
Treasure: and found it more precious, than Gold, or Silver, that he would not
be tempted by either of them to an Acceptance. Such another was Aelius Tubero,
surnamed Catus, who rejected the Richest Plate that could be sent him out of
Aetolia; and, tho of Consulary Rank, made choice of being served in Earthen
Vessels. Aemilius Paulus was a man, who having conquered K. Perses, and
enriched all the Romans with the Spoils of Macedonia, did most magnanimously
refuse to be the richer for them himself; as thinking it Recompense enough for
his utmost Labors, that his Country had the Emolument, and Himself the
satisfaction of doing well. Such was the generous Self-denial of Fabius Gurges,
and Ogulnius, and of the Fabij Pictores, when sent Ambassadors into Egypt,
they were opulently Presented by the Munificent King Ptolemy; and however all
was meant for their private use only, yet they sent it Home entirely into the
Treasury and Bank of the Commonwealth. Conceiving it dishonorable, if not
unjust, that Public Ministers should admit of any other Compensation, than the
Public Commendation of their Performance. Such were also Portius Cato, and
Marcus Cato Uticensis, men so proverbial for the Blamelesness and Integrity of
their Lives, for their Enmity to Pleasures, and Severity toward themselves,
that I need no more than Name them. Xenocrates was as free from Lust, and
Avarice, and Ambition, as if he had been in good earnest (what Phryne called
him) L. 4. c. 3.
an arrant Statue. Alexander the Great would have bought his Friendship, would
he have sold it at any Rate. And the Talents which were sent him would have
made him extremely Rich, but that he thought his Best Talent was his Ability to
despise them. Alexander found it an easier Task to conquer Darius with his
Army, than this Philosopher with his Wealth: So that Xenocrates, rather than
He, might have been with some reason surnamed The Great. Omnia habet qui nihil
concupiscit, was the Saying of Cornelia, the famous Mother of the Gracchi. And
if That has truth in it, certainly Solon, rather than Croesus, might have
passed into a Proverb for Riches too. Valerius Poplicola was L. 4. c. 4.
four times Consul; But it was for his Wisdom, not at all for his Wealth. For
contenting himself to have done Great Things for the Commonwealth, and
esteeming it his Happiness to do them gratis, he had Estate enough only to live
and dye with, But far from enough to pay the Expenses of his Burial. Of all he
had or was besides, he had been prodigally free; But his Poverty was a
Treasure, he would never once part with for all the World. Agrippa Menenius
made it his Choice, to be as deserving, and as poor too, if that can be a man's
Poverty, which is his Choice. If'tis, it is such a Poverty as makes its Owner
most truly Great. And if Agrippa had not been such, he had not sure been made a
Judge between the Senators of Rome and the Common People. But they who differed
most fiercely in other Matters, could not choose but agree in This, that poor
Agrippa Menenius was both the worthiest, and the fittest, and by much the most
likely to reconcile them. Attilius Regulus with an Estate of no more than Seven
Acres, was yet a Great and a Noble Roman; But delighting in a poor and a
private Life, he was taken from his Husbandry, to sit at the Helm of the Roman
Empire. And how unwillingly so advanced, did appear by This; That having
subdued the Public Enemies, and settled full Peace in the Commonwealth, he
very gladly hast'ned back to That his old way of living by Plough and Harrow,
which he had left for some time with an heavy heart. A Consolation to the Poor,
and an Instruction to the Rich, how unnecessary to great and glorious Actions
mere Riches are. I speak of Riches unattended with Frugality and Prudence, with
a Contempt of mean Pleasures, and Moderation, as well as with Conduct and
Magnanimity. Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus was just as Rich, or as Poor, as
Attilius Regulus: to wit a Lord of Seven Acres, and very busy at his Plough,
when the Dictatorship of Rome was presented to him. A glorious Dignity he
received, but not enriched himself by. For it appears that his Seven Acres were
at last shrunk to Four; he having lost the other Three, by being a Surety for
his Friend. Lord! the vastly wide difference 'twixt Those Times, and These! or
'twixt Their Grandees, and Ours! Ours are thought to live narrowly, if their
Houses do not stand on as many Acres, as made up all This renowned Dictator's
Means. Valerius tells us of a King he names not, L. 7. c. 2. n. 5.
(but describes to have been of a subtle Judgment) who said of a Diadem
delivered to him, that if a man did well consider, together with the outside,
the inside of it, (meaning the Troubles, and the Dangers, and the Anxieties it
is lined with,) he would not have it for taking up. And if Genusius L. 5. c. 6.
n. 4.
had not been of the same opinion, (by knowing the linings of a Crown at the
Cost of others,) he would not sure have left Rome in a voluntary exchange for
perpetual Banishment, merely to escape the Possession of it; merely to be free
from a Coronation. And however Theopompus did not plainly run away from the
Crown of Sparta, yet he instituted the Ephori, whereby to make it the less
significant, and so as to sit upon his Head with less disease.

19. These and multitudes of the like (whom to mention even with Brevity, were
to be tedious,) tho they were Persons in Themselves of very Great Honor, and
Renown, were yet exceedingly much the Greater, for their having had such
limited and stinted Appetites; for their knowing what was necessary, and what
expedient; what was sufficient for their great Purposes, and when they had
innocently enough. They did not only not seek Greater Things for themselves
than they had already, But either unwillingly did admit them, and with
Reluctance; or else did obstinately refuse them, and cast them off. Nay so far
they were from seeking Great Things for themselves, that they sought their
lessening. They thought there was nothing truly Great, or great enough to be
sought, but the Public Good. And for This very reason They were the Glory of
their Times; The Pride and Pleasure of their Historians; and (which is more to
their advantage) they were the Blessings, and the Supports, and the great
Ornaments of the Countries wherein they lived. But when a man, having arrived
at Great Things already, is ever casting about for Greater, and has an Ambition
like the Fire, which ever craves the more fuel, the more it has; when his
Appetite after Honor is as inordinate and as endless, as was That of Albert
Wallestein, whom nothing less would ever satisfy, than the being above his
Maker; Then a man's Greatness is his Disease, and his Disease of the worst sort
too. It Is his Hydrops, his Boulimis, his intolerable Prurigo, worse than the
Furor Uterinus, which made the Great Empress Barbara the vilest Thing in the
whole Empire. Even He, whose Abundance of Meat makes him hungry, and He whose
Superfluity of Drink makes him dry, is not quite so sad a Creature, nor quite
so much to be deplored, as He whose Honor makes him Ambitious, and whose
overmuch Wealth excites Habak. 2. 5.
his Avarice.

That such there are in This World, who do enlarge their Desires as Hell, and
are as greedy as the Grave, who like the two Daughters of Solomon's Horsleech,
have still enough, and too much, yet still too little; are often full, and
often weary, yet never satisfied, with seeking Great Things for Themselves, (I
say that such Things there are,) I need not take pains to convince my Hearers.
For All the Miseries we have read of, and all the Miseries we have seen in our
own Civil Wars, (not now to mention all the Miseries we have felt,) have been
especially the Effects of That Disease I now speak of; If I may not rather call
it a Complication of Diseases, which is commonly made up of four Ingredients;
to wit a boundless Ambition, an unstinted Avarice, a restless Envy, and an
insatiable Concupiscence after the Pleasure of Revenge.

20. Now in order to the Prevention, or to the Cure, (that is to say, to the
killing) of such a complicated Disease, every Great man must choose so fit a
Condition for Himself, and such an wholesome Proportion of this present World, as
may be aptest in it self to secure his Interest in the Next. Woolsey wished he
had done it, (and Wallestein too,) when 'twas too late. But Sir Thomas Moor did
it, and that in Time. This incomparable Person, (whom Lud. Vives in August. de
Civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 7.
Ludovicus Vives thought it dangerous to commend, for fear of doing him great
wrong by falling short of his Perfections,) having been raised by his own
Merits, and without his own seeking, from a very low Estate to the High
Chancellorship of England, became so satiated and cloyed, as well with the
Honor, as with the Cares of his glorious Office, Mortalium harum rerum satur,
quam rem a puero pene semper optaveram, ut ultimos aliquot vitae meae annos
obtinerem liberos, quibus hujus vitae negotiis paulatim me subducens, futurae
possem immortalitatem meditari, eam rem tandem indulgentissimi Principis
incomparabili beneficio, (resignatis Honoribus) impetravi. Tho. Morus de se in
suo ipsius Epitaphio a se conscripto.
that he gladly laid it down, (out of the love he had to Privacy and
Tranquillity of Life,) as any other man's Avarice, helped on by his Ambition,
could take it up. And this he did whilst yet a Favorite, far from being under
the Cloud (which he afterward was in) of his King's Displeasure. Yea he
esteemed it an higher Favor to be permitted by his Prince to ease himself of
such Grandeur, than That wherewith at first it was laid upon him. It being the
Thing which from a Child he had wished and prayed for, That God would give him
such a Vacation from the Affairs of This Life, as might suffice him to
contemplate the Immortality of the Next, and fit himself for its Enjoyment.
Which his Prayer having been granted, both by God, and the King, he was so
exceedingly Thankful for, as to carry his Gratitude to his Grave, and so as to
order its being written upon his Gravestone. From whence being transferred to
his Public Works, it is likely now to live as long as the Art of Printing. So
when the famous William of Wainflet (as Molestiarum pertaesus quas Cancellarij
munus afferre solet, simulque rerum humanarum satur, quicquid vitae supererat
totum Deo consecravit. Buddenus in Wainfleti vita, p. 61.
Budden tells us) made it his choice to divest himself of the High
Chancellorship of England, and gave the King immortal Thanks for giving him
liberty so to do, He did it not only as being weary of the Cares which That
Office had filled him with, (tho That perhaps was one reason,) nor did he it
only as being glutted with the Things of This World, to wit with the Riches and
Honors of it; (tho that was also another reason;) But it was chiefly that he
might mind the greater things of the Next with the less Distraction; that he
might not as before, serve God by Snatches, but that the Residue of his Time
might be wholly God's. Many others might here be named ( Seven at least I am
sure,) who eased themselves (as being weary) of the Great Seal of England, in
order to their advancement unto far greater things in a World to come. And tho
it cannot be denied, but that being Persons of most incorruptible Integrity,
they might safely have continued in their Great Iudicatures on Earth, without
the danger of being cast in the Court of Heaven, yet they resolved to take the
Way which they thought the surest; as knowing it better to make it easy, than
merely possible to be saved. For they considered what they well knew, as well
by Scripture, as by Reason, as well by History, as by Experience, as well by
other men's Experience, as by their own, that tho it is not quite impossible,
yet'tis a difficult thing on Earth, for the very same man to be Great, and
Innocent; to be a Favorite both of This, and the other World; to fare as
deliciously as Dives all his Days here below, and yet at last to lie with
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom. I am sure Sir Thomas Randolph thought it a thing so
rare and difficult, to Paulo ante Mortem literis quas vidi serio admonuit, quam
dignum quam necessarium, ut Ille Secretarii, Ipse Legati Technis jam tandem
valediceret; uterque coelestem Patriam cogitaret, et poenitendo divinam
implorarent Misericordiam. Cambdenus in Eliz. Annal. Tom. 2. seu part quarta,
p. 26.
be a man of much Public and Secular Business, and at the same Time to be fit
to dye, that by Letters he exhorted his intimate Friend Sir Francis Walsingham,
to bid adieu to all the Wiles of a Principal Secretary of State, as He himself
had newly done to all the Frauds or an Ambassador, (for the Number of his
Embassies had been no less than Eighteen,) and to prepare himself by a penitent
and private life, for the life to come. An Admonition very seasonable in regard
of Both Persons concerned in it; Walsingham, to whom; and Randolph himself, by
whom 'twas given. For they had long lived together as eminent Ministers of
State; and neither of them lived long from after the time of This Advice; Nor
did the one outlive the other above a Month or two at most.

What induced Queen Mary (the Royal Sister of Charles the Fifth) to quit her
Government of Belgium in Exchange for a private and quiet Life, it is very easy
to conjecture, but hard to tell. Perhaps 'twas chiefly out of Reverence to the
Example of her Brother, as 'twas done the same Day, wherein He laid down his
Empire, and Crown of Spain; and even wept out of Compassion to his poor
Brother, and his Son Philip, whose feeble Shoulders were now to sink under two
such Loads, to wit the Kingdom of Spain, and the German Empire. I say, whatever
was Her Inducement to do a thing above the Rate of her Sex and Breeding; sure
we are, that Queen Etheldred was Godwin. de Praesulibus Anglicanis, p. 198.
wholly induced by her Devotion to forsake the Pomps and Pleasures she might
have lived in all her days, (as the Daughter of one King, the Widow of another,
and the Wife of a Third,) had she not thought it an happier choice to live
retiredly in an Abbey, which she had built, and endowed, and was the Abbess of
till her Death. And not to mention Queen Christina of Sweden, or Bambas of
Spain, (unless it be thus by a Paralipsis) no fewer than Nine of our own Saxon
Kings, within the Space of Two hundred years, did freely relinquish their
Crowns and Kingdoms. To which I add; That when Ionadab imposed That strict Jer.
35. 6, 7.
Command upon his Sons, to drink no Wine, to build no House, to sow no Seed, to
plant no Vineyard, and all their days to dwell in Tents; (in little despicable
Huts by the River Jordan,) He did not only so command them to show his
Dominion, and his Will, or only to exercise their Obedience, and Self-denial;
But because he did esteem it the safest state and condition, to help enable
them for an Innocent, and Pious Life.

21. Another Use of This Text is with a Distinction to contradict it. We must
not seek Great Things for our selves, because we must. Not Great Things,
because the Greatest. For what can be Greater than a Kingdom? and what so Great
Kingdom, as the Kingdom of God, to the seeking of which our Lord excites us? (
Matthew. 6. 33.) So by St. Paul we are commanded, to seek those things that are
above, ( Col. 3. 1.) Not above us here on Earth, but above every thing that is
Earthy. Nor are we only to seek God's Kingdom, tho vastly Great, But (what is
infinitely Greater) we are to seek God himself, who is The Great Rewarder of
Them that diligently seek him, and The Rewarder of None besides, ( Heb. 11. 6.)
Thus the Dehortative, Seek not, is strongly enforced and urged on by a vehement
Exhortation, Seek Those Things that are Above. Seek the Greatest Things
imaginable, and Seek them for your selves too. Ye have not here a continuing
City, and therefore Seek one to come. For what says the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews? The life we have is Heb. 13.
worth Nothing, compared with That we hope for. Which, being yet hid with
Christ in God, we must seek, and seek on, till we find it out. Some things are
Great which are not Good, and some are Good but not Great; But These are the
Good and Great Things, which alone are worth seeking; and which we are not only
allowed, but bid and bound to seek after. In comparison with These, [ The Life
which is hid with Christ in God, The Kingdom of God, and God Himself.] we ought
to slight the arrant Isa. 40. 17.
Nothingness of the Things here below, which by a pitiful Catachresis the World
calls Great; and as devoutly seeks after, as after an Heaven upon Earth. So
every Hillock is a Great thing with a Community of Emmets wherewith it is
Peopled, tho it is not determined by Philosophers, whether (like Bees) they are
a Kingdom, or (like some other Insects) a Commonwealth. But yet as Great as
That Hillock does seem to Them, we know it is no bigger in respect of all the
Earth, than All the Earth in respect of Heaven. And yet so it is,
notwithstanding their littleness, and their contemptibility, we do no more
excel Them in point of Quantity, and Strength, than they do us in the good
Qualities of Peace, and Prudence. For all Communities of Emmets are still at
Agreement among Themselves; are never endangered, much less destroyed, by any
Intestine, or Homebred, either Divisions, or Insurrections. Whereas We have a
Kingdom so sadly divided against It self, that wicked men hope, and wise men
fear,) (and there is ground for a suspicion,) it cannot long stand.

22. Now to show the Real Littleness (the Prophet Esa calls it the Nothingness)
of the Great Things below, being weighed in the Balance with Those Above, It
will not probably be amiss, to put them Both into the Scales; that so we may
see how much the later weigh down the former. First the Great Things below are
but figuratively such, and secundum quid; somewhat Great in Appearance, but not
indeed; or only Great in their relation to what is very much less; and so an
Emmet-hill is as great in comparison with its Inhabitants, as the whole Globe
of Earth in respect of us. Whereas the Great Things above are Great
simpliciter, and in Themselves; They are absolutely Great, and without a
figure. In comparison with Them, all the Great Things below do presently
dwindle into a Point. The very Orb the Sun moves in is 100000 times bigger than
all the Earth; But in relation to the Circumference of the Coelum Empyraeum, or
but of That which is called the Primum Mobile, All the Dimensions of the Earth
do immediately vanish, and lose themselves into a Center. Next the Great Things
Below will sooner or later be sure to fail us, and so with very great reason
they have the Title of Uncertain affixt unto them in Holy Writ; whereas the
Great Things Above will abide for ever; There the Crown is immarcescible; nor
is there only an exceeding, but an eternal weight of Glory. Again, the Great
Things Below are mixed with Troubles and Solicitudes; the Stream of their
Enjoyment does never run clear; but what with Crosses, or Cares, is always
muddy; whereas the Great Things Above do flow with such Rivers of Delight, as
cannot be mingled with the least Drop either of Sorrow, or Interruption; in the
Presence of God is Life, and most sincere pleasures for evermore. Again, the
Great Things Below do only exercise our Thirst, if not increase it; Superfluity
it self, does but enlarge a man's Appetite, and every man's Avarice is only
wid'ned by his Possessions: whereas the Great Things Above will give us a
plenary Satisfaction. There 'twill be one of our Enjoyments, not to be able to
Desire; All our Longings and Ambitions will be wholly swallowed up into mere
Fruition. Besides, the Great Things Below are very often by God's Permission,
in the Disposal of the Devil; as is evident in the two Cases of Holy Job, and
the Sabaeans; of the Israelites, and Pharaoh; of Jesus Christ, and Pontius
Pilate; of the Greek Christians, and the Great Turk; of Innocent Travelers,
and Highway Thieves. By which and many other Cases there can be nothing more
clear, than that the Great Things Below are by the Sufferance of God in the
Devil's Disposal. Whereas the Great Things Above are above his Reach: His Chain
of Darkness, which is his Tedder, falling short of That Region from whence He
fell. Lastly, the Great Things Above do all legitimate our seeking, and make it
gracious; whereas the Great Things Below do increase its Guilt. And thence the
Great Things Above are strictly commanded to be sought; whereas the Great
Things Below are under as strict a Prohibition. Those we must seek, with
Baruch; But These, with Baruch, we must forbear.

These I think are All the Uses we are to make of This Message of God to
Baruch; (besides the Use I made of it by way of Anticipation on this Day
Sennight;) and with These I dismiss its full and final Consideration.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABstinence. A notable Instance of it, p. 620. Advantageous to a man's
well-being, 662 Aeternal life the Prime object of our search, 265, 266, etc.
how described in holy Writers, 305, 306, 307, etc. what meant by the words of
Eternal life, 325, 326, 373, 374, etc. Afflictions. Extremely beneficial, and
to be prayed for, 185, 186, etc. 191, 192. for them a Time of Recompense. 569,
570 Almsgiving necessary to life, 391, 392. a Necessary Concomitant of Prayer,
607, 608. encouragements thereto, 609, 610 Ambition. How to be regulated, 303,
304. wherein a Duty, 311, 312. etc. It Is Itch antidoted, 467, 468, etc. unto
the end. The danger of it, 615, 616, etc. Incident to Good men, 618
Antinomians. See Solifidianism. Apostates. Too general. p. 389, 390 Assurance
of Salvation, how and when to be attained, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 202, 203,
259, 260 Atheists. Reasoned with, 180, 181, 182, etc. Avarice. How a Duty of
the first magnitude, 311, 312, etc. how a Vice of the same, 490, 491, etc.
Idolatry and Fornication, 600, 601. increased by possessions, 650 Authority.
Obedience to it of the Essence of Christianity, 625
B.
BElievers. Seldom truly Christian, yet seldom doubt of their being such, 177,
178, 179, etc. many ways Believers without true Faith, 250, 251, etc. Brutes.
How didactical to men, 399, 400
C.
CAution. Needful to the Wisest and Best of men, 148 to 155, 161, 162 Christ. A
Master, a Lord, a Legislator, a King, a Prince, a Judge, and whatsoever may
oblige us to do him service, 10, 16, 17, 341, 342, etc. A stone of stumbling to
Solifidians and Antinomians, 6, 7. His false and true Followers, 18, 19, 20,
etc. 27, 28, etc. An easier Taskmaster than Moses, 37, etc. His Service
profitable and pleasant, 39, 40, etc. 47, 48, etc. His End in coming hither,
and Business when he was here, 115, 116, etc. 125, 126. our only Oracle to be
consulted, 327, 328, etc. His Example to be followed, 584, 585 Christianity.
Wherein it consists, 196, 197, 200, etc. 315, 316, etc. the hardest parts of
it, 351, 352. how made easy, 354, 355, etc. to 366. How divided, 434, 435
Commandments. How to keep them is the whole duty of a Christian, 11, 12. In
what Respects not grievous, 50, 51, 52, etc. 47, 48, 49, etc. 57, 58, etc. How
made possible and pleasant, 356, 357, 358, 359, etc. to 380. Competition for
our choice 'twixt God and Satan, 518, 519. to 527 Confession as necessary as
Faith, 222, 223 Consideration. Of what Importance, 182, 183, etc. 191, 195,
196, 198 Contentment. Its true Rise, not from Abundance but the Mind, 575. the
way to attain it, 576. Reasons for it, 624, 651. The Benefit of it, 660 Cross.
Easy, whether laid on us by others, or freely taken upon our selves, 64 to 77.
Curiosity. How to be profitably objected, 304, 305, etc.
D.
DAmnation. The most elaborately sought, 176, 177 Decrees of God how both
Absolute and Conditional 157, 158 Devil. How the God of this World, 50, 51. How
hard a Taskmaster, 368, 369. wherein his chiefest strength lies, 448, 449. etc.
to the end. How much of the World in his Disposal, and why, 528 to 569. How
limited, 551, 552, etc. A Remedy against his Temptations, 570, 571. his Gifts
improfitable, 576. and hurtful, 577. not to be boasted of, and why, ibid. His
Scope and End in bestowing them, 586, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593. what Return we
are to make him, 597, 598. How to beat him with his own Weapon, 607 Diogenes.
Miserably misunderstood, 509, 510, etc. Disciples of Christ how to Catechize
themselves, 28, 29, 30, 113, 114 Disputes. What the only safe end of them, 310.
among Christians a stumbling block to the Jews, 430, 431, etc. Divisions of
Christians scandalous, 429, 430, 431, etc. Dives. Why the Representative of the
Damned, 487, 488
E.
ELection unconditional how dangerous to be believed, 157 England. How much
happier than other Nations, 437, 438, etc. Englishmen the worse the more
Ungrateful, 439, 440. their Degeneracy, 667 Example. More cogent with some men
than Reason, 680, 681 Experience of the Worst and Best men compared, 50, 51,
52. A Proof of the Pleasure the Law of Christ yields us, 58, 59, 60, 61
F.
FAith. Seldom Truly Christian, 85, 86. of the greatest Consequence that it be
True, 86, 87, 102. a special Instance of Obedience, 108, 109. Never True but
when the Mother of Obedience, 110, 111. how a Telescope, 181, 182, 256, 257.
how and when Salvifick, 223, 224, etc. Its several Sorts and Significations,
229, 230, etc. Its mysterious Definition, 239, 240. how the Pandect of
Christian Duties, 241, 242, etc. to be found in very few, 418, etc. what Faith
Salvifick, 441 to 449 Fear. How required to true Faith, 96, 97. Fear and
Trembling of a threefold Importance, 131, 132, 133, etc. Nothing more
forbidden, or more commanded in Scripture, 135, 136, 137. the Reconcilement,
138, 139, etc. a Religious passion, 152, 154, 161, 162 Fiduciaries represented,
104, 105, 106, etc. 113, 114. Antidoted and humbled, 219, 220, etc. 250, 251,
etc. 319, 320
G.
GIfts. Of men Imperfect, 587, 588. of God only Complete, ibid. of the Devil,
dangerous, 589, 590, etc. 592. described, 593. to be bewared, 594, 595, 596
God. How a comfortable Light, and consuming Fire, 111, 112. how his Omnipotence
should oblige us to Obedience, 398, 399. his Permissions of Evil accounted for,
560, 561. etc. 583, 584. Other Reasons, 572. The Uses to be made of it, 573,
574, etc. The Difference 'twixt his Distribution of Endless Torments, and
present Goods and Evils, unto men, 628, 629, 630. Evils happen to Good men, by
his Order, or Permission, ibid. Goodness of Christ as a Legislator, 349, 350,
etc. Gospel. A Rule, not a mere Dispensation, 119. Its Summary preached by Paul
and Silas, 245, 246, etc. how a refuge from the Law, 329, 330. why to be called
the New Law, 341, 342 Government. Of a man's self difficult, 657 Grace. In All
is sufficient, 47, 48. How it signifies the Gospel, 92, 93, 94. Resembled by
Manna, 404, 405. how it exceeds the state of Innocence, 406. The freeness of
it, 407, 408, etc.
H.
HAppiness upon Earth wherein it lies, 259, 260, 305, 306, etc. 368, 369, 370,
etc. Heaven. See Aeternal life. Hell made for the Use of All, 156. an Hell to
think of, 183, 184. Humility. Necessary in the working out Salvation 131, 132,
etc. 141, etc. the Proper virtue of the Greatest, 287, 288, 289, etc. The great
Motive to it, 406, 407, etc. Hypocrisy. In what Professors most seen, 346, 347
I.
IDleness. Its miserable Effects, 498, 499, etc. Jews paralleled with
Christians and less obliged, 127. less unexcusable, 429, 430 Impunity the
severest punishment, 565, 566, etc. Infidelity. How to be proved, 441, 442,
etc. Infirmities. How beneficial, 404, 405, 406 Injuries. How beneficial to the
injured, 67, 68 Inquiries. How to be made, 302, 303, etc. to 315. what sort to
be avoided, 316, 317. etc. a Touchstone to try of what sort we are, 321, 322,
etc. Interest governs the World, 83, 84, 85 Job. His case at large, 529 to 535.
and 567, 568. Justice. Its wants in the World, 436, 437, etc. Justification.
From Eternity a dangerous Doctrine, 7, 8. to what kind of Faith it is ascribed,
233, 234, etc.
K.
KIngdoms. The littleness of them on Earth, 311, 312, etc. Kings next to God,
most capable of Injuries, 66, 67. most accomptable to God, because not at all
to man, 297.
L.
LAw of the Gospel, 42, 43, etc. of Faith, 121. of Moses, how it drives us to
Christ, 328, 329, 330, 350. Christ a Legislator as well as Moses, 341, 342,
etc. Liberality. In whom the Effect of Avarice, 593, 594. Libertines. How made,
and why so many, 6. like the old Gnostics, 44, 45. described, 103, 104 Liberty
of a Christian wherein it stands, 95, 96, 100, 166 Love. How it casts out
fear, and carries fear along with it, 138, 139, 161, 162. How the greatest of
Virtues, 312, 313. how seldom True, 433, 434. How it fulfils the whole Law,
445, 446
M.
MAhomedans. Better than many Christians, 425, 426 Man. How much more obliged
than other Creatures, 385, 386. yet of All the most ungrateful, 387, 388. How
to learn of the Brutes, 399, 400, etc. Martyrdom. The Reasonableness of it, 28,
29, etc. Moderation of mind how attained, 673. Motives to it, 673 to 700.
Money. Its danger and Description, 507, 508. Moses. How he leads men to Christ,
328, 329, etc. as a lesser Paedagogue to a greater, 342, 343, etc. 350, 351.
How he escaped the Devils Lime-twigs in his youth, 505
N.
NIggard. His largess and folly equal, 490, 491. to 495 Nobility. Wherein it
consists, 288, 289, etc. its proper duties, 296, 297
O.
OBedience, Its necessity to Salvation, 2 to 34. It must be Passive as well as
Active, 27, 28, 29, 30. its own Reward, 60, 61, 62, etc. Indispensably
necessary under the Gospel, 92, 93, etc. All one with Saving Faith, 235, 236.
The All in All to a Christian, 344, 345, 346, etc. if not Servile, but
ingenuous, 377, 378, etc. 395, 396, 400. the Condition, not the Cause of
Salvation, 410, 411, etc. Opinions. Why to be well examined, 8, 9 Oracles many
and deceitful, 331, 332 Orthodoxie not enough, 198, 199, etc.
P.
PErfection. Evangelical what, 364, 365 Persecution. Consisting with Pleasure,
71, 72, 73 Perseverance. Necessary to life, 146, 147, 149, 150, 152, 153, 390
Poverty. Preferred by many Heathens, 509, 510, etc. Sanctified by Christ, and
recommended, 513, 514, etc. 519. a Comfort, 605, 645, 646, 647, 652, 653, 654.
of what sort intended, 654, etc. Practice. The life of Christianity, 195, 196,
etc. 200, etc. follows Principles, 441, 442, etc. Prayer. Worthless without
Perseverance, 418, 419, etc. 462 Presumption. More dangerous than Despair, 144,
145, 147. often mistaken for Faith, 421 Pride. In the poorest, 294, 295. the Sin
of Sodom, 497 Principles. To be known by Practice, 442, 443, etc. Prodigality.
Hardly avoidable even by Niggards, 494, 495. no less Sin than Avarice, 601
Prognostic of the Coming of Christ to Judgment, 417 to 463. Promises of the
Gospel still clogged with Precepts, 123, 124. yet confer a Right on All
Performances of the Condition, 150, 151, 154, 159, 160 Prosperity. The hardest
Weapon to wield, 184, 185, etc. No mark of Goodness, 436. tho, often its
Reward, 437. the Common Portion of the worst, 539, 540, etc. Not to be envied,
583 accompanied with trouble, 676 Puritans. Modern Catharists, 388, 389
Pythagoreans. Their exact Conformity to their Master, 19, 20. wherein to be
aemulated by Christians, 177 Poverty. Wherein it truly consists, 659. the Good
Effect of it, ibid. and 660, 661. Consolation from it, 691
R.
REconcilement 'twixt Calvinists and Remonstrants, 158, 159. 'twixt St. Paul
and St. James, 248, 249 by whom endeavored, 431. by whom abhorred, ib. and 432
Redemption. At what rate procured, and wherein it chiefly consists, 12, 13, 14,
etc. Rather from Sin than Hell, 115, 116, etc. Religion. Its life lies in
Action, 32, 33 Repentance. How much is meant by it, 25 Reverence. Compounded of
Love and Fear, 94, 95, 96 Reward and Punishment the Inforcements of Duty, 94,
95 Rich men's Lesson, 285, 286. their Dangers most and greatest, 500, 501, etc.
Riches. Impediments to Eternal life, 485. Enemies to all that is good, 486, 487.
the Devil's Lime twigs, 502, 503, etc. Inquiry to be made how we come by them,
578. and accordingly to be enjoyed or acquitted, 579. Not always a sign of
God's favor, and why, 580, 581, 582. always Temptations, 599, 600. The
greatest Idol of the world, ibid. Separate us from God, 602 not to be sought by
us, and why, 603, 604. tho to be well employed when lawfully acquired, ib. The
dearest and cheapest things in the world, 605. Matter of Sorrow to the owners,
606. to be accounted for, 644, 645. how to be enjoyed with Innocence, 658, 659,
671, 680
S.
SAlvation. To whom alone it belongs, 21, 22, 23, etc. 32, 33, etc. what the
Condition on which it is given, 112, 113, etc. to be worked out by us, 129, etc.
hard to have an Assurance of, 147, 148 to 155. the only thing to be searched
after, 169, 170, etc. yet the least labored for, 175, 176 Satan. Why his
Harvest more than Christ's, 176. his Masterpiece, 468, 469, etc. Scandal. To
whom given by Christians, 434, 435, etc. Sedition. Dissuasives from it, 438,
439, etc. Self-denial and Self-revenge the Root of all Goodness, 453, 454, etc.
Exemplified in the Heathens, 509, 510, etc. but in Christ above all, 513, 514,
etc. Self-love. How the Root of All Evil, 450, 451, 452, etc. attended with
Revenge, and Carelessness, of others, 623 Service of God how mistaken, 107, 108
Sins. Some not to be Named, 110 Sloth. A Sin of Sodom as great as any, 498,
499, etc. Socrates. How like a real Christian, 512, 513 Solifidianism. Its
danger, 7, 31, 33, 45, 46. Confuted by Arguments ad Absurdum, 55, 56, 128. Its
venom laid open, 212, 213, etc. 228, 229, 319, 320 Sufferings. Peculiar to
Great and Good men, 65, 66
T.
TEmptations. How to be encountered, 75, 76. what the greatest in All the
world, 468, 469, etc. to the end. How to resist them, 524, 525, 597, 598. their
Benefit, 481, 482, 483, why to be rejoiced in, and when, ibid. Terrors. Of the
Lord of wholesome force, 156, 157, 169, 174, etc. 190, 191, etc. 193, 194. How
Instrumental to Christianity, 350, 351, etc. Truth. Hurtful when but partially
delivered, 9, 10. and when tacked on to as great a Falsehood, 47. Exemplified in
Satan, 555, 556, etc.
U.
UNity, among the Jews, 429. a Mark of Truth, 430, etc.
W.
WAtchfulness. A necessary Duty, 459, 460, etc. Wickedness. At what doors it
entered the world, 599, 600 World how turned upside down by the Apostles, 167,
168. How made an Antidote to its own Venom, 188, 189, etc. How universally
depraved, 456, 457, etc. Worldlings. Their Misery, 600, 601 Worldly Greatness.
Its dangers, 449, 450, etc. to the End. Why it is beggarly, and cannot be
undervalued, 573, 574, 575. the want of it our Advantage, 625, 626, etc.
Reasons not to seek it, 630, 631, 632, etc. to 646, 650. which the least
desirable, 656 to 663. wholesome Lessons to Poor and Rich concerning it, 663,
664, 665. the means and motives to the learning of them, 668, 669, etc. 682,
683, etc. from the Examples of Great men, 684, etc. Works. Good ones Absolutely
Necessary to Salvation, 23, 24, 31, 32, etc. How Salvation to be worked out,
129, 130, etc.
Y.
YOung men's Lesson, 277, 278
Books lately printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Perfect Copy of all the Summons of the Nobility to the Great Councils and
Parliaments of this Realm, from the Forty ninth of King Henry the Third, until
these present Times: With Catalogues of such Noblemen as have been summoned to
Parliament in Right of their Wives; and of such other Noblemen as derive their
Titles of Honor from the Heirs Female from whom they are descended, and of
such Noblemens Eldest Sons as have been summoned to Parliament by some of their
Fathers Titles. Extracted from Public Records, by Sir William Dugdate Knight,
Garter, Principal King at Arms.

The Order of the Installation of Henry Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of
Peterborough, and Laurence Earl of Rochester, Knights and Companions of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, in the Royal Chapel of St. George at Windsor,
July 22. 1685.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles, and Christians in all
Ages. Designed to supply the Omissions, answer the Objections, and rectify the
Mistakes of Mr. Selden's History of Tithes. Part I. The second Edition
corrected and amended. By Thomas Comber DD. Proecentor of York.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes; which is further
proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and illustrated by the Solemn Consecration
and great Convenience of them: With an Answer to the Objections of other
Authors against them. Part II. To which is added, A Discourse concerning
Excommunication. By Thomas Comber D. D. Proecentor of York.

A Treatise of Spousals, and Matrimonial Contracts: Wherein all the Questions
relating to that Subject are ingeniously Debated and Resolved. By Mr. Henry
Swinburne, Author of the Treatise of Wills and Testaments.

The Excellency of Monarchical Government, especially of the English Monarchy:
Wherein is largely treated of the several Benefits of Kingly Government, and
the Inconvenience of Commonwealths. Also of the several Badges of Sovereignty
in general, and particularly according to the Constitution of our Laws.
Likewise, of the Duty of Subjects, and the Mischiefs of Faction, Sedition, and
Rebellion. In all which, the Principles and Practices of our late Commonwealths
men are considered. By Nathaniel Iohnston Doctor in Physic.

Dr. Stern Archbishop of York, his Book of Logic. In Octavo.

Dean of Durham his Counsel and Directions, Moral and Divine, to a young Gent.


