A CORRECT COPY OF SOME NOTES Concerning Gods Decrees, Especially Of
REPROBATION.

Written for the private Use of a Friend in Northamptonshire. And now
published to prevent Calumny.

(...).

Isocrat. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane,
M. DC. LV.

To a Person of Honor and Integrity, who was the principal perswader to this
Publication.
THough I could not well answer your former Reasons why I should publish a true
Copy to anticipate a false one, yet I was willing to be obstinate in a case of
this nature; wherein to vindicate my credit, did seem (to me) too great a
prejudice to my ease; and was thought (by some friends) to be a hazarding of my
safety. And as I have never been delighted to lie busking in the Sun, so of
late (more especially) I have been even so Amorous of living retiredly in the
shade, that I would fain have provided for my Peace and Quiet, as more
considerable to me then my Reputation. Not that I dare be so wedded to ease, or
safety, as guiltily to court them by sloth, or cowardice; nor that I dare be so
indifferent to the good opinion of good men, as not to desire to be very well
thought on; but because I had resolved to sit and smile upon my sufferings, and
to purchase the continuance of my beloved obscurity and repose, by that which I
thought a lawful means; even the burying my self amongst my books, and living
under the protection of passive silence. But having put my Judgment into other
men's hands, and more especially into yours, and being perfectly conquered by
your this weeks letter, who was but disordered by your last, (against which I
must confess I did rather stand out, by an affected deafness, then any real
dissent) and being now no longer threatened by bare report, but by one who
professes ( under hand and Seal) to have been writing against papers which he
calls mine, ( adding, that he intends to make them public) I find my self
brought to such an unfortunate Dilemma, (either of having a false copy printed,
or else of printing a true copy to discountenance the false,) that I must pitch
upon this latter as the lesser evil. And so your wishes and my fears are come
upon me; whilst I lie under a necessity of going abroad into the world, merely
in order to my very privacy and peace. For the very same Letter which threatens
the publishing of papers falsely bearing my Name, calls me the Grandchilde of
Pelagius, the Enemy of God, of Christ, and of his Church, with more such (...),
then I will ever repay in kind. The greatest revenge that I will seek, shall
be ( in love to his person) to conceal his Name. I hope my Soul has been
dieted with cleaner food, then to break out at the mouth into such exulcerate
Erysipelas. And that I shall get moderation by those very means, by which I
find some men have lost it. And though I hope it does not lie in the power of
any man to infect my Name with such a Leprosy, as to make it loathsome to such
persons by whom I desire to be approved, yet have I hated the publication of
this my scribbling, for fear some young or old Trojan should make it an Apple of
Altercation. For you know this Age is full of Salamanders, who never live so
pleasantly as in the Fire of Contention: in hopes to expire and to be buried (
like some Pausanias or Herostratus) in the Arms of Fame, though not of Glory.
And truly this is the reason, why I have suffered so long in so deep a silence;
even hating the means, because abhorring the effects, of a Vindication; and
desiring that what I built upon such controverted subjects, might be ( like
Solomon's Temple) without the least noise of Axe or Hammer. If I had looked upon
my self with so much reverence, as to have made my self believe I could be
publ^ckly useful, I would have fastened upon a subject which should have been
fitter, and more easy, more profitable and pleasant, and every way more
acceptable to my self, and others. I have been very attentive to that preaching
of Siracides, Search not the things that are above thy strength, but
Ecclesiasticus 3, 21, 22, 23.
what is commanded thee think thereupon with reverence, etc. And whilst I
consider, that God will render to every man ( not according to his opinions,
but) according to his works; I do not think it so good a task, Romans 2. 6.
to make men orthodox Christians, as to make them honest and sincere ones. If I
had been one of those, who prefer the Truth of opinion to the Truth of
practice, and hate a man more for the least Error of his Judgment, then for
the greatest obliquity of his Will, I might indeed have been forward on such a
Subject. But because I have seriously observed, that whilst men scamble too
eagerly after the Truth of Religion, they ( in the heat of Contention) do lose
the practice of it, I have passed the hardest censure upon my present
necessity, and have been ( hitherto) the unkindest man in the world to mine own
Publication. But you ( Sir) are to thank me for my misfortune, in submission to
whose Judgment, I have offered violence to mine own. I may be a stranger to my
self through the deceitfulness of my Heart, but if my Heart does not deceive
me, no man living has gone to Press with greater vanity, then I go now with
self-denial. I am sure my averseness to this publication has extorted from me
an unproportionable length both of this my Letter to your self, and of my
Paraenesis to the Reader; which makes a Portal too large for the littleness of
the Cottage to which it leads. Which as I first submitted to your Judgment, so
must I now commit it to your disposal, and withal commend it to your
Protection. I say to your Protection, because ( whilst the Press is so
prostituted, and the Age so prurient) it is not likely to be the safer for
being innocent. It was not the modesty of Susanna that was able to secure her
from the Indictment of the Elders; and 'twas the innocence of Joseph, which
made his Mistress pronounce him guilty. But had I imagined ( as I did not)
that my private Notes would have been so vitiated and exposed, when I delivered
them as whispers into one man's Ear, I would infallibly have used them as
Virginius did his virtuous Daughter; that at least they might have gone
unpolluted out of the world. But since they are unhappily condemned to live in
spite of all my endeavors to have suppressed them, (Pro supplicio est, non
potuisse mori,) and that you will have them rather to be showed by me, in their
natural shape, then by any strange man, in any uncharitable disguise; I hope
that you will secure me from farther trouble, by undertaking its vindication
against any pragmatick person, who shall possibly abuse either them, or me. For
the temptation must be greater, and the necessity more urgent then I hope it
will be, if I draw at either end of the Saw of strife. But you have leisure as
well as skill; and you are able to forget your rank and Quality, in favor to
him, who does honor your virtues and Erudition, above your Fortune and your
Blood. And who is not more by obligation of Duty, then by the peculiar
inclinations of his Soul,

Sir, Your most affectionate, obliged, And humble Servant, T. P.

A PARAENESIS to the Reader.
( Showing the first occasion of this following Discourse, and the Author's
necessity to make it public.)

SECT. 1.
THat I am subject to errors, it is no humility to acknowledge; it being no
more then to confess, that I carry about me the infirmities of a man; which
whosoever does not, let him cast the first stone at me. But whether or no I am
an Heretic, or a Joh. 8. ^.
dangerous person, I desire my Censors may be my Judges; and do therefore
address this present Apology and Appeal, not to the kindness and partiality
of my dearest friends, but to the very jealousies and prejudices of my severest
enemies. I bar the suffrage of none, but the accuser of the Brethren, that
Abaddon or Rev. 12. 10. 9. 11.
Apollyon, so very skillful to destroy, who is the Father of Lies, and was a
murderer from the beginning. Joh. 8. 14, 44.


2. I do profess in the presence of that punctual Register within me, (to
which I bear a greater reverence then to affront it with a premeditated and
wilful Lie) that I do not unsheath my Pen, to wound the reputation of any man
living. But since mine own lies bleeding in the mouths of some, whose very
Tongues have Teeth, which bite much harder then I will ever allow mine, (and if
there happen to be any in all my papers, I shall not think it painful to have
them drawn) it is but needful that I be clothed at least with armor of
defense. I meant indeed at the first, only to have armed my self with silence,
that my reservednesse and obscurity might keep me safe: and even now that I am
forced and as it were dragged into the field, I contend not for victory, but for
an honorable Retreat. And if after I have suffered, I may be competently safe,
I will thank my Buckler, but not my Sword. Even now that I am writing, it is
with a kind of willingness to blot it out; and do only so do it, as
preferring an inconvenience before a mischief.

3. There had been a private conference betwixt a Gentleman and my self, which
(for his further satisfaction) I threw hastily into a paper; every whit as
incohaerent, as it had been in our oral and extemporary Discourses: a Discourse
which of necessity was forced to be without method as without premeditation;
because (in my answers to his objections) I was bound to follow after the
measure that I was led. I thought the thing so inconsiderable, as not to
vouchsafe it a reading over, but just as it was written, delivered it instantly
to my friend, to be returned (when he had used it) unto the usual place of my
forgetfulness. And forgotten it was so long, that truly I know not how long it
was; till discoursing with another Gentleman upon the very same subject, I
found my memory awaked by that sleeping scribble; but (forgetting that secrets
do cease to be so, when they are told though but to one, and that with strict
conjurations of greatest secrecy) I gave him leave to peruse it as his leisure
served him. It seems this Gentleman had a Confident, as well as I; and so my
original increased and multiplied into many false copies, of which not one was
like the Mother. Now that my paper went abroad by the help of more hands then
one, was against my knowledge, against my will, against my precept, against my
care, and lastly against my best endeavors to recall it. It having been
absolutely impossible, that I should love the publication of my poor Abortive,
who never esteemed my ripest and most legitimate productions to be any way
worthy of public view. So far was I from an ambition of being known by a
disfigured and mis shapen child, that when I first heard of its travels, it
was fallen out of my memory; and when it came to me in a disguise, it was quite
out of my knowledge.

4. I do acknowledge the great abstrusenesse of the whole subject on which I
treated, and the disproportion of Episc. Winton. in Iud. de art. Lamb.
my faculties to undertake or manage it. For if the learned Bishop Andrews did
choose with S. Austin, much more may I with Bishop Andrews, rather to hear
then to speak of these Insearchables. I do not hope to fathom either the Bathos
of the Apostle, or Romans 11. 33.
the Psalmists Abyss. But I expect to be pardoned, if Psalm. 36. 6.
when my way is slippery, I take heed to my footing; and so eschew the
precipice, as not to run upon the Wolf. It is not the business of this paper,
either to state an old question in a new found way, or to publish my judgment
as a considerable thing. Who am I, that I should moderate between the
Remonstrants and Antiremonstrants? betwixt S. Austin and other Fathers? betwixt
him and himself? betwixt the Synod of Dort, and that other at Augusta? betwixt
the Dominicans and the Jesuits? Arminius and Mr. Perkins? Twisse and
Bellarmine? or betwixt Whitaker and Baro? Much indeed may be excused, because
much may be looked for, from such reverend Prelates, as were Overall, and
Davenant. But I believe, amongst the Clergy there is not one in a hundred fit
to speak of these Mysteries; and amongst the Laity not one in a thousand,
that is fit to hear them. Hence was that silence first, and afterward that
secrecy, wherein I fain would have buried mine own conjectures: and even now
that I am forced to be more public then I meant, (by the many false copies of
my discourse, whereof one of the falsest is now preparing for the press, by
one, who it seems is at very great leisure) it is not at all from any ambition
to be followed, but from an humble desire to be rightly understood; and do
therefore only pretend to an Apology, and an Appeal. First, an Apology for my
imprudence; that I could think such a secret might be communicated to one; and
so betray those papers to the Light, which belonged only to the Fire. Secondly,
an Appeal, whether I am a Pelagian, or whether so much as a Massilian: or
whether indeed I am not rather a very orthodox Protestant of the Church of
England. I have managed my discourse, as I ground my Faith, not from the hidden
Mysteries of God's secret will, but from the clearest expressions of his
written Word. Where, of diverse interpretations, (as often as they are diverse) I
love to pitch upon that, which I find agreed upon by the wisest and the best;
and which, in my shallow judgment, (which yet is the deepest that I have) does
seem the safest, and the most suitable to the Analogy of Faith. Even Babes and
Idiots have this advantage of their betters, to be afraid of that fire where
wiser men have been burnt. And sad experience has taught me, (who am a Babe
and an Idiot in respect of the aged and the wise) to steer aloof in my
Doctrines from those fatal shelves whereon my own small vessel has been
soundly dashed, and many others (much greater) as it were shipwrackt before
mine eyes. This entirely is the reason, why I have hovered a long time betwixt
the Absoluteness of a Decree, and the Liberty of a Will; like a trembling
Needle betwixt two Loadstones; or rather like a man newly walking upon a Rope,
who so ballanceth his body with his two hands, that his continual fear of
falling down is the only Tenure by which he stands. I dare not, for my life, be
so bold as the Pelagians, nor yet so bloody as the Manichees. I would not split
my judgment on the Symplegades of two intolerable mischiefs, either by robbing
God of his Efficiency in any one Act which is naturally good; or by aspersing
his Holiness in any one Act which is morally evil. I do endeavor to keep my
self, (and others committed to my keeping) both from the rock of Presumption,
and from the gulf of Despair. I steer as carefully as I can (in this so
dangerous Archipelago) betwixt the nature of Gods will, and the condition of
mine own; that so my Confidence may well consist with my Humility. I dare not
impute to God what is unworthy for him to own; nor arrogate to my self what is
God's peculiar: and therefore settle my mind and my judgment upon these two
Grounds.

I. That all the Evil of sin which dwells in me, or The two Principles or
Grounds of my Belief in this business.
proceeds from me, is not imputable to God's will, but entirely to mine own.
The Serpent and the Protoplast were promoters of my guilt, but my God was no
promoter either of their guilt or mine. When the Serpent speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own; He is the Father of lies, and the works of your father ye
will do, Joh. 8. 44.

II. That all the good which I do, I do first receive; not from any thing in my
self, but from the special Grace and favor of Almighty God, who freely works
in me, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13.

CHAP. I.
5. IF these are Principles to be granted, my work is done; for these are the
Grounds on which I build my judgment, and these are the Touchstones by which I
try it. Whatsoever Sic proponam, sic asseram, ut verita^i quae nec fallit, nec
fallitur, semper inhaream, sempe^ obediens consentiensque reperiar. Fulgent. ad
Monim. l. 1. sub init.
I believe concerning Election or Reprobation, and those other Questions which
are depending, I do infer from these Truths, which (as I suppose) cannot
possibly deceive me. And whilst I stand to these Grounds, I am not able to
quit my judgment, how little soever it shall be liked by such as are wittily
unreasonable. So that my Principles be right, I care not whither they carry me,
whilst Scripture and my best Care are both Guides in my conveyance; for where
the Premises are true, the Conclusion cannot be false: all that needs to be
cared for in the progress of my search, is the legality of the deduction;
which, if it be wrong, I shall be glad to hear of it for my instruction; and if
it be right, it cannot choose but be Truth which leaps naturally forth from the
womb of Truth.

6. If by any inadvertency (either in me, or the reader) my words seem to clash
with my Belief, it is by no other misfortune Nec inest iis quae de libero
arbitrio Patres quidem and Neoterici asseruerunt, ea quam olim non nulli putant
impietas, si haec rite modo accipiantur, and sicut ipsi scriptores ea accipi
voluerunt.
then befell S. Austin, when he used such expressions against the Pelagians, as
seemed to contradict what he had spoken against the Manichees; and yet he
professes it was not his judgment, but his style only that was changed. The
saying of Bucer is remarkable, (and the more because it was Bucer's) That there
was no such harm in what was said by the learned, both ancient and modern,
concerning the freedom of the Will, if things were taken as they were meant,
(that is to say) by the right handle: and that would oftener be done, if the
persons of some men were not a prejudice to their cause: for I find the same
words may pass with favor from one, which would not be endured should Apud
Cassand. consult. p. 130.
they be spoken by another. One short example will not be burdensome to the
Reader. Doctor Twisse himself has said expressly, That the justice of God does
not appear in the absolute or In praefat. ad Vind. Great. p. 3.
simple condemnation of his creature, but in the condemnation of it for sin.
Thus he speaks in his Preface, which is most of it spent against Arminius. I
did but say the same words to some admirers of Dr. Twisse, and yet was counted
an Arminian; which makes me heartily desire, that I may meet with unbyas't and
impartial Readers; that whatsoever I shall say in these following papers, may
be compared with the two Principles which I have just now laid: I disallowing
all that disagreeth with those principles, as the unhappiness of my pen, or
the unsteadinesse of my brain. I desire all may go for no more then it is
worth. If I seem to any man to be overtaken in a fault, he shall do well to
restore me in the spirit of meekness, remembering Gal. 6. 1.
himself lest he also be tempted. If I am thought to be in the wrong by those
that think themselves only in the (...), they can conclude no worse of me, then
that I am not infallible: if in any thing I err, it is for want of
apprehension, not my unwillingness to apprehend; nor am I severely to be
censured, for being every whit as dull, as those thousands of thousands who
have thought as I do. I hope my Reasons will make it appear, that if I err, I
am not affectedly, but invincibly ignorant; and so for being most
unpassionately, I am most pardonably erroneous. Or if I am thought not to be
so, I desire one favor from them that so think, even that all my faults
(whether real or supposed) may rather be laid upon my person, then imputed to
my Cause.

7. Before I come to prove any thing from the first of my Principles, I foresee
a necessity to prove my Principles to be true; for though the foolishness of
man perverteth his way, yet his heart Prove. 19. 3.
fretteth against the Lord. There are men in the world of no small name, who
have told the world both out of the Pulpit, and from the Press, that all the
evil of sin which is in man proceeds from God only as the Author, and from
Man only as the Instrument; whether or no I am deceived, let the Reader judge
by this following Catalogue of Expressions. I forbear to name the Authors in
mere civility to their persons: but I have them lying by me very particularly
quoted, and will produce them, if I am challenged by any man's Doubt or
Curiosity. The Expressions are such as these: (to begin with the mildest.)

That all things happen, not only by God's Praescience, but L. 3. c. 23 6. p.
324.
by his express order and positive Decree. Whereby many from the womb are
devoted to certain and inevitable Destruction, that by their misery God's Name
may be glorified.

That God directs his voice to some men, but that they L. 3. c. 24. 13 p. 333.
may be so much the deafer; he gives light unto them, but that they may be so
much the blinder; he offers them instruction, but that they may be the more
ignorant; and he uses a remedy, but to the end they may not be healed.

That a wicked man, by the just impulse of God, does L. 1. c. 18. 4* p. 71.
that which is not lawful for him to do.

That the Devil and wicked men are so restrained on every L. 1. c. 17. 12. p.
66.
side with the hand of God, as with a bridle, that they cannot conceive, nor
contrive, nor execute any mischief, nor so much
as endeavor its execution, any farther then God himself does (not permit only,
but) command: nor are they only held in fetters, but compelled also as with a
bridle, to perform obedience to such commands.

That Thieves and Murderers are the instruments of the Divine L. 1. c. 17. 5.
p. 64.
Providence, which the Lord himself uses to execute his Judgments which he
has determined within himself; and that he works through them.

That Gods Decree, by which any man is destined to condemnation L. 1. part. 1.
Digr. 10. c. 1. 4. p. 125.
for sin, is not an Act of his Justice, nor does it presuppose sin. Or if
Damnation does presuppose sin, it does not follow, that the Praescience of sin
does precede the Will or Decree of Damning; or if the Will of Damning any man
is
an act of vindicative Justice, it does not follow that it praesupposeth sin.

That God can will that man shall not fall, by his will Ibid. 12. p. 140.
which is called Voluntas signi, and in the mean while he can ordain that the
same man shall infallibly and efficaciously fall, by his Will which is called
Voluntas beneplaciti. The former will of God is improperly called his will, for
it only
signifies what man ought to do by right; but the latter will is properly
called a Will, because by that he decreed what should [inevitably] come to
pass.

That when God makes an Angel or a Man a Transgressor, In sermon. de Prove. c 5
etc. 6. and sic citatur l. 2. part. 1. p. 36.
he himself does not transgress, because he does not break a law. The very
same sin, viz. Adultery or Murder, in as much as it is the work of God the
Author, mover, and compeller, it is not a crime; but in as much as it is of
man, it is a wickedness.

That they are cowards and seek for subterfuges, who L. 1. c. 18. 1. p. 68.
say that this is done by God's Permission only, and not by his Will. If the
ex^aecation and madness of Ahab is a Judgment of God, the fiction of bare
permission does presently vanish;
because it is ridiculous, that the Judge should only permit, and not also
decree what he will have done, and also command the execution of it to his
Ministers.

That God's decree is not less efficaeious in the permission
of Evil, then in the production of Good. (Nay) that L. 2. part. 1. p. 142,
143, 147, 148, etc.
God's will does pass, not only into the Permission of the sin, but into the
sin itself which is permitted. (Nay) that the Dominieans do imperfectly and
obscurely relate the Truth, whilst besides Gods concurrence to the making way
for sin, they
require nothing but the negation of efficacious Grace, when it is manifest,
that there is a farther prostitution to sins required. (Nay afterward) that
God does administer the occasions of sinning, and do so move and urge them,
that they smite the sinners mind, and really affect his Imagination, according
to all those degrees, whether of Profit or Pleasure, represented in them.

If my hand were not weary, if my heart did not tremble, if both my ears did
not tingle, I could reckon up many more such frightfull sayings, from mine own
knowledge and inspection, which I have quoted to the very page, and can do to
the very line of their several Authors: besides a cloud of blasphemies which I
could name from other compilers, if I either listed or had need to take up any
upon Trust. Now by all this it appears, (as well as by many too literal
expositions of some Texts in Scripture, which make God (blessed for ever!) to
be the Tempter, the Deceiver, and the Father of Lies) there is a necessity
lying upon upon me to prove my first Principle, before some Readers will dare
to trust it, viz.

That all the Evil of sin which dwells in me, is not The first Principle
imputable to God's Will, but entirely of mine own. Adam and the Serpent may be
allowed as sharers, but my God (blessed for ever!) is none at all.

8. This is plain by Scripture, and by the Evidences of Reason: Proved by
Scripture.
(to which anon I shall add Antiquity.) And first for Scripture, though the
force of a Negative Praedestinare Deum homines ad peccata, aut poenas, in S.
Scripturis non dicitur, sed eos ad vitam aeternam praedestinare dicitur, quos
v^care decernit. Grot. in Riv. Ap. Disc. p. 52.
Argument is not irrefragable, yet it is not unworthy to be observed, that God
is no where affirmed to Predestine sin: and therefore the word Predestination
is used without any Epithet, to signify nothing but Election in the ordinary
sense: and it is set by Divines (both ancient and modern) Quatuor priores
Articuli Lambethani sunt de Praedestinatione, and Reprobatione, quarum illa
significatur Romans 11. 33. haec Psalm. 36. 6. Epis. Wint. de Artic. Judi^.
as an opposite member to Reprobation; which cannot be done from the bare
nature of the word, but from the Use of it in Scripture: and why should that be
the sole use of it (when the word it self is as fit to signify the contrary)
but because God is the Author of all the good we do, and of all the good that
we receive, whereas Man is his own Author of all the Evil which he commits,
and of the Evil which he suffers for such commissions?

9. And though this bare negative Proof might seem sufficient in such a case
[that God does no where profess he wil's or decrees the sin of Man] yet (to
make us inexcusable when we excuse our selves, like Adam, by any the least
accusation of him that made us) God does every where profess, that he wil's it
not: as when he forbids it by his Laws, when he provides against it by his
Discipline, when he shows us how to avoid it, when he tells us he cannot endure
it, when he wins us from it by Promises, when he frights us from it by Threats,
when he professes that it is to him both a Trouble, and a Dishonor. How does
he wish that his People had walked in his Psalm. 81. 13.
ways? How does he expostulate and make his Appeal, whether Isa. 5. 3, 4.
he had omitted any thing, which might tend to the conversion Ezekiel. 18.
of a sinful Israel? In the whole 18. chapter of Ezekiel, God is pleased to
make his own Apology and Appeal, even to Verse. 2, 29.
them that had accused him in an unworthy Proverb: [The Fathers have eaten
sour Grapes, and the childrens Teeth are set on edge] Are not my ways equal?
and are not your ways unequal? Sure their ways had been his, if he had
absolutely contrived them. The soul that sins it shall die, verse. 4. And why
will ye die O house of Israel? verse. 31. Which was virtually to ask them, why
they would sin too; which they ought to have done, if he had willed it: for the
positive will of God must and ought to be done; and can any man be punished for
doing that which he must? Must any man be punished for doing that which he
ought? It Is but an ill (...) (which some men use) to say that God has a double
Will, of which the one is secret, and the other revealed; the revealed will not
only diverse, but even opposite to the secret one: God ordaining sin with the
one, whilst he forbids it with the other; and not always willing in secret
what he reveals himself to be willing to, for this is a Salve ((...)) a great
deal worse then the wound which it sain would cure. Gods will indeed is (...).
(...). in. c. 1. (...) Ephesians Homil. ^. p. 1036.
divided amongst orthodox Divines in respect of several Acts, and in relation
to several objects, or to the very same object at several Times, and in several
Qualifications, into his first will, and his second will, his antecedent and
consequent, his secret and revealed will: but to affirm two wills in simplicity
it self, the one contrariant to the other about the very same act, (the one
decreeing that very act which is prohibited by the other) seems a greater
blasphemy to me, then that which the Gnostics, and the Marcionites, and the
Manichees were guilty of, when they Augustir. (...). 6. Tertull. adversus Mar.
l. 1. c. 1. Duos D^os adf^rt tanquam duas Sy^plegadas naufragii sui.
affirmed two Gods, as the different Fountains of Good and Evil. For by what I
find in Tertullian (who was best acquainted with Marcion's Heresies) those two
Principles of Good and Evil were found out as a Refuge for those other
opinions, against which it is, that this my Scribble was first designed. And
what Tertullian speaks against Marcion, might very well be repeated against the
Absolute Reprobatarians: it having been better and more reasonable (in that
Father's Judgment) Quis iste Deus tam bonus, ut ab illo malus ^iat? ibid. c
23. Ibid. c. 26.
that God should never have forbid what he determined should be done, then that
he should determine to be done what he forbid. And so it is the lesser blasphemy
of the two, to ascribe Holiness to one principle, and Unholinesse to another
(in the Marcionite's sense) then both to him who is the Spirit of Holiness;
who therefore cannot so irrespectively decree the punishment of his Creature,
as to necessitate his sin, and so be the Author of his Impenitence.

10. Let no man say then when he is tempted, I am tempted of God Jam. 1. 13, 14.
(as our modern Ranters are wont to do) for every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away of his own lust and enticed. So far is God from being the Author of
any man's sin, that he is Faithful (says the Apostle) and will not suffer us
to be tempted above what we are able, but will be sure to make a way 1 Cor. 10.
13.
either for conquest, or for escape. I dare not say then (with him in the
Comedian, who had been a great sinner) Quid si haec quispiam voluit Deus? What
if some God has so decreed it? for Terent. in Eunuch.
S. James makes me believe, that sin is both engendered and conceived within me:
when my lust has conceived, it brings forth Jam. 1. 15.
sin: and if my Lust is the Mother of it, sure the Father is my Will. It was
David's saying of wicked Israel, that they Ps. 106. 29.
provoked God to anger (not with his will, but) with their own Inventions:
there are Contrivers of mischief, (Ps. 58. 2) Devisers of lies, (Eccles. 7.
13.) such as weary themselves to commit iniquity (Jer. 9. 5.) Which cannot
possibly be imputed unto an absolute decree. How many Volumes have been written
De Vide Cornel. Agrip. de vanit. scient.
art Magica? De art Meretricia? De art Lenonum? with such others as would
blush to be named in English; and dare we say they are decreed, to be
Mysteriously wicked? or that their destruction was irrespective, and
unconditionall? I am in such disorder and discomposednesse of mind, whilst I
only repeat these bold expressions, that were it not to good purpose (as I
conjecture and intend) I durst not venture to repeat them. O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of Dan 9. 7.
face. For thou have made man upright, but we have found out many Eccles. 7. 29.
inventions.

After Scripture I come to Reason; by which I hope to make Proved secondly by
Reason.
it appear, that God Almighty is so far from being Accessory to sin, and does
so many things to hinder it, that he does not permit it but in an aequitable
sense: and amongst many reasons which may be given, I shall (in civility to my
reader, and for the love of brevity) content my self with that one, which to my
seeming is the best; and I the rather think it the best, because I ground it
upon a notion which I have formerly learnt from most judicious Mr. Hooker: That
which Hocker Eccl. Polit. l. 1.
assigns to every thing the kind, that which moderates the power, and appoints
the form and measure of working, that we properly call a Law. Hence the being
of God is a kind of Law to his working; because that perfection which God is,
gives perfection to that he does. So that being nothing but what is good, he
can work nothing that is otherwise. It is therefore an error (says that Man
of judgment) to think there is no Reason for the works of God, besides his
absolute will, (although no reason is known to us) for the Apostle tells us, he
works all things (not simply and merely according to his will, but) (...),
according to the Ephesians. 1. 11.
Counsel of his will: and because he does voluntarily set himself a Law whereby
to work, it follows that that Law is no abatement to his freedom. If he is
pleased to set himself a Law or Rule, not to reprobate any but upon praescience
of sin, (because that is most conformable to the nature of his goodness) can
this be any praejudice to the perfection of his being? Is his nature the less
absolute, because it pleases him that his will be conditional in some things,
as it is absolute in others? Does he lose any praerogative, by being unable to
be the Author of sin? Or is not that rather a very great Argument of his Power?
such an ability as that being mere Infirmity. We are God's Creatures, but sin
is ours. God saw Gen* 1. 31*
every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. We see the things
that are made by the Fiat of our will, and behold they are very evil. This
Creative power of ours we justly reckon as the sequel of humane weakness, and
shall we heedlesly affirm it to be a Jewel in the glorious diadem of God's
Almightinesse? The Apostle indeed has told us, that God works all things,
(Ephesians. 1. 11.) but first he speaks it of God's Election which he praedestin'd in
his Son, and the means conducing to such an end, which are none but good; not
at all of Reprobation, the means in order to which are none but evil.
Secondly, even N^c tamen (...) sumus stipites; ea enim nobis ut v^limus and
possimus concedit. Beza. in Ephesians. 1. 11.
Beza himself does so interpret that place, as not to annihilate, or stupefie,
but rather to strengthen and to rectify our wills. God makes an ill will a good
one, not no will at all; (as Been volumus, non quidem natura, sed quia Deus ex
mala voluntate bonam fecit. Ad Philip. 2. 13.
Beza elsewhere speaks, and it were heartily to be wished that he had never
spoke otherwise) according to that of Austin, Ex nolentibus facit volentes. He
says facit, not adigit, cogit, compellit. He makes us willing who were
unwilling, but does not force us to be willing whilst we are unwilling; (that
is to say, to be willing against our wills, or whether we will or no.)

12. But I find that I have shot somewhat farther then I aimed; it being only
my design, and the proper business of this place, to show, that the words of
the Apostle, [ he works all things] are infinitely far from being meant
either of sin, or Reprobation. So far from that, that God Almighty does not
permit sin, as permission signifies connivence or consent; but he permits it,
as that signifies [ not to hinder by main force.] If I see a man stealing and
say nothing to him, I so permit as to be guilty: but if I warn and exhort, if I
promise and threaten, and do all that may avert him (besides killing him) I so
permit as to be innocent. In like manner, all that is done by God Almighty by
way of permission, is his suffering us to live, and have that nature of the
will with which he made us. Whereas to destroy us for the prevention of sin, or
to make us become stocks (as Beza phrases it) or like wooden Engines, (which
are moved only by wires at the mere pleasure and discretion of the Engineer)
were by inevitable consequence to Liberum and sui arbitrii and suae potestatis
invenio hominem a Deo institutum; nullam magis Imaginem and similitudinem Dei
in illo animadvertens, quam ejusmodi status formam. Tertull. advers. Marc. lib.
2. c. 5. see also cap. 6, 7.
uncreate his Creature, which to do were repugnant to his immutability, as
Tertul. shows. This is all that I am able to apprehend, or pronounce, [that
God permits our sins in this sense only; and that he disposes and orders them
to the best advantage.]

13. Having proved my first Principle by Scripture and Reason, it will be as
easy to confirm it by the common suffrage of Proved by Antiquity ^8.
Antiquity; and to avoid the Repetition of so long a Catalogue, which I suppose
will be as needless, Tametsi Deus ^reat and conservat Naturam, tamen causa
p^ccati est voluntas malorum viz. Diaboli and impiorum hominum quae avertit se
a Deo ad alias re^, con^ra mandata Dei. August. Confess. Artic. 9.
as I am sure it will be nauseous to a considerable Reader, I refer him to the
Citations which will follow my first inference Sect. 18. I will content my self
at present to shut up all with that Article of the Augustan Confession, (to
which our 39 Articles Aliquos ad (...) divina potestate (...) esse, non solum
non cre^, sed etiam si sint qui tantum m^lum cred^re ve^int, cum omni
detestatione in illis Anat^ema dicimus. Synod. Arausic. Can. 25.
have the greatest regard and conformity, and which for that very reason is to
me the most venerable of any Protestant Confession except our own) That though
God is the Creator and Preserver of Nature, yet the only cause of sin is the
will of the wicked (that is to say, of the Devil and ungodly men) turning it
self from God to other things against the (will and) commandments of God. And
the Orange Synod does pronounce an Anathema upon all that think otherwise.

If any will not subscribe to this Confession, I will leave him to learn
modesty both from Arrian the Heathen, and from Philo the Jew.

(...). Arrian. in Epictet. (...). Philo (...). p. 325.

CHAP. II.
MY first Demand being fully granted (as in the Mathematics The first
Inference. (...). Ammonius in Ioh. 8. Our selves we condemn as the only causes
of our own misery. Hook. l. 5. 72.
it is usual to build upon certain Postulata) it does immediately follow, that [
man himself is the sole efficient cause of his eternal punishment] (I say the
sole Cause, as excluding God, but not the Devil; whom yet I also exclude from
the efficiency of the Cause; because he can only incite, and propose objects,
and add persuasions to sin, but cannot force or cause it in me without my will
and consent: so that the Devil being only a Tempter and Perswader, cannot for
that be justly styled an efficient. Or if he were, sure for that very Reason
God himself cannot be so: but only Man and the Devil must be the Concauses of
man's Destruction.) Which is the second thing I am to prove both by Scripture,
and Reason, and the whole suffrage of Antiquity.

15. And sure I shall not be so solicitous as to rifle my Concordance, Proved
by Scripture.
but make use of such Scriptures as lie uppermost in my memory, and so are
readiest to meet my pen. These I In the negative.
find are of two sorts, negative on God's part, and affirmative Ezekiel. 33. 11.
on man's. God gives the first under his oath. (Ezekiel. 33. 11.) As I live, says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your wicked ways, for why
will ye die, O house of Israel? In the 18. chapter of the same Prophecy, the
Latin translation is more emphatical then the English: for there it is not [
non cupio] but [ nolo mortem morientis] C. 18. v. 32.
not that he does not will the death of a sinner, but that he wills it not; he
does not only not desire it, but (which makes the proof more forcible) he
desires the contrary, even that he should turn from his wickedness and live:
(chap. 33. v. 14.) not willing (says S. Peter) that any should perish, but 2
Pet. 3. 9.
(on the contrary) that all should come to Repentance. And so (1 Timothy 2. 4.) He
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.
Where it appears by the Context, that the Apostle does not only speak of all
kinds of particulars, but of all particulars of the kinds too: For he first
of all exhorts them, that prayers, and supplication, and giving of thanks be
made for all men, (verse. 1.) Secondly, he does instance in one sort of men, for
Kings and all that are in Authority, (verse. 2.) Thirdly, he adds the Cause of
his exhortation, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, (verse. 3, 4.) And if the Spanish
Friar said true, that few Kings go to hell, (giving this Reason) because all
Kings are but few, the Apostles way of arguing will be so much the stronger;
for when he speaks of all men in general, he makes his instance in Kings, in
all Kings without exception, thereby intimating Nero the worst of Kings, under
whom at that time the Apostle lived. And he uses another argument (verse. 6.)
because Christ gave himself a Ransom for all. This is yet more plain from Romans
2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, Romans 2. 5.
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? but after thy hardness and impenitent Veteris haec Ecclesiae
sententia suit, velle Deum conversionem ad salutem omnium, non tantum genera
singulorum, sed singulos generum intelligens. Gerard. Voss. in Pelag. Hist. l.
6. These. 2.
heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath? Observe who
they are whom God would have to repent; even the hard hearted and the
impenitent. But I have stronger proofs out of Scripture, and less liable to
Cavil then any of these, which yet I thought fit to use, because I find they
are the Chief of those that Vossius relies upon, and expounds to my purpose
from the Authority of the Ancients. I will add to these but three or four
Texts more, of which the one will so establish and explain the other, as to
leave no place of evasion to the gainsayer. First our blessed Savior is called
by the Apostle, the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, (1 Timothy 4. 10.) as if the Apostle had 1 Timothy 4. 10.
foreseen an objection, that the word [ all] might be restrained unto the
household of Faith, he prevents it by a distinction of general and special: for
if he is a special Savior of believers, he is a general Savior of those that
are unbeleevers; not that unbeleevers can be saved, whilst they are obstinate
unbeleevers, but upon Condition they will repent and believe: else why should
the Apostle affirm the Savior to be of all, and then come off with an [
especially] to them that believe? Certainly if it is every man's duty to
believe in Christ, Christ dyed for every man. And this very argument is not
easily answered in the very confession of Dr. Twisse; who yet by and by says
it is easily answered, and yet he leaves it without an answer, he only scorns
it and lets it pass. Twiss. in Respon. ad Armin. Praefat. p. 16. col. 2. This
is secondly confirmed from the Apostle's way of arguing (2 Cor. 5. 14.) If one
died for all, then 2 Cor. 5. 14.
were all dead. This is the major Preposition of a hypothetical syllogism; in
which the thing to be proved is, that all were dead; and the Medium to prove it
is, that one died for all. Now every man knows (that understands how to reason)
that the argument of proof must be rather more, then less known, then the
thing in question to be proved: so that if it be clear, that all men were dead
by the fall of the first Adam, it must be clearer (as S. Paul argues) that life
was offered unto all, by the death of the second Adam; and if none were died
for but the Elect, then the Elect only were dead: for the word [ all] must
signify as amply in the Assumption, as it does in the Sequel; or else the
Reasoning will be fallacious and imperfect: The Apostle thus argues,

If one died for all, then were all dead;
But one died for all; (that must be the Assumption)
Therefore all were dead.
Whosoever here denies the Minor, does (before he is aware) condemn the Sequel
of the Major; and so gives the Lie to the very words of the Text; which I can
look from none but some impure Helvidius, who would conclude the greatest
falsehoods from the word of Truth. This is thirdly confirmed from the saying of
the Apostle, ( Romans 11. 32.) Romans 11. 32*
that God concluded all in unbelief (the Gentiles first, verse. 30. and
afterward the Jews, verse. 31.) that he might have mercy upon all; from whence
I infer, that if this last [ all] belong to none but the Elect, then none but
the Elect were concluded in unbelief. But it is plain that all without exception
were (first or last) concluded in unbelief, therefore the mercy was meant to
all without exception. Lastly, it is confirmed from those false Prophets and
false Teachers, (2 Pet. 2. 1.) 2 Pet. 2. 1.
who though privily bringing in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bringing upon themselves swift destruction, yet it seems they
were such whom the Lord had bought. So far is God from being the Cause of man's
destruction, by an absolute, irrespective, unconditional Decree, that he gave
himself a ransom even for them that perish. They were not left out of the
bargain which was made with his Justice, but the Apostle tells us they were
actually bought* He whose blood was sufficient for a thousand worlds, would not
grudge its extent to the major part of but one: he was merciful to all men, but
the greatest part of men are unmerciful to themselves. He is the Savior of
all, but yet all are not saved; because he only offers, does not obtrude
himself upon us. He Gratiam salutarem non existimo conferri omnibus, sed tamen
omnibus offerri; and praesto esse Deum ut conferatur. Episc. Wint. de Artic.
Lamb.
offers himself to all, but most refuse to receive him. He will have no man to
perish, but repent by his Antecedent will, but by his Consequent will he will
have every man perish that is impenitent. Which is sufficient to have been said
for the negative part of my undertaking, [ That the cause of Damnation is not
on God's part] in which, if any one Text be found of power to Convince, let no
man cavil at those others which seem less Convincing. If any one has an
objection, Omnibus offertur Dei misericordia. Nemo illius expers est, nisi qui
renui^. Bernard. sermon. 1. in purif. Mar.
let him stay for an answer till his objection is urged. It might seem too
easy, to solve objections of my own choice, or confute an argument of my own
making; and therefore I pass (without notice of common shifts, and
subterfuges, till I am called to that Drudgery) to the second part of my
enterprise, which is the affirmative.

16. [ That man himself is the cause of his eternal punishment.] Which though
supposed in the negative, must yet be proved In the Affirmative.
to some persons, who are prevailed upon by fashions, and modes of speech; and
will deny that very thing when they see it in one color, which they will
presently assent to, when they behold it in another. He who is very loath to
say, that God is the Author of sin and damnation, will many times say it in
other terms; and therefore, in other terms, it must be proved that he is not. O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help, ( Hosea 13. 6.)
They that privily bring in Damnable Hos. 13. 6. 2* Pet. 2. 1. Prove. 19. 3.
Heresies shall bring upon themselves swift destruction. The foolishness of
man perverteth his way: and as when lust conceives it brings forth sin, so
when sin is finished it brings forth death, Jam. 1. 15.
( Iam. 1. 15.) If death is that monster, of which sin is the Dam, that brings
it forth, how foul a thing must be the Sire? and can there be any greater
blasphemy, then to bring God's Providence into the pedigree of Death? Death
(says the Apostle) is the wages of sin, ( Romans 6. 23.) And wages is not an
absolute Romans 6. 23.
but a relative word. It is but reason he should be paid it, who has dearly
earned it by his work. It is the will of man that is the servant of sin.
Disobedience is the work* Death eternal Verse. 20.
is the wages, and the Devil is the play master; who as he sets men to work to
the dishonor of their Creator, so he paies them their wages to the advancement
of his glory. From whence I Conclude (with the Book of Wisdom) God made not
death, Wisd. 1 13, 14, 15, 16.
neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living: for he created all
things that they might have their being, and the generations of the world were
healthful, and there is no poison of Destruction in them, nor the kingdom of
death upon the earth. But ungodly men with their words and works called it to
them, and made a Covenant with it; because they are unworthy to take [(...)]
part with it.

17. I will confirm this truth by no more then one Reason; Proved secondly by
Reason.
which, if it is not the best, does seem to me to be the fittest; as being
aptest to evince both the connection and necessity of my first inference, from
my first Principle. It is taken from the nature and use of Punishment; which as
soon as it is named, does presuppose a Guilt; for as every sin is the (...).
transgression of some Law, so every punishment is the revenge of some sin:
upon which it follows, that if a man's sin is from himself, it is from himself
that he is punished. And as the Law is not the Cause, but the Romans 7. 8.
Occasion only of sin; so God is not the Cause, but the inflicter only of
punishment: for so says the Apostle, Sin taking occasion by the Commandment
wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence: for without the Law sin was dead.
That which is good not being made death, but sin working death by that which is
good Verse. 13.
God and his Law, are, each of them, the Causa-sine-qua-non* the Condition
without which, sin and punishment could not have been, (for without Law no sin,
and without God no Reprobation) but not the Energetical efficient Cause, of
which sin and punishment were the necessary effects. For if God had made a Hell
by an absolute purpose, merely because he would that some should suffer it, and
not in a praevious intuition of their sins; Damnation had been a Misery, but
not a Punishment: as if a P^tter makes a vessel on purpose that he may break
it, (which yet none but a mad man can be thought to do) or if a man merely for
recreation cuts up Animals alive, (which yet none ever did that I can hear of,
except a young Spanish Prince) it is an Infelicity and a torment, but no more a
punishment then it is any thing else. Indeed the Common people, who do not
understand the just propriety of words, make no distinction many times betwixt
Pain, and Punishment; not considering that Punishment is a Relative word* of
which the correlative is Breach of Law; and therefore is fitly expressed in
Scripture by the mutual relation betwixt a Parent and a Child: when lust has
conceived it brings forth sin; sin being perfected brings forth death* Jam
1. 15. (...). Apud Lucianum dr.
( Iam. 1. 15.) which is as much as to say (according to the propriety of the
Apostles words) sin is the parent, and death is the child. Now there cannot be
a Child without a parent; (for they are relata secundum esse) much less can
the child be before the parent; (for sunt simul natura, and dicuntur ad
convertentiam) Upon which it follows, that punishment could not be ordained by
God, either without sin or before it, or without respect and intuition of it,
(which yet the great Ideo praesciverit, quia decreto suo sic ordinavit. and for
no other reason, Nisi quia Deo ita visum est. Call vin. Instit. l. 3. cap. 23.
p. 7.
Mr. Calvin does plainly say.) I say it could not, because it implies a
contradiction. For though God could easily make Adam out of the earth, and the
earth out of nothing, yet Non percipit se dicere, ea quae vera sunt, eo ipso
quod vera sunt, falsa sint. August. contra Faustum.
he could not make a sinful Cain to be the son of sinful Adam* before there was
an Adam, much less before there was a sinful one: because it were to be, and
not to be at the same time; Adam would be a Cause, before an entity; which God
Almighty cannot do, because he is Almighty. So that when the Romanists assert
their Transubstantiation, or the posterity (...). Origin. contra Celsim. l. 4.
of Marcion their Absolute decree of all the evil in the world, (both
pretending a Reverence to God's omnipotence) they do as good as say, those
things which are true may therefore be false, because they are true; or that
God is so Almighty, as to be able not to be God: that being the Result of an
Ability* to make two parts of a contradiction true: (so said Austin against S.
Faustus, Isido^us Pelusiota (...), (...), respondit, (...).
and Origin against Celsus.) Whenever it is said, [ God can do all things]
it is meant of all things that become him: So Isidore the Pelusiote. But (to
return to argument in the pursuit of which I have stepped somewhat too forward)
if Gods praeordination of man's eternal misery were in order of nature before
his praescience of man's sin, as Mr. Calvin evidently affirms in his [Ideo Loco
superi^s paulo citato.
praesciverit, quia decreto suo praeordinavit,] setting Praeordination as the
Cause, or Reason, or praevious Requisite to his Praescience) either man's
Reprobation must come to pass without sin, or else he must sin to bring it
orderly to pass; which is to make God the author either of misery by itself
without relation to sin, or else of sin in order to misery. The first cannot
be, because God has Idcirco jurat, ut si non credimus promittenti Deo,
credamus salum p^o salute juran^i. Hieron. Epist. 46.
sworn, he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, ( Ezekiel. 33. 14.) much
less in his death that never sinned. And because, if it were so, the Scripture
would not use the word Wages, and the word Punishment, and the word
Retribution, O beatos nos, quorum causa Deus jurat! O mise^rimos si nec juranti
credimus! Tertul. l. de Poe^it, cap. 4.
and the word Reward. Hell indeed had been a Torment, but not a Recompense; a
fatal Misery, but not a Mulct; an Act of power, but not of vengeance; which yet
in many places is the style that God speaks in, Vengeance is mine, and I will
repay, Romans 12. 19. Nor can the second be less impossible, it having formerly
been proved, that God is not the Author of sin; Eccles. 15. 12.
he has no need of the sinful man, whereby to bring man's Ruin the more
conveniently about; and most of them that dare say it, are fain to say it in a
Disguise. Some indeed are for [ ligonem ligonem] but the more modest
blasphemers are glad to dress it in cleaner phrase. A strange (...) in
Divinity, to put the Jam. 1. 15.
child before the parent, the Romans 6 23.
wages before the work, the Romans 6. 2^.
end before the means, the Reprobation before the sin! yet so they do who make
the Decree of Reprobation most irrespective and unconditional; and after that,
say, that whom God determines to the end, he determines to the means. To put
the horse upon the Bridle, is a more rational Hypallage: for by this Divinity,
eternal punishment is imputed to Gods Antecedent will (which is called the
first) and sin to his consequent will, (which is the second.) The first (...)
and the other only (...), punishment chiefly, and sin by way of Consecution.
Men are bid not to sin ex voluntate signi, or revelata; but are determined
Poterit Deus velle voluntate signi and approbante, ut ^ono non (...); interea
voluntate beneplaciti statue^e (...) gratiam efficacem negare, ex quo
insallibiliter and efficaciter sequetur ut labatur. Twiss. in vind. Great. l. 1.
de praed. 12. p. 140. Voss. Pelag. Hist. l. 6. These. 2.
to it ex voluntate occulta, or beneplaciti. Distinctions very good, when at
first they were invented for better uses. The former by S. Chrysostom, from
whom it was borrowed by Damascene, and from him by the Schoolmen. But I say
they all were used to very contrary purposes, by them, and by these, who
endevour'd to repel those Fathers with their own weapons, (as the elaborate
Gerard Vossius does very largely make it appear.) I am sorry I must say, (what
yet I must (says Quod dicere periculosum, ad aedificationem proferendum est.
Tertul. depoen. cap. 5.
Tertullian) when it may tend to edification) That the Lord God merciful, and
gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, who is all Bowels
and no gall; who hates nothing that he has made, who in the midst of
Judgment remembers mercy, ever forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, is
exhibited to the world by the Authors and Abettors of unconditional
Reprobation, as a kind of Platonic Lover of so excellent a Creature's
everlasting misery. Which if Mr. Calvin himself confessed to be a Decretum
horribile quid^m fateor, inficiari tamen nemo poterit. Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c.
23. 7.
Horrible Decree (who yet believed it) how frightful must that opinion appear
to me, who did therefore leave it, because it frighted me into my wits? For to
say that God is (...), a slayer of men from all eternity, (who is the Lamb
slain, that is, a Savior, from the foundation of the world, ( Rev. 13. 8.) is
to affirm that of him, which he affirmed of the Devil, who is called by our
Savior, A Murderer from the beginning, Ioh. 4. 44. Which the Devil could not
be; if God had absolutely willed the Death of any, without respect or relation
to the snares of the Devil, it being impossible to murder the Dead; or to slay
those that were killed long before they were born. I know by whom it is
answered, L. 1. part. 1. 13. p. 140.
[That God does will sin, not as it is sin, but as it is a Medium for the
setting forth of his Glory; and so Damnation.] But whilst men find out
Distinctions to excuse God Almighty, they do imply him to have offended. Which
I am so weary even to think on, that I hasten, for some refreshment, to my
third proof of this Inference, from the suffrage of Antiquity.

18. Before I name any particular, I will take the confidence to Proved thirdly
by Antiquity.
say in general, That all the Greek and Latin Fathers before S. Austin, and
even Austin himself before his contention against Pelagius, (and even during
that contention in some places of his works) besides those many Fathers who
lived after him, were unanimously of this Judgment, That God did not
absolutely decree the Reprobation of any Creature, but upon praescience and
supposition of wilful rebellion and impenitence. I have not lived long enough
to read them all, but I have dipped into the most: and by the help of such
Collectors as I have gotten into my Study, (whereof Vossius has good reason to
be the Chief upon this occasion: and I the rather use him, because I find him
so very punctual in every one of the quotations, which I have had means and
opportunity to make trial of) I say, by the help of such credible Compilers, I
shall give in a cloud of witnesses (I hope) sufficiently Authentic. I do as
little love to be Voluminous as Callimachus would have me, ((...)) and
therefore shall set down only the substance of what the Fathers have said,
referring the Reader, by Ignatius in cp. ad Magnes. p. 53. edit. Usser. Justin.
Martyr. in Apolog. prima pro Christianis page 35. edit. Sylburg. 1593.
my Citations, to the larger fields of their Discourses.

(...).

(...).

Pluribus pereuntibus, quomodo defenditur perfecta bonitas? Tertull. contra
Ma^cion. l. 5. c. 24 edit. Iun. A.D. 1597.
ex majore part cessatrix, paucis aliqua, pluribus nulla, cedens perditioni,
partiaria exitii? Quod si plures salvi non erunt, erit jam non bonitas, sed
malitia perfectior. -- magis autem non faciens salvos, dum paucos facit,
perfectior erit in non juvando. -- suae potestatis invenio hominem a Deo
constitutum, -- lapsumque Lib. 2. cap. 5. 6.
hominis non Deo, sed libero ejus Arbitrio deputandum. (I wonder Vossius did
not remember Tertullian, then whom there is not any one more directly for this
purpose. Justin Martyr also Clemens Alex. (...) p. 24. edit. (...). vide and
Clem. Romans l. 1. (...), cap. 45.
was ill omitted; and so was S. Ignatius.)

(...).

(...). Theophil. ad Au^ol. l. 3 p. 336. edit. Basil. 1555. Origin. tract. 34.
in Matthew. p. 194.


Ignem autem aeternum non illis, quibus dicitur [ discedite a me maledicti]
paratum ostendit, sicut regnum justis, sed Diabolo, and Angelis ejus: quia
quantum adse, homines non ad perditionem creavit, sed ad vitam aeternam and
gaudium. (Note that Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Euthymius, interpret those
words of Athanas. orat. de incarn. v^rbi Dei. T. 1. p. 45.
Christ, as Origin does.)

(...)

(...) Macarius Homil. 26. p. 230. Homil. 30. p. 53.


(...) Basil. Homil. in Psalm. 29. p. 80.


Ideo venit Dominus Jesus ut salvum faceret quod perierat. Ambros. l. 2. de
secunda Interpellat. David. c. 11.
Venit ergo ut peccatum mundi tolleret, ut vulnera nostra curaret. Sed^quia non
omnes medicinam expetunt, sed plerique Refugiunt, -- ideo volentes curat, non
adstringit invitos. Hilarious Diacon. in epist. Pauli in Romans c. 3. and 9 Idem
ad 1 Timothy 11.


Non injuste judicat, quia omnes vult salvos fieri, manente justitia. -- Deus
utique vult omnes salvos fieri. Cur non impletur ejus voluntas? Sed in omni
locutione, sensus est, conditio latet. Vult omnes salvos fieri, sed si accedant
ad eum: non enim sic vult, ut nolentes salventur, sed vult illos salvari, si
and ipsi velint: nam legem omnibus dedit, nullum excepit a salute.

Ch^ysost. in 1 Timothy c. 2. p. 1556.
(...) Idem ad Ephesians. c. 1. Hom. 1. p. 1036.


Miseratur humano generi Deus, and non vult perire quod fecit. Hieronymus
advers. Pelagianos l. 2. sub finem. and ad Ephesians. c. 1.


Vult Deus quaecunque sunt plena rationis and consilii. Vult salvari omnes and
in agnitionem veritatis venire. Sed quia nullus absque propria voluntate
servatur, (liberi enim arbitrii sumus) vult nos bonum velle, ut cum voluerimus,
velit in nobis and ipse suum implere consilium.

Constat Deum omnia bona velle, sed homines suo vitio praecipitantur Primosius
in 1 Timothy 2.
in malum.

(...) Damascenus l. 2. orth. sid. c. 29.
Idem contra Manichaeot p. 375 edit. Basil. 1578.


(...). Oecumenius ad 1 Timothy 2.


Duae sunt voluntates in Deo. Una misericordiae, quae non est cogens, Anselmus
in Matthew. c. 6.
nec aliquid libero arbitrio aufert. Qua omnes homines vult salvos fieri, quod
tamen in libera voluntate illorum positum est. Est alia, quae est de effectibus
rerum, de qua dicitur, [ omnia quaecunque voluit, fecit.] huic nemo potest
resistere. De qua dicitur, Voluntati ejus quis resistit? (atque haec est
duplex, permittens, respectu mali; approbans, respectu boni.) Itaque homines
resistunt voluntati misericordiae, and non resistunt voluntati justitiae.
(Postea in hunc sensum.) Orat ergo, fiat voluntas tua, sicut in coelo (ubi non
resistitur) sic and in terris, ubi resistitur.

Deus ex se sumit seminarium miserendi. Quod judicat and Bernardus sermon. 5. in
Natal. Dom. Idem sermon. 1. in purif. Mar.
condemnat nos, eum quodammodo cogimus, ut long aliter de cord ipsius
miseratio, quam anivadversio procedere videatur. -- omnibus offertur, and in
communi posita est Dei misericordia; nemo illius expers est, nisi qui renuit.

If after all these testimonies, I have S. Austin and Prosper to side with me
in my assertion, I know not why I may not seem, to those who think me in an
error, at least to have rationally and discreetly erred: and though Grotius
gives a reason why Grotius in Rivet. Apolog. Discus. p. 97, 98.
S. Austin is the unfittest to be a Judge in these matters, yet if Prosper (who
best knew him) may be allowed for his Interpreter, I am very well content that
he be one of my Jury; for of four Expositions which that Father made (in
several parts of his writings) upon 1 Timothy 2. 4. [ God will have all men to be
saved,] I find one very directly just such as I would have it; and it is even
in those writings which he penned after the Heresy of Pelagius was on foot;
which is therefore with me of very great moment and Authority.

To this Question,

De bona voluntate unde sit, si natura, cur non omnibus, cum sit Augustine in
lib. de spiritu and lite^a ad Marcellinum c. 33.
idem Deus omnium Creator? si dono Dei, etiam hoc quare non omnibus, cum omnes
homines velit salvos fieri?

He thus Answers,

Vult Deus omnes homines salvos fieri, non sic tamen ut eis adimat liberum
arbitrium, quo vel been vel male utentes justissime judicentur. Quod quum sit,
Infideles quidem contra voluntatem Dei faciunt, cum ejus Evangelio non credunt:
nec ideo tamen eam vincunt, verum seipsos fraudant magno and summo bono,
malisque poenalibus implicant, experturi in suppliciis potestatem ejus, cujus
in donis misericordiam contempserunt.

Inevitabilis illa sententia, [discedite a me maledicti] a piissimo Idem sermon.
38. de Sanctis.
Deo ideo multo ante praedicitur, ut a nobis totis viribus caveatur: si enim
nos Deus noster vellet punire, non nos ante tot secula commoneret. Invitus
quodam modo vindicat, qui quomodo evadere possimus, multo ante demonstrat: non
enim te vult percutere, qui tibi clamat, observa.

It Is very true that S. Austin did sometimes let fall such expressions,
(transported sometimes in the heat of his dispute) as raised some calumnies
after his death, as if he had thought that God created the greatest part of
mankind on purpose to do the will, not of God, but of the Devil. But Prosper
made it appear, in his Answers to that and the like Objections, that they who
censured Austin's Judgment, were seduced to it by his style: and that
(notwithstanding the misfortune of his expressions) Austin's judgment and his
own, was clearly this (and so Nihil aliud accipiendum in isto Augustini
sermon existimo, quo ad interitum quosdam praedestinatos firmat. etc. Fulgent.
ad Monim. l. 1.
Fulgentius does profess to understand it.)

-- Syncerissime credendum atque profitendum est, Deum velle ut Prosper (s^u
August) ad object. Vic^n* Artic. 2. and seqq.
omnes homines salvi fiant. Siquidem Apostolus, cujus ista sententia est,
sollicitissime praecipit, ut Deo pro omnibus hominibus supplicetur: ex quibus
quod multi pereunt, pereuntium est meritum; quod multi salvantur, salvantis est
donum. -- Nemo ab eo ideo creatus est, ut periret: quia alia est causa
Nascendi, alia Pereundi. Ut enim nascantur homines, conditoris est beneficium;
ut autem pereant, praevaricatoris est meritum. -- Insanum omnino est dicere,
Voluntatem Dei ex Dei voluntate non fieri; and Damnatorem Diaboli ejusque
famulorum, velle ut Diabolo serviatur. -- Nullo modo credendum homines -- ex
Dei voluntate cecidisse, cum potius allevet Dominus omnes qui corruunt, and
erigat omnes elisos. -- Dei ergo voluntas est, ut in bona voluntate maneatur.
Qui and priusquam deseratur, neminem deserit. Et multos desertores saepe
convertit. -- Deus nec quae illuminavit, obcaecat; nec quae aedificavit,
destruit; nec quae plantavit, evellit. Quia praesciti sunt casuri, non sunt
praedestinati. Essent autem praedestinati, si essent reversuri, and in
sanctitate ac veritate mansuri: ac per hoc praedestinatio Dei multis est Causa
standi, nemini est Causa labendi. -- Hi cum a pietate deficiunt, non ex Dei
opere, sed ex sua voluntate deficiunt. Casuri tamen and recessuri ab eo, qui
falli non potest, praesciuntur. -- Denique qui voluntatem spreverunt
invitantem, voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem.

(...). Theodor. Heracl. in Joh. 8. 44.

Anathema illi qui per Dei praescientiam in mortem hominem deprimi dixerit.
Synod. Arelatensis.

Suo prorsus decipiuntur Arbitrio, sua voluntate labuntur, and si in hac
desidia perseverent, ipsi se his quae accepere, despoliant. Scriptor de vocat.
Gent. l. 2. cap. 11.

Quos praescivit Deus homines vitam in peccato terminaturos, praedestinavit
supplicio interminabili puniendos. Fulgentius ad Monimum. l. 1.

Causa^ Rep^obationis certum est hanc esse, viz. peccatum in hominibus.
Melancthon in locis Theolog. de praedest. Idem ubique ait Perrus Molinaeus in
sua anatome Arminianismi.
Lastly, that this is precisely the Judgment of the Church of England, I
cannot better prove then by that sense and apprehension which Bishop Overal had
of it; who does professedly interpret the mind of her Articles in this
particular, and was as well able to do it as any man that ever lived.

-- Sub generali promissione and praecepto tuto quisque potest indubi^ D.
Overallus Theol. Cantab. professor de (...) Ecclisiae Anglic. etc. cap. 1.
fide se includere: and cum certa spe ac fiducia ad thronum gratiae accedere,
vereque cognoscere, si non confidat Deo promittenti, and mandanti obsequatur,
suam culpam esse, non Dei: idque per negligentiam suam, non gratiae divinae
defectum accidere. -- Ordo divinae praedestinationis nostrae in Articulo
septimo iste videtur intentus; Deum praescium lapsus generis humani ad remedium
ejusdem filium mittendum decrevisse, in eoque salutis conditionem statuisse;
tum ad eam in animis hominum producendam necessaria and sufficientia media and
auxilia omnibus generatim secundum magis and minus ordinasse, quae magis
speciatim his quos in Christo elegit ex reliquo hominum genere pro suo
beneplacito cumularet, quibus hi ad fidem, perseverantiam and aeternam salutem
certissime perducantur, and reliqui nihil habeant quod conquerantur, etc.

De morte Christi tam plena and ubique sibi constans Ecclesiae nostrae Cap. 2
de morte Christi.
sententia, pro omnibus omnino hominibus, sive pro omnibus omnium hominum
peccatis, Iesum Christum mortuum esse, ut mirandum sit ullos ex nostris id in
controversiam vocare.

Pro omnibus actualibus hominum peccatis, non tantum pro culpa Artic. 2.
Originis.

AEterna vita humano generi est proposita. Artic. 7.


Oblatio Christi semel facta perfecta est Redemptio, propitiatio and Artic. 31.
satisfactio pro omnibus peccatis totius mundi tam originalibus quam
actualibus.

It is farther observed by that most moderate and learned Calvin. ad Heb. 9. 28.
man, that Mr. Calvin himself, however rigid he was in some places, did yet so
soberly contradict himself in others, that those very texts of Scripture in
which it is affirmed [ Christ dyed for many] he so interprets as to say, the
word [ many] is put to Idem ad Romans 5.
signify [ all] as Heb. 9. 28. and that many are not saved is (says he) for
this reason, [ quia eos impedit sua incredulitas] because they are hindered by
their own incredulity.

19. I have not translated these Authorities, because they are principally
meant for such as are able to understand them. And The Total sum of the
Citations.
if any plain Reader shall desire to have them in the Gross without being
troubled to suffer them over in the Retail, he may be pleased to receive it in
these following words: That God did not absolutely, irrespectively,
unconditionally decree the everlasting misery of any one, but in a foresight
and intuition of their refusing his proffer. That he sent his son to dye for
all the sins of the whole world, inviting and commanding all men every where to
repent [and be forgiven] (Act. 17. 30.) but that most, like the slave in
Exodus, are in love with their bondage; and will be bored through the ear. That
everlasting fire was prepared The English Reader may be pleased to observe,
that these last words are translated out of Prosper in his vindication of
August^ne his dearest friend, who is: he only Father (I can hear of) whom our
Adversaries are willing to be tried by in this business. (See the Confession
of Dr. Twiss. in Vind^c. Great. l. 1. Dign. 8. 4. p. 110.)
especially, (not for men, but) for the Devil and his Angels; nor for them by a
peremptory irrespective Decree, but in praescience and respect of their pride
and Apostasy. That Christ came to save that which was lost, and to call
sinners to Repentance, and to have gathered them as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but they would not. That God gave his law, his rule,
his promises to all, and excepted none in the publishing of either; but so as
he expected they should be willing as well as he; for he would not save any
whether they would or no. That God Almighty made no man on purpose to torment
him, but that he might participate of his goodness. That so many as perish may
thank themselves; and that so many as live forever, are beholding to nothing
but the grace of God. That God Decreed the fall of none, but the raising up of
those were down: and that those very men who are reprobated had been
predestined to salvation, if they would have returned and remained in truth and
holiness. Gods Decrees being to many the cause of their rise, but to none of
their downfall. Lastly, that they who have despised the will of God which did
invite them to repentance, shall feel the terrors of his will, which is to
execute vengeance upon the children of Disobedience.

20. From all this together which has been said from Scripture, The Result of
all. from Reason, from the Authority of the Ancients (...). Plotin. Enn. l. 2.
p. 263.
(who are the fittest of any to interpret Scripture) I thus conclude within my
self. That God Almighty is the Author of men and (...). Hierocl (...). p. 258.
Angels; That wicked Angels and wicked men are the Authors of sin; and that the
sin of men and Angels is the Author of unexpressible and endless punishment.
That sin is Rebellion against the Majesty of God; That hell was made to punish
Rebels; and that God never decreed any Rebellion against himself. Upon which it
follows, that as I look for the Cause of my election in the sole merits of my
Redeemer, so for the cause of my Reprobation, in the obliquity of my will:
because the Reason of my punishment is to be taken from my sin; and the Reason
of my sin is to be taken from my self: from whence there follows (and follow
it will, do what I can) A second Inference from my first, Compared with my
first Principle, viz.

CHAP. III.
21. That every Reprobate is predetermin'd to eternal punishment, not by Gods
irrespective, but conditional Decree. God The second Inference,
does punish no man under the notion of a Creature, but under the notion of a
Malefactor: and because he does not create a malefactor, but a man, he hates
nothing that he has created, Explained.
but in as much as it has wilfully (as it were) uncreated his image in it. So
that no man is sinful, because ordained to condemnation; but ordained to
condemnation, because he is sinful. Sin is foreseen, and punishment is
foreappointed; but because that sin is the cause of punishment, and that the
cause is not after, but before the effect (in priority of nature, though not of
time) it follows that the effect is not foreappointed, until the Cause is
foreseen. So that God damns no man by an absolute decree, (that is to say)
without respect or intuition of sin; but the praescience of the Guilt, is the
motive and inducement to the determining of the Judgment. And yet however my
second Inference is depending upon my first by an essential tie, (which gives
it the force and intrinsic form of Demonstration) yet because some Readers
will assent much sooner, to a plain Reason less convincing, then to a more
convincing Reason less plain, (and that some are wrought upon, by an argument
exactly proportioned to their Capacities or Tempers, rightly levelled and
adapted more by luckinesse then design, whilst another argument is displeasing
they know not why, but that there is an odnesse in the look and mien, which
betokens something of subtilty, and makes them suspect there is a serpent,
though they see not the Ambush in which it lurks) I will gratify such a Reader
by a proof of this too; first from Scripture, then from Reason (grounded upon
Scripture) and last of all by an addition to my former suffrages of Antiquity:
in which S. Austin more especially shall speak as plainly, and as strongly in
my behalf, as any man that can be bribed to be an Advocate, or a witness.

22. That my proof from Scripture may be the more effectual, Proved by
Scripture.
I shall first desire it may be considered; that since God is affirmed to have
a secret and a revealed will, we must not praeposterously interpret what we
read of his revealed will by what we conjecture of his secret one: (for that
were to go into the dark to judge of those Colors which are seen only by the
light) but we must either not conjecture at that which cannot be known (as Gods
secret will cannot be, but by ceasing to be secret) or if we needs will be so
busy, we must guess at his secret will by what we know of his revealed one,
that so at least we modestly and safely err. Upon which it follows: that we
who meekly confess we have not been of Gods Council, must only judge of his
eternal and impervestigable Decrees by what we find in his Word concerning his
Promises and his Threats: which are fitly called the Transcripts or Copies of
his Decrees. Such therefore as are his Threats, such must needs be his Decrees,
(because the one cannot praevaricate or evacuate the other) but his Threats (as
well as Promises) are all conditional, therefore his decrees must be so too.
Thus in his Covenant Genesis 2 17.
with Adam (and indeed the word Covenant does evince what I am speaking) he
threatens Death, or decrees it, (not with that peremptory Reason, which is the
redoubling of the will only, I will therefore because I will, but) on
supposition of his eating the forbidden fruit. Which was not therefore
forbidden, that Adam might sin in the eating, ( man was not so ensnared by the
guide of his youth) but Adam sinned in the eating, because it had been
forbidden. Such immediately after was Gods language to Cain. [ If thou do well,
thou shall be accepted, and Chap. 4. v. 7.
if thou do not well, sin lies at the door.] Again (says God by the mouth
of Moses) Behold, I set before you this Day a Deuteronomy 11. 26, 27.
Blessing and a Curse. A Blessing, if ye obey; and a Curse, if ye will not
obey. That is the form of making Covenants betwixt God and man every where
throughout the Scripture: and according to the fulfilling or not fulfilling of
the Condition, the Righteous Judge of all the world proceeds to sentence. Which
that we may not so much as doubt of, He (by a merciful Anthropopathia) is
pleased to speak like one of us. I will go down now Genesis 18. 21.
and see, whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, and if
not, I will know. There is an expression of God to Eli (1 Samuel 2. 30.) which
shows his will sometimes is either not absolute, or not immutable. I said
indeed that the House of thy Father should walk before me forever. But now the
Lord says, Be it far from me. Which words do not argue any fickleness in his
Will, but demonstrate his Promise to have been conditional: there was an [ If]
impli'd, though not expressed, and so it appears by the very next words. This
is also the style that is used in the New Testament. If thou shall confess
with Romans 10. 9.
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, etc. thou shall be
saved. From whence it follows, that if thou shall not confess with thy mouth,
nor believe in thine heart, etc. thou shall be damned. If we forgive not men
their trespasses, neither Mat. 6. 15.
will your Father forgive your trespasses. If we suffer, we shall also reign;
if we deny him, he also will deny us. I will cast her into a bed, 2 Timothy 2. 12.
and them that commit fornication with her, into great tribulation, except they
repent (Rev. 2. 22.) If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins,
Joh. 8. 24. In a word, the very end of Christ's coming into the world, was to
save us from our sins, (Mat. 1. 12.) to redeem us from all iniquity. (Tit. 2.
14.) Mat. 1. 12.
He came to deliver us indeed out of the hand of our enemies, but Tit. 2. 14.
to the end that we might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our lives. (Luke 1. 44. 45.) Now the end (we know) Luke 1. 44, 44.
is the prime condition, the greatest requisite of all: which to neglect
without repentance, is the true Cause of condemnation: for so runs the sentence
of our Savior (Mat. 25. 41.) Depart Mat 25. 41, 42.
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Why? for what Reason? He gives the
true reason in the next verse, (not because ye were Reprobated by an absolute
Decree; not because ye were ordained to be vessels of wrath by a mere
irrespective and inexorable will, but) because I was hungry and ye gave me no
meat, because I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink. (Which yet they could not
have given him, if it had not been given them from above to give.) From which
and a thousand such Texts besides, I do thus state the matter betwixt me and my
self. That no man is infinitely punished by an unavoidable necessity, but for
not doing his Duty; nor because he cannot, but will not do it. Impossibility is
not a sin, and therefore no man is punished for not doing that, which it is
impossible for him to do. It was the cruelty Judge. 1. ^.
of Adonibezek, to cut off men's Thumbs, and then to make it their task to
gather up meat under the Table. A greater cruelty in Pharaoh to require a Tale
of brick, where he gave no straw. Whereas the master we serve, will render to
every man according Romans 2. 6. 11.
to his works. With him there is no respect of persons. But whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he reap. And therefore let us Gal. 6. 7.
not sin, under pretense that all we do is by an absolute Decree: (an opinion
brought, amongst other Merchandise, out of Turkey into Christendom, and would
be rooted out in the next Reformation) for every such sinner is his own worst
Satan, he seeks Wisd. 1. 12.
out death in the error of his way, and pulls upon himself Destruction with the
works of his hands.

Other proofs out of Scripture, (and perhaps, to some, more convincing) will be
found interweaved in my followlowing proofs.

23. I must next confirm this truth by Reason; and because this Proved secondly
by Reason.
Reason will be manifold, I will make it my endeavor to be brief in each.
Whereof the first shall be taken from the nature of punishment, which (as
before I signified) does praesuppose a sin; sin does imply a breach of Law; and
this again does imply at once, a rational and a voluntary agent. Which seems to
me to be the Reason, why God is not offended with the Cruelty of the Bear, or
with the Pride of the Peacock, or with the Theevery of the Fox. This is the
reason, why the Earth does not sin by breeding Thorns and Thistles against its
primitive Genesis 3. 17, 18.
Institution. For the ground cannot be punished, and was not cursed for its own,
but for Adam's sake. (Genesis 3. 17. 18.) And lastly, this is the Reason, why the
Tower of Siloe was not Damned for committing murder. Man is an Agent very
capable of a Law, and so of sin, and so of punishment; and is therefore
punished, not because he could not, but because he could help it, by that
goodness of God which would have led him to Repentance, if he had not despised
the riches of his goodness. Romans 2. 4, 5.
Man is punished because he would sin, and not because he could not but sin.

24. My second Reason is taken from the nature of a Covenant; which ever
implies a Condition: now when the first Covenant was broken, God immediately
made a second; not with a part, but with all mankind. And this is observable
in the Title of our Gospel; [(...)] which though we render the [ New Testament]
we might better render the [ New Covenant,] which cannot be without Conditions.
Heaven and Hell are set before us; the performance of Faith and Obedience, is
that important condition; without which, as the former will not be had, so
cannot the latter be avoided.

25. My third Reason is taken from the unlimited Generality whereby Promises
and Threats, Rewards and Punishments, Exhortations and Dehortations, are
exhibited to all. The Gospel is commanded to be preached to all; and it is
published in writing, Mat. 28. 19. Luke 24. 47. Joh. 20. 31. Luke 9. 5.
that all might read and believe; Baptism, Repentance, and Remission of sins
are commanded to be offered to all in general, even to them that refuse both
the Word and the Preachers. Who when they are refused (and not before) are to
shake the Dust off their feet for a Testimony against them. Now preachings
would be vain, and exhortations would be deceitful, if life and death did not
depend upon submitting or refusing to be amended by them.

26. My fourth Reason is taken from the Degrees of Damnation. Some shall be
beaten with many stripes, and some with fewer; Luke 12. 47. Cap. 20. v. 47.
Mat. 11. 20, 21, 23, 24. Mat. 10. 15.
some shall have a less, and some a greater Condemnation. It shall be worse
for Chorazin then for Tire, worse for Bethsaida then for Sidon, worse for
Capernaum then for Sodom, worse for the Jews then for the Ninevites; which is
not because one had a greater Necessity of sinning then the other, but one was
guilty of the greater Contempt. Not because God had absolutely Decreed a
greater Punishment to the one, but because the one had means of sinning less
then the other. For our Savior says expressly, that if the mighty works which
were done in Tire and Sidon had been also done in Chorazin and Bethsaida, they
would have repented in Sackcloth and Ashes. Which was as much as to tell them,
that it was not at all for want of means and mercy on Gods part, but for want
of will on theirs, that they did not do what was commanded to be done. And
therefore our Savior did upbraid them, because they repented not, (Mat. 11.
20.) which he could not have done, had it been impossible for them to have
repented. Our blessed Savior was too pitiful, and of too sweet a disposition,
to jee^ a poor Creature for being such as God made him, or for being such as he
could not but be, whether by fatal, or by natural infirmity. We esteem it an
ill nature to upbraid a stammerer for not speaking plain; nor is any man
reproached for being naturally, but wilfully blind; nor for being born deaf,
but for being like the Joh. 3 19. Psalm. 58. 4.
Adder that stops her ears. He that binds my feet, and then invites me to
come to him, intends me nothing for entertainment but a salted Sarcasme, or
bitter Jest; for if he were serious, he would set my feet at liberty, that I
might come in good earnest; and not say to me, as we say to a Child that is
fallen down, [ Come hither to me and I will lift thee up.] And yet this Mr.
Calvin is fain Calvinus in Institut. l. 3. cap. 23. 7.
to say, (having been first of all engaged in that opinion) That so many
nations of men together with their infants were involved without remedy in
eternal punishment, by the fall of Adam, for no imaginable reason, but that so
it seemed good in the sight of God: and being pincht with that Text (Ezekiel. 18.
23.) Have I any pleasure Mortem non vul^ Deus, in quantum vul^ poenitentiam.
Sed experientia docet, ita eam velle, ut cor peccatoris non ^angat. Idem in
Ezekiel. 18.
at all that the wicked should die, and not that he should return from his
ways and live? he is fain to say, That God wills not the Death of a sinner so
far forth as he wills his Repentance. Which experience teaches us he does so
will, as not to touch his heart that he may repent. Which is all one as to say,
He wills it so, as to command it; but he does not will it so, as to leave it
possible: (that is) he wills it in show, but not in reality. Nor do I know any
way possible for Mr. Calvin to escape those ugly sequels, but by saying [that
the sinner may repent by the strength and force of Nature, without the touch of
his heart by the grace of God,] which is to shelter himself under the Heresy
of Pelagius. Solomon gives us a more rational account, why Wisdom one day
will laugh at men's calamities, and mock when their fear comes; even because
they hated Prove. 1. 26. 29.
knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord.

27. My fifth Reason is taken from the nature of Death, as that does signify
Privation, and as Privation supposes a former Habit. A stone is said to be not
alive, because it suffers the Negation of life; but a stone cannot properly be
said to be dead, because it does not suffer the Privation of life. So that when
a man is said in Scripture to be spiritually dead in Trespasses and Sins, he is
implied by that expression to have been spiritually alive. And no man is damned
for the Negation, but the Privation of Grace; because the Negation of Grace
would be Gods work, whereas the Privation of it is his own. It having formerly
been showed, That God does not punish his own work in man, but man is punished
for his own work; not for Gods illiberality, but for his own being a prodigal;
not because no Talent was given him, but because he squandered it away. Sin is
properly the Death of Grace; Death is a privation, a privation is of a habit.
So that every sinner had grace, for this very Reason that he has lost it; he
was alive, for this very Reason that he is dead. He came alive out of Gods
hands, but he falls desperately by his own. A man may be dead born, but he
cannot possibly be dead begotten; deprived of life he cannot be in the very Act
of his conception. A man can no more be created a sinner, then he can be
generated a dead man: which infers the Condition of Gods Decree.

28. My sixth Reason is taken from Christ's having bought those very men (2 Pet.
2. 1.) whose damnation did not slumber. (verse. 3.) I have proved already,
Christ died for all that were dead in Adam, from (2 Cor. 5. 14.) and from
several other Texts. Which he could not be truly affirmed to do, if any one had
been past by, by an absolute Praeterition. For that any man does perish for
whom Christ dyed, is from his own sin, and not from Adams, if to free us from
Adams it was that Christ died. Which as it has been already proved, so it may
be confirmed from other Scriptures: as from 1 John 2. 2. where he is called the
propitiation, 1 John 2. 2.
not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world. The Apostle
foresees and confutes the Heresy of Christ's dying only for the Elect, with a
not only, but also. He died for Infidels and impenitents, as the whole stream
of the Fathers conclude from those words, Destroy not him with thy meat for
whom Christ died. Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 11.
And shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ died? That this was the
Judgment of the primitive Church, I can prove by an Induction, and though I
now spare my Reader, yet I shall trouble him hereafter if I am Challenged to
it. I shall at present refer him to the 31 Article of our Church of England.
[The oblation of Christ once made is a perfect Redemption, propitiation, and
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, as well Original as Actual.]
I had almost forgot a special Testimony of S. John, who calls the Messiah [ the
true light which Joh. 1. 9.
lights every man that comes into the world.] So that if any man is in the
Dark, it is not for want of Light, but because he will not see, (as S.
Chrysostom infers) which is the very interpretation that S. John himself gives
it (chap. 3. verse. 9.) This (says he) is the Cap. 3. v. 19.
Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, because their Deeds were evil. Sure that which is the Reason
of their Condemnation, was the Condition upon which they were determined to be
damned: then which I know not what can be said either more plainly, or more
convincingly of any subject whatsoever.

29. My seventh Reason is taken from the conditional Decrees of temporal Death,
and other temporal punishments; which are so evidently Conditional, as I cannot
believe any Creature will deny it. For the Denuntiations of Destruction to
Nineveh, and Jonah 3. 4, 10. 2 Kin. 20. 5.
of certain death to Hezekiah, do put this quite out of all scruple: for the
first was not destroyed, and the second did not die, at that determinate time
when God had threatened they should. Of which no reason can be given, but that
Gods Purposes, and Decrees, and Threats were conditional, on supposition of
their Impenitence he threatened to destroy, and therefore on sight of their
Repentance he promised to preserve. And from hence it is natural to argue thus.
Is God so merciful to bodies? and is he less merciful to souls? Does he decree
temporal Judgments conditionally, because he is pitiful? and will he decree
Eternal ones absolutely, merely because he will? Is he so unwilling to inflict
the first death, and will he show his power, his absolute power in the second?
Did he spare the Ninevites in this life, because they were penitents? and will
he damn them in the next, because they were Heathens, by his peremptory Decree?
Is he mild in small things, and severe in the greatest? Is there no other way
to understand those Texts in the 9. to the Romans, then by making those Texts
which sound severely, to clash against those that sound compassionately? Is it
not a more sober and a more reasonable Course, to interpret hard and doubtful
Texts by a far greater number more clear and easy, then perversely to interpret
a clear Text by a doubtful one, or an easy text by one that is difficult? which
is to show the light by the darkness. Or if some Texts have two senses, if
some Texts are liable to many more, must we needs take them in the worst? and
that in mere contradiction to the universal Church? If I had no other Argument
against an absolute Reprobation, this one were sufficient to prevail with me,
That that Father of mercies and God of all consolation, who spares when we
deserve punishment, did not determine us to punishment without any respect to
our indeservings. He that had mercy upon wicked Ahab merely 1 Kin. 21. 29.
because of his Attrition, did not absolutely damn him before he had done
either good or evil, before the foundations of the world were laid. He does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, (Lam. 3. 33.) much less
does he damn them for his mere will and pleasure. When God does execute a
temporal punishment, upon such as already have deserved it, he comes to it with
reluctation, ((...)) and therefore calls it his Isa. 28 21.
strange work, a work he loves not to be acquainted with, a work which he does
sometimes execute, because he is Just; but still Lam. 3. 33.
unwillingly, because he is compassionate. And he therefore so expresses it, as
we are wont to do a thing we are not used to, and know not how to set about, [
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Hos. 11. 8, 9.
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine
heart is turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together. I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, for I am God, and not man.] Now that God
does profess to Exodus 32. 14.
afflict unwillingly, and many times to repent him of the evil which he thought
to do unto his people, is a demonstrative argument of his Conditional decrees
in things Temporal, and by a greater force of Reason in things Eternal.

30. My eighth Reason is taken from the little flock which belongs to God, and
the numerous herd, which belongs to Belial. Which would not have been, if they
had both been measured out by a most absolute Decree. For when it pleased the
Divine goodness to suffer death upon the Cross for all the sins of the world,
(the every drop of whose blood had been sufficiently precious to have purchased
the Redemption of ten thousand Adams, and ten thousand worlds of his posterity)
he would not yield the major part unto his Rival Rebel, the black prince of
Darkness; reserving to himself the far lesser portion; and all this
irrespectively, merely because he would. He would not absolutely determine such
a general Harvest of Wheat and Tares, as freely to yield the Devil the greater
crop. He would not suffer his Justice so to triumph over his Mercy, who loves
that his Mercy should rejoice against Judgment. It was not for Jam. 2. 13.
want of a new Instance to show his Power, or his Justice; for they were both
most eminent in the great Mystery of Redemption. Much greater Instances and
Arguments then an Absolute Decree; as I could evidently show, if I were but
sure of my Readers patience.

My ninth Reason is taken from the Reprobation of Angels, which was not
irrespective, but in regard to their Apostasy, as is and must be confessed by
all who place the object of Reprobation in massa corrupta. For the overthrowing
of which tenent (in all the Sublapsarians) Dr. Twisse himself does thus argue.
Si Deus non potuit Angelos reprobare, nisi ut contumaces, ergo nec homines nisi
ut in contumacia perseverantes. De Praedest. Digres. 4. 4. c. 2.

31. My tenth Reason is taken from the Absurdities which have, and still must
follow, if Gods eternal decree of man's misery is not conditional but absolute.
And those absurdities are discernible, by this following Dilemma.

Let Dives be supposed to be the man that is Damned. It is either because he
sins, or merely because God will have it so. If for the first Reason, [ because
he sins] then sin is the Cause of his Damnation, and consequently before it.
From whence it follows, that Dives is not Damned merely because God will have
it so; but that God will have it so, because he sins. (Which plainly shows the
Conditional Decree.) But if it be said that it is for the [ second Reason,
merely because God will have it so] then that absolute Decree to have it so,
does either necessitate him to sin damnably, or it does not. First, if it does,
then how can Dives be guilty of that thing, of which Gods absolute Decree is
the peremptory Cause? Or how can that be guilt, which is necessity? ( Dives
could as little have cherisht Lazarus, as the Tower of Siloe could have spared
the Galilaeans, if his will had been no more free, then that Tower had a will.)
And secondly if it does not necessitate him to sin damnably, then Dives who is
Damned might possibly have not been damned. From whence it follows, That Dives
is not Damned absolutely, but in regard to his sins. (Which had they not been
his choice, they had not been his, but his that did choose them. And it is a
Contradiction to say, a man chooses any thing without a free will, or by an
absolute necessity, which is, whether he will or no.) Besides; if God did
absolutely decree the end, which is Damnation, and consequently the means,
which is final impenitence; these Absurdities would follow. First, it would be
a Reprobates duty to be damned. And to endeavor his salvation would be a sin.
Because 'twere striving against the stream of Gods absolute Will. If all men
are to choose, and withal to execute the will of God, and that it is Gods will
the greatest part shall be damned; it will then be a duty in the greatest part
of men, to go industriously to Hell. And to do good will be a vice, because it
tends Heaven-wards, and so to the Crossing of an absolute irreversible Decree.
Which since I have considered, I have less wondered then I was wont, at the
conclusion of Carpocrates, that the very worst of Actions are out of duty to be
performed. And that the soul shall be punished with its imprisonment in the
body, until she has filled up the number of her iniquities; according to that
Text Mat. 5. 29. Which we call Iniquities, but they Duties. And so indeed they
would be, if every thing in the world (the means as well as the end) were
absolutely ordained, and by consequence effected by God (blessed forever) who
can ordain nothing but good. And such sin and Hell must be [ exceeding good] if
they could possibly be ordained by as absolute a decree, as the Heavens and the
earth, the water, and the air, of which God said, they are very good. Secondly,
Gods Revealed will being that all should repent, and his Secret will being that
very few shall; it follows thence, That it is his will that his will should
not be done. And that God has one will which is the same with the Devils; and
that when a Reprobate says in the Pater noster [thy will be done] he
vehemently prays for his own Damnation. Which things, as they were falsely
objected in France against S. Austin, so Prospers way to excuse him, was to
make protestations against any such Tenent, as unconditional Reprobation. He
says the very Ineptissimae blasphemiae. Prodig^osa mendacia. Diabolicus
mendacio^um indiculus. Leguntur apud. Prosp. in Praesat. Respon. ad object.
Vinc.
things in his Masters vindication, which I have said in my own. And calls the
sequels of that opinion which he disowns; most sottish blasphemies, and not
only prodigious, but Devilish lies. But he denies not that such ill
consequences will follow upon the bold assertion of irrespective reprobation,
which he does therefore very distinctly and very earnestly disclaim. And he
does so much speak the very mind of S. Austin, that he seems sometimes to
speak out of his mouth too: it being hard to say, whether the Answers to the
Objections of Vincentius do truly belong to the Master or to the Scholar, they
being inserted in both their Works. And that which is called Prospers by
Vossius, is ascribed to S. Austin by Ludovicus Lucius. If I have made any
unfriendly or injurious inference, I will instantly retract it upon the least
conviction that it is so. But truly the Reasons which I have given, have served
to confirm me in my adhaerence to my second Inference. Which I yet farther
prove by the the remaining votes of Antiquity. For though my former Citations
are all to this purpose, yet I will not repeat them, but add some others,
(perhaps more fully and indisputably) to the number.

32. Proved thirdly by Antiquity. Solent veteres etc. and Scholastici in ea
acquiescunt etc. Non alia ratione quae futura sunt, praevideat, nis^ quia ita
ut fierent decrevit. Calvin. instit. l. 3. c. 23.. 6.
And first I will set down the Confession of Mr. Calvin, That the Schoolmen and
Ancients are wont to say, [ God's Reprobation of the wicked, is in praescience
of their wickednesse] but he professes to believe (with one more modern) that
God foresaw all future things, by no other means, then because he decreed they
should be made, or done. Nor ought it (says he) to seem absurd, That God did
not Nec absurdum videri debee, Deum non modo primi hominis Casum and in co
posterorum ruinam praevid^sse, sed a^bitrio quoque suo dispensasse. Idem ibid.
7.
only foresee, but by his will appoint the fall of Adam, and in him of his
posterity. The Ancients, he confessed, were quite of another mind, but because
he adds [ dubitanter] and would have it thought that S. Austin was for his
turn, I will set down some of their words, and begin with Austins.

33. No man is chosen unless as differing from him that is rejected. Nor know
I how it is said [that God has chosen us Nemo eligitur nisi jam distans ab
illo qui rejicitur. Unde quod dictum est, [quia elegit nos Deus ante mundi
Constitutionem] non video quomodo sit dictum, nisi de praescientia Fidei and
operum pietatis. and mox -- Iacobus non electus est ut fieret bonus, sed bonus
factus eligi potuit. Augustia. ad. Simplicianum l. 1. quaest. 2.
before the foundation of the world] unless it be meant of his praescience of
faith and good works. -- Jacob was not chosen that he might be made good, but
having been seen to be made good was capable of being chosen.

If S. Austin was so distinctly for Conditional Election (and in those very
works too, which he afterward writ as very sufficient to confute Pelagius) he
was infinitely rather for Conditional Reprobation. As any man knows that knows
any thing of him; and may be seen in the same book to Simplician.

Esau would not, and did not run. For if he had, he had attained Noluit ergo
Esau, and non cucurrit. Sed et si voluisset, and cucurrisset, Dei adjutorio
pervenisset, nisi vocatione contempta reprobus fieret. Id. in lib. ad Simpl.
by the help of God; unless he would be made a Reprobate by a contempt of his
vocation.

It seems unjust that without the merits of good or evil Number quid iniquitas est
apud Deum? absit. Iniquum enim videtur, ut sine ullis bonorum malorumve operum
meritis, unum Deus eligat, odiatque alterum. Id. in Enchirid. cap. 98.
works, God should love one, and hate another.

Wicked men had no necessity of perishing from their not Non necessitatem
percundi habue^unt, quia praedestinati non sunt; sed ideo praedestinati non
sunt, quia tales futuri ex volunta^ia pr^vaticatione praes^iti sunt. Prosper.
ad Galorum cap. 3. edit. Basil. 16^1.
being elected; but they were therefore not elected, because they were foreseen
to be wicked through their own wilful prevarication.

God foresaw that they would fall by their own proper will, Illos (...) propria
ipsorum volunta^e praescivit, and ob hoc a filiis Perditionis nulla
praedestinatione discrevit. Id. idem. ad. cap. 7.
and for that very reason did not separate them by election from the sons of
perdition.

God is the creator of all men, but no man was created to the end that he may
perish, Omni^m quid^m hominum Deus Creator est, sed nemo ab eo ideo creatus est
u^ pereat. Idem. ad object. Vinc. 3.


34. I have given the more Testimonies out of Prosper, because he is known to
have been the Scholar and vindicator of S. Austin. And to produce their
suffrages is to imply all the rest. They having been the only Ancients whom
their contentions against Pelagianism made to speak sometimes to the great
disadvantage of their own opinion: as they do not stick to confess themselves.
And we ought in all reason to take that for their Judgment, which we find
delivered by themselves by way of Apology and vindication. But though I need
not, I will add some others.

He therefore brought the means of Recovery to all, that Ideo omnibus opera
sanitatis de^lit, ut quicunque perierit, mortis suae causas sibi ascribat, qui
curari noluit, cum remedium haberet quo posset evadere. Ambros. l. 2. de Cain
and Abel cap. 13.
whosoever perished might impute it to himself who would not be cured, when he
had a Remedy whereby he might.

Even they that shall be wicked have power given them of Conversion and
Repentance. Etiam his qui mali sint futuri, datur potestas conversionis and
poenitentiae. Hieron. l. 3. adversus Pelagianos.


God's love and hatred arises from his praescience of things to come, or from
the quality of men's works. Dilectio and odium Dei vel ex* praescientia nascitur
futurorum, vel ex operibus. Idem, ad Malach. 1.


If the day is equally born for all, how much rather is Jesus Si dies
aequaliter nascitur omnibus, quanto magis Christus? -- Cum singuli ad donarium
vocentur, quid est ut quod a Deo aqualiter distribuitur, humana interpretatione
minuatur? Cyprian. Epist. 76.
Christ? -- When every man is called to a participation of the gift, what is
the reason, that what God has equally distributed should by humane
interpretation be any way lessened?

Patet omnibus fons vitae, neque ab ju^e potandi qui^quam prohibetu^, aut ^elli
u^. Arnob. Adversus Not. lib. 2.
The fountain of life lies open to all. Nor is any man forbid or hindered from
the right of Drinking.

Let D. Twisse himself be heard to speak in this matter, and that against
Piscator (both Antiarminians) Damnatio est Actus Iudicis, and procedere debet
secundum justitiam vindicativam: at ne vestigium quidem Iustitiae apparet in
Damnatione Reproborum. (He speaks of absolute irrespective Reprobation which
Piscator set up) Nam justitia neminem damnat nisi merentem. At esse reprobum,
nequaquam significat mereri Damnationem. Sola Damnatio peccatoris splendere
facit Dei Iustitiam. Twissus in vind. Gr. de Praed. l. 1. Digr. 1.. 4. p. 57.

35. Time and paper would fail me, and sufficient Patience would fail my
Reader, if I should make repetition of all I find to my purpose. For
whatsoever has been spoken by the Fathers, of universal Redemption, does
Diametrically oppose the irrespective Reprobation. And to reckon up their
verdicts in that behalf, were to engage my self and my Reader in a new Ocean of
employment. I hope the account that I have given of my belief in this matter is
a sufficient Apology for my belief, and may at least excuse, though not
commend me. Rather then offend any man who takes me upon Trust to be unsound in
my principles, I have made this excuse for being orthodox. And do humbly desire
to be forgiven if I still adhaere to that Doctrine, which by Scripture, and
Reason, and the Authority of my teachers, I am verily persuaded is the truest
and the most safe: (to wit,)

1. That man himself is the Cause of his sin. The sum of all that has been
said.
2. That sin is properly the Cause of its punishment. And by consequence,

3. That man is the procurer of his own Misery. And by consequence,

4. That Reprobation is a Conditional thing.
Not decreed by God Almighty to show his absolute power, but to show his power
in the exercise of his Justice. Not Determined before, but because of his
praescience. Nor without regard or respect, but in Relation to sin, in
foresight, and hatred, and requi^al of it, as of an injury; on which Damnation
is praeordain'd, by way of Recompense and Revenge. And therefore the last day
is called a day of Judgment, as well as of perdition. 2 Pet. 3. 7. Jer. 51.
56. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
And the Judge himself is called the Lord God of Recompense. And when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed in flaming fire, it shall be to take vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Now that which
is the motive to the taking of vengeance, was also the motive to the making of
the Decree. He who therefore takes vengeance, because they obey not the Gospel
of Christ, did for the very same Reason, Decree to take it. Which to me is
Demonstration that the Decree is Conditional. (...).

36. I have nothing now of Duty that lies upon me to be done, An obvious
expedient to reconcile dissenters.
but that I descend to the second ground of my Belief. But for the love of
Charity and Reconcilement, I will endeavor to take a Course of making some
Composition with my Dissenters. If they will but come up to my most Reasonable
Demands, we will not strive about words and phrases; so small a thing shall
never part us. I will swallow the word [ Necessity,] so I may Qui non sunt
praed^stinati ad salu^em, necessario propter p^ccata condem. nabuntur. Art.
Lamb. 4.
take it down with a grain of salt. I will say with Mr. Whitaker (in his 4.
Article at Lambeth) That they who are not praedestin'd to salvation shall be
necessarily Damned (but) for their sins. (as he himself speaks.) I allow my
self to be no wiser then Bishop Andrews, (the strings of whose books I am not
worthy to untie) who interprets Necessario, not by an absolute Necessity, Atque
id necessario (si sic loqui placeat) sed necessi ate ex hypothesi, non Absolu
a. Id est, ideo quia peccarunt, non autem ideo, quia non sunt praedestinati.
Epist. Wint Jud. de art Lamb.
but by a Necessity which follows sin. They shall be damned for their sins;
that is, for that very Reason, because they have sinned, not for that only
Reason, because they are not praedestin'd. And because that Reverend, (I know
not whether more learned, or Saintlike) Man, allowed himself to be no wiser
then all the Fathers and Schoolmen that went before him, he thought 'twas fit
to abstain from [such (...)] such new phrases and ways of holding forth and
making out the Ancient Doctrines of the Church; and therefore in stead of [
necessity] to say [ without doubt.] And for my own part, I desire to be no
deeper, and to speak no better language, then all the Fathers of the Church
(who have gone to Heaven with those opinions, for which I am Censured by some
to Hell,) I choose to say [a Conditional, not an absolute Necessity.]

37. If I may guess (without censure) at the Cause of other men's mistakes, by
that which once was mine own, I shall ascribe The probable cause of the
Dissension is a mistake of Gods praescience.
much of it to the vulgar misconception of Gods praescience or foresight. Which
being constant and infallible, seems to give a necessity to all events, which
are the objects of that praescience. And this must certainly be the reason, (I
at least must so conjecture, who can think of no better, and did my self once
stumble upon this very stone) why Mr. Calvin will have Gods praescience to
succeed his praeordination. The ground of which error does so border upon
Truth, as to lessen the wonder why men of good parts should so frequently
mistake it for that truth it self, on which it borders. (And does unluckily
verify the Italian Proverb, Troppo confina la virtue col vitio,) Gods
praescience indeed does imply a necessity, which it is mistaken to have
effected. And again necessity is not by every body distinguished, as by the
Admirable Boethius: (to whom I owe my greatest light in this particular.) for
if it were, I believe many others might be converted, as I have been. But
before I mention, (much less insist on the Distinction) I shall choose to say
something in preparation to it. It is briefly this.

38. That the knowledge of the Eternal far transcending all motion The mistake
is endeavored to be rectified.
and succession of time, does abide in the simplicity of its present being;
beholding all past and future things in his simple knowledge, as just now done.
And therefore Boethius will have it called not Praescience, but Science. Not
Praevidence, but Providence: Boethius de consol. Philosoph. lib. 5.
which does not change the natures and proprieties of things future, but
considers them as they are, in respect of himself; which is as they shall be,
in respect of Time. For as the knowledge of things present does import no
Necessity on that which is done; so the foreknowledge of things future lays no
necessity on that which shall be: because whosoever either knows or sees
things, he knows and sees them as they are, and not as they are not. Gods
knowledge does not confound things, but reaches to all events, not only which
come to pass, but as they come to pass: whether contingently, or necessarily.
As (for illustration) when I see a man walk upon the earth, and at the very
same instant, the Sun shining in the Heavens, I see the first as voluntary, and
the second as natural. And though at the instant that I see both done, there is
a necessity that they be done (or else I could not see them when I do) yet
there was a necessity of one only, before they were done, (viz. the Suns
shining in the Heavens) but none at all of the other, (viz. the man's walking
upon the earth.) The Sun could not but shine, as being a natural agent; The man
might not have walked, as being a voluntary one. Upon which it follows,

39. There is a twofold necessity. Whereof one is absolute, and By the
consideration of a twofold necessity in (...).
the other on Supposition. The Absolute is that, by which a thing must be moved
when something moves it. The Suppositive is that, by which a man shall be
damned if he die Impenitent. Duae sunt necessitates. Simplex una, veluti quod
necesse est omnes homines esse mortales. Altera conditionis, u^ si aliquem
ambulare scias, cum ambulare necesse est. Boeth. de con. Phil. l. 5.
The latter necessity (though not the first) does mightily well consist both
with the liberty of man's will, and God's Conditional Decrees. E. G. I am now
writing, and God foresaw that I am writing, yet it does not follow that I must
needs write; for I can choose. What God foresees must necessarily come to
pass, but it must come to pass in the same manner that he foresees it. He
foresees I will write; not of necessity but choice; so that his foresight does
not make an absolute and peremptory Necessity, but infers a Necessity upon
Supposition. (We must mark, in a Parenthesis, how great a difference there is
betwixt the making, and the inferring of a Necessity.) Whatsoever I do, there
is an Absolute Necessity that God should foresee; yet God foreseeing my
voluntary Action does not make it necessary, but on supposition that it is
done. If all things are present to God, (as indeed they are) his foresight must
needs be all one with our sight. As therefore when I see a man dance as he
pleases, it is necessary that he do what I see he does; but yet my looking on
does not make it necessary; So Gods foreseeing that man would sin, employed a
certainty that so it would be, but did not make it an absolutely necessary or
involuntary thing. For that a thing may be certain (in respect of its event)
and yet not necessary (in respect of its cause) is no news at all to a
considering person, who will but duly distinguish: Gods Omniscience from his
Omnipotence, and his Foresight from his Decree, and infallible from necessary,
and spontaneous from voluntary, and that which fallows as a Consequence only,
from that which fallows as a consequent. If I may judge by those errors which
I convince my self to have been in, when I was contrary minded to what I am, I
see as many mistakes in other men arising from the misfortune of confounding
those things which I just now distinguished, as from any one unhappiness that I
can think of. And from all that I have spoken upon this last subject, it seems
inevitably to follow, that a suppositive Necessity, and none else, is very
consistent with a free and contingent Action. Whilst I see a man sitting, it
is necessary that he sit, but upon supposition that I see him sitting. His
posture is still a voluntary contingent thing. For he sat down when he would,
and may arise when he pleases. (but still with a proviso of God's Permission.)
I desire to be taught what is, if this is not, exact speaking, viz. That God by
his prohibition under penalty makes my Disobedience become liable to
punishment. And Ecclus. 15. 14.
by his Decree to permit, or not hinder me, he leaves me in the hand of mine
own counsel, and so in the state of peccability, that I may sin and perish if I
will. So that by his praescience that I will sin he has no manner of influence
or causality upon my sin; which infers my destruction to be entirely from my
self. I am a little confident, that whosoever shall but read Boethius his fifth
book, and reading shall understand it, and understanding shall have the modesty
to retract an error, he will not reverence the 4. Section of the 23. chapter of
the 3. book of Institutions, because it is Mr. Calvin's, but will suspect Mr.
Calvin because of that Section. The Question there is, [ Whether Reprobates
were praedestined to that corruption which is the cause of Damnation] To which
he answers with a [ Fateor] I confess that all the sons of Adam, by the
express will of God, fell down into the misery of that condition in which they
are fettered and entangled. And a little after he professes, that no account
can be given, but by having recourse to the sole will of God, the cause of
which lies hidden within it self. And that we may not think he speaks only of
the posterity of Adam, he tells us plainly in the close of that Section, that
no other cause can be given for the defection of Angels, then that God did
reprobate and reject them. In this place I would ask, Was the Angels Defection
or Apostasy their sin, or no? if not, why were they reprobated and cast into
chains of darkness? and if it were, how then is God's Reprobation not only
the chief, but the only Cause of such a sin? This is the sad effect of being
enslaved to an opinion, and of being ashamed of that liberty which looks like
being conquered. I believe the love of victory has been the cause of as many
mischiefs as have been feigned to leap forth from Pandora's Box. Whereas if
every one that writes, would but think it a noble and an honorable thing, to
lead his own pride captive, to triumph over his own conceitednesse and
opiniastrete, and to pursue the glory of a well natured submission; there is
perhaps hardly an Author of any considerable length, but might think he had
reason to write a book of Retractations. And sure it will not be immodesty for
a young man to say, That many old men might have done it, with as much reason
as S. Austin.

40. But as I have learnt of Boethius (that most excellent Christian, And by a
right. Application of a twofold Will in the Almighty.
as well as Senator; and profound Divine, as well as Philosopher; who lived a
Terror to Heresy, and died a Martyr for the Truth) to distinguish of
Necessity; so have I learned from other Ancients, to distinguish better of
God's will, then I was wont to do before the time of my Retractation. First, I
distinguish (with S. Chrysostom) of a first and second will. Gods Chrysostom. in
Epist ad Ephesians. c. 1. Homil. 1.
first will is, that the sinner should not die, but return rather from his
wickedness and live. His second will is, that he who refuses to return
receive the wages of iniquity. Secondly, I distinguish Damascen. l 2. Orth.
Fid. c. 29.
(with Damascene) of an antecedent and a consequent will. The antecedent is
that, by which he wills that every sinner should repent. His consequent is that,
by which he preordaineth the Damnation of the impenitent. Which distinction is
not made in respect of Gods will simply (in which there cannot be either prius
or posterius) but in respect of the things which are the object of his will.
For every thing is willed by God so far forth as it is good. Now a thing
considered absolutely may be good or evil, which in a comparative
consideration may be quite contrary. E. G. To save the life of a man, is good;
and to destroy a man, is evil, in a first and absolute consideration. But if a
man secondly be compared with his having been a murderer, then to save his
life, is evil; and to destroy it, good. From whence it may be said of a just
Judge, that by his antecedent will he desires every man should live; but by a
consequent will decrees the death of the Murderer. And even then, he does so
distinguish the murderer from the man, that he wishes the man were not a
murderer. Whom he condemns as murderer, and not as man. For whilst he has a
will to hang the murderer, he has a merciful woulding to save the man. He does
not hang the man, but only because he is a murderer. And (if it lay in his
power) he would destroy the murderer, to save the man. Both the one and the
other is not an absolute, but a conditional will. He would save the man, (with
an) [if] he were not a murderer. And does destroy the murderer (with a) because
he is a Malefactor. Just so, God's antecedent will is, that every man would
repent that they may not perish. It is his consequent will, that every Prosper.
in Respon. ad objec. Vincen. sub finem.
one may perish who will not repent. Both the one and the other is respective
and conditional. Thirdly, I distinguish (with Prosper) of an inviting and
revenging will. The inviting will is that, by which all are bidden to the
Wedding Feast; his revenging will is that, by which he punishes those that
will not come: Or fourthly, I distinguish (with reverend Anselme) of the will
Anselmus in Mat. cap. 6.
of God's mercy, and of the will of his Justice. It is the will of his Mercy,
that Christ should die for the sins of all; but it is the will of his Justice,
that all should perish who come not in to him, when they are called, or who
only so come, as not to continue and persevere unto the end.

41. All these Distinctions come to one and the same purpose, and being rightly
understood, as well as dexterously used, do seem to me a Gladius Delphicus,
sufficient to cut asunder the chiefest knots in this Question. For the first
will of God may be repealed, whereas the second is immutable. Which is the
ground of that Distinction betwixt the Threats and Promises under God's Oath,
and those other under his Word only. Of which says the Council of Toledo,
Iurare Dei est, a seipso ordinata, nullatenus Council. Tolet. 8. ^. 2.
convellere. Poenitere vero, eadem ordinata, cum voluerit, immutare. When he is
resolved to execute his purpose, he is said to swear; and when it pleases him
to alter it, he is said to repent. For there are some Decrees of God which
(being conditional) do never come to pass; as he thought to have done an Evil
of punishment unto Israel, which yet he did not. Exodus 32. 14. And the reason
of this is given us from that distinction before mentioned. Which also serves
to reconcile many seeming repugnances in Scripture. For when it is said, that
God repents (1 Samuel 16. 35) it is meant of the first nill; and when it is
said he cannot repent (1 Samuel 16. 29.) it is meant of the second. In respect of
the first, we are said to grieve, to quench, to resist the Spirit of God, (1
These. 5. 19.) but when it is said, who has resisted his will? (Romans 9. 19.) it
is meant of the second. God's Mercy is above and before his Justice, and
therefore that is his first will, that all should be saved and come to the
knowledge of the Truth (1 Timothy 2. 4.) but yet so, as that his Justice is not
excluded by his Mercy, and therefore that is his second Will, that so many
should be damned as hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord.
(Prove. 1. 29.) The will of his Mercy, that all should live, is from nothing but
his goodness; whereas the will of his Justice, that some should die, depends
upon something in the Creature. (So that both parties may be gratified, they
that are for the dependence, and the independency of his Will.) That the
Reprobate is invited, is from the mercy of God's Will; but that he is punished
for not accepting, is from the obliquity of his own. In respect of the first,
it is the man that refuses God (Ier. 8. 5.) But in respect of the second, it
is the God that does reprobate man. (Romans 1. 28.) The free Love of the Creator
is the only motive to his first will; but man's ingratitude and rebellion is
his impellent to the second. The first shows him a tender and compassionate
Father; the second speaks him a righteous and an impartial Judge. Both proclaim
him a powerful and a provident God. Now can any Distinction be better chosen,
can any word that is aequivocable be more safely understood, can any Opinion
(of God's will, or man's) be more rationally, or more warily, or more
religiously entertained, then that wherein God's Mercy does greet his Justice?
and wherein his Love does kiss his Power? I appeal to any man living, whether
this be an Error, or if it is, whether it is not a very safe one; and if it is
so, whether it is not a very small one; and if so safe, that no body can suffer
by it; if so small, that no body can see it; whether the Author of this Appeal
is not very excusable, both for not being able to see his own Eyes, nor to see
his own Error with other men's. As much as in me lies, I would live peaceably
with all men. With those especially, Romans 12. 18
who when I speak unto them thereof, make them ready to battle. And in order to
that Peace, I desire them to lay this one thing to heart. That as, if I were as
they, I would quit my Opinion; so, if they were as I, they would not long keep
their own.

CHAP. IV.
42. HAving proved hitherto, that Sin is really the cause of Punishment, that
Man is really the cause of Sin, and therefore that Man is the grand cause of
Punishment, (as being the cause of the cause of his Damnation) intending
thereby to secure my self against the errors and blacker guilt of the
Manichees, the Marcionites, the Stoics, and the Turks, who do all affirm (some
directly, some by necessary consequence) That God's absolute Will is the cause
of sin, and man's only the instrument; the second part of my Task is to be an
Advocate for the pleading and asserting the Cause of God too; and that against
the Opiners of the other Extreme, to wit, the Pelagians and the Massilienses;
who, to be liberal to Nature, do take away from Grace; and to strengthen the
Handmaid, do lessen the forces of the Mistress. And though I think the latter
to be the milder Heresy of the two, it being less dangerous to ascribe too
much goodness to the Power of Nature, (which very power is undoubtedly the
gift of God) then the very least Evil to the God of all Grace, (and this
according to the Judgment of the Synod at Orange, which pronounced an Anathema
upon the first Heresy, whereas it did but civilly reject the second) yet in a
perfect dislike and rejection of this latter Extremity, as well as of the
former, my second Principle is this.

That all the good which I do, I do first receive; not from The second
Principle or Ground of my Belief in this business.
any thing in my self, but from the special Grace and Favor of Almighty God.
Who freely works in me, both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil.
2. 13.

43. That I may not be suspected of any secret Reservation within Explained.
my self, in the laying down of this Principle; I will endeavor to speak out,
and make my Reader my Confessor, by revealing the very utmost of what I think
in this business. I believe, that no man can come to Heaven any otherwise then
by Christ; nor to Christ, unless it be given; (that is, unless the Father
draw him.) First the Father loves the Son; next Act. 4. 12. Joh. 6. 44. 65.
he loves us in the Son; then endowes us with his Spirit; so endowed he elects
us; so elected he praedestines us; so praedestin'd he will glorify us; by
crowning his Gifts and Graces in us. I say his Graces, because they are not
acquired by us, but infused by him. Nor so properly given, as lent us. Lent us
as Talents, not to hide, but multiply. We owe it wholly to God, not that he
gives us his his Grace only, but that he gives us the grace to desire his
Grace, as well as to use it to the advancement of his Glory. And we are to
thank him, as for all other mercies, so for this also, even that we have the
Grace to thank him. So far am I from that Pelagianism whereof I have wrongfully
been accused, (I beseech God not to lay it to my Accusers charge) that I have
never lain under any the least Temptation to any degree of that Heresy. No, no
more, then Fulgentius, or Prosper, or S. Austin himself. It not only is, but
ever has been my assertion, That as we cannot spiritually be nourished unless
the Father of Mercies does reach out unto us the Bread of Heaven; and as we
cannot take it when it is offered, unless he give us the hand of Faith; so
cannot we possibly desire to take it, unless he gives us our very appetite and
hunger. We cannot pant after the waters of life, unless he give us our very
thirst. He stirs us up, when we are sleeping, that we may seek him; and shows
himself, when we are seeking, that we may find him; and gives us strength,
when we have found him, that we may hold him fast unto the end. There is no
good thought arising in us, unless suggested by his preventing Grace. No nor
increasing, unless strengthened by his subsequent Grace. No nor consummate,
unless perfected by his Grace of perseverance. If I am 1 Cor. 4. 7. Jam. 1.
17. 1 Cor. 1. 3^. Psalm. 115. 1.
better then any man, it is God that makes me differ. Every good gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights. And therefore he that will
glory, let him glory in the Lord, saying with the Psalmist, not unto us O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise.

44. Having thus secured my self from giving the Will of Man a Reconciled with
Choice, which is irreconcilable with Irresistibility.
sacrilegious Liberty; I must withal provide, that I be able to answer the
Objection of the Marcionites; which Tertullian could not do, but by asserting
the liberty of the Will. Which Grace does correct, but not destroy. Grace does
strengthen, but not Object. 1. Si Deus benus and praescius mali, and potent
depellere, cur hominem lab^ passus est? Resp. liberum and sui arbit^ii and suae
potestatis invenio hominem. and s^qq.
compel. Grace does guide, but not necessitate. Grace makes able to choose
good, but not unable to refuse it. Marcion objected thus. If God is good, and
praescient of all the Evil which is to come, and withal able to prevent it, why
did he suffer mankind to fall? why did he not hold him fast by irresistible
Grace? Tertullian answered, That God made man in his own Image, and that in
nothing more lively, then in the liberty of a Will. And to that it is to which
his fall must be imputed. But (says Marcion) Man ought to have been made of
such a frame, as not to be able to fall away. Marry then (says Tertullian)
Object. 2. Homoita d^uit institui, ut non posset cadere. Resp. Ergo bonum suum
haberet (...) sibi a Deo. E^ bonus aut malus necessitate fuisset inventus, non
voluntate. Nec boni nec mali merces iure pensaretur ei. Tertull. advers. Marc.
l. 2. c. 5* 6.
Man had not been a voluntary, but a necessary Agent. (which is as much as to
say, a Man should not have been a Man.) Nor could have been a right object of
Reward and Punishment.

45. Before I venture on any rational, or Scholastical way of arguing, I must
first enlighten my self out of some clear places of Scripture. Amongst which
there is none that seems more proper, then that of S. Paul to the Philippians.
Workout your salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which works in
you, both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. He bids them work, because
God works, which they needed not have been bid to do, if God had workt after
a physical irresistible manner. That they might not be betrayed into a yawning
reliance upon their being superacted to the working out of their salvation, he
bids them work it out with fear and trembling. (as our Savior 1. Proved by
Scripture. Phil. 2. 12, 13.
bids us, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, because many shall strive, and
shall not enter.) which they needed not have done, had their salvation been
(not only certain, but withal) a necessary unavoidable thing, and so
inconsistent with choice and option. But the Apostle tells them (in the next
verse) that it is God which works in them, not only to do, but to will, and
to do; by his preventing Grace he works in them to will; by assisting Grace
he works in them to do: by neither so irresistibly, but that they must work
it out themselves too; and that not only with expectation and hope, but with
fear and trembling. God works in us to will (says the Apostle) not without,
or against, but according to the nature of that very will with which he made
us. Grace does not destroy, but establish, and strengthen, and perfect Nature.
Shall we say that we do a thing without liberty and choice, because God works
in us to will and to do? (that is) to do it by choice and option? is the
liberty lost, because it is guided and enabled to do that which is good? If I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Liberi arbitrii nos
condidit Deus. Nec ad virtutes (...) ad vitia necessitate (...). Alioqui ubi
necessitas, ibi nec damnatio, nec corona est. Hieron. contra Jovinian. l. 2.
Valet liberum arbitrium ad bona, si divinitus adjuvetur; qued fit, humili^er
petendo and faciendo. August. epist. 89. Psalm. 119. 32. Joh. 8. 32. Tertull.
loco citato.
then can I ( through him) both refuse the evil, and choose the Good. Which
would not be choice, if it were whether I would or no. And so it would be, were
I unable to resist it. (as I shall show by and by in the open confession of D^.
Twisse, whose Favorers cannot be angry with one that speaks his language.) I
can do all things through him that strengthens me, (says the Apostle) now to
strengthen, is not to necessitate. For then to strengthen would be to weaken.
Because to necessitate or compel with an irresistibility, is to vanquish, and
over-master; not to give strength, but rather to take it away. Again, our
Savior is said to tread down Satan under our feet. To what end does he tread
the Serpent down, but that we may have the freedom to trample on him? and
though he does it with his own feet, yet it is under ours. This liberty and
freedom of the regenerate will, is at once expressed and expounded in those
words of the Psalmist, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall
set my heart at liberty. To which is agreeable that of our Savior, and the
truth shall make you free. It being a great absurdity (in the opinion of
Tertullian) that a man should have his happiness forced on him by God
Almighty. So far is God from prostituting his Blessing, by such a controlling
of the will, and such an ob^ruding of the object, as makes the object
unavoidable, Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 19.
that he does not only offer and propose it to his peoples choice, but desires
them also to choose it. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you
(says God by Moses) that I have set before you Life and Death, blessing and
cursing. Therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live. But choose we
cannot, if God works in us irresistibly; as I will farther prove by Reason.

46. 2. Proved by Reason. Illud propri^ dicitur ^resistibile, cui resistere
nemo potest, quamvis vellet. Twiss. in praef. ad vin. Great.. ^. p. 31.
That is properly called irresistible, which is of such an overruling and
prevailing force, that a man cannot withstand it, although he would. (And thus
Dr. Twisse has well defined it) Upon which it follows, that to choose
irresistibly, is a contradiction in Adjecto. For it is to will a thing whether
one will or no. He that says, God works in us to choose irresistibly, does
say in effect, He so works in us, as that we cannot choose but choose. Which
is as much as to say, not only that we do, what we cannot do, but that we
therefore do it, because we cannot do it. He that cannot choose but choose,
does choose because he cannot choose. Which is as bad as to say, that the thing
is necessary, because it is impossible. To make this plain to my plainest
Reader, I will show the legality of my deduction by these degrees. First, he
that is wrought upon by God (to believe, obey, or persevere) irresistibly,
cannot possibly do otherwise (then believe, obey, or persevere.) Secondly* he
that cannot possibly do otherwise then he does, cannot possibly choose but do
what he does. Thirdly, he that cannot choose but do what he does, does clearly
do it whether he will or no. Fourthly, he that does believe, obey, or
persevere, whether he will or no, does do it by as evident undeniable
Necessity, as that by which a stone tends downward. (Which tendency of the
stone, though it is spontaneous, yet is it not voluntary, and as it is not by
violence, so it is not by choice neither.) Fifthly, he that wills to believe,
obey, or persevere, whether he will or no, does do it by a Necessity, by which
a stone tends upwards, when it is thrown. (Which tendency of the stone is so
far from voluntary, that it is not spontaneous. It is not only an irrational,
but an unnatural thing.) and besides implies a contradiction in a voluntary
Agent, which cannot take place in an involuntary stone. For to say, a man
wills to obey or believe, whether he will or no, is to say he wills it
either without his will, or against his will, or else not having a will at all.
Which is as bad as to say, that he must needs will it because he cannot any way
possible. I know not any trick imaginable to escape the odium of these
Absurdities, unless by denying the definition of irresistible. Which were not
to escape, but to commute absurdities. And not only the authority of Dr.
Twisse, but the very force of the word would cry it down. And so little is my
deduction in a capacity to be blamed, that In act^ vol^di locum non habet. In
loco citato.
Doctor Twisse says expressly of irresistibility, it has no place in the act
of willing. And though he pleads for a

Necessity which he will have to follow Gods operation upon the Ex hujusmodi
autem operatione divina existit Necessitas offect^s, cum ips^ liberate
voluntatis con sen^iens. Ibid.
Soul, yet he will have that Necessity to be no other, then what may very well
agree with the liberty of the will. So that if that Doctor, in that his
skirmish with Arminius, had not confounded a necessity with a certainty of
event, and used that word in stead of this, his Antagonist and He (in that
particular) must needs have wrangled into Friendship. For Arminius denies the
irresistible working of Grace upon the Will, and so does Dr. Twisse. Again Dr.
Twisse affirms, that the liberty of the will does agree with the working of
Grace upon the Will, and so does Arminius. And therefore I hope for no hard
usage from such as are haters of Arminius, whilst I say the same things with
them that hate him.

47. Me thinks the principal Ground of my mistakes heretofore in this
business, (if I may be allowed to pass a conjecture upon The Ground of the
opposite mistake removed.
my self) is the misapprehension of certain Texts, the cause of whose
misapprehension is the illogical confounding of two things, which though they
look like one another, are yet exceedingly different. E. G. from [ Ezekiel. 26.
27. Cant. 1. 14. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. I will cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc.
Draw me, we will run after thee. Whosoever is born of God cannot sin, because
he is born of God, and the like] many conclude that Gods working upon the wills
of his Elect, is by such a physical immediate immutation of their wills, as does
not only produce a certain, but a necessary effect. And being forgetful (rather
then ignorant) to distinguish necessity from certainty of events, they call
that necessary which is but certain and infallible, and so (through have or
inadvertency) they swallow down the Error of irresistible Grace; using the word
irresistible in stead of efficacious. And this is a second inadvertency
begotten of the first; as commonly one error loves to draw on another. Now
because a fallacy undiscerned in the praemises cannot possibly be discovered by
gazing only on the Conclusion, (just as an error in the first Concoction is
hardly mended in the second) I must mark out the difference betwixt infallible
and necessary, before I can usefully By rightly distinguishing betwixt
Infallible and Necessary.
distinguish betwixt effectual and irresistible.

48. Infallible properly is that, that cannot err, or be deceived. That is
properly Necessary, which cannot but be. The first relates to the perfection of
the Knowledge of God, but the second to the Almightinesse of his will. The
first is properly applied unto the object of God's foresight, (and though it is
otherwise used, yet it is by such a Catechresis, as I humbly conceive to be a
stone of stumbling.) But the second more precisely unto the object of his
Decree. The first is consistent with those contingent events, to which the
second is Diametrically opposed. E. G. That I am now writing is but contingent,
because I do it upon choice. Yet Gods foreknowledge of this my writing from all
Eternity did infer that this my writing would infallibly come to pass. This
event is contingent, for I can choose; but yet infallible, for God cannot err.
This contingent therefore does infallibly come to pass, not by way of a
consequent, but by way of consequence. My writing being not the effect, but the
object only of God's Omniscience. Which is, in order, before the Act. God
foresees a contingent will contingently come to pass, and therefore we infer
it will infallibly come to pass, because he foresees it who is infallible. So
that his praescience is a consequent of the thing's coming to pass; and its
infallibility of coming to pass is inferred from his praescience only by way
of consequence. It is one thing to follow as the effect of a Cause, in order of
Nature; and quite another, to follow as the sequel of an Antecedent, in way of
Argumentation. The short and plain upshot of all is this. The precious vessels
of Election do very certainly and infallibly persevere unto the end, and that
by reason of God's omniscience which cannot be deceived; but not of necessity
and irresistibly, by reason of his omnipotence which cannot be frustrate nor
defeated. What God foresees shall come to pass shall infallibly come to pass,
and that because he cannot err who is omniscient. (On the other side) what God
decrees shall come to pass must come to pass of necessity, because he cannot
be resisted who is omnipotent.

49. Hence it is easy to distinguish betwixt the other two things, Betwixt
sufficient, effectual, and unresistible.
which have been so often, and so unhappily confounded; I mean sufficient,
effectual, and irresistible, applied to Grace. 1 Sufficient Grace is that,
which possibly may produce that effect for which it is given. 2 Effectual is
that, which certainly will. 3 Irresistible is that, which necessarily must.
That which is irresistible does carry away its object to what it pleases, like
a mighty Torrent, by indisputable force, malgre the greatest opposition that
can be made, and therefore cannot take place in the elections of the will,
which cease to elect after the nature of a will, in case it be made to do any
thing whether it will or no. (as has already been showed from no less a
concession then that of Doctor Twisse.) But that which is only effectual is
quite another thing, and does prevail upon the will not ineluctably, but
infallibly. It does so strongly and effectually incline the will, at such
critical opportunities, and by such congruous means, as that the will does very
certainly and undoubtedly assent. But it does not so irresistibly and
compulsively necessitate, as to take away the freedom and possibility of
assenting, by making it do what it does, even whether it will or no.

50. I discern the Truth of this distinction with greater ease, by having
always in my prospect the very great difference betwixt Betwixt action in
general, and volition in particular. Betwixt taking and choosing.
the generical notion of acting or taking, and the specifical notion of willing
or choosing. God indeed (if it please him) can by his absolute power over his
Creature, make him act this thing, or take that thing, by ineluctable
Necessity, and whether he will or no. But then that acting is not volition, and
that taking is not choice. For the very word choice cannot be apprehended but
it must carry along with it a sound of freedom. Optio must be optimorum, and
so duorum at least. It is of two things or more, that we choose the best,
whether in reality, or in appearance. And this liberty of the will, by which we
choose, being acknowledged on all sides, (as well by Mr. Perkins and Dr.
Twisse, as by Bellarmine and Arminius, as every man knows that has but read
and compared them) that famous (...) of a twofold Necessity, the one of
coaction, and the other of infallibility, (being built upon a manifest and
gross mistake both of the word Necessity, and the word Infallibility,) seems
to me to be serviceable to no other end, then to cover a wound, which it is
impossible to cure. But admit of that distinction of a twofold Necessity, or
admit a Necessity be twentifold, yet still it cease not to have the nature of
a Necessity. If it is absolutely Necessary that I must go to London, it does
not cease to be Necessity, because I am drawn rather then driven. Coaction and
infallibility, if they do both imply an absolute and peremptory Necessity, (and
so by consequence an irresistibility, and so by consequence are opposed to the
elective faculty of the Will,) it is no matter how they differ in their
syllables and their sounds. Shall I declare my Judgment then, (although in
weakness, yet in sincerity) how freewill is necessary to the choosing of good,
to which, without Grace, it is altogether insufficient? My judgment is, that
it is necessary, not as a Cause, but as a Condition. Not as that, by virtue of
which, we can do any thing that good is; but as that, without which, we cannot
choose it. God's Grace alone is the cause of the good, but man's will is as
really the instrument of the choice. We can do good, as God's Engines, without
a will; and so did Balaams Ass without a Reason. But we cannot choose good,
without a freewill, as that Ass could not possibly understand what she spoke,
without a Ratiocination. This seems to me to be as plain as the light. And now
I speak of the light, (if my Reader please) by that light I will make it plain.
We know the Sun is the fountain or Cause of light. And light the only means by
which we see. But yet the opening of the Eyelid is a necessary condition,
because if I wink, I am dark at noon. And if my Eyelid is held open by such a
power as I cannot resist, my Eye in that case cannot choose but see, and
therefore cannot choose to see. My sight may be with delectation, but not
properly with that which is called election. Thus if a man be never so much
delighted in doing good, but (by reason of necessity) cannot possibly but do
it, it is God that chooses that good, and the man does only act it. I say God
chooses, by a catachrestical way of speaking, merely the better to show my
thoughts. For though God did choose to make a world, and one world, because it
was in his power to have made many worlds, or none at all; yet I conceive it
absurd, to say that God did choose to be good, or that he chooses to do good,
(in opposition to evil) because he is good, and does good by an absolute
necessity; he cannot choose to be, or to do, any otherwise. And so he loves,
but does not choose it. For if that were true speaking, it would be as true
speaking to say, that God does will his being and doing good whether he will or
no; or that he cannot choose but choose. Which is sure very childish untoward
speaking. Only he chooses to enable us to do it, because he can choose,
whether he will so enable us, or not. When he gives us his Grace, he has the
power to withhold it; when he continues his Grace, he has the power to
withdraw it; therefore does he choose both to give and to continue it. The
goodness of his essence is not arbitrary and elective, but spontaneous and
natural. Whereas the goodness of his effects in all his Creatures is not
naturally necessary in respect of him, but arbitrary and elective, merely
depending upon his choice and pleasure. For he gave us our goodness when we
would, and may take it away when he pleases. To understand this the better,
and to hold it the faster in my understanding,

51. I must carefully distinguish betwixt spontaneum (that which is of its own
accord) and voluntarium, (that which is freely and Betwixt voluntary and
spontaneous.
upon choice.) The first is agreeable to inanimate creatures, the second only
to rational. That is properly opposed to violence, but reconcilable with
necessity, to which this is opposed. E. G. A stone tends downwards by a
natural, and necessary, and spontaneous motion. It tends downwards of
necessity, because it cannot but do so. And yet spontaneously, because it does
it without violence, and of its own accord. But yet that motion is not
voluntary, nor does the stone choose that kind of tendency; because it could
not refuse it, as not being furnished with the liberty of a will. Thus when I
made my entrance out of the womb into the world, I did not choose to go
forwards, because I had not the power to stay behind. I did it as a
spontaneous, not as a voluntary Agent. But now that I am capable either of
virtue, or of vice, and do pursue the one, in refusal of the other, I do it not
only in a spontaneous, but in a voluntary manner. We have the perfect character
of a voluntary Agent in that admirable (...) of the Son of Syrach. The Lord
left man in the Ecclesiasticus 15 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
hand of his Counsel; if thou will, to keep the Commandments. He has set fire
and water before thee; stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou will. Before
man is life and death, and whether him likes shall be given him. I dare not
(like Marcion) be more inquisitive, why God made man with such a freedom of
willing or nilling, then why he made the hand with those two Muscles, whereof
the one does move to the taking of a thing, and the other, to the throwing of
it away.

52. Having spoken all this in order to the clearing of resistibility A result
of the whole in two Examples*
of the working of Grace in God's Elect, I think I cannot do better then to
apply my reasoning to two examples (at least as much of it as shall be
needful) whereof one must be the Protoplast before his Fall, and the other
must be one of his posterity whom we are very well assured to have been one of
God's Elect. Adam was made in a state of Innocence, and (God not requiring any
impossibilities, as brick without straw) had grace enough to have performed a
most adaequate obedi^nce to God's Command. Which if he had not resisted, how
could he have sinned? and if that measure of Grace was lessened before he sinned,
how was the taking away of Grace any punishment of his Fall? or how was he then
in the state of innocence? If he was not, then was he sinful before he sinned.
God does not take away his Grace, unless to punish the abuse of it. But Adam
did not abuse it before he sinned; and by our Savior's Rule [ To him Mar. 25.
2^.
that has shall be given] God would rather have given him more, then have
taken away any. From whence it follows, that though the working of Grace in
the heart of Adam was so strong and so perfect, as to enable him to stand, and
that in no less then ^ state of Innocence, yet was it also so resistible, as
to suffer him to fall, and that into no less then a state of perdition. And
although he had the favor to be raised again in some measure, yet it was not
to that Innocence from whence he fell. So that as to his first Covenant, and
his first pitch of perfection, his Fall was not only total, but final too. And
indeed I would know, why our Savior has told us, that from him that has not
shall be taken away even that which he has, if it is not for this reason,
because he has lavisht out his talent, and has resisted that power of doing
well which was offered him. Sure there is no better arguing then ab actu ad
potentiam. Man can resist, because he does. And I may wonder, as well as
Grotius, why such men are not confuted by their own experience, who say that
Grace in the elect is unresistible, unless they will deny themselves to be of
the number of the elect. David has Grace to have done better then he did in
the double matter of Uriah, but he resisted it with a witness, and that for
some months together. He was a vessel of election; how then did he resist the
Grace of God, so as to fall into those damnable and killing sins, in which, if
he had been snatched away, he had perished irreversibly? it was not without
Grace, (for he was one of the Elect) nor by its concurrence, (for God was not
guilty) it was therefore against the working and means of Grace. Indeed if God
did his utmost, such as David could never sin. Or if they could, it would argue
God to be conquered either by man, or Devil. Unless we should say, that such
omnipotent Grace does come, and go, and come again, after the measure that God
is willing a man should sin and repent, and sin again. And therefore it is
evident, that God Almighty, in his Elect, does show the congruous efficacious
Power, but not the irresistibility and Almightinesse of his Grace. Sure David
(and Solomon) did fall from Grace, by resisting it, in both acceptions of the
word Grace; (as it is taken for gracious living, and as it is taken for the
favor of God) and this invincibly conclusible even from that very answer which
is wont to be alleged for irresistibility. For they say that God had decreed
the Repentance and return of David, and that therefore he could not die, until
he had repented. Which is spoken by them for this reason, because if David had
not repented, he must have perished. Which yet he could not have done, if he had
continued in the state of Grace.

53. If against this it is excepted, That though a vessel of Election may fall
damnably from Grace, yet he cannot finally, this is unworthy And that cleared
from an exception.
for a Sch^lar to speak, or hear; for who ever was so silly, as to say or
think, that the precious vessels of Election can fall away finally? this is not
answering the argument, but forsaking the Question. The Question is, whether
the Grace of God does work irresistibly in the Elect? not, whether or no it
brings them to a most certain and infallible degree of bliss. (For they that
dispute against the first, affirm the second,) Grace is proved to be resistible
in Gods Elect by such examples as David. And to that it is answered, he could
not so resist as to fall away finally. Which is first a skipping from the first
Question to the second, and secondly, it is to say (what no man living does
gainsay) That such as persevere unto the end can never fall away finally. A
gross identical proposition, which does not only betray the weakness of that
opinion which it asserteth, but does establish the Truth of this very cause
which I am pleading. For it confesses, that Grace is resistible, and only
denies that it is finally resisted. David was able to resist it, but he did not
resist it unto the end. And every technical Grammarian can distinguish the Act
which is implied in the Participle, from the Aptitude which is couched in the
Adjective in bilis. But (to hasten toward the conclusion of my Readers
sufferings) there is also a final as well as total resisting of such a Grace as
is sufficient for the attainment of Glory. For (not to speak of those men who
resisted and sinned against all the means that could be used, Isa. 5. 4. and
who always resisted the holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. and who would not be gathered,
after never so many essays, Mat. 23. 37.) how many Christian professors are now
in Hell, who when they were Infants were fit and suitable for Heaven? Shall not
I spare Jonah 4. 11.
Nineveh, in which are above 120000 souls, which cannot distinguish betwixt the
right hand and the left? Ion. 4. 11. God speaks there of Heathen Infants,
toward whom his Bowels did yearn within him, and that upon the Impendence of
but a temporal destruction. But I speak here of Infants born and baptized into
a membership of the Church. How many are there of such who in their harmless
Nonage were babes of Grace, and yet have outlived their Innocence, so as at
last to be transformed into vessels of wrath? I will shut up this Paragraph
with the words of Tertullian. Saul was turned into Saulem tam Dei Spiritus
vertit in Prophetam, quam and malus spiritus postea in Apostatam. Iudam
aliquandiu cum electis deputatum postea Diabolus intravit. Tertul. de Anima. c.
11.
a Prophet by the Spirit of holiness, as well as into an Apostate by the
spirit of uncleanness. And the Devil entered into Judas, who for some time
together had been deputed with the elect. And with the saying of S. Augustine,
Si regeneratus and justificatu^ in ^alam vitam sua voluntate relabitu^, certo
is non potest dicere, Non accepi, quia acceptam gratiam Dei suo in malum
arbitrio libero amisit. Aug. de Great and Correp. c. 6. etc. 9.
That if the regenerate and justified shall fall away into a wicked course of
living by his own will and pleasure, he cannot say, I have not received,
because he has wilfully lost that Grace of God which he had received, by that
will of his which was at liberty to sin. And how exactly that Father does speak
my sense of this business, I leave it for any one to judge who shall consult
him De praed. Sanct. l. 1. c. 14. De bono Persev. l. 2. c. 1. and 6. and l. 2.
c. 8. and 13. And I would very fain know, whether the lost Groat, the lost
Sheep, and the prodigal Son, do not signify (in our Saviors Parables) that a
true believer may be lost, and being lost may be found, and again become a true
believer. Which is as much as I desire to prove the thing under consideration.

CHAP. V.
54. HAving evinced to my self (and that is all that I pretend to) First, that
my will of it self is inclinable to The Decree of Election conditional and
respective.
evil; and that, secondly, of it self it is not inclinable to good; and that,
thirdly, it is inclined by the singular and special operation of Grace, to the
refusing of evil, and to the choosing of good, and that therefore Qua gratia
non nova voluntas creatur, neque invita voluntas cogitur, sed infirma sanatur,
depravata corrigitur, and ex mala in bonam convertitur, ac interiore quodam
modo tra^itur, ut ex nol^nte volens effi^iatur, and Divinae vocationi libenter
consentiat, etc. August. de great. and lib. arb. ad Valent. c. 13.
in the fourth place, that singular Grace does not work so irresistibly as to
compel an unwilling will, but yet so strongly as to heal a sick one; not so
necessitating the will of God's elect, as that inevitably it must, but yet so
powerfully persuading, as that it certainly will, both believe and obey, and
after repentance persevere unto the end; I should in civility to my Reader
conclude his Trouble, if I were sure that some men Sicut praf^it, praedestinat,
and propterea prae* destinat, quia quale futurum sit, praescit. Mala tantum
prae* s^it, and non praedestinat. Aug. in Resp. ad calum. Pelag. sub initium l*
6. Hypognostic^n.
would not call it Tergiversation; and if I were not obliged by those papers,
which have been so frequently, s^ falsely (that I may not say so maliciously)
transcribed, and are threatened to be laid very publicly to my charge, (and
which I plead in the defense of this mine own publication, which I should never
have ch^sen upon such a subject, as I have least of all studied, and am least
delighted in of any other) to remonstrate the utmost of what I think in these
matters. For I do steadfastly believe (what I also asserted in that extemporary
Discourse, which was the innocent cause of this unacceptable effect) That* Gods
Decree of Election from all eternity, was not absolute and irrespective, but in
respect unto, and in praescience of some qualification, without which no man is
the proper object of such Decree. And this I prove to my self from these ways
of Reasoning.

55. First, I consider with my self, that there is no salvation but only to
such, as are found to be in Christ Jesus, in the day of Death and of Judgment.
Which no man living can be, unless Proved by reason, from its being respective
of our being in Christ, and of the conditions by which we are so.
he be qualified with such conditions, as without which it is impossible to be
so found; (such as are Faith, and Obedience, and Repentance, after sin,
bringing forth such fruits as are worthy of Repentance, and perseverance in
weldoing unto the end.) That God will save none but such, is all men's
Confession. And that he saves none but such whom he decrees to save, is every
whit as plain. Therefore none but such are the object of such Decree. For if he
decreed to save any without regard or respect to their being such, he might
actually save them without regard or respect to their being such. Because
whatsoever is justly decreed, may be justly executed as it is decreed. But it
is granted on all sides (as I suppose) that God will save none except such as
are found to be in Christ with the aforesaid qualifications; and therefore it
should be agreed on all sides, that he decreed to save none but such as they.
And what is that but a respective and conditional Decree? made in intuition of
our being in Christ, and of our being so qualified to be in Christ? So that
although our election is not of works, but of him that calls, yet good works
are required as a necessary condition, though utterly unworthy to be a cause of
our election. Nor can it be without respect to the condition of the Covenant,
that the Covenant is made, and the promise decreed to be fulfilled.

56. Secondly, I consider, that the Decree of the Father to send the Son to be
a second Adam, was in respect and regard to the backesliding of the first Adam.
Without which it was impossible that the Son of God should have been sent to be
the Savior of the world. And the decree of God Almighty to save the first
Adam, Ephesians. 1. 4, 6. Romans 8. 39. 1 Cor. 5. 15.
was in regard of and respect to the meritoriousness of the second Adam. For
God adopteth never a child, nor does acknowledge him for his own, so as to
give him eternal life, unless it be for the sake of his only begotten Son.
First God pitied a woeful world, then he loved what be pitied, next he gave his
own Son to save what he loved, and upon the condition of believing in his Son,
he gave it a promise of eternal life. For so believing is interposed betwixt
love and life, in the 3. of S. John verse. 26. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life. From this Text it appears, that God loved the
world before he gave his Son to it; for therefore gave he his Son, because he
loved it. But it was not a love by which he loved it to life everlasting; for
with such love he only loved it in his Son. And the world is not capable of
such a love without the condition of believing. It was therefore in praescience
of our believing in Christ, that God elected us to life eternal. For Christ is
not only the means, (as some affirm) but the meritorious cause, and the Head of
our Election. Christ was foreknown, 1 Pet. 1. 2. and we in him, Romans 8. 29.
Christ was praedestin'd, and we by him, Ephesians. 1. 5.

57. Thirdly, I consider, that there must be a Difference before there can be
an Election. Love indeed is an act of favor, And from the nature of Election.
(...) Oecum. apud Episc. Wint. de Artic. Lam. Iud.
but Election is properly an act of Judgment; a preferring of the better
before the worse. They that say God Elected such a number of men without the
least intuition of their qualifications by which they are differenced from the
reprobated crew, do speak illogically (to say no worse.) how much safer is it
to say, That because such men as are in Christ by Faith are better then such as
are out of Christ by Infidelity, therefore those are taken, and these are left?
Nor does this derogate from God, or arrogate to man, to say, he chooses his
own gifts, any more then it does, to say, he crowns them. For God does give us
the advantage of our being in Christ, as well as choose us for that advantage.
First he gives us his Son, next he gives us his Grace whereby to enable us to
believe in his Son, and so believing he does elect us. So that here is no
matter for man to boast on; he having nothing which he has not received, no
not so much as his (...) It is God that makes the difference, as well as God
that chooses. And it seems this very argument from the Nature and Use of the
word Election, did prevail with S. Austin and Oecumenius. S. Austin says
expressly, that Justification precedeth Election; Non ta^en Electio praecedit
Iustificationem, sed Electionem Iustificatio. Nemo enim eligitur, nisi jam
distans ab illo qui rejicitur. Unde quod dictum est, Quia el^get nos Deus an^e
mundi constitutionem, non video quomodo sit dicendum nisi praesc^entia. August.
ad Simpl. 1. 2.
and his reason is, because no man is elected unless he differ from him that
is rejected.

58. Fourthly, I consider, that the whole Tenor of the Scriptures, Proved by
Scripture.
in the Judgment of all the Fathers, who are best able to understand them,
teaches no other Praedestination, then in, and through Christ, which is
respective and conditional. First the Scripture gives us none but conditional
promises, such as, If any man keep my saying, he shall never taste Joh. 8. 51.
Gal. 6. 7, 9. Rev. 3. 20.
Death. Whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap. And we shall reap if we
faint not. If any man will hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, etc. Nay even the very Texts which are wont to be urged for irrespective
Election do seem very precisely to evince the contrary. For when God is said to
praedestine according to his good pleasure Ephesians. 4. 9.
which he had purposed in himself, the word (...) rendered good pleasure, does
not signify the absoluteness, but the respectivenesse of his will. For it
relates to something in which God is well pleased, and that is Christ. It
being impossible for God to please himself with mankind, or for men to be
acceptable and well pleasing to God, any otherwise then in him, of whom it was
said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Besides, all those
Scriptures which do^ teach universal Grace, and Redemption, (which I suppose
has been proved in the prosecution of my first Principle) do seem to me most
clearly to infer a respective and conditional Election. For if it is true,
that Christ did offer up himself, not only sufficiently, but intentionally for
all; if he did earnestly desire that every one would come in, upon the
preaching of his Word, and receive the benefit of his Death and Passion; if his
warnings were not in jest, and his invitations serious; if [ depart from me ye
cursed] was therefore foretold, that every one might beware and not obtrude
himself upon that sentence; if he is unwilling that any one should be caught in
the Serpents snare, who shows to all (without exception) a certain way to
escape; if (as S. Austin speaks) he is desirous not to strike, who bids us look
to our posture, and stand upon our Guard; if (as S. Austin speaks again) he
Aug. in Sermon. 28. de Sanct. Idem contr^ 2 epist. Pelag. l 3. c. 2. Idem de sp.
and lit. ad Marcell. c. 33.
shows his power to punish none but only those that refuse his Mercy; and would
not damn any one without respect to sin, who gave his own Son to die for all;
then his refusing of the Goats in respect of that which makes them differ from
Sheep, infers his Election of the sheep, in respect of that which makes them
differ from Goats. And I have made the more haste to make this Inference,
because as the respectivenesse of Election needs not otherwise to be proved
then by the respectivenesse of Reprobation; so they are both taken for granted,
upon the supposition of Christ's having dyed not only sufficiently, but
intentionally for all. Toward which (having discoursed so largely of it
already) I will only offer this one consideration which meets my pen as I am
writing, and even obtrudes it self upon me to be delivered. It is briefly this.
That since our Savior upon the Cross, did very heartily pray, even for those
very homicides, and parricides, and Deicides that Killed him, we have no reason
but to believe, That he laid down his life even for them that took it away; and
that he dyed for all for whom he prayed. And yet we reading of their Murders,
but not of their Repentance, I should be loath to tell my people, that those
crucifying wretches, were precious vessels of Election, (in compliance with
that opinion, that Christ died only for the Elect) lest they should comfort up
themselves in the most ^rimson sins that can be named (like some in the world)
as well consisting with their pretensions to the Kingdom of Heaven. And yet in
my shallow Judgment, (which because it is shallow, I do submit to those of
deeper and profounder reach, how dogmatically soever I may seem to have spoken
in many places of this Discourse) I say in my shallow Judgment, Christ dyed
for all for whom he prayed; and he prayed for them that cursed themselves. His
blood be upon us (said they) and yet (said he) Father forgive them. He made his
Murderers Execration become his prayer. He took the poison out of their Curse,
and made it wholesome for them. He wished, as well as they, that his blood might
be both upon them and upon their children; but in his own most merciful, not in
their barbarous and cruel sense; for they meant the guilt, He the benefit of
his blood; and would have it ^ight on them, not to accuse, but cleanse them.
And yet I dare not affirm, that they were all a portion of God's Elect.

59. Lastly, I consider, that the main stream of the Fathers And by Antiquity,
from the concessions of Anti remonstrants.
does run this way. And not to trouble my Reader with such a Catalogue of
particulars, as I gave in before, for a Conditional Reprobation, (which yet I
think were very easy upon a very small warning) I will content my self at
present to Patres hic nullo modo audiendi, qui ad praevisionem hoc referunt.
Beza in Romans 11. 2. edit. 2.
prove what I say from the confessions of Beza, and Doctor Twisse. First Beza
in his Comment upon Romans 11. 2. rejects the Judgment of the Fathers, because
they are not (as he would have them) for the absolute, irrespective,
unconditional way. And Dr. Twisse confesses, that all the Ancients, before S.
Austin, did place the object of God's Election in Twiss. in Vin. Gr. l. 1.
part. 1. Digr. 8. sect. 4. p. 110.
Fide praevisa. At which S. Austin was so far from being any way displeased, as
that (with very great reverence to their Authority) he made it appear to be an
innocent and harmless Tenent. He affirmed that all the Fathers, who lived
August. de bono persever. c. 19. and 20. Twiss. loco citato.
before himself, agreed in this, That the Grace of God is not prevented by
humane merits. Which one profession he thought sufficient for the asserting of
the free Grace of the Divine praedestination. To which saying of S. Austin,
because I find that Dr. Twisse does very readily subscribe; I ought in reason
to be secured from any very hard censure, because I am not an affirmer of
humane merits, much less do I place them in a precedence to Grace.

60. I conclude with a desire of so much liberty of conscience, The Conclusion.
as to believe with S. Paul, That God is a respecter, not of Romans 2. 11.
Persons, but of Verse. 14.
Works. That my sins are perfectly and entirely mine own. And that if I do any
thing that is good, it is not I that do it, but the Grace of God that is in me.
Yet so, as that I can do all things through him that strengthens 1 Cor. 15. 10.
me. And who does so strengthen as that I may do them, but not so force me as
that I must. In this, and every other thing, I have been long since taught by
Vincentius Lirinensis, (whom I shall ever observe to the utmost of my
Discretion)* To opine with the most, and most Judicious, rather then with the
fewest, and least discerning. Opinionastrete is a fault, but Fallibility is
none. If my Teachers are in the right, they have knowledge enough to make me
moderately instructed; if they are any where in the wrong, they have authority
enough to make me pardonably erroneous; if I have not perspicacity to
comprehend them as they deserve, it seems they have Depths enough to prove, I
am Invincibly ignorant.

The End.
ERRATA'S.
Page 2. lin. 19. read extemporary Discourse, p. 10. l. 30. r. and does so
move, p. 11. l. 10. dele upon, l. 12. for of r. to mine own, p. 17. l. 15. f.
sure r. here. p. 19. l. 8. f. preposition r. proposition, l. 25. after look
add for, p. 21. l. 19. f. unworthy r. worthy, p. 23. l. 4. after ret^rn to
add that, p. 24. l. 25. f. Joh. 4. r. Joh. 8, p. 33. l. 18. after we add may,
p. 44. l. ult. r. Gallorum, p. 45. l. 4. after id. r. ibid. p. 53. l. 30. f.
aequivocable r. aequivocal, p. 60. l. 19. f. Cant. 1. 14. r. Cant. 1. 4. l. 29.
f. efficacious* r. effectual, p. 61. l. 4. f. Catechresis r. Catachresis, p.
71. l. 5. f. eleget ^ elegit.


