THE Revengeful Queen.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, near the
Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleetstreet.
PYrrhus King of Epirus, a Tragedy; Acted at the New Theater in Lincoln's- Inn
Fields, By His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Hopkins.

Love's a Jest, a Comedy, etc. Written by Mr. Motteux.

A Plot and no Plot, a Comedy; as it was Acted at the Theater Royal in
Drury Lane. Written by Mr. Dennis.

The Novelty, Every Act a Play; Being a short Pastoral, Comedy, Masque,
Tragedy, and Farce, after the Italian manner; as it was Acted at the New
Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. Written by Mr. Motteux.

The Intrigues of Versailles, or, a Jilt in all her Humors, a Comedy; Acted at
the Theater in Little Lincoln's- Inn-Fields.

The Provoked Wife, a Comedy; as it is Acted at the New Theater in Lincoln's-
Inn-Fields.

Twenty Five Select Allusions, to several places of Horace, Martial, Anacreon,
and Petronius Arbiter. Written by Mr. Dilke.

The Pretenders, or the Town Unmasked, Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincoln's- Inn-Fields, By His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Dilke.

THE Revengeful Queen: A TRAGEDY. As it was ACTED at the Theater Royal, BY His
MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by WILLIAM PHILIPS, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for P. Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, near the
Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street, School.

To His GRACE The Duke of ORMOND, etc.
IT is an old Observation that one Misfortune always attends another. I have
sufficiently experimented it; and I may as justly say the same thing of my
folly, in the Conduct of my Life, and in what relates to this Play. It was
folly in me to Write at all, greater to Write no better, and chiefly to Print
what I have Writ. If in any thing I have acted with Conduct and Prudence, it is
in begging Protection for this from your Grace, who are so able to shield both
this and its Author from their Enemies. And indeed, I may say it is natural in
me, to claim this from you; because your Family have vouchsafed to be the
Patrons of mine for several Generations. Nor should I doubt your proving so to
me, since you are replete with Goodness, and inherit all the Virtues of your
Ancestors, had I the least Pretense to say so of my self; but I can only boast
the same Zeal and Affection for your Service and Interests.

I perceive that the Characters of Alboino and Rosamund are not agreeable to
the present Taste of the Town; the best defense I can make is, that I have
followed the truth of the Story, as any one will find, who will take the Pains
to read it in the Fourth or Fifth Page of Machiavel's History of Florence:
There are, without doubt, other faults in it, I wish, those who have the Wit to
observe them, would have the Candor to inform me of them, that if ever I am
Idle enough to write again, I might endeavor to avoid them: And though this
should abound with more, yet I fancy, there are many in this Town, who will
have good or ill Nature enough to acknowledge, there are great Allowances to be
made to a Man's first Play, and to a Man of Ireland.

A considerable time after this was Writ, I was informed, That Sir William
Davenant had made a Play on the same Story; I knew it not before, nor have I
yet seen it: It was very unhappy for me to happen on the same Subject with so
Ingenious a Person; I suppose no one will think me designedly guilty of such
Confidence; that is a Vice, I hope I shall never be justly taxed with; and yet
I have now insensibly slid into it; for it does not argue greater assurance in
one so weak as I am, to write after him, than to write to you. And therefore
though I allow the Errors the Critics may please to find in this Trifle, and
though I slight no one's Opinion or Censures; yet they must excuse me, if I
declare, I dread not those so much, as that your Grace will not Pardon this
Presumption in,

May it Please your Grace, Your Grace's most Obedient and most Faithful
Servant, WILL. PHILIPS.

PROLOGUE.
AS a Pale Virgin coyly does refuse,
To grant the Favor which she longs to lose;
Faintly contending, that she may remove
The actual Consummation of her Love;
Fain would she have her Dreams unridled to her,
Yet bashfully resists him, that would show her:
Seems to desire no farther Prosecution,
Yet wishes for the Hour of Execution;
At length she understands the full Intent,
Partly by Rape, and partly by Consent.
So this Day's Author between Hope and Fear,
Hopes to succeed, yet trembles to appear.
He struggled long against his Muse's force,
(Jades are more headstrong, than a Well-bred Horse)
His Phillis first, by Songs, he tried to move,
Two cursed Diseases, Poetry and Love!
And having once given loose to her dull Rage,
She now has Impudence to mount the Stage.
Just so the Nymph, no more by Honor awed,
She turns Pit-Whore, then Gallery, then Bawd.
Too like are Poets to a common Whore,
As being much despised, and very Poor.
No better Evidence can I Am sure be found,
Where there are some kind Masks, where Wits abound.
How happy were it would both leave off in time!
Scribbling and Loving quit, while in their Prime.
But being pleased at first, they still go on,
And never leave, till they are both undone.
Till one is swing'd, and till the other's damned.
Oh Jove avert from both what I have named!
Dramatis Personae.
Men,
Alboino, King of Lombards, very Brave, but Rash, Opinionated and Cruel.
Aistolfus, His General. Desiderio, His Friend, in Love with Angellina.
Almachild, A general Admirer, very Rich, Dissembling, Cowardly. Odoacre,
Treacherous and Splenetick. Avaro, a Covetous, Rich, Old Fellow. Clefi, his
Son. Longinus, The Roman Exarch. A Roman Ambassador.
Women,
Rosamund, the Queen, Haughty, Proud, Revengeful. Cleanthe, one of her
Attendants, in Love with Almachild. Angellina, Avaro's Daughter, Virtuous and
Discreet, privately in Love with Desiderio. Flora, Odoacre's Daughter,
Affected, Proud, Mercinary, Jiltish.
Guards and Attendants.

THE Revengeful Queen.
ACT. I.
SCENE Verona, An Antichamber. Enter Alboino, followed by a Roman Ambassador,
Aistolfus, Desiderio, and Guards. Alb. HOW has Longinus dared to offer this
Affront?
Have I, by any Action of my Life,
Done ought, which should encourage him to this?
Ha'nt I, by Deeds surpassing all Belief,
By steadfast Honor, and by noble Daring
Purchased a Crown, and many Victories?
And shall I, for a haughty, bloodless Summons,
Shamefully sully, poorly abandon all?

Romans Emb. Think not, that in contempt of you, I Am sent;
All own you brave; Longinus knows you so:
And in Regard to that, would not your Ruin.
For can your single Valor, or your Arms
Prevail against the dreaded Roman Power?
Besides the Offers I have brought are such,
That any other gladly would accept.

Alb. Accept! Look here, my worthy Soldier,
Who in the Heat of Battle can advise;
[To Aistolfus. Who wisely acts, when Fear, as well as Death,
Prevents the trembling Coward's shameful Flight,
And roots him to the Earth.
My temperate, bold Friend, learn thou his Errand,
Then judge, if I should tamely hearken to it.

Aist. Sure Alboino so well is known, that none
Dare rashly strive to injure his Renown.

Alb. Yes, spite of my Fame, Virtue, Glory, all,
Spite of the Conquests which these Arms have won;
Though this Place (impregnable of it self)
Is by an Army backed, flushed with Success,
And headed by the Man, whom Victory
Attends, whom Fortune follows as his Slave;
Yet rash Longinus, the Roman Viceroy,
Sends here his Envoy to demand this Town,
And by Recital of his Master's Titles,
Thinks to awe me to a tame Surrender.
Gods! that the Man, who singly in the Field
Shuns me, as the dared Lark, the towering Hawk,
Should yet nourish such presumptuous Hopes;
Because he has a mighty Crowd of Slaves,
Who thrust themselves between cold Death and Him.
While He, ghastly and pale behind his Troops,
Shrinks at my Blows, he at a Distance sees.

Romans Emb. Since you refuse to hearken to our Terms,
A little time will show, how much you wrong
Not brave Longinus only, but your self.
Since we by friendly Offers cannot prevail,
We must use Force, and that can hardly fail.

Alb. It Is Force indeed must make Alboino stoop.
Not Jove's Command, without his Thunder too
Should bend my stubborn Mind from this Resolve;
That to the utmost I Will defend this Crown,
Which by my single Valor I have gained.

Desid. Caesar secure in Africa may Command
His Soldiers on such desperate Attempts.
The Blows we give cannot reach so far; he is safe;
And therefore slights how many Thousands fall
Only to glut his mad, ambitious Mind.

Aist. Princes should scorn to owe the Crowns which they possess
To any other Merit but their own.
And not, when Glory calls them to the Field,
Commit their Armies to another's Charge,
And only serve to be his Councellor.

Romans Emb. It is Unjust thus to degrade --

Alb. No more.
It Is in requital of your Thoughts of us.
Go, tell Longinus, that this happy Day
I Yearly Celebrate, in Memory
That on this Day, I fought, and won this Crown.
Nor shall his vain Attempts obstruct our Mirth.
While he for Business and for War takes Care,
I, straight for splendid Triumphs will prepare.

[ Exit Alb. and Embass. severally. Manent Aistolfus and Desiderio. Aist. Well
Desiderio, how relish you this?
You hear we shall have Business now again.
This base corrupting Peace is at an End,
War, and it is chief God our Prince, now once more
Summon us out to Glory and to Arms.

Desid. I thought to my General I had been known
So well, it might have spared that Question.

Aist. Mistake me not, my Gallant Friend, I know
There is so much Fire lodged within thy Breast,
That it requires an Alloy of Years
To temper thy youthful, boiling Spirit.
But Peace has spread its ill Effects on you;
And though she cannot win thee to her Side,
She would rebate thy eagerness to War;
And makes a Woman Pimp to her Designs,
Thou art a Soldier, but a Lover too.

Desid. It Is true, Cupid has shot a sharp and bearded Dart
Into my Breast fixed and rooted here't lies.
We Soldiers are not moved with every Face,
Like the vain, giddy Courtiers of the Age.
It Is hard to make a Conquest over our Hearts,
But that once gained, it is easily preserved.
As Metals which require the longest time
To melt them down, remain the longest warm.

Aist. How comes this God never had a Dart for me?
Have War and Business frighted him away?
Till thou, my Friend, were grown his Votary
I own, I always looked on Love to be
The Effect of Idleness and pampered Luxury.

Desid. Have you forgot, when from the War returned,
That tedious Bloody War, which won this Crown.
Your Spirits were by Famine almost sunk:
Your Blood was so exhausted by your Wounds,
That you had scarce enough to nourish Life.
Yet those few Drops by Rosamunda warmed,
New Life and Vigor spread over all your Limbs.
I marked you when the Beauteous Queen arrived
In Mournful, Solemn Pomp, to ask her Life,
And for a Father and a Kingdom's Loss
Dissolved in Tears; 'twas then, what Blood you had
Sprung to your Cheeks, and strait retreated thence:
Your Eye Balls fixed, and tremblingly you moved;
'Twas then, your altered Looks declared you loved,

Aist. Some odd Distemper seized me, I confess;
Some short, unusual Qualm came like a Flash
Of Lightning, and as soon it disappeared:
'Twas not Love; a Face alone never moves me,

Desid. A Face alone!
Now by my Life, in forming her, Nature
Has been profuse, and shown her utmost Art:
For her she has been at such a vast Expense,
Futurity can never hope to see
Another perfect Beauty; in every
Motion, what wondrous Majesty appears,
Her Shape is Graceful, and her Looks Divine.

Aist. It may be that the gods were so intent
Upon her Form, that they forgot her Mind.
And while they admired the Creature they had made,
Some sooty Angel stole into the crowd,
And shuffl'd in a Soul of his own stamp.

Desid. You're too severe.

Aist. I know to whom I speak.
Pride and Revenge rule chiefly in her Breast;
There Is not a Vice so foul she would not commit,
Where either might be fully gratified.
She is so fired, upon the least distaste,
Hell's not so hot, and might be sooner cooled.
Pray Heaven her Passions may not work our Ruin.

Desid. We may fear so furious a Temper
Will not long agree with Alboino's;
Who is himself ungovernably fierce.
His Virtues too have a Compound of Faults;
He Is rigorously Just, brave to Rashness;
So Generous, he would bestow his Crown,
Rather than Merit should not meet Reward.
But he delights too much in Death and Blood;
Vast Destruction still attends his Conquests --

Aist. No more; this is no place for such discourse;
For though we both mean well, yet should some Sly,
Insinuating Courtier over-hear,
This to our Ruin would be soon improved.
And look yonder comes one, who would rejoice
To have all worthy Men destroyed.

Desid. My Rival, Almachild, with Flora, Odoacre's Daughter.

Aist. Yes, and every Man's as well as thine,
Who has a handsome Wife or Mistress.

Desid. He courts each Woman that he sees, and few
In vain, for he is a successful Lover.
Has all the Arts, and Charms which please that Sex:
Young, Handsome, Rich, an exact Dissembler,
Has Wit, and Prodigal of Pains and Wealth.

Aist. To corrupt Virtue, or to reward Vice;
To bribe a Pimp, or to procure a Whore,
Lavishly he would give an Hundred Talents:
But to assist the Brave, the Worthy Man,
To save from Ruin his King and Country,
He would not part with one single Dram.
He has that Tinsil Wit which Women like,
Can Fool and Toy, and idly prate with them,
For it is Words, not Reason, they regard.
For's Cowardice he will be the more approved,
It Is so agreeable to their Nature.

Desid. I would Angellina were to see
How busily he Courts another Face.

Aist. Nay, fear not her, she will not be won with Noise
And Equipage, what ever her Father may.

Desid. However,
Let us retire, here let him freely Love;
All his Intrigues, but one, I would improve.

They pass carelessly by Almachild and Flora as they enter. Flo. Who are those?


Alma. Aistolfus the General, and his Friend Desiderio.


Flo. They might have paid more Respect to a Lady; but Rudeness is so Natural
to a Soldier.


Alma. They fancy they express their Courage by that, and their Wit by
Fighting. It Is their way to hector the Women into a Compliance, and think to
win their Mistresses, as they do Towns, by rudely Storming them.


Flo. For my part, I prefer you Men of Breeding to all others; who know when to
express your Courage and Civility; and I think exceed Soldiers in all places;
for they are neither so Brave as you are in Courts, nor so Civil in Camps.


Alma. Rudeness is not their only Vice; they are subject to a much worse, want
of Money.


Flo. But yet they have the confidence to address themselves to us; though a poor
Lover is as ridiculous a Creature as an Eunuch Lover; and I Would almost be courted
as soon by the one, as the other. They are both odious to a Lady of Quality
especially.


Alma. Were I a Woman, I should be apt to suspect want of Wit, or want of
Truth in that Lover, where there was want of Wealth. For, supposing me in his
circumstances, what greater Madness can there be, than for Poverty to Court
Beggary: To have a whining Couple sigh out their Necessities, instead of Love:
And had I Riches, I should conclude, he courted my Person only to be Master of
them.


Flo. Well, your Lordship has all the necessary Qualifications of a Lover, as
Generous, as Rich; and truly, I think, there can be no greater Proof given of
Love, than Generosity. And I should never think my self Mistress of any one's
Heart, till I were of his wealth.


Alma. You know you command mine, and I hope the small Present I made you
Yesterday, was some demonstration of it. You received it --


Flo. I vow you make me blush; it was great and noble: but I could not better
discover my Esteem for you, than by my acceptance of it; for my Reputation runs
a great Hazard, should it be known. But if I could get a few more such, he
would be glad to marry me, to recover them again.


Aside. Alma. Secrecy is my greatest Virtue. You have promised to trust both
your Reputation and Person to that -- when must I receive the Reward of all my
Services -- my Love, will admit no more delays, and my Passion no more
disappointments -- is not this the promised day -- and is not Opportunity
favorable --


Flo. But could you find in your heart to Ruin the Woman you love?


Alma. But can you count it Ruin, to taste the Joys, and have the Wealth,
which I can give? I Will fly into thy Arms all Gold, Jove rained not half so much
in Danaes lap, as I will into thine.


Flo. Nay, it is Love alone can Conquer me: and if you love as you pretend, why
do you refuse the last great Proof, Marriage?


Alma. It Is the last indeed, for Men seldom give any after. Marriage is no more
a Proof of Love, than a Security of Constancy. Do not I daily vow Fidelity; the
rest is no more but Ceremony, and whatever consists so wholly of that, be
assured has little truth in it. Besides, you will lose the greatest Tie upon my
Vows, my Honor, which a Lover may forfeit by Inconstancy, but a Husband never
does.


Flo. But still my Reputation.


Alma. Nay, now you suspect my Honor again: But though it should be known, I Will
place you above Censure; fear not that, while I Am your Lover. Poverty and
Disrepute are always joined, the Rich are never scandalized. And Wives now
adays run a greater Hazard of being kept Poor, than Mistresses, and
consequently are more contemptible.


Flo. You have my heart, methinks that should content you.


Alma. The best Answer I can give to that, is the Song I made on you.


Flo. You will oblige me, by letting me hear it again.


Almachild Sings. I.
No more, Aminta, say you love,
Or I Am the object of your mind;
While still you fear, and disapprove
To do, what will declare you kind.
Filled with suspicious thoughts, my heart must be,
Till with your words, I find your Acts agree.
II.
Ah! Can you hear me thus complain,
And see me racked with fierce desires,
Yet will do naught to ease my pain,
Nor will fulfill what Love requires?
If Truth you spoke, you would not thus Cruel prove,
You may pretend, but cannot hide your love.
Alma. For we Men never believe Women give their Hearts, till they do their
Persons. And as you think Generosity, so I think Enjoyment the only infallible
sign of Love; and I can no more credit yours, while you deny your Person, than
you would mine, should I withold my money.


Flo. And the only way to have our hearts esteemed, is to refuse you our
Persons. For should I yield, Contempt will as certainly follow on your side, as
Repentance on mine. The greatest Blessings are disesteem'd by long Possession;
nothing makes us put so true a Value on them as misfortunes.


Alma. They render not Life a greater Torment, than Despair does Love; and no
brave Man should live Unhappy, nor wise One Love without Hopes. You have given
me so much, that your Reputation will be in greater danger, by denying me, than
granting. Come, it is too late to Capitulate for the Fort, after a Promise of
Surrender -- let us retire -- Such things are so often Practiced in Court, 'twill
be regardless.


Flo. Well -- since you will have it so, I Will meet you an Hour hence --


Alma. The Old Reply, and I shall find the same Usage, why not now?


Flo. Oh! Heaven! my Father! I must begone e're he sees me.
He Is ignorant in Love, who hopes to find
That Gifts, which I have got, will make me kind;
[Aside. It Is those which are to come, must bend my mind.

[Exit.] Alma. Farewell, thou Mercenary, Jilting, Errant Woman; I never was so
Fooled by any in my life, she has cost me more Money and Pains than any of her
Sex; and yet I believe she has no more Virtue; for I never knew one who was a
Jilt to many, but was a Whore to some body. Her continual Disappointments have
vexed me, but I Am resolved I Will have her; for she shall not have it to boast, I
courted her in vain.

The Nymph seems coy, in hopes to raise our Fire;
Too long delays do rather cool Desire.
And we pursue, not out of Love, but Pride,
Scorning to have it said, we were denied.

Enter Odoacre. Odoa. So thoughtful, my Lord, you whose Perfections make you
the Men's Envy, and the Women's Admiration. You should leave melancholy
Reslections to the Unfortunate, as I am.


Alma. Your Daughter's unkindness only has Power to discompose me.


Odoa. I do not find her averse to Marriage, and I suppose you do not intend to
disgrace our Family by any other Design.


Alma. By no means: But --


Odoa. Nay, my Lord, there can be no Objection but her want of Fortune; it is
true, our Family has proved more durable than our Estate; for Fate has
maliciously increased the one, and impaired the other.


Alma. She has made you amends, by so beautiful a Daughter.


Odoa. Handsome Daughters seldom prove Blessings to their Parents. I am so used
to Curses, that I suspect every thing. Fortune uses me, as Rooks do their
Cullies, if ever she suffers me to be a seeming Winner, it is only by my
credulity to make Ruin surer.


Alma. Your Misfortunes are wholly owing to your Fancy, as it is to that I owe
my Joys. Scarce any thing has truly in it self Pain or Pleasure, it only bears
the Image our wild Fancy stamps upon it. At least, hope for better Fortune.


Odoa. I can no more hope for future Good, than fancy I now have any; neither
the Expectation of what is to come, nor the Reflection on what is past, can
please me. I Am weary of the Drudgery and dull Repetitions of Life. If e're to
Morrow comes, to Morrow will tediously be consumed just as to Day; to Day will
be as Yesterday, and Yesterday has been as Ages past. And were not you more
obliged to your Youth and Wealth, than to your Fancy, you would think as I do.
But since you have so vigorous a Fancy, you need not my Daughter, to complete
your Happiness.


Alma. The Hopes of having her mine, gives me Pleasure; but it cannot be
complete, till she is so.


Odoa. It must be then in the way I have mentioned. In short, my Lord, Marry
her, or quit your Pretensions to her. And the next time you Visit, bring a
Priest with you; or you shall find colder Treatment from your Mistress, and
rougher from a suspicious Father, than possibly you expect: And so I leave you
to reflect upon it.


[Exit. Alma. This would discourage any Man, who had such an aversion for a
Wife, as I have; and did not know Woman so well as I do.

He thinks his Daughter, by his Care, secure;
I know, no Woman will Restraint endure:
To shun Confinement, they from Fathers fly;
And Cuckolds make themselves, by Jealousy.
That others they will obey, why should I fear;
Since sure to do, what they themselves forswear.

[Exit. ACT II.
SCENE continues. [ Enter Almachild.] Alma. WEll, I shall see most of my
Mistresses here to day; they will all come to this Entertainment. I am the most
indifferent to Angellina, because that is a dull, Matrimonial Love; yet I must
marry her, since she will be very rich, and her Fortune will enable me to
debauch other Women. For Cleanthe, my Court Mistress, I think her pretty
secure, notwithstanding her affected Coyness. But I must use dispatch with
Flora, or that Old, Treacherous Father of hers will spoil my Design: If I could
but meet her singly now, I have got that here will tempt her; [Shewing a Jewel.
Ha! yonder she comes: Now Bribes and Dissimulation be my Friends.


[ Enter Flora.] Flo. Ah, my Lord! I know not how you entertained my Father,
but he came home in a strange Humor; he says you only design to ruin me, and
vows this shall be my last day of liberty.


Alma. Then let us use it with the best advantage. Gratify me to day in my
Pleasures, and to morrow I will you, with your Freedom. You shall not owe your
Support to your Father; then why should you be confined by him. For most
Children obey their Parents, as Most Statesmen do their Monarchs, only out of
Interest.


Flo. Oh, I abhor the very Name of Interest! I would no more pay Obedience,
than I would give my Love, for so base a Reason.


Alma. Yield to my Embraces, I Will not ask the reason; and will neither suspect
your Love, nor --


Flo. Nor value it; 'twill soon be contemned: therefore mention it no more, I
will not so much as hear of it.


Alma. How, Madam!


Flo. I confess I made some return to your Love, while I thought you would have
been my Husband; but since you deny that, I must all Favors.


Alma. Then I am not to hope for --


Flo. Any thing but what I can lawfully grant. Oh, Heaven! that ever I should
hear an unlawful, dishonorable Passion professed to me.


Alma. Very fine: And you are resolved to recall your Love, though you have
confessed it; and will not yield, though you promised it.


Flo. I know not what I have said; I made those Promises inconsiderately, and
therefore they are not binding.


Alma. It Is very well, Madam: Your Servant; I have no more to say. I shall
quickly find out a Mistress who will make me a more grateful Return to my
Services; and who will gladly accept this Jewel, designed for you.


Flo. How Is this! Nay then I must alter my Carriage. [Aside. Not the Riches of
the Earth should procure a kind Look: were all the Jewels of the East, were an
Empire proffered me, I could contemn them all. But alas! who can be insensible
to your Love? You have won my Heart, and I fear will make me grant too much.


Alma. You cannot give too much to Love, to Truth like mine.


Flo. I confess you have given me great Demonstrations of them.


Alma. They are but Trifles, to what I design you after --


Flo. Ay, but should you forsake me after -- and should expose me to Infamy and
Want. We Women run mighty Hazards, when our Reputation must depend on our
Lovers Discretion, and our Support, on his Generosity.


Alma. I have not opportunity now to make a Settlement: however, this shall be
yours, and but retire a moment into my Apartment here.


Flo. Nay, not for that neither. But why so hasty?


Alma. I fear we may be interrupted again; and there comes old Avaro, I would
not have him see you here.


Flo. Nor I, for the World.
I have not promised that I will comply;
But to conceal my self, I Will thither fly.

[She runs off. Alma. In vain you fly from me, in vain you hide;
I may be sure to find, since Love's my Guide.

[He follows her. [ Enter Avaro, Angellina, Clesi.] Ava. Well, Daughter, to
please you, I have brought you to Court; and to secure you, I am come along
with you: where you will meet a great many Admirers, and I a great many
Debtors: But if they are no better Paymasters of Love, than they are of Money,
the Devil may have their Custom for me.


Angel. Yet you would have me marry a Courtier, who is --


Ava. No Debtor. You shall not have one, who only makes the Court his
Sanctuary; one who mortgages his Estate to every crediting Banker, and his
Heart to every handsome Women.


Angel. Had Almachild as little Wealth, as he has Truth, you would dislike him as
much as I.


Ava. If you get his Person and Estate in possession, no matter for his Truth.
But I know for whom you dislike him. It Is true, were Almachild's Dependence
wholly on the Court, as Desiderio's is on the Army, I should value neither: But
you shall no more have one who lives by his Sword, than one who lives upon
Court-Promises, nay, than one who lives by his Wits.


Angel. Marry a Coward!


Ava. He Will live the longer. A Pox of those fighting Madmen; there is some hopes
of recovering one's Money from a peaceable, quiet, passive Man: But a Soldier,
forsooth, runs into your Debt, and then into the Army; there gets an unlucky
Blow, which chops off his Head, and cancels his Bonds; and has no way of
getting our of our Books, but by getting out of the World.


Cle. Ay, Do, Father, make her marry Almachild, and then the less Portion will
serve.


Ava. Clefi says true, therefore dispose your self to it.


Angel. You will not force my Inclinations.


Ava. Force my Inclinations. Why there is it now: A pretty Excuse for
Disobedience. Death! that we should beget their Persons, and cannot their
Inclinations. Pray, from whence had you any Inclinations? I declare them
illegitimate, and will your Person, if you obey not my Will.


Cle. Nay, if Money will not bribe her, she is not your Daughter, and I disown
her to be my Sister; and yet it is very advantageous to have a Handsome Sister.
See what it has got me this Morning: [Shewing a Purse. All this did Almachild
give me, only to speak in his behalf. I wonder when your Hero will make me such
a Present: Perhaps, after the next Battle, he will send you a Load of shattered
Legs and Arms, and broken Skulls; though one would think they were cracked before
they went to fight, or else they would never be so mad to go.


Angel. He scorns as much to give, as take a Bribe; his Worth and Honor plead
for him.


Cle. His Worth and Honor! Ha, ha, ha: Where do they lie? in his Sword, or in
his ghastly Scars? Better he could prove his Honor by the depth of his Pocket,
than by the depth of his Wounds. His Honor is more likely to send him
handsomely out of the World, than maintain you so in it. And I Will justify, that
though there were a Standing Army, this Purse has more Honor, and more Worth in
it; and shall procure much more Respect, than all the Swords in the Army.


Ava. It Is a powerful Purse indeed; let me see, and a very weighty one too.
This is it that makes the Fool pass for a Wit; the Ugly, handsome; Cowards,
brave; this sets Nation against Nation, and Family against Family; makes
Friends treacherous, and Lovers false; makes Guardians betray their Charge, and
Parents and Children rob each other. I will not rob thee, Boy; but since it is
so dangerous a thing, I must secure you from its Effects, by keeping it my self.


[Puts it in his Pocket. Cle. Why, what do you mean? why sure you will not take it
from me, will you? Was the Devil in me, to show it him!


[Aside. Ava. Take it: no, no; I Will only put it to Use for you, that is all.


Cle. Ay, but look you, Sir; if it makes Parents rob their Children, Adad, it
may make Children quarrel with their Parents.


Ava. Why Sirrah, why you Villain, you Unnatural Rogue, what you will not Murder
me, ha!


Cle. No, no, I am no Killing Man; but I would not be cheated of my Money.


Ava. How cheated! What Sirrah, dare you call me Cheat? here is an Impudent
Varlet. Hark ye, Angellina, now I think better of it, I do not care for forcing
your Inclinations. Though Desiderio has not so great an Estate as Almachild, yet
he is in great Favor with the King, and has good Employments; and if I settle
all my Fortune upon you, you may live pretty Comfortably.


Angel. I make a freer Confession to you, than ever I have to him, by owning I
should think my self happy in him, with your Consent.


Cle. Hey brave! here is like to be fine doings. [Aside. Why sure, Sir, you are
not in earnest, are you? though you are no Courtier, yet by coming here, I hope
you will be influenced so far, as not to mind what you say. You will not be so
singular as to keep your word at Court?


Ava. Keep it; yes, so firmly, that no Entreaties, no Persuasions, no
Submission shall ever alter it.


Angel. Heaven continue him in that resolution.


[Aside. Ava. How much such another Purse may mollisie me, I cannot tell.


Angel. So I find it is who bids most, will have me. Hard Fate of Children! to
be not only cruelly debarred, perhaps a worthy Choice, but in Obedience forced
to throw themselves away on some inglorious Wretch.


[Aside. Ava. Let me see, who are those? a whole Cluster of my Debtors: here I
have their Names. [Pulling out a long Roll. Why, what a numerous Catalogue of
gaudy, empty things, have I got here! I Will accost them; what a Pox though a Man
may not Arrest, he may civilly Dunn in Court. Do You hear Clefi, do not leave
your Sister; and remember, I have hinted to you, how I may be pacified.


[Exit. Cle. Ay, ay, I am likely to obey you indeed, when you take my Money
from me. What will you give me now, and I Will leave you to your own Management.


Angel. You may stay, if you please, I have no private Business.


Cle. No, I Will be gone however to look out Almachild, acquaint him with your
being here, and get somewhat for my Intelligence.


[Exit. Enter Desiderio. Desid. Angellina here and alone! I am almost as much
surprised as pleased, to find you at Court.


Angel. It Is the Novelty of it, may do both.


Desid. Always indifferent. Whatever satisfaction I may receive by your Sight,
I am not likely to have much from your Words.


Angel. Suppose you had, you would hardly stop there; they would encourage you to
ask for something more, and I will never give such a Proof of Love, as
Disobedience.


Desid. I fear you pay this great Obedience, not only out of Duty to a Father's
Will, but out of dislike to me.


Angel. You have no reason to imagine that. But you cannot wonder if I am
cautious in the disposal of my Heart; for when e're I give it, it shall be for
ever. I can no more love twice, than die twice.


Desid. Be not cruel too; let Pity to the Torments I endure, let Gratitude to
so sincere a Flame prevail.


Angel. Gratitude, whoever loves may plead the same; am I obliged to love,
because I am beloved? were that a Plea, you had put in yours too late.


Desid. I confess, I have no Right, no Merit to offer but my Truth.


Angel. That too is a general Pretense; how shall I distinguish it from
Affectation.


Desid. I never could dissemble. I could no more affect, than I can conceal my
Love. But if I can love with so much Zeal, when my Breast is filled with as
much Despair, as yours is with Indifference; how should I love, how dote, how
be transported, would you afford me some Return!


Angel. Then you would triumph in my weakness; and scorn to keep your Conquest
over my Heart, though you would take Pride to win it.


Desid. The Pride of winning it, would not be so great, as the Pleasure of
preserving it, to a grateful, generous Mind.


Angel. All Arguments are as weak where we dislike, as our Defenses are, where
we love. I am unwilling to avow either; an Indifference to you, or a Regard for
my self, silences me.


Desid. Either is Unkind, I dare not say Unjust: But since you do not declare a
Hatred, may I not hope.


Angel. To bid you hope, were to declare I love; Yet something may be granted
to so much seeming Truth. I do not bid you hope, nor would you should despair.
But see the Court begins to fill. I am so much a Stranger, I shall want a Guide
to the Presence Chamber.


Desid. May not I be honored with the Employment.


Angel. Since my Father has not stayed to be my Guardian, I may be allowed to
choose one.


[Exeunt. Enter Flora, Almachild following her. Flo. Oh, I shall never have the
Confidence to look my Friends in the Face again! you have ruined me, and all
the World will see it in me.


Alma. Fear not; keep but your own Counsel, and you are safe; betray not your
self by your Words, and none will discover it in your Face.


Flo. I can never appear Innocent there, while I have so much Guilt in my
Breast.


Alma. You Will find no such great difficulty in dissembling.


Flo. I shall do it so awkerdly, so faintly, that the Cheat will be obvious to
all.


Alma. Rather, have a Care of over acting; for Women render their Virtue
suspected, as Men do their Courage, when they pretend to it, too much.


Flo. No, it is you alone have Power to preserve me from the Censure of the
World, and distracting Thoughts.


Alma. Pho, Pow, she begins to grow troublesome now; how shall I get rid of her.


[Aside. Flo. And will not Love prevail with you to do that for me, when it has
made me grant so much?


Alma. What would she be at now?


Aside. Any thing, my Dear, to satisfy you.

Pish! this is so nauseous.

Aside. Flo. Then you may easily do that, only by marrying me.


Alma. O fie, my Dear! that you should expect that after Possession, when I
refused it before.


Flo. But I am more sensible now, that it is necessary to preserve my
Reputation.


Alma. A Husband, indeed, is a pretty necessary Instrument to botch up a
Reputation; and under that Disguise, Women are allowed to take many Liberties.
But never let that Man be a Repairer of your Honor, who has robbed you of it;
you will lose a fond Lover, and only gain a jealous Husband.


Flo. But I must never expect one, if you refuse it.


Alma. Yes, yes; there are Fools enough designed by Nature for that Employment.
See, the Queen moves this Way to the Presence Chamber, there is one follows
her, Clefi, Avaro's Son, who is as we could wish; he is rich, and I have an
Ascendant over him; what think you of him?


Flo. Can he be acceptable to my Arms after you, or can I be to yours after him?


Alma. Ay, ay, we shall relish each other the better. Come retire awhile* and
leave him to my Management.


Flo. You know you can persuade me to any thing.
This is the Fate which over Women rules,
We yield to Men of Wit, then catch at Fools.

Exit* Alma. If I can work him to it now, I think I shall behave my self like a
Man of Honor and Prudence, to provide a rich foolish Husband for a cast
Mistress.


Enter Rosamund, followed by Cleanthe, Clefi, and Attendants. Rosa. Go tell the
King, that I attend him here.
Why should dull Custom thus impose on us
Slavish, uneasy Duty to a Man?
He has a Mind to revel, and rejoice --
That on this day he won some Victory;
That he has butchered Crowds of harmless Men;
Triumphs in Blood and Ruin, and I must join,
Must listen to his Vanity and Boasts,
Seem pleased and flatter him.
How the Court thickens! what Swarms of Gazers!
Are you, my Lord, too fond of Pageantry?
[ Seeing Almachild. You who inhabit sure come not to look;
Monarchs grow cheap, by being often seen.

Alma. Monarchs, for being so, we must admire;
But when they are adorned with such a Form,
When so much Beauty's joined to Majesty,
We would for ever gaze, and still be pleased.

Rosa. Monarchs and Women are used to flattery;
Nor can our Vanity distinguish Truth:
Nay, though we know we are flattered, we are pleased.

Alma. Your Crown not more exceeds a Peasant's State,
Than your Triumphant Beauty the whole Sex.
The most admired She, when you're in View,
Like Pebbles placed by shining Diamonds seem.

Enter Alboino, Guards, and Attendants. Alb. What means that secret Conference
with Him!
By Heaven she smiles upon the worthless Wretch,
And now he bows, and seems to give her Thanks
That Starting and Confusion fit thee now,
Going up to her. Well may thou blush to be so entertained.
Have thou culled out the Man I most despise,
To grace him with thy Smiles, and private Talk?
But I disdain to be disturbed by him;
Jealousy would but disgrace my self.
Shall I, whose Actions have exceeded Faith,
And by my Deeds am ranked in Honor's Form
With Alexander, or the first Caesar?
Shall I, who often have triumphed over Kings,
And been the Theme of Envy and of Praise?
Shall I, seem jealous of a reptile Slave?

Rosa. I started at your Frowns, not at my Words;
I must confess I Am pleased with his Discourse,
You were the Subject, he was praising you,
Not Men; nay, not gods could be more extolled.
What could I else have list'ned too from Him?
What but your Praises could oblige a Smile?

Alb. I want not Praises, my Fame's established.
But yet, if that were all, excuse my Thoughts.
Now move we forward to our Room of State,
Where Wine and Music, Pleasures shall create.
There we'll enjoy the soft Delights of Peace,
And all Domestic private Jars shall cease.

[Exeunt Omnes, Praeter Almachild and Clefi. Alma. Clefi, A word; Have you
persuaded your Father to let your Sister come here to day?

Cle. I have; and came to find you out, and acquaint you, she is already here.


Alma. I am obliged to you, and you shall find me grateful.


Cle. Well, I am a faithful Solicitor; I have said more sine, moving things to
her, on your account, than ever I could say to any Woman, for my self; and the
truth on it is, I believe, should prevail sooner for you, than for my self.


Alma. That Is only because you think it not worth your while: Women are Trifles
beneath your Consideration.


Cle. Why that is true too; Ha, ha, ha! I do contemn them indeed: though If I
could find one, who had Wit enough to value me as I deserve, I should not be
ungrateful. But I hate to speak witty things to a Fool. I reserve my self, till
I meet with a Person of equal Endowments.


Alma. Then you should be always silent.


Cle. And that is the reason the Women think me dull: Now I am a Person the
farthest from that in the World; for how can any one be accounted dull, ho is
always laughing and talking?


Alma. It may be they are angry, you entrench so much on their Privileges.


Cle. Ay, they are envious of me, without doubt, because I say so many more
witty things than they: And therefore let me break never so many Jests, they do
not so much as smile; nay, though I give them an Example they will not, and show
them when they should, by laughing my self, and treading on their toes, nay, if
I repeat it fifty times, they never mind it.


Alma. I perceive the Fool is acquainted with Women of Sense.


[Aside. Cle. So that since I cannot bridle my Native Heat so much, as to be
altogether silent, I suit my Discourse to their Capacities, and can now talk a
whole day together, and yet not say one word to the purpose.


Alma. That Is no great Constraint: [Aside. However, all Women are not
insensible of your Merits. I know a Lady of most surprising Beauty, who as far
excels Men in Wit, as her own Sex in Virtue; I have heard her say such kind,
such tender things; with so much Passion, yet with so much Modesty --


Cle. What, of me? Ha!


Ala. I ought not divulge a Lady's Secrets: but -- you are my Friend, and her,
I honor; and it may be a kindness to both, to acquaint you with her Thoughts.


Cle. Ay, Come, Prithee do, out of pity to the Lady. Adad, I Am strangely
pleased at this.


Alma. She says you have so much Grandeur in your Countenance, one would judge
you born a Monarch; yet you have so much Sweetness there, and of so delicate a
Complexion, you might be suspected to be a disguised Woman. God's Death, can he be
such a Fool to believe this?


[Aside. Cle. I am amazed, I am transported, I am confounded, I am extasy'd, I
am, I am --


Alma. That you are of an easy Shape; graceful and free in all your Motions;
that --


Cle. Hold, Hold; I cannot contain my Joy; I am convinced she loves me; there
can be no doubt of it; nay, I have been told such things before now; but then
it has always cost me so much Money: Out of pure Gratitude, I have been forced
to reward them so highly.


Alma. This is a Lady of Quality.


Cle. Lady of Quality. Adad all the difference between Ladies of Quality and
other Women, is, that they set a greater Price upon their Favors; and by their
Titles, often make false Jewels pass for true ones. But who is this enamored
Lady, for amongst her other good Qualities, you have forgot the chief, is she
very wealthy? what is her Name?


Alma. I am obliged to name her now, to justify her; it is the chaste, the
beauteous Flora, Odoacre's Daughter.


Cle. Hum -- Odoacre's Daughter. I was afraid, indeed, it was one, who admired
my Money, as well as my Person.


Alma. Oh! you wrong the Lady. I must confess, the World frowns a little on her
Father; but his Fortune is not contemptible: and Flora, by her good management,
has gathered considerable Riches, and has Jewels inestimable (to my Cost I Am
sure.)


[Aside. Cle. Say you so; But how shall I be assured of this?


Alma. Dare you take my Word?


Cle. Ay, ay, your Word is sufficient.


Alma. Then you have it, that she is very Wealthy. I saw her pass but this Way
now, follow her and make your Addresses; she cannot resist one so accomplished
as your self.


Cle. Nay, if it be so, I Will marry her instantly; and if I do once set about
it, there is no Woman can resist me, though I say it. Though may be I shall find it
difficult to persuade her to marry me at first sight.


Alma. Try; I Will accompany and assist you. If she seems coy, I Will own I have
discovered her Love.


Cle. Ah my dear Lord! how shall I be able to requite this Favor! I, on her
Wealth and Virtue may depend; Since I Am assured of both by such a Friend:


[Exeunt. ACT III.
The SCENE Draws. And shows Alboino and Rosamund seated. Desiderio, Almachild,
Odoacre, Cleanthe, Angellina, etc. Guards and Attendants. Alb. THus we possess
in War, the Joys of Peace;
And scorn the vain Efforts of Roman Arms.
And while our Foes prepare for rash Attempts,
In Pleasure waste your time, secure by me.

Rosa. We do not fear Success where you command;
But yet when we reflect upon the Toils
Of War, and various Deaths all aimed at you;
I tremble at your approaching Danger.
The Brave, no more than Cowards, are exempt from Death;
Else both your Life and Conquest were secure.

Alb. I scorn the utmost of my feeble Foes:
They dare not hope Success, where I Command*
For if, when by Ambition urged alone,
I have surpassed Belief, and the Reports
Of Fame; what mighty Wonders shall I act,
Both to preserve a Crown, and her I love!

Rosa. I have a Soul which scorns Danger; it is not
For my self I fear: Would my Sex permit,
Fearless I would into the Battle rush,
And share your Hazards, Though I cannot prevent.

Alb. Your Merit, Rosamund, shall wing Conquest:
I Will haste to conquer, sooner to return,
That I may place fresh Laurels on my Brow,
And on your Head fix a more splendid Crown.
There Is he who taught me first the Art of War.
[ Enter Aistolfus. Where have thou been loit'ring, my old Friend,
While we were drinking to our Arms, Success?
Come, Retrieve your lost Time; Fill me a Bowl,
And give my General one, to pledge me.

Aist. I Am not good at this; it is out of my road:
I Am as awkward a Drinker, as Lover;
They both are Foes to Business, and to War:
But in Obedience --

[Drinks. Alb. I know it well, War is thy whole Delight:
But on a Day so memorably Great,
A Day of Triumph and of Joy, whereon
I fought, and won a Battle, Queen, and Crown,
We may exceed the strict Bounds of Temperance,
And gives our selve a Loose: Fill me again;
Then let the Music that is prepared, begin.

[Drinks. [And then Enter Mars, attended by Warriors.] Mars Sings, Entering. I.
TO Arms, the God of War commands to Arms:
Hark how the lofty Noise of Battle charms!
Fearless, into the thickest Hazards run:
Death's to be sought, where Glory's to be won.
II.
Who Is he, has Courage to express his Fear,
Or dare a Coward seem, when I appear:
While such I fright to Danger's disregard,
Honor's the Brave Man's Motive and Reward.
Chorus.
See how we appear at thy dread Voice,
Prepared to conquer, or to die:
In Victory we do rejoice,
Or pleased in Honor's Bed to lie.
Mars. I.
Vnmov'd, our Army bears the Foes Attack;
See with what Vigor now, they force them back:
The Brave, like the Innocent, no Danger dread;
Follow resolved, where Fame and Virtue lead.
II.
Timorous Wretches meanly do survive;
In Horror, and in fear of Death, they live:
While the Bold Man freely resigns his Breath;
Undaunted dies, without the fear of Death.

Chorus.
Now, now we triumph over the Plain,
Joy, our Hearts so much distends:
We Have not leisure to mourn the Slain,
The Living grow much dearer Friends.
[Enter a Troop of Virgins, one of them Singing.] I.
Do not your Youth thus Misemploy;
Let me possess your vigorous Prime:
For Youth alone can give me Joy,;
You're fit for War, though old as Time.
II.
If Death you seek, then let me reign,
To be alone Votaries:
For he who Loves, thinks Life a Pain,
And with Excess of Pleasure dies.
[Enter Bacchus attended, etc. He Sings, Entering.] No more of War, or whining
Love;
I come, your Empires to remove:
To me, your boasted Palms resign,
To me, the mighty God of Wine.
[A Drinking SONG.] I.
THE Toil of Life will soon be done;
Perhaps, before next Rising Sun:
Though it, by chance, should longer last,
It will with Sorrows be overcast:
Life is uncertain, Ills are sure,
They will come, should that endure;
But Drinking, all our Griefs will cure.
Then let this Glass end all our fruitless Care*
We'll Drink, till there is no room left for Despair.
II.
It Is not Time, that gives the Blessing,
But it is wisely Time possessing;
Therefore naught past, shall torment us;
Whate're's to come, shall content us:
Nay, it the present Bliss destroys,
Should we reflect on absent Joys;
It Is this alone our Thoughts employs.
We slight the Bottle, whilst in Caella's Arms;
But when we Drink, Caelia has then no Charms.
Alb. So, it is enough; Be gone, and leave us now.

Aist. I hate these low effeminating Sounds;
Such Music which softens while it pleases:
I Would hear none but the lofty Phrygian Airs;
Timotheus alone should play to me,
Who might Inspire me, like Alexander,
With so much transporting Warmth and Courage
Could force me, think,
Though over my Cups, I were at the Army's Head,
And from the Table leap, to shake my Spear.

Alb. It Was Wine inspired the Hero, not his Notes;
And we will try, how that will work on us.
Another Bowl -- Not that we want an Edge,
To go where Glory calls.

Desid. He warms apace;
Would he could be persuaded to forbear.

[ To Aistolphus. Rosa. I can be no Assistant to this Sport:
I Will retire.

Alb. Stay; I will have none depart.
What, does my Mirth prove tedious to you?
Thanks to the Wine, it has refreshed my Thoughts;
Awakened Jealousy, that seemed to sleep:
It may be, she would retire, to talk to him.
God's Death! how that Thought has stung me to the quick!
Apart. But I will first discover that, which shall
As much disquiet her.
Wait a moment,
I Will bring a Bowl shall tempt you too to drink.

[Exit. Aist. I have not known him so much moved with Wine.
By Nature he is too fierce; and heated thus,
I dread some Inconvenience may attend.

[Re-Enter Alboino, with a Goblet in his Hand.] Alb. I prize this Goblet far
above my Crown;
It Is the Trophy of my noblest Conquest.
Dangers and Death I seemed to court, yet scorned
And triumphed over both, to purchase this:
And when my ambitious Aim I Would won,
Victory and Empire attended it.

Rosa. Some Magic Cup, which you may well admire,
Since it portended so much good to you.
For me, I have an aversion for it;
If I but look on'it, I faint away,
Tho'I'm not able to ascribe the Cause.

Alb. There Is Mystery in my Discourse: Some Wine;
Pledge me, then I will unfold the Riddle.
Come Rosamund, Here Is to the Memory
Of that Bloody Day whereon I won this.

Desid. What can the meaning of this be?

[Aside. Rosa. I would be excused -- But since it is your Will --
An unusual Horror seizes on my Mind;
My Blood runs cold, and stagnates in my Veins.
I tremble too, as if I saw a Ghost.
If I must drink, give me some other Bowl.

Alb. Nay, drink out of that.

Rosa. You must be obeyed.

Alb. For it is but fit, that on a Day of Mirth,
[While she drinks, he speaks So happy, memorably great as this,
That you should drink one Cup with your Father.

Rosa. With my Father! I understand you not.

Alb. I Will explain my meaning to you. Know then,
That on this very Day, which now I celebrate,
Your Father fought a Battle, and with it
Lost his Life.

Rosa. Dismal Day! I know, indeed,
My Father fell in Battle; but by whom
He lost his Life, I never yet could learn:
The Day too was concealed when he was slain;
I judged some nobler Cause, why this was kept.

Aist. Now, on my aged, faithful Knees, I beg
You would not own by whom her Father fell;
Apart to Alboino. But rather lay the fault on me, or him;
Say any other did it, but your self.

Alb. What, would thou deprive me of my Glory?
By Heaven, I Will own and boast a Deed so great.
Away; Disturb me not.

Aist. I Have seen the Day,
When your Renown, your Empire, and your Life,
Have in one dreadful Battle all been staked,
All had been forfeited by one false Step;
Then I have been listened too.

Alb. To the Camp,
Retire; There Preach where Sense is drowned by Noise*
An honest Man should never do an Act
He is ashamed to own.
Had I been of that bold Gigantick Race,
Who durst aspire to storm even Heaven,
Though Lightning blazed, and Thunder roared around
My Head; I Would own the brave, though rash Attempt.

Rosa. Lives he yet, who robbed me of my Father!

Alb. The Sun had scarcely Crimsoned over the Morn,
When the two eager Armies in the Field
Appeared; One was by your Father headed,
The other was by me.
Raised by my Merit to so great Command;
Not by a lucky accidental Birth,
Or by blind Fortune's Power. Each quickly saw
Success depended on the other's Death.
Like Lions fighting for their Prey, we met;
Each Army paused to see our mightier Blows;
Long he resisted my impetuous Force:
Till summoning my whole Power in one stroke,
I sent his Body headless to the Earth.

Rosa. What was it from you my Father had his Death?
And do you own the cruel, bloody Deed?

Alb. Own it; I boast it; I Have not yet owned half.
Shall I disown what purchased me a Crown?
His Crown and you, were by the Conquest mine.
And that an Act so fortunately great,
Might never wither in my Memory,
I straight alight, and seized upon his Head,
And of his Skull I made that Drinking Cup.

Rosa. Oh Horror!
Oh Barbarian! Unnatural Tyrant!
What, of my Father's Skull to make a Cup
To assist your beastly, drunken Frolicks.
Give me the Sacred, the Profaned Relict,
Let me adore the dear, much wronged Remains;
Let me weep in it, till t'deluge with my Tears,
Till it be purged from such vile Pollution.

Alb. Take her away, This suits not with our Mirth.

Rosa. I Will take my self for ever from your sight.
Rather than you, I would a Tiger meet,
Robbed of her Young, or hunting for her Prey:
Thy barbarous Temper cancels all my Love,
And fills me with a nobler flame, Revenge.
Come then the haggard Furies, start from Hell,
Lodge all your Venom in my Breast, here dwell;
With Spite and Rage distend my swelling Heart,
Through every Vein your snaky Tresses dart.
Statesmen disgraced, and tender Maids betrayed,
All Womankind, I summon to my Aid.
If all too weak; urged by my self, such things I Will do;
That for Revenge, to me, the injured World shall sue.

[Exit. Alb. Revenge, but ill becomes a Woman's Mouth;
Revenge, though it is Heaven's chief attribute
In Mortals is a Vice;
But it is a noble one; it is boldly to retort
An Injury, and can they dare to do
An Ill, who have not Courage to do well?
Who threats, but feebly does intend an Harm,
His Enemies does with Precaution arm.
While vainly, Ill to us, our Foes intend,
In Sports as we have begun the Day, we'll end.

[Exeunt Omnes. Praeter Odoacre. Odoa. This is, as I could wish; I Am never
pleased,
But when the World's discontented, like me;
The Queen's dissatisfied, and vows Revenge;
A Powerful Army is at our Gates;
May not some Mischief be collected hence?
I Have turned with every Change of Government,
Not out of Love to another, but Hate to the present;
But never yet could meet destined Reward;
And till I do, I Will still turn, and Plot on.
Here comes the Queen, and seems as much disturbed
As I could wish; I Will make bold to observe.

Enter Rosamund. Rosa. Revenge I vowed, and I will keep my Vow:
But the means; can Woman's malicious Wit
Be at a Loss, to give Destruction?
I must have help, yet know not whom to trust,
The surly old General never was my Friend,
Desiderio's his, and both love the King,
They Are brave and honest, not for my Purpose;
Odoacre wears Villain in his Face,
And such, are seldom honest in their Hearts;
Treachery shall be his Business:
Officious Hell has sent him to my Mind.
Odoacre come near; I Have long observed
Your Discontent; your Looks, your Speech, your Gate,
Do all betray some inward weight of Grief.
It ought to be a Monarch's greatest Care
To relieve, and to redress;
Impart your Griefs to me, and you will find
Speedier Relief than from Alboino.

Odoa. My whole Life has been consumed in Sorrows;
But now my face bears double Marks of Grief:
The Injury has been offered you this day,
Sits heavier on me, than my private Ills.

Rosa. Is 't possible, art thou so much my Friend?

Odoa. I know, he meant it to disquiet you,
Why should he else expose the barbarous Deed?
Nor can you more resent your Father's Wrongs,
Than I do yours.
The Affront which warmed but you, set me on Fire.

Rosa. Then sure you would Join in my designed Revenge.

Odoa. Join! my Head to counsel, my Hands to act;
Not Thunder flies more swiftly from Jove's Arm,
Than I, to execute what you command.
Name your Design, think it already done.

Rosa. I dare believe you true, and will reward
Your Services, beyond Ambition's Hope.
But as thou'st edged my Rage, tell me, how
Shall we proceed to make his Ruin sure?
It Is hard, for by the Army he is adored?

Odoa. I know it; the desperate thoughtless Madmen
Love him, 'cause he leads them into Danger.
However it is an easy Task, by one Blow
To end his Pride, and his Ambitious Thoughts.
And to secure the Deed, let the Romans
Who lie encamped, near the Ravenna Gate,
Be privately admitted in the Night.

Rosa. Thou speak my Thoughts, but who is 't I dare trust
With such a Secret, but your faithful self.
Send to invite 'em strait, and be it your Care
To betray the Gate to 'em this very Night:
In the mean time, I Will Plot the Tyrant's Death.

Odoa. I go to execute what you command;
Secure,
That our Designs not only will succeed,
But you will remember who advised the Deed.

[Exit. Rosa. So, here is one noble Mischief well contrived.
And now, Murder must next employ my Thoughts,
For nothing less will satiate my Revenge.
More Company!
It Is strange I have not time to think on Ill.
I must listen too; how conscious is Guilt?
How curious am I, since my designed Plot?
If I but see two whisper, it is of me
I think they talk.

[She retires Enter Almachild and Cleanthe. Alma. Your disbelief of my Passion,
my Cleanthe, afflicts me as much, a your Refusal to gratify it. It argues a
meaner Opinion of me. Have I declared my Love so long, and vowed its Truth so
often, yet without making any impression on your Mind, or gaining any Credit?


Cle. You are but too sensible you have done both. And I fear this is your
universal way of Entertainment; you think you cannot be complaisant, without
making Love.


Alma. I have rallied sometimes, fooled away an Hour; but never loved before.
It Is not a greater Wrong to my Love, than to your own Beauty, to suspect me;
let that confirm the truth of what I say. Every Part, every Motion charms and
surprises; there is not a Feature in that Angellick Face, but would adorn
Deformity, and render it agreeable.


Cle. I must confess, I should be pleased you had such Thoughts; but why do you
take such Pains to persuade me to be so opinionated of my self?


Alma. Because you will then the more readily credit my Love? for how can you
know, you possess so much Beauty, and believe me insensible?


Cle. Injustly you tax me with Indifference, you know I am not so; but you are
obstinately Blind, and will not see my Love, till I have given too much.


Alma. Did you love, your self would think you cannot give too much; nor do
they love, who think they love enough. I long have thought my Passion was so
great, it could admit of no Increase; but each succeeding Minute heightens so
much my Flame, I think I did not love before; and can you refuse Love so great,
ever Young and always Growing.


Cle. I should not stay to listen to your Arguments.
Who hears her Lover, is more than half won,
Let me be gone, before I Am quite undone.

Alma. Not till you have promised to meet me in my Appartment here, an hour
hence. Come the Back-way, it is most private.


Cle. You appoint Time and Place, as if I had already promised.


Alma. Your Looks discover your Consent.


Cle. What, meet you in the Dark -- I must not, dare not --


Alma. It shall be Dark too, my Life; I will not see your Blushes.


Cle. I shall disappoint you. --


Alm. You will not sure --


Cler. Indeed I fear I shall not -- but be gone now, for Sir the Queen if she
has overheard me I am undone.


[ Exit Almachild. Re-enter Rosamund. Rosa. Yes I have heard your dishonorable
intent, how did thou dare to entertain such thoughts, and yet attend my
Person?


Cler. I only seemed to yield, to get free of his importunity I did not design
it.


Rosa. It Is false, your Eyes did then declare you spoke a Truth,
And now a lie. Be gone, out of my sight -- yet stay I Will
Secure you first and spoil your Assignation.
A sudden, huddle, indigested thought
Rowls in my Brain -- it is the safest Method --
But is it not base and wicked -- no matter,
I Will stop at nothing that is base or ill,
So I the hated Tyrants Blood may spill.

[Exeunt. ACT IV.
Enter Almachild and Rosamund veiled. Alm. NAy this is unkind my Dr. Cleanthe,
Why is that beauteous face hid now, why veiled?
Thou have deprived me of half my pleasure,
By covering the face I so admire,
That face to which I am so much obliged.

Rosa. Y' are more obliged to me, than you conceive;
More than to Cleanthe, for it is not she,
You Will scarce believe who it is, when you have seen.

[Vnvails herself. Alm. The Queen! incredible indeed! it is well
I knew not, that from you I had the joy;
The mighty pleasure sure would then have killed.
Oh! let me throw my self beneath your Feet,
Let me adore such Love! that has prevailed
With you, to yield thus freely to my Arms.

Rosa. Love, no I scorn the foolish, childish Flame.
Know, 'twas a nobler cause prevailed on me.

Alm. Not Love!

Rosa. You Have heard Alboino boast to day,
'Twas by his salvage hands my Father fell;
And by his barbarous Temper urged
Made of his sacred Skull a drinking Cup.
For this I would Revenge, and thus far I Have proceeded.

Alm. It Is a pretty step toward it truly, can she go any farther?
(aside.) I have happiness beyond addition
To have assisted you in this Revenge.
If you propose some other, I Would be proud to serve.

Rosa. Thou shall't.
For I Have resolved the haughty Tyrants Death.
And it is by you, that he must lose his Life.

Alm. By me! what, kill the King! I dare not do it.

Rosa. Have not Courage to murder in the dark?
A Coward Villains fittest to murder.
But if thy fear delays my just Revenge
One short moment, I Will strait to Alboino,
And with my deepest dissimulation
I Will weep, I Will vow thou forced me to thy lust.
Think how his boundless Rage will use thee then,
A Death so lingering, painful he will inflict,
The Torments of the damned will come far short of thine.

Alm. Hold Madam, allow me a Moments thought.

Rosa. But if thou dare perform, what I command,
Rewards, great as his punnishments, are thine.
Think when thou strik'st the Tyrant to the Heart
The lucky blow gives thee his Crown and Queen.

Alma. Now you have named the most prevailing motive,
Unmoved thus Paris heard the Rival Goddesses
But when the Queen of Love proffered herself
She quickly won the Hero to her side:

Rosa. Lose no time then, it is now the dead of night,
The prop'rest Season to commit such deeds.
The Town will to the Romans be betrayed,
But Alboino must be dispatched before,
See where his ill stars send him to his Death,
Undressed, unarmed; blessed opportunity!
I leave you to the Execution.
You Will sure strike home, since you already know
The great rewards that will attend the Blow.

[ Exit Rosamund. Enter Alboino. Alb. Yesterday's Riot sits heavy on me;
My Fancy, Spirits are so much oppressed.
By the dregs of Wine, I cannot freely think.

Alm. Now is my time, while his back is to me -- but
Then it is too sure a way, I must by one stroke secure his death
(apart,
Alb. Business and action must employ this day.
The Romans shall repent their daring soon;
And where they hoped submission, find their Death.
I Will strait give orders that my Army moves,
And at the approaching of day, I Will fight them.

Alma. First let me warn you of impending Ills.
Before you do a Foreign foe attack,
From a domestic one secure your self,
A black Conspiracy against you's formed;
By discontented Slaves, and seeming Friends.

Alb. Lives there the Wretch who dares attempt my Life?
Who can complain of Wrong, since I was King?
Some Men may tax me with severity;
But it is the height of Justice to reward
Virtue, and rigorously punish Crimes.
None wish my Death, who would be safe themselves.

Alma. Were your whole Court composed of honest Men,
Would Heaven grant their Prayers alone, you would be
Immortal, and would reign secure as Jove.
But even Heaven has not been free from Vice;
Pride and Ambition boldly enterd there,
And even there conspiracies were hatched.
Jove hurled from thence those Vices to the Earth,
But still permitted such to swarm in Courts.

Alb. This from thee! this speaks thee brave and honest.
Thy Character was misrepresented;
Thou have been wronged, and I imposed upon.
But Monarchs are the last who hear the Truth:
If thou are half so honest, as thou seemst,
Relate this black design against my Life.

Alma. Were I less honest silence were more safe;
Mine is a dangerous piece of Loyalty,
Who rashly against Favorites informs,
Gains with his Prince unwilling slow belief,
Where he expects Rewards, meets with Contempt,
And by their greater interest, is crushed.

Alb. Doubt not severest Justice on my Foes;
I Will punish them, and thee I will reward.
Let this Embolden thee to utter Truth,
Be thus near me ever.

[Embraces him. Alma. Then I impart
The secret thus.

(stabs him.) Alb. Oh treacherous Villain!
Oh barbarous, inhumane, bloody Slave!
That I could reach thee, with my dying gasps,
I Would force thee with me to my Grave.

Alm. Now I can safely hear thee threat and rail,
And that the thoughts may give the paineful Death,
Kow that I passed last night with Rosamund.
To murder thee was the reward she asked,
And by this deed, she and thy Crown are mine:
Dye with that Thought. I Would stay to plague thee more,
But I must haste away to seize on both.

Exit. Alb. It Is a tormenting, dismal thought indeed.
Which racks me worse, than even the Pangs of Death,
Woman! Woman! how endless are thy ills!
They know not when to leave, when they have once
Begun, but boundless in all their Passions.
Was It not enough to wrong the Marriage Bed,
But must my death complete thy Crimes.
Shall my Crown, the Crown which I have purchased
At the expense of so much Toil and Blood,
Be the Reward of Murderers and Whores?
Ebb faster out ye dull remains of Life,
That death may free me from such tortering thoughts.

Enter Aistolfus, Desiderio. Aist. Can it be certain that the Towns betrayed,
Can there be a Villain so besotted,
So blindly led by Passion or disgust,
Who would betray his Country and his King
To Foreign Power to gratify himself?

Desid. What urged the Traitors to an act so vile
I know not; but one of my Officers
Who was posted at the Ravenna Gate,
Came to inform me of the Treason, and by
His Wounds confirmed the Truth of his Report.
Let Us lose no time then, but haste to the King:
Try if his presence can reedeem the Town.

Aist. Ha! is not that the King, stretched on the Ground?
What can that sad dejected posture mean?

Alb. Shall I thus tamely, thus poorly perish,
And is there none, who will revenge this Murder?

Aist. What! murdered! Ha! Oh cursed nefarious deed!

[both Running up to him. Desid. Murdered! nay then our Ruin is complete.
But what is Life or Power when you are gone!

Alb. Surely ye two are honest, and my Friends,
And for numberless Villains may atone.
Else Heaven may blush at Monsters it has formed,
Disown creative Power, and lay the work on Chance.

Aist. The infernal God of Malice and Revenge
Contrived this horrid Act, and watched his. Time
To rob us of you, when your unhappy,
Your betrayed Kingdom did most require.
For tho no ills like this, this is not all;
The Romans have by treachery got the Town,
Already they are masters of the Gates,
And now pour in unresisted Forces.

Alb. Oh for a moments strength! that my weak Limbs
Could bear me, only to my Armies Head!
That like a King and Soldier I might fall;
And some brave Foe might glory in my Death.
But I sink, and have only strength to wish.

Aist. Oh tell us first, e're you leave us ever,
Who was the Wretch, who impiously durst strike
The Man who represents his God on Earth,
But who would kill his King, difowns the Gods.

Alb. My Wound gapes wider with the racking Thought,
And my blood faster gushes out, that I
Who have so often braved Death, bred in Battles,
Inured to dangers, and have still overcome;
Should by a Cowards stroke thus meanly fall.
For Almachild by Rosamunda urged,
Bribed with the enjoyment of the Prostitute,
Seemed my Friend to be the blacker Villain;
And while I took the Viper in my arms,
He basely plunged his Dagger in my breast.
I would not live so long to think this over,
Farewell -- Revenge my Death, and wear my Crown.

[Dies. Aist. Ah! what is thy Crown now its support is lost
Or what thy Kingdom since its Soul is gone?
It Is now an headless, dull, unactive Lump.
But to revenge is nobler than bewail;
'Twas thy Command, and thou shall't be obeyed,
Or may I have the Plagues of Regicides,
To live despairing and dye presumptuous.

Desid. Monsters! it is they then have betrayed the Town.
Oh fatal proof of Anger and Revenge!
Passion works strongest still in weakest minds.
What Is to be done to satiate our Revenge?
The Queen has many Friends,
Gained by affected low humility;
For proudest Minds are the most abject too.
And backed by Rome, she may maintain a War
Which will protract, perhaps evade our just intent.

Aist. We'll try to effect it then by other means.

(Trumpets are heard. Hark they come triumphant in their baseness.
Longinus has a noble generous Soul,
Which must abhor this black, tho gainful deed,
By honorable peaceful Terms I Will work my end,
For force should always be attempted last.
And if I can revenge my Masters Death,
Twill please me more than to possess his Crown.
But let us have his body first removed
Dead Kings should not be seen by vulgar Eyes,
For Monarchs we ought never to despise.
But the dull Rabble ignorant, and bold,
Think him no King, who was born of common Mold.
[Exeunt, the Guards bearing off Alboino. Trumpets. Enter Longinus, Rosamund,
Almachild, Odoacre, Guards. Rosa. When I contrived barbarous Alboino's Death,
It Was not Revenge alone that moved me to it.
I knew the World of right belonged to Rome.
Justice prevailed with me to kill the King,
And lay my Crown at brave Longinus Feet.

Long. The generous Gift does more secure your Crown,
Then vain Alboino's best Resistance could.
Tho by our Arms, it had been forced from him,
Your conquering eyes had won his Kingdom back;
For Heaven designed you Mistress of the Earth,
And made you Queen of beauty, and the World.
Such wondrous beauty gilds over all her faults.
None can see that and yet reflect on them.

(aside.) Rosa. But by me alone the War's not ended,
He too deserves a share in the applause.
(pointing to Alma. Who boldly from a Tyrant set me free,
And Rome from an invet'rate Enemy.
Nor could I less, than bestow my Person,
As some Reward for services so great.

Long. It Is a reward as far above desert,
As your Heavenly Form's above description.
No Tongue can give to that sufficient Praise,
No Service can presume to merit you.
It Is reward so vast, that should Justinus
Lay the whole Roman Empire at his Feet,
He might contemn the mean, the worthless Gift.

Alma. Words have not Force to say how well I love,
And Gratitude's as hard to be expressed,
My future Acts will best discover both.
But their remains some yet to be dispatched,
To make us more securely blessed and great,
Old Aistolfus and Desiderio.

Rosa. He counsels well, my Lord; were they remvo'd,
Their Army then would moulder and disperse.

Long. They both are worthy and experienced men;
'Twere well that we could win them to our side.
However they may be still within the Town.
Let us then haste and issue orders out
To have each Gate secured, and stop their flight.

Exeunt omnes praeter Odoacre. Odoa. And is my hoped Reward then come to this?
Am I thus slighted, after what I Have done?
No thanks paid, no notice taken of me.
Death and Hell! have I betrayed my Country,
Lost my Honor, and Peace of Mind for this?
God nothing but a distracted Conscience?
And stripped of all my hopes by Almachild,
Because he has acted a greater ill.
Interest made me plot before, now Revenge:
I Will either work his Ruin or my own.
And by Longinus amorous looks, I guess
And Praises of Rosamunda's Beauty,
He Will join with me in my design.
Soft Love will urge as far, as fierce Revenge.
As he is going out, Enter Flora. My Daughter here! Flora, what business brings
you to Court?

Flo. I came to find you out, and on my Knees to ask you forgiveness.

Odoa. You could not have taken a worse time; I was
Meditating on Revenge, and am but in an ill humor
To forgive. But what is your offense?

Flo. Tho you might have consented, had I acquainted
You with it; yet concealment is a Crime.

Odoa. Well, what is it?

Flo. For nothing can excuse my disposal of my self without Your knowledge.

Odoa. Disposal! what is it you mean, I say?

Flo. I am privately married.

Odoa. Married! promised I suppose you mean. For Almachild is otherwise engaged.

Flo. It Is not to him, tho 'twas by his advice I married Clefi, Alvaro's Son.

Odoa. Ay his advice! why should he advise her? -- he has
Enjoyed her first himself, then thrown her on that
Fool. I Will know the bottom.
aside. Base and unworthy! you ask forgiveness, not that you repent your
Crimes; an unfeigned sorrow would acknowledge all; but you
Confess a fault, you know you cannot conceal.

Flo. Acknowledge all! I will not invent to try your Goodness,
It Is well if I am pardoned this.

Odoa. To try your Hypocrisy, I have thus long pretended
Ignorance; but I can bear no more, and your denial
Will be vain, after Almachild has openly told all.

Flo Told it! oh ungrateful, perfidious Man! What Has he told!


Odoa. So, now it is plain, but I Will smother my resentment of her baseness, to
be the surer revenged on him, and now I have a double cause. (aside.) Yes he
tells it publicly, and triumphs iu your undoing, and in dishonouring my Family.


Flo. What! already declare my weakness, has he taken so much Pains, been at so
great expense of Time and Wealth only for the pleasure of talking? can Men
delight so much in publishing their Vices and Women's Follies? but I have not
more reason to be enraged against him, than you against me, What must I do to
pacify you, and be revenged on him?


Odoa. Could I undo him with the Queen, 'twere noble mischief, I have it, make
her jealous -- right -- that cannot fail. (aside.) You cannot appease me, nor
demonstrate your repentance but by punishing him.


Flo. Instruct me how; I Will hasten with a more eager joy, than I did first to
his Embraces.


Odoa. Being a Man of great quality and wealth, he has been allowed an
apartment in Court, I think that door leads to it; I suppose you are well
acquainted with it; contrive to get admittance there, and be ready to answer
when I call; leave the rest to my management.


Flo. I have still the fatal Key he gave me, which opens a private backdoor.


Odoa. That Is lucky; convey yourself into it; I Will acquaint you farther with my
design as we walk.

Successful Ruin will attend my Plot,
Since I Have the assistance of a Woman got.

Exeunt. ACT V.
Scene continues. Enter Longinus, Aistolfus, Desiderio. Aist. Hmd we to your
Army designed to fly,
We have convinced you how secure 'twou'd be.
But we intend not to prolong the War,
Let Alboine's Murderers be punished,
And of his Crown dispose as you think fit.

Desid. Our zealous duty to our dead Master
Is not more concerned in it, than your Glory.
To protect such Wretches, approves their Crimes;
Think how they will be abhorred by honest men;
How black they will seem to all posterity;
And would you with such Miscreants be ranked?

Long. I Am not biased by the gainful Treason,
Nor so much blinded by Rosamund's Face;
As to approve or justify the Deed.
But since they have thrown themselves on me for aid,
It were meanly done, should I desert them.

Aist. Heaven winks at Crimes for reasons it best knows.
And by a long sorbearance often seems pleased,
Nor with injustice must we tax the Gods
Tho Vice thrives, and Virtue is afflicted,
Unsearchable, yet just, are their Decrees.
But Man is judged by outward, present acts,
Our Fame is irrecoverably lost,
Should we seem vicious, for a real Good;
W' are branded with Hypocrisy at least.

Long. Then let the Guilt be wholly Almachild's,
Let him be punished, and excuse the Queen.
Perhaps to remove the Odium from her self,
I may prevail with her, to give Consent,

Desid. Impartial Justice will pardon neither,
Shall he suffer for the Murder only,
And shall she escape who urged him to it?
There can be no sufficient Tortures found
To rack the impious, sacrilegious slave
Who durst imbrue his Hands in Royal blood.
But she had a double Tie of Duty,
And sacred each, her Husband, and her King.

Aist. And one she owed her Life and Freedom to,
When he had conquered by a lawful War
Her Fathers Kingdom, he shared it with her,
And from a Captive raised her to a Crown.

Long. That matchless beauty, which moved Alboino,
Now strongly pleads in her behalf with me.
Who ever looks on her must be her slave.
'Twere arrogance in me to censure her;
Whatever she does I cannot think a fault,
The Property of Vice by her is changed;
She stamps a beauteous form on all her acts,
And makes destructive Mischief pleasing seem.

Aist. So Men
Do fatally in Calentures mistake,
And for firm Ground the liquid Waters take.
Or tho she is varnished over with what men Beauty call,
Yet look within you will find her black as Hell.
No Sirens voice has more enticing Charms,
Nor gives more certain Ruin than her Face.

Long. Be not so violent in your Revenge,
Let Almachild first fall your Sacrifice.
Have Charity for her, as she is Woman,
And give her leisure to repent her faults.

Aist. 'Twere rather Charity in killing her,
Let her not live to taste such Misery,
TO endure the Tortures of such fierce Despair,
As must gnaw her Soul, when she sees her Crimes.

Long. Reason and Justice strengthen all you say.
I Will strive to conquer this impetuous God,
That would control my Honor, and corrupt my Sense.
An hour hence expect me in that Room,
Where one at least shall fall your Sacrifice.

Exit. Enter Avaro, Clefi, Angellina, Ava. Oh my Lord, luckily encountered, I
have often
Forbore Court, to avoid you, now I am come purposely
To find you. But my Rage at present overcomes my
Intended Kindness. Do you see that sheepish Rogue there,
Look on him, do you not perceive what he has done?

Cle. Nay, the truth on it is, I must confess that --

Ava. Confess, no, no, you need not, you need not confess;
Whoever looks on you may see it. Come, come hither
I Will refer it now to all this company, if without
Thy Confession, they would not know thee, by that
Miserable, simple, mortisy'd Countenance, to be Married.

Aist. Come Sir, let us mediate in his behalf: Pray be
Pacified; if he is married, I Will undertake he is
Sufficiently wretched, without your anger.

Ava. Why he has married a Beggar; would you have
An hungry man filled without Victuals, would you have
Me pacified without Money; he may be filled with
Wind indeed, and I with Rage, but never satisfied.

Cle. I did not think but --

Ava. Few in thy condition ever thought; nor did I when
I begot thee. No, I dare swear thou did not think;
Why I can see that too in thy countenance; truly thou
Have a very foretelling Face. Come, I Will read thy
Destiny in it. First, there is Matrimony; no, first
There Is Cuckoldom, for thou were it a Cuckold before
Thou were it married; next there is Poverty, next
Repentance, next Despair, then Death and the Devil.

Cle. Lord, Lord, you are so choleric, you will not hear a
Body speak. I would no more have married her, than
You would, if I had not been persuaded she was
Rich, and I though that so good an excuse, that you
Would even be pleased with me, for my disobedience.

Ava. If she had been so, I had never inquired how she
Became so: but do you think I will pardon you,
Since you were deceived. Go, begone out of my sight,
Try how Matrimony and Poverty will agree. Go, see,
Now you are poor, whether people will mistake your
Laughing for good humor, and your much talking for Wit.

Aist. A little of your kindness will make 'em happy,
And agreeable to each other: for fools are generally
Fonder of each other, than wits.

Ava. Ah, my Lord, I know you speak only out of good
Nature; but I believe 'twill please you more to
Bestow my Daughter on Desiderio. What say you, Sir,
Will you pardon all my former denials, if I now give
You my consent?

Desi. Most readily; I could pardon thee had thou been
One of Alboino's Murderers, to purchase her.
But tho I am so desirous to have her mine, I would
Not owe it wholly to her obedience; rather let Love
Prevail with her, let her give one proof of that, she
Has many of Duty to you.

Ang. I have already confessed my Love to my Father, tho
Perhaps I never should to you, without his consent.
Believe not my Love to be the less, or that I shall make
The worse Wife for my Obedience. For who pays it
Not to a Parent, never will to a Husband.

Desid. Be mine at any rate, I must be happy.

Ava. Well, take her, take her, and with her you shall have
All my Wealth; but then you must stay till I am
Dead, I cannot for the blood of me part with it,
And live.

Desi. I never required that, nor do I want it to increase
My happiness. And you, Sir, [ To Clefi.] tho
You have not been my friend, yet since you are
Angellina's Brother, I will provide for you.

Cle. Ah, ten thousand thanks upon my knees; well I am not the
First man has raised his fortunes by a handsome Sister.

Aist. Well, Desiderio, I have had patience thus long,
To see your happiness confirmed.
And now Alboino's blood calls for Vengeance.
I will delay no longer my Revenge.
If Longinus consents not, I Will force him.
But be not vain, because she says she loves.
Believe me friend, it is owing all to fate,
It Is not for Merit that we love or hate.

Exeunt. Enter Rosamund, Longinus, Odoacre. Longinus speaks entering. (aside.)
Long. All my designs are baffled by her eyes;
I am so much her Beauty's slave,
So awed, I dare not have the man destroyed
Upon whose ruin depends my happiness;
For fear it should offend, and raise a frown.

Rosa. Is then Alboino so much lamented?
Could such invet'rate cruelty and pride,
Gain him a lasting popular applause?

Odo. When Monarchs fall by an untimely death,
The people color commonly their faults;
Their virtues then are only named and praised.
Cruelty is called impartial Justice,
And pride, a noble carriage fit for regal state.

Long. He tells you true.
Never was man so pitied and beloved.
The people mourn his loss in louder cries,
Than Soldiers Io's for their victories.
Their loss of liberty and life they slight,
His death alone engrosses all their Grief.

Rosa. Let the unthinking Rabble bellow on,
I scorn their censures, they are never in the right.
They hate one day what they will adore the next.
Color the most abominable wrong.
With Liberty's deceitful specious name,
And you may gain them to what ill you please.

Odo. That way I tried, almost to my ruin.
The Mob attended calmly my discourse,
While I harranguld in praise of Liberty;
But when I said, by Alboino's death 'twas purchased,
Had I pronounced their deaths, they had raged less;
Down with him, flea him, burn him, was the cry;
And then they hurled against me Stones, Forks, Staves,
And all the Rabbles instruments of War.
And had the Guards not quickly interposed,
I soon had been devoured by their rage.

Long. Nor can I awe them to more mild resolves,
Than punishing the murderers with death,
So they call them.

Rosa. What, am I not secure
By my own Guards, and by the Roman power?
In my own Palace shall I dread the crowd?
I slight the weak many headed Monster,
Nay Life I scorn rather than owe it them.

Long. They Are of themselves giddy and impotent,
Yet they are often employed, as great Men's Tools,
Who work their ends by their impetuous Force,
Secure and secret they increase the Flame,
And loo them on to desperate mischief.

Odoa. Their number gives them courage to attempt.
They rashly enterprise what they resolve,
Before they have leisure to reflect on fear.
Nor from their fury can you long be safe
But by deliv'ring to them Almachild;
Which may divert their charge of guilt from you.

Rosa. It Is thou should be delivered to their Rage,
Who prompt'st me thus, to such ingratitude.
Wou'd'st have me so unworthily desert
The Man, whose act obedience was to me?

Long. I must advise the same, but I am moved
To wish his Death, by those enticing Eyes,
I burst with Envy at the joys he reaps,
And yet those awful Eyes secure his Life;
Did I not dread their Frowns, his Rivals Sword
Should soon remove the bar to all my hopes.

Odoa. And yet it is strange, that such Victorious Eyes
So used to Conquests and preserve them too;
Should be so suddenly contemned by him.
That such refreshing charming Sweets should cloy
The stupid Animal in one short Hour.

Rosa. Take heed, mock not me, nor vilify him*
My anger will prove as dangerous to you,
As my enraged jealousy would to him.

Odoa. He was my Friend, and still he should be so,
Had I not seen his perfidy to you.
And proof of that within this Hour I had,
If sighs and vows to others may be Proofs,
And if embraces and appointments are.

Rosa. It Is only Pride with hinders jealousy;
Meanly we think of others, of our selves too well
But proceed.

(aside* Odoa. A Vail concealed the Lady he admired,
But in this Room I overheard the Intrigue.
He pressed her hands, and on it swore his truth;
My Life! he cried, in an Hour I Will return,
I Will but pay the Queen a formal Visit,
And haste to thee, my Soul; here take this Key
And wait so long in my apartment there.

Rosa. I disdain to show how much I Am enraged,
I Will keep my fury collected within,
Till at once I pour it all on him.
(aside. Perhaps she still is there, force open the door,
I Will see this powerful Beauty.

Odoa. Best stay, I Will knock and counterfeit his Voice,
My Love! my dear! here is your Almachild.
(knocking at the door. She speaks as she opens the Door, and runs to him.

Flo. Where have thou been loit'ring so long, my Life?
Seeing them, she pretends to shriek and run back.

Odoa. [ holding her.] Nay Madam, do not believe you shall retreat
We Have discovered the amor, and must your Face.

Rosa. Approach nearer thou presumptuous Fool,
Unvail thy self, that I may see that Face
Which dare admit his Love, whose Heart's my due.

Flo. Where shall I fly, who will protect me now?
What can I hope from an offended Queen?
And Death I dread from an enraged Father:

[lifting up her Vail. Odoa. Damnation, what do I see! my Daughter!
On unworthy, infamous Prostitute!
Have I thus labored to prove him Villain
But to publish my Families disgrace,
But with my Sword I Will wipe the stain out, thus --

Long. [ holding him.] Hold, moderate your Passion, pity her,
And show more respect in the Queen's presence.

Rosa. Do thou pretend to rage? it is I that ought:
What Is scandal or disgrace, to jealousy?
But furious words are Cowards Resentments,
And weak Women's, who cannot right themselves.
Monarchs in acts not words should show their Wrath.
And by one blow thus I procure Revenge.

(going to stab her.) Flo. [ kneeling.] Ah do not kill me! and I Will confess all.

Odoa. Confess! interpose or we are ruined.

( to Longinus. Rosa. Confess! do thou think that will excuse thee.
Do believe I Will listen, till thou repeatst
The Arts he used, the Vows he made to win thee;
That will increase my painful Rage too much,
Delay thy death, and my Revenge too long.

Long. Give me leave to interceed for her Life;
Forgive her for her faithful Fathers sake;
Tho now he would join with you in your Revenge,
Nature will soon move him to pardon her,
And wish to have her stained, rather than Dead.

Rosa. To his services let her own her Life;
But, hence, I can no longer bear her Sight.
Why, this exceeds Alboino's Crime! I burst with rage.
Tho it is not that I love the fickle wretch,
For Wives are jealous, tho they do not love.

Odoa. I beg I may obtain one favor more,
That I may punish him, for both our wrongs.
Then if I may advise, take Longinus,
A worthier choice, and which secures your Crown.

Rosa. Merits like his may hope for any thing.
But I Will please my self in the Traitors Death,
Ha! behold he comes to his appointment!
How every circumstance agrees!
Retire, and leave his Punishment to me.
[ Exeunt Longinus and Odoacre Now let me play the Woman to deceive:

Enter Almachild Pensive. Alm. Was it a dream? have Dreams such wondrous power*
Vast Prerogative of Sleep,
Thus to insult our thoughts when we are awake.
Other Men sleep, and so forget their Pain,
But one Hours sleep robs me for ever of my rest,
The Murder was as great, the Sin as great before;
Yet was I easy in my Mind, calm and at peace.
Do Sense and Judgment clearer work in Sleep?
Business and noise diverted them before;
Sleep has awak'ned them to my eternal Plague.

Rosa. What mean those Sighs, har'd Looks, and heavy Gate.

(a side.) Alm. Oh my Rosamund! I have been seeking you,
To try to ease my Griefs b'imparting them:
For oh! I bear a load within my Breast
Enough to sink me to the lowest Hell.
But I Am so filled, so choked with black despair,
I well may burst, but have not breath to speak.

Rosa. What can this mean? sure it is to color his design.
(aside. Alike we should relate our joys and griefs,
'Twill improve the one, and lessen the other.
As Winds imprisoned in the Earths Cavernes
Then rage and storm with greatest Violenc,
And seem to shake the basis of the World,
But when they have forced a Vent, they quickly waste.
So sorrow stifled in our breasts racks most.
But why do thou complain of Griefs and Pain,
Cannot a Crown and Queen complete thy Joys?

Alm. Are you to ask the Cause of my despair?
You who compelled me to the cruel deed.
Art thou so hardened in impenitence,
Or do thou only ignorance affect?
Think on Alboino, my murdered Master.
Think on thy wronged Husband, think on our King,
And then be happy; do not stattle thee?
Does not despair and horror seize thy Soul?

Rosa. Nay then it is time to kill the Tender Fool,
And end his idle superstitious Fears,
Else such disquiet Thoughts he will raise in me.

(aside) Alm. Confess the gnawing fortunes of thy Mind,
And with severest words accuse thy self,
That I may have a clearer Idea
Of my Sin, fill me with raging despair
Till it distracts my distempered senses.
Oh wretched State! oh tormenting Crime! When I
From Madness only can expect a Cure.

Rosa. Some melancholy dream has raised these thoughts.
Thou feast I am quiet and undisturbed,
Nor can repent what Justice moved me to.

Alm. See where the Royal, sacred Ghost appears,
(starting.) See where he stands, and bodes me certain Hell.
And look this cursed Hand is stained with Blood.

Rosa. You but create this anguish to your self,
There Is no such thing, these are idle fancies.

Alma. My Conscience sees him plain; and tho he is gone,
His dreadful Image is fixed ever here.
Break, burst my Heart, why should thou thus endure
Such cruel Torments, as admit no Cure?
From time it self, thou can not hope for ease,
No action past, none to come can please.
Friendless without, distraction all within,
Obdurate made* as Punnishment for Sin.

Rosa. These sad thoughts, Music and Love shall banish,
Retire with me to my Alcove, and try their Force.

Alm. Lead on, and dispose of me as you please,
But much I fear, there can no Art be found
To heal my Minds envenomed desperate Wound.

Exeunt. SONG.
I.
OH Love how mighty are thy Joys!
Who can bear the Ecstasy,
Joy so great my Life destroys,
In Rapture now I dye.
II.
But that I ever might partake
Of such transporting Bliss,
I would in t'ether World awake,
As I expire in this.
After the Song is ended, the Scene draws and discovers Rosamund and Almachild
sitting, she with a Cup in her hand. Rosa. Here Is what will end his care; it is
a Poison
Of such force, three drops destroys him in a moment.
aside. Still you appear disturbed, my Almachild;
Have my tender Embraces no effect?
Shall all my Arts and Love be tried in vain,
Will naught dispel your melancholy thoughts?

Alma. Nothing can ease me while my Memory lasts.
Music heightens and improves our passions;
It increases, but never changes them.
The pleasant it transports with Mirth and Joy,
But fills the sad with a more fierce Despair.

Rosa. If Love and Music cannot prevail, try this.
Here I Have prepared a Cordial for my Love.

Alma. Wine for the present may allay our Griefs,
But they will return, and rack with double Force.
However give it me, I Would leave naught untried.
(He takes the Bowl and Drinks. A Cordial is it? it is strangely nauseous.
I cannot force my Stomach, to receive
One drop more -- what means this sudden coldness
Near my Heart, and this swimming in my Head?

Rosa. I find it begins to work already,
Half he has drank, will send him strait to Hell.

(aside. Alm. Now it is plain, by all my fears it is Poison,
But she shall not triumph in my Death too.
(aside. Here my Rosamund, I find its Virtues
To be so excellent, that you must pledge me.

Rosa. I need it not, I have my health entire.

Alm. Oh thou bloody Monster! worse than Woman!
How have I deserved this barbarity.
Thy refusal, as well as my Torments,
Discovers thy baseness But I Will not fall alone.
Here drink this, while I have strength to force thee.

Rosa. Help! Murder! help! where are my Guards? Murder!

Alm. Thy resistance is vain, here take thy choice,
Drink or I Will strike this Dagger to thy Heart.
Nay delay not one Moment, if thou do --

[offering to stab her. Rosa. Hold, give it me, Death looks less dreadful here.
She drinks, and then Enter Longinus, Aistolfus, Desiderio, Odoacre, Guards.
Alma. So, now let them come to her assistance.
I dye pleased, since time was for this deed given,
And by this Justice I may merit Heaven.

Dies. Long. What does this mean?
Whence proceeds his Death and your fainting Looks?

Rosa. Ah! you are come too late, he has forced me
To share the Poison, I prepared for him.
Odoacre there! then dread thy Fate next.
Justice has overtaken the Murder
I contrived, and will soon thy Treachery.
TO Enemies your Country you betrayed,
While I a Plot to kill Alboino laid.
No Art can thee from divine Justice guard.
And I in Death and Hell shall meet Reward.

(Dies.) Desid. Were It thou the Villain, who betrayed the Town,
Thus Traitor I Will fulfill her Prophecy.

(They fight. Long. Hold, part them.
(Odoacre falls.
Odoa. I have deserved this end, and should rejoice.
I Have lived long in misery, my Conscience
Plagued me so much, I could no more bear Life.
My Fate is just and kind, I Will not complain,
And Death may end, but cannot increase my Pain.

(Dies. Long. I will not blame what Justice bid thee do,
Nor for interest will protect Villains.
( to Desiderio. But her I must lament, not all her Crimes,
Not death can deprive her of her beauty.

[looking on Rosamund. Aist. Be pleased, and thankful for Heaven's Justice,
Which has wisely freed you from the Love,
Which would else have sullied all your Renown.

Long. Time may persuade me to mind your advice.
But that I may pay the Regard that is due
To the noble Alboino's Memory;
Wear the Crown* which he bequeathed you; and be
Assured, Justinus will confirm the gift.
But only promise to remain his friend,
And quit all pretensions to Verona.

Aist. I Will readily agree to any terms,
So I may preserve Longinus friendship.
The greatest businss of my life is over,
Alboino's death is now fully revenged.
Yet for his fall, grief still my breast distends,
Crowns cannot recompense the loss of Friends.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
Spoke by Miss Dennis Chock.
OF all the Actors you have seen this day,
Our Scribbler culls out me, to excuse his Play,
I cried I was too young; be said, he knew
The likeliest way to please, was to be new.
I could not choose but laugh, to find the Fool
Should think Ine're was tried, bred in this School:
And therefore, to remove his gross mistake,
I told I Would been used before to speak.
But since I was it address to you, he swore,
It was no fault, to have been used, Before.
Tho he has taken after all wrong measure,
Either to give the Men, or Ladies Pleasure.
Gladly he would divert yon beauteous Row;
In vain he strives, for by my self I know,
They hate, what they admired an hour ago.
Yet, since they are not always of one mind,
Some, at some minutes, may perhaps be kind.
One tender look from them will please him more
Than when the Pit applauds, or Gall'ries roar.
And for the Men, I m told there was a time,
When nothing moved like Virgins in their Prime.
But Time alas is changed; now it is not so,
Nothing will please the Beaux now, but a Beau.
They come not now with Masks to keep a pother,
But from Side-boxes ogle one another.
But I forget for what I am come here.
Well, it is not yet too late, because I hear,
For all your forward boasts, you love the Rear.
I come, to beg for Mercy for the Play,
Yet do not think, I Will for your Judgment stay.
No, I Will be gone, because such generous Youths,
When my Back's turned, will speak the kindest Truths.
FINIS.

