THE Two First BOOKS, OF PHILOSTRATUS, Concerning the Life of Apollonius
Tyaneus: Written Originally in GREEK, And now Published in ENGLISH: TOGETHER
WITH PHILOLOGICAL NOTES Upon each CHAPTER.

By CHARLES BLOUNT, Gent.

Cum omnia in incerto sint, fave tibi,
and creed quod mavis. --
Senec. -- non vocibus ullis
Numen eget: dixitque semel Nascentibus auctor
quicquid scire licet, sterileis nec legit arenas,
Vt caneret paucis, mersitque hoc pulvere verum:
Estque Dei seeds nisi terra, and Pontus, and aer,
Et Coelum, and virtus, Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcumque vides, quocumque moveris.
Luc. Ph. lib. 9. LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL THOMPSON, next Door to the Sign
of the Cross-Keys in Fetter-Lane, Anno Domini, 1680.

The PREFACE.
READER,
WHether kind or unkind, I shall call you neither, for fear lest I be mistaken;
However, to You alone (and that without the Patronage of any great Person) I
Dedicate this Book; which if it be any ways diverting to You, will answer my
expense of Time, and Yours of Money: if otherwise, it is now too late for either
to repent. The humor of this Age is such, that a Dedication or Preface before
a Book, and a Grace before a Meal, are thought to be equally necessary, and
useful: As if the one was no less a Preservative against the succeeding folly
in the Author, than the other against the crooked Pin in the Pudding First then
for Dedications, their Flattery is so gross and fulsom, that all Men of
Ingenuity or Honor must nauseate and abhor them; There you shall see the wise
men of Greece, and Heroes of Troy laid flat on their backs, when in comparison
of our gallant Patron, (perhaps some Country Esquire or Justice) Aristotle's a
Coxcomb, Plato an Ass, Hercules, Ajax, Achilles, Alexander and Caesar, are all
but so many Cowards and Striplings: Or if she be a Woman to whom He Addresses
Himself, though She be really and truly as ugly as the Devil, and as Whorish as
Thais her self, yet He has that art of washing a Blackmore white, that with two
or three lines of his Pathetick Quill, he can make her more Beautiful than
Helen of Troy, or the Egyptian Queen, and more Chaste than Penelope her self;
Insomuch, that most Dedications differ little from some Funeral Sermons,
wherein, for a new Mourning Gown, a Gold Ring, and Five or Ten Pounds to the
Vicar of the Parish, our beloved Brother [though a Devil in this World,] is
made a Saint in the next. Secondly, for Prefaces, they ever were, and still are
but of two sorts, let other Modes and Fashions vary as they please; Let the
profane long Peruke succeed the godly cropped Hair; the Cravat, the Ruff;
Presbytery, Popery; and Popery, Presbytery again, yet still the Author keeps to
his old and wonted method of Prefacing; when at the beginning of his Book he
enters either with an Halter about his Neck, submitting himself to his Readers
Mercy whether he shall be hanged or no; or else in a huffing manner he appears
with the Halter in his hand, and threatens to hang his Reader, if he gives him
not his good Word. This, with the excitement of some Friends to his
undertaking, and some few Apologies for want of Time, Books, and the like, are
the constant and usual shams of all Scriblers, as well Ancient, as Modern.

But now as for my part, I enter the Lists upon another score, and think my
self obliged in Duty to give you some account why I have here presented you
with so imperfect an History. My Author PHILOSTRATUS, Written Originally in
Greek, has ever till now of late been esteemed so inoffensive a Writer, that
the most strict Catholic Inquisitors have never opposed either the Reading or
Translating of him; Thus we see him already rendered into Latin by Monsieur
Morell, and into French by Monsieur Vigenere; both which Translations are now
Printed in France by public Authority and Approbation. Neither indeed could
they rationally except against him, as being no more than a bare Narrative of
the Life of a Philosopher, not of a new Messiah, or any ways in opposition to
the old; no, PHILOSTRATUS does not any where so much as mention the name of
CHRIST; And if one Heathen Writer (HIEROCLES) did make an ill use of this
History, by comparing APOLLONIUS with CHRIST, what is that to PHILOSTRATUS, who
never meant nor designed it so, as I can any where find? However, EUSEBIUS has
already confuted HIEROCLES, which Confutation I had intended to have annexed to
PHILOSTRATUS by way of Antidote; although to Rational Men, I think there needed
none. Secondly, if it be objected, (as I know it will,) that it may be of ill
Consequence, to let the Vulgar perceive that any other Person acted Miracles
besides MOSES, CHRIST, and the APOSTLES; How comes it then to pass that that
passage in the Old Testament of the Magicians, and that other in the New of
Simon Magus, have hitherto escaped the Index Expurgatorius? Moreover, how came
Dr. More's Mystery of Godliness to be permitted? wherein he writes a whole
comparison betwixt our Savior Christ and Apollonius, setting down at large the
Miracles both of the one and the other? Besides, the Scriptures themselves do
frequently acknowledge that such Miracles shall be acted by False Prophets, as
would deceive [if it were possible] the very Elect: So as if the Vulgar were
hereby made acquainted with the Miracles of Apollonius, it would be no new
thing, but rather advantageous to the Scriptures, than otherwise, by how much
the luster of a true Diamond appears the more beautiful when compared with
counterfeit Stones. However, Philostratus delivers them with so much of
indifferency and modesty, that he endeavors all that in him lies to withdraw
his Readers from the belief of them; to instance only in the last Chapter of
his Fourth Book, where, speaking of Apollonius's raising a young Wench from the
dead, He there gives you several Natural Reasons to show how it might be done
without a Miracle; and so much for Philostratus.

Now as to my self, I am so far from comparing him with our Blessed Savior, or
from giving credit to any other New Miracles, that my daily request of God is,
to give me Faith enough to believe the old. But then if it be inquired for what
Reason I undertook to Translate him; my Answer is, that I thought the many
Descriptions in him of remote Countries, and Ancient Customs so far different
from our own, as well as the Philosophical Discourses of Morality, might be
both diverting, and beneficial to all those that perused him. There are various
hints of ancient History, wherein Philostratus is esteemed Authentic, and
which I had design d to have illustrated by my Notes, had it been permitted
me. But Right is not a sufficient Argument against Might; Therefore 'twas a
wise Caution of the Ass in the Fable, who when there was a Law made against
all horned Beasts, feared lest his Ears might be expounded to be Horns, since
the Exposition of an Arbitrary Power is unlimited, and its vvays past finding
out. Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori.
Ovid. It is not altogether safe in this Plotting Age to ask what it is a
Clock, for who knows but some over sage-Coxcomb may from that most Wicked
Quaere, cause you to be apprehended for a Jesuit, as having some treacherous
Conspiracy to Execute at such an hour, that makes you so inquisitive of the
time of the day. But to doubt of any thing that is delivered in verbo
Sacerdotis, what can be a more Damning Sin? Therefore if you should
interrogate any such how he could prove his Divine Commission, his Doctrine,
Inspiration, and the like; I know his Answer would be, that you are a saucy
wicked fellow, that it concerns not Layicks to meddle with such matters, that
you cannot go to Heaven but by his means; that if a King or Principal
Magistrate did send you a message or Command by one of his known Officers, you
would not then presume to make all these uncivil Questions, and that you may as
well believe an Ass spoke, as believe there is a King of France, or City of
Rome, which you never savv, etc. But to the Point.

The whole Translation I have already finished, and had proceeded thus far as
you see in my Illustrations, when I found the Alarm was given in all parts
what a Dangerous Book was coming out; such a Book as would unmask all
practical Atheists, which [they being the greater number of men,] might
therefore prove of pernicious consequence to the Public. Above all, the Popish
Clergy thought themselves chiefly concerned herein, Who are so zealously
revengeful and malicious, that I feared it might fare with me as it did with
poor Esop, Who [notvvithstanding he had broken Jests upon several great Kings
and Potentates, without being punished for the same, yet] only speaking
against the Priests of Delphos, cost him his Life; the Story runs thus: Esop
being arrived at the City of Delphos, and looking upon the Priests, he said, I
may fitly compare You to the Wood which is carried upon the Sea; beholding it
afar off, we judge it of great value; but when we come near, we slight it: Even
so did I, (when far from your City,) admire you; but coming among you, find you
to be the most useless of Men. Now when the Delphian Priests heard this,
[fearing lest he should disparage them in other places,] they determined
craftily to take away his life; Whereupon taking a Golden Cup out of Apollo s
Temple, they secretly conveyed it amongst Esop's Baggage, who [not being aware
of their Subtilty,] began his Journey to Phocis, whereupon the Delphians
pursuing him, charged him with Sacrilege: He denied the Fact; but they
searching his Baggage, and finding the Cup about him, prevailed with the
Ignorant multitude [who knew nothing of the Cheat] to put him to death as a
wicked Sacrilegious Person. Now fearing least some such Chalice should be thus
thrust into my Portmantue, and the silly common People made believe I was a
Thief or an Atheist, which might cost me my Life, as it did Esop; I thought it
my safest way to let the two Milstones of Knavery and Folly, grind on to the
end of the World, without interposing my inconsiderable Opinion, which like the
small Barly-corn would serve only to be ground to pieces it self, without any
effect upon the motion of the Stones. It Is a thing of most Dangerous
Consequence to oppose any Doctrine that is publicly received, how sottish
soever it be; I have often vvonder'd at the obdurate Hearts of some incredulous
Mahometans, who, even to this day persist in that Heresy of believing in the
story of the Seven Sleepers; that there were but Five [besides the Dog] that
slept 300 years in a Cave; Whereas the A^CORAN positively declares, that true
Believers affirm them to be Seven, and their Dog to make up the Eighth, with a
severe Anathema upon all that believe otherwise. Now for my Part, rather than
incur the like Anathema, I think it much more safe to believe as the Church
believes; And (were I a Mohammedan,) should most willingly subscribe that
there were 800 besides the Dog, if the Mufti directed me so to do; But as I
am, shall at all times pin my Faith upon my Lord of Canterbury's sleeve:
Wherefore, if the Clergy would have APOLLONIUS esteemed a Rogue, and a
Iuggler; that being risen from the Dead, he is one of the principal fomenters
of this Popish Plot; or that there never was any such Man as APOLLONIUS, with
all my heart, what they please; For I had much rather have him decry'd in his
Reputation, than that some grave Cardinal, with his long Beard, and
Excommunicative Ha, should have me burnt for a Heretic. Therefore for these
Weighty Reasons I have thought fit to Prorogue the remaining part of this
History till Interest have no longer need of a Holy Masque, and till there be
discovered some new Road to the Heavenly Jerusalem, where every honest Man
may go without Leading-strings, or without being put to the Temporal charge of
a Spiritual Guide, and till Men quit the thoughts of going to Heaven by the
same means as they go to a Playhouse, ( viz.) by giving Money to the
Dore-keepers. Si Religio sit Fabula, Umbra fiet Sacerdos.

Lastly, As for my Illustrations; Notwithstanding they have ever some coherence
with my Text, yet I likewise designed them as Philological Essays upon several
Subjects, such as the least hint of my Author might present me with; And herein
making some occasional Reflections upon the defects of Humane Conversation; it
may [as I expect no otherwise] render me odious to all such guilty Persons
whose Follies are here exposed: For instance, Religion is a thing Sacred; but
he that shows how it is sometimes made a Cloak for Knavery, and how some Men
fight the Devils Battle under a counterfeit Banner of Christ, ( ut melius
possis fallere, sum Togam,) Shall render himself a mortal Enemy to Hypocrites.
In like manner Honor is Venerable, as being (when justly conferred) the Reward
of Virtue; But he who should tell you that it is sometimes made use of only as
Fullers-earth, to wash out the stains of an ignoble and base Original, or as a
support to the sinking credit of some half-witted rich Heir new launched into
an Estate, and thus upbraided by the Poet, Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in
illa
Fortuna. --
Horat. Whoever (I say) exposes any thing of this Nature, cannot but acquire
the ill will of all such who have nothing to show for their Gentility or
Brains, but a Patent; and so the like upon all other Subjects. Now the main
Scope and Design of Books in general, is, to teach either what Men should do,
or what they really do; whereof the first instruct you in little else than what
every Devout Old Gentlewoman teaches her little Grandson, and differ not much
from our Childrens Common Catechisms. But on the contrary, those Authors, who
(like Machiavil, Montaign, and all Writers of Satyr), give a true Description
of what Men really do; show that Mankind in general, ever was, is, and will be
the same, viz. Base, Treacherous, and False, studying nothing but their own
Interest and Safety, to which they will attain by any means whatsoever; That he
who makes himself a Sheep, becomes a Prey to the Wolf; and that if men are less
vicious, or more honest, it is not out of manners, but fear. Now by receiving
this Character, every man puts himself upon his Guard, and is thereby rendered
less apt to be invaded or injured; distrust making men more vigilant, and
vigilance more safe. Nevertheless, veritas odum parit; And he that gives this
true Character of his Fellow-Citizens, shall be hated even unto death, for that
most men are Dishonest, but few desire to be thought so. However, this is the
way of Writing which I have endeavored (though imperfectly) to imitate; And if
by showing what ill men do, some malicious Persons (who would have their Hearts
no more than their Chests of Treasure, unlocked by any but themselves,) should
mis-interpret my Design, as if I encouraged others to do the same; Let this
serve for my excuse, that I can be no more accountable for my Reader's
indiscretion herein, than any Fencing-master answerable, if his Scholars make
use of the Skill he taught them, to the Destruction of their Friends; whose
only aim was to instruct them how to Defend Themselves in a Just and Lawful
Cause.

Farewell.

CHARLES BLOUNT.

THE FIRST BOOK OF PHILOSTRATUS, Concerning the LIFE of APOLLONIUS the Tyanaean.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Rites and Silence of Pythagoras; also of Empedocles
the Agrigentine.
THey who commend [1] Pythagoras the [2] Samian, do generally relate that he
was not at first an Ionian, but [3] Euphorbus the Trojan, and dying (as Homer
writes) did afterward revive again. Furthermore they report, that he refused
to wear any Garment made with the skin of that Creature which died of any
Disease; also that he abstained from [4] eating living Creatures, being of
opinion, that no such thing ought ever to be [5] sacrificed, nor that the
Altars of the Gods should be defiled with blood; but rather that Wafers made
with Honey, Frankincense, and singing of Hymns should be rendered up unto them:
For such were the only Sacrifices that he himself did offer unto the Gods;
asserting, that he had ever found them to be far better pleased with those kind
of offerings, than in any [6] Hecatomb, or Knife with a Basket. For having been
conversant with the Gods, he had there learnt what things were pleasing, and
what displeasing to them. From hence he likewise gave out, that he had learned
those Principles which he used to deliver concerning the Nature of Things; and
that whereas other men treated of divine Matters only by conjecture, (most of
them [7] contradicting one another) yet that Apollo had appeared to him, and
told him plainly he was Apollo: As also Pallas and the Muses, (not declaring
who they were) together with other Gods, whose Shapes and Names were yet
unknown to men. And that whatsoever he delivered was by his Disciples not only
observed as a Law, but also be himself was revered as coming from Jupiter. They
also observed [8] Silence concerning Things divine; for that they heard many
sacred Mysteries, which were hard to understand, for those that had not first
learned that to be silent is a kind of Reasoning. It is likewise reported, that
Empedocles the Agrigentine was addicted to the same kind of Philosophy, as is
evident from this passage in his Poems: Comrades adieu; from henceforth I shall
be,
(God-like) exempted from mortality.
And in another place: I have already been both Boy and Girl. Also the [9] Ox,
which he (having made Wafers) is reported to have sacrificed in Olympia, was a
Testimony of one that esteemed the Doctrine of Pythagoras. And many other
things do Historians report concerning the Followers of that Philosopher's
Manners; which I must here omit, in that I hasten to my intended Discourse. For
Apollonius, who exercised things near of kind to these, and yet came nearer to
divine Wisdom than Pythagoras himself, is not yet known among men, by that true
Wisdom which he followed solidly and like a Philosopher, though he lived
neither very long ago, nor yet very lately: But of him one commends this,
another that.

Also there are some, who because he conversed with the Magicians of Babylon,
the Brachmans of India, and the Gymnosophists of Egypt, account him likewise a
Magician: and slander him for obtaining his Wisdom by indirect means. Such a
misrepresentation had they of so great a Man! whereas Empedocles, Pythagoras,
and Democritus, notwithanding their frequent Converse among the Magicians, were
never censured for that Art. Plato also traveling into Egypt, and intermixing
many Doctrines of their Priests and Prophets in his Writings, or like some
curious Painter laying Colors on a rude Draught, did never yet incur the least
suspicion of Magic, although for his singular Wisdom he was not a little
envied.

Illustrations on Chap. 1.
[1] VIr fuit hic ortu Samius: -- Ovid Metam. 15. lib. Pythagoras by Birth a
Samian, and Son to Mnesarchus the Jeweller, was a great Hearer of Pherecydes
the Syrian, till removing from S^mos to Babylon, he there set up for the study
of Astrology; where it is reported, that he had no less than 600 Auditors fled
unto him in one night: Among which were the famous Archytas Tarentinus,
Alcmaeon Crotoniata, Hippasus Metapontinus, and Philolaus Crotoniata.
Afterward returning back again into his own Country, he continued not long
there, (by reason of the Tyrannical Government of Polycrates) but departed from
thence into Italy, where he set up School; and was from thence called, Italicae
Philosophiae Princeps. See Plutarch de Philosoph. Opinion. lib. 1. chap. 3. who
calls him the first Author of the Name of Philosophy. Pythagoras first taught
the Doctrine of (...), or Transmigration of Souls into other Bodies, when
speaking of himself, he said, He was at first Euphorbus, (who being slain in
the Trojan War) he was then Hormotimus, next Pyrrhus a Fisherman, and now last
of all Pythagoras the Philosopher. He learnt this Opinion (as both Herodotus
and Plutarch write) from the Egyptian Priests; according to which Doctrine, if
a Man of a fierce and fiery Disposition dies, then his Soul goes into some
Lion, Bear, or other ravenous Beast, proportionable for so ravenous a Spirit:
However this Principle bred in them an amicable Friendship and Hospitality for
all living Creatures, not knowing to the contrary, but that in showing kindness
to an Horse, or a Dog, they oblige their dead Father or Grandfather, whose
Souls might happen to be invested with their Bodies. This made Pythagoras so
kind to the Inhabitants of the Ocean, that having purchased a draught of Fish
of the Fishermen, he turned them all loose again into the Sea. Plut. Symp. lib.
8. Qu. 8. He restrained his Disciples from nothing more than from Cruelty to
dumb Beasts, which made him so great an Enemy to Fowlers, Fishermen, and the
like. Concerning Pythagoras's Precepts, most of them were abstruse, resembling
the Egyptian Hierogliphicks; he held that the Principle of all things were
Numbers, and their Proportions. But of this see more in Plutarch's Morr. as
also in Diog. Laert. lib. 8. Pythagoras founded his Sect of the Pythagoreans,
A. M. 3360. about the time that Jerusalem was besieged by Nebuchadnezzar.

[2] Samos is an Island in the Ionian Sea, called Cephalenia, wherein is a Town
of the same Name, but now it is called Porto-Guiscardo; Laertius tells us, that
this was the Birthplace of Pythagoras.

[3] Euphorbus a Nobleman of Troy, that was slain in the Trojan War by
Menelaus. This Euphorbus's Soul Pythagoras affirmed to have been transmigrated
into his own Body, according to that of the Poet: Ipse ego (nam memini) Trojani
tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram. Hom. Iliad lib. 17.
--
Ovid Met. lib. 15. Pythagoras held that God was the Soul of the World, and
that from him each Creature received his Spirit, and returned it to him again
at his Death; so that afterward the Almighty did bestow the same Soul upon
other Men, or other Beasts, according to his divine Will and Pleasure: But of
this I have treated more at large in the last Chapter of Philostratus's 8th*
Book, concerning Apollonius. [4] Heu quantum scelus est in viscere viscera
(...),
Congestoque avidum pinguescere corpore corpus,
Alteriusque animantem animantis vivere Letho? etc.
Ergo ne pietas sit victa cupidine ventris,
Parcite, vaticinor, cognatas caede nefandas
Exturbare animas: nec sanguine sanguis alatur*
Ovid. Metam. lib. 15. Thus Ovid in the 15th. Book of his Metamorphosis, gives
us a full and admirable Character of all Pythagoras's Tenants, whereof the
abstaining from Flesh-meats was one: however not out of Superstition, as some
would have it, but rather (as Laertius observes) for convenience and healths
sake, as thinking all those sanguinary Meats too gross and stupifying for the
Brain; and therefore most disagreeable with the study of Philosophy.

[5] Mankind being for the most part ill-natured, and unapt to oblige others
without some reward, as also judging of God Almighty by themselves, did at
first conceive the Gods to be like their Eastern Princes, before whom no man
might come empty-handed. And thus came the original of Sacrifices. Now the
crafty Sacerdotal Order (who (like Swine fatten'd with trough) were maintained
and made rich out of the Follies and Passions of men) did above all things
improve and propagate this Opinion, and that because great part of the
Offerings fell to the Priests share. Wherefore they soon left off Pythagoras's
poor Institution of Frankincense, Fruits, Flowers, etc. which lasted till their
Gods (or to speak truly, their Priests) grew so covetous, that nothing but the
Blood of Beasts could satiate them; and so fell to sacrificing, first Beasts,
then Men, Women and Children, and the very Gods themselves if they could have
got them. And all this was to bring Rost-meat to the Priests. But one of the
wisest among the Heathens, who was guilty neither of this Folly, nor this
Impiety, sings you another Song, saying, Non Bove mactato coelestia Numina
gaudent,
Sed quae praestanda est vel sine test fides.
Ovid. But if you would discover the whole Roguery of these Priests in this
matter, you may find it written at large in a Piece that is lately stolen
forth, under this Title, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, or the Original of
Idolatry, and politic Institution of the Gentiles Sacrifices. Cum sis ipse
nocens, moritur cur victima pro te,
Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem.


[6] A Hecatomb was a Sacrifice, wherein were offered up an hundred Beasts of a
sort all at one time, as an hundred Oxen, an hundred Sheep, or an hundred
Swine: Vota Iovi Minos taurorum corpora centum
Solvit. --
Ovid Met. 8. This Sacrifice is said to have been first instituted by the
Lacedaemonians, who having subdued a hundred several Cities, made an Offering of
Oxen, proportionable to the Towns they had conquered.

[7] If Preachers, Teachers, and Pastors of the Church, disagree about Matters,
which they preach up as necessary points of Faith, they deservedly lose all
their Credit and Authority; for who will believe Witnesses on their own words,
if they disagree in their Testimony?

[8] One chief Command which Pythagoras imposed upon his Disciples, as well as
upon himself, was a five years silence: In all which time, though they were to
refrain from speaking themselves, yet might they receive company, and hear
others discourse to them. Asserit haec Samius post docta Silentia Lustri
Pythagoras. --
Sidon. Apol. Again, At non Pythagorae monitus, annique silentes.
Claud. Now this refraining from Discourse, did not only corroborate the
Memory, but heightened the Fancy, and improved the Understanding, by such a
constant and uninterrupted Meditation, far beyond any Converse or Study: For
that Reading is like E^^ing, and Contemplation like Digestion, where (if we
observe) out of all the twenty four hours, two only are sufficient for Eating,
and all the rest for Digestion. Nor are any men so considerable in a Kingdom,
and so odious to a dissolute Prince, as such thinking Subjects, who must needs
contemn him in their hearts.

[9] Among all the Beasts of Sacrifice, none was higher esteemed for that
purpose than the Ox, who at all such times was offered up with great Pomp and
Ceremony, as you may learn from the Poet: Victima Labe carens, and
praestantissima forma
(Nam placuisse nocet) vittis praesignis, and auro
Sistitur ante aras, auditque ignara precantem,
Imponique suae videt inter cornua fronti,
Quas coluit fruges. --
Ovid Metam. lib. 15. After all things were in readiness, and the Priest had
ended his Prayers to God Ianus, and the Goddess Vesta, (without whose
Intercessions they might not have access to any other Gods) then did he lay
upon the Beast's Head a little Corn, together with a Cake made of Meal and
Salt, called in Latin, Mola, Spange salsa cala taurorum mola. Sen. Oedip. Act.
2. Aelian.
Then giving a long crooked Knife to Underofficers, (called from thence
Cultrarii) they killed the Beast therewith. Suidas.
See Rosin. Antiq. lib. 3. chap. 33.

CHAP. II. How Apollonius having foretold many Things, was accused for Magic;
when at the same time Plato, Socrates, and Anaxagoras, were not taxed with the
like Crime, although they were likewise divine Men, and foretold the most
remote Things.
IT would be a very [1] unjust thing for any Man to tax Apollonius with such a
Crime, only because he foresaw and foretold sundry Things: In as much as [2]
Socrates will come under the same Condemnation, for the Things which he
foreknew by the help of his Genius; as also [3] Anaxagoras, for the many Things
which he by his Wisdom foretold would come to pass. For who knows not, that
Anaxagoras at Olympia (when there was no sign of Rain) came into the Stadium
with a furred Garment, and presently after there succeeded a vehement Shower?
Likewise foretelling that a certain House would fall to the ground, he was in
the right, for it fell: Also predicting that the day would be turned to night,
Laert. l. 2.
and that [4] Stones should fall down from Heaven about the River [5] Aegos, he
told true. And yet they who have ascribed these things to the Wisdom of
Anaxagoras, will not allow Apollonius to foresee things by Wisdom, but say that
he did such things by Magic Art: Wherefore thinking it convenient to remove so
great ignorance out of the minds of many, and to search diligently of this Man
both the times when he said, or did any of these things, as also the kind of
Wisdom, by which he acquired to himself the reputation of so divine a Person.
Now whatever I here propose to write concerning him, is collected partly from
those Cities which entertained him, partly from the Writings of those Priests
with whom he had conversed, or rather from those Temples whose Rites he had
restored, and partly from those things which others have reported of him. He
wrote also Epistles to Kings, Sophisters and Philosophers, at [6] Elea, [7]
Delphos, [8] Egypt and India, concerning their Gods, Customs, Manners and
Laws, among whom he reformed whatsoever was done* But the most certain I have
thus collected.

Illustrations on Chap. 2.
[1] SElf-love is so predominant in mankind, that no person how good or how
just soever can be exempt from partiality to himself and his profession: It Is
that which renders Mahumetanism so odious to Christians, and Christianity so
contemptible to the Turks, as also Popery to the Protestants, and the
Protestant Religion to the Papists. This made Hierocles the Heathen so much
extol Apollonius above Christ, and Eusebius the Christian so highly prefer
Christ before Apollonius. Apollonius is by many accused of Magic, and so was
Christ himself by Celsus and others: Therefore whether one, both, or neither,
did justly merit such accusation, ought to be impartially examined without any
regard either to Interest or Religion; since whatever person tryes matter of
fact by his own Catechize, gives the same reason to his enemies Negative as to
his own Affirmative, and so leaves the contest in statu quo prius. Therefore he
who would indifferently judge between both, must consider three things, 1.
Their Doctrine. 2. Their Miracles. And 3. Their Evidence: After which, if you
find them equal in all three points, then how to prove that one acted by a
diviner spirit than the other, is a work too difficult for any but he that can
remove Mountains, which grain of Mustard Seed I pretend not to: Nor do I need
it, for that I am satisfied in Christ's pre-eminence. Most men are apt to
flatter their own Party, calling that Religion in themselves which in others
they term Irreligion or Superstition; how often have I heard a pretended Zealot
call the same passion Love in himself and Lust in another, the same noise
chiding in himself and scolding in others. Concerning this Partiality we have
frequent Examples in ancient History, as well sacred as profane: For instance,
how mightily can Tertullian inveigh against the Heathens for persecuting a few
Christians, but never exclaim against Vespasian for murdering so many hundred
thousand of the Jews; and why, because whoever is our enemy, we also make him
to be God's enemy, that we may have the better pretense to kill him. Again
Tertullian in his Apology denies the Divinity of the heathen Gods, because says
he, had they had the power of making themselves, they would never have been
born men, and subjected themselves to mortality, when they might have enjoyed
so much a more excellent condition; which Argument is not only partial but
dangerous, when the wicked Heathens urge the same Objection even against Christ
himself, saying, How then was he a God, who subjected himself to far more
miseries both in life and death, than ever any of the heathen Gods underwent;
which according to his Rule he must never have done, had he been a God. Tertull
Apol. chap. 11. Furthermore Tertullian in the same Chapter speaking of the
heathen Deities, says, He knows not what need God has to communicate himself to
men; that 'twere an injury to the Divinity to require the assistance of any
person living, much l^ss that he should employ to so excellent an end the
ministry of dead men, etc. which Argument the wicked Pagans are too apt to
retort. So that nothing can be of a more pernicious consequence than such an
over-active and partial zeal, which snatching up all weapons to defend its
Cause, most commonly lights upon one with a double edge. If you believe the
Monks, such as Suidas and others, Lucian was torn in pieces by Dogs which
scandal they raised upon him for being an enemy to their Religion;
notwithstanding other Historians tell us he died in much honor, being
Procurator of Egypt. They will also tell you, that Judas was blear-eyed,
hump-shoulder'd, and crook-legg'd, because he betrayed Christ: Again, that the
Jews (notwithstanding their mixture with other Nations renders it impossible)
have a particular ill savor, because of their aversion to Christianity; not
distinguishing whether a Jew converted, or a Child begot between a Jew and a
Christian, shall retain its ill scent, if such an one there be? Thus (like some
of the primitive Christians with their piae frauds) many do still propagate
their Religion and Interest with lies. Dare we not say a Thief is handsome, if
he really be so? or that a Woman has a good Breath, because she is dishonest?
or that a Lawyer pleads well, because he is for my Adversary? Many are so
zealous to help their Prophet into the Saddle, that they endanger tumbling him
over and breaking his Neck. Will you (says Job) talk deceitfully in God's
Cause, and tell a lie for his sake? No, we mistake, it is not for God's sake,
but for their own. I have heard the Heathens object it as a stumbling block,
that David, who murdered his Friend Vriah, and then lay with his Wife, should
be accounted a man after God's own heart; whereas (say they) if one of us had
done so, we should have been counted worthy of death here, and damnation
hereafter: And when I told them of David's Repentance, they replied, that so
much was usual in all Malefactors at the hour of condemnation. But to conclude
this Discourse, we must have great care lest (like Esop's Ape) when we too much
commend our selves, we procure that laughter at our selves which would
otherwise never have happened: For it is a great mistake to think, that our own
Opinions or the custom of our own Country is always infallibly the best; and
it betrays a narrowness of fancy in us, when our Party infects our
understanding.

[2] Of Socrates^s Genius I have spoken more at large in another place. See the
Index.

[3] Anaxagoras the Philosopher, Son of Hegesibulus, was born in the 70th.
Olympiad at Clazomenae; in the 20th. year of his Age (at the time of Xerxes
Expedition into Greece) he traveled to Athens, there to study Philosophy,
where he continued 30 years, partly under the instruction of Anaximenes. He
relinquished his Patrimony and Estate, converting himself from civil Affairs to
the knowledge of Things. Cicero Tusc. Quest. 5. Suidas affirms, that he left
his Grounds to be eaten up by Sheep and Camels; and that therefore Apollonius
Tyanaeus said, he read Philosophy to Beasts rather than to Men. Plato derides
him for quitting his Estate. Hipp. may. But Laertius reports, he assigned it to
his Friends; whereupon being by them accused of Improvidence, why (answered he)
do not you take care of it? One reproving him for taking no care of his
Country; wrong me not (said he) my greatest care is my Country, pointing to
the Heavens. Another asking for what end he was born, he answered, to
contemplate the Sun, Moon and Heavens: Laertius. So eminent was Anaxagoras in
natural Philosophy, that they honored him with the title of (...), the Mind,
as being the first that added that principle to Matter: He first held the order
and manner of all things to be directed by the power and reason of a Spirit
infinite. Plutarch (in the Life of Nicias) says that Anaxagoras first found out
the Lunary Eclipse: It was his opinion of God (says Polyd. Virg.) that he was
Infinita men's, quae per seipsam movetur. Many eminent Persons were the Scholars
and Auditors of Anaxagoras, viz. Pericles Son of Xantippus, Archelaus Son of
Apollodorus, Euripides Son of Muesarchus, Socrates Son of Sophroniscus, and
some amongst these mention Democritus. After having lived 30 years at Athens,
he went to Lampsacum, where he dwelt 22 years more, and then died. Laertius and
Clemens tell us he was the first Philosopher that ever put forth a Book: The
Inhabitants of Lampsacum buried him magnificently, with this Epitaph, which Mr.
Stanly thus translates out of Laertius: Here lies, who through the truest paths
did pass
Of The World caelestial, Anaxagoras.


[4] Pliny 5.58. tells that the Graecians celebrate Anaxagoras the Clazomenian,
for that he foretold by his Learning and Science, in the 2d. year of the 78th.
Olympiad, on what day a stone would fall from the Sun, which happened in the
daytime in Thrace at the River Agos, which stone (says he) is at this day
shown about the bigness of a Beam of an adust color. Plutarch tells us that
this stone was in his time not only shown, but reverenced by the Peleponesians.
For the time of its fall, the most certain account is given us by that Marble
of Arundel-House, (graven about the 129th. Olympiad) which says that it fell in
the 4th. year. of the 77th. Olympiad, when Theagenides was Archon. Aristotle
gives us but a very slender account hereof, saying, that it was a stone
snatched up by the Wind, and fell down again in the daytime: However Plutarch
in the Life of Lysander presents us with a large Relation of it. Charimander
undoubtedly meant this stone, when in his Book of Comets he says, that
Anaxagoras observed in the Heavens a great and unaccustomed Light, of the
bigness of a huge Pillar, and that it shined for many days. Senec. quaest. 7.5.

[5] Aegos potamos, i. e. Caprae fluvius, Anglice Goatsbrook. At the entrance
into this River the Athenian Fleet was taken by Lysander. Pliny (as I said
before) mentions this to be the place where Anaxagoras's stone fell from the
Sun.

[6] Elea, a City of Greece, lying near the Hellespont, wherein Zeno the
Philosopher was born. There is another City of this Name in that part of Italy
which was called Lucania.

[7] Delphos, a City of Phocis in Greece, (now called Salona and Castri,
Ortel.) seated on Parnassus, where the Temple of Apollo stood. But of this see
more in the Index.

[8] Aegyptus, the Country of Egypt, so called from Aegyptus, the Brother of
Danaus, that slew him, and reigned there 68 years. Egypt is situated in Asia,
however Ptolomy places it in Africa. It is bounded on the East with the Red
Sea, on the West with Cyrene, on the North with the Mediterranean, and on the
South with Habassia. Long. 58. Lat. 30. It is by Mela divided into two parts;
the upper called heretofore Thebais, and now Sahid; the lower called Delta.
Egypt, called by the Hebrews Misraim and Chus, has ever been famous for the
invention of Arts and Learning, from whose Fountain, Homer, Pythagoras, Solon,
Musaeus, Plato, Democritus, Apollonius, and many others, enriched themselves
and their Countries all with Egyptian Knowledge: For which reason (as Crinitus
writes) Egypt was ever honored with the Name of Terrarum parens, or as
Macrobius sometimes calls her, Artium matrem. Saturn. 1.15. Many and great
Disputes have there been amongst the Learned concerning the Antiquity of this
People: Some with Josephus, Bochartus, and others, make the Israelites more
ancient than them; others, as with Apion, Manetho, etc. prefer the Egyptians,
and say, that the Israelites received their Learning from Egypt, which to me
seems most probable, by what I gather out of such ancient Historians, which
write neither for favor nor affection; neither ought any Jewish or Egyptian
Testimony to be taken in this matter, since as our Savior says, If I bear
record of my self, my record is vain* However for your further satisfaction in
this point, I refer you ^o that modern excellent Treatise called Cronicus Canon
Aegyptiacus, written by the Learned Sir John Marsham. This Country is famous
for its fertility, occasioned by the River Nile, which supplies that want of
Commerce which other Nations enjoy.

Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis,
Aut Iovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
Lucan. [9] India is a name now applied to all far distant Countries, not only
in the extreme limits of Asia, as the Ancients describe it, but even to all
America, through the error of Columbus, and his Comrades; who at their first
arrival in the Western World, mistook, and thought that they had met with
Ophir, and the Indian Regions of the East. But the Ancients comprehended under
this name, a huge Tract of Land, no less in the Judgment of Alexander's
Followers in his Eastern Invasions, than the third part of the Earth: Ctesias
accounted it one half of Asia. Yea a great part of Africa is also comprehended
under that name: So Turnebus in his Adversaria, says, that not only the
Bactrians and Parthians are called by that name in Virgil, but also Thebes,
Ammons Temple, and Aethiopia, are placed in India by Higinus. But to limit
India more properly, Dionysius bounds it with Caucasus and the Red Sea, Indus
and Ganges. Dion. Afer. And to this purpose speaks Ovid; -- Qua cingitur India
Gange. Ptolomy and other Geographers did usually divide India by the River
Ganges into two parts, one on this side Ganges, and the other beyond. The
Indies are commonly now distinguished by the names of East and West; the East,
being divided by the River Ganges, was that wherein Apollonius traveled: the
West, comprehending all America, is that newfound India discovered and so
called by Columbus. Megasthenes reckons up an hundred twenty and two Indian
Nations: but Arrianus wonders how he could make any certain account in a thing
so difficult to be known. Arrianus in his 8th Book, gives us a large
description of this Indian World. See more concerning this subject, in the
first Chapter of Philostratus his sixth Book.

CHAP. III. Of Damis, Apollonius's Companion; as also of the Commentaries
concerning the Sayings and Actions of Apollonius, in reference to the Empress
Julia.
THere was a certain ingenious man called Damis, (sometimes dwelling in the
ancient City of [1] Niniveh) who applying himself to the Philosophy of
Apollonius, wrote both his [2] Travels, (wherein he says he was his Companion)
and also his Sentences, Sayings, and Predictions. One that was an intimate
Acquaintance of this Damis's, brought the Empress Julia to the knowledge of his
Commentaries, which till then had not been published: (this Empress Julia was
much addicted to the study of [3] Rhetoric) therefore I conversing frequently
in her Court, she commanded me to transcribe those Commentaries, and bestow
some pains on the Relations contained in them: for Damis had given a plain, but
uneloquent description of them. I had moreover the Assistance of one Maximus an
Aegean his Book, wherein was contained all the Deeds of Apollonius in the City
of [4] Aegis. There is likewise a Testament written by Apollonius himself,
whereby it plainly appears, how much he was enamored with Philosophy.
Neither is there any credit to be given to Moeragenes, who writing four Books
concerning Apollonius, seems to be altogether ignorant of his Actions. In
what manner therefore these dispersed Relations of Apollonius were gathered
together into one Volume, as also the cause which incited me to compose these
Books, I think is sufficiently declared. Now this Work procures both Honor to
the person of whom such things are written, and Benefit to such as are lovers
of Learning, for that they may by this means attain to the knowledge of things
whereof they were before ignorant. Apollonius had for his Country the Greek
City [5] Tyana, situated in the Country of [6] Cappadocia: his Father was of
the same name with him, and descended from a very ancient Family, wherein there
had been many famous men: for Wealth he exceeded most of his fellow Citizens.
When his Mother was with Child of him, there appeared unto her a Vision of the
Egyptian God [7] Proteus, who (as Homer reports) used to transform himself into
diverse shapes. The Woman not being terrified hereat, asked the Apparition what
she should bring forth? to whom Proteus answered, Thou shall bring forth me.
Whereupon she further demanding of him, Who he was? I am (said he) the Egyptian
God Proteus. Now of what great Wisdom Proteus was, I think it superfluous to
relate, especially to them who have read the Poets: for out of them, I suppose,
every one can tell how various Proteus was, shifting himself one while into
this form, another while into that; so as it was very difficult to seize him.
Also how he seemed to know and foreknow all things. And indeed it was very
material to make mention of Proteus in this place; because the sequel of our
discourse will demonstrate, that Apollonius fore-knew more things than ever
Proteus did. He likewise unriddled many Mysteries, and expounded things that
were most difficult to be understood, not failing in any one; more especially
at the time of his death.

Illustrations on Chap. 3.
[1] NIniveh (so called by the Ancients, though now Mosul) is an ancient City
of the Assyrian^ built (as some say) by Ninus the Son of Belus, of whom it took
its name, to be called either Ninus, as we read in Pliny, or after the manner
of the Hebrews, Ninive. Others will have it, that Ninus (whom the Scriptures
call Ashur) only repaired it, and that Nimrod or Belus (whom I take to be the
same) first founded it: But all agree that this City was very spacious; some
say, three days Journey, others 480 furlongs in circuit. Volateranus affirms,
that it was eight years a building, with above 10000 men continually at work
upon it. Diodorus tells us, that the Walls of it were 100 foot high, and the
breadth capable to receive three Carts on a row: also that they were adorned
with 1500 Turrets. This City was watered with the River Tigri^: It stands for
Long. 78. Lat. 36. hither was Jonas the Prophet sent to preach.

[2] It is more the business of Travelers to learn, than to teach; wherefore
it is not amiss for all Travelers to imitate Damis, in keeping a Journal of all
things remarkable that occur in their Travels. Now as Traveling does much
advantage Wise men, so does it no less prejudice Fools; adding Affectation to
Folly, and Atheism to the Curiosity of many not well principled by Education:
Such wanderers imitating those Factors of Solomon, who together with Gold,
returned Apes and Peacocks; Osborn, 3. The Ancient Philosophers were most of
them addicted to Travel, as knowing how much it enlarges men's minds, to know
the different manners of Countries remote from their own. For my part, the too
great indulgence of my Parents heretofore, and the concerns of my Family now,
has denied me that happiness which I so much envy in others, and must
endeavor to repair by my Studies. They only advantage themselves by Travel,
who well fraught with the experience of what their own Country affords, carry
over with them large and thriving Talents, as those Servants did commended by
our Savior: for he that has nothing to venture, has nothing to improve, and
will hazard losing his small parts, either in the French Levity, Spanish Pride,
or Italian Treachery: Because, not being able to acquaint himself abroad of
more prudence then what he meets with in the Streets, or other public places,
the Activity of his Legs and Arms may possibly be augmented, and he by tedious
Complements become more acceptable in the eyes of silly Women; but altogether
useless, if not pernicious to the Government of his own Country, in creating
doubts and dislikes by way of a partial Companion. I have never met with more
ridiculous subjects for Laughter, than are most of our young Sparks newly come
out of France, tied to their Swords with a broad Belt upon their Loins, like a
Monkeys Chain; when with their Hat under one arm, and the other hand at their
Cod-piece, you shall hear nothing but of what they did in the French Camp, or
at St. Germans, beginning each sentence with a Iarne, or Mort de Dieu; and when
they speak to their Lacqueys, ever mistaking Garcon, for Boy: nothing can be
more insipid, than such a Coxcombs discourse; he magnifies Tyranny, because he
conversed with none but the Commanding party; and extols Popery, for its
Pageantry: and this is all that most of our young Gallants profit by their
French Voyage. Traveling (says Montaign) is very necessary, not only (as
half-witted men use) to report how many yards the Church of Sancta Rotonda is
in length or breadth, or what rich Garments, costly Stockings or Garters such a
great Lady wears; or as some do, nicely to dispute how much longer or broader
the face of Nero is, which they have seen in some old ruins of Italy, than
that which is made for him in other old Monuments elsewhere: But they should
principally observe, and be able to make a certain relation of the Humors and
Fashions of those Countries they have seen, that they may the better know how
to correct their own Wits, by those of others. Certainly nothing can be more
pleasant or profitable, than to behold variety of new Objects, and to propose
to ones self the diversity of so many other men's Lives, Humors and Customs. As
it is more pleasant to Travel up and down ones own Country, than always to
remain in ones own Parish; so is the pleasure no less heightened in Traveling
into other Countries: for which purpose, he that can shelter himself under the
protection of an Ambassador, as one of his Retinue, will Travel the safest,
cheapest, and have more respect showed him upon all occasions. Concerning this
subject, see those two admirable discourses in the Lord Bacon's Essays, and Mr.
Osborn's Advice to his Son.

[3] Rhetoric is nothing else but an Artificial help, called by some the
Mystery of Flattery, by others downright Lying, whereby they endeavor what
they cannot gain by Truth, to effect by the flourishing varnishes of fine
Languag^^ in so much that Pliny reports of Carneades, that whilst he
discoursed, it was hard to discern what was true, and what not. Whether
Rhetoric be an Art or no, remains to this day a dispute amongst the Learned:
Socrates in Plato demonstrates it to be neither an Art, nor a Science, but a
certain kind of Subtlety neither noble nor honest, but low, illiberal and
servile Flattery: which made the Lacedaemonians altogether refuse it, believing
that the speech of good men ought to proceed from sincerity of Heart, and not
from the hypocrisy of studied Artifice. The first who ever taught or wrote of
Rhetoric, were Thisias, Coraces, and Gorgias; however there were many others
among the Ancients, who through the strength of their natural parts, became
very famous for Eloquence: whereof the chief were these, Antiphon, Isocrates,
Demosthenes, Aeschines, Lysias, Demades, Cicero, Marcus Seneca, Petronius
Arbiter, Hermogenes, Quintilianus, Lucianus, Aelianus, Aristides, Symmachus,
etc. The force of Eloquence may be proved by sundry Examples, whereof this one
may suffice, concerning Hegesias the Cyrenian; who representing the miseries of
this Life, made so deep an impression upon the hearts of his Auditors, that
many of them cast away their own Lives voluntarily: in so much that King
Ptolomy (a^ Valerius informs us) forbad him to dispute any longer upon that
subject. We read that Thucydides being asked by Archidamus (King of Sparta)
whether he or Pericles was the best Wrestler, made answer, Your question, Sir,
is very hard to be decided; for if in wrestling with him, I give him a fall,
with his fair words he persuades those that saw him on the ground, that he
never fell, and so gets the Victory. Ariston does wisely define Rhetoric to
be a Science to persuade the common people: wherefore if we observe, it
succeeds so much no where as in Commonwealths, and those Governments wherein
the ignorant vulgar people have had the greatest Power, like that of Athens,
Rhodes, and Rome: in which places few arrived to any Grandeur, without
Eloquence; Pompey, Caesar, Crassus, Lucull^s, Lentulus, Metellus, have taken
their Rise from hence. However it was found by experience, that these Orators
were very pernicious to the Government, in so much that that most wise Roman,
Marcus Ca^^, prohibited those three Athenian Orators, Carneades, Critholaus,
and Diogenes, to be admitted to public Audience in the City, being men endued
with such acuteness of wit, and eloquence of speech, that they could with great
ease make evil good, and good evil. For this reason Cicero was at Rome called
King, because he ruled and guided the Senate which way he pleased by his
Orations. For my own part, I confess my self to be a great enemy to all long
formal Speeches, which seldom have wit or fancy sufficient to make amends for
the tediousness of the Discourse: For Brevity is always good, be it, or be it
not understood.
Hudib. We read in Dion Cassius of an Orator who was allowed two hours to plead
in behalf of a Prisoner his Clyent; whereof the first hour he spent in
lamenting his want of time to plead in such a Cause; the second hour he spent
in his Exordium ad captandam benevolentiam; and so the time being expired
before he came to the merits of the Cause, the Council was suffered to speak no
longer, and his Clyent fairly hanged. Most of these Orators do so much study
words, that they little at all regard either sense or matter: Nor can any thing
be more insipid and impertinent than such a Sir Formal Trifle, who is at best
but the stately figure of a Fool: The most eloquent of these Discourses are
like our Syllabubs, little else but froth. Whenever I hear any Author of a
Book, or Orator, spend much time in complaining of his own weakness, I always
take him at his word, and so listen no more to what he says. Rhetoric presents
all things by a false light, when (like the magnifying Glass) it makes small
things appear great. When I hear a Physician thunder out his Terms of Art, I
always suppose him an ignorant Quack; however it gives them a Reputation with
Women: which made Pliny observe, that Physicians get their Living by Rhetoric.
Montaign says, That Rhetoric is little better than a Chambermaids
Tittle-tattle; when (like fine Clothes upon a Monkey) Orators do generally
endeavor to repair the deformity of a bad Cause, with multiplicity of words.
This Art of Rhetoric, says Diodorus, was first invented by Mercury; however
Aristotle declares, that Empedocles was the first Author of it.

[4] Aegis; See my Notes upon the foregoing Chapter.

[5] Tyana (called heretofore Thoanau) a City of Cappadocia, lying almost in
the middle between Caesarea and Tarsus. This place is chiefly famous for the
Birth of Apollonius, from whence he is called Tyaneius.

-- Ostendit adhuc Tyaneius illic
Incola de Medio vicin^s corpore Truncos.
Ovid Metam. 8. [6] Cappadocia (so called from the River Cappadox) is a
spacious Country in Asia the Less, otherwise named Leuc^syria, Amasia, or
Genech, and anciently Moga. This Country is exposed to the Euxine-Sea, between
Galatia and Armenia, also to the Confines of Cilicia, being separated by the
Mountain Taurus; wherein the most eminent Cities were Trapezus, Comana Pontica,
Comana Cappadociae, and since Amasea, Caesarea, Tyana, and Sebaste, or Satala.
This Country was ever esteemed famous for its Breed of Horses: Terra ejus ante
alias Nutrix Equorum; as both Solinus and Isidore write. The Inhabitants of
Cappadocia were esteemed to be of a poisonous nature, in so much that if a
Snake should draw blood of a Cappadocian, the man's blood would poison it.

[7] Proteus, the Son of Oceanus and Thetis, esteemed by the Ancients a God of
the Sea, for that reigning in the Isle of Carpathio, and in Egypt, he chiefly
inhabited moorish watery places, by the assistance of which Waters, he preserved
himself from the fury of the Scythians: He sometimes dwelt in the Pharos, or
Tower of Alexandria. It is reported by all the Ancients, that this Proteus used
when he was asleep to be transformed into diverse shapes, into wild Beasts,
Serpents, Birds, Trees, Water, Fire, etc. from whence arose that Proverb,
Proteo mutabilior: The Author of which Fable Homer is thought to have been; for
so he writes in his Odysses: (...),
(...),
(...)*
To the same purpose has Virgil written, Georg. 4. Fiet enim subito sus
horridus, atraque Tigris,
Squamosusque draco, and fulv^ cervice Leaena;
Aut acrem flammae sonitum dabit, atque ita vinclis
Excidet, aut in aquas tennes dilapsus abibit.
-- Ille suae contra non immemor artis
Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum,
Ignemque horribilemque feram, fluviumque Liquentem.
Most of our ancient Poets have written to the same effect: As Horace, lib. 2.
sat. 3. Ovid Metam. lib. 8. and Silius Italicus, lib. 7. Horace compares the
unconstancy of vulgar people with this of Proteus: Quo teneam vultus mutantem
Protea Nodo? Some report the original of this Fiction to be the Diadem which
Egyptian Kings used to wear, whereon were engraved diverse shapes of all kinds
of things. Natalis Comes says, that this Proteus (or as some call him,
Vertumnus) reigned four years before the Trojan War, An. Mundi 2752. and that
Paris having ravished Helena, fled to Proteus for shelter, which both Herodotus
and Diodorus affirm.

CHAP. IV. Where Apollonius was born; also concerning the mavelous Virtue of
a certain Water.
APollonius is reported to have been born in a certain Meadow, near unto which
there is now a Temple erected to him; therefore let not the manner of his Birth
be unknown, as something worth relating: That when his Mother was near the time
of her delivery, she was admonished by a Dream to go forth into a Meadow to
gather Flowers; which accordingly she did the day following: Where having
stayed somewhat long, and her Maidens being all dispersed and employed in
gathering Flowers, she her self fell asleep in the Grass. Whereupon the Swans
that fed in the Meadow encompassed her round in a Circle whilst she slept, and
clapping their Wings, (as their manner is) filled all places round about with a
great noise, a South-west Wind blowing gently at the same time over the
Meadows. Now she being awakened from her sleep with the singing of these Swans,
was presently brought to bed of a Boy; any fright being apt to make a Woman
fall in labor before her time. Moreover the Inhabitants of that place say,
that at the time of her [1] delivery, a flash of Lightning fell down from
Heaven upon the Earth, which was no sooner seen, but immediately ascending up
on high into the Air, it vanished quite away: This very thing (as I conceive)
portending that the newborn Child should transcend all earthly things, and
dwell near unto the Gods; they foreshewing a brightness above all things below,
with a vicinity to the Gods, and all the greatness this man arrived to. Now
there is near unto Tyana a [2] Water for Oaths, consecrated (as they report) to
Jupiter, which the Inhabitants call [3] Asbestos, that is to say, such as will
not be consumed by fire. The Spring it self is very cold; however it boyleth
and bubbleth up like a Kettle over the fire. This Water (as they say) is mild
and sweet to the taste and sight of all such persons as are just and careful in
keeping their Oaths; but unto them that are false and [4] perjured, it is a
present punishment; in so much that having drank thereof, it seizes their
hands, eyes and feet, taking them with Dropsies and Consumptions. Nor are they
able to depart from thence, but abiding by the Waterside, they there confess
their perjuries, and lament their calamity. The Inhabitants of that place
acknowledge Apollonius to be the Son [5] of Jupiter, notwithstanding he himself
affirmed that he was the Son of Apollonius. Now in process of time, being grown
up to those years that are capable of Discipline, he soon gave remarkable
Testimonies of his great Wit and Memory. He used the Attick, nor would he so
far comply with the custom of the place to use any other. He drew the eyes of
all men upon him for his incomparable Beauty.

Illustrations on Chap. 4.
[1] It Is well known to all men that have searched into the Records of ancient
Time, how necessary it has ever been esteemed for Heroes to have a Birth no
less miraculous than their Life; as it appears by the several Histories of
Semiramis, Cyrus, Romulus, and many of the heathen Gods. We have a common
saying, That a good beginning makes a good ending; and a miraculous Birth goes
half way toward the making of a Prophet. A seventh Son (because unusual)
without any Daughters between, is naturally born with a healing Hand, according
to the Vulgars opinion. A Prodigy at any persons Birth (like a Comet hanging
over a Kingdom) has ever been esteemed an Omen. Thus was Plato's swarm of Bees
that lighted upon him in his Cradle, looked upon with admiration; although
perhaps, had not his Life been so eminent, it would never have been regarded or
remembered. Now when Poets or vain Historians do tell of such prodigious Births
of great persons. I conceive that such Wonders may be Lies that have been added
after their Deaths, to complete the strangeness of their Lives: since no Story
loses by its carrying; for every man improving his Talent in those Cases,
desires to make his Tale more wonderful. I have heard the Story of a
Bastard-child, that being cast off London Bridge in a Hand-basket, was
miraculously caught and saved by a Boat, that was accidentally going
underneath: The strangeness of this Child's preservation, gave many curious
persons great expectation what he would come to; but he disappointed them all;
for he was no sooner grown up to be a lusty young Fellow, but he was hanged for
stealing; verifying that old Proverb, He that is born to be hanged, will never
be drowned. This matter of Fact is certainly true, and happened in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. But to conclude this Subject, I question not but Hierocles in
his Parallel, did impiously compare this Miracle of the Swans and Lightning, at
Apollonius's Birth, with that melody of holy Angels, and new Star appearing at
Christ's Nativity, as being both equally strange, but not alike true. For to
believe any Stories that are not approved of by the public Authority of our
Church, is Superstition; whereas to believe them that are, is Religion.

[2] Not only Groves and Woods, but Waters, such as Rivers, Lakes and
Fountains, were often consecrated by the Ancients, having some God or Nymph of
their Name: The River Nilus was worshipped as a God by the Egyptians, and so
was the River Ganges by the Indians, by reason of the benefit which both
Countries received from them. Many and famous are the Stories of the
consecrated Pagan Waters: As for instance, There is a Lake in the Lesser
Armenia called Arethusa, wherein it is said nothing will sink, and that the
River Tigris (though it runs through it) mixeth not with it; the Fable
concerning it is this: That one Arethusa, a Virgin and Favorite of Diana's,
being beloved by Alpheus, and unable to escape his violence, was by Diana
transformed into a Fountain of that Name; when le^t she should be mixed with
Alpheus, she ran under the ground by secret Channels, and brake out again about
Syracusa; however Strabo writes, that it sinks not at all, but disgorges it
self into the Adriatic Sea. By which Story of Alpheus's following Arethusa,
the Ancients expressed the Souls pursuit of Virtue. In the same manner write
they of Aesculapius, a Well in Athens, that rendered up again, (whatsoever was
thrown in there) at Phalerium, a City of Hetruria. Also Lycus, a River of
Phrygia, swallowed by the Earth, not far from Colossus, arises 8 furlongs off,
and falls into Menander. And Erasinus flowing from the Arcadian Lake
Stymphalides, sinks and conceals his current, until he ascends in the Field of
Argos; thither conveyed (as it is feigned) by Juno. Moreover many Virtues and
distinct Operations are assigned unto particular Waters: Styx is a Lake in
Arcadia, the Water whereof is so cold and venomous, that it kills any thing
that drinks of it; it corrodeth Iron and Brass, nor cannot be contained in any
thing but the Hoof of a Mule: Some say Alexander was poisoned with it by
Antipater, at the request of Aristotle. The Poets feign this to be a River of
Hell, over which all must pass that travel to the infernal Region; and that
Charon is the Ferry-man that wafts them over. They esteem this Styx so sacred
to the Gods, that if any of them swear by it, and violate their Oaths, he shall
be deprived of his Godhead, and drink no Nectar for an hundred years. Acheron
is said to be of the same nature with Styx, and belonging to the same Ferry-man
Charon. Also another famous Water esteemed of amongst the Ancients, was the
River Lethe in Africa, that runs by the City Berenice, whereof if any one
drinks, it will make him forget all things that are past. Anigrus, a River in
Thessaly, was at first sweet, and afterward became bitter, as they feign, by
the Centaurs washing in it their wounds, which they had received from ^ercules.
Antigonus relates, that in Athamania, near a Temple dedicated to the Nymphs,
there is a Fountain exceeding cold of it self, yet heats whatsoever hangs over
it, setting dry Wood, or any combustible matter on fire. And Pliny writes of
the like in Epicus* Crathis and Sybaris, two Rivers of Calabria, change other
colored Hair into yellow. There are Lakes in Aethiopia, which procure to the
drinker at least a Lethargy, if not downright madness. Among the Cicones, a
people of Thrace, there is a River which congeals the Bowels of all who drink
thereof, and converts whatsoever it receives into stone: Neither are we without
many such Springs in England, which will in a short time petrefie any Stick.
Likewise in diverse parts of Christendom we have Waters of great virtue, as well
to use inwardly as outwardly, such is the Spaw in Germany, the Waters of
Burbon, and in England our mineral Wells of Tunbridge, Epsom, Barnet,
North-hall, and Astrup; also to apply outwardly, the Bath, and St. Winnifreds
Well, whereof the Papists (in imitation of their Predecessors the Heathens)
have made a Saint the Patron. We read in Scripture of the Pool of Bethesda, so
famous to heal the Bodies of men diseased; wherefore our Hero Apollonius to
outdo the other, pretends a Cure for the Soul, by punishing all dishonesty and
perjury; for the truth of which, it is much easier and more reasonable to deny,
there was ever any Tyanaean Water had such a virtue, than either to justify or
confute it by Reason; because in all storms of Credulity, he that would avoid
those two dangerous Rocks of malice on the one side, and folly on the other,
his safest way is to put into the Harbor of Skepticism.

[3] Asbestos signifies no more then inextinguibile, or that which cannot be
consumed by Fire; we read that the Ancients had amongst them a certain kind of
Flax of the same nature, (called by the Greeks Asbestinum, by the Latins Linum
vivum) whereof were made whole pieces of Linen Cloth, and Garments, which were
not only exempt from the Tyranny of Fire, but being cast into the same, and
taken out again, became more pure and white, than any Water could have washed
it. They frequently used to burn the Bodies of their Kings and Emperors in
Sheets made of this Linen, to prevent the Ashes of their Bodies (when burnt)
from mingling with the Ashes of the Wood. Pliny (lib. 19. chapter 1.) tells us,
that this Flax is esteemed above all other Flax in the World; that it is rarely
to be found, and as difficult to be woven, by reason of the shortness thereof;
and that in price it equaled the most excellent Pearls. Nero is reported to
have had a Garment of the same, but at this day it is not any where to be met
with. I have seen a small piece of Mineral, (as I suppose) though resembling a
gray Stone, and of an equal hardness, which my Father brought with him out of
Italy, had the same quality not to be consumed with Fire; but whether it were
of this Flax, or that Flax of Cyprus which Podocatanus (a Knight of Cyprus)
brought to Venice, Anno Dom. 1516. I know not, for as much as that Cyprus Flax
would likewise prevail against the Fire. This Flax proceeds from no Plant, as
ours does, but from the Stone Amiantus, which being found in Cyprus, and broken
with a Hammer, the Earthy dross purged from it, there remains fine hairy threads
like Flax, which are woven into Cloth. See Porcachio, Tabula 2. Funeralium.
Damasus in the Life of Pope Sylvester, writes, that Constantine ever made them
mix some of this Linum vivum in the Lamps of his Chapel. Furthermore,
Lud^vicus Vives in his Notes upon St. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. chapter 6.
says, that he saw Lamps at Paris whose light never consumed: but this may
proceed from another cause, whereof I shall speak in another place. Lastly,
Pancirollus (who mentions most of what I have written upon this subject) tells
us, that at Lovaine a Napkin taken from the Table at ^ Feast, and thrown into
the Fire, and being red as a Coal, was taken out again, cooled, and restored to
the owner, more white than if it had been washed with all the Water and Soap in
Town.

[4] Perjury is the highest degree of Lying, wherein we vouch God for the truth
of what we say; each man's Oath being recorded as well in Heaven as upon Earth:
A Prince that is made Mediator in any Treaty of Peace, resents the violation of
such a Peace for so high an affront to his Mediatorship, that he immediately
thinks his Honor engaged to fall upon them that first break it. Even a private
person receives it as a baffle and disrespect, to elect him Arbitrator, and
afterward to recede from his Arbitrament. What then can we think of our
selves, when we dare to do that to God, which we fear to do unto man? Wherefore
Montaign well observes, that he who tells a Lie, is bold toward God, and a
coward toward man; for a Lie faces God, and shrinks from man. The Lord Bacon
well observes, that the mixture of falsehood with truth, is like an allay in
gold or silver Coin, which may make the Metal work the better, but still it
embaseth it; such winding and crooked courses being like the goings of the
Serpent, basely upon his belly, and not on his feet. No vice is so destructive
to humane society as falsehood, nor would the greatest Liar, Jesuit, or St.
Omers Evidence, but be ashamed to justify that perjury which he so much
practices. In this late feigned Presbyterian Plot, how many worthy innocent
Gentlemen had lost their Lives, how many noble Estates had been unjustly
forfeited, and how many of the bravest Protestant Famili^s had been barbarously
ruined and undone, had not God of his mercy detected their Iesuitical forgery?
The Greeks (who in opinions as well as honesty, differ little from the Papists)
have almost undone one of the greatest Cities in the World, viz. Grand-Cair^,
by their false Oaths, which render all manner of Commerce with that place
unsafe, for Strangers that have any Wealth to lose: in so much that the Turks
were forced to make a Law, that the Evidence of three Christians, should but
equal one Turk; nor would it be unjust or unreasonable, if we had the same Law
here amongst us, in reference to the Papists, since by sad experience we find,
that their false Oaths are no less dangerous than their Daggers or Poison. Some
will go to extenuate this Vice of Lying, by softning its name, and calling it
breaking ones word; however the thing is the same, no better or worse, a Lie.
Whoever is given to this Vice, ought to have both prudence and memory, le^t he
saves other men the labor, in giving himself the Lie. The French, as Montaigne
writes, receive not the Lie from any man without Duelling him, as finding
themselves more conscious of that Vice, than any other Nation. But now on the
other side, we must not lay down too general a Rule in this case, in making all
Falsehoods alike: when to pacify my Children, I tell them stories of a Cock and
a Bull; or when to illustrate my discourse, I make use of a Fable in Esop; or
like the Holy Writers, I mention some Parable for Argument sake, I cannot think
any of these Falsehoods comprehended in the Ninth Commandment, or equal to an
Oath, whereby I endanger my Neighbors Life, Limb, or Estate. Nay (if
Christianity did not teach me otherwise) I should think I might, in some cases,
do evil that good might come of it, and save my Friends life from a Murtlierer,
by denying even upon Oath (if it be required) that I know where he is. Also
that a King is not obliged to keep his Covenant with a Foreign Prince, when
it is to the ruin of his Kingdom; for that he is entrusted only with the power
of doing his People good, but not with power to ruin them: However, let not
any Prince break his word with hi^ own People, though he does it with
Foreigners; because he must live by the one, and not by the other. To conclud^
this subject, giv^ me leave to cite one story out of Exodus, Chap* 1. and that
is of the two Hebrew Midwives, Shiphrah and Puah, who to save as well their own
lives, as the lives of the young male Children, pacified King Pharaoh with a
Lie; whereupon it is said, that those Midwives feared God, and that God dealt
well with them for so doing, verse. 20. This in my poor Judgment seems to make
it lawful for any one to save an innocent persons life, though by a false
Testimony: Perjury, in the extremity, cannot produce any thing worse than
Murder, wherefore Murder is the worst of the two; and if so, then Nature bids
us of two Evils choose the least. Also Self-preservation tells me it is all one,
whether I cut my Friends throat with a Knife, or with an Oath.

[5] Apollonius we see in this Chapter refuses that honorable Title which the
people would confer upon him, of being Jupiter's Son: Now whether he did this
out of modesty, like Mahomet, who says that God has no Sons; whether out of a
distrust of succeeding in this pretense, thinking Jupiter's other Children
might obstruct the same Trick from passing twice; or whether out of Cowardice,
fearing lest he might be knocked on the head, as Sarpedon was; I shall leave my
Reader to judge. However his Parents were too rich, and too well known to
suffer such a Fiction to pass; for nothing is so great an assistant to a Divine
Birth, as obscure and mean Parents: this made Alexander the Great render
himself ridiculous, when he pretended himself of the Iupitrean Family* because
his Father Philip was so well known. Nay the Jews were so wicked to make this
objection against the true Son of God, Christ Jesus, saying, Was not this the
Carpenter's Son? etc. And Minu^ius Felix has some notable passages upon this
subject, where Octavius decrying the Heathen Deities, says, Of those that dye,
none be Gods, because God cannot dye; and no Gods are born, because whatsoever
is born, must dye; and that only is Divine, which has neither birth nor death:
and if there were Gods born, why are not some born in our days? unless Jupiter
be now grown old, and Juno left off Teeming.

CHAP. V. Apollonius being 14 years of age, was by his Father brought first to
Euthydemus the Rhetorician, and afterward to Euxenus.
WHen he was arrived to 14 years of age, his Father brought him to [1] Tarsus,
there to be instructed by that famous Rhetorician Euthydemus the Phoenician.
Apollonius well approved of his Masters discipline, but thought the manners of
that City absurd, and not fit for one to study Philosophy amongst* in that the
Citizens being very much addicted to Luxury, Scoffing and Insolence, resembled
the Athenians only in their outward Garb, but not in their Wisdom and Manners.
The River [2] Cydnus runs through this City, on whose Banks the Citizens are
used to fit like Waterfowl. Apollonius therefore wrote to them in an Epistle,
that they should give over making themselves drunk with Water. When having
obtained leave of his Father, he removed his Master to Aegas, a City not far
distant from Tarsus; where was not only a fit accommodation for the study of
Philosophy, but also such exercises as were suitable to Youth, together with
the Temple of [3] Aesculapius, wherein Aesculapius himself did sometimes appear
unto men. He there came acquainted with diverse Sects of Philosophers: having
the conversation of Platonists, Chrysippeans and Peripateticks. He likewise
made an inspection into the Doctrine of Epicurus, thinking that even that was
not to be despised. But for the Pythagoreans, he had little or no opportunity
to learn their abstruse Tenants, in that his Tutor was not very studious of
that kind of Discipline, nor cared much to conform the Actions of his Life
thereunto; for totally resigning up himself to Gluttony and Lust, he rather
seemed to frame his Life after the prescript of Epicurus: his name was Euxenus
of [4] Heraclea in [5] Pontus. As for the Opinions of Pythagoras, he [6] knew
them no otherwise then Birds do the sentences which they have learned from men:
sometimes uttering such like expressions as these, (...), God save you; (...),
God speed you; (...), may Jupiter be favorable to you, etc. not knowing what
they say, nor apt for converse with men, but only taught a certain modulation
of the Tongue. Wherefore as young Eagles, when first taught to fly by their
Parents, dare not stir far from their sides, but when they are grown strong of
wing, do oftentimes fly higher than their Parents, especially if they perceive
them to he given to their belly, and stooping after their prey: even so
Apollonius whilst he was a Child, submitted to the government of Euxenus, but
when he was once arrived to 16 years of age, he fell in love with a
Pythagorical course of life, being winged for an higher flight by some better
Master. Nevertheless he c^ased not to express his love to Euxenus, but having
begged of his Father an House in the Suburbs, accommodated with pleasant
Gardens and Fountains, he bestowed it upon him, saying, Live thou after thine
own [7] humor; but for me, I will conform to the Institution of Pythagoras.
Euxenus perceiving him to be of so great Spirit, asked him how he would begin
such a course of Life? to whom Apollonius answered, He would begin as
Physicians used to do; who having first purged the Entrails, prevent some from
falling into diseases, and cure others that are already fallen into them. And
having said this, he began to abstain from eating the flesh of living
Creatures, as being impure, and stupifying to the understanding. Wherefore he
fed only on Fruits and Herbs; saying, that such meats were pure, which the
Earth did afford unto men. He was also of opinion, that Wine was a pure kind of
drink, as proceeding from a mild Plant; yet nevertheless he esteemed it an
enemy to the settled state of the mind, in respect that it sometimes disturbed
the Air of the Soul.

Illustrations on Chap. 5.
[1] TArsus a City in Cilicia, now called Terassa, Hama, or Hamsa, Long. 60.
Lat. 38. is at this day possessed by the Turks, and esteemed to be the capital
City of all Cilicia or Caramania, Strabo lib. 15. it is pleasantly situated
amongst spacious Fields, and watered with the River Cydnus. Solinus reports,
that it was built by Perseus the Son of Danae, saying, Matrem Vrbium habet
Tarson, quam Danais proles nobilissima Perseus locavit; Solin. cap. 14. from
whence sings Lucan, lib. 4. Deseritur Ta^rique nemus, Perseaque Tarsos. Others,
as Athenaeus lib. 12. will have this City to be founded by Sardanapalus, and
that it was so expressed in the inscription on his Tombstone, in these words,
Anchialen and Tharsam uno die a Sardanapalo conditas. Strabo called it the
Mother of Cities, from the great Learning which flourished therein, surpassing
as well Athens as Alexandria. In this place resided many great and famous
Philosophers of the Sect of the Stoics, as Antipater, Archelas, Nestor, and
the two Athenodoru^'s: Nor is it less famous for being the Country of St. Paul,
as he mentions of himself, when speaking to the Tribune, he says, Acts 21.39. I
am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a City of Cilicia, a Citizen of no mean
City. As also for that famous Council which was held in it under the Emperor
Valent* mentioned in Sozom. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 6. chapter 12. This City for its
Antiquity was freed from the Roman yoke. Now concerning its Name, some think it
was called Tarsus from the dryness of its Soil, (...) signifying siccare; or
because that those parts were first freed from the Waters after Noah's Flood.
Besides this Tarsus of Cilicia, there were many other Towns bore the same Name;
whereof one was situated in Spain, near the River Betis, and two miles distant
from Corduba, being built by the Phaenicians, who Traded into those parts;
Strabo lib. 3. and Polybius lib. 3. it was to this City many think that Solomon
sent his Vessels, with those of Hyram, as it is written 2 Chronicles. 9.21. For the
Kings ships went to Tarshish, with the servants of Huram; once every three
years came the ships of Tarshish, bringing Gold and Silver, Ivory and Apes, and
Peacocks. Hesychius will have Tarsus to be a City of Syria; Ptolomy, that there
is one of that name in Hungary; and Strabo, that there is a River so called in
Tr^as: Also Arrianus, that there is a Promontory named Tharsus in Persia.

[2] Cydnus a River in Cilicia, (now called Carasu) which issuing out of the
Mountain Taurus, runs through the City Tarsus. Quintus Curtius, lib. 3.
speaking of this River Cydnus, says, That it is most famous, not so much for
its greatness, as for the clearness of its Water; which from its original
Fountain runs clearly through all the Country, without any other River mixing
with it, to disturb the pureness of the Stream; for which cause it remains
always clear and cold, by reason of the Woods that do shadow all the Banks.
This River, as Vitruvius writes, is famous for curing the Gout; Cydnum podagrae
mederi docet, cruribus eo mersis, Vitruv. 8.3. however Alexander the Great had
like to have received his death from it; who (as both Curtius and Justin write)
when he arrived at Tarsus, being much delighted with the pleasantness of the
River Cydnus, having unbuckled his Armor, and being covered with sweat and
dust, he cast himself into the River, which was extremely cold: whereupon
immediately so great a numbness and chilness invaded every Joint, that being
speechless, his danger boaded nothing less than present death: However by the
assistance of one of his Physicians, whose name was Philip, Alexander was
recovered to his health again. Just. lib. 11. Curt. lib. 3. Solinus writes,
that this River took its name from its whiteness and clearness; Quicquid
candidum est (inquit) Cydnum gentili lingua Syri dicunt. Dionys. verse. 868.

Tibul. lib. 1. (...).
At te Cydne canam, tacitis qui leniter undis
Caeruleus placidis per vada serpis aquis.
Ovid. 3. de Art Am. Vel prope te nato, lucide Cydne, croco:
[3] Aesculapius is most commonly said to be the Son of Apollo, and the Nymph
Coronis; he lived about the year of the World 2710. a little before the Trojan
War. He was so famous for his skill in Physic, that he was worshipped for a
God, especially among the Epidauri; from whence he was called Epidaurius.
Pausanias in his Corinthiac. tells us, that Phlegya the Father of Coronis, not
knowing that his Daughter Coronis had conceived by Apollo, carried her along
with him to Peloponesus; and that she being brought to bed of a Boy in the
Confines of Epidaurus, exposed the young Child in a Mountain, which from that
accident was afterward called Titthias: however others report this happened in
the Fields of Telphusium; in which place the Infant being suckled by a Goat,
was discovered by a Dog that had wandered from the Flock which he was keeping;
whereupon the Master of the Flock returning, and finding many of his Herd
missing, searched all up and down the Pastures, till at length he found both
the Child, the Goat, and his Dog. And that observing flashes of Fire to
evaporate out of the head of the Infant, he supposed it to be of a Divine
extraction, and soon spread the fame thereof all over those parts. Some there
be who report, that when Coronis was with Child, she lay with Ischyis the Son
of Ela^us; which Diana resenting, as an high affront done to her Brother
Apollo, she put her to death for the same: And that after she was dead, either
Mercury or Phoebus took Aesculapius out of his Mothers belly; as the Poet
mentions: Non tulit in cineres labi sua Phoebus eosdem
Semina: sed natum flammis, uteroque parentis
Eripuit, geminique tulit Chironi^ in antrum.
Ovid. Met. lib. 2. Lactantius reports, that he was born of unknown Parents;
and then being exposed, was found by some Huntsmen, and committed to Chiron's
care, who instructed him in Physic; and that by Birth he was a Messenian, but
dwelt at Epidaurus. From whence, as St. Augustine writes, he came to Rome; that
so expert a Physician might practice with the greater credit in so famous a
City. He was numbered amongst the Gods, (says Celsus) for adding such
excellency and luster to that Art, which before was but rude and undigested.
The Epidaurians therefore consecrated a Temple unto him without the Walls of
their City, where he had his Statue in the form of a Physician, holding his
long Beard in one hand, and a Staff involved with a Serpent in the other. For
the Serpent was sacred unto him, not only (as Macrobius says) for the quickness
of his sight, but because he is so restorative and sovereign in Physic:
Serpens Epidaurius: Horat. So the brazen Serpent, the Type of our eternal
Health, erected by Moses, cured those who beheld it. And here Aesculapius is
said to have converted himself into that form, because by health men seem to
renew their youth, like a Snake that has cast her Hackle. In this shape, says
Lactantius, he sailed to Rome, and is said by Pherecides to have Serpentine
feet. He chose his Seat in the Isle of Tyber, and then vanished out of sight;
where his Temple was built, and his Festivals kept in the Calends of January.
And now in the Hortyards of St. Bartholomeus at Rome, there is a Ship of Marble
to be seen, with a Serpent on the Hatches, in memorial of his Transmigration.
Epidaurus, a City in Peleponnesus, was famous for the Shrine of Aesculapius, to
which all sick persons that did resort, were (as both Strabo and Iamblicus
write) informed in their sleep what Medicine would cure their Distemper. When
the Romans were afflicted with the Pestilence, they sending Ogolenus to consult
Apollo's Oracle at Delphos, he directed them to his Son Aesculapius at
Epidaurus, with Orders to carry him to Rome; but the Epidaures were unwilling
to part with their God, (or rather his Image) yet notwithstanding Aesculapius
in the form of a Serpent went aboard one of the Roman Ships, and so along with
them to Rome. Orpheus writes, that Jupiter struck Aesculapius with his
Thunderbolts, because he had restored to life Hyppolitus, who had been torn in
pieces by his own Chariot-Horses, when he fled from the fury of his Father, as
we may see in the Story of Theseus. And that Apollo being much afflicted at the
death of Aesculapius, but not being able to revenge himself upon Jupiter, he
killed the Cyclops, that had made the Thunderbolts wherewith his Son had been
slain. Orph. de Aesculapio in Hymn. Heraclit. de Incred. The Moral of this is,
that Aesculapius was said to be begot by Apollo, in that the Sun is the Author
of Health.

[4] Heraclea Ponti, the Metropolitan City of Bythinia, called at this day
Penderachi; it lies at the mouth of the Euxine Sea, near the River Lycus: It
took its ancient Name from Hercules, as Mela informs us. And our Author
distinguishes it by the Name of Ponti, for that there are diverse other Cities
known by the same Name: As for instance, There is one in the Confines of
Europe; another in Italy, between Siris and Aciris; another in Sicily, near
Lilibaeum; another in Narbon, by the River Rhodanus; another in Caria, now by
the Turks called Ergel; another in Creete; and another in Lydia, from whence
the Touchstone takes its Name of Heracleus Lapis: All which several Towns were
heretofore called Heraclea.

[5] Pontus, a Kingdom of Asia the Less, so called from a King whose Name was
Pontus. Strabo tells us that it is bounded, on the West with the River Haly, on
the East with Colchos, on the South with the Lesser Armenia, and on the North
with the Euxine Sea. But Ptolomy (lib. 5.) says it is limited on the West with
the Thracian Bosphorus, on the South with Asia, and on the North with part of
the Euxine Sea^ Sit. zon. temp. Clim. This Country is famous for producing
Poisons, which gave occasion to Medea in the Fable to bring all her Poisons
from hence.

Has herbas, atque haec Ponto mihi lecta venena,
Ipse dedit Maeris; nascuntur plurima Ponto.
Virg. Eccl. 8. [6] Philostratus tells us, that Euxenus knew no more of
Pythagoras's Philosophy, than Birds do the sense of those words which they
learn by rote: And this is the very case of vulgar people in Religious matters,
who hold the Articles of their Faith like their temporal Estate from their
Predecessors, having a title of Tradition for the one, and of Inheritance or
Fee-simple for the other. Most Men (like Carriers Horses) follow one another in
a Track, where if the fore-Horse goes wrong, all the rest succeed him in his
error; not considering that he who comes behind, may take an advantage to
avoid that pit, which those that went before are fallen into. If the primitive
Christians had been so little curious or inquisitive, how could Christianity
ever have been received in the World? when they should have persisted in the
blind Heathenish Idolatry of their Forefathers, esteeming Christ rather as an
Upstart and Innovator, than what he really was, the only legitimate Son of God.
The generality of men are but like so many Religious Parrots, who are taught to
say they believe the Scriptures, but why or wherefore they know not, only that
Mr. A. the Minister of their Parish bids them. For my part, neither Socrates,
Plato, or Aristotle, shall persuade me, if my Judgment be not convinced by
Reason of what they say; Reason is the only Mistress I court, and to her alone
will I pay my Devotion. Those Arguments which will deceive in a false Religion,
cannot instruct in a true one; but the beginning at Faith, and ending at
Reason, would deceive in a false Religion; therefore it cannot instruct in a
true. What proceeds from common Reason we know to be true, but what proceeds
from Faith we only believe it; and there is a vast difference between knowing
and believing. I will never embrace an Opinion, only because a great many hold
it; because then I must turn Turk, that Religion being the most universal of
any we know. Neither will I build my Religion upon that weak Basis of
Antiquity, lest some Jew or Pagan come and supplant me. Nor upon Martyrs, lest
the Indians of Bengala (who crush themselves to pieces under the wheels of
their Idol) compare with me, or lest the Heretics we our selves have put to
death, put in their claim to a share in the Crown of Martyrdom. Nor will I
altogether depend upon Miracles, lest Simon Magus, Pharoah's Magicians,
Apollonius, and others, pretend to be my Rivals. Nor to those Rules of
Self-denial, Mortification, and Patience, which our Doctrine teaches, since
Monsieur Tavernier gives us an account of some Indians that may likewise exceed
us in that way. No, I will rely wholly upon my Reason, and yet not obstruct my
Christianity. Men do not any where more easily err than where they follow a
guide, whom they think they may safely trust; and the greatest part of the
World is led rather with the Names of their Masters, and with the reverend
Respect they bear their Persons and Memories, than with the soundness and truth
of the things they teach. For as Vadian says in his Paradise, Magnos errores
magnorum virorum autoritate persuasi transmittimus. Whilst we are young, our
Judgment is raw and green; and when we are old, it is forestalled: so that
Inter Iuvenile Iudicium, and Senile Praejudicium, veritas corrumpitur. I cannot
but laugh at those Pedants, who have no stronger Argument for the truth of what
they say, than to alledg, it is a Maxim; as if their Maxims are more certain
than their other Propositions. However, I Will believe them when they show me a
Philosophy, whose Principles can neither be questioned nor doubted of, and
wherein all the World agrees; otherwise it is ridiculous: for it is easy to
prove any thing, when one adjusteth Principles to Opinions, and not Opinions to
Principles. Again, one main Argument which I have often heard used, is that St.
Ierom or Thomas Aquinas says so: In the same manner one told Dr. Harvy, that
Galen was of a contrary opinion to him; whereupon he wisely replied, I have
read as much, and lived longer in the World than ever Galen did, therefore he
is no Authority to me. Moreover, how do we know but that those Ancients no more
than we, have not always written what they believed? The Law and Religion of
their Country, may have often obliged them to accommodate their Precepts to
the Politics of their Government; for as Montaign well observes, The wisest
man must write something contrary to his own Genius to get his Book Licensed.
All men ought to reverence Antiquity, but not conclude it infallible: yet (says
Mr. Osborn) I should take her word sooner in Divinity, than any other Learning,
because that is clearest at the beginning; whereas all other Studies more
muddy, receive clarification from experience. However, we may likewise in these
matters, for fear of running upon infidelity, split upon credulity: Therefore
let us remember, that when Livy says, the Gods made an Ox speak; in not
believing the miracle, it is not the Gods, but Livy we disgrace. For although
God can do every thing, yet I am not bound to believe he does all things that
men report; Enim a posse ad esse non valet consequentia.

[7] Every man in his humor, makes all things easy and pleasant, as well in
Conversation as Religion; for it is neither Policy, Reason, nor Religion, to
persecute men for conscience sake, so long as they disturb not the public
Peace. First, That it is not Policy, appears, for that the greatest people of
the World in their most flourishing condition, have always permitted it. As for
instance, The Romans that had conquered the greatest part of the then known
World, made no scruple of tolerating any Religion whatsoever in the City of
Rome it self, unless it had something in it that could not consist with their
Civil Government: nor do we read that any Religion was there prohibited, save
only the Jews; who (thinking themselves the peculiar people of God) held it
unlawful to acknowledge subjection to any mortal King or State whatsoever. The
Inquisition-Principles of Persecution lost Holland from the Spaniard,
notwithstanding all the Power of Spain, and Treasure of the Indies. All wise
Princes, till they were overborn with Faction, or solicited by peevish
persons, gave toleration to differing Sects, whose Opinions did not disturb the
public Interest. And the experience which Christendom has had in this last
Age is Argument enough, That toleration of differing Opinions is so far from
disturbing the public Peace, or destroying the Interest of Princes and
Commonwealths, that it advantages the public, and secures peace; because there
is not so much as the pretense of Religion left to such persons to contend for
it, being already indulged to them. When France fought against the Hugonots,
the spilling of her own blood was Argument enough of the imprudence of that way
of promoting Religion, together with the prosperity she has enjoyed, ever
since she gave permission to them. The Affability and Clemency of Margaret of
Parma had almost extinguished that flame, which afterward the Duke of Alva
made greater than ever, when by managing the matter of Religion with Fire and
Sword, his Religion and his Prince too had almost both been turned quite out of
the Country: for the being restrained and made miserable, mutually endears the
discontented persons, creating more hearty and dangerous Confederations. In
England, although the Pope had as great power here as any where, yet there were
no Executions for matter of Religion known till the time of Henry the Fourth,
who (because he usurped the Crown) was willing by all means possible to endear
the Clergy to his purpose, by destroying their enemies. Secondly, Persecuters,
like men always in a passion, have seldom Reason on their side; for the great
God and giver of Reason, is not to be found either in the Whirlwind of Passion,
or i^ the Earthquake of Persecution, but in the still voice of Love and mutual
forbearance. Grotius (in his Book de Iure Belli and Pacis) says, It is
unreasonable to punish any man for not assenting to the things of the Gospel,
since they cannot possibly be discovered by the light of Nature, but must be
made known by Revelation. As for us, the very Revelation, whereby we have a
knowledge of them, is not so clear, as that a man should incur civil punishment
for doubting of it: since this Revelation, though at first confirmed by
Miracles, and so infallible to them that saw those Miracles; yet is it not so
to us, for that both the Miracles and Doctrine come down to us only by
Tradition. And Christ says, Had I not done these things among ye, (observe
those words, among ye) your want of faith had not been imputed to you for sin.
To the same purpose speaks Salvianus, Bishop of Marcelles, who (concerning the
punishment of the Arrians for denying the Divinity of Christ) says, They are
Heretics, but against their knowledge; they are so in our opinion, but not in
their own; for they think themselves so far Catholic, that they defame us with
the title of Heretics; therefore what they are in our opinion, we are in
theirs: We say they do wrong to the divine Generation, in saying the Son is
less than the Father, and they believe we do wrong unto God the Father, in
saying the Son is equal unto him: We say the Truth is with us, but they say the
Truth is with them: The Honor of God is with us, but they think they honor
the Godhead more: They are impious, but they think it true Piety: They err, but
they err with a good mind, not out of hatred, but out of affection to God,
believing that by this they honor and love the Lord: Though they have not the
right faith, yet they think theirs the perfect love of God; and how they are to
be punished at the day of Judgment for this error of a false Opinion, none
knows but the Judge himself: In the mean time, as God lends them his patience,
so may we lend them ours. Tertullian tells us, that nothing has more advantaged
Christianity than Persecution; for, says he, the Romans by every cruel act did
but tempt others to come over to their Party; the oftener they were mowed down,
the faster they sprang up again; the blood of Christians making the Churches
soil more fat and fertile. Tertul. Apol. Nor is Persecution less powerful to
advance a false Religion than a true. There is no Religion, says Lactantius,
so erroneous, which has not somewhat of wisdom in it, whereby they may obtain
pardon, having kept the chiefest duty of man, if not in deed, yet in intention.
Thirdly, It does no ways advantage Religion; for the Apostles themselves,
although they were infallibly assured of their Doctrine, and could also make
their Hearers assured of it by Miracles, yet never desired that the Refractory
should be compelled to embrace it. Therefore I could wish, that men would use
one another so charitably and so gently, that no error or violence tempt men
to hypocrisy, rendering sincerity both troublesome and unsafe. For credulity
breeds hatred and malice against unbelievers, whereas incredulity does only
pity believers; so that by how much malice is worse than pity, by so much is
credulity worse than incredulity. How vain a thing is it for men to pretend
every Opinion necessary in so high a degree, that if all said true, or indeed
any two of them in 500 Sects, (and for ought I know there may be 5000) it is
500 to one but that every man is damned; for every Sect damns all but it self,
and that is damned of 499. and it is excellent fortune then if that escape. For
it is natural to all Zealots to call their own enemy God Almighty's enemy, and
we may as well hang all men that are not like us in feature, as in opinion.

CHAP. VI. Of Apollonius's Garment, and of the wonderful Concourse of men that
followed him, after he had been commended by Esculapius: Also of an Assyrian
Youth whom Apollonius cured of a Dropsy.
AFter such a retrenchment of his [1] Diet, he also regulates his [2] Habit, so
as to go barefooted, and to wear linen Clothing, refusing all such as came of
living Creatures; he likewise suffered his [3] Hair to grow long, spending most
part of his time in the Temple, where all the Officers and Priests admired him;
also Aesculapius himself rejoiced to have Apollonius a [4] witness of his
Cures. There resorted to Aegas the Cilicians, and all such as dwelt round about
those parts, to see Apollonius: in so much that it became a common Proverb
amongst them, Whither go you so fast? to see the young man. Here I conceive it
will not be improper to relate what then happened in the Temple; for that I
have undertaken to give you a Narrative, containing the Deeds of such a man as
was in esteem with the very Gods themselves. An Assyrian Youth that came to
Aesculapius, was riotous even whilst he was sick, and lived (or rather died) in
Drunkenness. He was taken with a Dropsy, but pleasing himself with his
Drinking, he took no care of curing his Drought. Whereupon the God neglected
him, and would not so much as appear to him in a [5] Dream; and when he
complained of this hard usage, Aesculapius appearing to him, said, If thou will
consult Apollonius, thou shall have ease. Accordingly the young man going to
Apollonius, demanded of him what benefit he might receive from his wisdom, for
(says he) Aesculapius commanded me to come unto thee. To whom Apollonius
answered, That he knew something would be much worth to him in that condition:
for that (as he thought) 'twas only Health which he wanted. Whereupon the man
replied, That (indeed) was the thing which Aesculapius did promise, but not
perform. Be favorable in your words, I pray, (said Apollonius) for he always
bestows Health upon such as are willing to have it; but thou do those things
which are contrary to thy Disease: for addicting thy self to Debauchery, thou
satiatest thy moist and almost rotten Entrails with delicious Food, thereby
adding Mud to the pre-existent Water. And herein he delivered his mind plainer
than the Wisdom of [6] Heraclitus, who told one that came to him for the same
Distemper, That he must turn wet Weather into dry: which words were obscure and
difficult to be understood. Whereas Apollonius did more easily explain his wise
Advice, and recovered again the young man to his health.

Illustrations on Chap. 6.
[1] CErtainly there is nothing does more conduce to the Study of Philosophy
than a thin spare Diet, which gave the old rhyming Monks occasion for that
jingling saying, Impletus venture non vult studere libenter; A full belly makes
a dull understanding: And in all our Courts of Judicature, as well at our
Assizes as Sessions, I have ever observed the great dispatch of Business to be
in the Morning, and little or nothing considerable done in the Afternoon. How
many men of all Professions are there daily undone by that unhappy custom of a
Mornings Draught? Therefore St. Paul tells us, They that are drunk, are drunk
in the night: And we see how the Dutch grow rich and prosper in following this
Rule: for notwithstanding they are so much given to that Vice, yet they ^ver do
their Business first and drink afterward. The drinking a little Wine for the
Stomachs sake, has made as many good Fellows, as the Thief upon the Cross,
Highway-men. Nor is over-eating ones self any other than a dry Drunkenness;
which equally stupifies the understanding: and was more used by the Ancients
than the other; although both were sufficiently practiced by them. However at
present I shall speak only of their Diet. To understand good Eating was then as
commendable as now; for which quality Apicius was very remarkable, who, laying
up ninety millions of A Sesterce the 4th. part of a Roman Denarius.
Sesterces for his Kitchen, and fearing that would not suffice, poisoned
himself for fear of starving: which Martial very wittily scoffs at in this
Epigram: Deder as Apici, ter trecenties ventri,
Sed adhuc supererat centies tibi Laxum,
Hoc tu gravatus, ne fam^m and sitim ferres;
Summa venenam potione duxisti,
Nil est Apici tibi gulosius factum.
Mart. l. 3. ep. 22. 'Twas an usual thing to devour a whole Patrimony at one
sitting, as the Poet tells us: -- Vna comedunt patrimonia mensa.
Juven. Sat. 1. What can be more lewd (says Seneca) than a sumptuous Supper,
wasting a Knight's Revenues? frequently standing (those that are most frugal)
in 300000 Sesterces. Sen. Ep. 96. Suetonius reports of Tiberius, that he spent
a whole night and two days in nothing but eating and drinking, Noctem
continuumque biduum epulando, potandoque consumpsit: And of Nero, Epulas e
media die ad mediam noctem protrahebat, He held out his Feast from noonday till
midnight. Also of Vitellius, That he feasted usually three or four times a day,
every sitting being valued at 400000 Sesterces, being able to go through them
all by constant vomiting: Vomunt ut edant, edunt ut vomant; epulas, quas toto
orb conquirunt, nec concoquere dignantur: says Seneca de consol. ad Albinam,
chapter 9. the number of their Courses at a sitting were usually seven* and that
sometimes when they eat privately: -- Quis sercula septem
Secreto caenavit avus? --
Juven Sat. 1. But that Monster Heliogabalus had served in at one Feast two and
twenty several Courses: Lampridius. And Suetonius tells us, That Vitellius had
a Supper made him by his Brother, In qua duo millia lectissimorum piscium,
septem avium apposita traduntur. And Macrobius speaking of Anthony, says, He
devoured with his Chaps and Teeth, whatsoever the Sea, Earth, or Air brought
forth, as if all had been born only to satisfy his Luxury. Saturn. 3. and 17.
The furniture of two Dishes was very famous among the Ancients; whereof, one
was Vitellius's, filled with the Brains of Pheasants and Peacocks, the Tongues
of Phaenicopters, and the Melts of Lampries, brought from the Spanish and
Carpathian Seas: The other Aesop's, the Tragaedian, which he furnished out with
the rarest singing Birds, or such as best imitated man's Voice, which cost him
6000 Sesterces a piece, and the whole Platter, 600000. Val. l. 9. chapter 1. Sen.
ep. 96. The Example of these kinds of Luxury, together with the ill
consequences thereof, may have been a great Motive to induce the wisest of the
Philosophers to such a kind of Abstinency. As for Fasting or Feasting, I am
extremely well pleased with the order and discipline of our Church, which
prescribes both; since as the one advances Health, so does the other Religion,
many of the Common people holding their Christianity by no stronger Tenure,
than that of Mine'd-pyes and Plum-pottage. Asclepiades rejecting the use of
Medicaments, reduced all Cure to the order of Diet, observing the quantity,
quality, and seasoning of Meats. Gellius, citing out of Varro the most delicate
Meats used by the Ancients, presents us with this Bill of Fare; the Samian
Peacock, the Phrygian Turkey, the Ambracian Kids, the Tartesian Mullet, Cranes
from Melos, Trouts from Pessinuntium, Tarentine Oysters, Crabs from Chios,
Tatian Nuts, Egyptian Dates, and Iberian Chestnuts. For my own part, I ever eat
rather out of necessity, than pleasure; and as Montaign says, hate a multitude
of Dishes, as much as any other throng, being no Friend either to delicacy or
variety; and am naturally apt to give God thanks as well when I empty my self,
as at my Meals; since a man may as well live without eating, as without
evacuating. Nor do I ever receive a bag of Money without as solemn a
Thanksgiving, as over a dish of Meat, since without the one, I could not enjoy
the other. As for the times of Eating, let them that can do it, comply with the
custom of their Country; but for my self, neither in this nor any other thing
will I ever be a slave to Presidents, but by eating when I am an hungry, and
drinking when I am a dry, enjoy more satisfaction in one Meal, than in ten
eaten without an Appetite. However, were I to choose any one time for my chief
Meal, it should be at six in the Evening, like the ancient Romans, since I can
by no means approve of that great interruption of Business occasioned by our
Dinners; when we break off at Midday, and most commonly render our selves
unapt for action all the day after.

[2] The mighty influence which Custom has over mankind, appears in nothing
more than in the several Fashions of men's Apparel, which becomes agreeable or
unpleasant to behold, according to the usage of the Country. As for fine
Clothes, were all men wise, nothing would appear more ridiculous, but the folly
of the Vulgar renders them in some measure necessary; for they, being only able
to judge of the outside, set an estimate upon the man, according to the number
of his Tags, Laces and Ribbons. I never see any persons wear Clothes above
their quality, but I fear they come dishonestly by them, and either received
them from a Gallant, or run on the score for them: And whether they paid for
them or no, yet they are little to be trusted; since he that lives above his
Fortune, is generally tempted to feed his own extravagancy with dishonest and
indirect dealing. The Ancients were much addicted to this Vice; Pliny (lib. 9.
chapter 35.) speaks of the great abundance of Pearl and Purple that was worn as
well by men as women: First, as for the men; we read that when a Praetor (being
to set forth a magnificent Show) came to Lucullus to borrow of him some short
Cloaks, he lent him (as says Plutarchus in Lucullo) two hundred out of his own
Wardrobe, ducentas accipere jussit: But Horace speaks of a far greater
number, no less then five thousand; -- Chlamydes Lucullus ut aiunt
Si posset centum scenae praebere, rogatus,
Qui possum tot: ait? tamen and quaeram, and quot habebo
Mittam, post paulo scribit sibi millia quinque
Esse domi chlamydum, partem vel tolleret omnes.
Hor. Ep. 6. Marcellinus (lib. 28.) says, that they had a rich loose upper
Garment, of which when they went to the public Baths, they had so many brought
after them as might well suffice a dozen men to carry. And at public Feasts
they often changed them, only for ostentation to show their variety, at least
so often as the several Courses were served in: Vndecies una surrexti Zoile
coena,
Et mutata tibi est Synthesis undecies.
Mart. lib. 5. Ep. 81. Neither was the price less considerable than the number;
for ten thousand Sesterces were frequently given for a Cloak: -- Millibus december
dixti
Emptas lacernas munus esse Pompillae.
Mart. lib. 4. Ep. 61. And in another Epigram, Emit lacernas millibus december
Bassus*
Mart. lib. 2. Ep. 10. Now that which raised them to such an immoderate price,
was the rich dye which they borrowed from Shellfish; Quibus eadem matter
luxuria paria pene etiam margaritis pretia fecit, which our Luxury (says
Pliny, lib. 9. c. 35.) has brought to prizes almost equal to those of Pearls.
A pound of Violet Purple was sold for an hundred pence, in the time of
Augustus; as witnesses Cornelius Nepos, who lived and wrote during his Reign.
Another extravagancy whereof they much boasted, was the wearing a multitude of
Rings, in so much that we find both Pliny and Seneca thus complaining: We
garnish our Fingers with Rings, and upon every Joint shines a precious Stone.
Senec. Not. Quaest. lib. 7.31. Per cujus digitos currit levis annulus omnes.
Mart. 5.63. Again, Sardonychas, Smaragdos, Adamantas, Iaspidas uno
Versat in articulo Stella, Severe, meus.
Mart. 5.11. At the Battle of Cannae, the Carthaginians gathered from the
Fingers of the slaughtered Romans who died in that Battle, three Modii; which
by Hannibal were sent to Carthage, as a token of the greatness of his Victory.
And Nonnius the Senator, being proscribed by Anthony, carried with him in his
flight no other Goods but only one Ring, wherein was set an Opal, valued at
twenty thousand Sesterces, Pliny lib. 37. chapter 6. Nay, they were so vain to have
some Rings peculiar for the Summer, and others for the Winter* as Probus
writes: Luxuria invenerat alios annulos aestivos, alios vero hyemales. To the
same purpose writes Iuvenal, Sat. 1. -- Cum verna Canopi
Crispinus Tyrias humero revocante Lacernas,
Ventilet aestivum digitis sudantibus aurum,
Nec sufferre queat majoris pondera gemmae.
Nor were their women less extravagant in these matters* than their men; as you
may see by this of the Poet: Matrona incidit census induta Nepotum.
Prep. lib. 3. Elog. 11. Again, Perque caput ducti lapides, per colla manusque,
Et pedibus niveis fulserunt aurea vincla:
Manil. lib. 5. Suetonius (chapter 50.) tells us, that one Pearl which Julius
Caesar bought for Servilia the Mother of Brutus, cost him sixty hundred
thousand Sesterces. Their Ropes of Pearl were so rich, that St. Ierom tells us,
uno filo villarum insunt pretia, upon one Rope hang the prices of diverse
Lordships: in vita Pauli Eremitae. But they exceeded most in Jewels they wore
in their Ears; Quare uxor tua locupletis domus censum auribus gerit? says
Seneca; Why does thy Wife wear in her Ears the Revenues of a rich Family?
Seneca likewise tells us, ( de Benef. 7.9.) that the women wore Silken
Clothes, if they may be called Clothes, wherewith neither their Bodies nor
Shame are covered; which a woman wearing, cannot safely swear that she is not
naked: exposing no less to the public view abroad, than they do to their
Lovers in bed. Which immodesty is thus taxed by Horace: Cois tibi pene videre
est
Vt nudam. --
They painted not only their Faces, but their very Eyebrows: Scitis and
inducta candorem quaerere cera,
Sanguine quae vero no^ rubet, art rubet;
Art supercilii confinia nuda repletis,
Parvaque sinceras velat aluta genas:
Nec pudor est oculos tenui signare favilla,
Vel prope te nato livide Cydne croco.
Ovid. de Romans Amor. They likewise dyed their Hair: Foemina canitiem germanis
inficit h^rbis,
Et melior vero quaeritur art color.
Ibid. They also wore Hair which they bought of others, instead of their own:
I^rat capillos esse quos unit suos
Fabulla, nunquid illa Paul pejerat?
They used Artificial Teeth, in defect of Natural: Thais habet nigros, niveos
Leucania dentes,
Quae ratio est? emptos haec habet, illa suos.
Mart. lib. 5. Ep. 43. Lastly, they were furnished with Paint of diverse
colors, to conceal their deformities: Pyxidas invenies, and rerum mill
colores,
Non semel hinc stomacho nausea facta meo.
Ovid. de Medic. fac There is no modern Folly or Vice which was not paralleled
by the Ancients; amongst whom this Luxury of wearing rich Apparel was much in
use by all, excepting either those whose poverty denied them the opportunity,
or those whose Philosophical wisdom showed them the vanity of it: as we see
Apollonius's did. Diodorus writes, that Pallas first taught the use of
Clothing and Apparel. Eusebius says, that one Vso, a Sicilian born, was the
first that made Clothing for men of Beasts Skins. However the History of Faith
deduces Clothes from Adam's green Breeches. Boethoius invented the Shoomakers
Art. Attalus first taught men to weave Gold in Clothes. And the Phrygians
invented Imbroydering. The Greeks devised the Mantle. And the Hetrurians, Robes
of State. There is no time in my opinion so ill spent as that of Dressing and
Undressing, which like Penelope's Web is nothing but doing and undoing, with a
Parenthesis of ten hours betwixt the one and the other. Nor are other Creatures
to be a little envied in this respect, whom Nature has exempted from this
trouble. Montaign is of opinion, that our Skin may as well bear nakedness as
theirs: witness diverse Nations, which yet never knew the use of Clothes. The
ancient Gauls were but slightly apparelled. No more were the wild Irish, in so
cold a Climat. Nor do I believe the ancient Britains received any great warmth
from their Woad, the only guard they had from the cold. If there be any weak
part in us, which in likelihood should seem to fear cold, it ought to be the
Stomach, where disgestion is made: and yet our Forefathers used to have them
bare, and our Ladies are many times seen to go open-breasted. Z^leucus
endeavoring to correct the excessive prodigality and finery of the Locrines,
took a very ingenious course, worthy all Princes imitation; for he enacted a
Law, that no Woman of free condition, should have any more than on^
Maidservant to follow her when she goes abroad, unless when she be drunk; and
that she might not go out of the City by night, nor wear any Jewels of Gold or
precious Stones, or Goldsmiths Work, or Imbroidery about her, except she be a
professed Whore: Also that it should be lawful for none but Pimps and Panders
to wear any gold Rings, or rich Garments, etc. Now by this means he reformed
their Manners, without any Tyranny or Cruelty. In fine, The be^^ method is for
all men to go dressed according to their Quality and Estate; but for my self, I
desire never to be remarkable either for the fineness or meanness of my
Garments.

[3] The Hair of a Man (though no other then an Excrement) has been more taken
notice of, than any part of the Body, in so much that several Laws have been
produced about it. Heretofore in Greece, as also in most of the Eastern
Countries, it was esteemed for a great punishment to have the Head or the Beard
shaven. In many places the punishment of Fornication was to have the Beard cut
off, as a mark of the highest Infamy. N. Boyer says, that it was the custom in
France, (also Ta^itus writes the same of the Germans) that the Wife being
convicted of Adultery, should be shaven, and her Clothes cut off round about
her to the middle of her Waste, in which posture she should be carried through
the Towns and Villages to be seen of all people. Also Gandinus (de malefic. in
tract. poen. nu. 56.) reports, that in Lombardy the Thieves and Firers of
Forests, were for the first offense poll'd on the top of their Heads; but for
the second, had all their Hair cut off. Thevet (in his Cosmography) tells us,
that it is at this day a punishment in the Isle of Candy to cut off any man's
Beard. The Salick Law (says Camerarius) sets a Fine upon them that shall
shave young Boys or Girls. We read also among the ancient Laws of the Germans,
made in the time of Clotarius, this Edict: That if any one cuts off the Hairs
of a Freeman against his will, let him pay him twelve shillings to make him
amends; and six shillings if he makes his Beard be shaven. Again, By an
Ordinance of the Emperor Frederick it was enacted, That if any person shall
pluck off the Hairs of another Head or Beard, he shall forfeit ten pounds to
the party offended, and twenty pounds more for the satisfaction of Justice.
Plutarch speaking of the custom of the Sicilians, says, That the Conquerors
were mounted upon Horses crowned with Bays, and that the Prisoners being
shaved, were led in triumph. Heretofore among the French, the Subjects were
shaved in token of Vassallage, but the Princes wore long Hair as a mark of
Ruling: And this appears by the Pictures of their Kings in the Churches of St.
Denis, and St. Germain des prez.. In former times likewise, the Turks were used
to let the Hair of their Heads and Beards grow to a very great length; for we
read in their Histories published by Leonclavius, that to cut the Beard with
Scissers was not a thing in use. The Counselors and Bassaes of the Sultan wore
very long Beards; and if the Sultan were displeased with any one, he presently
caused his Beard to be cut off for a shame and punishment: as Leonclavius
reports the Sultan Emir Suleyman did by Chassan, a Captain of the Ianizaries;
Anno Dom. 1512. This custom of wearing Beards or Whiskers may be more necessary
in those Parts, than in our more cold and Northern Climates, where that brutish
Vice of carnal Copulation with our own Sex is not so usual, nor by consequence
a smooth Chin in so much danger. Moreover there have been others who were
enemies to long Hair: As we see Alexander the Great, when ready to join Battle,
expressly commanded his Macedonians to shave their Beards, that so their Enemies
might want that hold, when they grappled with one another. Alexander of
Alexandria writes, that the Abantes and the Mysians, a People of Arabia, did
the same thing in time of War, and for the same reason. The like also do the
Americans, and other West-Indians at this day. St. Paul followed this Rule, as
most conformable to wisdom and reason, when he says, (1 Cor. 11.14.) that it
is a dishonor to the man to wear long Hair. Plutarch tells us, ( Vita
Thesei) that the custom of the young men was, when they came to full age, they
went and shaved their Hair in the Temple of Delphos. And that for a man to
swear by his Beard, was esteemed a most holy and Religious Oath. Now whether
our Philosopher Apollonius neglected his Hair, and let it grow, out of
superstition, affectation, or laziness, is uncertain; but if I might judge by my
self, I should guess the latter. Wherefore the invention of Perriwigs is of so
great use, and saves men so much trouble, that it can never be laid aside: It
helps to disguise the Thief; to make an ill Face, tolerable; the tolerable,
handsome; to ease the lazy of trouble; and to make men their Vassals, if women
would but wear them.

[4] Aesculapius himself rejoiced to have Apollonius a witness of his Cures;
that is, the Priests of the Temple were exceeding glad to have so crafty a man
as Apollonius was, confederate with them in their Cheat: he being of no less
service to them, than Sergius the Monk was to Mahomet. Apollonius did as it
were bind himself Apprentice to the Miracle-Trade, when being one of the Sacris
Initiati, and so receiving his freedom from Aesculapius, he afterward (as we
see) set up for himself. If I bear record of my self, my record is vain,
therefore in all such cases the testimony of others is requisite. For two
conspiring, one to seem dead and buried in a hollow Vault, (which is easy to
be done) and the other to raise him again, will deceive many; but many
conspiring, one to be dead, the other to bring him to life, and all the rest to
bear witness, will deceive more. So that the main stress of all these things
relyes upon the nature of the Evidence. And herein is to be examined the
Interest and Credit of the Witnesses: First, For their Interest; some out of
vainglory think to acquire to themselves no small reputation, by being
recorded in Story for a Companion to a God, or any such divine Person: We see
how fond half-witted men are of conversing with such as are eminent either for
Wit, Quality, or Courage, boasting of the Honor they had in being acquainted
with such a Poet, Author, Lord, or General. Again, Others affect to cause
admiration by relating wonderful Stories; but in such a case, which is most
rational to believe, either that an old Woman flew through the Air in a Sieve,
or that he who related it, told you a Lie. Nay, it is possible for a man to tell
that Tale which he made himself so often, till at last the Author of it really
believes it true. Furthermore, Some have got vast Revenues by professing a
Doctrine to be true: and like Knights of the Post make money of their Evidence:
which Lie being at first planted out of policy, is afterward believed out of
folly, and believed even unto Martyrdom. Others have gone so far in their false
Testimony, that they could not with Honor dis-engage themselves; and so before
they were aware, have been drawn into a forfeiture of their own Lives, rather
than recant. In the next place, Let us consider the Credit of the Witnesses,
that they be neither Women, Children, or Fools, that is to say, rude, ignorant,
common people, such as are susceptible of belief: who believe all things
Miracles that are above their understanding, taking ingenious men for
Conjurers, and think that God never shows his Power, but when he alters the
course of Nature, building their Religion upon some monstrous Birth, or the
like: Were those men to write the Life of Archimedes, they would have presented
you with another Dr. Faustus. Should any man go to London Bridge with one of
Sir Samuel Moreland's Trumpets, and from thence proclaim Destruction to the
City, I question not but many silly Watermen and Fishermen would receive it as
a Voice coming from God. Now the more easy they are to be imposed upon, the
less credit ought their Testimony to have.

[5] God appeared to him in a Dream; that is, he dreamed that God appeared to
him: for so the Malmsbury Philosopher very ingeniously expounds it. Dreams
(says he) are the reverse of our waking Imaginations; beginning at one end
when we are asleep, and at the other when we are awake: For instance, As Anger
when we are awake, heateth such and such parts; so if when we are asleep we
over-heat the same parts, it produces angry Dreams: Also as Fear when we are
awake causes a palpitation of the Heart; so if by lying on our left side,
those humors which flow to the Heart causes the like palpitation, there
likewise succeed frightful Dreams. The Ancients were very superstitious
concerning Dreams, as we may see by the many remarkable Observations which were
made of them: Herodotus tells us, that a Vision appeared two several times to
Xerxes in his sleep, and by threats constrained him to make War upon the
Graecians: whereof his Uncle Artabanus being informed, he making slight of it
as a Dream, and persuading his Nephew to Peace, the same Vision came likewise
to him, with a pair of burning Tongs in his hands, as if he would have put out
his eyes, for opposing the Counsels of War. Herod. lib. 7. Xenophon writes,
that one time as Cyrus lay asleep in his Palace, an Apparition came to him
resembling an old man, with a venerable and divine Aspect, bidding him, Prepare
thy self O Cyrus to go a Journey, for shortly thou must go to the Gods; which
Dream awaking him, gave him warning of his death, which soon followed. Much
such Stories as these, are those Dreams of Artorius, Physician to Augustus, of
Calpurnia, Wife to Julius Caesar, of the two Consuls, Decius Mus, and Manlius
Torquatus, of Titus Atinius, of Cicero, of C. Gracchus, of Aterius Rufus, of
Annibal, of Alexander of Macedon, of the Poet Simonides, of Cassius Parmensis,
of Craesus, of Astyages, Cyrus's Grandfather, of Himera, of Dionysius's Mother,
of Amilcar, the Carthaginian General, of Alcibiades, and of the two Arcadian
Friends, all mentioned in Valerius Maximus; lib. 1. chapter 7. Also the Dreams of
Dio, the Syracusan, related by Plutarch in his Life. And of Julian the
Apostate, written in Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 20. But that which is the most
remarkable Story of all, is that of Marcus Brutus, related by Plutarch, and
thus descanted on by Hobbs: We read (says he) of Marcus Brutus, (one that had
his Life given him by Julius Caesar, was also his Favorite, and yet
notwithstanding murder d him) how at Philippi, the night before he gave Battle
to Augustus Caesar, he saw a fearful Apparition, which is commonly related by
Historians as a Vision: but considering the Circumstances, one may easily judge
to have been but a short Dream. For sitting in his Tent pensive and troubled
with the horror of his rash Act, it was not hard for him, slumbering in the
cold, to dream of that which most affrighted him; which Fear, as by degrees it
made him wake; so also it must needs make the Apparition by degrees to vanish:
and having no assurance that he slept, he could have no cause to think it a
Dream, or any thing but a Vision. And this is no very rare Accident; for even
they that be perfectly awake, if they be timorous and superstitious, possessed
with fearful Tales, and alone in the dark, are subject to the like fancies; and
believe they see Spirits and dead men's Ghosts walking in Churchyards; whereas
it is either their fancy only, or else the knavery of such persons as make use
of such superstitious fear, to pass disguised in the night, to places they
would not be known to haunt. From which ignorance how to distinguish Dreams and
other strong Fancies from Vision and Sense, did arise the greatest part of the
Gentiles Religion in times past, that worshipped Satyrs, Fawns, Nymphs, etc.
and now adays the opinion that rude people have of Fairies, Ghosts, Goblins,
and Witches. Leviath. chapter 2. part 1. Sleep is a time wherein we are naturally
apt to imagine those things which are not: however I must for my own part
acknowledge, that the last Superstition from which I dis-engaged my self, was
my resentment of Dreams; by reason of the many strange predictions that as well
my self, as my acquaintance, have received from them: which however, I esteem
accidental. The first expounding of Dreams, Pliny ascribes to A^phiction, and
Trogus to Joseph the Son of Jacob; but Clement says, the Telmessians first
invented it, Polyd. Virg. l. 1. chapter 19. But whosoever first invented it, yet
the Priests alone made themselves the Interpreters of Dreams, in which Art none
were thought more skilful than the Chaldeans. Plato says, it is the Office of
Wisdom to draw Divining Instructions from them, against future times; wherein I
see nothing but the wonderful experience, that Socrates, Xenophon and Aristotle
(men of unquestionable Authority) relate of them. This Art was heretofore
called On^irocritica, whose Interpreters were properly called Conjecturers,
according to that Verse in Euripides: He that conjectures least amiss,
Of all, the best of Prophets is.
Many great Philosophers have been given up to this delusion of Dreams, as
Democritus, Aristotle, and his Follower Themistius, as also Synesius the
Platonic, so far building upon examples of Dreams, which some accident has
made to be true, that from thence they endeavor to persuade men that all
Dreams are real. Macrobius distinguishes Dreams into five several kinds: 1.
(...), 2. (...), 3. (...), 4. (...), 5. (...). Nay the distinction of Dreams
was so accurate, that in the making of them Somnus was feigned to have no less
than three Servants wait upon him: for if he would have a Dream that should
concern Men, he made use of Morpheus; if Beasts, of Phobetor, (as men called
him) or Icolos, (as called by the Gods;) if inanimate Creatures, of him whose
name was Phantasos. As to the external or internal causes of Dreams, there are
different opinions: For Aristotle refers the cause thereof to common sense, but
placed in the fancy: the Platonicks reckon them among the specific and
concrete Notions of the Soul: Avicen makes the cause of Dreams to be, an
ultimate intelligence moving the Moon in the middle of that light, with which
the fancies of men are illuminated while they sleep. Averroes places the cause
in the imagination; Democritus ascribes it to little Images, or Representatives
separated from the things themselves; but Julius Caesar Vaninus, together with
all Physicians, refer the variety of Dreams, to the variety of Meats we eat,
imputing the cause thereof to the vapors and humors which ascend up to the
Brain. Montaign says, that Dreams are the true Interpreters of our
Inclinations, proceeding from the cares and affections predominant in persons
when they are awake; according to that of the Poet: Res quae invita usurpant
homines, cogitant, curant, vident,
Quaeque agunt vigilantes, agitantque ea ficut in somno accidunt
Minus mirandum est. --
Historians say, that the Inhabitants of the Atlantic Isles never dream, who
feed on nothing that has been slain; which might perhaps be the reason. The
Ancients had many Ceremonies relating to this exposition of Dreams, which are
too tedious here to be inserted: Sometimes they would go and sleep in the
Temple, with Laurel about their heads, and sacrifice to Brizo the Goddess of
Dreamers. Also the Lacedaemonians kept men of purpose to sleep in the Temple of
Pasithia, to watch for Dreams: as silly people use amongst us to go watch at
the Church-door, and know who should dye the next year: The like was done in
Egypt, in the Temple of Serapis: Also Pluto in Aristophanes did the same. In
fine, there were great advantages accrued both to the Priest and Civil
Magistrate hereby; who were not only paid for their exposition, but also made
such Interpretations as ever rendered them serviceable to the public. Many have
written upon this subject of Dreams, whereof the most eminent are Artemidorus
and Daldianus. Some Books of this subject go about under Abraham's Name, whom
Philo in his Book of the Giants, asserts to have been the first practiser
hereof: however, Pausanias attributes it to Amphiaraus. Plutarch mentions other
Books concerning this Art, which were found in Mithridates's Study. Artemon
Milesius wrote two and twenty Books of it himself; and there is a Copy of about
fourscore Senarii Verses in Greek, showing the signification of such or such a
sight in a Dream. Other Treatises there are, falsified under the Names of David
and Solomon, containing nothing but Dreams upon Dreams: however Marcus Cicero
in his Book of Divination, has given sufficient Reasons against the vanity and
folly of those that give credit to Dreams.

[6] Heraclitus was a Philosopher of Ephesus, surnamed by Suidas (...),
obscurus, from his affecting dark sayings: he lived in the time of the last
Darius, A. M. 3447: ant. Not. Chr. 501. his affections were contrary to those
of Democritus; for he always wept at the miseries of this World, whereas
Democritus continually laughed at them. Some report, that he never had any
Master to instruct him, but that he acquired all his knowledge by his own
labor and industry. He held Fire to be the Principle of all things; that the
World was full of Spirits and Demons; that the Sun was a resplendent Flame,
not being any bigger then it appeared to our eyes; that all things were
governed by Destiny: besides many other strange opinions, concerning the
production of Natural things, all mentioned in Diogenes Laertius, lib. 9. also
in Cic. lib. 4 de Quaest. Acad. In his old age he fell into a Dropsy, but
would not use the help of Physicians: at last, having fallen into some dirt,
and then lying in the Sun to dry himself, he fell asleep, and (as some report)
was devoured by Dogs in his sleep. Suidas tells us, that he had for his
Disciples Pythagoras, Hesiod, and Xenophon. Pliny says of him, that for his
Rigor and inflexible roughness of Nature, he was called (...), a man without
passion. He was styled by Epicurus (...), an Ape or Mimick; as also (...),
mero-bibus. He used to say of himself, that when he was young he knew nothing,
and when he was old he was ignorant of nothing. There were four others of this
name, besides this Philosopher, viz. the first, a Lyrick Poet; the second, of
Halicarnassus, a man of great Eloquence; the third, a Lesbian, who wrote the
Macedonian History; and the fourth, a person eminent for nothing but his Folly.

CHAP. VII. Of a very rich Cilician, who sacrificing to Aesculapius for the
Restoration of his lost Eye, and showing the occasion of his losing it, was
thereupon, by the command of Aesculapius, excluded the Temple.
APollonius on a certain time beholding much Blood sprinkled on the Altar, and
Sacrifices laid thereon, together with Egyptian Oxen and Swine of a vast
bigness lying slain, some fleying them, and others cutting them into pieces;
also two Golden Bowls dedicated, wherein were placed most incomparable and
precious Indian Stones, he went to the Priest and asked him what was the
meaning of all this? saying, surely some magnificent person is liberal toward
the God. To whom the Priest answered, But you would more wonder, if you
consider, that this man has yet made no Request, nor stayed the usual time,
nor received health from the God, nor had that which he desires; for he came
but yesterday, and yet sacrifices so generously. Moreover, he promises to
sacrifice and dedicate more largely, if the God will but grant him his request:
for he is very rich, and possesses more Wealth in Cilicia, than all the rest
of the Cilicians put together. Now his Petition to the God is, to restore him
his Eye that is lost. Apollonius (as his manner was, even in his old age)
having fixed his eyes upon the ground, enquired what was the man's name? which
being told him, he replied to the Priest, That it was unfitting such a Fellow
should be admitted into the Temple, as being of a depraved Spirit, and one that
had procured this blemish by no good: wherefore that he should be so prodigal
in his Sacrifices, before he had obtained any thing at the hands of the God,
argues that he does not so much Sacrifice, as expiate his own base and
criminous actions: Thus far Apollonius. But Aesculapius appearing by night to
the Priest, said unto him, Let this rich man be gone, having according to his
deserts; for he deserves to lose his other Eye which remains. The Priest
therefore having enquired of the man, found that this Cilician had a Wife which
had a Daughter by a former Husband, with whom this Cilician being extremely
enamored, was accustomed to lie with her; so as it was no longer concealed,
for the Mother coming suddenly to their Bed, with Needles pricked out both her
Daughters eyes, and one of her Husbands. Hereby he taught this piece of
Philosophy, That it becomes not them who Sacrifice, or offer Gifts unto the
Gods, to exceed a medium.

Illustrations on Chap. 7.
IN this whole Chapter we find but two things remarkable: the first, concerning
the extravagancy of the Gentiles Sacrifices; the second, of their Gods
appearing to them; both which were the main support of their Idolatry, and
gives me a just occasion to inspect the same. Now the original of all the false
Doctrine, Idolatry and Superstition among the Heathens, proceeded from these
causes: First, Revelations from above, devised and forged by their Priests.
Secondly, Oracles of the same stamp. Thirdly, ambiguous Prophecies, (such as
those of the Sybils) either applied to future events, or counterfeited after
them; thereby to gain Authority for any thing they would have credited by the
people. Fourthly, Interpretation of Dreams in what sense they pleased. Fifthly,
doing things which seemed Miracles to the Vulgar, only by Natural means, or
otherwise by the confederacy of Priests and Impostors amongst themselves.
Sixthly, by intruding Traditions of great Persons or Actions in former times,
without alleging any certainty of them. And lastly, by adventuring to tell
more Fables and Lies, because the foolish could not, and the wise durst not
contradict them. Out of all which they extracted and composed a Doctrine of
Rites and Ceremonies, (such as Sacrifices, Oblations, and the like) according
to their own fancy, and possessed the easy people therewith; who received them
as coming from God himself. Nothing was more usual among the ancient Priests,
than to affirm to the people, that while they watched in the Temple their
several Gods revealed several things to them, (as we here see Aesculapius is
reported to have done) which they were commanded to communicate to the people;
while for the rest, the said Priests (being of great Authority and esteem as
well with the Magistrates themselves, as with the Vulgar) did with much gravity
(for it behoved them to keep their countenances) communicate to their Auditors
the said supposed Revelations; adding, that it concerned both People and
Magistrates to take notice of, and obey those counsels and precepts which they
gave. In the mean while the Vulgar, not presuming so much as to question the
least syllable of what was told them, neither heard with their own ears, nor
saw with their own eyes; in so much awe did Religion hold them: For the Priests
did interest themselves in almost all manner of public business, especially in
the times of War, and public calamities, well knowing that all men are more
Profane in prosperity, and more Superstitious in adversity, as being less apt
to give thanks, than to ask pardon. Who but their Priests had (I do not say Wit
to invent, but) Authority to introduce Novelties into Religion? Who (but those
that got by it) would be so wicked to withdraw men from the practice of a Godly
life, such as many of their Philosophers taught, to a barbarous and sottish
form of Rites and Ceremonies, more becoming a Puppet-shew, than the Service of
God? Again, could any else get thereby but the Priests, who profiting
themselves more by men's ignorance, than knowledge, and by men's vices, than
their virtues, cared not how often and how much they imposed and multiplied
their Commandments; that so the Prevaricators might be more obnoxious to their
censure and punishment. That which is of a Divine Nature, (like the Deity it
self) admits of neither mixture nor pollution from any gross and Elementary
substances; therefore it is not to be believed, that those necessary and Divine
Truths which do really come from God, can be any more shaken in men's minds, or
defiled by any Superstitions, than the Sunbeams could be defiled by shining on
a Dunghill: the Heathen Religion was mixed, altered and corrupted; therefore
did it not come from God, as a necessary and Divine Truth. Universality is
esteemed a main Argument of a true Church; now the several Sects in any
Religion, takes away this Universality. Another Argument that Priests make use
of to prove a true Religion, is Antiquity: and here, that Priest who begins his
Religion at a later time than the beginning of History, comes short of this
mark of Antiquity, and casts a blemish on Gods providence for the former times.
Campanella in his Atheismus Triumphatus, reduces the wicked Objections of our
modern Atheists against Christianity, into six principal Quaeries, whereof the
first reflects upon the Antiquity of our Religion: however because they are
short, and of no force, I will here venture to insert them, just as I find them
in him. 1. Si Christus est Deus providus, cur prioribus non venit saeculis, ad
salvandum homines? 2. Et cur nunc tam innumerae damnantur Gentes? Ergo vanus
fuit adventus ejus; Et cur alias multas perire absque remedio permisit
postmodum in altero Hemisp^aerio, quod vocant Novum orbem? 3. Et cur creat
Animas, quas praenovit esse damnandas, and plures salvandis? 4. Et cur unius
pomi morsus tantum invexit malorum, ut totus exitio sic debeatur Mundus ex tam
levi crimine, quod Deus necesse habeat incarnari, and redimere eum per gravius
crimen, in sua morte ab homine commissum. 5. Si enim homo ob tantillum
inobedientiae tanta passus est mala, nunc quia occidit Deum ipsum, quanto
majora pati debet, nec salvari illius sanguine, sed irreparabilius damnari? 6.
Et cur hodierno tempore Diabolus locupletior and potentior est quam Christus
inter homines. But these Arguments are so weak and futilous, that they need no
Answer, as appears by the very first: for all men that understand Christianity,
know that we hold Christ to have been from all Eternity, and so he speaks of
himself; before Abraham was, I am, John 8.58. But to proceed: The definition of
Religion, according to St. Austin, is that which prescribes the reverence and
ceremony of some superior Nature, which they call Divine. Lactantius
distinguishes Superstitious persons, from those we call Religious, thus; the
Superstitious are those who reverence the surviving memory of the Dead, or who
out-living their Parents, adore their Images at home, as their Household Gods:
which many of the Heathens did. Plutarch defines them to be such, who are by
fear brought to believe Demons or Gods. But Mr. Hobbs makes Religion to be
Tales publicly allowed, and Superstition to be Tales that are not allowed of
by public Authority. Now he that will examine all the Religions in the World,
must in the first place cast off all menaces and threats; Secondly, he must
comfort himself with the assurance that God is the communis Pater of all
mankind; and Thirdly, he must learn how to distinguish the True, from the
Likely, the Possible, and the False, in all Religions. First, there are holy
precepts for a good Life, in honor of the Supreme God, contained in the
Alcoran. Secondly, which cannot come but from one extraordinarily endued with
Gods holy Spirit. Thirdly, and were delivered to Mahomet by the conveyance of
the Angel Gabriel. Fourthly, therefore constituted so perfect a Religion, that
without it none can be saved. Here the first proposition is true. The second,
a^most, is but likely; for Mahomet might have many of his Doctrines to that
purpose (...) ancient Philosophers, and perhaps from Moses himself, by the help
of Sergius the Monk, with whom it is said he advised. The third, is po^sible
only; since though God might (if he so pleased) by the ministry of the Angel
Gabriel, inform Mahomet of the Doctrines he taught; yet this is not likely,
since there is no Testimony for it, but Mahomet's single word, who was no other
than an Impostor, as appears by his addition of diverse points of his own
invention; and that therefore this Article is more remote than the former. As
for the fourth proposition, it is absolutely false; there being a more perfect
Religion than Mahomets, (since it contains many absurdities) and therefore not
such as in it men can only be saved. Mr. Hobbs tells us, that in these four
things, opinion of Ghosts, ignorance of second causes, Devotion toward what
men fear, and taking of things casual for Prognostics, consists the natural
Seed of Religion; which by reason of the different Fancies, Judgments, and
Passions of several men, has grown up into Ceremonies so different, that those
which are used by one man, seem ridiculous to another. Now the first founders
of Religion amongst the Gentiles, whose ends were only to keep the people in
peace and obedience, have in all places taken care; First, To imprint in their
minds a belief, that those precepts which they delivered, might not be thought
to proceed from their own device, but from the dictates of some God, or else
that they themselves were of a higher nature than mere mortals, thereby to have
their Laws more easily received: like the first King of Peru, who pretended
himself and his Wife to be the Children of the Sun. Secondly, They have had a
care to make it be believed, that the same things were displeasing to the Gods,
which were forbidden by the Laws. Thirdly, To prescribe Ceremonies,
Supplications, Sacrifices, and Festivals, by which they were to believe the
anger of the Gods might be appeased; and that ill success in War, great
contagions of Sickness, Earthquakes, and each man's private misery, came from
the anger of the Gods; and their anger from the neglect of their Worship, or
the forgetting or mistaking some point of the Ceremonies required. And though
among the ancient Romans men were not forbidden to deny, that which in the
Poets is written of the pains and pleasures after this Life; which diverse of
great Authority and Gravity in that State have in their Harangues openly
derided; yet that belief was always more cherished than the contrary. By these
and such other Institutions, they obtained in order to their end, (which was
the peace of the Commonwealth) that the common people in their misfortunes,
laying the fault on neglect or error in their Ceremonies, or on their own
disobedience to the Laws, were less apt to mutiny against their Governors.
Also being entertained with the pomp and pastime of Festivals, made in honor
of their Gods, they not only imbibed their Religion, (by drinking the Founder's
Health, as is usual at such times) but likewise needed only Bread, to keep them
from discontent, and murmuring against the State. And thus you see how the
Religion of the Gentiles was a part of their Policy. Leviath. chapter 12. part 1.

CHAP. VIII. Whether or no the Gods know all things? And how we are to pray?
Also what things are due to men from the Gods? And last of all, the words of
Apollonius to Aesculapius.
WHen upon the repulse given to the Cilician, many flocked to the Temple,
Apollonius demanded of the Priest, whether the Gods were just? The Priest
answering they were most just, Apollonius further asked him, whether they were
wise? What (said the Priest) is wiser than God? Then he again asked him whether
they were acquainted with humane Affairs, or whether* they were ig^^rant of
them? To which the Priest replied, that therein the Gods seemed most of all to
excel men; for that they through the weakness of their Understandings do not
sufficiently know their own Affairs, whereas the Gods know not only their own,
but also the Affairs of men. You have answered very well and truly, said
Apollonius to the Priest; wherefore seeing the Gods know all things, it seems
very reasonable that he who comes to the Temple of God, should [1] pray after
this manner: O ye Gods, give me that which I ought to have! Now to good and
holy men, good things are due, but to wicked, the contrary. Accordingly the
Gods, when they find a man to be sound and untainted with sin, send him away
crowned, not with a golden Crown, but with all manner of good things; whereas
if a man be polluted, stained or corrupt, they give him over to punishment:
being the more offended at him, for daring to approach their Temples in his
impurity. Apollonius having spoken this, and looking back upon Aesculapius, he
said, Thou, O Aesculapius, do practice such a kind of Philosophy as is
abstruse and agreeable to thy self, not permitting the wicked to have access
here, no, not though they should present thee with all the wealth of the
Indians and Sardians; for they do not sacrifice or offer up these things
because they honor the Deity, but for that they would buy off that vengeance,
which because you are most just, you will never yield unto them. Many such
pieces of Philosophy did Apollonius utter, whilst he was but a Youth, and lived
at Aegas.

Illustrations on Chap. 8.
[1] WE find in the holy Scriptures that Prayer was from the beginning; for
Abel prayed, and so did Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, with the other Patriarchs,
pray unto God in all their doubtful Affairs, and returned thanks for their good
success. Also Moses and Aaron, with others, as Hannah the Wife of Elcanah,
showed us an example of Prayer. But Christ was the first that ever instructed
us in any set form of Prayer, as appears by St. Matthew's Gospel. Afterward,
when men began to count their Prayers, as though God were indebted to them for
begging of him, there were devised, by one Petrus Heremita, a Frenchman of the
City of Amiens, Beads, whereby to number them: Anno Domini, 1090. Now for the
custom of turning our faces toward the East when we pray, that (as Folyd.
Virgil observes, lib. 5. chapter 7.) is taken from the Heathens, who Apuleius tells
us, used to look Eastward, and salute the Sun. The actions of divine Worship
are signs of our intention to honor God: and such are Prayers and
Thanksgiving. First, Prayers; for not the Carvers, when they made Images, were
thought to make them Gods, but the people that prayed to them. And so sings the
Poet: Mart. lib. 8. Epig. 23. Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos, qui rogat, ille facit.
It Is not the Workman, nor the precious Wood,
But it is the Worshipper that makes the God.
Secondly, Thanksgiving; which differs from Prayer in divine Worship, no
otherwise, than that Prayers proceed, and Thanks succeed the Benefit; the end
both of the one and the other, being to acknowledge God, for Author of all
Benefits, as well past as future. However, I cannot but prefer Thanksgiving
above Prayer; for that every man would serve his own turn by Prayer if he
could, but few are so generous to give thanks when their turns are served. In
giving thanks I serve God, in praying I serve my self: therefore of the ten
Cripples, nine prayed, and the tenth praised God, and him our Savior regarded
most. To this purpose Cyrus told his Father Cambyses, That he shall more easily
obtain any thing of the Gods, who does not fawn upon them in distress, but in
prosperity calls most upon them. Xenoph. lib. 1. chapter 8. The Heathens together
with their Sacrifices made use of solemn forms of Prayer for the invoking those
Gods, whom the Priests intended to propitiate. These Seneca calls Sacrificae
preces. This custom was general, not only among the Romans and Greeks, but the
E^yptians themselves; as Diod. Sicul. relates. In some Countries, the praise of
the present King or Magistrate was set forth; but this was not ordinarily used.
Iamblicus says, that Prayers were not the least part of Sacrifices, since by
them the Sacra were fulfilled and perfected. And in another place he writes,
that nothing can be done in the Worship of God rite and auspicato, without
Prayers and Supplications. Plato in Alcib. That the most sumptuous Sacrifices
that could be made, were not so acceptable to the Gods, as Supplications
offered with a pious Soul. The word precari, which more properly than orare
signifies to pray, is yet taken in an ambiguous sense; for unless the Preces be
limited with either bonae or malae, it is not easy to know in what sense they
are taken: therefore the ancient Jews were used to say, Bonas preces precamur.
The bonae preces were addressed in a most solemn manner to Jupiter optimus
maximus, and the Dii Deaeque immortales. The malae preces or Curses were used
in night-Sacrifices to Pluto, and the Dii inferi: for, that Imprecations or
Curses were used against Enemies in Prayer, may appear even from David's
Psalms, where much mischief is wished to his Enemies: Put to shame that wish,
etc. Psalm. 42.14. The Ancients when they came to pray to their Gods, presented
themselves Capite obvoluto, or their heads covered with woollen, and an
Olive Branch in their hands, casting themselves down at the feet of the Image
of that God to whom they addressed their Prayers and Vows. Petitioners both to
the Gods and Men used to go with (...), Garlands about their necks, or green
Boughs in their hands, to beget respect, and amuse the beholders, as the
Scholiast on Sophocles observes. In those Boughs they put Wool, (as we do Silk
in Posies) and so called them (...), Vittatas laureas. The Wool was not tied,
and so fastened to the Boughs, but only wreathed and wrapped up in them: from
whence (it may be) Aethea, in the Tragedy of the Theban Women Petitioners ( v.
31.) called it, The Tie without a Knot. The Italians likewise used such Boughs;
for Virgil says, Iamque oratores aderant ex urbe Latina
Velati ramis oleae veniamque rogantes.
Also Livy speaks of the like practice of the people of Rhodes; their Boughs
were either of Laurel or Olive: Vittatae Laurus, and sup^^icis arbor Olivae.
Stat. Theb. l. 12. for the Laurel was a sign of prevailing, and the Olive of
peace and good will, as Lactantius says, Per quam pax petitur supplicando. Now
the custom was with these Boughs, if they were doubtful of prevailing, to touch
the Knee of the Statue of the God. It is said by Pindar in his (...), that when
they desired the parties consent, they touched the Head, to have it annuere;
when his help, his Hand; and when success, the Knee. Their usual gesture in
praying was to hold up their arms toward Heaven, as you may see it in Eurip.
Helen. v. 1200. and to rest their hands as far as they could upon their Wrists:
according to that of Eschylus, where he says of Prometheus, that though the
Gods had tied him fast to the Hill, his stomach was so great, that he said he
scorned to submit or pray manibus supinis, with bended hands, like Women and
Children: (...). Another custom when they presented themselves before their
Gods, was, that as they saluted and adored them, turning their bodies to and
fro sometimes to the right hand, and sometimes to the left, they prostrated
themselves, when putting their right hand to their mouths they kissed it, and
afterward sat down: Quo me vortam, nescio: Si Deos salutas, dextro vorsum
censeo. Plaut. in Curculi. Now sometimes if they obtained a Request which was
of consequence, you should have them relate it to the Priest of the Temple to
be registered; or write it down in a Table, and leave it behind them for a
Testimony. In the ancient Prayers of the Romans, Ianus and Vesta were first
preferred, (as Fabius Pictor has it) because they first taught the Religious
use of Corn and Wine; and as they were first used in Sacrifices, so they had
the first place, though not the chiefest, which was ever reserved for Jupiter
optimus maximus. After them, the several other Gods had their particular
Carmina and Precationes, addressed to them; and some Priests for that purpose
appointed to say or sing them in a certain Tone, (like our Te Deum in the
Cathedral Churches) whilst others stood by to assist them. At the same time
another commanded the people Favere Linguis, or to be silent, whilst the
Tibicen or Musician played by fits on the Pipe. Furthermore, Prayers to the
Gods were used not only in Temples but also at Sepulchers, the words of them
being for the most part barbarous and obsolete, thereby to seem the more
mysterious: although some Prayers may be found fitted to the present occasion,
and delivered in good language. In some Countries much clamor and loud
speaking was used when they called upon their Gods; which we see Elias wisely
derided in the Priests of Baal. The Poets used to say, that Prayers were the
Daughters of Jupiter, but lame, because they did not always obtain what they
desired. There are hardly any forms of public Prayer made by their Priests
extant; and if any, they are too obscure to be understood. I have never read
but of one, which was the form of Prayer used by the Athenians, and mentioned
by that learned Emperor Antoninus, in these words: O rain, rain, good Jupiter,
upon all the Grounds and Fields that belong to the Athenians. Which Petition
had in it so little charity for others, that Antoninus well observes, either we
should not pray at all, or pray more absolutely and more charitably. For
Prayers made by private men in Temples, (whether for themselves alone, or for
the public) Plato recommendeth to us that wise Petition of the Poet Ion, who
used to pray thus, Zeus, etc. O Jupiter, give us good things whether we ask
them or no; but those things that are evil give us not, though we crave them
never so much. Plat. in Alcib. For as the Poet well observes: Stulti haud
scimus, frustraque scimus; quum quod cupienter dari
Petimus nobis, quasi quid in rem sit possimus n^scere,
Certa amittimus dum incerta petimus, atque hinc venit
In labor atque dolor ut mors obrepat interim.
Plautus in Pseudolo. Other Examples of this kind may be found among the
Ancients, as in Virgil, Cicero's Prayer to Jupiter Stator in the name of
himself and the Romans; (where after repetition of what he had done) he begins
thus; Imperii Statorem, etc. I beseech the stay of the Empire, that he would be
pleased to give assistance to the Commonwealth, the whole State, and my
Fortunes. Also Romulus when his men ran away prayed thus; (says Livy) At tu
Pater, etc. But thou O Father of Gods and Men, chase the Enemies from hence,
take away terror from the Romans, and stop their shameful flight, etc. Scipio
going also against the Carthaginians, used this following Prayer out of the
Pretorian or Admiralship, in presence of his Soldiers, in these words; Dii,
Deaeque, etc. Ye Gods and Goddesses that possess both Sea and Land, I pray and
beseech you, that those things which during my Command have been, are, or shall
be done, may succeed well to me, to the people of Rome, to our Allies, and to
the Latin Name, who follow my Command and Conduct: As also to the people of
Rome both by Sea and Land; may you give them all prosperity; increase their
Numbers; bring them home again in safety, laden with spoils, and triumphing
over their conquered Enemies; grant likewise both to me and the people of Rome,
to do such Feats against the City of Carthage, as the City of Carthage thought
to have done against our City: Of this kind you may find diverse in Livy,
Valerius Maximus, Velleius Paterculus, and others. I shall give two Examples
more of the Vestal Virgins, one whereof carried Water in a Sieve to the Temple
of Vesta, after using these words, Vesta si sacris, etc. O Vesta, If I have
always employed chaste hands in thy sacred Rites, grant that I may with this
Sieve draw Water out of Tiber, and carry it into thy Temple. Another of a
Vestal mentioned in Suetonius's Tiberius is remarkable, if it be true: That ^he
alone drew after her a great Boat that stuck in the Sands or Mud. But these
were only private Prayers, and not the public used at dedication of Temples,
and making of the more solemn Sacrifices, and which were used in the morning,
at midday, and at night, after great Victories obtained, when sometimes
Supplications, or Prayers, with Thanksgivings, were made for the space of
fifteen days; as you may see in Cael. Rhodig. The order and manner of
celebrating them, were set down in their Books called Rituales.

Now in Prayer there are two things to be considered: First, The person
petitioning; and Secondly, The thing petitioned for. As to the first, The
person petitioning was required to be clean, pure, and without guile. Wherefore
Cicero says, ( de Legib. lib. 2.) Let men that approach the Gods, be chaste and
Religious, for they that do otherwise, shall be punished of God himself. Again
also, Let not the wicked presume to pacify the wrath of God by Presents. This
made Bias, one of the seven wise men of Greece, forbid the wicked Mariners to
call upon God in a Storm, saying, Hold your peace, for fear lest the Gods
should know you are here. Plut. Mor. Pliny (lib. 18. chapter 3.) says, That all
things are better accepted, when they come from honest and pure hands. Also
Plato interdicted all wicked men from attempting to appease the Gods: Plato de
Legib. Upon this Consideration, the Ancients took care, that those Women who
were employed about their sacred places and Temples, should abstain from all
filth and pollution nine days and nights, before they were admitted to that
Office. Thus were Cybeles Priests gelded with a sharp Stone, only to preserve
them chaste. Also in Athens they drank Hemlock, to allay their desires of
coming to their Wives; and the Women that vowed a Religious Life, lay upon a
sort of Leaves, that were proper for the same purpose. Demosthenes likewise
speaking of the chief Priests and Overseers of the holy Ceremonies, says, I am
of opinion that he who handles sacred things, and takes care of what belongs
to the Service of the Gods, ought to be chaste and continent, not only such a
number of days, but that in his whole Life, he abstain from all dishonesty.
Thus also the Emperor Justinian in his Institutes, ( Novell. 9. Collut. tit.
16. chapter 5.) strictly enjoyneth Godliness and Chastity to all Friars and Nuns.
Methinks Chrysostom in his Sermon of Covetousness, has a pretty similitude
upon this subject: The face of the Soul (says he) is the Conscience; and as a
fair face delights those that behold it, so is a clean Conscience no less
beautiful in the eyes of God. When an impious suppliant makes his address to
God, instead of expiating his former crimes, he aggravates them, by presenting
him with an heart full of irreverence, sin, and malice, to whom we should sue
for grace and forgiveness: Therefore Xenophon prudently advises us very rarely
to pray unto God; for that it is not easy to settle our minds often in so
regular and so devout a frame, as is required when we pray aright and
effectually. Much more of this subject you may find in all the Fathers, but
more especially in Lactantius.

The second thing to be considered in Prayer, is the Boon petitioned for: and
herein great caution must be used, that it be such a thing as is fit for God to
grant, and us to implore. Now as Montaign (lib. 1. chapter 56.) well observes, many
men invoke the Divine assistance, to abet their greatest Villainies; according
to that old saying, In nomine Domini incipit omne m^lum; endeavoring (as much
as in them lies) to make God a confederate, or accessory at least to all their
wickedness. Thus the Covetous man prays for the vain increase and
preservation of his superfluous ill-gotten Treasure; det vitam, det opes,
Horat. The Ambitious petitioneth for Honors and Victories, to satisfy his
unsatiable pride; cupit hic Regi proximus ipsi, Senec. in Herc. The Envious
imploreth Revenge; like that hot angry Prophet, who cursed the poor little
Children, and made them be destroyed with Bears, only for calling him
Bald-pate, 2 Kings 2.23. The Lover prays to satisfy his Lust; and he that has
purchased Bishops-Lands or Crown Lands, prays for the ruin of Episcopacy and
Monarchy: He that is possessed of Abby-Lands, prays devoutly for the downfall
of Antichrist; as I do my self, upon the same occasion. The Thief, the Pyrate,
the Murderer, nay and the Traitor all call upon God, all implore his aid, and
all solicit him to give them courage in their Attempts, and constancy in their
Resolutions, to remove all obstructions and difficulties that in any sort
withstand their wicked Executions; and sometimes they give him thanks if they
have met with good success: the one, if he have met with a good booty; the
other if he return home rich; the third, if no man see him kill his Enemy; and
the last, if his Treason took effect without discovery. The Soldier, (if he
goes to Fire a Town, batter a Castle, force a Religious House, storm a Fort, or
enter a City that would not surrender, to put Man, Woman and Child to the
Sword, or any such villainous act) before he attempt it, prays to God for his
assistance, though his intentions and hopes are full of nothing but Cruelty,
Murder, Covetousness, Luxury, Sacrilege, and the like; according to that of the
Poet: Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri;
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
Hor. lib. 1. Ep. 16, 59; Paraphrased; Grant me, to play the Rogue, and act the
Saint;
Conceal my Vices with Grimass and Cant.
Margaret Queen of Navarre makes mention of a young Prince, who going about an
amorous Assignation to lie with an Advocates Wife of Paris, and his way lying
through a Church, he never passed by that Holy place either going or coming,
without offering up his prayers to God to be his help and furtherance. He that
calls upon God for his assistance in such a sin, does like that Cutpurse who
should summon a Justice of Peace to his help; or like those who produce God in
witness of a Lie: -- tacito mala vota susurro
Con^ipimus. --
Lucan. lib. 5.94. There are few men would dare to publish to the World those
secret requests they make unto God; wherefore the Pythagoreans very wisely
ordained them to be made in public, that all might hear them; and that no man
should dishonourably invoke God, or require any undecent or unjust thing of
him. Now such kind of Petitioners were not only unsuccessful, but many times
severely punished for their impious requests: We see how severely the Gods
dealt with Oedipus, in granting him his request; for his prayer was, that his
Children might between themselves decide his succession by force of Arms: and
he was taken at his word. Dr. Brown is of opinion, that it is not a ridiculous
Devotion to say a prayer before a Game of Tables; because (says he) in
Sortiligies and matters of greatest uncertainty, there is a settled and
pre-ordered course of effects: and so there is in Murder; but yet I should
think it a presumption to implore the Divine assistance either in one, or the
other.

Again, some there are, who without any evil intent, but merely out of their
own ignorance, pray for such things which (if granted) would certainly prove
their ruin: This foolish desire of men the Poets signified by the Fable of
Phaeton, who having by his importunity obtained o^ his Father Phoebus the
conduct of his Chariot, set both the World and himself in a flame. Also Cicero
expresses the same by another Fable of Theseus, who craved of Neptune three
wishes, whereof one was the d^struction of his own Son Hippolitus. The same
Moral may be likewise drawn from the Fiction of Midas, to whom God Bacchus (for
restoring to him his Foster-Father Silenus) granted his wish; which afterward
proved his punishment, in having all things that he touched converted into
Gold: Hic Deus optanti gratum, sed inutile fecit
Muneris a^bitrium, gaudens altore reeepto:
Ille male usurus doni^, a^t, effice qu^cquid
Corpore contigero fulvum vertatur in aurum.
Annuit optanti, nocituraque munera solvit
Liber, and indoluit quod non mel^ora petisset, etc.
Ovid. Met. lib. 11. Now to preven^ any of these misfortunes, let us always
follow God, and never go before him; for which purpose, I think the best of
Christians may herein follow this Divine advice of the Poet: Juv. Sat. 10. Nil
ergo optabunt homines? si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque si. utile n^stris,
Nam pro jucundis, ap issima quaeque dabunt Dii.
Charior est illis homo quam sibi: nos animorum
Impulsu, and coeca, magnaque cupidine ducti
Co^jugium petimus, partumque uxoris. At illis
Notum qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor.
Shall men wish nothing? be advised, refer
That choice unto the Gods, (who cannot err;)
For better then our selves, our wants they know,
And will, instead of Toys, things fit bestow.
Man's dearer to the Gods, than to himself;
Moved by the strong impulse (of Love, or Wealth)
We Wife and Sons desire: But only Jove
Knows what this Wife, and how those Sons may prove.
We are taught by many of the Ancients, what requests we ought to make at
prayer; Solomon begged for Wisdom. That best of Poets Iuvenal advises, Orandum
est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano. But that learned Emperor Antoninus says,
Whereas one prays that he may compass his desire to lie with such a Woman;
pray thou, that thou may not lust to lie with her: Another, how he may be rid
of such a one; pray thou, that thou may so patiently bear with him, as that
thou have no such need to be rid of him. Another, that he may not lose his
Child; but pray thou, that thou may not fear to lose him. To this end and
purpose let all thy prayers be, and then see what will be the event.

Some few of the Heathens used no prayers at all, as we may gather from that
old verse of Ennius; Desine fat a Deum flecti sperare precando: or at least no
other then, Thy will be done; and that rather by way of Acquiescence, than
Petition: But all other enlargement of request they declined, partly because
they thought not the Deity flxanimous, to be won by entreaty, or bribed by
Sacrifice; and partly because they held it a presumption in man to direct God
what to do, and what to forbear; thinking that such a boldness would be but
slenderly excused, by an additional clause of submission to his Will. From
hence Cardan took his Notion, when he writes, Deum non flecti precibus, esset
quasi unus e nobis, passionibus and doloribus obnoxious. Of this boldness in
directing God, I know not any amongst us so guilty as those gifted Brethren, --
Who with short Band and Hair,
Do belch and snuffle to prolong a Prayer.
These are the men who pray by the Spirit, till the Dinner is spoiled, and
their Auditors almost starved with hunger and cold; for the Spirit will neither
feed us within, nor warm us without. I do not find anciently either among the
Jews or Gentiles, that long Prayers were approved of, or publicly permitted,
especially according to the Spirit (that is, the Fancy) of him that prays. Nay
our Savior himself (whose example we ought to imitate in this, as well as in
all other things) teaches us the contrary, by his short, but Divine Prayer.
Besides, in these long ex tempore Prayers, how many Tautologies, Irreverences
and Undecencies are they guilty of! for all Prayers and Thanksgivings ought to
be made in words and phrases, not sudden, nor light, nor plebeian, but
beautiful and well composed; or otherwise we do not honor God as much as we
can. Who would go into a Presence Chamber to make a Petition to his Prince,
without thinking beforehand what he had to say? besides let us remember, that
God is in Heaven, and we upon Earth, therefore should our words be few.
However, Prayer in general is most commendable; for what can be greater relief
and comfort to a man in affliction, than to have a God to flee to in his
distress? The greatest ease in sorrow, is to have a Friend to break our mind
to; and if so, how much greater relief and satisfaction must it be for an
afflicted man to have God for his refuge, who is so well able to counsel,
direct and assist him! Wherefore Tertullian says, that a Christian while he is
at his Prayers with his hand lift up to God, is insensible of all punishment.
Take a Dog (says the Lord Bacon) and mark what courage he assumes when backed
by a man, who is to him as a God, or melior Natura: now of the same use is
confidence in God to men; for it animates them with that assurance, as ever
renders them successful. Of the power of Prayer, hear what the generality of
the Ancients thought: Et dominum mundi flectere vota solent.
Mart. lib. 8. Ep. Flectere iratus, voce rogante, Deus.
Ovid. lib. 1. de Art Am. Sed solet interdum fieri placabile numen,
Nube solet pulsa candidus ire dies.
Ovid. lib. 2. de Tristib. Moreover, if Historians do not lie for Gods cause,
we have many famous examples of the powerful effects of Prayer: as was that of
the Plague in Rome, stopped by the prayers of Gregory the Great, A. D. 590. at
which time an Angel with a flaming Sword in his hand, is said to have appeared
on the top of Moles Adriani, from thence called ever after the Castle of S.
Angelo. Also how Constantinople when besieged by the Saracens and Arabians, A.
D. 717. was freed, and the Siege raised, by the Prayers of St. German* then
Patriarch of the said City. With many others of the like nature, too long here
to be produced.

CHAP. IX. A Cilician being captivated with the Beauty of Apollonius, as also
with his discourse, solicited him to Incontinency: whereupon within three days
he died.
ONe of the Principal men among the Cilicians, being very infamous, and much
addicted to his Lusts, no sooner heard of [1] Apollonius's Beauty, but setting
aside all other concerns, went immediately from [2] Tarsus (where he was at
that time upon business) to Aegas; pretending himself sick, and that he wanted
Aesculapius's assistance. Therefore coming to [3] Aesculapius, as he was
walking alone by himself, he entreated him to introduce him to the God.
Whereupon Apollonius answered, What need have you of one to introduce you, if
you your self be a good man? for the Gods are ready to entertain such as are
virtuous, without an [4] Advocate. But (replied he) the God has made you his
Guest, but not me as yet. It Is true, said Apollonius, the study of Honesty and
Virtue has gained reception for me; when by practicing that (as far as a young
man is capable) I am the Servant and Friend of Aesculapius: wherefore if you be
likewise addicted to Honesty and Virtue, you may go with confidence to the God,
and ask whatsoever you desire. By [5] Jupiter, said he, I will do it, after I
have made one request to you. What may that be which you would request of me,
said Apollonius? Even the same, answered he, that is frequently begged at the
hands of such as are beautiful; namely, that they would not envy others the
fruition of their Beauty, but freely communicate it to them. And this he spoke
very effeminately, watering his Cheeks with Tears: for there is nothing so mean
or base, to which such vicious and infamous men will not condescend. Then [6]
Apollonius looking upon him with a stern countenance, said, Oh vile wretch,
thou art mad! Whereupon the other falling into a Rage, threatened to cut off his
Head. At which Apollonius smiling, cried out, [7] Oh that pleasant day! for
indeed within three days after, the Villain was slain upon the Highway by the
Executioners, (or Lictors) for being in a Conspiracy with [8] Archelaus King of
Cappadocia, against the Romans. These and many other such like things are
written of him by Maximus the Aegean. Moreover Kings themselves vouchsafed to
write Letters to Apollonius, by reason of his great Fame.

Illustrations on Chap. 9.
[1] APollonius's Beauty: It is very probable that we know not yet what Death
either in Natural, or in General, is, since we attribute so diverse forms to
Humane Beauty: of which if there were any certain Standard whereby to know it,
we should not give those several descriptions of handsome and ugly, according to
our several Fancies. We in these Northern Climes represent Hell for a place of
extraordinary heat and burning; whereas on the contrary, I have heard of some
Indians inhabiting hot Southern Countries, that describe those Torments to be
extremity of cold: and so amongst them the blackest complexion is the
handsomest; but with us, the fairest skin is the greatest Beauty. In Peru the
greatest Ears are ever esteemed the fairest; those of Mexico esteem the least
Foreheads, the most beautiful. And blubbered thick Lips, with a broad flat
Nose, is generally beloved amongst the Indians; as also Teeth spotted with
black or red, and long great Dugs, wherewith they may give their little ones
suck over their Shoulders. The Turks love great saucer Eyes, in so much that
one pleasure which Mahomet promises men in his Paradise, is the enjoyment of
Wenches with great Eyes. In Spain the chiefest Beauty is lean and slender; in
Italy fat and corpulent: the soft, delicate and flattering please the one; the
strong, vigorous, fierce and imperious the other. Vt natura dedit, sic omnis
recta figura:
Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color.
Propert. El. 18. lib. 2. In Beauty, that of Favor is more than that of
Color; and that of decent and gracious Motion beyond that of Favor. A man
shall often see Faces, that if you examine them part by part, you shall find
never a good feature, and yet all together agreeable enough. That is the best
part of Beauty which a Picture cannot express. Aristole speaking of Beauty,
says, That Dominion appertains to those that are beautiful: that they are
most venerable next unto the God^ themselves, and that all who are not blind
are touched with it. Cyrus, Alexander and C^sar, those great Commanders, have
made much use thereof in their greatest Affairs; yea even Scipio the best of
them all. Fair and Good are near Neighbors, and expressed by the self-same
words both in Greek and in the Scriptures. Many great Philosophers have
attained to their Wisdom by the assistance of their Beauty. Bacon's Essays, and
Charron of Wisd. Deformed persons are generally even with Nature, and as Nature
has doneill by them, so do they by Nature, being for the most part void of
natural affection. Certainly there is a consent between the Body and the Mind,
and where Nature erreth in the one, she ventureth in the other: Vbi peccat in
uno, periclitatur in altero. Deformed persons, says the Lord Bacon, chiefly
endeavor to free themselves from scorn, which must be done either by virtue or
malice: therefore let us not wonder, if there have been persons eminent not
only for Beauty, but also for Deformity, that yet have been both eminent for
Virtue. Augustus Caesar, Titus Vespasian, Philip le belle of France, Edward the
4th. of England, Alcibiades of Athens, and Ismael the Sophy of Persia, were all
high, great Spirits, and yet the most beautiful men of their Times. On the
contrary, Tamerlain, Agesilaus, Zanger the Son of Solomon, Aesop, Gasca
President of Peru, Socrates, and Crasus, all men remarkable for their
Deformity, and yet were no less eminent for their extraordinary Virtue.
Wherefore I cannot but condemn that Law of Aristotle as barbarous and unjust,
who thinking all lame and deformed Children not worth the rearing, ordained
them to be exposed and destroyed. For (as Senec^ says) Ex casa vir, etc. An
eminent man may come out of a poor Cottage, and a beautiful high Mind out of a
low and deformed Body. It Is true, a crooked Body is often inhabited by a
crooked Mind: and because they are not good enough to be esteemed in this
World, they for that reason promise themselves happiness in the next: making
Lameness, Crookedness, Squinting, great red Nose, Pimples, or Carbuncles, to be
infallible marks of Election, or divine Grace: Deformed enough to be a Saint:
They owe their Virtue to Necessity; and as an ugly Face is an Antidote to
another Venery, so is it a Call to their own Chastity. In a great Wit
Deformity is an advantage to his Rising: for in ancient Times (as well as at
this present in some Countries) Kings were used to put great confidence in
Eunuchs; because they being envious toward all, are more obnoxious and
officious toward one. The first distinction which is thought to have been
amongst men, and the first consideration that gave pre-eminence to some over
others, it is very probable was the advantage of Beauty; as the Poet seems to
hint: -- agros divisere atque d^dere
Pro facie cujusque and viribus ingenioque:
Nam facies multum valuit, viresque vigebant.
Lucret. lib. 5. The Aethiopians and Indians (says Aristotle) in choosing of
their Kings and Magistrates, had special regard to the Beauty and Talness of
their persons: for that it breeds a respect in his Followers, and a fear in
all his Enemies, to behold a proper handsome man walking at the head of his
Army. Ipse inter primos praestanti corpore Turnus
Vertitur, arma te^ons, and toto vertice supra est.
Virg. Aen. lib. 7. The chief Vice whereof the Beautiful are guilty, is Pride;
Sequitur superbia formam; as vainly esteeming themselves upon the mere
liberality of Nature: which nothing but the Addresses, Courtship, and
Admiration of others make them understand in themselves.

However, methinks this vainglory should cease when they consider, Simia quam
similis, turpissima bestia nobis! Ennius Cic. Not. Deor. lib. 1. But if any
Country under Heaven may boast of this natural Endowment, I may without vanity
say it is England, whose Court is never without a Cleopatra, equal for Beauty to
Anthony's Egyptian Queen.

[2] Tarsus, a City in Cilicia, now called Terassa, Hama and Hamsa. Long. 60.
lat. 38.

[3] Aesculapius, the God of Physic, and feigned to be the Son of Apollo.

[4] The Gods entertain such as are virtuous without an Advocate. This shows,
that the most wise and honest amongst the Heathens opposed the Doctrine of a
Mediator betwixt God and Man* for they wanting the Light of our Gospel, and
being altogether ignorant of our blessed Intercessor Christ Jesus, might
perhaps oppose the Mediatorship of all others, for these Reasons: First,
Thinking it unnecessary, Misericordia Dei being sufficiens Iustitiae suae.
Secondly, God must have appointed this Mediator, and so was really reconciled
to the World before. And that thirdly, a Mediator derogates from the infinite
Mercy of God, equally as an Image does from his Spirituality and Infinity. Now
these Reasons prevailed with many of the wisest of the Heathe^s* but for the
vulgar and generality of those who were subject to the Idolatry of their
Priests, they believed otherwise of this matter, and swallowed without chewing
those pills of Faith, which were accommodated to the Sentiments of Mankind.
Thus therefore, besides their particular and Topical Deities, they moreover
acknowledged one supreme God; not Jupiter of Crete, but the Father of Gods and
Men. Only they said, that this supreme God being of so high a Nature, and there
being other intermediate Beings betwixt God and Mankind, they were to address
themselves to them as Mediators, to carry up their prayers, and bring down his
blessings: so as the opinion of a Mediator, was the foundation of the Heathens
Idolatry; they not being able to go to the Fountain of Good it self. And thus
we see, this invocation of Saints which is now peculiar to the Church of Rome,
was no other than an old Relick of the Heathen Idolatry, and taken from their
invocation of Demons: who as St. Augustine says, are Interpreters and
Messengers between God and Men, that hence they might carry our Petitions, and
thence bring us down supplies, because those Demons excel us m^n in merits.
Aug. Civit. Dei, lib. 8. chapter 22. Thus also do the Papists urge the merits of
the Saints in their Prayers, as in the Prayer of St. Andrew it is thus, Oh
Lord, let the holy Prayer of B. Andrew, make our Sacrifice pleasing to thee,
that being solemnly exhibited to his Honor, it may be acceptable by his
merits, through our Lord, etc. in Festo S. Andreae. But for the Heathens
invocation of their Demons, hear what Plato says of it: God is not approached
by men, but all the commerce between him and them is performed by the mediation
of Demons, who are Reporters and Carriers from Men to Gods, and from Gods to
Men, etc. Plato's Symbolum. Also Ap^leius in his De Deo Socratis. And St. Aug.
Civit. Dei, lib. 8. chapter 24.

[5] By Jupiter. The manner of Swearing in old time was thus: He that should
swear, took a Stone in his hand, and said, If I wilfully deceive you, may
Jupiter banish me out of all good men's company, as I now ca^t away this Stone
from me. Polyd. Virg. lib. 4, 8. Pliny writes, that it was not lawful for any
man to bear an Office five days, unless he were sworn: as amongst us at this
day, such Officers are obliged to take such and such Oaths, before they are
admitted into any Office of Trust in the Government. The Emperor Justinian
first appointed that men should swear by the Gospel: and now adays, all that
swear, lay their hand on the Book and kiss it, saying, So help me God, and the
holy Gospel: because as the Gospel of our Religion and Faith may for no cause
be violated, so neither ought an Oath to be broken. However, considering the
dull apprehensions of the Vulgar, I could wish that some more execrable form of
words were inserted in our Oaths, which might (I am persuaded) more terrify
the unthinking Crowd, than the phrase we now use. I have my self known a silly
old Woman, that having taken her Oath in one of the Courts of Westminster, and
being afterward asked by the Judges whether she was sworn, told them, no,
ignorantly believing that those words, You shall swear the Truth, and nothing
but the Truth, were only preparatory, and in order to some horrid Execration
which she was afterward to take. (...), an Oath, (the Son of Eris, and yet the
end of all contention) was of two sorts, viz. (...), and (...), the greater and
the less. The greater Oath was either of Men by the Gods, or the Gods
themselves by the Stygian Lake. Hesiod* Epist. ad Heb. 6.16. Wherefore some
fetch the word (...), an Oath, from Orcus, Hell. This Oath was then invented by
Jupiter, and prescribed by him to the rest of the Gods, when he had the
assistance of Styx and his Sons against the Tytans; or when he drank of the
Water to quench his thirst in the Fight. Servilius says, (out of Orpheus) that
if any God had sworn false, or broken his Oath, when he swore by Styx, he was
to be punished for it in Hell nine thousand years. Which Order even Jupiter
himself submitted to; and therefore took the more care how he swear, as
Minutius says, Destinatam enim sibi cum suis cultoribus poenam praescius
perhorrescit. Also sometimes it was their custom to add an imprecation of some
evil, wherewith he knew them able to punish him, if he swore false: as
Telemachus does in Homer; saying, By Jove, and the sorrows of my Father.
Jupiter was the proper Custos Iuramentorum; however, they swore by many of the
other Gods, as also by their own men lately dead: as we see Demosthenes swore
by those that valiantly died in the Battle of Marathon. Some swore by the Name
of Hephaestion; and C. Caligula esteemed Drusilla to be the most sacred Name he
could swear by. Sueton. in Calig. chapter 24. The Lacedaemonians used to swear by
their own two Gods, Castor and Pollux, and some by the whole Jury of Gods. But
in the Markerplace in buying or selling they commonly swore by Mercury. When
they took any great Oath in public, they used to lift up their hands, as
Apollo in the Poet bids Lachesis, (...). This Ceremony Menelaus in Euripides
demanded of Helena. Helen. v. 834* Also at the time of their Swearing they
sacrificed either a Boar, ^ Ram, or a Goat; and sometimes one of each.
Aristoph. in Lysist. The Romans at the confirmation of any League or Truce,
used to sacrifice Pigs, because Jupiter was nursed by a Sow. Now the Flesh that
was used to be eaten at other Sacrifices, was not at this, unless it were by
the Worms or the Fish; for either they buried it in the ground, or else threw
it into the Sea: as Talthybius did the Sow, which was sacrificed at Agamemnon's
Oath. Aristoph. in Lysist. and Eustat. in Hom. Il. Radamanthus (the justest man
that ever lived) had expressly forbid them to swear by the Gods, but instead
thereof, allowed them the use of a Dog, a Goose, a Ram, or such like Creatures.
Sometimes they swore by the Ground, as Hippolytus does in Euripides, verse.
1025. Sometimes by their Head, as he does in Virgil, Per Caput hoc Iuro, per
quod Pater ante solebat. Ecc. lib. 2. which was the reason (says Athenaeus) why
they esteemed the Head holy and sacred. Now as well amongst the ancient
Heathens as Christians, he that made conscience of swearing right was esteemed
Religious, whereas on the contrary, they expressed a wicked man by the Name of
perjurious. Both Minutius and Tertullian write, that they esteemed it a more
heinous crime to swear false by their Kings than by their Gods; and were more
severely punished for it. St. Augustine tells us, that it was a custom amongst
the Christians of the Primitive Church, to decide matters in controversy by
Oaths at the Tombs of Martyrs. August. Ep. 137. which makes me wonder at the
Quakers, who with their Yea and Nay, refuse all lawful Oaths before a
Magistrate; when at the same time, in a godly manner, (as they call it) they
speak less truth than other men. Some desire to trade with men of that
persuasion before any other, but for my own part I have never met with greater
Fourbs than those Quaking Saints, who cheat by the Spirit. One of that Sect I
knew who was a notorious Liar, and always began his Lies with a Verily, verily,
I say unto thee. We read amongst the Gentiles, that Witnesses used to be
examined upon Oath, and that Xenocrates was the only person whose bare word was
accepted: Tantae Authoritatis and fidei fuisse Xenocratem, ut quantumvis alios
ad Testimonium dicendum nemo absque juramento, admittendus fuit. The ancient
Romans, as well their Senate as Magistrates, were most exact and punctual in
the observation of Oaths and Promises, even to their very Enemies, for the
regard they had not only to Justice, and to their own Reputation, but also to
the consequence of their good Example in the Commonwealth. To which purpose we
may alledg the Example of that worthy Consul Marcus Attilius Regulus, who being
taken Prisoner by the Carthaginians, and dismissed upon his Oath, (promising
either to procure the delivery of certain Prisoners, or to return himself to
Carthage) was sent back by the Senate with his own consent, they being
unwilling either to release the Prisoners, or to retain the Consul contrary to
his Oath. The like may be also cited of T. Veturius, and Spurius Posthumus,
Consuls; likewise of T. Mutius, and Q. Aemilius, Tribunes of the people, who
were delivered Prisoners to the Samnites, because the Senate would not ratify
the Peac^ which the said Consul and Tribunes had made with them. Cicero, lib.
3. de off. Sextus Pompeius, Pompey the Great's Son, having Wars with Antonius
the Triumvir, and meeting him at the Seaside upon a Treaty of Peace, invited
him to Supper in his Galley, giving him his Oath for his assurance, and being
demanded secretly by Metrodorus the Pirate, whether he would have him weigh
Anchor* and set Sail, and so make himself the Lord of the World, he answered,
That he was not used to forswear himself, esteeming it neither honorable nor
profitable to gain the Empire of the World by Perjury. Plat. in Anton. Of no
less Honor and Fidelity was Lycurgus, Brother to Polydectes, King of
Lacedaemon^a, whose Widow offering to stifle the Child in her Womb, (begotten
by the late King Polydectes) if Lycurgus would marry her; he not only refused
it, but also proclaimed the young Child (his Nephew) King, so soon as it was
born. Plat. in Lyc. Also for the Honor of the Romans, no less famous is that
Story of Fabricius; to whom his Enemy's Physician coming, and offering to
poison the King his Master, and thereby to render Fabricius victorious; he not
only refused his Treason, but also seized the Traitor, and s^nt him bound in
fetters to his Master, with a full discovery of his treacherous intentions
against him. Eutrop. Brev. Romani Scelerum semper sprevere ministros.
Noxia pollicitum domino miscere venena
Fabricius regi nudat a fraud remisit;
Infesto quem Mart pe^it, bellumque negavit
Per famuli pa^rare nefas, ductosque Camillus
Trans murum pueros obsessae reddidit urbi.
Claud. de bello Gild. Cicero tells us, that Fides est Fundamentum Iustitiae.
Wherefore we see how Plutarch inveighs against Alexander the Great, (for
killing certain Indian Soldiers, that had rendered themselves upon his word)
saying, that that one act had spotted and stained all his glorious Conquests,
and other royal Virtues. Plat. in All. Also in Thucydides, (lib. 3. de bello
Pelep.) We see how Paches the Athenian Captain is condemned for violating his
Faith with Hippias. So sacred were Oaths and Faith given among the Ancients,
that on many of their old Coyns for Testimonies of Faith kept, we see two hands
joined together with this Inscription, Fides Exercituum, or Fides Legionum, and
sometimes Fides Romanorum. The Stoics say, Faith is derived of the Verb
fac^re, to do; because all things that are faithfully promis^d, ought to be
executed. But still provided there be no compulsion; for if a Thief on the
Highway should with a Sword or Pistol at my Throat, make me swear to pay him
on such a day all the Money I have in the World, I think no man will presume to
say this Oath is binding either in honor or conscience; neither could I avoid
taking it without running into a greater evil, and rendering my self Felo de se.
Quid? si me Tonsor, quum stricta novacula supra est,
Tunc libertatem, divitiasque roget;
Promittam? nec enim rogat illo tempore Tonsor,
Latro rogat: res est imperiosa Timor.
Mart. Epig. lib. 11. Which may be thus paraphrased, in imitation of Martial.
If Shaver Howard with Razor at my ear
The Author of Bucks Ballad should enquire;
A Rogue, not Howard, imposes on my fear,
I Would promise, but not grant him his desire.
However, for any man to violate his Faith or Oath, when made upon just
grounds, nothing can be more dishonorable or more destructive to humane
Society. And if we believe Historians, those violaters of Faith have been
oftentimes severely punished for so doing: First, In sacred Writ, we find how
Simeon and Levi were cursed by their Father Jacob, for violating their League
with Sichem, Genesis 49. How Readiness posterity were punished for his breach of the
League with the Gibeonites, 2 Kings chapter 21. How Andronicus, a Favorite of King
Antiochus, was punished for his Treachery to Onias the High Priest, 2 Machab.
chapter 4. Also we see the great regard that Joshua had of his Oath and League with
the Gibeonites; saying, (when the Children of Israel murmured against it) We
have sworn unto them in the Name of the Lord God of Israel, and therefore may
we not touch them, lest the wrath of God fall upon us for breaking our Oath,
Joshua 9. Neither is profane History less filled with Examples of this nature:
for Plutarch to the same purpose instances in that Story of Cleomenes King of
Lacedaemonia, who making a Truce with the Argives for seven days, set upon
their Camp in the night, excusing himself with this Equivocation, that the
Truce was made for the days, and not for the nights: however this
perfidiousness was his ruin, as the sequel of the Story shows. Plut. in Apoth.
Lacedaem. The same Author likewise tells us of one Calippus, who being justly
charged with a Conspiracy against Dion of Sicily, and having denied it with
many solemn Oaths in the Temple of Ceres, was deservedly slain with the same
Dagger wherewith Dion was killed before by his consent. Plut. in Dion. And many
other notable Examples of this kind are recorded amongst the Writings of the
Ethnicks, who were highly sensible of that Vice: in so much that when
Tissaphernes the Persian broke his Truce which he had made with the Grecians,
Agesilaus rejoiced at it, saying, We are beholden to Tissaphernes for making
the Gods his Enemies, and our Friends, wherefore let us boldly give him Battle:
which he did, and overthrew him. Polian. lib. 2. Ah Miser, and si quis primo
perjuria celat,
Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus.
Tibull. Eleg. 9. lib. 1.

[6] Then Apollonius looking on him with a stern Countenance. This Chapter
gives not only a sufficient Testimony of Apollonius's great Chastity, but also
of his wonderful Patience, when he returned so high an affront with so much
modesty and gentleness: rendering himself a fit pattern for all good
Philosophers and Christians to imitate.

[7] Oh that pleasant day! This expression, as well here as throughout the
History, ever relates to the time to come.

[8] Archelaus King of Cappadocia: There were several Kings of this Name; one
of Macedonia; one of Judea; and two of Cappadocia, whereof one was overthrown
by Sylla, and the other kept prisoner at Rome by Tiberius. But the person
mentioned here by Philostratus, I take to be the same Archelaus mentioned by
Josephus, in his Wars of the Jews; (lib. 1. chapter 17.) who married his Daughter
to Alexander the Son of Herod and Mariamne. There was also a Milesian
Philosopher of this Name: who was himself Scholar to Anaxagoras, and Master to
Socrates.

CHAP. X. Of the death of Apollonius's Parents, and the plentiful Estate that
his Father left him; also by what means he reclaimed his vicious Brother; And
lastly of his wonderful Chastity.
SO soon as he received intelligence of his Fathers death, he went away to [1]
Tyana, and there with his own hands interred him near the Sepulcher of his
Mother, who died not long before. The Estate being very large, he divided with
his Brother, who was a very intemperate young man, and much given to drinking,
being twenty three years of [2] age, which by the Law rendered him above the
protecti^n of a Tutor: whereas Apollonius being but twenty years old was under
the discipline of Tutors. Therefore returning again to his Philosophical
Studies at Aegas, he there instituted both a Temple and a [3] Lycaeum: for
there was in him an Echo of all manner of Philosophy. In a short time after,
being arrived to full age, and become Master of his Estate, he returned to
Tyana, where when one told him that it was his duty to reclaim his Brother, and
reform his Intemperance, Apollonius replied, Truly this would argue great
confidence in me; for how should I being a younger, reform an elder?
Nevertheless, I will endeavor as well as I am able to cure him of these
Distempers. Therefore in the first place, he bestows on his Brother half his
own Portion, saying, that he wanted many things, whereas himself needed but
little. Then insinuating himself into his company, and wisely alluring him to
yield to one that would reform him: our Father (said he) who used to instruct
and admonish us, is now departed; it remains then, that you admonish me, and I
you. By this means, as men are used to do when they break Colts, he by little
and little prevailed with him to reform his Life, and give over his numerous
Vices, being addicted to Dicing, Drinking and Whoring, and so proud of his Hair
as to dye it, walking in a haughty and stately manner. Now he had no sooner
reformed his Brother, but he began to work upon his other Kindred; and to
render them the more observant of his Admonitions, he bestowed on such as were
in want the remaining part of his Estate, reserving but very little to himself.
For he was used to say, that [4] Anaxagoras the Clazomenian spending his Estate
on stocks and herds of Camels, was a Philosopher for Sheep rather than for Men:
And that [5] Crates the Theban, who threw his Money into the Sea, was useful
neither to Men nor Cattle. And Pythagoras being famous for this saying* That a
man should inwardly converse with none but his own Wife, Apollonius replied,
This I conceive was spoken unto others; but as for me, I am resolved never to
marry, but to abstain from the company of all Women whatsoever. In which
respect he seemed far to surpass that of [6] Sophocles, who being grown old,
said, that he was delivered from a mad and fierce Master. Whereas Apollonius by
his own virtue and temperance, was not overcome by him even in his youth: for
being both youthful and of a strong Body, he mastered and subdued that mad
passion. Yet some still accuse him of Venery, as following the errors of Love,
and for that very reason continuing one whole year among the Scythians; whereas
indeed he did never go into Scythia, nor was he ever captivated with the
passions of Love. And therefore notwithstanding Euphrates has composed false
Accusations against him, yet did he never accuse him of Venery; as we shall
demonstrate, when we come to speak concerning the business of Euphrates. This
Euphrates had a quarrel with Apollonius, because he jeered him for his love of
Money, and endeavored to withdraw him from the study of gain, and from making
merchandise of Wisdom. But let us adjourn these Matters to be treated of in
their due place.

Illustrations on Chap. 10.
[1] TYana; a City of Cappadocia, famous for the Birth of Apollonius.

[2] Three and twenty years of Age, which by the Law rendered him above a Tutor.
The Ancients divided the Age of man into seven parts, which they resembled to
the seven Planets: comparing our Infancy to the Moon, wherein we seem only to
live and grow as the Plants; the second Age or Childhood to Mercury, wherein we
are taught and instructed; the third Age or Youth to Venus, the days of Lust,
Desire, or Vanity, at which time being wrapped in the third Heaven of Love, we
there both see and do things not fitting to be uttered; the fourth to the Sun,
the most strong, flourishing and beautiful Age of man's Life; the fifth to
Mars, in which we seek Honor and Victory, traveling to ambitious ends; the
sixth to Jupiter, wherein we begin to take an account of our Times, to judge of
our selves, and to perfect our undestanding; the seventh and last to Saturn,
wherein our days are sad and overcast with old age, sickness, and infirmities.
Rodeg. 10.61, 62. Macrobius in his first Book of Scipio's Dream, ( chap. 6.)
extolling the singular effects of the septenary Number, expresses the
remarkable changes of Nature every seventh year in the course of man's Age: As
casting of the Teeth in the first seven; springing of the Pubes in the second;
of the Beard in the third; the utmost period of Growth and Stature in the
fourth; of Strength in the fifth; a Consistence in the sixth; and a Declination
in the seventh. Philo Iudaeus (in that excellent Book of the Workmanship of the
World) affirms likewise, that at the end of every seventh year there is some
notable change in the Body of man; and for better proof thereof, he produces
the Authority of Hippocrates, and this Elogy of Solon's: Impubes pueri septem
volventibus annis,
Claudunt enatis dentibus eloquium:
Post alios totidem Divorum numine dextro,
Occul^um pubis nascitur indicium.
Annus ter septem prima Lanugine malas
Vestiet aetatis robore conspicuus, etc.
The Ancients had great respect for Old Age, vainly judging of men's wisdom by
the length of their Beards; in so much that they had their particular years
prescribed for such and such undertakings: The Age of one and twenty, freed
them from the Tyranny of Masters and Tutors; therefore Philostratus here tells
us, that Apollonius's Brother being 23 years of Age, was exempt from the
Jurisdiction of a Tutor. They had also their particular years wherein they were
capacitated for Marriage, and public imploys: the Jewish Talmud, as also the
Civil Laws and Canons of the Church, allow a woman to be married at twelve;
Hesiod, at fifteen; Xenophon, and the Comedian, at sixteen; Aristotle, at
eighteen; and Plato, at twenty: of all which, I conceive the marrying at twelve
to be the most unreasonable; first, because there is not one in a hundred but
what is fitter for a Joynted ^aby, than to look after the concerns of a Family,
at that Age: and secondly, because it seems very unfit that she who by the Law
has not a Testamentary power to bequeath an old pair of Shoes, should yet at
the same time have power to dispose of her own Person and Fortune in marriage.
The Lex Papia, made by Tiberius, prohibited such men as were past sixty, or
women above fifty, to marry, as being unapt for Generation; the chief end of
marriage: which Law was repealed in part by Claudius, but more fully by
Justinian. The blessed Virgin, when she brought forth our Savior Christ, was
but fifteen. Secondly, for public imploys, particular Ages were required, and
that both in Church and State: Lancelot in his Institutions of Canon Law,
says, No man ought to be made a Bishop till he be 30 years of Age, for as much
as we read that Christ was baptized, and preached not till that Age. St.
Chrysostom was made a Bishop at 43 years of Age: Savil'^ Preface. Thomas Becket
was made Archbishop of Canterbury at 44; Mat. Parker, Antiq. Brit. Venerable Bede (our Countryman, who lived 800 years since) was by his own Testimony made
Deacon at nineteen. And Origin, by the Testimony of Eusebius, was made
Catechist at 18 years of Age. In the next place, for public imploys in State:
The Gauls put their Sons in Arms, and prepared them to War, at fourteen. The
Gracchian Law ordained, that none should be levied under seventeen. The
Athenian Laws only commanded men to follow the Wars from 18 to 40; but as well
they, as the Romans, seldom exceeded 45, as both Dionysius and Polybius speak.
Seneca in his last Chapter de brevitate vitae, says, that the Law does not
compel a Soldier to serve after 50, nor a Senator after 60. To which Law Pliny
alludes, in his Epistle to Pomponias Bassus, in these words; Ipsae leges
majorem annis 60, otio reddunt. Romulus, according to Plutarch, began his Reign
at 12; Alexander had in a manner conquered the World at 33; Augustus entered
upon the Consulship at 20, and received Virilem Togam at 16* Su^^on. We read in
Baronius, of a Pope not above 12 years of Age. Cicero pleaded in public before
the Senate at 23 years old. Some men are sooner ripe than others; and when I
read a Book, I never examine the Author's age. He that writes a foolish Book,
makes his Reader but little amends by prefixing in the Frontispiece Aetatis
suae 60: neither on the contrary is Nonage any sufficient Plea in an Author,
since he that thinks himself old enough to write a Book, can hardly excuse the
Folly that is in it by calling himself Child.

[3] Lycaeum was the name of a School which Cicero erected at his Manor of
Tusculum; calling it so, after the name of Aristotle's School near Athens,
which stood without the Walls in a Grove. L^ertius speaking of Aristotle's
arrival at Athens, says, that the Academy being prepossessed by Xenocr^tes,
Aristotle made choice of the Lyceum; which, as Suidas writes, was situated in
the Suburbs of Athens, and first built by Pericles for the exercising of
Soldiers. In this place he taught and discoursed of Philosophy to such as
frequented him, walking continually every day till the hour of anointing, which
the Greeks usually did before Meals; from whence he and his Followers are
called Peripateticks: Inque Academia umbrifera nitidoque Lycaeo
Fuderunt claras divini pectoris arts.
Cic. Acad. So that in imitation of this Lyceum at Athens, Apollonius erected
such another at Aegas.

[4] Anaxagoras the Clazomeni^n; of whom I have written at large in my Notes
upon the second Chapter of this first Book, Note 3. page 6, 7.

[5] Crates the Theban, Son of Ascandas, was a Cynick, and one of the most
eminent of Diogenes's disciples, as both Laertius and Suidas write: however,
Hippolytus says, he was not the disciple of Diogenes, but of Bryso the
Achaean. The original of the Cynicks was from Antisthenes the disciple of
Socrates, who after the death of his Master Socrates, made choice of the
Cynosarges, a School at Athens just without the Gates. The chief Professors of
Cynicism were Antisthenes, Diogenes, Crates, and Demetrius. However, Crates had
many eminent Auditors, as his Wife Hipparchia, her Brother Metrocles, Menippu^
the Phoenician, and Zeno the Father of the Stoics, from whence sprang that
great fraternity and communion betwixt the Cynicks and the Stoics; in so much
that (as Laertjus says, lib. 6.) the Stoics themselves acknowledged Cynicism
to be a short way to Virtue. Nevertheless he that well examines this Sect,
together with the Manners and Behaviors of those who professed it, will find
that Philosophy appears so fantastical in no dress as in Cynicism; differing in
its pride, ill nature, moroseness and slovneliness, from all other Sects of
Philosophy, just as a rigid Calvinist differs from all other Professors of
Christianity. And this was the chief motive that induced Zeno to quit the
Cynick Sect* for being commanded by Crates to do some undecent actions, his
modesty made him refuse, and quit Crates's School: whose Cynick impudence was
so great, that we read how Crates lay with his own Wife in public, before a
great number of people.

This Theban Philosopher flourished about the 113th Olympiad, A. M. 3620.
Pasicles, the disciple to Euclid, was his Brother. Now the account which
Laertius gives us of Crates, is this: Antisthenes (says he) in his Successions
relates, that being at a Tragedy where Telephus was represented, carrying a
Basket in a sordid condition, he after that betook himself to the Cynical
Philosophy, and selling all his Estate, (for he was very rich, having got
together above two hundred Talents) he distributed it amongst the Citizens, and
was so constant a Professor of this Philosophy, that Philemon the Comic Poet
takes notice of it in these words, (...), etc. thus rendered by the ingenious
Mr. Stanley in his Lives of the Philosophers: By him in Summer a thick Coat was
worn;
In Winter time (so Temperate) a Torn.
Diocles (as also our Author Philostratus) reports, that Diogenes persuaded him
to part with his Estate, and to throw all the Money he had left into the Sea;
saying, Abite pessum malae cupiditates, ego vos mergam, ne ipse mergar a vobis;
for he thought that none could have Riches and Virtue together. Some of his
near Friends that came to dissuade him from this course of Life, he beat away;
being of a most resolute Spirit: his House was from Alexander, and his Wives
from Philip. Furthermore Demetrius the Magnesian says, he deposited some Money
in the hands of a Banker, upon this condition, that if his Sons betook
themselves to any Civil employment, it should be repaid to them again; but if
to Philosophy, that it should then be distributed amongst the people, for as
much as a Philosopher stands in need of nothing. Eratosthenes likewise relates,
that Crates having a Son named Pasicles by his Wife Hipparchia, so soon as he
arrived at man's estate, he brought him to the house of a young Maid that was
his Slave, saying, this is an Hereditary Matrimony to you: but those who commit
Adultery, are according to the Tragedians punished with banishment or death;
and those who keep Concubines, were according to the Comedians, by luxury and
drunkeness transported to madness. He was exceeding invective against all
Common women, thereby (as some say) to exercise himself to bear railing from
others. Beholding one time at Delphos a golden Image of Phryne the Curtezan, he
cried out, This is a Trophy of the Grecian Intemperance! Another time, being
beaten black and blue in the Face by Nicrodomus the Lutenist, he pasted a piece
of Paper on his Forehead, wherein was written, Nicrodomus did this. Also at
Thebes, being beaten by the Master of the Gymnasium, or as others say at
Corinth, by Euthicrates, he laughed, saying, (...), etc. He by the Foot him
drew,
And over the Threshold threw.
Mr. Stanly 's Transl. Alexander asking Crates, whether he would that his
Country should be restored or no? Crates answered, To what end, seeing there
will come perhaps another Alexander and destroy it. Again, The Athenian
Magistrates blaming him for wearing a long Robe, I will show you (says he)
Theophrastus in the same Attire; which they not believing, he brought them to a
Barber's Shop, where Theophrastus was sitting to be trimmed. Zeno in his Chrias
says, that he sowed a Sheeps-skin on his Cloak to appear the more deformed;
however of himself he was very unhandsom, and always whilst he discoursed,
laughd. In his old age he grew crooked, to which he alludes, when looking upon
himself, and perceiving Death's approach, he said, -- (...), etc. --. -- And
do thou go old Friend,
To the next World, thou whom old age does bend?
He died old, and was buried in Boeotia. The Epistles of Crates are extant,
wherein (says Laertius) he writes excellent Philosophy, in a style resembling
Plato. He wrote likewise diverse Tragedies full of deep Philosophy. Stanly his
Lives of the Philosophers; Suidas; Laertii lib. 6. Stobae. Sermon Plutarch. Mor.
Gale's Court of the Gent. part 2. Crates is much commended by Plutarch, for
that he had no sooner read upon that Monster Sardanapalus's Tomb these Verses,
(Haec habeo, quae edi, quaeque exsaturata Libido
Hausit: at illa manent multa and praeclara relicta.)
Chaerill. Poeta. But he extempore made this addition to them; (Haec habui,
didici studio quae pulchra; Camaenae
Me quibus instruxere.) --
I cannot present you with a true Character of this Philosopher's Virtue,
without rendering it morose and ill natured to the brisk and airy, affected to
the complaisant, fulsom and unclean to the nice, clownish to the well-bred,
prodigal and extravagant to the covetous, and unimitable to the licentious and
youthful; however, since his Virtue (which consisted in a self-denying
temperance) was great, the custom and discipline of his Sect, may justly atone
for all his other ill-bred errors. Now besides our Theban Philosopher, (whom
Philostratus here speaks of) there were other eminent men of the same Name,
viz. Crates, an ancient Comic Poet of Athens, a Disciple of Polemon the
Philosopher: Suidas. And Crates the Grammarian, (under Ptolomy Philom.
Contemporary with Aristophanes) surnamed Criticus, or Homericus, for that he
wrote fifty nine Books of Comment* upon Homer's Iliads and Odysses: Suidas. He
also first brought the Study of Grammar to Rome, as Suetonius says; for being
sent by King Attalus to the Senate, he made many Narrations upon the death of
Ennius, during the time of his Embassy. There was likewise another Crates of
Pergamus, that wrote a Book containing the wonderful Curiosities of many
Countries; of whom Pliny (lib. 7.2.) and Aelian (de Animal. 17.9.) make mention.

[6] Sophocles, the Prince of Tragic Poets, by Birth an Athenian, and Son of
Sophilus, was born in the second year of the seventy first Olympiad, whilst
Philippus was Archon, as Anonym. in descript. Olymp. and the Scholiasts upon
Sophocles say. However, Suidas and others write, that he was born in the
seventy third Olympiad, which account makes him to be seventeen years older
than Socrates; about A. M. 3520. and Ant. Christ. 428. Suidas says, that he
died six years after the death of Euripides, but yet is preferred before him,
for the majesty of his Style, though not for the number of Sentences. He was
Co-partner with Euripides and Pericles in the Office of Praetor. He wrote, as
Suidas informs us, one hundred and twenty three Tragedies: and in his
contention for the Laurel with other Poets, he obtained no less than twenty
four Victories, whereof there were three most eminent. The first was the
Victory which he got in his youth over Aeschylus, for the which, (as some say)
Aeschylus retiring into Sicily, did there die of grief. Plutarch. in Cimone.
The second was, when his own Sons accused him in his old age for want of Wit
before the Judge; whereupon Sophocles producing a Tragedy which he had lately
written, and asking the Judg's opinion, whether that seemed to be the Work of
an Idiot? The Judge did so highly esteem of it, that reproving his Sons very
severely, he dismissed them with disgrace, and their old Father with honor.
Cicero, Cato Maj. 20. The third and last Victory of Sophocles was that which
cost him his life, as some say; for being very ancient, and having rehearsed a
Tragedy at the public place for trial of Wit, after a long Dispute, remaining
at last Victor by one voice, he died for joy that he had won. Valor. Maxim.
lib. 9. chapter 12. From hence it was that Cicero (calling him the divine Poet)
says, That he wrote Tragedies to the very last period of his old age. Cicero,
Cato Maj. 20. Nay, Pliny is so Romantic in his commendation of Sophocles, that
he brings a Miracle to honor him after his death, saying, ( lib. 7. chapter 29.)
that when Sophocles, the Prince of all Tragical Poets, was dead in Athens, it
being at the same time that the City was besieged by the Lacedaemonians, God
Bacchus appeared several times by way of vision in a Dream to Lysander their
King, admonishing him to suffer that person in the World whom he most delighted
in, to be interred: Whereupon the King enquiring, what person was lately
departed this Life in Athens, by relation of the Citizens soon found it to be
Sophocles whom the God meant, for that he was the last man that had died
amongst them; therefore he permitted them to bury him in peace, and to perform
his funeral Obsequies without any molestation or trouble* Concerning
Sophocles's rejoicing at his old age, as a means to extinguish his Lust, which
Philostratus here mentions, the same is also spoken of by Plutarch and Cicero,
who say, that Sophocles being on a time demanded familiarly by one of his
Friends, whether he could yet keep company with a Woman if need were; answered,
God bless me, my good Friend, talk no more of that I pray, for I am long since
free from those matters, and by the benefit of my old age, have escaped the
servitude of such violent and furious Mistresses. Plut. Mor. de Avaritia, ac
etiam de Senect. and Sympos. lib. 1. and Cicero, Cato Maj. 43. Sophocles
writing a Tragedy upon the Story of Antigone, Daughter to Oedipus King of
Thebes, was so happy and successful both in his Fancy and Expressions, that the
Athenians bestowed upon him as a reward, the Government of Samos. From whence
that Proverb came, Sophocles est, He is a happy Orator. Sophocles introduced
many new things for the reforming of the Stage; such as leaving out the action
of the Poet, by reason of his own ill voice; (for before his time, the Poet
himself always acted;) he invented white Shoes, which the Actors and Dancers
wore; he augmented the Chorus of Youths to fifteen, which before were but
twelve; and likewise fitted his Tragedies to the Natures of his Actors. Also
Vossius writes, that he first made use of Tribus Histrionibus, by adding, as
Eschylus a second, so he a third Actor, who was therefore called Tritagonista,
viz. an Actor of the third and last part. Concerning his death, notwithstanding
what has been said before, Lucian writes, that he was choked with a
Grape-stone; which opinion is likewise confirmed by that Verse of S^tad. apud
Stobaeum: (...). Suidas says, that besides his Tragedies he wrote likewise
Elegies, Pa^ans, and some Prose. Cicero tells us, that a great golden Platter
being taken out of the Temple of Hercules by theft, the God appeared unto
Sophocles in a Dream, and told him who had done it; the first and second time
he slighted the Vision; but upon its frequent soliciting him, he credited it so
far, as to inform the Magistrate thereof: who commanding that person to be
apprehended whom Sophocles had accused, he was no sooner charged with the Fact,
but he voluntarily confessed it, and brought back the Plate. Cicero de Divinat.
lib. 1.50. Caroli Stephans Edit. Sophocles* resided very much at Colonus, a
place near Athens, from whence Oedipus living there an Exile was called
Colon^us; at this place Neptune was worshipped* Cicero de Finib. lib. 5.2.
Concerning the true Character of Sophocles, I find the Ancients had a great
Veneration for him: Pompey when he was betrayed to the Egyptian shore by
Sempronius, no sooner discovered his error, and grew jealous of his own ruin,
but he (though too late) reflected on the great wisdom of Sophocles, and
repeated to himself (says Appian, lib. 2. de Civil. Bell. Rom) these Lines of
his: To Tyrants Courts, the Valiant and the Brave,
Though free they enter, soon become their Slave.
Sophocl. Vell. Paterculus says, that one Age, and that not consisting of many
years, did enoble the Tragic Buskin, by means of those Divine-spirited men
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides; lib. 1. Polemon the Athenian Philosopher,
was so delighted with Sophocles, and with Homer, that he would frequently say
they were both endued with equal wisdom; calling Homer, Heroical Sophocles; and
Sophocles, Tragical Homer: (...). Diog. Laert. lib. 4. How much Virgil esteemed
him, appears sufficiently in his Eclogues, when he says, Solo Sophocleo tua
Carmina digna Cothurno.
Virg. Eclog. 8. The wise Simonides terms him, the Flower of Poets: his style
was so sweet, that Suidas tells us he was called (...), the Be: his Verses
masculine and lofty, as may be inferred from this Line of Iuvenals; Grande
Sophocleo carmen bacchamur hiatu.
Sat. 6. He left behind him five Sons, viz. Iophontes, Leosthenes, Aristones,
Stephanus, and Meneclides. Opsopaeus (in Greek Epigram 3. upon the Sepulcher of
Sophocles) prefers Sophocles much before either Aeschylus or Euripides. We read
in Plutarch, (de vitis X. Orator.) that Lycurgus enacted for a Law in Athens,
That at the public expense of the City, there should be erected Statues of
Brass for Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides; also that their Tragedies should
be exemplified, and fairly engrossed, for to be kept in the Chamber of the
City: that the public Notary of the City should read them unto the Players,
and that otherwise it were unlawful to Act them. Some think that Sophocles
first introduced upon the Stage (...), or the Painting of Scenes; which Horace
seems to aim at, when he says, Modicis instravit pulpita signis: but I rather
find this Ornament to be first invented by Aeschylus, and afterward perfected
by Sophocles.

CHAP. XI. What Apollonius answered to him that asked him, why he did not
commit somewhat to writing? And of his five years silence, wherein he did not
utter so much as one word: but yet by Nods, and other signs, did very much
good. Also concerning the Sanctuary of Tiberius.
[1] WHen Euxenus asked Apollonius, why he did not commit somewhat to writing,
being so good a Philosopher, and able to write so approved and quick a style?
his Answer was, That he had not yet exercised Silence; and from that time he
began to think it his duty to [2] practice Silence. Wherefore laying a
restraint upon his Tongue, yet nevertheless both with his Eyes and Mind reading
many things, he committed all that he either heard or saw to his memory; by
which exercise of his memory, when he was even an hundred years of Age, he was
thought to excel [3] Simonides. He did likewise sing an Composed by Simonides.
See Lylius Gyr. Dial. 9.
Hymn in praise of memory, wherein he says, that all things are faded by Time;
and that Time it self never grows old, but is immortal through the memory.
However, during the time of his Silence, he was no unpleasing Company; for his
eyes and hands, as also the nodding of his head, signified something to all
that was said: nor was he found unpleasant or morose, being of himself a lover
of his Friends, and of an agreeable conversation. Moreover he affirmed, that
this course of Life which he continued for five years together, was very irksom
to him: being one who had many things to say, yet not to say them, that heard
many exasperating speeches, yet not to hear them; and when provoked to reprove
sundry things, only to say within himself, Be quiet Heart and Tongue! for he
received with silence many opprobrious terms against himself. Now all this time
of his silence he resided partly in [4] Pamphilia, and partly in [5] Cilicia;
where notwithstanding he lived amongst such a soft and effeminate people, yet
did he never speak one word. Sometimes when he came into a City that was full
of sedition and division about vain Shows, he going to the People, and
presenting himself to them in public, would by his hands and looks express
that reproof which he intended against them, and thereby appease their
discords; making them as mute as if they were conversant about the mysteries of
Religion. For when men are at variance about such small matters as Shows or
Horses, it is no great difficulty to pacify them; because they who are
disorderly about such things, with blushes recollect themselves, and come to
their right mind at the sight of any [6] grave person amongst them.
Nevertheless when a City is oppressed with [7] Famine, it is no easy matter to
appease their wrath, with ever so powerful restraining words: But the mere
silence of Apollonius was able to work such an effect; for coming to [8]
Aspendus, (the third eminent City of Pamphylia, which is situate by the River
[9] Eurymedon) he there found nothing to be sold but Vetches, and such kind of
mixed Grain, whereon so many people fed; because whatsoever Corn there was, a
few Rich men that were of Power in the City, had hoarded it up, that so it
might be sold adulterate out of the Country. Whereupon a great number of people
of both Sexes, and of all Ages, flocked to the Governor, and carrying Fire
along with them, threatened to burn him alive, notwithstanding he were fled to
the Emperor [10] Tiberius's Statues; which were a more reverend and a safer
Sanctuary, than those of Jupiter himself in [11] Olympia: in so much that one
was thought to be impious, because he beat his own Servant, who had about him a
Silver dram signed with the Image of Tiberius. Wherefore Apollonius coming to
the Governor, made signs to him to know what was the matter: The Governor
answered, he had done nothing unjustly, but was unjustly wronged together with
his people; and that unless he had reason done him, both he and his people
should be destroyed. Upon this, Apollonius turning himself to those that stood
about him, and admonishing them by his Becks to hear what their Ruler could say
for himself, they not only kept silence, but also deposited the Fire upon the
Altars that were there. Then the Governor taking courage, said, It is this and
that man (naming several of the Citizens) who are the Authors of this Famine,
by hoarding up the Corn some in one place, and some in another. The Aspendians
hearing this, and encouraging one another to fall upon their Farms, Apollonius
prevailed with them by signs, not to do that, but rather to summon those who
were accused, and receive Corn from them of their own accord. Wherefore they
being come to him, he had much ado to forbear relating his resolution of
Silence, by persuading them with an Oration to do what he would have them: For
he was exceedingly moved with the Tears of Women, Children, and Old men, who
bewailing their misery, complained that they should speedily perish with
hunger. Nevertheless Apollonius holding firm to his resolution of Silence,
dictated in a Writing-Table this Reproof, which he delivered to the Governor
to be read. Apollonius to the Aspendian Corn-Merchants, sends Greeting: The
Earth is the Mother of all, for she is just; but ye being unjust, have made her
to be your Mother only: So that unless you desist, I will not any longer suffer
you to continue upon her. Being affrighted at these things, they replenished
the whole Market with Corn, whereby all people were relieved.

Illustrations on Chap. 11.
[1] NOtwithstanding Monsieur Morellus, in his Latin Translation of
Philostratus, places this Letter of Apollonius to the Corn-Merchants, in the
succeeding Chapter; yet finding it related more particularly to the subject of
this 11th Chapter, I thought it most proper to insert it here: and since, upon
the perusal of Monsieur Viginere's French Translation of the same, I ^^nd he
has done the like.

[2] He began to practice Silence; this Doctrine of Silence he learnt from the
Principles of Pythagoras, who enjoined it with so much rigor to his disciples,
as an Art whereby to procure himself the more respectful attention: or rather,
as Clemens Alex, says, that withdrawing themselves from things sensual, they
might the more clearly and innocently contemplate upon God, Strom. lib. 5. of
all Creatures, they had the greatest respect for Fish, by reason of their
silence, says Athenaeus, 20. That Pythagoras received this Principle from the
Egyptians, see Caelius Rhodig. Lect. Ant. lib. 15. chapter 23. The Government of
the Tongue (says Iamblicus) is of all most difficult, lib. 1. chapter 31.
wherefore Apuleius writes, That the first founder of Philosophy, first taught
his disciples to hold their peace; and his first meditation in order to the
procuring wisdom, was to bridle the Tongue, and keep our words within the wall
of our Teeth, etc. Apul. Florid* 15. Quintilian (Declam. 19.) says, he thinks
there is no Virtue more difficult, than that of Silence. Laertius tells us,
that the Pythagorean Novices kept silence five years, only hearing Pythagoras's
discourses, but not seeing him, till they were fully approved of; and then they
became of his Family, which he calls (...), Systeme, Laert. lib. 8. also
Servius on Virgil, Aen. 10. However Aulus Gellius (lib. 1. chapter 9.) writes, that
this five years silence was not required of all, but of some more, of some
less; yet that none were enjoined less than two years silence, as none more
than five. The like Apuleius in his Florid tells us, that some were silent for
a lesser space, especially such as were more Grave; but those who were more
Talkative, were enjoined a quinquennial silence. The Pythagoreans for this
their silence continued in great honor even to Isocrates's time, who in his
Busiris says, That men more admired the Pythagoreans, who held their peace,
than others who had obtained the greatest glory by speaking. Furthermore,
Pythagoras enjoined his disciples some kind of perpetual silence; for he
taught, 1. That we ought to be silent, or to speak things better than silence:
and 2. To comprehend many things in few words, and not few things in many
words; whence Zeno blamed such, who instead of being (...), lovers of Learning,
were (...), lovers of Words. 3. and lastly, Pythagoras forbad his Scholars
declaring his mysteries to others; Theoph. Gale, Court of the Gent. lib. 2. chapter
6. This Pythagorean silence answers that of Job, chapter 6.24. Teach me, and I will
hold my Tongue. Pythagoras held this to be the first rudiment of Wisdom,
meditari condiscere, loquituri dediscere; as Pancirollus has it, Tit. 10. de
Horolog. Cardan speaking of Pythagoras's silence, wonders at the occasion of
it; nisi (dixit) ut intelligeremus, nihil esse nocentius lingua; unless (says
he) we should thereby understand, that nothing is more mischievous than the
Tongue, Tom. 2. l. 2. chapter 8. de Mut. Nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum.
How many men for one word speaking, have incurred banishment, imprisonment,
poverty, disgrace, the ruin of themselves and their Families, the anger of
their Prince, the imputation of foolish, wicked, impudent or dishonest, and
sometimes the loss of their very Lives! Nay, Princes themselves (as the Lord
Bacon well observes) have sometimes given Fire to Sedition, by witty and sharp
speeches which have fallen from them. Caesar did infinitely prejudice himself
by that speech, Scylla nescivit literas, non potuit dictare: for it did utterly
cut off that hope, which men had entertained, that he would at one time or
other give over his Dictatorship. Galba undid himself by that speech, Legi a se
militem, non emi: which put the Soldiers out of hopes of the Donative. Probus
likewise by that speech, Si vixere non opus erit amplius Romano imperio
militibus, gave great despair to the Soldiers. And many more of the like I
could instance; in so much that I may safely say, of all those that are killed
for private Quarrels, (excepting such as dye in the Wars) there is hardly one
in four that suffers for any other cause, but words inconsiderately spoken.
Simonides used to say, that he had often repented himself of his speech, but
never of his silence. Plut. Quid de quoque viro, and cui dicas saepe caveto;
Percontatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem est:
Nec retinent patulae commissa fideliter aures;
Et semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum.
Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 18. This would be a very fit Inscription for the doors of
all our Coffee-houses, wherein you can seldom behold a dozen persons, without
their Judas amongst them. The Dutch Knight that was Fined in our late Kings
time, for some words that he had spoken, would have made a rare disciple for
Pythagoras ever after, when he desired leave only to Tickle it with tinking.
Words make all sorts of men our Enemies, and none but Fools our Friends;
therefore, Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur. He that makes others afraid of his
wit, ought himself to be afraid of their memory: for as much as I have known
many men, who (though they could not break a Jest) could break a Head. So that
whether it was to avoid these inconveniences of speech, or whether to enjoy the
benefit of a tacit contemplation, that the Soul retiring into her self, might
be diverted from all external objects and irregular passions; whether for the
one reason, or the other, yet evident it is from all their own Writings that
the Ancients as well Pythagoreans as others, did greatly esteem silence.
Lycurgus obliged the Spartans to initiate their Children to silence from their
very youth, Coel. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. lib. 13. chapter 5. Ammianus Marcellinus (lib.
21.) tells us, that Silence amongst the Persians was worshipped as a Deity.
Plutarch says, that Silence argues deep and profound Wisdom, it implies
Sobriety, is a mystical Secret, and Divine Virtue: Mor. of Intemperate speech.
The same Author likewise tells a story of Zeno, who dining at a Feast in
company of some Persian Ambassadors, and not having spoken a word all
Dinnertime, they (by way of jeer) asked him what account they should give the
King their Master of him? Marry (said Zeno) you may only tell him this, that
there is an Ancient man at Athens, who can fit out a whole Meal without saying
any thing: and so turned the laughter upon them. Hesiod says, that the Tongue
ought not to be spent upon every body, but reserved as a Treasure. And of later
times we find an Institute of Justinians, (in Oratione ad Antecess.) commanding
all Students of the Law their set times for silence, and for speaking, after
the Pythagorean manner; Loqui ignorabit, qui tacere nescit, Auson. But of all
the Scholars that ever Pythagoras had, there never was any comparable to our
Hero Apollonius, who not only persevered in his resolution, but also during the
time of his silence, he did more works of piety and charity without speaking,
than any other Philosopher ever did with it: besides those many opprobrious
terms and provocations which were daily offered unto him, though not with more
malice then his great patience could bear.

[3] Simonides; There were several eminent men among the Ancients that bore
this Name, as the learned Gerardus Ioannes Vossius writes. There was one
Simonides who wrote the History of Dion and Bion, and lived soon after Euclid.
Another Simonides Ceus, the Son of Leoprepes, who living before the Expedition
into Persia, was born in the fifty sixth Olympiad, and died in the seventy
eighth, being eighty nine years of age: he wrote a Scheme of Cambyses and
Darius Government in the Dorick Dialect, as also Xerxes Sea-Engagement, and his
Fight at Artemisium, in Elegiack Verses; but the Battle of Salamina he
described in Lyrick Verse. And many other things he did, as you may find in
Suidas, Lilius Gyraldus, and Anonymus ad Olymp. 62. an. 2. There was also
Simonides Magnesius, the Son of Sipylus, and Co-temporary with Antiochus
Magnus, whose Acts he relates in Verse: more especially his War with the
Galatians, wherein Antiochus's Caval^y was routed by the Elephants. Likewise
another Simonides Amorginus Crinei, mentioned by Strabo, lib. 10. and by
Eustathius, in his Comment upon Dionysius. But the person mentioned here by
Philostratus, was another Simonides Ceus, Grandson by the Mothers side to
Simonides the Lyrick; this Simonides was surnamed Melicerta, and is said to
have invented the Art of Memory. He lived about the 82. Olympiad, and
flourished just before the Peloponesian War. Suidas says, that he wrote three
Books (...), or de rebus inventis: also three Books more of Genealogies, from
whence (...) is called (...), by the Scholiast, upon the 11th. Book of
Apollonius. Gerard. Ioann. Vossius de Histor. Graec. Pliny tells that he dwelt
five years at Meroe, (an Island upon the Nile, at this day called Naulelate)
where he wrote the History of Aethiopia. Nature. Hist. lib. 6. chapter 29. He
further says, that the Art of Memory was first devised and invented by this
Simonides Melicus, and afterward brought to perfection by Metrodorus Sepsius;
whereby a man might learn to rehearse the same words of any Discourse
whatsoever after once hearing: Thus King Cyrus was able to call every Soldier
that he had in his whole Army by their own Names. L. Scipio could do the like
by all the Citizens of Rome. And Cineas (Ambassador to King Pyrrhus) the very
next day he came to Rome, both knew and saluted by Name all the Senate, Gentry,
and Cavalry throughout the whole City. Cicero Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1. Likewise
King Mithridates, reigning over two and twenty several Nations of different
Languages, did himself give every one of them Laws, and administered Justice to
them in their own proper Tongues, without the assistance of an Interpreter, and
in making his Orations, still varied his Language according to the people's he
spoke to. Also one Charmidas, or Charmadas, a Grecian, (whom both Cicero and
Quintilian call Carneades) had so singular a Memory, that he was able to
deliver by hear^ the Contents word for word of all the Books that a man would
call for out of any Library, as if he had read the same within Book. Pliny Not.
Hist. lib. 7. chapter 24. Furthermore Pliny speaking of Simonides, says, that he
made an addition to the Greek Alphabet of these four Letters, (...): Eustathius
says he added but these three, (...); Also, that to the Harp or Lute, Simonides
added the eighth String, and Timotheus the ninth. Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 7. chapter
24. and Plut. Mor. Sympos. lib. 9. Cicero speaking of the Nature of God, says,
Roges me quid aut qualis sit Deus? Auctore utar Simonide: who being asked by
King Hiero to show him what God was, desired one days time to consider of it;
the next day being come, and the King thinking to receive his Answer, Simonides
prayed to have two days more for consideration; which two days being expired,
he then prayed for three; and so often as the King required his Answer, he
still increased the number of days; whereat the King being amazed, enquired of
him the reason why he did so? To whom Simonides replied, Because the more he
considered of the thing, the more obscure and intricate it appeared to him. De
Natura Deor. lib. 1.42. Ca^. Steph. Edit. Now the great veneration that
Simonides had for God, might perhaps procure him that great share in his
providence, which it appears by these two Stories he had. One time Simonides
being at supper with Scopas at Cranon a City of Thessaly, news was brought him,
that two young men were at the door earnestly desiring to speak with him;
whereupon going to the Gate, he found no body there; but in the mean time, the
Roof of the Dining Room fell down and killed Scopas, with all his other Guests.
So beloved of the immortal Gods was Simonides, to be preserved from so eminent
a danger, as Valor. Max. well observes, lib. 1. chapter 8. de Miraculis. Another
time, Simonides having been a Voyage at Sea, and newly come on shore, he found
the dead Body of a man lying unburied, whereupon out of charity he buried it,
and was by the same Body admonished that night in a Dream not to set sail the
next day; which he giving credit to, stayed ashore: but those that went to Sea
were all cast away. Whereof being informed, he was not a little glad, that he
had committed his life to the security of a Dream, rather than to the mercy of
the Sea: and being mindful of the benefit received, eternized the memory of the
dead person in a living Poem, etc. Val. Max. lib. 1. chapter 7. and Cicero Divin*
lib. 1.52. Simonides offering to teach Themistocles the Art of Memory, he
refused it, saying, He had more need of forgetfulness than memory, for that he
remembered what he would not, but could not forget what he would. Another time,
Simonides having requested of Themistocles a thing that was unjust for him to
grant, Themistocles told him, That no man could be a good Musician that plays
without time, nor a good Magistrate that governs without Law* Simonides used to
say, That a man's Reputation is the last thing that is buried of him, unless we
speak of such whose Honor and Virtue die before themselves. Plut. Mor.
Simonides being ancient, and disabled from all other carnal and corporeal
pleasures by reason of his years, he entertained one still which fed and
maintained his old age, and that was the delight which he took in getting and
hoarding up money; wherefore he is reproached for Covetousness, as we see in
Plutarch. Mor* de Senect. He was a great lover of Silence, being used to say,
(...) (...). That he had often repented of his speech, but never of his
silence. Cael. Rhod. lib. 13* chapter 5 Pliny (Not. Hist. lib. 35. chapter 11.) speaks
of a famous Painter of this Name, who acquired great reputation by drawing two
Pictures, the one of Agatharrus the famous Racer; the other of the Goddess of
Memory, called Mnemosyne.

[4] Pamphylia, a Country in Asia the less, on the East Side of Cilicia, by
the Mountain Taurus. It is called by Pliny, Monsopia; by Girava, Settalia; by
Thevet, Zina; and by Nigrus, Caraman. The ancient Poets often mention it: Hunc
quoque perque novem timuit Pamphylia messes.
Stat. lib. 1. Also Lucan: -- Pamphylia Puppi
Occurrit Tellus. --
lib. 8. There is also Pamphylia, a City of Media, Stephan.

[5] Cilicia, a Country of Asia the less, bounded on the West with Pamphylia,
on the East with Syria, on the North with the Mountain Taurus, and on the South
divided from Cappadocia by the Cilician Sea. At this day it is commonly called
Caramania or Caramanta, and not Turcomania, as Ortelius writes. It is divided
into two parts, Campestris and Trachea, that is, the plain and the rocky. In
this Country St. Paul was born. The Inhabitants are much inclined to Lying and
Stealing, from whence the Proverb comes, Cilix non facile verum dicit.
Situated for Long. 69. Lat. 37. Clim. 4. This place abounds much with Saffron,
as you may learn from the Poets: Et cum scena croco Cilici perfusa recens est.
Lucret. lib. 2. Quotve ^erat dicam terra Cilissa crocos.
Ovid in Ibin. The Cilicians being eminent for Pyracy, were overcome by Pompey,
and afterward made use of by him in his Sea Fights against Caesar. Itque Cilix
justa non jam pirata carina.
Lucan. lib. 3. Arias Montanus says, that Cilicia was by the Hebrews called
Chalab. And Stephanus conjectures from Herodotus that the Inhabitants of this
Country were heretofore called Ach^ians. The derivation of its Name Cilicia
was taken from the Hebrew Challekim, or Challukim, i. e. Lapidibus, for that
the Country is full of Stones. Hinc Cilicis Tauri saxosa cacumina vitet.
Sil. Ital. lib. 13. Heretofore it was one of the most wealthy Provinces
belonging to the Roman Empire; and eminent for its Proconsul Cicero.

[6] Come to their right mind at the sight of any grave person: That the
gravest Bird is an Owl, and the gravest Beast is an Ass, was the observation of
a great modern Wit, hereby ridiculing Formality and Gravity in men; as if
Gravity was an essential qualification both for Knave and Fool; it is the
Ceremony of the Face, as all other Equipage and Ceremony is the Gravity of the
Body, and peculiar as well to Offices and Employments as to men. Gravity in a
Prince consists of his Crown, his Robes, his Guards, his Presence Chamber, his
Councils, Officers, Ministers of State, Retinue, etc. In a Nobleman, it is his
Title, his Coronet, gilt-Coach, fine Clothes, numerous Pages, Lacquies, etc. In
a Lawyer, it is his Robes either of black or scarlet, his Coif, his
Underofficers, etc. In a Clergyman, it is his Surplice, black Scarf, or Lawn
Sleeves, his Clerk, or Lecturer, and saying Awmen with a laudable voice. In a
General, it is his great Scarf hanging at his backside, his Commanders Staff,
his Underofficers, his Drums, Trumpets, Colors, rich Furniture of his Horse,
etc. Also for Places, the Gravity of a Court consists in the many Accesses to
it, the several Centries, Guard-Chambers, Chairs of State, Chambers of
Presence, etc. Courts of Judicature, In the high Throne whereon the Judges and
Justices sit above the rest of the people, in the Bar whereat the Prisoners
hold up their hands, in the Crier, Tip-staves, Jailer, Underofficers, etc.
Churches, In the high, gloomy, painted Windows, Altars richly furnished with
Plate, as great silver Chalices, and Candlesticks, in Organs, in long Wax
Tapers, a fine Ring of Bells, etc. These are the several kinds of Gravity which
influence the silly vulgar people into an awful veneration and obedience;
though being the greatest part of the World, Mankind may (in effect) be said to
be governed by Rare Shows. Sir Formal Trifle, with his little Hat sitting on
one side, his short Hair, short Band, great Ears, short black Cloath-Cloak
bobbing at his tail, stroking his Gloves through his hands betwixt his
Forefinger and his Thumb, as also his Eyes drawn awry with squinting at
Heaven, his Nose shrivled up with speaking the godly Dialect, is the true
Character of the peoples Favorite, who think Gravity and Goodness always go
together. This made not only Philostratus, but also the wise Florentine
Secretary write, that nothing is more conducive to appease a popular Tumult,
than some grave person of Authority appearing amongst them; and so sings
Virgil: Tum pietate gravem, ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant.
If in their Tumults a grave man appears,
All Is hushed, and nothing stirring but their ears.
He therefore who commands in a mutinous Army, or seditious City, and desires
to appease either the one or the other, ought (in my judgment) to present
himself with the most grace and advantage that he can; adorned with all the
ornaments of his dignity, and whatever else may render him venerable to the
people. Thus in the year 1505. Pope Julius the 11th. marching unarmed into
Bologna, being accoutred with all his Pontifical habits, accompanied by his
Cardinals arrayed in scarlet, and carrying along with him the holy Sacrament,
did with that Formality and Ceremony overcome the wickedest of men, John Pagolo
Baglione, who had been guilty both of Parricide and Incest; for notwithstanding
his Guards were sufficient to have resisted the Pope, yet were not his
resolutions strong enough to withstand the solemnity of that Ceremony: because,
as Machiavil observes, Men are as seldom perfectly bad, as perfectly good.
Machiav. discourse. lib. 1. chapter 27.

[7] A City oppressed with Famine it is no easy matter to appease, etc. The
Causes of Seditions and Tumults (says the Lord Bacon) are Innovation in
Religion, Taxes, alteration of Laws and Customs, breaking of Privileges,
general Oppression, advancement of unworthy persons, Strangers, disbanded
Soldiers, Factions grown desperate, and Dearths, or Famines. Bacon's Essays,
chapter 15. Now of all these, Famine is the most prevailing Motive; and that is
occasioned three ways: either by War, Weather, or ill Government. First, By
War, when an Army or City through a long siege is reduced to that scarcity of
Provisions, as necessitates them to feed upon Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, man's
Flesh, and the like; as we read of the City of Jerusalem when besieged by
Titus, wherein a bushel of Corn was sold for a Talent, and Sinks raked to find
old dung of Oxen to eat: Also of a certain Noblewoman that sod her own Child
for meat. Of which you may read more at large in Josephus de bell^ Iud. lib. 6.
chapter 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Also of the Famine amongst the Carthaginian Army; Titi
Livii Decad. 3. lib. 9. The Famine amongst the Africans; C^s. C^^. lib. 1. The
Famine in C^esar's Army; C^es. Comment. lib. 7. The Famine of the Ro^ans
besieged in the Capitol. Livius, lib. 5. And many others as well ancient as
modern; such as was at the siege of Colchester in our late Civil Wars, wherein
I have heard a great Officer say, he once dined at an Entertainment, where the
greatest delicacy was roasted Horseflesh, a Starch Pudding, and a dish of
fried Mice: to so great extremities does War oftentimes reduce! Secondly,
Unnatural Seasons, or Weather, does often produce a scarcity of Bread-Corn,
even to a Famine: In King Numa's Reign, the Poet assures us, that the Earth
answered not the labor of the Husbandman, but miscarried sometimes by reason
of an excessive drought, and at other times by reason of too much wet. Rege
Numa, Fructu non respondente Labori
Irrita d^c^pti v^ta colentis erant,
Nam m^d^ siccus erat gelidis Aquilonibus annus,
Nunc ager assidua luxuriabat aqua.
Ovid. lib. 4. Fast. During the Reign of Valentinian, there was so sharp a
Famine throughout Italy, that Fathers were forced to sell their Sons, Vt
discrimen mortis effugerent. Nov. Titl* 11. apud Cod. Theod. Under the Emperor
Honorius, so great was the scarcity of Victuals even in Rome it self, that the
cry of the Market was, Pon^ pretium hu^an^ Carni, Set a price upon man's Flesh.
Zozimus, 6. Annal. lib. 4. And long before, when L. Minutius was first made
Overseer of the Corn, Livy reports, Multos e plebe, ne diutina fame
cruciarentur, capitibus o^volu^is sese in Tyberim praecipitasse. What a
miserable De^rth was that in Egypt, (held by the Ancients to be the Granary of
the World) when for want of Bread, their greatest Noblemen were forced to sell,
not only their Estates but themselves, and become Bondslaves to Pharaoh? Genesis
47.23. How universal was that which Agabus predicted, and came to pass under
Claudius Caesar, whereof both Dion and Suetonius bear record with St. Luke,
Acts 11.28. Also here in England, (though being an Island Droughts can never
much hurt us, yet) have excessive Rains produced as ill effects: for, A. D.
1314 about the beginning of Edward the Second's Reign, there was so universal a
Dearth over ^his Land, that a Parliament was fain to be summoned on purpose to
moderate the prices of Victuals; and upon St. Laurence-Eve, there was scarcely
Bread to be gotten for the King's own Family: Also the year following, it
increased so violently, that Horses, Dogs, yea Men and Children were stolen for
Food, and what was more terrible, the Thieves newly brought into Goals were
torn in pieces, and presently eaten half alive by such as had been longer
there. Thomas de la Moor. Likewise in the year 1317. in the 10th. year of the
same King, as well the Famine, as a general Murrain amongst all kind of Cattle,
continued no less violent than before. Sam. Daniel. But to conclude this
Tragical Discourse, the third and last thing which produces a Famine, and
scarcity of Victuals, is many times the ill Government, wherein Monopolies are
suffered, by which means some few rich men engrossing all, the rest are left to
perish for want, as was the case of the poor Aspendians mentioned in this
Chapter. Wherefore above all things, care should be taken, that the Treasures,
Moneys, and Manufactures of a Kingdom, be not gathered into a few hands; for
otherwise, a State may have a great Stock, and yet starve: for Money, like
Muck, is not good except it be spread. Now this is done, by suppressing, or at
the least keeping a strait hand over the devouring Trades of Usury, Engrossing,
great Pasturages, and the like. Bac. Essays, chapter 15.

[8] Aspendus, ( the third mos^ eminent City of Pamphylia, su^ated upon the
River Eurymedon) was built by the Argives. The Inhabitants of this City used to
offer up Swine in Sacrifice to Venus, because Mopsus at his arrival there
vowing to offer up the first thing he met, it happened to be a Sow. Stephanus,
as also Dionysius (verse. 851.) write, that this Town was founded by one
Aspendus, from whom it derives its Name. (...)
(...).
Where (...) cannot signify Maritimum, as Hen. Stephens renders it, unless
there be manifest in the Poet, (...). For Aspendus is reckoned by Ptolomy
amongst the Mediterranean Cities of Pamphylia; and by him said to be far
distant from the Sea: lib. 5. chapter 5. Also Strabo affirms it to be 60 stadia
distant from the Sea: lib. 14. Nevertheless Montanus thinks that it is a Town
hanging over the Sea, from that word (...); and that being situated on a Hill,
it might overlook the Sea, and yet be some distance from it. Mela 1.13. Now
Aspendus has the prospect of that Sea, wherein happened the great Engagement of
the Athenians, under the Convoy of Admiral Cimon, against the Medos and
Persians, mentioned in the first Book of Thucyd. As also by Dionysius.

9. Eurymedon, a River that rises out of the Mountain Taurus, and runs through
the middle of Pamphylia: Mel^. Wherefore Ptolomy errs in placing the City
Aspendus remote from the River Eurymedon; as he does in his Tables.

[10] Tiberius's Statues: It is no doubt (says Polyd Virgil. lib. 1 chapter 5,)
but that in the Infancy of Government, men did highly advance their first Kings
honor and praises, when either for their wonderful courage and virtue, or to
flatter the condition of their dignity, or for some special benefit from them
received, they magnified them as Gods; erecting Images to them, and taking
pleasure in beholding the same. Macrobius writes, that Hercules was the first
inventer of Statues or Images. Lactantius attributes them to Prometheus; and
Diodorus, to the Aethiopians or Egyptians. Rachel when her Husband fled out of
Mesopotamia, from his Father-in-Law Laban, did steal away her Fathers Gods or
Statues. And some think that men took occasion from God to make Images, who
willing to show to the gross wits of men, some representation of himself, took
on him the shape of men, and appeared to Abraham and Jacob: from whence men
received the manner of making Images of God, to keep him fresh in their memory.
Thus Spurius Cassius in Rome erected the Image of Ceres in Brass. Afterward
the Statues of Men were made, to excite others to Noble enterprises: And for
that cause the Athenians set up the Images of Hermodius and Aristogiton, who
slew and expulsed the Tyrants. Leontinus Gorgias made himself an Image of pure
Gold, without any hollowness, and erected it at Delphos in the 78th Olympiad.
Likewise Pharnaces caused one to be made of Silver like himself, which Pompey
in his Triumph removed. In Italy M. Atilius Glabrio erected the first Statue of
Gold on Horseback, in remembrance of his Father. There were also Images made
of Brass, Ivory, Wood, and Marble. See more at large of this Subject in Pliny's
Nature. Hist. lib. 34. The manner of the Romans was to set up their Images
covered, but the Graecians formed them all naked. These Statues of Tyberius
mentioned by Philostratus, might be those which Tacitus speaks of in the 14th.
Book of his Annals, chapter 8. as also in the 3d. Book of his An. chapter 8. where it
is said, That every wicked Fellow, if he could but catch hold on Caesar's
Image, might freely and without punishment injure honest men, etc. At first
there was no Statues nor Pictures in the Christian Church, but they crept in by
little and little, and men made private Images of the Cross of Christ, and him
upon it, after the Example of Moses, who set up the brazen Serpent; as also of
Agbarus, Duke of the Edissenians, who sent a Painter to draw the Image of our
Savior Christ; but not being able to behold the brightness of his Face, Christ
laid a Napkin thereon, wherein by his divine Power he printed the resemblance
of his Visage, and so sent it by the Painter to the Duke. Polyd. Virg. lib. 6.
chapter 10. We also read that St. Luke had the Image of the Virgin Mary in a
painted Table. But Images were never publicly received and worshipped in the
Church, till, about the year 630. (in the sixth Council held at Constantinople,
by the Command of Constantine, and Justinian the 2d. his Son) it was so decreed.

[11] Olympia, a City near the Hill Olympus, wherein Jupiter Olympius had his
Temple; it is now called Langanico, or Stauri, as Castaldus writes; and not far
distant from Elis and Pisa, two Cities of Greece. This City was famous for its
Celebration of the Olympic Games every fifth year. Strabo tells us, that it
was anciently called Arpina, lib. 8.

CHAP. XII. How Apollonius's time of Silence being expired, he went to Antioch;
Also concerning the Temple of Apollo-Daphnaeus, and of Daphne, and the great
concourse of the Assyrians that followed him: Likewise his Precepts to his
Disciples, and what they were to do the whole day.
AFter this, the time of his Silence being expired, he came to [1] Antioch,
surnamed the Great, and there entered into the Temple of [2] Apollo-Daphnaeus,
to whom the Assyrians apply the Arcadian Fable, asserting that Daphne, the
Daughter of the River Ladon, was born there; for there is indeed a River with
them called Ladon, and they revere the Laurel, in commemoration (as they say)
of the Virgin Daphne. Also, Cypress Trees of an immense height stand round
about the Temple, and the Country yields pleasant and gentle Springs of
Water, wherein they report Apollo uses to bathe himself. The Earth of that
place yields also a Grove of Cypress Trees, in memory (as they say) of [3]
Cyparissus, an Assyrian Youth: and truly the beauty of the Tree gives credit to
the Metamorphosis. But perhaps I may seem to recite too youthful Stories,
whilst I mention these [4] Fables; which nevertheless I do, not for the Fables
sake, but in order to my following Discourse. Now Apollonius, observing the
Temple to be pleas^nt, but without any discipline, being inhabited by men half
barbarous, said, Oh Apollo, change these dumb men into Trees, that they may at
least make a noise like the Cypresses. Furthermore, observing the Springs how
quietly they ran, without making any manner of noise, he said, The silence of
this place is such, as it does not permit so much as the Springs to speak. And
when he beheld [5] Ladon, he said, Not only thy Daughter, Oh Ladon, is changed
into another form, but also thou thy self, in that of a Greek and Arcadian,
thou art become a Barbarian. After this, when he minded to discourse with them,
he refused the rude and disorderly manners of the Inhabitants, saying, That he
had need of Men and not of Clowns. Yet nevertheless, if he saw any civil
persons, and such as were of good behavior, he admitted them into his
Conversation. He dwelt amongst the Priests, and at Sunrising performed certain
Religious Rites in private, which he communicated only to those who had
exercised four years silence with him. But afterward if he happened to be in
any Greek City, where the Religious Rites were made public, he would discourse
Philosophically with the Priests of the Temples concerning the Gods, and
correct what errors he found amongst them. But if he came into any barbarous
City, that had peculiar Manners of their own, he always enquired who were the
Founders of their Rites and Customs, as also how long they had continued in
that discipline; and then endeavored to persuade them to change for the
better. Afterward applying himself to his Disciples, he commanded them to ask
whatsoever they would; and told them, that whosoever would Philosophize so as
he did, should in the Aurora musis amica.
morning first converse with the Gods; then as the day grew on, discourse
concerning the Gods; and last of all, consult of humane Affairs. Now when he
had answered all such Questions as were asked him by his Companions, and was
satisfied with their Converse, he would then apply himself to the multitude;
yet never in the forenoon, but only toward the evening. And when he had
discoursed with them so much as he thought convenient, he would be [6]
anointed; and afterward being rubbed, he went into cold Water, saying, that
[7] Hot Baths were the old age of Mankind: from which, when the Antiochians
were expelled for their enormous vices, Apollonius said, the King has granted
to you long life for your wickedness. Also the [8] Ephesians being about to
stone the Master of the Baths for not making them hot enough, Apollonius said
unto them, Ye accuse the Bath-master because you do not bathe well, but I
accuse you for that you bathe at all.

Illustrations on Chap. 12.
[1] ANtioch, surnamed the Great: There were diverse Cities among the Ancients
which bore this Name: One the chief City of Pisidia, lying in the lesser Asia,
and now by the Turks called Versacgeli; Long. 61, 20. Lat. 39, 36. Another upon
the Mountain Cragus, being a City of the Cilician shore, bordering upon Pisidia
and Pamphylia, and lying between Selinuntes and Nephelis, two adjacent Cities;
Long. 62, 30. Lat. 38, 30. Another of Margiana, which (as Pliny writes) was
called by some Alexandria, by others Seleucia, but at this day named Indion.
Another in Caria, now called Pythopolis Another near the Mountain Taurus, a
Bishop's See; Long. 68, 40. Lat. 39, 20. This City took its Name from Antiochus
the Great, who fled from Syria to that place, when he was overcome by the
Romans; herein St. Luke the Evangelist was born. Another which is the
Metropolitan City of Mesopotamia, called at this day Nisibis, founded by King
Seleucus, who therefore Christened it after the name of his Father Antiochus; it
stands upon the River Tigris. There were likewise seven other Cities called by
the Ancients after this name, which being inconsiderable, I shall here omit.
But Antioch the Great, mentioned in this place by Philostratus, was a famous
City of Syria, built by Seleucus Nicanor, (to whom, in honor of his memory, in
Mount Casius they observed sacred Solemnities, as to a Demi-god;) this was
sometimes the Seat of the Syrian Kings, third City of the Roman Empire, third
Seat of the Christian Patriarchs, and place where the first Council was held,
also wherein men first received the name of Christians; Long. 68.10. Lat.
36.20* This City was called by some Epiphan^, by others Reblatha, or Rebla, by
others Theopolis, or the City of God, and by others the Daphnean Antioch,
because it is but five miles distant from the Sacred Daphne. Villonovanus
calls it Aleppo, upon which indeed it bordereth; and by others it is named
Alexandria, however in our common Maps they appear to be three distinct Cities
bordering upon one another. Strabo in his Geography ( lib. 16.) tells us, that
there were four Cities ( viz. Antioch near Daphne, Seleucia in Pieria, Apamea
and Laodicea) which by reason of their concord were called Sisters; he says,
that all four were built by Seleucus Nicanor, who named the first Antioch the
Great, from his Father Antiochus; the second Seleucia, from his own name; the
third Apamea, from his Wives; and the fourth Laodicea, from his Mothers. No
City was more famous amongst the Ancients, than this of Antioch, and none at
present more desolate and ruinous: Boterus calls it, the Sepulcher of it self;
and Niger, a great Wilderness, being left but a small Village in the midst of
its own Walls.

[2] Apollo-Daphnaeus; so called, from that Fable of Daphne, which you may read
at large in Ovids Metamorph. lib. 1. Daphne was the Daughter of the River
Paneus, or Ladon, with whom Apollo being violently in Love, and she refusing
his unchaste embraces, he pursued her to ravish her by force; whereupon Daphne
being unable to outrun him, prayed to her Father the River, that by some
Transformation he would rescue her from Apollo's violence, who immediately
thereupon transformed her into a Laurel: Vix prece finita torpor gravis occupat
artus,
Mollia cinguntur tenui praecordia libro,
In frondem crines, in ramos brachia crescunt.
Pes modo tam velox pigri^ radicibus haeret,
Ora cacumen habent, remanet nitor unus in illa.
Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. Having prayed, a numbness all her Limbs possessed,
And slender films her softer sides invest:
Hair into Leaves, her Arms to Branches grow,
And late swift Feet are standing Roots below;
Her graceful Head a leafie Top sustains,
One beauty throughout all her form remains.
Thus Daphne is said to be changed into a never-withering Tree, as an Emblem of
what immortal honor a Virgin obtains by preserving her Chastity inviolable.
She is called the Daughter of Paneus, because the Banks of that River abound
with Laurel; to be beloved of Apollo, in that the fairest grew about his Temple
of Delphos; to fly his pursuit, in that they affect the shadow; and to resist
the Fire of Lust, in not being scorched by the Sun, nor by Lightning. About
five miles from Antioch (as I said before) stood this fair and sacred Daphne,
which Ortelius in his Theater has presented to the view of his Spectators,
with a peculiar description thereof; Sozom. lib. 5. chapter 18. It was ten miles
about, being on all sides environed with many stately Cypresses, and other
Trees, which suffered not the Sun to salute the Earth. It was replenished with
variety of Flowers, according to the Season, and with great diversity of
Waters. One Spring there was, deriving (as men suppose) her water from the
Castalian Fountains, to which Superstitious Antiquity attributed a Divining
faculty with like name and force to that of Delphos. Here were erected
sumptuous Buildings: the Temple of Apollo Daphneus, with a stately Image
therein; the Work (as was thought) of Seleucus: also Diana's Chapel and
Sanctuary; Niceph. lib. 10. chapter 18. Evagr. lib. 1. chapter 16. Strabo, lib. 16.
Julius Capitolinus writes, that Verus a voluptuous Emperor spent four Summers
here, and Wintered in Laodicea and Antioch. Severus put to death certain
Tribunes, by whose negligence several Soldiers were suffered to Riot here. The
Oracles added great renown to this place, which were delivered out of these
Daphnean Waters, by a certain breathing wind. From hence is Hadrian the Emperor
reported to have received the faculty of Divining* by dipping a Cypress-leaf in
that Fountain; and for the same purpose Julian did frequently resort hither:
also before he began his War against the Persians, he first sent to enquire of
these Daphnean Oracles, what his success should be? who returned him this
Answer, That the Bones of one Babylas a Bishop, and other Christian Martyrs,
being interred amongst them, their Divining power was ceased: whereupon Julian
commanded the Christians to remove them; which (says Theodoret) was
accordingly done with a most solemn Procession, and singing of Psalms; making
this the burden of each Verse, Confounded be all they that worship graven
Images: whereat Julian being enraged, began his Persecution against the
Christians. Nicephorus (lib. 16.23. and 17.14.) speaks of the continuance of
this Daphnean Grove, honored with Buildings and Spe^tacles by Mammianus and
Chosroes. Apollo's Image placed therein was made of Wood, covered over with
Gold: Theodosi^s forbad the cutting of any of those Cypresses. This place had
many Names; Julian called it, the Habitation of the Daphnean God; Claudian,
Apollineum Nemus, and Sacra Tempe; Dionysius, Optima Tempe; and sometime it is
called, Constantiniana Daphne.

[3] Cyparissus an Assyrian Youth, is feigned to be the Son of Telephus, and
Inhabitant of Caea, one of the Cycladian Islands; the Fable of him is at large
described by Ovid in his Metamorphos. lib. 10. Affuit huic Turbae metas imitata
Cupressus,
Nunc Arbor, puer ante -- etc.
How Cyparissus was a lovely young Boy, and Favorite of Apollo: who killing by
chance a Stag, pined away with sorrow; and desiring the Gods that he might
remain a perpetual mourner, was transformed into that Funeral Tree. He is
feigned to have been beloved of Apollo, for that he was studious in Poetry; and
because the Cypress Tree being cut down or Lopt, (as Man, by the Sithe of
Death) re-flourisheth no more, it was therefore used at Funerals: yet only at
the Exequies of the more Noble. Urns were also wrought of the same, to enclose
the Bones of them who died for the Public good: thinking it preserved them
from putrefaction. The branches they stuck at the doors of the deceased, lest
any ignorantly entering, should be polluted with the dead Body; according to the
Levitical Law: wherefore Pliny writes, that the Cypress is consecrated to
Pluto, lib. 16. chapter 33.

[4] Fables; The Antiquities of the first Age were buried in oblivion and
silence: which silence was succeeded by Poetical Fables; and those Fables
supplanted by the Records we now enjoy: So that the mysteries and secrets of
Antiquity were distinguished and separated from the evidence of future times,
by the Veil of Fiction, which interposed it self between those things which
perished, and those which are extant. If we seriously reflect upon the
mendacity of Greece, we shall find, that a considerable part of the Ancient
times was by the Greeks themselves termed (...), that is, made up of Fables.
And surely, the fabulous inclination of those days, was greater than any since;
which swarmed so with Fables, and from such slender grounds, took hints from
Fictions, poisoning the World ever after; wherein, how far they amplified, may
be drawn from Palephatus his Book of Fabulous Narrations. That Fable of
Orpheus, who by the melody of his Music drew Woods and Trees to follow him,
was raised (says Dr. Brown, Vulg. Err. lib. 1* chapter 6.) upon a slender
foundation; for there were a crew of mad women retired into a Mountain, from
whence being pacified by his Music, they descended with boughs in their hands;
which gave sufficient occasion for those Fabulous times to celebrate the Magic
of Orpheus's Harp, as having power to attract the senseless Trees about it.
That Medea the famous Sorceress could renew Youth, and make old men young
again, was nothing else but that from the knowledge of Simples, she had a
Receipt to make white Hair black, and reduce again old Heads into the Tincture
of Youth. The Fable of Gerion and Cerberus with three Heads, was this: Gerion
was of the City Tricarinia, that is, of three Heads, and Cerberus of the same
place was one of his Dogs, who running into a Cave upon pursuit of his Masters
Oxen, Hercules by force drew him out of that place; from whence they affirmed,
that Hercules descended into Hell' and brought up Cerberus into the Land of the
Living. Upon the like occasion was raised the figment of Briareus, who dwelling
in a City called Hecatonchiria, they reported him to have an hundred hands.
They gave wings to Dedalus, because he stealing out of a window from Minos,
sailed away with his Son Icarus; who steering his course wisely, escaped; but
his Son carrying too high a Sail, was drowned. That Nio^e weeping over her
Children, was turned into a Stone, is nothing else but that during her life she
erected over their Sepulchers a Marble Stone of her own. When Acteon had ruined
his Estate with Dogs, and the prodigal Attendants of Hunting, they made a
solemn story of it, how he was devoured by his own Hounds: and upon the like
grounds was raised the Anthropophagie of Diomedes his Horses. Also upon such a
slender foundation was erected the Fable of the Minotaur; for one Taurus a
Servant of Mino^, got his Mistress Pasiphae with Child; from whence the Infant
was named Minotaurus, and Pasiphae accused of admitting conjunction with a
Bull: which gave a hint of depravity to Domitian, to act the Fable in reality.
In like manner, Diodorus presents us with such another Nativity of that famous
Fable of Charon; who being no other but the common Ferryman of Egypt, that
wasted over the dead bodies from Memphis, was made by the Greeks to be the
Ferryman of Hell, and many solemn Stories raised of him. Likewise that the
generation of Castor and Helena was out of an Egg, because they were born and
educated in an upper room, according to the word (...), which with the
Lacedaemonians had the same signification. That Romulus and Rhemus were suckled
by a Woolf, because Acca Laure^tius Nursing them, and she being an infamous
Strumpet, was called in derision Lupa; Lupanaria amongst the Romans signifying
Brothel-houses, and Lupa a Strumpet: And many more of the like nature could I
instance, quas nunc prescribere longum est. The learned Herbert Baron of
Cherbury says, the original of Fables was this: That the several Countries and
Ages having their several Gods, and the people, to magnify their own, raising
Lies on one another Gods, feigned them to be guilty of Rapes, Murders,
Frauds, etc. instancing particular Stories of them, which were afterward
delivered to posterity by the Greek and Roman Poets: Wherefore to furnish men
with a right opinion of the Gods, as also purge Divinity from all these absurd
Notions, Romulus did in his time order a public Reformation of Religion, as
Dion* Halicarnass* writes, lib. 2. (...) etc. quae ita vertit interpres:
Caeterum fabulas de ipsis (Graecis) a majoribus tradit^s, probra eorum
continentes, ac crimina impr^^a, censuit, inutilesque ac indecentes, ac ne
probis quidem viris dignas; nedum Diis sup^ris; repudiat isque his omnibus, ad
been and praeclare de Diis sentiendum ac loqu^ndum cives suos induxit, ni^il
iis affingi passus quod beatae illi naturae parum esset consentaneum. Neque
enim Coelus a suis liberis exectus apud Romanos traditur. Neque Saturnus
proprios natos abolens m^tuensque, ^e ipsorum appetatur insidiis: non Jupiter
Saturnum Patrem regno dejectum Tartareo includens carceri: nec item Deorum
Bella, vulnera, vincula servitutesve apud homin^s: nullum apud ^os Festum
atratum, aut Lugubre agitur, in quo mulieres sublatos e medio Deos planctibus
and lamentis prosequantur: qualia sacra Graeci faciunt, raptam Pr^ferpinam
^asusque Bacchi r^ferentia, and id g^nus alia. Yet notwithstanding all this,
the Greek Fables soon after prevailed amongst the Romans. Natalis Comes in his
Myth^logie, (lib. 1. chapter 2, 3, 4.) treating of the Fables of the Ancients,
divides his discourse into five parts* 1. d^ fabularum utilitate; 2. de
fabularum v^rieta^e; 3. de fabularum scriptoribus; 4. de Apol^gorum
fabularumque differentia; and 5. de partibus fabu^^rum. Which I shall here
reduce into three: 1. de fabula^um utilitate; Plato (de Respub. lib. 2.)
commands all Parents to instruct their Children the first thing they do, in the
knowledge of good and virtuous Fables* for that the hidden mysteries of all the
Heathen Gods, and Heathenish Religion, are comprehended in their Fables: thus
were the Vulgar terrified into good manners, when awed by Jupiter a
Thunderbolts, Neptu^e's Trident, Cupid's Darts, and Vulcan's fiery Torch. Under
most of the Ancient Fictions, lay couched certain Mysteries and Allegories,
even from their first invention: Therefore says the Lord Bacon, (Wisd. of the
An^.) who can be so stupid and blind, as (when he hears how Fame, after the
Giants were destroyed, sprang up as their younge^^ Sister) not to refer it to
the murmurs and seditious reports of both sides, which are wont to fly abroad
for some time after the suppressing of Insurrections? rections? Or when he
hears how the Giant Typhon, having cut out and brought away Jupiter's Nerves,
which Mercury stole from him, and restored again to Jupiter; does not presently
perceive, how fitly it may be applied to powerful Rebellions, which take from
Princes their Sinews of Money and Authority; but so that by affability of
speech, and wise Edicts, (the minds of their Subjects being in time privily,
and as it were by stealth reconciled) they recover their strength again? Or
when he hears how (in that memorable Expedition of the Gods, against the
Giants) the braying of Silenus's Ass, conduced much to the profligation of the
Giants, does not confidently imagine, that it was invented to show how the
greatest enterprises of Rebels, are oftentimes dispersed with vain rumors and
fears? Moreover, to what Judgment can the conformity of Names seem obscure?
seeing Metis, the Wife of Jupiter, does plainly signi^^e Counsel; Typhon,
Insurrection; Pan, Universality; Nemesis, Revenge; and the like. Another
Argument to prove that these Fables contained certain hidden and involved
meanings, is, seeing some of them are so absurd and foolish in the very
Relation, that they do as it were proclaim a parable afar off: for such Tales
as are probable, may only seem to be invented for delight, and in imitation of
History; but as for such as no man would imagine or relate, they seem to be
sought out for other ends. Therefore in the first Ages, (when Humane inventions
and conclusions, which are now common and vulgar, were new, and not generally
known) all things were full of Fables, Aenigma's, Parables, and Similes of all
sorts, whereby they sought to teach and expound knowledge to the Vulgar: for as
Hieroglyphics preceded Letters, so were Parables more ancient than Arguments.
Dion. Halicarnass. lib. 1. says, e Graecis fabulis nonnullae sunt hominibus
perutiles: ^liae siquidem sunt, quae naturae opera sub allegoriis contineant;
aliae humanarum calamitatum habent cons^lationem; aliae terrores, animorumque
perturbationes a nobis depellunt, opinionesque parum honestas destruunt; aliae
alterius cujuspiam utilitatis causa fuerunt inventae. First therefore, some of
these Fables contained in them many secrets of Nature, as that where Venus is
said to be born of Froth, and where Phoebus is said to have killed the Cyclopes
because they made Thunderbolts for Jupiter. Other Fables show the inconstancy
of Fortune, and teach us to bear adversity with courage, as those things which
are reported of Phoebus's looking after Admetus's Cattle; others reform us from
all wicked principles, Cruelty, Perfidiousness and Lust, as the Fable of
Lycaon. Again, some deterr men from Vice, as Ixion's punishment in Hell; others
exhort men to Courage, as the Fable of Hercules; others withdraw us from
Avarice, as the Thirst of Tantalus; others condemn all sudden Rashness, as the
misfortune of Bellerophon, and blindness of Marsya; others induce us to Virtue,
Piety and Religion, as the wonderful pleasure of the Elysian Fields; and
lastly, others deterring men from wickedness, as the infernal and cruel
Triumviri judging and condemning the Souls of men departed: And this may
suffice to show the great use the Ancients made of their Fables. 2. de
fabularum varietate; there are several kinds of Fables, whereof some take their
names from the places where they were invented, some from the Authors of them,
and some from the nature of the subject: as those of Cyprus, Libya, Cilicia,
Arcadia, and Sybaris, from the place; those of Homer, Aesop, etc. from the
Authors; and those many subjects of Tragedy and Comedy, from the Nature of the
subject. 3. de fabularum scriptoribus; there were many writers of Fables among
the Ancients, whereof Aesop the Samian was ever esteemed the most ingenious;
and besides him, Hesiod composed in verse a Fabulous History of the Original of
the Gods: And Eusebius tells us, that P^rphiry wrote several Books, wherein he
endeavored to accommodate the Genealogies of the Gods to Reason and Nature.
Also Cicero (in his Not. Deor.) says, that Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus
composed many Books of Commentaries upon the ancient Fables, which are now
lost. As likewise Orpheus, Musaeus, Mercurius, Linus, Phurnus, Palephatus
Stoicus, Dorothaeus, Evantes, Ponticus Heraclides, Silenus Chi^s, Anticlides,
Evartes, and many other Mythologizers, out of whose Writings Ovid compiled his
Metamorphosis. More of this subject may be read at large in Natalis Comes,
Apollodorus, and others.

[5] Ladon, a River of Arcadia, near which the Poets feigned the Nymph Syringa
to be transformed into a Reed. The greatness of this River is mentioned by
Calli^achus; its length, by Dionysius; its clearness, by Pausanias; and its
rapacity, by Ovid. Ar^ades hunc L^donq* rapax. Fast. 2.

[6] He would be anointed; Ointments (as Josephus writes) were used long before
the Trojan War, though Pliny says the contrary; for we read that Jacob sent
them to his Son Joseph in Egypt: and Moses, that was 350 year before the Siege
of Troy, makes mention of Ointments, concerning the Sanctification of the
Tabernacle, and Priests of the Old Testament: however it is not known who was
the first deviser of them. Pliny and Solinus report, that Alexander when he wan
the Camp of Darius, found among other Jewels and Spoils, a Cask of rich
Ointments, that very much delighted him. But Herodotus does declare, that it
was in frequent use before Darius's time: For Cambyses, Son to Cyrus, sent
Ambassadors to Aethiopus King of the Macrobians, with great Presents, whereof a
Box of Ointments was one. I know not the certain time when they were first
introduced into Rome, but we read in Pliny (lib. 13. chapter 3. Not. Hist.) that
the 565th year of that City, Antiochus being vanquished, and all Asia subdued,
P. Livinius Crassus and Julius Caesar being then Censors, commanded that no
Foreign Confection of Ointments should be sold in the City of Rome. Pancirollus
tells us, that the Romans derived this custom of Anointing themselves, from the
Greeks; who after they had washed the Body with Water, ever anointed it over
with perfumed Ointments, kept in a (...), or Vessel so called, which they had
for that purpose: Now the reason of this was, (as the Scholiast in Aristoph.
has it) to close up the pores again, after they had been opened by the hot
weather; or by anointing before they went into cold Water, to keep out the
cold; as we see Apollonius did. We read also, that both Greeks and Romans used
to anoint their Heads, -- habent unctae mollia serta comae, Ovid. which they
did either to keep out any Fumes ascending thither from drink, or to open the
pores that so they might evacuate the sooner: wherefore it was generally used
at great Entertainments. He that would read more concerning the virtue, several
kinds, and manner of using these Ointments, let him look into Athenaeus Dipnos.
lib. 3. chapter 14, 15, etc.

[7] Baths were used by our Forefathers as constantly before Meals, as we use
Water to wash our hands; nor was there any extravagancy wherein the Ancients
did more excel, than in that of their Baths. So magnificent were the Roman
Baths, so stately and glorious were their Fabrics, that they resembled so many
Cities. But above all, the two most famous were the Antoninian and Dioclesian:
the Antoninian Baths (as Palladius in his Antiq. Vrb. Romans says) were built by
Alexander, being of a prodigious height, and adorned with great Marble Pillars;
the Dioclesian, which were also of a vast height, had 140000 men employed for
many years together in building them. These Baths alone were so capacious, as
they contained for the use of washing, 1600 several Seats, and those all of
polished Marble: an accurate description whereof, is already given us by
Vitruvius, lib. 5. chapter 10. Agrippa, as witnesses Pliny, built (during his
Aedilship) for the free use of the Public, one hundred and seventy Baths; and
the same Author likewise adds, that at Rome in his time their number was
infinite: And for the largeness, some of them, says Olympi^dorus, were
ingenti, or as Cassiodorus writes, mirabili magnitudine. Ammianus (lib. 16.)
says, that their Baths were in modum Provinciarum extructa, built in the
manner of Provinces. Neither were their insides less glorious than their
outsides: for Seneca (in his 86 Ep. lib. 13.) describes the common
Bathing-rooms to be rather like the Palaces of Princes, than places only for
the washing off sweat and filth of their Bodies; and accordingly Statius
agrees, in this his description of them: Nil ibi plebeium, nunquam Temesaea
notabis
Era, sed argento foelix propellitur unda,
Argentoque cadit, labrisque nitentibus instat,
Delicias mir^ta suas. --
in balneo Etr^sci. Rosinus in his Chapter de Thermis, affirms, they used to
anoint the very Walls of their Baths, with rich odoriferous Unguents; and that
even of such Baths that were but for the use of Servants, Rosin. Antiq. Romans
But as Dr. Hakewell observes, the most considerable expense about their baths
was, the charge which they were at in heating the Water, especially being so
large, that one of them contained at least ten times so much in compass as the
Kings Bath in Bathe, and that to be heated so hot as they could hardly endure
their Bodies in it: which Plutarch testifies in the 8th Book, and 9th Chapter
of his Symposiachs. Hakewel^ Apol. for Provid. lib. 4 chapter 8. Moreover Plutarch
says, that while they were in them, they drew in Air that was mingled as it
were with Fire and Water; whereas in ancient times men could sleep, eat, and
drink in their Baths, without over-heating their Bodies. Now however some few
among them used Bathing for their health sake, yet Artemidorus tells us, that a
Bath in his time was little else but a passage to Supper; so as they which eat
often, washed as often: it being therefore observed of Commodus the Emperor how
often he eat, by his Bathing seven or eight times in one day. And among the
Christians, Sisinius a Bishop was censured as intemperate, for washing twice in
a day. Many there have been, says Plutarch, (in his Precepts of Health) who
have brought themselves to this pass, that they could neither eat nor drink
unless they had first either Bathed, or sweat in a Stove; among whom Titus the
Emperor was one, as they did testify who had the cure of him when he lay sick.
And in the same Book, he brings in Zeuxippus giving precepts of Diet, and
persuading men not to think it strange, if they come now and then to the Table
without having been at the Bath or Hot-house before: so common a thing was it
in those days at Rome, to make use of their Baths before they came to their
Meals. Many have declaimed against Bathing in excess, and some have preferred
hot Baths, and others cold Baths, as we see Apollonius did, but few have ever
decry'd them altogether. Clemens Alexandrinus reckons up the several good
effects of Bathing, as cleansing, warming and comforting the Body, besides the
great pleasure of it. Suidas says, that Baths are uncertain cures for pains,
but certain guides to pleasure; which agrees with that old Inscription which
was written over the Baths: Balnea, Vina, Venus corrumpunt corpora nostra;
Sed vitam faciunt Balnea, Vina, Venus.
Coel. Rhod. lib. 28. Camerarius (in his Hor. Succisiv. lib. 2. chapter 14.)
demonstrates, that the Pagans have been more modest in their Stoves and Baths,
than many of the Christians were: for though under the Rule of that monster
Heliogabalus, the Baths of Rome were open both to men and women promis^uously,
yet both before and since it was a thing prohibited by the Roman Laws; and was
then only practiced for a time, Regis ad exemplum: for Romulus, the first King
of the Romans, ordained, that whatever man should suffer himself to be seen
naked by a woman, should dye. Plutarch speaking of the modesty of M. Cato,
writes, That in old time Fathers were ashamed to bathe before their Children,
and the Father-in-Law before his Sons-in-Law: he further adds, that Cato was
as much ashamed to utter an unhandsom word in his Sons presence, as in presence
of the Vestal Virgins: that they never bathed together, for that the
Sons-in-Law being out of countenance to uncover their Bodies before them, never
met in Baths or common Stoves with their Fathers-in-Law. To this we may annex
the Speech of Cyrus to his Sons a little before his death: If any of you (says
Cyrus) desire to take me by the hand, or to see my eyes, let him come while the
breath is in me; for after I am dead and covered, I command you, my Sons, not
to let my Body be uncovered or looked on, either by your selves or any one
else; Xenoph. lib. 8. And as I have been informed, Maximilian the first Emperor
of that name, did the same. It is written that the Emperor Adrian made a Law,
That men should have their Baths apart from the women: which Law was confirmed
by Alexander Severus, and afterward followed by Justinian. Moreover the
ancient Canons admitted not of this ignominy, for in them it is forbidden that
men should bathe and wash with women, because the very Pagans were against it:
notwithstanding to our shame we see it allowed amongst the Christians of this
Age. Finally now, to conclude this discourse of Baths, let me not be unmindful
of those hot ones at Bath, which providence has furnished this Nation with,
and which by relation are no way inferior to any of the Ancients, curing many
distempers of all sorts, and that as well inward as outward, especially since
they take to drinking them, which of late years they have done; in so much that
Nechams Verses, may as justly be verified of their goodness at this present, as
they were 400 years since, about which time he is said to have written them in
these words: Bathoniae Thermis vix praefero Virgillanas,
Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra Seni.
Prosunt attritis, c^llisis, invalidisque,
Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest.


[8] Ephesians, a people of Asia the less, and Inhabitants of that great and
famous City Ephesus, which is now called Alt^ Luoco; but of this more hereafter.

CHAP. XIII. What kind of speech Apollonius used; and what Answer he made to
the Question of a Logician. Also of his departure from Antioch to the Indies;
and how coming to the City Ninus, he there met with Damis; who admiring
Apollonius, became his perpetual Companion; intending accurately to commit to
writing all his Sayings and Deeds.
APollonius used a kind of speech neither [1] Dithyrambical, or swelling with
Poetical expressions, nor on the contrary very Refined and [2] Hyperattick; for
he esteemed such expressions unpleasing as exceeded the [3] Attick mediocrity:
Neither in his discourse did he affect curious niceties. No man ever heard him
speak [4] Ironically, or act the [5] Peripatetick to his hearers; but as out of
the [6] Tripos, when he discoursed he said, This I know; or, Thus it seems to
me; To what purpose are these things? You must know, etc. His sentences were
compendious and smart; his words very significant, and fitted to the things
themselves; also what he uttered, carried the sound of Authority with it, as if
enacted by the Scepter. Being asked by a certain Logician, why he did not seek
and enquire; his answer was, That he sought when he was a Youth, and that now
it became him no longer to seek, but to teach the things which he had found.
When he further asked him, how therefore a wise man ought to speak; he
answered, as a Lawgiver; for a Lawgiver must make those things Injunctions to
the people, which he himself is first persuaded of. This was the manner of his
behavior at Antioch, whereby he drew unto him even those that were the least
given to Learning. Afterward he resolved to take a longer Journey, and go to
the Indies, that he might there talk with those wise men, who are called [7]
Brachmans and Hyrcanians: for he said, that it chiefly concerned Young men to
Travel abroad into the World. He likewise expected to learn many things by the
way, of the Magicians of Babylon and [8] Susa; and therefore discovered his
resolution to his disciples, who were seven in number. They endeavored to
divert him from it; but he said unto them, I have consulted with the Gods about
this affair, and told you now what I resolved upon, only to try whether you be
hardy enough to undergo the same things with me: therefore since ye discover
your selves to be soft and effeminate, farewell! do you study Philosophy, but I
must go whither both Wisdom and the Gods lead me. Thus having finished his
discourse, he departed from Antioch with only two Servants, who were his
Country men; one of which could write a very swift, and the other a very fair
hand: with whom he traveled along to the ancient City of [9] Ninus, wherein he
beheld a Statue erected after a barbarous fashion: it was [10] To the Daughter
of Inachus, having little horns ready to shoot out on both sides her forehead.
Now as he was admiring this Statue, and variously contemplating about that and
other things which he had heard from the Priests and Prophets, there came to
him one Damis a Citizen of Ninus, whom I before See lib. 1. chap. 3.
mentioned in the beginning of this discourse, saying, that he traveled
together with Apollonius, and was a partner with him in his trading for all
kind of Philosophy, as also one that committed to writing many of his
remarkable 'Deeds and Sayings. Now this Damis admiring Apollonius, also having
a desire to travel with him, he said unto him, Oh Apollonius, let us travel
together, thou following God, and I following Thee! Moreover thou may think
me worthy of esteem; for, though I should know nothing else, yet am I well
acquainted with the way to Babylon, knowing both how many Cities there be, and
the Towns wherein the best accommodation is to be had, it being not long since
I returned from thence. Likewise how many [11] Languages are spoken by the
Barbarians, such as the Armenian, Median, Persian, and Cadusian, all which I
understand perfectly well. To this Apollonius replied, My Friend, I am well
skilled in all these, notwithstanding I never learned any one of them. Damis
being in admiration at this, Apollonius said further to him, Do not wonder that
I pretend to [12] understand all the Languages of men, for I can tell even
those things which they conceive in their very thoughts. When the Assy^ian
heard this, he prayed unto him, and respected him as a God: also resigning up
himself to his discipline, committed to memory all that he could learn. This
Assyrian had a reasonable Talent of expressing himself, though no great
Elegancy in writing, being educated amongst the Barbarians: but for discourse,
converse, and whatsoever he saw or heard, he could well enough describe, and
compose Memoirs thereof, being practiced therein, as appears by the Books which
he composed of the Acts and Sentences of Apollonius; wherein he omitted none of
those things that were either said or done by Apollonius, though never so
trivial. And here it will not be amiss to insert what Answer he gave to one
that found fault with this his Commentary: an impertinent and envious Fellow
carping at him, said, That in other things Damis wrote well, when he described
the Sentences and Opinions of Apollonius; but when he took notice of flight
things that casually dropped from him, he did like Whelps who eat that which
falls from their Masters Table. To whom Damis replied, If the Gods have any
Feasts, or eat at all, they have Serviteurs who take care that the least
fragments of Ambrosia be not lost. Such a Companion and Friend had Apollonius
to accompany him the greatest part of his Life.

Illustrations on Chap. 13.
[1] DIthyrambick (Greek) signifies any lofty high strain, in imitation of an
ancient Hymn sung in honor of God Bacchus, which was so called.

[2] Hyperattick (Greek) is no more then an Eloquence exceeding that of Athens.

[3] Attick mediocrity; for that Athens was endued with the justest measure of
Eloquence.

[4] Ironically; is when by that Rhetorical Figure called Irony, a man in a
jesting way speaks quite contrary to what he thinks: Contra (...) sentit solet
Ironia jocare.

[5] To act the Peripatetick; is meant in this place, to study words more than
matter: for we read, that after the death of Theophrastus, the School of the
Peripateticks remitted much of their application to Natural Philosophy, for the
study of Eloquence.

[6] As out of a Tripos; that is, he spoke like any Oracle: Tripus was
sometimes called (...), as Callimachus has it; (...). This Tripod belonging to
the Delphick Oracle, is by some reported to have been a great Vessel filled
with Powder, out of which the Spirit of Prophecy ascended: but most Authors say
it was a three-legg'd Stool, whereon Pythia used to sit whilst she delivered
her Oracles; also that that part of the Tripod whereon she sat, was called
Holmon: for which reason Sophocles names Apollo, Enholmos; and Prophets,
Enhol^^ides. Iamblichus (in his Myster. Egypt.) writes, that the Sybil of
Delph^s had two several ways of Divining: one, by a certain Spirit, or gentle
Fire which ascended up under her Coats from a hollow Vault; the other was
sitting upon a brazen Stool, which had three or four Legs on it; and in both
these postures ^he delivered her Divinations with a Divine Spirit. Lactantius
the Grammarian upon that Verse of Papinius, (Salve prisca sides Tripodum, primo
Thebaid.) says, that a Tripod is a kind of Laurel with three Roots, consecrated
to Apollo by reason of its Divining power. Now Apollonius is here said to speak
like an Oracle, in that he used short sentences and monosyllables in his
discourse, which way has ever been affected by Oracles, as well as by Kings,
Princes, and men of Authority, who would be thought to weigh every word they
utter, and therefore not over-liberal of them. All Lawgivers and other eminent
men have ever had some particular affectation in expressing themselves; the
ancient Hebrews were much given to circumlocution, when instead of saying, He
spoke; they would in a most tedious manner cry, And he opened his mouth and
said: for fear perhaps lest we should mistake him for a Ventriloquer, or one
that spoke not with his Mouth, but his Belly. Julius Caesar Vaninus (whether
his design was good or bad, I shall not determine, but Charity bids me think
the best of all men) gives us many instances of our Savior Christ's most wise
and prudent converse, together with the many Divine Answers and Replys, that he
made to those ensnaring Questions that were asked him; in all which he seemed
far to excel the wisdom of Apollonius, or any other Lawgiver that ever lived
upon the Earth. As for example: Christ (says he) being asked by the Jews,
whether the Adulteress was to be stoned? denies it not, because the Law
hindered: nor affirms it, because in so doing he had given an example of a
cruel mind, which might probably have seduced away many from his Law; therefore
to prevent the ill consequence of either, he wisely answered, Let him of you
that is without sin, cast the first stone at her: whereupon none durst to
condemn the Adulteress. Another time, the Scribes asked him, whether they were
liable to pay Tribute to Caesar? He feared to deny it, lest he should render
himself guilty of Treason; neither would he affirm it, because it overthrew the
Law of Moses: therefore not to incurr the penalty either way, he asked them,
Whose is this Image? to which they answered, Caesar's; whereupon he concludes,
Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are Gods. Another time also, when the Pharisees demanded by what power he
taught? he observed himself to be in a straight on either side; for if he had
said, by Humane Authority, they had convinced him of falsehood, he not having
been initiated in the Jewish Holy Orders: neither durst he openly affirm that
Authority was given him from God, for fear of the Jews; therefore he subtlely
demanding, with what power John the Baptist did baptize, put the Pharisees in a
like straight; for Reason of State forbad them to attribute the preaching of
John to God, because therein they had presently condemned themselves, who had
opposed: nor durst they say the Baptism of John was an Humane invention, for
then they had brought the wrath of a credulous multitude upon themselves. These
are some of the most wise Acts of Christ: But that which surpassed them all,
was the Prophecy which he made concerning Antichrist, whereby the Eternity of
the Christian Law was best provided for; and herein he excelled the Ancient
Lawgivers: For they foretold, that the Messiah should be a great man, adorned
with all the endowments of Virtue, and most worthy of Reverence and Worship;
whereby they gave occasion for many to feign themselves to be the Messiah, that
they might acquire those high praises which tickle the minds of all men: But
Christ, ^^e wisest of Prophets, foretold that a new Lawgiver should come, an
adversary to his Law, hate^^l to God, the Devils Agent, the Sink of all Vices,
and desolation of the World; so that none will feign himself Antichrist, since
he can gain from thence nothing but disgrace or infamy: and while Antichrist is
absent, the Law of Christ must stand. Vanini Dialog. lib. 4. Dialog. 1. de
Religione Ethnic.

[7] Brachmans and Hyrcanians, a Sect of Philosophers or Divines in India, who
live only upon Herbs and Fruits. But of this Philostratus discourses more at
large in his third Book.

[8] Susa, a famous City of Asia, and Metropolis of the Country Susiana, in
the Persian Empire. It is situated between the River E^l^ns and Selencia
Westward; Persaepolis Eastward; and Ecbatan toward the South. This City was
first built by Memnon, as says Dionysius. Strabo writes, that when Cyrus and
the Persians had subdued the Medes, they established their Palace Royal at
Susa, as well for its vicinity with their new acquests, as for the beauty and
magnificence of the Place. It is at present under the Dominion of the Sophy of
Persia, being now called Ch^s, and the Country round about it Chusistan, or as
Marcus Paulus the Venetian has it, Curdistan: It has been subject to the
Kings of Persia ever since Apollonius's time. In all ancient Writers, Susa and
Ecbatan are ever mentioned together, for that the Persian Kings have ever
resided at Susa all the Winters, and at Ecbatan all the Summers. So Xenoph.
Cyrop. lib. 8. Strabo, lib. 15. Plutarch. de Exil. Athenae, lib. 12. Eustath.
in Dionys. Aristid. in Orat. de Roma. This Place has ever been famous for
Archers, -- Armantur Susa sagittis. Prop. lib. 2. as also for Magicians, since
it appears both in Daniel, Herodotus, and Plutarch, that the most eminent in
that Science, were ever to be found in this Court, both under Nebuchodonozor,
Baltazar, Cambyses, Artaxerxes, and Alexander the Great; and that with them the
Kings consulted in all arduous Cases.

[9] Ninus, or Niniveh, and now called Mosul, was an ancient City built by
Ninus, the Son of Nimrod, or Belus. Of this, see lib. 1. chapter 3.

[10] Io, the Daughter of Inachus, having little Horns ready to shoot out on
both sides her forehead; Io, or Isis, a Goddess of the Egyptians, was (as the
Poets inform us) the Daughter of Inachus, also a professed Whore, and yet the
Priest of Juno. She persuaded Jupiter to yield to her Lust; but Juno's
jealousy pursuing after her Husband found them together, Jupiter in the form
of a Cloud, and Ino in the form of a white Cow, for Jupiter had transformed as
well her as himself, that he might not be suspected of his Wife, who
nevertheless discovered his subtlety. Wherefore she begged the Cow of Jupiter,
who being afraid by his refusal to discover the intrigue, granted her Juno,
which she presently committed to the custody of Argus with his hundred eyes;
where she continued in much misery and persecution, until Mercury was sent from
Jupiter to deliver her, who playing Argus asleep with his Music, intended to
steal away* the counterfeit Cow; but an unlucky Boy, named Hierax, giving
notice to Argus, awaked him as the other was departing with his prize.
Whereupon Mercury seeing no remedy, but that he must either neglect Jupiter's
Command, or kill Argus, he took up a great Stone, and knocked him dead upon the
place, also changed Hierax into a Hawk for his ill office. Juno was not a
little displeased at the loss of her faithful Servant, therefore she
transformed him into a Peacock, which yet retains the number of his Eyes in his
Feathers. Also she sent some Creatures to vex Isis, in so much that she became
mad, and ran up and down the World, swimming over the Seas into Ionia, unto
which she left her Name; as also to the Sea that bounds that Country. At last
she returned back to Egypt, where she married Osiris; her Son by Jupiter was
called Epaphus. After her death, she was adored by the Egyptians; her Hair
being preserved as a sacred Relic in her Temple at Memphis. She was honored
as the Goddess of Weather and Navigation. Her Statue was (as it is here
mentioned) with Horns on a Cows head, or as others say, a Dogs head, unto which
Ovid alludes, calling her Latrator Anubis* The Romans had a great veneration
for this Goddess, notwithstanding they banished her, because her Priests had
consented to defile her Temple with Whoredoms, (as you may read in Josephus)
but afterward she was admitted again. Her Priests were initiated with Blood
and Water, they had their Heads and their Beards shaven, and did all wear white
linen Garments. At the entry into her Temple was the Statue of a Sphynx, to
signify that she was a mysterious Goddess: for her sake the Egyptians did keep
i^ a corner of her Temple a white Cow; which when it died, they did all mourn,
as for a Prince, until another was substituted in its room. See Ovid's Metam.
lib. 1. Not. Com. lib. 8. This Fable has an Historical allusion unto Argus,
that old and prudent Argive King, who was slain by Mercury, in hopes to succeed
him: and when banished for that fact by the Greeks, fled into Egypt. But
Allegorically, in that skill and industry is more available in Husbandry than
the influence of the Stars; the Cow wandering through many Regions, is the
propagation of that knowledge; and in that Egypt exceeds all other Countries in
the richness and fertility of its soil, Io is there feigned to recover her own
Figure. Others have wrested this Fable to Morality: That Jupiter, the mind of
man falling from Heaven, and joining with Io, the Body in a Cloud is turned
into a Beast, as forgetful of its own original, and captivated by his vices;
but when of more maturity in age and judgment* Mercury is sent to kill Argus,
in that Reason bridles and subdues the exorbitancies of the Affections: and
then Juno is said to let loose her Furies, which are the stings of Conscience.
As for Inachus, the Father of Io, he was the first that ever reigned in Argos,
and being accidentally drowned in Carmanor, that River was afterward called by
his Name.

[11] Likewise how many Languages are spoken by the Barbarians, such as the
Armenian, Median, Persian, and Cadusian. Mr. Leigh (in his Religion and
Learning) divides all Languages into Oriental and Occidental: 1. Oriental;
which contains the Hebrew, Chaldee, Samaritan, Syriack, Arabic, Aethiopick,
Persian, Armenian, and Coptick. 2. Occidental; which also comprehends the
Greek, Latin, Spanish, French, Italian, German, English, and Slavonick, which
is spoken very generally. And of all these, the three principal or learned
Languages are the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. The Oriental Tongues are all
(except the Aethiopick and Armenian) written and read from the right hand to
the left. Also the Graecians did at first write forward and backward, from
whence arose that phrase, Literas exarare, and Linea are called Versus. Now to
treat of all these Languages separately, we will begin with the Oriental; and
of them, first with the Hebrew, because it is esteemed not only the most
ancient, but was also the most pure without any mixture or corruption, whereas
there is no other Language which had not certain words derived and corrupted
from the Hebrew, and others, as we shall show hereafter. The Hebrew Language
was the first most ancient and only Language before the building of the Tower
of Babel, for which presumption, (as Josephus and others write) God sent a
confusion of Tongues among the Workmen, so as rendered them unable to proceed in
their Work. Wherefore the Nation and Language of Israel borrow their Name (
Hebrew) from Heber, whose Son was called Peleg, (Division) relating to the
Division of Babel. And this I take to be a more probable account than that of
Arias Montanus, who derives the Name of Hebrews from Abraham, as if they were
called Hebraei, quasi Abrahaei. The same Author likewise tells us, that this
Name of Hebrews was not appropriate to any Family, but common to all such as
having passed over the River Euphrates, fixed their Tents, and inhabited
between that River and the great Sea. Gesner in his Book of many Languages,
which he styles Mithridates, (because Mithridates was said to understand twenty
two several Languages) writes, that the Hebrew Tongue is the fountain of all
others, viz. of the Indian, Persian, Babylonian, Armenian, Syriack, Arabic,
Egyptian, and Aethiopi^k. Also Beckman shows, that many Greek words are derived
from it: and that the Punick Tongue was the Canaanitish or old Hebrew Language,
which was vulgarly spoken among the Jews before their Captivity. For as the
learned Breerwood in his Enquiries observes, the old and right Hebrew remained
(after the Jews Captivity in Babylon) only among the learned men, being taught
in Schools, as among us the learned Tongues are accustomed to be. Breerw. chapter
9. Among the Christians, for above 1000 years after Christ, the Jews were so
much hated, that their very Language suffered for their sake: in so much that
Origin was upbraided for learning the Hebrew Tongue. Thus that Language
continued without any regard had to it until the year of Christ, 1440* when by
the invention of Printing all Arts and Sciences began to flourish Now among the
Restorers of the holy Tongue, Reuclin was esteemed the first; for the Ice being
broken by him, Hebrew Bibles were printed first at Pisanna, after at Venice,
and in Italy* Nay Martinius was so industrious as to compose an admirable
Grammar of that holy Tongue. Many famous men of all Countries have excelled
herein; but one of the first that taught it here in England was Wakefield.
Neither ought we here to forget the learned Dr. Pocock, who is at present the
glory of this Nation for his great skill in the Oriental Tongues. Now for the
Pricks wherewith the Hebrew is at present read, Martinius says, that they were
invented by the Masorites to supply the want of Vowels, lest by inserting new
Letters they might have altered the ancient original Text: whereof they were so
careful, that they tell of a certain Rabbi who was slain by his Scholar Ioab,
because he had read Zacar for Zecer. As for the Masoreth, it was a most
faithful and ancient Tradition of all the diverse readings that were ever extant
of the Hebrew Bibles. But to say no more of this Subject, Arias Montanus (in
his Preface to his Book de Hebraicis Idiot.) giv^^ this Character of the Hebrew
Tongue, that it comprehends much matter in a few words, is very significant,
has gravity, sweetness, vivacity, and mavelous efficacy in its words and
Periods. However the scarcity of words has sometimes gravelled its
Interpreters, when one word many times has two contrary Expositions, as
Blessing and Cursing.

Secondly, The Chaldee is as it were a Dialect of the Hebrew, differing not
much more than the Dorick from the common Greek, or than the Northern and
Western Speech from plain English; nevertheless it is nearer related to the
Syriack, in so much that Mercerus makes them to be both one. Now during the
seventy years Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, there was a mixture of the
Hebrew and Chaldee Languages, as is evident by the Writings of the Prophet
Daniel, composed of both, as Ierom has well observed in his Preface upon that
Prophet, as also by the Writings of Ezra, and more evidently by the Chaldee
Paraphrases. This Language is much used by the Learned in Egypt and Aethiopia.
You may find in Job, the Proverbs, Jeremiah, and elsewhere, a mixture of some
Chaldaick words. Many Christians in Syria use this Language in Grammaticis and
sacris, about the Mountain Libanus.

Thirdly, The Samaritan Language has no other Letters or Characters proper to
it, but those of the Hebrew: the Samaritans therefore used only twenty two
Letters, as the Hebrews did, until Ezra (after the restoration of the Temple
under Zorobabel found out other Letters, which we now use. Many of the Jews
dwelling at this day in Syria, but more particularly in the Town of Sichem, are
called Samaritans, and speak this Samaritan Language.

Fourthly, The Syriack Language, (which is called, Isa 36.11. Lingua Aramaea,
or according to the new Translation, the Syrian Language; according to the old,
the Aramites Language) is certainly thought (says Masius in Praef. Gram. Sir.)
to have had its beginning in the time of the Jews Captivity in Babylon, while
they were mingled among the Chaldeans; in which long revolution of seventy
years, the vulgar sort of the Jews forgot their own Language, and began to
speak the Chaldee; but yet pronouncing it amiss, and framing it somewhat to
their own Country fashion, in notation of Points, Affixes, Conjugations, and
some other properties of their ancient Speech, it became a mixed Language of
Hebrew and Chaldee: a great part Chaldee for the substance of words, but more
Hebrew for the fashion, and so degenerated much from both: especially after our
Savior's time, when it likewise received much mixture of Greek, also some of
the Roman and Arabic words, as in the Jerusalem Talmud gathered about 300
years after Christ by R. Iochanan, is apparent, being far fuller of them than
those parts of the Chaldee Paraphrase on the S. S. which were made by R.
Jonathan a little before Christ; and by R. Aquila, (whom they call Onkelos) not
long after. Breerw. Enq. chapter 9. Fabricius clearly demonstrates, that the vulgar
Tongue of Jury (in the days of our Savior's pilgrimage here upon Earth) was
Syriack. Waserus (in his Comment upon Gesner) writes, that Christ with his own
lips did consecrate this Language, as also that his Apostles did sometimes use
it, as appears from these words, Abba, Aceldama, Bar, Barrabba, Bar-Iesu,
Barjona, Bar-Timi, Bell, or Beel, Beelzebub, Bethabara, Bethania, Bethesda,
Belial, Benerehem, Ephphata, Gabbatha, Genesara, Golgotha, Korbona, Mammona,
Rabbi, Talitha-Kumi, and others, all which occur in the New Testament, and are
merely Syriack. In this Language there is likewise extant a most ancient and
elegant Translation of the New Testament, which is much esteemed of among the
Learned. Crinesius much commends the Syriack Grammar of M^sius, Mercer, and
Tremellius, but especially Wafer's. De Dieu's is likewise highly extolled.

Fifthly, Arabic, is now the common Language of the East, especially among
such as embrace the Mahumetan Religion: This Language in the first division of
Tongues according to Epiphanius, was begun by Armot, the first speaker and
Author thereof. Epiph. contra Sethian. It is now the most universal in the
World, as Bibliander, Postellus, Scaliger, and Claude Duret, (in his Histor.
del Origin des Langues) do prove at large, from the Herculean Pillars to the
Molluccas, and from the Tartars, and many Turks in Europe* unto the Aethiopians
in Africa, extending it self. Bree^wood (Enquir. ob. 8.) says, that in the East
part of Cilicia beyond the River Pyramus, as also throughout Syria,
Mesopotamia, Palestina, Arabia, Egypt, and so Westward, in all the long Tract
of Africa, that ^^tendeth from Egypt to the Strait of Gibraltar, I say, in all
that lies betwixt the Mo^^tain Atlas and the Mediterranean Sea, (now termed
Barbary) excepting Morocco, and ^here and there some scattered remnants of the
old Africans in the Inland parts, the Arabic Tongue is become the vulgar
Language, although somewhat corrupted, and varied in Dialect, as among so many
several Nations it is unpossible but it should be. And although I be far from
their opinion, who (like Postellus) write, that the Arabian Tongue is in use in
two third parts of the inhabited World, or more, yet I find that it extends
very far, and especially where the Religion of Mahumed is prosessed; for which
cause (over and besides the parts above mentioned, wherein (as I said) it is
the native Language) moreover in all the Northern part of the Turkish Empire,
lying Northward from the Mediterranean Sea, as also among the Mahumetan
Tartars, (though not the vulgar Tongue) yet is it familiar with very many, both
because the Alcoran and all their Religion is written only in that Language,
and for that every Boy which goes to School is taught it, as amongst us Latin
and Greek: in so much that all the Turks write their own Language in Arabic
Characters. Joseph Scaliger (Annotat* in Eusebius. Chron.) writes, that neither
this Language, the Hebrew, or Syrian, are capable of Geometrical Measures by
quantities of Syllables. Now this Arabic Tongue is to be esteemed not only for
its Extent, but also for its Antiquity, Elegancy, and Profitableness. 1. For
its Antiquity, whereof St. Ierom testifies in his Comment upon Isa. as likewise
Erpenius in his first Orat. Ling. Arab. 2. For its Elegancy, whether we
consider the plenty of words, and force of signification, or the sweetness of
the Phraseology, or the facility and gravity of the whole Language. Mr* Greaves
says, it exceeds both the Greek and Latin in number of words: also he commends
it for its facility, as having no Dialects, turnings of Elections, nor
Anomalies. 3. and lastly, It is a profitable Language, since he that has the
knowledge thereof, may without an Interpreter travel almost all over Africa and
Asia. There are many words in the Hebrew Bible and in the Chaldee Translation
of it, with sundry manners of speaking, whose signification and sense cannot be
had but out of this Language. Neither are the Opinions of Mahomet to be
faithfully learnt without it. Moreover this Arabic Tongue gives great light to
the Syriack, Aethiopick, Persian, and other Languages; as also to the
Mathematics, they having invented Algebra, and having amongst them
Mathematicians more accurate than Ptolomy; also to Physic, Avicenna, Mesua,
Serapio, and Rasis, were famous Arabian Physicians. Neither will that
Platonist, Avicenna, or that Aristotelian, Averroes, appear less eminent in
Philosophy to them who shall consult their two Tracts de Anima, which I have
with much satisfaction perused; not to mention their larger Volumes. Likewise
many famous Poets and Historians have they had amongst them; as Mr. Greaves in
his Oration informs us. Finally, Mercer, Joseph Scaliger, Rophelengius, Isaac
Causabon, Iunius, Tremelius, Clenard, Golius, and our Pocock, and Greaves, did
highly prize this Arabic Language, and promote the study thereof.

Sixthly, The Aethiopick or Indian Language is so near (says Bibliander de
Rat. Ling. chapter 2.) to the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Arabic, that there is scarce
any Diction which is not found in some of them. The Aethiopians write from the
left hand to the right. This Language (which differs only in Characters from
the forementioned Tongues) is used very much through all the Kingdom of
Aethiopia and Africa, which is of great extent. Some think the Prophets were
written in the Aethiopick Tongue, from the times of our Savior Christ and his
Apostles; also that the Eunuch (who was Treasurer under the Queen of Candace)
read it, by which Eunuch all Aethiopia was afterward converted to the Faith of
the Gospel.

Seventhly, The Persian Language (says Bibliander) is of all others the most
easy. There are many footsteps of this Language in the Scripture, especially
in Esther, as Ahasuerus, Esther, Hammedatha, Phur, or Phurim, Gaza, Susa,
Zeres, Mordochai, and others. Mr. Greaves says, that at this day the Persian
Language is much used throughout all Asia: but more especially in Eastern
Princes Courts by the Grandees and better sort, as amongst us the French is.

Eighthly, The Armenian Language is the most difficult of all others, as
Bibliander writes. Agrippa says, it is a corruption of the Chaldee. Sixtus
Senensis informs us, that St. Chrysostom being by the Emperor's Decree
banished into Armenia; he did there translate the holy Scriptures into the
Armenian Tongue; which Translation is at this present in solemn use amongst
them: they likewise exercise their common Divine Service in the Armenian
Tongue. But of this see more in a late Treatise published upon this Subject by
Mr. Paul Ricaut.

Ninthly and lastly, The Copticks, or Christians of Egypt, in their Liturgy
use the Chaldaean Language, but read the Gospel in the Arabian. And thus much
for the Oriental Tongues.

In the next place being to speak of the Occidental, I shall begin with the
Grecian.

First then, The Greek Tongue came in esteem by its Elegance, Sweetness, and
Richness, as also by the Philosophy, Arts and Sciences, which has therein been
handled; it has likewise been propagated by the Navigations, Commerce, and
Colonies of the Athenians* as well as by Macedonian Arms, which ruling in Asia,
Syria, and Egypt, made their Language known in many Countries. Likewise the
New Testament being first written in Greek did not a little promote it. It
would be too prolix and tedious here to insert the many Provinces and Countries
that were acquainted with this Language, therefore in that matter I refer you
to Breerwood's Enquiries, chap. 1. only in general I must acquaint you, that
Cicero declares in his time the Greek Tongue was read almost in all Nations.
Now in this great glory and splendour continued the Greek Tongue in the Eastern
parts, till by the inundation of the Saracens of Arabia, it came to ruin in
those Provinces, about 640 years after the Birth of Christ, in the time of the
Emperor Heraclius, when the Arabians introduced their Language together with
their Victories into all the Regions they subdued: even as the Latin Tongue is
supposed to have perished by the inundation and mixture of the Goths, and other
barbarous Nations in the West. So that at this day, the Greek Tongue is very
much decayed; and that not only as touching the largeness and vulgarness of it,
but also in the purity and elegancy of it. Now the greatest part of the
corruption of that Language ha^h been bred at home, and proceeded from no other
cause than their own negligence or affectation. As for Example: First, By
mutilation of some words, pronouncing and writing (...) for (...) for (...)
etc. Secondly, By compaction of several words into one, as (...) for (...) for
(...), etc. Thirdly, By confusion of sound, as making no difference in the
pronouncing of three Vowels, viz. (...); and two Dipthongs, (...) and (...);
all which five they pronounce by one letter (...), as (...), they pronounce
Icos, Icon, Stithi, Lipi. Fourthly, By translation of Accents from the
Syllables, to which in ancient pronunciation they belonged to others. All which
four kinds of corruption, are very common in their Language, and may have
produced the unelegant variation in the Greek Tongue. The Greek Language (more
especially in their Poets) is difficult, by reason of the several Dialects,
viz. the Attick, which was the purest of all, and used only at Athens; the
Dorick, which was the most gross; the Eolick, and Ionick; which three last were
used in other Greek Countries remote from Athens. But the Greeks are now at
this day (by reason of their slavery to the Turk) so ignorant and unlearned,
that they have (says Cabasilas) about 70 Dialects of the modern Greek, whereof
the purest is at Constantinople, and the most barbarous of all at Athens. I
think I may say without vanity, that both for understanding and pronouncing of
the pure ancient Greek, there is at this day no people under Heaven more expert
at it than the English, which all Travelers acknowledge. Wherefore having so
eminent Grecians amongst us, and since by the French example we see how much
good Translations benefit a Language, I cannot but lament to see such noble
Authors as Plutarch, Josephus, Appian, and others, translated into English at
second hand out of the French Translations, and not out of the original Greek:
a thing not only highly scandalous to our Nation, but also unfaithful and
prejudicial to the Authors themselves; since notwithstanding the French are
sometimes to be commended for their Notes, Print, Cuts, and Paper, yet I have
known very great Judges which will not allow their very best Translations to be
any other than Paraphrases; nor will their Language admit of so compendious and
exact a Version as ours. But to proceed; there is no Language of more use than
the Greek: First, For that there is none so happy in composition, nor so fit in
joining and coupling one word with another as the Greek, which Julius Pollux a
Greek Author in his Onomasticon fully demonstrates. Aul. Gell. lib. 11. chapter 16.
All the Hebrew and Latin Eloquence, know not with their mystery and gravity how
to express and utter so properly and naturally many Nouns and Verbs, as are to
be found frequently in the Books of Greek Authors. Turneb. Animadvers. lib. 5.
chapter 19. Greek Books, says the learned Causabon (Enthus. chapter 2.) are best able
to make a man wise and learned. Secondly, Many terms of Art both in Grammar,
Logic, Physic, Rhetoric, Music, Arithmetic, Geometry, Chronology, and
Mathematics, derive their original from the Greek: so that Ignoratis terminis,
ignoratur and Ars.

The next of the three Learned Tongues, is the Latin, in comparison of which,
all others are said to be barbarous. Some hold that the flourishing pure, and
incorrupt Age of the Latin Tongue, was from Terence to the times of
Quintilian: for in that Age lived Terence, Pacuvius, Lucretius, Virgil, Horace,
Propertius, Tibullus, Catullus, Ovid, Persius, Seneca, Silius Italicus, and
Martial, Poets; Varro, Cicero, Julius Caesar, Salust, Columella, Livy, Quintus
Curtius, Historians and Orators. The Latin Tongue grew to perfection by
degrees, and in Caesar's and Cicero's times, (whereof the one for purity, the
other for copiousness, were the best that ever writ) it came to the highest
flourish, together with the Empire under Augustus Caesar. Among the Poets,
Plautus, Naevius, Accius, Pacuvius, Ennius, and Virgil most refined it; among
the Orators and Historians, M. Cato, Sisenna, Caesar and Cicero. Both Julius
and Joseph Scaliger held, that many Originals of the Latin Speech were deduced
from the Greek; however Crinesius derives the Latin from the Hebrew. Mr.
Breerwood in his Enquiries, produces five several examples to prove the
variation of the Latin Tongue, before any Foreign inundation happened: First,
because Quintilian records, that the Verses of the Salii which were composed by
Numa, could hardly be understood by the Priests of later times in the
Commonwealth, as Quintilian writes, Instit. Orat. lib. 1. chapter 6. Secondly, For
that Festus (in his Book de Verb. significat.) who lived in Augustus's time,
declares, that the Latin Speech (so named of Latium) was at that time so much
changed, that (says he) scarcely any part of it remained in knowledge.
Thirdly, In as much as the Laws of the Roman Kings, and of the Decemviri,
(called the Laws of the 12 Tables, and collected by Fulvius Vrsinus) if
compared with the later Latin, will testify the same. Fourthly, Because
Polybius (lib. 3.) writes, that the Articles of a League betwixt the people of
Rome and Carthage, made soon after the expulsion of the Roman Kings, could in
his time very hardly be understood by the best Antiquaries in Rome. Fifthly and
lastly, For as much as there remains at this day in the Capitol at Rome,
though much defaced by the injury of time, a Pillar (called Columnam rostratam)
dedicated to the memory of a Roman Consul, upon a Naval Victory which he
obtained in the first Punick War: the words inscribed on the Pillar, together
with the later Latin under them, are these, and thus written: Obsol. Lat.
Recen. Lat. Exemet. Leciones. Macistratos. Castreis. Exfociont. Pucnandod.
Exemit. Legiones. Magistratus. Castris. Effugiunt. Pugnando.
Cepet. Enque. Navebos. Marid. Consol. Primos. Ornavet. Navebous.
Cepit. Inque. Navibus. Mari. Consul. Primus. Ornavit. Navibus.
Claseis. Poenicas. Sumas. Cartaciniensis. Dictatored. Altod. Socieis.
Classes. Punicas. Summas. Carthaginiensis. Dictatore. Alto. Sociis.
Triresmos. Naveis. Captom. Numei. Navaled. Proedad. Poplo, etc.
Triremes. Naves. Captum. Nummi. Navali. Proeda, Populo, etc.
Where you may see in many words, e for i, c for g, o for u, and sometimes for
e, also d, superfluously added to the end of many words: Breerw. Enquiries, chapter
6. Now that the Roman Tongue did refine and vary from the impurity of its
Original, we cannot oppose: neither by any thing I have yet read or heard, do I
see any just grounds to recede from that common opinion, which supposes, that
the mixture of the Northern barbarous Nations among the ancient Inhabitants,
was the cause of changing the Latin Tongue, into the Languages which now they
speak, the Languages becoming mingled, as the Nations themselves were. Now from
hence two things are observable; First, The Persons who thus overran Italy:
and they were the Huns in Pannonia, the Vandals in Africa, the East- Goths and
Longobards in Italy, and the West- Goths in Aquitain and Spain. The second
thing to be observed, is the time of the dissolution of the Empire, which
happened in Europe and Africa, in the time of Valentinian the third, and about
the year 450. being caused by the barbarous Nations of the North: as afterward
the like dissolution of the same Empire happened in Asia by the Arabians, in
the time of Heraclius, about the year 640. when together with the Rule of the
Empire in the West, by the inundation of the said barbarous Nations, the Latin
Tongue became likewise corrupted.

The Spanish Tongue as now it is, consists of the old Spanish, Latin,
Gottish, and Arabic, as there is good reason it should, Spain having been so
long in the possession of the Romans, Goths, and Moors: of which, the Latin is
the greatest part, and next to it the Arabic, wherefore they themselves call
their Language Romance. And Breerwood himself says, that he has seen an
Epistle written by a Spaniard, whereof every word was both good Latin and good
Spanish; also an example of the like is to be seen in Merula: Cosmog. part. 2.
l 2. But the Language of Valentia, Catalonia, and part of Portugal, is much
tempered with the French. Now the ancient and most general Language used in
Spain before the Roman Conquest, without question seems to have been the
Cantabrian Tongue. See more of this in Breerwood's Enqu. chapter 7.

The French Tongue, what it was of old remains doubtful, some thinking it to
have been the German, others the Greek, and some the Welsh. But these
suppositions were grounded upon an error, of thinking that one Language was
vulgar throughout all France; whereas both Caesar and Strabo record, that
diverse Languages were spoken in the several parts of France. Strabo tells us,
that the Speech of Aquitain had much affinity with the Spanish: as also that
part in Caesar called Belgia upon the Rhine, did partake much of the German
Tongue: And the Celtae who inhabited the middle of France, (as Hottoman, and
from him Breerwood, are of opinion) used (as now they do) a Language compounded
half of a Latin Original; and the other half made up of the German, Greek, and
British, or Welsh words, with an equal proportion of each. Of the deduction of
the French words from the Greek, you may read Perionius, Postellus, and others:
of those from the German, Tschudus, Goropius, Isacius, etc. of the Welsh,
Lhuid, Cambden, etc.

Italy was heretofore divided into many ancient Tongues, (as well as Dialects)
according to its several Provinces: In Apulia, the Mesapian Tongue; in Tuscany
and Vmbria, the Hetruscan, now quite perished, (whereof some few Monuments
(though understood by no man) are registered by Gruter and Scaliger in the Book
of ancient Inscriptions;) in both the higher and lower Calabria, as also far
along the Maritime Coast of the Tyrrhene Sea, the Greek; in Latium, (now
Campagna di Roma) the Latin; in Lombardy and Liguria, the old French Tongue,
whatsoever it was. And though besides these five, we find mention in ancient
Writings of the Sabine, the Oscan, the Tusculan, and some other Tongues in
Italy, yet were they no other than differing Dialects of some of the former
Languages; as may be easily proved out of Varro, Festus, Servius, Paulus
Diaconus, and others. Now people speak the best Spanish in Castile, best French
in Blois and Orleance, and best Italian in Hetruria. The modern Spanish Tongue
is near to the Italian, and seems to come nearer the Latin than the French, but
not so near as the Italian. The Language of the Spaniards is said to be Manly,
the Italian Courtly, and the French Amorous. Scaliger prefers the French
Language for its elegancy and sweetness, before either the Spanish or Italian.
But for my own part, I have as ill an opinion of the French Tongue as People;
since the very Language it self is a Cheat, being written one way, and
pronounced another: moreover that which they call the beauty and grace of their
Language, seems altogether tedious and impertinent to me. Joseph Scaliger
says, the Latin Tongue was the Mother of the Italian, French, and Spanish, all
which in a barbarous manner were called Romanse instead of Roman.

The German Tongue has also diverse Dialects, or Idiomes; the chief whereof are
the Dutch, Saxon, and Danish.

The Slavonick Tongue is the vulgar Language of many Nations in Europe, and
some in Asia. It is also much spoken in the Turk's Senrail at Constantinople,
as well as by his Janissaries and Soldiers.

Now concerning the Antiquity of Languages in general: Herodotus (lib. 2.)
tells us, that one Psamneticus, King of Egypt, caused two Children to be
closely brought up by a Shepherd, with order to suckle them with Goats Milk,
and not ever suffer them to hear any humane Voice: whereupon after two years
spent in this Education, the Children uttered these words, Bec, Bec, having
learnt so much from the Goats; which the King finding to signify Bread in the
Phrygian Language, and not knowing how they had learnt it, very weakly
concluded the Phrygian Tongue to be the most ancient.

[12] I pretend to understand all the Languages of men: Philostratus herein
thinks not only to outvy the Gift of Tongues, which the Holy Ghost bestowed on
the Apostles, by entitling his Prophet Apollonius to the same power; but
likewise to exceed them, in making Apollonius acquainted with the most secret
thoughts of men's hearts.

CHAP. XIV. When Apollonius came into Mesopotamia, what Answer he made to one
that asked him, What Wares he brought along with him; concerning Mesopotamia,
why it was so called; and of the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates: Also how great
the Fortitude and Wisdom of Apollonius was.
AFter these things, coming into [1] Mesopotamia, the [2] Publican who was set
over the Bridge, carried them to the Tole-book, and asked them what Commodities
they had brought along with them? To whom Apollonius answered, That he brought
with him Temperance, Justice, Virtue, Continency, Fortitude, Exercise, and many
other Virtues, which he called by Feminine Names. Whereupon the Publican being
intent upon his gain, said, he would set down the Maids Names; to which
Apollonius replied, You may not do so, for I bring them not as Maids but
Mistresses. Now [3] Tigris and [4] Euphrates running out of Armenia from the
bottom of [5] Taurus, Sic dict. quod (...) significat, media inter duos; and
(...) fluvios.
give the Name to Mesopotamia, encompassing the Country, in which there are
some Cities, but for the most part Villages. The people are [6] Armenians and
[7] Arabians, who being environed with the said Rivers, do for the generality
wander up and down in Tents without any certain abode. They likewise esteem
themselves to be so much Islanders, that they say they go down to the Sea when
they descend to the Rivers, thinking those Rivers the bounds of the Land; for
when the said Rivers have encircled the whole Country, they evacuate
themselves into the Sea. There are some who report, that a great part of
Euphrates is swallowed up in a certain Lake, so that its course is finished in
the Earth. But Viz. Pliny
others undertake a bolder Assertion, viz. That after it has run a long way
underground, it arises up again in Egypt, and mixeth with the Nile. For
curiosities sake, and that I might not omit any thing which Damis described, I
were willing thus to relate what he did amongst the Barbarians. Now although my
Relation does hasten toward more great and admirable Subjects, yet not so as
to neglect these two things: First, The Fortitude of Apollonius, in traveling
through [8] barbarous Nations that were addicted to Robbery, and unsubdued by
the Romans: and secondly, His Wisdom, in that after the manner of the Arabians,
he came to understand the several Voices of living Creatures: for this he
learned of the Arabians, who understand and practice it the best of any; also
it is yet common to the Arabians to hearken to the Voice of Birds, as
foretelling whatsoever Oracles can. This Converse with irrational Creatures
they gain by eating (some say) the Heart, (others say) the Liver of Dragons.

Illustrations on Chap. 14.
[1] MEsopotamia, a large Country of Asia, limited on the East with the River
Tigris, on the West with the River Euphrates, on the South with Babylon, and on
the North with Caucasus. It is called Mesopotamia (as Philostratus here
observes) from its situation between the two Rivers Tigris and Euphrates. By
the Hebrews it is called Aram Naharaim, i. e. Syria fluviorum duorum.
Heretofore it was named Seleucia, as Pliny informs us, lib. 6. Olivarius says,
it is at present known by the Name of Halapia: though others call it Apamia,
some Adiabene, and some Azamia. Arrianus names the Inhabitants of this
Country, Incolas inter amnes, lib. 3. Cicero says, that the River Euphrates
makes it very fertile, Nature. Deor. lib. 6.

[2] Publican, a Farmer of public Rents or Revenues belonging to the Crown,
such as we call an Excise-man.

[3] Tigris is a River in Asia, so called from the swiftness of its current,
alluding to the swift flight of a Dart or Arrow, which in the Median Tongue was
called Tigrin, viz. Sagittae. Strabo Geogr. lib. 11. It runs with such an
impetuous and speedy current through the Lake Arethusa, that neither the Waters
nor the Fish mingle with those of the Lake. It runs into a hole on the side of
the Mountain Taurus, and rising out again on the other side of the Mountain,
continues its course, till running into Mesopotamia it there divides it self
into two branches, whereof one evacuates into the Persian Gulf, and the other
into Euphrates. For its Original, Justin and Solinus derive it from the
Armenian Mountains. But of this see Justin, lib. 42. Solin, chapter 40. Lucan, lib.
3. verse 256. Boethius de Consol. lib. 5. Arrianus (lib. 7. de Exped. Alex.)
writes, that this River was heretofore called Sylax; Eustathius and Plutarch,
Sollax. Arrias Montanus say, the Hebrews name it Hidekel. Josephus calls it
Diglath, and Pliny, Pasitigris. But at this day Castaldus says, it is known by
the Name Tegil.

[4] Euphrates, a famous River of Mesopotamia, arising (as says Strabo) out of
Niphates, a Hill in Armenia; this is one of the Rivers that comes out of
Paradise, and passes through Babylon. I conceive it takes this Name (
Euphrates) from the Arabic Tongue, wherein Pharata signifies inundare, to
overflow. Some will have its Name from the Hebrews, Hu-perah, Genesis 11.14.
Boethius will have it, that Tigris and Euphrates have both but one head: Tigris
and Euphrates uno se font resolvunt. This River far exceeds Tigris in
magnitude; Strabo, lib. 2. As well Lucan as Cicero takes notice how much this
River conduces to the fertility of Mesopotamia: -- Sparsus in agros
Fertilis Euphrates Phariae vice fungitur undae.
Lucan, lib. 3. Of this River you may see a description at large in Pliny, Not.
Hist. lib. 5. chapter 24. Also in Strabo, lib. 16. There was a famous Philosopher
of this Name, who lived under the Emperor Adrian, till being troubled with some
grievous Disease, which rendered his life burthensom, he (with the Emperor's
consent) did voluntarily, by a mornings draught of Hemlock, pass into the other
World.

[5] Taurus, the most famous Mountain of Asia; which beginning at the Indian
Sea, stretches out its two arms Northward and Southward, also Westward to the
Aegean Sea. In which manner extending it self through many Countries, it
receives in each a several Name: Thus in Cilicia it is called Taurus, --
Taurusque Cilix -- Ovid, Met. 2. in Lycia, Cragus; in Pamphylia, Coracesius,
and Sarpedon; in the Lesser Armenia, Antitaurus; in the Greater Armenia,
Moschicus, and Pariedus; in Mesopotamia, Chaboras; in Syria, Amanus; in the
Confines of Mesopotamia and Armenia, Niphates, or Gordiaeus; in Colchos,
Coraxicus; in Iberia, and Albania, Caucasus; in Media, Zagrus; in the Confines
of the farther Assyria, Orontes, Iasonius, Coronus, and Choatras; in Parthia,
Paracoathras; in Carmania, Strongylos; in Bactria, Paropamisus; in Scythia,
Imaus; between Scythia and India, Emodus; all which were in general by the
Greeks called Ceraunios; in the Word of God it was called Ararat: So that we
see this Mountain through each Country it ran, received a new Name. However Q.
Curtius seems to make Taurus and Caucasus two distinct Mountains: Taurus
(especially in Cilicia) is at this day called Cambel, Bacras, and Giulich.

[6] Armenia, (so called, as Strabo affirms, ( lib. 11.) from the Name of one
of Iason's Companions, which followed him in his Navigation out of Harmenia, a
City of Thessaly; or as others say, from Aram, the Son of Sem) is a Country of
Asia, divided into two parts, the Greater and the Lesser: The greater has a
part of Cappadocia and Euphra^es on the West; Mesopotamia on the South;
Colchis, Iberia, and Albania, on the North; the Caspian Sea and Media on the
East. Part of this greater Armenia is now called Turcomania, and the other part
contained in Georgia. Ptolomy reckons many principal Mountains in it, as the
Moschici, Paryarges, or Pariedri, Vdacespes, Antitaurus, Abos, and the Gordaei,
which the Chaldaean Paraphrast calls Kardu; Quintus Curtius, Cordai; and
Berosus, Cordyaei. On these Hills it is said the Ark rested; and Haithon (one
of the same Country) calls this Mountain Arath, little differing from the
Scripture Appellation, Ararat. Now for the lesser Armenia, (which is called
Prima) it is divided from the greater, or Turcomania, by Euphrates on the East;
it has on the West Cappadociae; on the South Cilicia, and part of Syria; on
the North the Pontick Islands. It was sometimes reckoned a part of Cappadocia,
till the Armenians by their Invasions and Colonies altered the Name. The
Armenian Country being conquered in the year of our Lord, 1515. by Selimus the
first, was annexed to the Ottoman Empire, and subjected to its Tyranny. The
Armenians are now much dispersed all over the Turks Dominions, through the
encouragement of Traffic and Commerce, to which they are much addicted. As for
their Constitutions, the Men are naturally of healthy, strong, and robustious
Bodies, their Countenances commonly grave, their Features well proportioned,
but of a melancholy and Saturnine Air: On the contrary, their Women are
generally ill-shaped, long-nosed, and not one of a thousand so much as commonly
handsome. The men are in their Humors covetous and sordid to a high degree,
heady, obstinate, and hardly to be persuaded to any thing of Reason; being in
most things of a dull and stupid Apprehension, except in Merchandise and
matters of gain, wherein they understand nothing but their advantage. The Turks
give them the Name of Bokegees, and the Jews esteem them to have been of the
ancient Rac^ of the Amalekites, being a people whom they envy, because they
will not easily be cheated. Many ascribe their heaviness of Complexion to the
Air of their Country, which is imprisoned in the vast Mulberry Woods, as also
thickened by the Vapors of their Fens, and Marshes, and Winds, from the
Caspian Sea, together with the ungrateful steams arising from the Cauldrons,
wherein they boil their Silkworms. As for the Rites and Ceremonies of this
Church, whilst subjected to the Roman Empire, they were the same with the
Grecian, maintaining the same Doctrine, and acknowledging the Patriarch of
Constantinople for the Head of their Church, till afterward, Differences
arising in Government, have divided them both in Doctrine and Discipline. The
Armenian Church (as Mr. Ricaut informs us) is at present governed by four
Patriarchs, whereof the chiefest resides at Etchmeasin in Persia; the second at
Sis in Armenia minor; the third at Canshahar; and the fourth at Achtamar: for
those Armenian Patriarchs which remain at Constantinople, are only titular,
made to please the Turks. As for the Doctrine of the Armenian Church, they
allow and accept of the Articles of Faith in the Council of Nice; they also
make use of the Apostles Creed. Notwithstanding they have made a Creed or
confession of Faith of their own, which is as follows: I confess that I believe
with all my heart in God the Father uncreated, and not begotten, and that God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, were from all eternity; the
Son begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds only from the Father. I
believe in God the Son increated and begotten from eternity. The Father is
eternal, the Son is eternal, and equal to the Father; whatsoever the Father
contains, the Son contains. I believe in the Holy Ghost which was from
eternity, not begotten of the Father but proceeding, three Persons, but one
God. Such as the Son is to the Deity, such is the Holy Ghost. I believe in the
holy Trinity, not three Gods but one God, one in Will, in Government, and in
Judgment, Creator both of visible and invisible. I believe in the holy Church,
in the remission of sins, and the communion of Saints. I believe that of those
three Persons one was begotten of the Father before all eternity, but descended
in time from Heaven unto Mary, of whom he took blood, and was formed in her
Womb; where the Deity was mixed with the Humanity, without spot or blemish. He
patiently remained in the Womb of Mary nine months, and was afterward born as
Man, with Soul, Intellect, Judgment, and Body, having but one Body, and one
Countenance; and of this mixture or union resulted one composition of Person.
God was made Man without any change in himself, born without humane Generation,
his Mother remaining still a Virgin: And as none knows his Eternity, so none
can conceive his Being or Essence; for as he was Jesus Christ from all
eternity, so he is to day, and shall be for ever. I believe in Jesus Christ,
who conversed in this World, and after thirty years was baptized according to
his own good will and pleasure, his Father bearing witness of him, and said,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and the Holy Ghost in form
of a Dove descended upon him; he was tempted of the Devil, and overcame, was
preached to the Gentiles, was troubled in his Body, being wearied, enduring
hunger and thirst, was crucified with his own will, died corporally, and yet
was alive as God, was buried, and his Deity was mixed with him in the Grave;
his Soul descended into Hell, and was always accompanied with his Deity; he
preached to the Souls in Hell, whom after he had released, he arose again the
third day, and appeared to his Apostles. I believe that our Lord Jesus Christ
did with his Body ascend into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God; and
that with the same Body by the determination of his Father, he shall come to
judge both the quick and the dead; and that all shall rise again; such as have
done good shall go into Life eternal, and such as have done evil into
everlasting Fire. This is the sum of the Armenian Faith, which they teach their
young Children and Scholars, also is repeated by them in the same manner as our
Apostles Creed is in our Divine Service. But he that would read more of their
Fasts, Feasts, Ceremonies, Penances, etc. let him peruse that late excellent
Treatise, called, The present State of the Armenian Church, written by the
ingenious Mr. Paul Ricaut, who conversed sometime amongst them.

[7] Arabia is called by the Hebrews, Arab; wherefore some derive the Name
Arabia from the Hebrew word, (...), Arabah, which signifies a Desert, for that
Arabia is full of Deserts Others ascribe the Name to Arabus, the Son of Apollo
and Babylonia. Some will have it that Homer called the Arabians, (...), quasi
(...), i. e. nigros. But of this see Strabo, and Magnum Etymologicum. Arabia is
a very large Country of Asia, lying between two Bays or Gulfs of the Sea, the
Persian on the East, and that which from hence is called the Arabian on the
West; on the South is the Ocean; and on the North is Syria and Euphrates; it
confines on Iudaea on the one hand, and Egypt on the other. Now Arabia is
commonly divided into three parts, Petraea, Deserta, and Faelix. And the forged
Berosus of Annius tells, that Ianus Pater sent one Sabus into Arabia Faelix;
Arabus into Arabia Deserta; and Petreius into Petraea; all Nephews of Cham, or
rather, Sons of Annius his Brain. Arabia Faelix called at this day by some
Aimon, but by the Turks, Gemen, or Giamen) comprehends the Southerly parts of
Arabia, and received the Epithet Faelix from its fertility. Arabia Petraea
(called by Pliny and Strabo, Nabathae, but now at this day Barraah, or
Bengaucal) received the Name of Petraea, (as says Arrias Mont.) from Petra,
the Seat Royal, afterward called Arach, of Aretas the Arabian King. Lastly,
Arabia Deserta (now known by the Name of Beriara) was so called from the nature
of the place, being in great part without Inhabitants, by reason of the
barrenness of the Soil; as is also great part of that which is called Petraea.
Of this read at large in Purchase his Pilgrimage, lib. 3. chapter 1. This Country
is famous for rich odoriferous Spices and Unguents: Arabia odorum fertilitate
nobilis Regio, says Curtius, lib. 5. Likewise all the ancient Poets express the
same.

[8] Barbarous Nations that were unsubdued by the Romans: For the Romans
professing themselves to be the only Masters of Humanity, did (as we may find
by their Historians) esteem all people barbarous, that were not subject to
their Empire. And so likewise did the Greeks; for when King Pyrrhus came into
Italy, after he had surveyed the discipline of the Army which the Romans had
sent against him, I know not (said he) what barbarous men these are, but the
conduct of their Army is nothing barbarous. The like also said the Graecians of
that which Flaminius sent into their Country. But nothing could be more
arrogant or more unjust than this: They are savage and barbarous, as we call
those Fruits wild, which Nature of her self and of her ordinary progress has
produced; whereas those natural productions which we by our Arts and devices
have altered, might more justly deserve that term of Barbarous. Corn, Wine, and
Oil, are wanting to this ground,
With which our Countries fruitfully abound;
As if this infant World yet unarray'd,
Naked and bare, in Natures Lap were laid.
No useful Arts have yet found footing here,
But all untaught and salvage does appear:
As we by Art unteach what Nature wrought,
So all their Customs are by Nature taught.
There Nature spreads her fruitful sweetness round,
Breaths on the Air, and broods upon the Ground;
There Days and Nights the only Seasons be,
The Sun no Climate does so gladly see;
When forced from thence, to see our Parts, he mourns,
Takes little Iourneys, and makes quick returns.
Mr. Dryden. These Nations therefore seem barbarous to me, because they have
received little improvement from Humane wit; whereas if we rightly considered
it, they ought the more to be valued, as being so much the nearer to their pure
original Nature, without any allay of Art or Custom. Nature is the work of the
Almighty, and Art the work of Man; so at most but Natures Bastard. We have by
our inventions so much overcharged the beauties and riches of Nature, that we
have in a manner choked her: Et veniunt hederae sponte sua melius,
Surgit and in solis formosior arbutus antris,
Et volucres nulla dulcius art canunt.
Propert. lib. 1. El. 2.10. Ivies spring better of their own accord,
Grounds unmanur'd much fairer Trees afford,
And Birds untaught much sweeter Notes record.
All our Wit or Art (says Montaign) cannot so much as represent the contexture,
beauty, and use of the least Birds Nest, or Spiders Web. On the other side,
those words that import Lying, Falsehood, Treason, Dissimulations, Covetousness,
Envy, Detraction and Pardon, were never heard of amongst them: Hos Natura modos
primum dedit. Whilst we detract from others, we flatter and dissemble with our
selves; and whilst we condemn them for eating men that are dead, we forget how
much worse it is to crucify, torment, and roast men alive, which the Spaniards
have done under the name of Christians. So that to me this Calumny seems to be
grounded rather upon envy, than any thing else: as we often see it in private
Families, where if one Brother has more wit or sense than the rest, the others
shall presently conspire together against him, thinking to repair their own
folly or weakness, by traducing him with Lies, and slanders of debauchery,
wickedness and intemperance: Nor can weak Truth his Reputation save,
The Fools will all agree to call him Knave.
Sat. against Man. In him the smallest Trip, is adjudged a Stumble; the least
Mote, a Beam; and if upon any extraordinary accident, he be guilty of the least
act of intemperance, they shall record it to all posterity, as if they boasted
of that equality of understanding which they had with him, when he was in
drink, and they sober; for Fools are drunk by Nature. Again, if he never so
strictly keeps and observes the Moral part of the Christian Law, and omits but
the least point of the Ceremonial, he shall presently be decryed for an
Atheist; when in the mean while they who so accuse him, lending their outward
man to the Church, and their inward to the Devil, covet, lie, back-bite,
censure, envy, detract, and violate the most sacred Oaths, Vows, and Contracts
made before God and man; when yet notwithstanding, by the help of reading a few
Psalms and Chapters, or repeating daily a few Prayers, they think they have
expiated all their other failings, which at the most they will allow to be only
Sins of infirmity. The word Atheist is now used, as heretofore the word
Barbarous was; all persons differing in Opinions, Customs or Manners, being
then termed Barbarians, as now Atheists.

[9] He came to understand the several Voices of living Creatures: as that best
of Satyrs, Hudibras, speaks of Squire Ralph^; He understood the speech of Birds,
As well as they themselves do words:
Could tell what sub^lest Parrots mean,
That speak and think contrary clean;
What member it is of whom they talk,
When they cry Rope, and Walk Knave, walk.
Canto 1. Pliny (lib. 10. chapter 49.) amongst other fabulous Narrations, tells us
of a vain report, that Dragons taught Melampus, by licking his Ears, to
understand the language of Birds. Also Democritus mentions certain Birds, of
whose blood mingled together and suffered to corrupt, there is engendered a
Serpent, which whosoever eats shall understand the speech of Birds.
Porphyrius (lib. 3 de Abstinentia) writes, that if you will give credit to
Antiquity, there have been and were in his time several that understood the
languages of Birds and Beasts; as amongst the Ancients, Melampus and Tyresias:
Also he says, that a Friend of his had a Boy who understood the speech of
Birds; that the Arabians understood the language of Crows, and the Tyrrhenians
the language of Eagles. Now that Apollonius had this gift, not only
Philostratus, but also Porphyry, Eunapius, and others affirm. Likewise if you
observe his gift of Tongues, and other Miracles, I see no reason why you should
doubt of this; Faith being like a piece of blank Paper, whereon you may write
as well one Miracle as another.

[10] It is yet common to the Arabians to hearken to the voice of Birds, as
foretelling whatsoever Oracles can; which Converse with irrational Creatures,
they gain by eating (some say) the Heart, (others say) the Liver of Dragons:
Those Princes and Commonwealths (says the most wise Florentine) who would keep
their Government entire and incorrupt, must above all things have a care of
Religion and its Ceremonies, to preserve them in due veneration; and that not
only in the beginning of a Government, (as Numa did, whereby he reduced a
martial and fierce people to civil obedience) but also in any Government
established, for that Irreligion introduces Luxury, and Luxury Destruction.
Whatsoever therefore occurs, that may any way be extended to the advan^age and
reputation of the Religion established, (how uncertain or frivolous soever it
may seem in it self) yet by all means it is to be propagated and encouraged by
prudent Magistrates; this course having been observed by wise men, has produced
the opinion of Miracles, which are celebrated even in those Religions that are
false: for let their Original be as idle as they please, a wise Prince will be
sure to promote them, and his Authority recommends them to every body else. A
Prince therefore, to those that see and hear him, ought to appear all Goodness,
Integrity, Humanity, and Religion, which last he ought to pretend to more than
ordinarily, because more men do judge by the eye than by the touch; for every
body sees, but few understand; every body sees how you appear, but few know in
reality what you are; and those few dare not oppose the opinion of a multitude,
who have the Majesty of their Prince to defend them. Solon Lycurgus, Numa, and
all other heathen Lawgivers, were fain to crave the assistance of Religion in
the establishment of their new Governments. Now the Religion of the Gentiles
ran much upon the Answers of Oracles, Divinations, and Soothsaying, upon which
all the rest of their Sacrifices, Rights, and Ceremonies, did depend; for they
did not doubt, but that the same thing which could presage your fortune, (be it
good, or be it bad) could as easily confer it. Among other kinds of
Foretellers, we read of three principally used in former times, namely,
Auruspices, Auspices, and Augures; all which we English, Soothsayers, though
the Latin words do import a main difference: for the Auruspices did divine or
foretell things to come, by beholding the Entrails of Beasts sacrificed; whence
they had their Name, ab Aras inspiciendo, from beholding the Altars. The
Auspices did foretell things by beholding the flight of Birds; so that Auspices
are said quasi Avispices, ab Aves aspiciendo. Lastly, The Augures did divine
from hearing the chattering or crowing of Birds; as Philostratus here says the
Arabians did; whence they are called Augures, ab Avium garritu, from the
chirping and chattering of Birds; which Art (as our Author here says) they
learned, by eating the Heart or Liver of Dragons; also Solinus affirms, that
for this purpose the Arabians used to eat Serpents. Now for the particular
kinds of Soothsayings, I shall not trouble you with here, but refer you to
Caelius Rhodiginus, Rosini Antiquitates Romanae, Godwin's Antiquities, and
others, who describe the manner of them at large; I shall only give you some
short hint of their politic Institution, and so conclude. First then, Julius
Caesar Vaninus (dial. 56. lib. 4) says, that the Soothsayings of the Ancients
are the fables and illusions of Priests, to get money and praise, as also the
figments of heathen Princes, to keep the people in awe with the fear of a
supreme Deity. If Auguries foretell future events, then they are either their
causes or effects; for thus Astronomers give judgment by the Stars, the
efficients of sublunary things; and Physicians by effects; but Auguries are
none of those things, wherefore they are vainly used to the foreknowledge of
things to come. Among the Gentiles* Auguries were a great part of their
Religion, and (as the wise M^chiavil observes) they contributed not a little to
the well-being of the Roman Commonwealth; for which reason the Romans esteemed
them above any other Ordinance, and made use of them in the creation of
Consuls, in the undertaking of Enterprises, in drawing out their Armies, in
their Battles and Engagements, and in every other business of importance,
whether Military or Civil; nor would they ever begin an Expedition, till they
had possessed the Soldiers that the Gods had promised them success. Among the
several Orders of Auspices, they had one called the Pullarii, who were to give
their Presages ever before they fought the Enemy: If the Pullen over which they
had inspection, eat, it was a good Omen, and they might with confidence engage;
but if they did not eat, it was an ill sign, and they were obliged to forbear.
Thus the Chickens who refused their meat, and flew out of the Coop, foretold
the overthrow of Ma^cinus by the Numantines, and of L^cius Papyrius, in the
Battle against the Samni^es. Wherefore (as V^^inus observes) to prevent any
such dis-encouragement to the superstitious Army, when the Commanders were very
desirous of giving Battle, and the Soldiers unwilling for fear of danger, that
they might excite them to fight manfully* they endeavored to engage them not
with humane, but divine counsel; and therefore kept Chickens long fasting, and
afterward brought them almost famished out of the Coop, who greedily devoured
the meat that was cast before them: Then the Augurs being clad in their solemn
Robes, did with much gravity and stroaking their Beards, in the name of the
Gods promise victory to the Army* and so enflamed the credulous multitude to
fight, to the destruction of their Enemies. On the contrary, when the General
was unwilling to hazard a Battle, he offered meat to the Chickens when their
bellies were full, and when they refused it, the Augurs who were ever of the
secret Council of War, did beseech the Soldiers by the bowels of the Gods, not
to engage the Enemies, for that the Gods being angry for the sins of the Army,
did threaten their ruin; whereupon all obeying those Admonitions of so great
an High Priest, abstained from Battle; neither was that attributed to the
cowardice of the General, but to destiny. Also when they were vanquished or put
to flight, that it might not reflect on their valor, they feigned that they
fought contrary to the Answers of their Augurs. Thus Flaminius perished
together with his Army for not being obedient to the Augurs. The chief and most
eminent Office among the Romans was that of the Augurs; the veneration and
honor given to them was so great, that they were looked upon not only as the
Gods Interpreters, but also as Messengers and Agents betwixt them and mankind.
Besides, they were ever advanced to the Senate, and the rather as is conceived,
because from the first foundation of Rome, until the change of the Government,
Kings themselves were Augurs, as thinking it unsafe to dis-joyn from the Regal
Power, a discipline so full of Authority: like as our King here in England is
Head as well of the Church as State, which Power in Catholic Countries is
divided between the King and that old Roman Augur, the Pope. Now the chief end
of Auguries, was to encourage Soldiers to fight with more alacrity and
confidence, which contributed much to their success; nor was any Magistrate
chosen till they were first consulted: Those who to Empire by dark paths aspire,
Still plead a Call to what they most desire.
Mr. Dryden* Thus (as Livy informs us) Romulus and Numa could receive their
Scepters only from the Augurs hands. Neither did they begin to build Cities,
till they had first por'd into the Entrails of Beasts: for if they were found,
they argued the temperateness and fruitfulness of the Soil; but if they were
lean and shrivelled, that showed the Clime to be unhealthy: for many times they
drew their Conjectures from other natural Causes, and yet ascribed them to
Augury. Now this Art of Augury is very ancient, especially in Italy, Greece,
and Asia minor, where one Car or Cara is said to have invented it, and Orpheus
to have amplified it; for as they then wanted the knowledge of Divination by
the Stars, in such perfection as the Egyptians and Chaldeans had it, so they
devised these Arts to make themselves esteemed Prophets; as if the Counsels of
the Gods were hidden in the filthy dunghill of the Livers and Entrails of dead
Men and Beasts: for we read, that both Heliogabalus and Julian sacrificed men
for this purpose, as thinking, that from their bowels the most knowing and
fatal Divinations might be gathered. Moreover these Auguries were never
undertaken without much Solemnity and Ceremony, at which time a Procession was
made by the Patrici^, and better sort of People, all crowned with Bays; before
whom, the Po^^i^ex Maximus walked in great State, accompanied behind with all
sorts of People: which Ceremony I could not but call to mind some years since,
when out of curiosity I beheld a Catholic Procession at St. James ^ Chapel,
thinking the Papists had taken that Custom from the ancient Heathen Augurs; it
being but a politic and wise part to conform their Religious Rites (as much as
is possible) to the practice of the ancient Roman Empire, without innovating
more then needs must. Now that these predictions by Augury were only credited
by the Vulgar, and therefore countenanced by the Wise, we may learn both from
Pliny and Cicero, whereof the first says, That Auguries signify nothing, and
gain force only from our Imagination, wherefore he denies that they pertain to
an incredulous person. And the other ( viz. Cicero) writes, That he wonders how
one Augur can behold another without laughing, when they think how they cozen
the people; miror c^r Haruspex Haruspici vide^s, non rider? (which sentence a
profane person of my acquaintance did ever make use of, when he beheld two
Priests together.) Finally, when a Roman General deferred to give the Signal of
a Battle, because the Soothsayers Chickens forbore to eat, a young Nobleman
standing by, told him, He wondered he would omit so great an opportunity, for so
small a thing: to whom the General replied, These things seem small, but our
Forefathers by regarding these little things, have made this Empire great.

CHAP. XV. How Apollonius leaving Ctesiphon, came into the Confines of Babylon;
and what Answer be made to a certain Governor that demanded who he was, and
whence he came. Also, how afterward becoming intimate with the Governor, he
refused Treasure and other rich Presents offered to him, accepting only of
Bread and Herbs.
Afterward Apollonius going above [1] Ctesiphon, passed into the Confines of
Babylon; where the King had placed a Guard that suffered not any to pass
without enquiring who and whence he was, also what his business was there. The
Governor set over this Guard, was (in my opinion) as an Eye to the King: for
the Median King being new come to the Kingdom, thought not himself secure, but
fearing as well Chimaera's as real Dangers, lived with continual Trembling and
Apprehensions. Therefore Apollonius and his Companions are brought before this
Governor, who had made himself a Tent on a Wagon, and was riding abroad; but
seeing a man in a very sordid Garb he cried out like any timorous Woman, and
hid his face. But afterward with much ado looking up upon him, he asked him,
as if he had been some Demon, From whence art thou sent to come among us?
Apollonius answered, From my self; to try if you can become men even against
your wills. The Governor asked him again, Who he was that durst thus enter the
Kings Territories? To which Apollonius replied, The whole Earth is mine, and I
have liberty to pass through the same. Hereupon the Governor threatening to put
him to torture, unless he answered more plainly those things which he asked
him, Apollonius said to him, If thou touch me, thou shall be tormented with
thine own hands. The Eunuch amazed at him, for that he saw him want no
Interpreter, but understanding his speech with ease, and without any trouble,
spoke now more mildly to him, and changing his Tone, asked him, In the name of
the Gods, who art thou? Apollonius answered, For as much as you now ask me in a
fair and courteous manner, hear thou who I am! I am Apollonius the Tyanaean,
and my Journey is to the King of the Indians, that I may see the things there:
I would also willingly be admitted to your King, because such as have been with
him say, he is no bad man; if it be [2] Vardanes, who has lately recovered the
Kingdom which he had lost. It is the same (said the Governor) O thou divine
Apollonius, of whom we have long since heard the same, and he would yield his
very Throne ^o a wise man; no doubt therefore but he will send you to India,
every one with his Camel. As for me, I make you my Guest, and give you leave
(showing him a great Treasure of Gold) to take of this what you please, not
only once, but ten times over. Now Apollonius refusing his Money, the Governor
said unto him, Nevertheless you shall accept this Vessel of [3] Babylonish
Wine, whereof the King himself does drink to the ten Governors. You shall
likewise take these pieces of roasted P^rk, and Goat, together with Flower,
Bread, and whatsoever provision else you please: for in the greatest part of
your Journey you will meet with none but small Villages, wherein good
accommodation is not to be had. The Governor had no sooner uttered these
words, but he reproved himself, saying, How extremely have I been mistaken, to
entertain a man that neither eats of living Creatures, nor drinks Wine so
absurdly and clownishly. To which Apollonius replied, Notwithstanding my Diet
is slender, yet, Sir, you may Feast me with Bread and Fruits. That (said he) I
will willingly do, for I will present you with leavened Bread, and great yellow
Dates; together with all sorts of the best Herbs that the Gardens of Tigris
produce. But those Herbs and [4] Fruits (said Apollonius) are sweeter to me
that grow wild of their own accord, than those that are forced and produced by
Art. Those Herbs (replied the Governor) are indeed the sweeter: but our ground
about Babylon being full of [5] Wormwood, brings them forth unpleasant and
bitter. Wherefore he accepted of such Herbs as the Governor proffered him, and
at parting said unto him, Oh thou good man, be not only courteous at the end,
but also in the beginning: implicitly upbraiding him with the Torments that he
had before threatened; as also, for the other [6] Barbarous Language he at first
received from him.

Illustrations on Chap. 15.
[1] CTesiphon, a Town of Assyria lying upon the Shore of Tigris, and built by
the Parthians, where in the Winters their Kings used to spend some time, by
reason of the Temperateness ^f that Air. Pliny (lib. 6. 26.) writes, that
Ctesiphon was the head City of the Babylonish Empire. Also Ammianus
Marcellinus, reckoning up the three most famous Cities of Assyria, mentions
this as one of them, viz. Babylon, Selencia, and Ctesiphon; lib. 23.

[2] Bard^nes, or Vardanes, was the Son of Artabanus, whose Story we read in
Tacitu^^ his Annals, lib. 6. and lib. 11. Artabanus dying, left behind him
several Children, viz. Arsaces, Darius, Bardanes, Gotarzes, Orodes, Vol^geses,
Pacores, and Tiridates, besides one Daughter whereof we have no farther
mention. Now Arsaces having the Government of Armenia given him by his Father,
was there killed by his own Subjects, being suborned so to do by Mithridates
and Pharasin^^, two Princes of Spain* Darius was sent in Hostage to Rome, to
the Emperor Tiberius; whereupon the third Son Bardanes, (of whom Philostratus
here speaks) came to the Crown by his Fathers Will, by reason of his two older
Brothers misfortune, which happened to them during Bardanes's Life. Of his Wars
you may see an account at large in Tacitus, as also of his unlucky death.

[3] Babylonish Wine: Strabo (lib. 16.) speaking of the fertility of the
Province of Babylon, says, that this Country produces greater store of Corn
then any other, in so much that it is said to render 300 for one; and for all
other necessaries requisite to the subsistence of man, their Palms supply them
with* as Wine, Honey, Vinegar, and Clothing, which they extract from the
Palm Tree; together with Nuts, which serve their Smiths and such as make use of
Fire, instead of Coals: also these Nuts being steeped in Water, serve to fatten
their Sheep and Oxen Pl^ny (lib. 14) writes, that all the East used no other
Wines but what are made of Palms. Athenaeus (lib. 14. chapter 26.) says, that the
Persian Kings used only to drink the Calybonia^ Wine, which (as Possidonius
affirms) grew only in Damascus of Syria, for that the Persians had there
planted Vines. He that would know more of this Subject, let him peruse Pliny's
14th Book, as also Athenaeus, wherein you may find all the several sorts of
Wine extant in the World, together with their original growth and increase.

[4] Those Fruits are sweeter that grow wild; Apollonius esteemed them so, as
admiring the simple works of God and Nature, beyond all the Art and improvement
of Man. How much sweeter are the wild Notes of the Nightingale, than any
Artificial ones which we teach our tame Birds? How much more beautiful are the
colors of the Rainbow, than any we can imitate? and we find by daily
experience, how much sweeter many of our Fruits are which grow of their own
accord, than such as we nurse up with our hot Beds in Gardens.

[5] Wormwood is called in Greek (...), quasi (...), impotabile, ob
amaritudinem; vel ingustabile, quia illud non tangunt animalia in Depascendis
herbis. Dioscorides calls it (...), a profundo amarore. Dioscorides and Galen
make mention but of three sorts of Wormwood; the one a common sort, well known
by all men, whereof the best grows in Pontus and Cappadocia; the other
Sea-wormwood, or Seriphium; and the third Santonicum, of the Country beyond the
Alps in France. Nevertheless, there has since been found out many Herbs
accounted to be kinds or sorts of them, both for their likeness of Face, and
Virtues. Absinthium vulgar, or the common Wormwood, is of an heating and
binding property, it purges Choler that cleaves to the Stomach or Belly. But
of this see more in Parkinson's Theatrum B^tanicum, Tribe 1. chapter 36. also Pliny
lib. 27. chapter 7.

[6] Barbarous Language; Charron (who is but an imitator of Montaign, wearing
his Thoughts at second hand) tells us, (in his Treatise of Wisdom) that Speech
is the interpreter and image of the Soul, animi index and speculum, the
Messenger of the heart, the Gate whereby all that is within issues forth; in
so much that an ancient Philosopher said once to a Child, Speak, that I may see
thee; that is to say, the inside of thee. As Vessels are known whether they be
broken or whole, full or empty, by the sound, and Metals by the touch; so Man
by the sound of his Tongue, or Speech. Of all the visible parts of the Body
which show themselves outward, that which is nearest the Heart is the Tongue,
by the root thereof; so that which comes nearest unto our Thought, is our
Speech: for from the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Life and Death
are in the power of the Tongue: so that there is nothing better, and nothing
worse than the Tongue. Hearing and Speech are the two Gates whereby the Soul
does traffic: at the one all things enter in, and at the other all go forth.
But Hearing is the first Gate, through which all must first pass; for there can
nothing come forth of the Soul, but that which first enters: and therefore he
that by Nature is born deaf, the same is likewise dumb. Now from the
communication of these two, as from the stroke of two Flints or Irons together,
there comes forth the sacred Fire of Truth. The Tongue, like other benefits of
Nature, is bestowed upon us as a singular blessing; yet nevertheless, as with
those Legs which are given us to walk about our necessary occasions, we may
leap into a River, or off from a Steeple; or with those Hands which are lent us
by providence for our defense and service, we may cut our own Throats; so
likewise our Tongues, though an eminent gift of Nature, may (if irregularly
managed) prove our destruction; as I have already showed in the 11th Chapter of
this Book. A man's wit should serve rather for a Buckler to defend himself by a
handsome reply, than a Sword to wound others, though with never so facetious a
Reproach; remembering, that a word cuts deeper than a sharper weapon, and the
wound it makes is longer in curing. A sudden blow is the effect of an
inconsiderate Passion; but a disgraceful Speech, is the result of a low and
base esteem settled of the party in your Heart: Therefore nothing blows up
Anger into mischief, like Bitterness of words, especially if they be aculeate
and proper; for communia maledicta are little resented. No sharp expressions
are so much allowed of, as smart Repartees, which being both ex tempore, and on
the defensive part, are not only pardonable, but commendable: wherefore all
applauded that Nobleman, who being given the Lie by a Physician, told him he
had rather take that of him, than Physic. I must confess there is nothing for
the which I have a greater aversion, than foul words, in so much that I can
sooner Study with twenty Drums beating about my ears, than with two people a
Scolding; for not only the noise, but also the curiosity to hear what they say,
too much commands my attention, and that out of an opinion I have, that there
is not so much Truth spoken any where, as at Billinsgate, when the
Orangewenches call one another Whore, Thief, etc. It Is the same reason induces
me to peruse those Polemical Books, which are written in a more refined
Billinsgate Dialect, such as the Friendly Debate its several Parts, the Books
in Answer to Mr. Hobbs, Marvel's and Parker's several Contests, as the
Rehearsal Transposed, etc. in all which, an impartial Reader may discover the
several Rogueries (if there be any) of each Sect; whose Pastors (though all
Christians) agree in no one Article so Catholically, as in that of paying them
Tithes. We have a saying, That when Knaves fall out, honest men come to their
Goods; and so likewise in these clamorous and verbal accusations, when one Sect
upbraids another Folly, a wise man discerning the Folly of both, comes to the
knowledge of Truth.

CHAP. XVI. Of a huge Lyoness slain by Huntsmen, and of eight Whelps found in
her Womb; also what is reported concerning the Birth of Lions: Likewise
Apollonius's Prediction from the Lyoness and her Whelps: Also of the eight
Birds and their Dam that were devoured by a Dragon in Aulis.
THey had not traveled above twenty Furlongs, before they light on a Lyoness
slain in hunting; the Beast was of so vast a proportion, as they had never seen
before. There was a great Outcry of [1] Huntsmen about her, as well as of
others, who from the neighboring Villages stockt in, as seeing some wonderful
thing in the Beast: And there was indeed a strange thing; for her Belly being
ripped open, they found eight Whelps in her Womb. Now it is reported, that a [2]
Lioness brings forth in six months, and that but thrice in all her life: At
the first time, three Whelps; at the second, two; and at the third, one; which
last is (I suppose) more big and fierce than ordinary. For we must not give
credit to Pliny, and Herodotus.
them who say, that when the Whelps are grown to perfection, they tear the Womb
of their Dam, and so come forth: for that which does breed, and that which is
bred, seem naturally to be serviceable to one another, for the conservation of
their kind. Apollonius therefore casting his eyes upon the Beast, and
withholding his speech a long time, at last said, O Damis, the time of our
sojourning with the King will be a year and eight months; for neither will he
let us go sooner, neither will it be easy for us to depart sooner: and this I
conjecture from the number of the Whelps, each of which signifies a month, and
the Lyoness her self a whole year; for perfect things are to be compared with
things that are perfect. But what will the [3] Sparrows in Homer say to this,
(answered Damis) whom, being eight in number, the Dragon devoured, taking also
the Dam for the ninth? which [4] Calchas interpreted to signify the nine years
that Troy should be besieged. Look to it therefore, lest (according to the
determination of Homer and Calchas) our residence be prolonged for nine years.
Whereunto Apollonius replied, Homer did rightly compare the eight Birds when
they were hatched unto years; but why therefore should I liken unto years such
unperfect Beasts as were not yet born, and perhaps would never have been born?
for such things as thwart the course of Nature, are either never brought forth,
or if they be, do soon perish. But confide in what I have said, and let us be
upon the march, making hereafter our prayers to the Gods, who show us these
things.

Illustrations on Chap. 16.
[1] HVntsmen: That Hunting is a Princely Recreation, we find by the Testimony
of Cyrus, Alexander, and all other Princes, both ancient and modern, who have
used it. Also that this Pastime is of great use and advantage to all Princes
that follow it, we have the judgment of that wise Florentine, Machiavil, who
says, (in his Prince, chapter 14.) A Prince ought to inure himself to Sports, and
by Hunting, Hawking, or such like Recreations, accustom his Body to hardship,
hunger, and thirst; also at the same time inform himself of the Coasts and
Situation of the Country, etc. Hunting (says a modern Author) is a Recreation
commendable not only for Kings and Princes, but likewise for private Gentlemen:
And as it is a noble and healthy Pastime, so it is a thing which has been
highly prized in all Ages; for that it trains up youth to the use of manly
Exercises in their riper age, being encouraged thereto by the pleasure they
take in pursuing either the generous Lion, the stately red or fallow Deer, the
wild Boar, the cunning Otter, the crafty Fox, or the fearful Hare. This
Exercise neither remits the mind to sloth, softness, or effeminacy, nor (if
used with moderation) does it yet harden it to inhumanity. It is no small
advantage to be inured to bear hunger, thirst, and weariness, from our
Childhood; to take up a timely habit of quitting ones Bed early; and loving to
sit well and safe upon a Horse. What innocent and natural delights are they,
when we see the day breaking forth with those Blushes and Roses, which Poets
and writers of Romances only paint, but the Huntsman truly courts? When he
hears the chirping of small Birds pearching their dewy boughs? When he draws
in the fragrancy and coolness of the Air? How jolly is his spirit, when he
suffers it to be transported with the winding of Horns, and noise of Hounds,
which leap up and play round about him? Nothing does more recreate the Mind,
strengthen the Limbs, whet the Stomach, and clear up the Spirit when it is
heavy, dull, and overcast with gloomy cares, than Hunting. Mr. Osborn is an
enemy to this Sport, who from Sir Philip Sidney's example, next to Hunting
likes Hawking the worst. As also the learned Cornelius Agrippa, who (in his
Satirical Invectives) says, Hunting is a most detestable Recreation, a vain
Exercise, unprosperous and unhappy Sport, with so much labor and watching
night and day to rage and make War against the poor Beasts; a Pastime cruel,
and altogether tragical, chiefly delighting in blood and death. And therefore
from the beginning it was ever esteemed the chief Exercise of the worst of men;
for Cain, Lamech, Nimrod, Esau, and Ishmael, are reported in Scripture to be
mighty Hunters: Nor do we read of any one in the New Testament that was given
to Hunting; nor of any Nations that were greatly addicted to that Sport, unless
the Ishmaelites, Idumeans, and other people that did not know God. Hunting was
the first original of Tyranny, which cannot find a fitter Author, than such an
one, as by continual sporting himself in Blood and Murder, has learned to
despise God and Nature. The Persian Kings however esteemed it as an imitation
of warlike Exercises: For Hunting has in it self something fierce and cruel,
while the poor Beast overcome at length by the Dogs, becomes a spectacle of
delight, in having its blood shed, and bowels torn out; at which the barbarous
Hunter laughs, whilst the foe Beast routed with an Army of Dogs, or entangled
in a Toil, is carried home by the triumphant Huntsman, with a great troop at
his heels, where the fatal prey is cut up in bloody terms of Art, other than
which it is not lawful to use. A strange madness of such kind of men, where
they themselves casting off their humanity, become Beasts, when by perverting
of their manners, like Acteon, they are changed into irrational Creatures. Now
the Inventers of this fatal Exercise are said to be the Thebans, a Nation
famous for Fraud, Theft, Perjury, and Incest; from whence the practice thereof
was transmitted to the Phrygians, a Nation equally abominable, foolish and
vain, which therefore the Athenians and Lacedaemonians had in great contempt.
Afterward when the Athenians had repealed their Law against Hunting, and that
the exercise was admitted publicly among 'em, then was the City of Athens
first taken; which makes me wonder to find Hunting so much commended by Plato
Prince of the Academicks; unless the Event, honesty of the Invention, or
Necessity should be the occasions of its commendations: Thus Meleager slew the
Caledonian Boar, not for his own pleasure, but to free his Country from a
common mischief: and so likewise Romulus hunted Deer, not for pleasure sake,
but to get food; Agrip. Van. chapter 77. Thus much Agrippa produces against
Hunting, which in my opinion he did, rather to show his wit in inveighing
against that which is generally approved of, than for any other reason. I have
my self been sometimes Master of a Pack of Hounds, and although I must
acknowledge that had its inconveniences, (which all other things have) yet the
^^od does far exceed the evil of it; and the only thing which makes this
exercise so lit^^^ esteemed of in Books, is, for that the Learned (who are the
chief Authors of our public Writings) have seldom had leisure to be acquainted
with this Recreation. As for my self, (who profess not to be one of those, and
who never laid Pen to Paper, but for want of something else to do) I have ever
found the advantage of Hunting, far to exceed the inconveniences of it: it is
true, the expense and ill company may in some measure be objected, yet a
prudent man may so manage himself, as not to be incommoded with either. Rising
early is troublesome, but yet it is wholesome; and, provided the young Bride
suffers not for it, ( -- manet sub Jove frigido
Venator tenerae conjugis immemor.
Hor. lib. 1. Od. 1.) not to be discommended. A speculative man, may observe in
Hunting many things not unworthy his contemplation: as the natural instinct of
Enmity and Cunning, whereby one Beast (being as it were confederate with Man,
by whom he is maintained) serves him in his designs upon others: The perfect
scent and smell of the Hound, who never leaves it, but follows it through
innumerable changes and varieties, even over the Water, and into the very
Earth. Again, how soon will the Hound fix his eye on the best and fattest Buck
of the Herd, single him out, and follow only him through a whole Herd of Rascal
Deer, without changing, and not leaving him till he kills him. The wonderful
knowledge of Dogs, who coming to three several ways, shall try two of them,
when not finding the scent there, shall betake themselves to the third, without
laying their Noses to the ground: as if they argued within themselves, since he
is not here, nor here, he must be there. Moreover, the docibleness of Dogs is
as admirable as their understanding; for as a right Huntsman knows the Language
of his Hounds, so do they know his: also the meaning of their own kind, as
perfectly as we can distinguish the Voices of our Friends and Acquaintance,
from Strangers. When an old Stanch Dog cries it, how will all the others run in
to him; whereas if a young Whelp that is newly entered does the like, the
others will take no notice of it. Again, how satisfied is a curious mind to
observe the Game fly before him, and after it has withdrawn it self from
sight, to see the whole Line where it has pass'd-over, with all the doublings
and cross-work which the amazed Beast has made, recovered again, by the
intelligence of the Dogs. Neither is it less curious to observe the several
passions of the Huntsmen, when one for singling a ^at Buck out of the Herd,
values himself upon his Horsmanship; another for closing in with the Deer when
he is at Bay, for his Valor in saving the Hounds; a third, by unkennelling a
Fox in a brake of Bushes, tells you but for him you had gone without sport that
day; a fourth, by hunting the Foyl, boasts that you had lost the Hare if he had
not hollowed her; a fifth, to show his great learning in finding a Hare,
reproves you for not riding abreast, and at an equal distance; then the
Huntsman, with his green Coat, and that by his side which belongs to many a
greater persons head, shows his extraordinary skill, in reproving you with much
violence for riding upon the Dog^; as also having rated a Dog, tells you they
had gone away with a wrong Game, had not he rid hard for it. Neither are all
these several humors and passions of the Huntsmen more diverting to observe,
than the pleasant relations they give of their Pastime, when the Ceremony being
over, they retire to some Country-Alehouse, to debauch in Cheese and Ale; there
you shall hear how Iowler led it in such a Field, how Tomboy cried it in such a
Wood, how Boman recovered it in such a Lane, and how Rockwood hit it off at
such a Path; as also how boldly such a man (crying Neck or nothing) took such a
Gate, Hedge, or Ditch; how successfully another headed the Game from the Wood
in such a place, etc. All which repetitions must be highly diverting even to
the most wise observer, who from thence may reflect on the weakness of man's
Passions, when each one stands up for the honor of his Favorite Dog, with no
less heat and zeal then for his Religion, nay then for his Mistress: so that
all these things considered, Hunting (when used with moderation and discretion)
is a very innocent and commendable Recreation. Now the sort of Hunting which
our Author here mentions, is that of Hunting the Lion: Pliny tells us, that
they used to hunt him with Dogs, and that the Huntsmen rid armed with Darts,
wherewith when they had an opportunity they wounded him, and then the Dogs
plucked him down. Also speaking of the Generosity of this Creature, he says,
tha^ be there never so many Hounds and Hunters following after him, so long as
he is in the open Plains where he may be seen, he seems to contemn both Dog and
Man; retiring with honor, and sometimes making head at them: but having once
gained the Woods and Thickets out of their sight, he then skuds away, and makes
what haste he can to save his Life by his flight; as knowing full well, that
the Trees and Bushes conceal the dishonor of his Retreat. The same Author
likewise reports, that the way of taking them in old time was by Pit-falls; but
that in the Emperor Claudius's time, a Getulian Shepherd taught the Romans
another manner of catching them, which seemed at first very incredible; it was
by throwing any Mantle or Covering over his head, and that his eyes being
covered, his Spirit and Strength failed him, in so much that you might seize
him, fetter him, or do what you pleased with him. Pliny lib. 8. chapter 16.

[2] It is reported that a Lioness brings forth, etc. Herodotus writes,
(what our Author here mentions as Fabulous) that the young Lions in their Dams
Bellies, tear their way out with their Claws; as also that a Lioness brings
forth but one in all her life time. To which the Fable of Aesop alludes, where
the Lioness being upbraided by the Fox for bringing forth but one Whelp in her
whole life, replies, It is true, but that is a Lion. Solinus and Aristotle
write, that Lions have five young ones the first Litter, four the second, three
the third, two the fourth, and one the last, all which is in the space of five
years, and after that, bears no more: but this doubt, says Camerarius, (
Medit. Hist. par. 1. chapter 22.) is now cleared, for that in Parks and Chases of
Lions belonging to the Princes of Germany, the Lioness brings forth young
oftentimes, without any certainty of Number or Time. Now concerning the Nature
and great Courage of this Beast, we read many wonderful and almost incredible
things. The Whelps at first (says Pliny, lib. 8. chapter 16.) are without shape,
like small Gobbets of flesh, no bigger than Weasels; for the two first months
they stir not at all, and when six months old they can hardly go. Africa
breedoth the most and the greatest Lions; now the colder the Climate is, the
gentler they be: Lions are the most lustful of all other Creatures, and in time
of their coupling, eight or ten will follow one Female, whereupon arise very
terrible and bloody Battles among them. The Lion knows by the scent and smell
of her Pard, when the Lioness has played false with him, and layn with
another, for the which (if he discovers it) he chastizes her very severely:
whereupon, after she has jilted him in that manner, she either goes to the
Water, and washes away the rank savor of the Pard, or else keeps some
distance off from the Lion, that he might not smell her. They engender
backward, and ^o does the Camel, Elephant, and Tiger. Their Nature is highly
generous and grateful; for their Generosity makes them spare Women rather than
Men, and prey not at all on Infants, unless in case of extreme hunger; and
albeit the Lion be a fierce and cruel Beast, yet is he said to show great
clemency to the humble* and such as submissively prostrate themselves before
him. They naturally are apt to set upon the best man in the company, as we see
by the Lion that set upon Alexander himself, not meddling with Lys^machus, or
any other of the company* Quint. Curt. lib. 8. The Lioness or she Lion is the
fiercest, and always the most cruel. Their Tail is a token of their inward
meaning; for it it stirs not, he is gentle and peaceable; but moving, he is
angry. These Beasts will keep revenge in mind a long while, either against Man
or Beast that hurt them; witness the memorable example in the Story of Iuba,
King of Mauritania; for this King having in his Train a young Gentleman of
Quality, that marched with his Army by the Deserts of Africa, this Gentleman
meeting in his Journey with a Lion, wounded him with an Arrow; whereupon the
Lion laying wait for his return, did among so many several Troops pick out this
very man, and to^e him in pieces, notwithstanding all possible means were used
to save him. In like manner, they will as long be mindful of a Benefit, and do
their best to express their gratitude: as is famous by those Stories of Mentor
the Syracusian, Androdus the Roman Slave, and Helpis the Samian; which are thus
related in History. First, As for Mentor the Syracusian, he happening in Syria
to meet with a Lion, who in an humble manner seemed to fawn and lie down before
him, was very much surpised thereat, and began to fly away from him; but the
Beast still pursuing, and in a loving manner licking the very tracks of his
Feet, Mentor looking back upon him, espied a great Wound and Swelling in the
Lion's Foot; whereupon taking courage, and gently lifting up the Beast's Foot,
he gave him great ease, by plucking out a Splinter of Wood that had gotten into
it, and occasioned the Sore; for the which the Lion expressed much thanks, by
his gentle and innocent carriage toward him. Pliny, lib. 8. chapter 16. Secondly,
Concerning Androdus, he flying from his Master, for some hard usage that he had
received at his hands, by chance happened to take up his Lodging in a Cave
which (unknown to him) was a Lion's Den; where having been lodged some time, a
little before night the Lion came in from hunting, and having gotten an Hurt
upon his Foot, he no sooner espied the trembling man, but going gently to him,
he stretched forth his Foot, and made moan, as though he desired help. The poor
Slave at the first expected nothing but death, till at last perceiving what the
matter was, he took the Lion by his Paw, searched the Wound, pulled out a
Thorn, bound up his Foot, and gave him ease; which kind office being performed,
was first of all requited with a daily portion of provision which the Lion
brought in for his Guest, and the poor helpless Slave roasted in the Sun as
well as he could, and then eat it. But being weary of this kind of Diet, as
well as of his solitary Life, he one day when his Host was gone abroad to
forage, stole away; for whose absence the Lion (as himself could hear) made
great mourning and lamentation: Now this man was no sooner parted from
Charybdis, but he fell into Scylla, and was apprehended by some whom his Master
had sent to seek him, whereupon he was condemned to be torn in pieces by wild
Beasts in the Amphitheater. But it happened that in the interim this very Lion
was likewise taken; who being brought into the Theater, greedily devoured such
Malefactors as were thrown to him, till at last his old Guest Androdus coming
to suffer in his turn, the Beast forgot his fury, and turned it into fawning,
whereby the poor Slave perceived what Lion it was, and thereupon gathered up
his spirits, renewing again his acquaintance with his former Friend, even to
the admiration of all spectators: Whereupon the whole matter being made known
and related to Caesar, he had not only pardon for his Life, but the Lion also
was bestowed upon him; so that he ever after got his livelihood by leading him
up and down, and showing him; which made the people wherever he came cry out,
Hic est Leo Hospes Hominis; Hic est Homo Medicus Leonis: Here goes the Lion
which was the Man's Host; and there is the Man who was the Lion's Physician.
This Story is related both by Appian, who was an Eyewitness of it, also by
Aelian, and Aulus Gellius, in his Noct. Attic. lib. 5. chapter 14. The third
Instance of this nature, is that of Helpis the Samian; who upon a certain Coast
of Africa, having drawn out a Bone that stuck in a Lion's Throat, was in
recompense of that Cure, fed and maintained by the Lion's hunting, so long as
his Ship lay at Anchor on that Shore. Pliny. lib. 8. chapter 16. And this may
suffice to show the generous Nature of this Beast; of which you may read at
large in Pliny, Leo Africanus, Camerarius, and Gesnerus. The male Lion uses
not to feed with the female, but either of them apart by themselves. Aelian
(Var. hist. lib. 1.) writes, that when a Lion is sick, nothing will cure him
but to eat an Ape. And some say, that a Lion trembles at the crowing of a Cock;
but Dr. Hakewill tells us, that King James upon trial found this to be
fabulous. Apol. for Provid. lib. 1.

3. The Sparrows in Homer, etc. This passage, according as Philostratus here
cites it, is in the second Book of his Iliads thus described: (...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)*
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)*
(...),
(...);
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Thus rendered by the Translator: Illic apparuit magnum signum, draco dorso
sanguine us,
Horribilis quem ipse Olympius misit in Lucem,
Quum ex altari prosiliisset ad Platanum porrexit:
Ibi erant Passeris pulli, parvi filii
Ramo in extremo sub foliis volitantes,
Octo: sed matter nona erat, quae peperit filios.
Ibi ille hos miserabiliter comedit stridentes:
Matter autem circumvolabat lugens dilectos filios:
Hanc circum actus ala pre^endit circum-clamantem.
Sed post quam filios devoravit passeris and ipsam,
Hunc quidem clarum fecit Deus qui ostendit:
L^pidem enim ipsum fecit Saturni filius versuti.
Nos autem stantes admirabamur quod factum erat:
Vt igitur terribilia portenta deorum subiere hecatombas:
Calchas autem statim postea vaticinans dixit,
Cur multi facti estis comati Achivi?
Nobis quidem hoc ostendit signum magnum prudens Jupiter;
Serum, quod tarde persicitur, cujus gloria nunquam peribit.
Vt hic filios devoravit passeris, and ipsam,
Octo, sed matter nona erat, quae peperit filios:
Sic nos tot annos bellabimus hic:
Decimo autem civitatem capiemus Lativiam.
Ille sic interprebatur: haec jam nunc omnia perficiuntur:
Hom. Il. 2:

[4] Calchas interpreted: This Calchas, a Grecian, (the Son of Thestor, and
therefore called by the Poets Thestorides) was a wise and experienced
Soothsayer, whose counsel the Greeks followed in all their Exploits against the
Trojans. When the Grecian Navy was detained in Aulis by tempestuous Weather,
occasioned (as they feigned) through the indignation of Diana, he taught Agam
emnon away how to pacify that Goddess. Also from the forementioned Prediction
of the Sparrows, he showed them that the Siege of Troy would last ten years
before the City would be ta^en* Afterward the Pestilence raging amongst the
Army, he showed them how to stop it, by appeasing the anger of Apollo, in
sending home Hyppodamia to her Father Chryses, who was one of Apollo's Priests;
and from whom Agamemnon had taken her by violence, to revenge himself upon
Achilles. This Calcha^ is said to have died for grief, in that he was overcome
by Mopsus in his own Art of Divination: for that after the taking of Troy, he
traveling with Amphilochus toward Colophus, (a City of Greece) out of a
desire to visit the Temple of Apollo* happened to fall into the company of one
Mopsus, a famous Augur; who questioning Calchas how many Figs such a wild
Fig Tree might bring forth, he stood mute, as not being able to give him an
Answer; whereas Mopsus, without any hesitation, told him the certain number,
not miscounting one; which is thus mentioned in Hesiod: (...)
(...);
Quos grossos haec ficus habet miror, licet illa
Parva sit: an numerum posses mihi dicere eorum?
Respondit autem illo tacente: (...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
Mill quidem decies numero: mensura medimni est.
At superest unus, quod non percurrere posses.
Sic ait, est numerus vere hinc compertus eorum.
Calchanti aeterno clausit mors lumina somno.
Concerning this, see Hom. Iliad. lib. 1. Virgil. Aen. lib. 1. Hesiod. and
Natalis Comes Mythol.

CHAP. XVII. The Dream of Apollonius in Cissia, with the Interpretation
thereof. Also the History of the Eretrians; and the Epistle of Apollonius to
the Clazomenian Sophister. Likewise how the Eretrians came out of Euboea into
Media; and what Apollonius said whilst he repaired their Sepulchers: together
with his Request to the King in behalf of the Eretrians.
BEing now come into the Country of [1] Cissia, and near unto Babylon, he
received from God in a dream a Vision to this purpose: Certain Fishes being
driven ashore, and lying panting on the ground, seemed to complain like Men,
lamenting that they had come from their proper habitation They also seemed to
implore a Dolphin, swimming hard by the Land, to help them, being as fit
objects of pity, as men bemoaning themselves in a strange Country. Now
Apollonius being nothing terrified at this Vision, considered with himself what
it might signify. Nevertheless, intending to frighten Damis, for as much as he
knew him to be timorous, he related the Vision to him, and made as though he
himself was afraid of what he had seen, as ominous. Whereupon Damis, as if he
had seen the same things himself, cried out, and dissuaded Apollonius from
going any farther; saying, Let us beware lest we our selves (like the Fishes)
being cast out from our own Country, should suffer much hardship, and utter
many sad complaints in a Foreign Land, when falling into inextricable distress,
should at length extend our suppliant hands to some King or Potentate, who
might slight us, as the Dolphin did the Fishes. Whereat Apollonius smiling,
said, Tou are no right Philosopher, being afraid of such things as these:
therefore [2] I will turn Prophet, and explain what this dream portends. The
[3] Eretrians inhabit this Country called Cissia, being formerly transplanted
by [4] Darius out of [5] Euboea into these parts, almost 500 years ago: And
these, like the Fishes in the dream, are said to lament and mourn at their
Captivity, being all (as it were) taken in a Net; Therefore the Gods seem to
enjoin me, in as much as I am come into these parts, to take care of them so
far as I am able. And perhaps the Souls of those Greeks who lost their Lives in
these parts, may by a certain destiny have drawn me hither for the benefit of
the Country. Wherefore let us a little go aside out of our way, and enquire for
that Well, by which they only inhabit: For they say it is mixed with Bitumen,
Water, and Oil; so that if any one drawing Liquor from thence, pours out the
same, they separate and may be discerned severally. Now that Apollonius came
into Cissia, he himself testifies in his Letter to the [6] Clazomenian [7]
Sophist: For Apollonius was so kind and desirous of commendation, that so soon
as he had seen this, he gave an account thereof to the Sophist, as also what he
had done for the sake of the Inhabitants, exhorting him through the whole
Epistle to take pity of the Eretrians, and that when ever it happened that he
spoke in their behalf, he would not forbear to shed tears for them. And
herewith agrees that which Damis wrote concerning the Eretrians; for they
dwell in the Kingdom of the Medes, not farther from Babylon then an able
Footman can travel in one day. The Country has no Cities, for Cissia is all
Villages; There are also a sort of the [8] Nomades dwelling amongst them, who
live almost continually on Horseback: but the Village of the Eretrians is
situated in the middle of the Country, encompassed with Ditches cut out of the
Rivers, which they are said to have cast up about the Town instead of Walls, to
secure them from the incursion of Barbarians. The Country is full of Bituminous
Waters, wherefore Plants do not ^ell prosper there; neither are the Inhabitants
long-lived: for Waters tainted with Bitumen, infect the Entrails. They are
nourished chiefly by a certain Hill near the Village, which being raised up
above the other Land, they sow, and esteem good Ground. The Natives report they
have heard how above 780 of the Eretrians were taken Prisoners, not being all
fit to bear Arms, also for that amongst them there were Women, Old men, and I
suppose some Children: for a great part of the Eretrians had fled to [9]
Caphareus, and the mountainous parts of Euboea; but about 400 men, and 10
women, made their escape in Ships; whereas the rest (beginning from Ionia and
Lydia) did all perish, being driven into the upper parts. But their Hill giving
them opportunity for the digging of Stone, and many of them being skilful in
the hewing of Stones, they erected Temples after the Greek fashion, together
with a [10] Forum, suitable to the condition of the place. They likewise set up
Altars, two to Darius, one to [11] Xerxes, and several to [12] Daridaeus. They
lived after their Captivity unto the time of Daridaeus, above 88 years. They
write their Letters, as also the inscriptions upon their ancient Monuments, in
Greek Letters, which Epitaphs seldom contain any more than this, Here lies
such a one, the Son of such a one: The Letters are Greek, but they say they
never saw such before. They reported likewise that Ships were engraven on the
Tombs, according as every one had lived in Euboea, either as Ferryman, or
Fisher for Purple, or of some other Seafaring employment. They also relate,
that there is an Elegy written upon the Sepulcher of the Mariners and Pilots:
We who the Aegean Sea did coast 'ere while,
Lie now entombed in the midst of Ecbatane:
Farewell Eretria, our once famous Soil,
Farewell to Neighboring Athens, and the Main.
Furthermore Damis says, that Apollonius with his own hands repaired and shut
up those Sepulchers which were decayed; also that he made such Libations and
Offerings as were accustomed, excepting that he would kill nothing, nor make
any expiation. That he shed Tears, and being filled with an inward impulse,
expressed himself thus: O ye Eretrians, who were brought hither by the
appointment of Fortune, though ye be far removed from your Native Country, yet
wanted ye not Burial: whereas those that cast you hither, perished about your
Island, lying ten years after you Unburied; for the Gods declare what has been
done in hollow Euboea. Again, Apollonius in the end of the Epistle which he
wrote to the Sophist, says, I being yet but a young man, have nevertheless
taken care of your Eretrians, and have afforded them what help I was able, both
to the living and to the dead. But in what manner did he assist the Living?
even thus: When the Eretrians had sown the Hill, (whereof I spoke before) the
Barbarians adjacent coming upon them about Harvest time, used to prey upon the
ripe Corn: whereby the Eretrians were likely to perish with hunger, whilst they
had labored for other men: Thereupon Apollonius made a good motion to the King
when he came into his presence, that he would grant to the Eretrians the sole
use of the Hill.

Illustrations on Chap. 17.
[1] CIssia; Strabo (lib. 15.) gives this name to all the Country of Susa,
deriving its name from Aeschylus the Mother of Memnon; who was called Cissia.
Yet nevertheless that part of Susa wherein is the Persian Gulf, and part of
the Red Sea, may most properly be called Cissia, or Cussia, and which at
present is named Chusistan.

[2] I will turn Prophet, and explain what this Dream portends;
Notwithstanding, as St. Paul writes, Humane wisdom is Foolishness before God,
yet the impudence of some is so great, that they will presume to penetrate into
the most secret Councils of Heaven: Nor can any thing less than, I am that I
am, delivered by God himself, give a stop to the audacious progress of their
curiosity; for because the Omnipotent Being can inspire whom he pleases with
this Spirit of Prophecy, as we see he really did the Writers of Holy Writ;
therefore upon all occasions, to satisfy our own turns, we set up for an equal
knowledge with them, and from the two Spirits of Impudence and Dishonesty,
assume to our selves the pretended power of expounding Dreams, interpreting
Visions, Predictions of things to come, and the like: from hence arose those
many Prophets among the Heathens, such as Calchas, Mopsus, Firesias, Helenus,
Cassandra, Polybius, Ampharaus, Corinthus, Epimenides, Socrates, Anaximander,
Diotyma, and Galanus the Indian; also the Magi among the Persians, ^rachmans
among the Indians, Gymnosophists among the Aethiopians, Draids among the Gauls,
and Sybils among the Romans: nay and one that lived but the other day, in
comparison of any of these, viz. Nostredame, whose Prophecies of the Firing of
London, and of the Pa^e Kings untimely death, are no whit inferior to any
thing delivered by the Ancients. But with what certainty or credit could these
pretend to Prophecy, when (as Corneli^s Agrippa observes) the Writers of Holy
Writ, notwithstanding they were filled with the Holy Ghost, did sometimes stray
from the Truth; which they did not willingly, but through Humane frailty: Thus
Moses failed in telling the people he would bring them out of Egypt, and carry
them into the Land of Canaan; for though he brought them out of Egypt, yet did
he not bring them into the Land of Promise. Jonas failed in predicting the
destruction of Niniveh within forty days, intended; but delayed. Elijah failed
in foretelling many things to come to pass in the days of Ahab, which yet were
not fulfilled till after his death. Isaiah failed in foretelling the death of
Hezekiah the next day, when his life was prolonged 15 years afterward. Many
other Prophets also failed, and their predictions are found either not to have
come to pass at all, or else to have been suspended. Amongst 400 Prophets of
whom the King of Israel asked counsel concerning the War he made against
Ramoth-Gilead, only Micaiah was a true one. The Prophet that was sent to
Prophecy against the Altar set up by Jeroboam, (though a true Prophet, and that
by two miracles done in his presence appears to be sent from God) was yet
deceived by another Old Prophet, that persuaded him as from the mouth of God,
to eat and drink with him. So that if one Prophet deceive another, what way is
there of knowing the Will of God, but by Reason? The Apostles and Evangelists
also failed: Peter failed, when he was reprehended by St. Paul for telling a
Lie craftily. Matthew also failed, when he wrote, that Christ was not dead till
the Lance had pierced his side. From whence it follows, that all Prophets and
Writers in some things seem to fail and err, according to the Scripture which
faith, all men are Liars. Now the occasion of this failing may be, for that the
Holy Spirit did sometimes leave them: This Spirit was sometimes with Moses, but
when he struck the Rock, it was departed; it was with Aaron, but departed when
he made the Calf; it was with Miraim their Sister, but not when she murmured
against Moses; and so likewise was it with Saul, David, Solomon, Isaiah, etc.
but rested not constantly with them. Neither are Prophets always Prophets, or
Seers, or Foretellers of things to come; nor is Prophecy a continual habit, but
a Gift, Passion, or transient Spirit. The Prophecies in the Old Testament
concerning the coming of a Messiah, are certainly more exactly and truly
fulfilled in the Birth, Life, and Death of our Savior Christ, than ever any
Prophecies or Predictions were: yet the Jews do most impiously object against
them. Some of their Manuscripts I have now by me, amongst which there is one of
so remarkable a subject, that I thought fitting here to insert it; it being a
Dialogue between a Turk and a Jew, where the Turk (invading that Province which
of right belongs only to the Christians) does in a very extravagant manner
attempt to prove his Prophet Mahomet to be the true and only Messiah prophesied
of in the Old Testament, whilst the Jew opposes it out of the same, as follows.

Turk. The last time we discoursed together upon Religion, I remember you put a
Question to me, What I thought of the coming of the Messiah? whereupon my
Answer was, That I thought him already come.


Jew. You did so; and I likewise call to mind, how that at the same time I
asked you, In whom that Prophecy was fulfilled? and you replied, In Mahomet:
after which we were immediately interrupted, therefore now proceed with your
Argument.


Turk. The chief Arguments I shall produce, are the ancient Hebrew Prophecies,
contained in the Old Testament. And of them, we will first begin with that of
Deuteronomy. 13.4. where Moses bids them hearken unto the Prophet whom the Lord their
God should raise up unto them from amongst their Brethren: whereby Mahomet
seems to be pointed at, according to my apprehension.


Jew. I cannot allow of that: For first, although it is a sin not to hearken to
God's voice, yet does it not therefore follow, that they were to listen to
every one that pretended himself a Prophet, since Experience taught, that there
arose up many false Prophets amongst them. Secondly, To believe that Moses
promised Mahomet, as the only Prophet to whom they should hearken, is without
any grounds from Moses's words, and rather a subversion of them, as will
appear, if we consider the end for which Moses said, a new Prophet would come;
also if we examine the Directions he gave them to know if the Prophet spoke in
the Lord's Name, or presumptuously. First, For the end of this Prophet's
coming, Moses knowing they desired God himself might not speak to them, told
them, that God would raise up a Prophet, putting his words into his mouth, and
he shall speak to you, viz. direct you in the right way, and tell you of your
sins. Secondly, This Prophet should be from among them, which we are no where
told that Mahomet was; and if (as some Arabic Historians write) his Mother was
a Jew, yet that does not argue his Father of the same Tribe, since ever after
the Captivity the Israelites married amongst Strangers. Thirdly, Moses promised
his people to receive great peace and plenty from the coming of this Prophet,
whereupon the Christians so much startle us, when they tell us of Augustus's
peaceable Reign during Christ's abode upon Earth; but for Mahomet, his Doctrine
is supported only by the Sword; also there were never more Frauds, Thefts,
Wars, Massacres, Murders, and Bloodshed, known in the World, than since the
first planting of the Mah^metan Religion: So as Moses seemed rather to point at
those Prophets which were raised unto our Forefathers, when they came into the
Land and possessed it, than at your Prophet Mahomet.


Turk. If Murder and Bloodshed are such heavy Crimes, what made you crucify
that good and holy man Christ Jesus?


Jew. Because we have a Law amongst us which says, that if any Prophet teaches
contrary to that Covenant which God has made with us at Mount Sinai, that
Prophet shall be stoned to death, for endeavoring to withdraw them from the
Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 13. Wherefore the Jews thought to stone Jesus for
Blasphemy, that he being a Man made himself God, Job. 10.33. for, said they, we
have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die, in that he made himself the Son of
God, Job. 18 7.


Turk. We have the same Law amongst us; but what made you falsely accuse him
before Pilate for speaking against Caesar, whereof he was innocent?


Jew. Because being under the Roman Power, and so unable to exercise our own
Government, we could not take away his life for that other offense committed
against our Religion, and therefore made use of this device.


Turk. A pretty Religion indeed, which (like Popery) regards only the directing
your intentions; so that if the end be good, you care not for the means, though
you wade through innocent Blood to attain it. But to proceed. The Lord God in
making a new Covenant, has destroyed the old; wherefore though ye were to
hearken to Moses, and the Covenants which God made with him at Mount Sinai, so
long as ye lived in the Land God gave you to possess; yet notwithstanding you
had broken that Covenant, and the Prophet had said in the Name of the Lord, he
would make a new Covenant with you, not according to that which he had made
with your Fathers; and therefore you are now to hearken and walk according to
the new, and not to the old; which new I conceive to be that Covenant which the
Lord made by his Prophet Mahomet.


Jew. To this we answer, by considering, 1. With whom the Lord will make this
new Covenant. 2 The Covenant it self. 3. The manner of it. And 4. the time when
it was made. But first, with whom the Lord will make this new Covenant. The
Prophet Jeremy says, chapter 31. v. 31. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, and
I will make a new Covenant, etc. So as here he promises to make a new Covenant
with the house of Israel and Judah, a people to whom he had given his Laws by
the hand of Moses; but they having transgressed those Laws, the Lord had
brought evil upon them, and suffered them to be led away captive out of the
Land which he had given them: but then God raising up his Prophet Jeremiah, at
the time when he did these things to his people, it pleased the Lord to reveal
unto Jeremiah their Return after 70 years, chapter 29. So as this Prophecy seems
only to point at the new Covenant which the Lord designed to make with them,
after their Return from their 70 years Captivity, Ier. 30.3. Secondly, By
considering the Covenant it self, which was, that God would write his Laws in
their hearts, that he would give them hearts to know him, that they should be
his people, and he would be their God; and this is the Covenant it self which
the Prophet foretold the Lord would make with his people after their Return
from Captivity. Thirdly, By considering the manner and not the matter of this
new Covenant, which consists in giving them hearts capable to receive this Law,
eyes to see it, and ears to hear it, so that he never made them fitting to
receive it till now. The 4th and last thing is to consider the time when the
Lord would make this Covenant, which will the better appear, if we observe that
after he had promised to write his Laws in their hearts, he gives this Reason
for it, because I will forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no
more: Now the time when he forgave their iniquities was, when he caused them to
return from their Captivity, as 'ti^ wri^ten, chapter 33.7. chapter 50.20. Ez^k. 36.25.
It was then therefore that the Prophet said, the Lord would make his new
Covenant with them, and write his Laws in their hearts. From hence we may
conclude, that this Prophecy makes no promise of a new Law, but only of new
hearts to receive their old Law, which Prophecy also seems to have been
fulfilled after their Return from Captivity, and so to have no tendency either
to Mahomet, or his Alcoran.


Turk. Did not the Jews look for a Messiah, or new Prophet, and did not Moses
write of him?


Jew. Some of them did look for a Deliverer, or Savior, such an one as God had
formerly raised up to deliver them out of the hands of their enemies and
destr^yers, to restore to them their Kingdom again, as they thought their
Forefathers and Prophets had testified. Fear thou not, O my servant Israel, for
I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the Land of their Captivity, and
Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and in quie^, and none shall make him
afraid. Though I make a full end of all Nations whither I have scattered thee,
yet will I not make a full end of thee, Jer. chapter 30. v. 10, 11. For I will
restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord,
because they call thee an Outcast, v. 17. So that with the Prophet to be here
raised, was to save them from their enemies, that they being delivered, might
serve him upon earth without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days
of their life. Also those Prophesies of Jeremiah do hold forth, that God would
raise up to David a righteous Branch, and that a King should reign and prosper,
executing justice on the earth, etc. and in his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel dwell safely. None of which was fulfilled in Mahomet, but all of it was
accomplished, when God caused them to return from their Captivity in Babylon
into their own Land; for it is said in the next Verse, The days come, says the
Lord, that they shall no more say, the Lord lives which brought up, etc. but
which led the seed of Ia^ob out of the North Country, and from all the
Countries whither I had driven them, and shall dwell in their own Land. By this
we see, that a Savior and Deliverer they looked for, but such an one as might
deliver them from the hands of their enemies, etc.


Turk. Did not Moses write of him, when he speaks of that enmity which God put
between the Serpent and the Woman's seed, saying, that the Woman's seed should
break the Serpent's head?


Jew. If you think that Prophecy has relation to Mahomet, sure it is very far
fetched; nor would a reasonable man (as I conceive) expound it otherwise, than
that the Serpent should be in subjection to man, and that there should be a
perpetual enmity betwixt them, which should excite the children of men, to
endeavor their destruction wherever they met them. This I conceive to be the
sole intent of that Curse upon the Serpent, and no other; and this likewise we
see daily put in execution. Nevertheless I have known some ingenious men
wonder, why the whole species should be cursed for the Devils assuming their
shape upon himself, which was no act nor error of theirs; however the Lord has
done it, and it is mavelous in our eyes.


Turk. The next Text of Scripture which seems to make for Mahomet, is Genesis
22.17. where in the Oath made to Abraham, when he commanded him to go to the
Land of Canaan, as also Isaac and Jacob, chapter 26.3, 4. chapter 28.13, 14. it is
said, that in their seeds shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; which
words are thought to point at Mahomet: Also when it is said, Genesis 12. that he
should be a blessing, and in him should all the Families of the Earth be
blessed: Again, that Abraham (Genesis 18.18.) should be a great and mighty Nation,
etc. which Prophecy seems to mark out the great and large extent of the
Mohammedan Religion and Empire.


Jew. In the time that Solomon reigned over the house of Israel, was the seed
of Abraham a great and mighty Nation, 1 Kings 3.8, 9. So as then it is probable
this Oath or promise was fulfilled, according to the 72. Psalm. 17. Again, the
same thing was promised to Jacob, as you make it appear, not in his seed only,
but in him and his seed, etc. To which purpose we read, that Laban was blessed
for Jacob's sake; and that the Lord blessed Potiphar's house, and all that he
had, for Ioseph's sake. And indeed did I not think that this promise of the
Nations being blessed in Abraham or his seed, had reference to him or his seed,
as a mighty Nation, I should conclude that it had been fulfilled, when there
came people from all Countries to buy Corn of Joseph. Now what the blessing was
that Abraham's seed should enjoy, see Deuteronomy. 28. from the beginning to the 15th.
Verse; also the 33d. Chapter throughout.


Turk. What say you to that Prophecy in Genesis 49.10. which says, The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, etc. till Judah come, and to him shall the
gathering of the people be? for by Shiloh I understand Mahomet.


Jew. From what ground you can extort that Interpretation, I understand not;
but this I am sure of, that the Table which is said to contain the true
signification of the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek and Latin words, printed in the
year, 1608. as indeed all other Expositors, Englisheth Shiloh, dissolving, or
destruction; and this was Jacob's meaning, viz. that the Government should not
depart from Judah, till dissolving come, that is, Destruction, as Balaam
afterward foretold, Numb. 24 24. for Dissolving and Destruction is there the
same*


Turk. Well Sir, I find you have made it your business to study these points
more than ever I did; therefore not being Book-learned my self, we will (if
please you) adjourn this Dispute till the Afternoon, when I will bring with me
a learned Christian to enter Combat against you, and if you can convert him,
you shall have me into the Bargain. Adieu my dear Rabbi.


Now the Jews (however a credulous people) would never hear a man pretend to
prophecy, but did always require a Sign of him: First, Because in so doing,
they imitated their faithful Father Abraham, who did the like, as we read, Genesis
15. and Gideon Judge. 6. and Hezekiah, 2 King. 20. Secondly, 'Twas the manner of
the Prophets to confirm what they spoke in the Name of the Lord by a Sign,
witness Exodus chapter 4. and Exodus chapter 16.6, 7, 8. the 1. Sam. 10.2, 3, 4. the 1.
King. 13.3. etc. Thus Moses and Aaron said to the Children of Israel; At Even
shall ye know that the Lord has brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and in
the morning shall ye see the glory of the Lord; viz. when the Lord shall give
you in the evening Bread to eat, and in the morning Flesh to the full. And this
I conceive was the reason why the Jews required a Sign, as it is written, Job.
6. when the Jews asked him, What Sign he showed to prove himself to be sent
from God, as the Prophets of old did? saying, Our Fathers did eat Manna in the
Wilderness, etc. To set up for a Prophet, the chief thing necessary is a lively
strong Fancy and Imagination They who have the strongest Imagination, are least
apt to understand things clearly; as on the contrary, they who have more
Understanding, and chiefly esteem that, retain the imaginative power
discreetly, as it were with a Bridle, not to confound the Imagination with the
Intellect: wherefore they who study to find out the wisdom and knowledge of
things Natural and Spiritual, from the Writings of Prophets, are mistaken. All
Prophets have expressed things Spiritual by Corporal, making God like our
selves, knowing this to be more natural to our Imaginations, for that there is
nothing in the Understanding, which is not first in the Senses. Thus we see
Michaias makes God sitting* Daniel makes him an old man clothed with a white
Garment; Moses makes him walk in the Garden in the cool of the Evening, as also
ask Adam, Where art thou? Ezekiel makes God a Friar; Those who were with
Christ, made the Holy Ghost a Dove; The Apostle made it consist of Fiery
Tongues; And last of all St. Paul represents God as a great Light. Spinosa (in
his Ingenious Tractat. Theolog. Politic.) observes, that the Signs given of the
Prophets, were according to the capacity of each particular Prophet, and
therefore they varied in them all, according to their several humors, and
temperament of their Bodies. If the Genius of the Prophet was merry and
cheerful, his Revelations were always of Peace, Victory, and things that
produce Mirth; on the contrary, if he was melancholy and splenatick, he
revealed nothing but Wars, Miseries, Pestilences, Overthrows, and the like.
Also if the Prophet was a man of Elocution, he received the Dictates of God in
an elegant style; and so the contrary, if he was uneloquent. The same Rule may
likewise be observed in their Revelations or Visions: thus if the Prophet had
received a Country Education, his Visions were most of Cows and Oxen; if he
was a Soldier, his Visions were of Armies, Wars, Battles, Sieges, and the
like; if a Courtier, of Princes, Palaces, etc. As we see to the Magi (whose
chief Study is Astrology) was therefore revealed the Nativity of Christ, from
an imagination of a Star arising in the East, Mat. 11. Now to justify the
premises, you may read, that when Moses was angry, God revealed unto him that
dreadful destruction of the Firstborn, Exodus 11.4, 5. When Ieremias was sad,
and troubled with a Taedium vitae* he prophesied* of the Calamity of the Jews.
Also Michaeas never foretold any good to Ahab throughout his whole Life, but
always evil, whereas other more cheerful Prophets told him otherwise, 2 Chronicles.
18.7. Also you may observe how the style of the Prophesies varied, according to
the Eloquence of the Prophet that delivered them, if you compare the ^ough
style of Ezekiel and Amos, with those eloquent Writings of Esaias and Nahum,
and so of the rest. All which being well considered, it will soon appear, that
God had no peculiar style of expressing himself, but only according to the
Learning and Capacity of the Prophet he spoke to.

We find in 1 Kings 22.19, 20, etc. it is said, that Micaiah saw God sitting on
his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing on his right hand and on his
left; and that after debate had concerning Ahab, God sent a Lying Spirit into
the Prophets of Ahab, persuading him to go up to Ramoth Gilead, to the intent
he might fall and perish there. Upon which, I have heard this wicked Syllogism
raised: Whatsoever God commands, is good, just, and fit to be done; but God
commanded a Lying Spirit, in the manner above-recited; ergo, it is good, just,
and fit to be done. Here the Major is unquestionably true; but concerning the
Minor, much may be considered. First, whether Micaiah's single Testimony
concerning this Vision, could bind his Auditors to an undoubted belief thereof,
in a point so unusual that no other History can parallel it. Secondly, that
this his Testimony, for inducing us to believe that God sat on a Throne,
having a right hand and a left, is contrary to the notions we have of Gods
Infinity, even by our Divines own confession. Thirdly, that he sent a Lying
Spirit in the manner aforesaid; since it seems inconsistent not only with his
attribute of Faith, but also of his Goodness. Besides, I conceive my self bound
to believe, that God had many other means to destroy Ahab, then in such an
oblique way as this. I would gladly know therefore, whether the Minor may be
reputed of equal validity and force with the Major, for framing a good
Conclusion to this Syllogism? It may be answered, That we find (in the Book of
Judges, chapter 9.15. and Isa. 19.14.) something to this purpose in the point of
Gods employing wicked Spirits: which also will not seem so strange, if we
consider, that in some cases God may employ them as his Ministers, for the
execution of Justice, as the Prince does the Hangman, for the punishment of
Malefactors. But as concerning the particular of Micaiah's saying, that he saw
God sit on his Throne, and that the Host of Heaven was on his right hand, and
on his left, unless it be taken otherwise than in a Literal sense, I hope I may
(without offense) so far declare my self, as that I should not easily give the
Minor in the balance of Reason at least, an equal poize with the certainty of
the Major, unless our Divines help it out with some Allegorical Interpretation.
Especially when I considered, that the narrative part of Micaiah's Vision (as
was said before) depended only on his single Testimony, and seemed to be
approved of no otherwise, than by one single event in the fall of Ahab, which
in a Battle might yet happen upon many occasions. Others, and particularly the
Adversaries of our Faith, will more boldly object, that Ahab's Prophets being
confident, that the Armies of Judah and Israel when joined together would get
the day, persuaded the King to fight, whilst themselves according to their
usual manner, stayed at home and prayed; and that it was not unlikely that all
things might come to pass as they did, without God's sending a lying Spirit
into the mouths of Ahab's Prophets. And finally, because God had so many
ordinary ways to procure Ahab's distraction, they would say, that it seems
incongruous for the divine Wisdom and Goodness to choose this. For which, and
many other Reasons also, if they rejected not the narrative part as improbable,
they would however not allow it to go in equal balance with the Major.
Nevertheless in this, as in all other controverted points, it were good to
consult our Divines, before any thing be determined: Now the Reason why many
false Prophets have delivered most of their Precepts Aenigmatically and
Parabolically, is either upon the same account as the Heathens did their
Oracles, that they might be expounded several ways, according to several
Interests, and so likely to speak truth one way or the other; or else that some
might get their Living by expounding them, knowing that all who live upon their
Doctrine, will not fail to speak well of the giver of it, as we see by
Mahomet's Priests. Prediction or Prognostication are in a manner the same with
Prophecy, differing only as Credulity and Faith, whereof the former is usually
applied to temporal things, and the latter to things divine. Now
Prognostication is thought by many to be but a happy guess, which from the vast
experience of what is past, directs its Prospect to judge of things to come,
when meeting with the same actions and circumstances, as in former times, (also
well knowing that mankind ever was, is, and will be the same, and subject to
the same Passions) they have reason to expect the like success for the future.
Now of all sorts of Prophesies, those which respect general Things, and remote
Times, are most of all to be suspected: To foretell that such a Kingdom shall
be invaded, or embroyled in Wars, as (were we now at Peace throughout the whole
World) to prophecy that there should be great Wars between the French and the
Spaniards, or that in time the Mexicans and West-Indians should revolt from the
Dominion of Spain, that such an Empire should be destroyed, such a Country
infested with the Plague, or such a great City fired, are things that require
little Art or skill; for that (unless some time be limited wherein these things
should happen) such a Prophecy can never be proved false, until it be
fulfilled, which in all probability (if they be any of the forementioned
things) will come to pass once in a thousand years. Again, To prophecy of the
end of this World, or of the other World, (without some divine confirmation by
a Miracle) renders the truth of such a Prediction very uncertain, and makes men
jealous that the Prophet spoke of so remote a time, and laid the Scene of his
Prophecy at such a distance, only that he might not live to see himself
contradicted, well knowing, that whilst the World endured, no man could
disprove him. Cur Mundi finem propriorem non facis? ut ne
Ante obitum mendax arguerere? sapis.
Owen upon Napier. Prithee, why placed you not the Worlds end nigher?
Lest 'ere you died you should be proved a Liar.
'Twas wisely done. --
Prognostications and Prophecies do often help to further that which they
foretell, the silly people wilfully running into such a predicted Fate, as if
inexorable, because foretold: Again, others as craftily may endeavor to fulfill
a Prophecy which is to their advantage, so that the first Prophecy may produce
a second Prophet: as some of the Ancients received their titles of Wise, only
from the Oracles. But without some of these helps, you will find little more
credit to be given to Prophecies, (except the Sacred ones) than to our common
Almanacks, of which, as Montaign observes, where they say warm, should you say
cold; and in lieu of dry, moist; ever setting down the contrary of what they
foretell. Were I to lay a wager of one or to others success, I would not care
which side I took; except in such things as admit no uncertainty, as to promise
extreme heat at Christmas, and exceeding cold at Midsummer, etc. Prudens futuri
temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte pre^it Deus,
Ridetque si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidat. --
Horat. lib. 3. Od. 29. For my part, this ignorance of my own Destiny, I look
upon to be one of the greatest blessings Almighty God has bestowed upon me. I
would not know the time or manner of my death, for the World: if I knew the
time, I might not (as perhaps I now may) live with that joy, content and
pleasure, till the very hour before my death; nay it might then he irksom to me
some years before it happened, when I could positively say, on such a day, in
such a year, and such a month, I must certainly dye: so that the uncertainty of
the time, does in some measure extenuate the certainty of the suffering.
Neither would a certain knowledge of the manner and place of my death, be less
irksom to me: for if I knew it was to be by some fall out of a Coach, or off
from a Horse, it might disable me from traveling either way, lest the first
time I rid so, might prove the fatal hour. Again, if I knew I should dye at
such a Relations House, this might terrify me from visiting him, for fear of
making his Habitation my Sepulcher. So that the All wise disposer of all
things, who does nothing in vain, has for the good of mankind concealed this
prescience from us.

[3] Eretrians; were the Inhabitants of Eretria, which was a famous City of
Euboea. They are said to take their name from Eretrius the Son of Phaeton.
Herodotus (lib. 6.) speaking of these Eretrians, says, that Datys and
Artaphernes being arrived in Asia, took these Eretrians Prisoners, and sent
them away captive to Susa, for that they had exasperated Darius in making War
upon him wi^^out any provocation: where being presented before Darius, he
planted them at Anderica in Cissia, about 210 furlongs distant from Susa.

[4] By Darius; This Darius was the Son of Hystaspes, who got the Crown of
Persia by the Neighing of his Horse at Sunrising: for his Groom Oebares having
the Night before let his Horse cover a Mare at that place, the Horse was no
sooner brought thither the next morning, but he immediately fell a Neighing in
remembrance of his past pleasure, and by that means won his Master the Crown,
after the death of Cambyses. He married Atossa the Daughter of Cyrus, for the
strengthening of his Title. He recovered Rebellious Babylon by a Stratagem of
Zopyrus, one of his Noblemen, who cutting off his own Lips and Nose, and
miserably disfiguring himself, got in with the Babylonians to be their Leader
against the Tyrant his Master, who as he pretended had so martyred him; which
done, he betrayed to his Master Darius. After this, he marched against the
Scythians, who in derision presented him with a Bird, a Frog, a Mouse, and Five
Arrows, which by Hieroglyphical interpretation signified, that if the Persians
did not speedily depart from them, flying as Birds in the Air, or ducking
themselves as Frogs in a Marsh, or creeping as Mice into Holes, then they
should have their Arrows in their sides to send them packing; which was soon
done with shame. Upon his being defeated by the Scythians, the Greeks rebelled
against him, and were subdued: which encouraging him to think of conquering all
Greece, and thereupon marching with 600000 men against it, he was shamefully
overthrown by Miltiades the Athenian, who brought but 10000 against him, in the
Field of Marathon, and registered (as Plutarch says) by almost 300 Historians.
In this Fight Themistocles the Athenian gave sufficient proofs of his valor;
wherein also one Cyneris (a common Soldier) was so fierce, that when both his
hands were cut off, he fastened his Teeth upon a flying Ship of the Persians,
as if he meant to stay it. Afterward, Darius thinking to repair this
ignominious loss, the Rebellion of the Aethiopians, and quarrel between his
Sons for the Succession, brought him to his end: for Artabazanes his eldest Son
claimed it as Heir, but (in regard he was born whilst his Father was but a
Subject) the younger Son Xerxes carried away the Crown, he being Grandchild to
Cyrus by Atossa. Of this Prince you may read at large in Herodotus, lib. 3, 4,
5, 6. also in Justin, lib. 1, 2. in Valerius Maximus, Aelian, and others. He
began his Reign An. Mund. 3431.

[5] Euboea; an Isle in the Aegean Sea, on the side of Europe over against
Chios; it is severed from Achaia by a little Euripus: by the Ancients it was
sometimes called Macra, Macris, Chalcis, Chalcodontis, Aesopis, Oche, Ellopia;
and by Homer, Abantis; and the Inhabitants, Abantes: It is now called
Negropont^, or Egriponte; and by the Turks (who won it from the Venetians, An.
Chr. 1470.) Egribos, and Eunya.

[6] Claz^menian Sophist; so called from Clazomenae, a City of Ionia in Asia,
built by Paralus; it was afterward called Gryna; it lies near Smyrna. This
Clazomenae was the Country of Anaxagoras; it borders upon Colophon.

[7] Sophist; a Sophism is a cunning evading Argument, or Oration; in Logic it
is when the form of a Syllogism is not legally framed, or false matter
introduced under color of Truth: whence a Sophist is in plain English but a
subtle Caviller in words. Thus we read that Protagoras (the Disciple of Zeno,
as also of Democritus) wanting Solidity, endeavored to be Subtle, and coming
short of a Philosopher, set up for a Sophist.

[8] Nomades; were a certain people of Scythia Europaea, said to be descended
from those that followed Hercules in his Expedition into Spain; Salust. They
were called Nomades, (...), that is, a pascendo, in that they spent their time
chiefly in feeding Cattle, and lying amongst them. Dionys. verse. 186. (...),
etc. Also Virgil mentions the same, Aen. lib. 4. and 8. They are also thought
to be people nigh Polonia, and Russia; as likewise of Numidia in Africa,
otherwise called (...), and Numida. Also people of Asia, by the Caspian Sea,
now called Daae, and Parni.

[9] Caphareus; a high Mountain of Euboea toward Hellespont, by which place
the Greeks Navy were sore afflicted for the death of Palamedes, (Son of
Nauplius, King of that place) who was slain by Ulysses. Homer (Odys. 4.11.) and
Ovid (Met. lib. 14.) represent to us a famous Shipwreck which the Grecian Navy
suffered in their return from Troy: Euboicae cautes, ultorque Caphareus.
Virg. Aen. 11.

[10] Forum; So called by the Romans, was a Marketplace, or Common Hall,
wherein they kept their Courts of Judicature.

[11] Xerxes; This Xerxes was the Son of Darius Hystaspes, who (in the third
year of the third Olympiad) succeeded his Father to the Crown, and was the 4th
King of the Empire, drawing his Title thereunto from Cyrus his Grandfather, by
the side of his Mother Atossa. Now his Father Darius having at the time of his
death prepared all things in readiness for a War with the Egyptians, his Son
Xerxes had nothing left to do but to begin his March; wherefore his first
Expedition was against the rebellious Egyptians, (who had revolted from his
Father) wherein proving successful, he returns, and makes that great Feast
mentioned in the Book of Esther, who becomes his Queen in place of Vasthi. His
second Undertaking was to revenge his Fathers Quarrel upon Greece, against
which he is said to have led the most numerous Army that ever was yet heard of,
consisting, as Herodotus writes, of 1700000 Foot, and 80000 Horse, besides
Camels and Chariots; Diodorus writes of 800000 Foot; Trogus, Justin, and
Orosius, mention 1000000 in all, also 1207 Ships of War; all which numerous
Army was entertained by one Pythius at Sardis, who besides presented Xerxes
himself with 2000 Talents in Silver, and in Gold four millions. Now having from
Sardis sent into Greece to demand Earth and Water, in token of subjection, he
afterward marched from thence with his Forces, making Mount Athos an Island
for the convenient passage of his Fleet, also passing his Army over the
Hellespont by a Bridge of Boats; which Bridge happening one time to be broken
by a great Tempest, his pride and folly was so great, that he commanded 300
stripes should be given to the Sea, as also a pair of Fetters to be cast into
it, in token of Servitude; and causing the Heads of the Workmen to be chopped
off, ordered other Bridges to be made. Soon after this Xerxes lost 20000 of his
Army at Thermopyle, by the opposition of Leonidas, and 300 Lacedaemonians; upon
which followed (as one misfortune seldom comes alone) a defeat of his Navy at
Artemisium, in the Straits of Euboea. This was also seconded with another
overthrow by Themistocles, at Salaminis; as also by another from Pausanias, had
against Xerxes's General and Favorite, Mardonius, at Plateae; as also by the
great rout which Leutychidas the Athenian, and Xantippus the Lacedaemonian
Admirals, gave his Fleet the same day by Sea, near Mycale, a Promontory in
Asia. All which happening together, so terrified this mighty Tyrant over both
Sea and Land, that he was forced to return toward his own Country over the
Hellespont, in a small Cock-Boat; where after his sacrilegious assaulting the
Temple of Delphos, and barbarous dealing with his Brother, and his chaste Wife,
for their opposing his incestuous designs, as also prostituting himself to all
villainy and baseness, he was at last treacherously slain in his Bed by his
Uncle Atabanus, leaving his Son Artaxerxes (whom he had by his Queen Esther) to
succeed him, Anno Mun. 3587.

[12] Daridaeus; was a Persian King, that lived in the Reigns of the Emperors
Tiberius and Claudius; he was the present King of their Country when
Apollonius was amongst them.

CHAP. XVIII. How great the Walls of Babylon were; Also concerning the River
Euphrates, and the large Bridge over it; Likewise of the stately Palace,
Lodgings, and other things therein; together with something of the color of
the Saphir; and concerning the Magicians.
AS for the Deeds of Apollonius in Babylon, and what things there are
remarkable, I find this brief Account of the same. In the first place they
report, that the [1] Walls of Babylon are so great, that they are 480 Furlongs
in compass; the height one Acre and an half; the breadth little less than an
Acre* the River Euphrates runs exactly through the midst of the City, under
which is made an admirable Bridge, joining so as it cannot be perceived: the
Royal Palaces stand on each side the River; for it is reported, that a [2]
Semirami^.
Woman of the Median Race, who sometimes reigned in Babylon* did make a curious
Bridge under the River, the like whereof was never seen in the World: for she
caused Stones, Brass, Bitumen, and all other materials requisite for the
joining things in Water, to be brought to the River side, and so turned the
course of the River into the Fens, when having dried up the Channel of the
River, and dug a Trench of (...) is generally rendered two Fathoms, as I
have done it; however Hesychius renders it six cubits; but Salmasius corrects
him, and says, it signifies four cubits
two Fathoms deep, she afterward artificially covered it, that there might be
a passage through it, as on firm Land, from the two Palaces that stood on each
side of the River, one to the other, the height of the Arch being equal to the
bottom of the Channel. Thus the foundation of the Walls and the hollow Trench
went on; but the Bitumen requiring Water to petrifie it, and make it firm, the
Euphrates was let in over the moist Roof, and so the Bridge was finished. The
Palaces are covered with Brass, and glister with it; also the Chambers both of
Men and Women, together with the Porches, are adorned, some with Silver, some
with Tapistry of Gold, and some with beaten Gold, instead of Pictures. Their
Hangings are also adorned with Greek Stories, so that in every place you may
behold [3] Andromeda, [4] Amymone, and [5] Orpheus; for the Inhabitants take
great delight in Orpheus* admiring his Turbant and Slops; as for hi^ skill in
Music and Poetry, they were little taken therewith. You might there likewise
behold [6] Datis drawing N^xos out of the Sea, and Artaphernes besieging
Eretria, together with all the [7] Victories of King Xerxes. Nor were Athens
and [8] Thermopylae left out, together with the more proper Acts of the Medes,
their drying up the Rivers, making a Bridge over the Sea, and cutting through
Mount [9] Athos They further report, that Apollonius came into a Chamber, which
had a Roof in form of an Arch, resembling Heaven, covered with Sapphire stone,
which stone is sky-colour'd like the Heavens; aloft in this Room stood the
Images of their reputed Gods, in imitation of Gold and Air. Now this is the
place where the King sits in Judgment; there hang down from the Roof four
golden Birds called A Bird with a wry Neck*
Torquillae, representing the Goddess of Vengeance, and admonishing the King
not to elevate himself above the condition of men. It is said, that the
Magicians, when they first come into the Chamber, commanded those Pictures to
be made, calling them the Tongues of the Gods. As for the Magicians that are
there, Apollonius spoke that which he said he thought sufficient, saying, that
he conversed with them, and taught them many things, as also learnt some things
of them. But Damis says, that he knew not what discourses he had with the
Magicians, in that Apollonius forbad him to go along with him when he was going
among them. Howbeit Apollonius was accustomed to confer twice every day with
the Magicians, namely, at midday, and about midnight; so that Damis once asked
him, what the Magi were? To whom Apollonius replied, that they were indeed wise
men, though not wise in all things. But of these things more hereafter.

Illustrations on Chap. 18.
[1] WAlls of Babylon; Ninus the Husband of Semiramis being dead, and the
Empire lest solely to her possession, she being a Woman of an high spirit,
d^sires nothing more than to surpass her Husband Ninus in Glory; for the
accomplis^ment whereof, she first resolves to erect a m^gnificent City in the
Province of Babylon, (called at this day Ba^det) and for that p^rpose having
assembled the best Architects from all parts of the World, as also made
provision of materials requisite for so great a Fabric, she imploys three
millions of men about it, which she had summoned together from all parts of her
Dominions; and that it might be the sooner built, dividing it into several
Furlongs, she committed the care of each particular Furlong to some one of her
Confidents, supplying them continually with money wherewithal to defray
charges. This City was founded (as Philostratus here writes) on each side the
River Euphrates, which ran through the midst of it: the Walls whereof were in
circuit 22 Leagues and an half, (as Diodorus tells us) all planted thick with
high Turrets, and the breadth of them such as six Chariots might pass afront on
them, besides their height almost incredible, if you will believe C^esias; but
according to others, so broad that two Chariots might go on breast: As for the
length, it had so many Furlongs as there were days in the year, their manner
being on each day to erect a Furlong of Wall, says Diodorus Sic. lib. 3. chapter
4. Herodotus, Pliny, Solinus, and our Philostratus say, that these Walls of
Babylon were 480 Furlongs in compass, being situate in a large apiece
Plain, environed with a broad and deep Ditch full of Water; Strabo says, the
compass of the Wall was 380 Furlongs; and Curtius will have it but 358. whereof
only 90 Furlongs inhabited, and the rest allotted to Husbandry. Again,
Concerning the thickness and height of the Walls they also disagree: The first
Authors affirm the height 200 Cubits, and the thickness 50. and they which say
least cut off but half that sum; so that well might Aristotle esteem it rather
a Country than a City, being of such greatness, that some part of it was taken
three days by the Enemy, before the other heard of it. Lyranus out of Ierom
upon Esaias affirms, that the four-squares thereof contained 16 miles apiece,
wherein every man had his Vineyard and Garden to his degree, wherewith to
maintain his Family in time of Siege. The Fortress or principal Tower belonging
to this Wall, was (says he) that which had been built by the Sons of Noah; and
not without cause was it reckoned among the Wonders of the World. It had an 100
brazen Gates, and 250 Towers. This Bridge which Philostratus mentions, was 5
Furlongs in length. The Walls were made of Brick and Asphaltum, a shiny kind of
Pitch which that Country yields. She built two Palaces, which might serve
both for Ornament and Defense: one in the West, which environed 60 Furlongs
with high Brick Walls; within that a less, and within that also a less Circuit,
which contains the Tower. These were wrought sumptuously with Images of
Beasts, wherein also was the game and hunting of Beasts displayed; this had
three Gates. The other in the East, on the other side the River, contained but
30 Furlongs. In the midst of the City she erected a Temple to Jupiter Belus
(says Herodot. lib. 2.) with brazen Gates* and apiece, (which was in his
time remaining) each square containing two Furlongs, in the midst whereof is a
solid Tower, of the height and thickness of a Furlong, upon this another, and
so one higher than another, eight in number. In the highest Tower is a Chapel,
and therein a fair Bed covered, and a Table of Gold, without any Image. Neither
(as the Chaldaean Priests affirm) does any abide here in the night, but one
Woman, whom this God Belus shall appoint, (and she I presume a very handsome
one, because his Priests had the custody of her;) some say the God himself used
to lie there, which Report I conceive was given out only to make way for such
another Story, as was that of Paulina, in the Temple of Isis, (recorded by
Josephus, and which I shall mention hereafter at large) where if she was
modest, they lay with her in the dark, and heightened her fancy with the conceit
that 'twas God Belus himself had gotten her Maidenhead; and if she happened to
conceive, her spurious Issue was honored with the title of a young Jupiter.
But to proceed. Diodorus affirms, that in regard of the exceeding height of
this Temple, the Chaldaeans used thereon to make their Observations of the
Stars. He also adds, that Semiramis placed on the top thereof three golden
Statues: one of Jupiter, 40 foot long, weighing a 1000 Babylonian Talents, till
his time remaining; another of Ops, weighing as much, sitting in a golden
Throne, with two Lions at her feet, and just by her side many huge Serpents of
Silver, each of 30 Talents; the third Image was of Juno standing, in weight 800
Talents; her right hand held the Head of a Serpent, and her left a Scepter of
Stone. To all these was in common one Table of Gold, 40 foot long; in breadth
12. in weight 50 Talents; also two standing Cups of 30 Talents, and two Vessels
for Perfumes of like value* likewise three other Vessels of Gold, whereof one
dedicated to Jupiter weighed 1200 Babylonian Talents; all which Riches the
Persian Kings took away when they conquered Babylon. Of this see more in
Herodot. lib. 2. Pliny, lib. 6. chapter 26. Solin. chapter 60. Diodor. Sic. lib. 3. chapter
4. Strab. lib. 16. Quint. Curtius, lib. 5. Aristot. Polit. lib. 3. chapter 2.
Daniel 4.

[2] A Woman of the Median Race; who this Woman was, is already expounded by
Herodotus, when speaking of the Kings of Babylon, he says, there were many
Kings who contributed to the adorning of Babylon, both in its Walls and
Temples, and amongst them, two eminent Women, whereof the first was called
Semiramis, who reigned five Ages before Nitocris, the other, and from a Level
raised a most magnificent and stupendous Wall, which encompassing the City
round, did very much preserve it from those frequent Inundations of Water,
wherewith it was before infested. Herod. lib. 1. Likewise Ovid confirms the
same, saying, Coctilibus Muris cinxisse Semiramis urbem. Concerning the
Original of Semiramis, Historians vary: Reineccius (in his Syntagmate Her^ico,
p. 47*) will have her to be the Daughter of Sem. But Diodorus Siculus writes,
that she was born at Ascalon, a Town in Syria, and presents us ( lib. 3. chapter
2.) with this Fable of her Original: There is (says he) in Syria a City named
Ascalon, and not far from it runs a Lake well stored with Fish, near unto which
stands the Temple of the Goddess Derceto, who having the Face of a Woman, is
all over her Body like a Fish; the occasion whereof, is by the Inhabitants
fabulously related to be thus; viz. that Venus meeting one day with this
Goddess Derceto, made her fall in Love with a beautiful young man, that
sacrificed unto her, who begot on her a Daughter; but the Goddess ashamed of
her misfortune, banished the Father from her sight, and exposed the Child in a
desert place full of Rocks and Birds, of whom by divine providence the Child
was nourished. Yet however the Mother being conscious to her self of what she
had done, went and drowned her self in the Lake, where she was metamorphosed
into a Fish; for which very reason the Assyrians have (says Diodorus) even to
our time abstained from eating those kind of Fishes, adoring them as Gods.
Furthermore they tell another miraculous Narration, viz. that the Birds
sustaining the Child on their wings, fed her with Curds, which they stole from
the Shepherds adjoining Cottages; and that when the Child was a year old, in
regard that she then stood in need of more substantial meat, they nourished her
with Cheese taken from the same Cottages, which the Shepherds having discovered
by the continual pecking of their Cheeses, they soon found out the Child which
they had educated amongst them, and afterward for her exce^lent beauty
presented her to Simma, the King's Superintendent over the Shepherds of that
Province, who having no Children of his own, with great care educated her as
his own Daughter, calling her Semiramis, after the name of those Birds which
had fed her, and which in the Syrian Tongue are so called, and were from that
time adored by the Inhabitants of that Country as so many Gods. And this,
says Diodorus, is the account which Fables give of Semiramis's Birth, which,
as Sabellicus observes, very much resembles the Fictions which Posterity
invented of Cyrus and Romulus, not to mention the true and sacred Narrative of
Moses. Now Semiramis surpassing all other Virgins in beauty, and being then
marriageable, Menon, the Governor of Syria, (who had been sent by the King to
take an account of his Cattle, and residing at Simma's House) fell in Love with
her, and married her; then carrying her back with him to the City of Niniveh,
he there had two Sons by her, Iapetes and Idaspes. Now her beauty did so
totally influence Menon, that wholly resigning up himself to Semiramis, he
would do nothing without her advice. But Fortune (who envies nothing so much as
the happiness of Lovers) would not permit them long to enjoy this mutual and
calm satisfaction; for the Prince is engaged in the Fields of Mars, and the
Subject must not lie sleeping at home in the Embraces of Venus: King Ninus is
storming the City Bactria and Menon his Officer must no longer absent himself
from the Camp. Therefore leaving Venus for Mars, his Semiramis for the War,
Menon posts away to the King, who was then besieging Bactria; where he had not
continued long, but impatient of his Wifes absence, he sends for Semiramis to
accompany him in the Camp. Thereupon, she being a most prudent Woman, and
endued with more courage than is usually found in that Sex, making use of this
opportunity of showing her extraordinary virtue, undertakes the Journey, in
obedience to her Husband, notwithstanding it was long and tedious. But to
render it the less difficult, she attires her self in such a Garment, as she
might pass either for Man or Woman upon occasion, and which would not only
protect her from the heat of the Weather, but was withal so light, as it could
no ways incommode her, in case of any Action; which Habit was so generally
approved of, that first the Medes, and afterward the Persians, (when they
possessed the Asiatick Empire) did for a long time use no other than this
Semirian Garment. Now in this Dress she arrived incognito at the Assyrian Camp,
where having observed the posture of the Siege, as also the situation of the
City, she discovered that the Castle (naturally strong, and difficult of
access) was therefore neglected, and unprovided of men for its Guard, the
Bactrians at that time being wholly employed in defending the Outworks of the
City, which the Assyrians only assaulted, as looking upon the Castle
impregnable. Whereupon Semiramis having privately made this observation,
selects out of the whole Army a Detachment of such men, as were best skilled in
climbing up steep Rocks and Mountains, who with much difficulty ascending up
through the rough and narrow passages, made themselves Masters of one part of
the Castle; when to amaze the Enemy, she makes a dreadful noise, withal giving
notice to the Besiegers that the Castle was taken; whereat the Besieged within
were so terrified, that evacuating themselves, they abandoned the defense of
the Town, and attempted nothing more but the saving of their own Lives by
flight. The City thus taken, and Semiramis discovered, all persons were in
admiration of her heroic Virtue and Beauty; in so much, that King Ninus
himself (who is called in the Scripture, Ashur) falling desperately in Love
with her, did first by fair means require her Husband Menon to resign up his
Wife to him; which he refusing to do, the King at length threatened him with the
loss of both his Eyes: to prevent which Torture, Menon (desiring of Evils to
choose the least) did with his own hands strangle himself. Hereupon the King
married his Widow Semiramis, by whom he had one Son called Ninus the second, or
Ninyas; and soon after died, leaving the Government both of his Son and Kingdom
to Semiramis. There are various Reports concerning this Ninus's Death; for some
with Orosius and Reusnerus will have it, that he died of a Wound received by a
Dart in the Bactrian War: but Diodorus tells us, that the Athenians and other
Historians affirm, that Semiramis presuming upon the influence of her Beauty,
requested Ninus that she might be invested with the Royal Robes, and rule
absolutely but for five days; whereunto he assenting, she after having made
experiment of the Fidelity and Obedience of some of her Guards, commands them
to imprison the King her Husband, which immediately they performed, and by this
means she assumed the Government of the Empire. Herewith likewise both Aelian
and Plutarch agree, differing only in these Circumstances, that whereas
Diodorus says, she imprisoned him, they affirm, that she killed him: also
whereas Diodorus and Aelian write, that she requested to rule five days,
Plutarch says, her petition was but for one day. Now for Semiramis's Government
after her Husband's Death, Justin gives us this Account of it; That Ninus
himself being slain, and his Son Ninus but young, Semiramis not daring to
commit the Government of so great an Empire to a Boy, nor openly to exercise
the Command of it her self, (so many and so powerful Nations being scarcely
obedient to a Man, would be much less to a Woman) did counterfeit her self to
be the Son instead of the Wife of Ninus, and a Boy instead of a Woman. They
were both of a middle Stature, their Voice but soft, their Complexion and
Features of Face, as likewise the Lineaments of their Bodies were alike both in
Mother and Son: she therefore with Raiment covered her Arms and Thighs, putting
a Tire on her Head; and that she might not seem to conceal any thing by her new
Habit, she commanded the people all to be clothed in the same Attire, which
that whole Nation have ever since observed: having thus counterfeited her Sex,
she was believed to be a young Man. After this, she made her self famous by
great Achievements, by the magnificence whereof, when she thought she had
overcome all Envy, she confessed who she was, and whom she had counterfeited;
neither did this detract from the dignity of her Government, but rather
increased her admiration, that a Woman not only surpassed her own Sex, but also
the bravest of Men, in Virtue. She builded Babylon, (as I showed before) and
being not contented to defend the bounds of the Empire obtained by her Husband,
she not only made an addition to the same of all Aethiopia, but also carried
the War into India, which (besides her self and Alexander the Great) never any
invaded. At last, when she desired to lie with her own Son, she was killed by
him. Thus far Justin, lib. 1. Arrianus, and others, allow her a more honorable
death, and say, that marching against the Indians with an Army of 3000000
Infantry, and 50000 Cavalry, besides 100000 Chariots, she was overthrown by
Stanrobates upon the Banks of Indus, and there slain; or as some will have it,
turned into a Dove, Venus's Bird: whence the Babylonians ever after carried a
Dove in their Banners, and worshipped her for a Goddess under that shape: Quid
referam ut volitet crebras intacta per urbes
Alba Palaestino Sancta Columba Syro.
Tibul. 1.7. Semiramis first invented Eunuchs: she was a woman of great Lust
and Venery, witness her design upon her own Son, mentioned by Justin, Berosus,
Diodorus, Plutarch, and Suidas. She was one of an unbounded Ambition, as her
many Conquests in Egypt, Aethiopia, Arabia, and Bactria evidence; Plutarch,
Orosius, Justin, and Diodorus. She had much of Vainglory in her, as may be
seen by her magnificent Structures; amongst all which Strabo recites the
Obelisk of Babylon, as the most eminent, Geog. lib. 16. She was highly
Revengeful, for some report that the reason of her Expedi^ion against
Sta^robates the Indian King, was to be revenged of him for some reflective
Censures that he had passed upon her Lust. Lastly, she was a woman of great
Expedition, as appears by that Story which Valerius Maximus relates of her,
saying, that News being brought her when she was a dressing, that Babylon was
revolted from her, she with half her Hair hanging about her Ears, went
immediately to besiege the Town, and totally reduced it, before she gave her
self time to finish the dress of her head; Val. Max. lib. 9. chapter 3. She reigned
42 years, as says Berosus, Diodorus, Plutarch, and Suidas.

[3] Andromeda, was the Daughter of Cepheus King of Aethiopia, and of his Wife
Cassiopeia. This Andromeda was for the Pride of her Mother Cassiopeia, (who
presumed to contend with the Nymphs for beauty) condemned by advice of the
Oracle to be bound to a Rock, and exposed to the mercy of a Sea Monster, which
Neptune (out of anger to Cassiopeia for her presumption in contending with the
beautiful Nereides) had sent to infest that Country, devouring both Men and
Cattle. From this Monster Andromeda being afterward freed by Perseus, as he
was returning into his own Country, she married him. The Fable further says,
that after her death, Andromeda was placed among the Stars, by the benignity of
Minerva; and that (according to the Astrologers) the influence of her
Constellation is malign, denoting Imprisonment and Banishment: Andromede
monstris fu^rant devota marinis,
Haec eadem Persei nobilis ^^or erat.
Propert. lib. 2. Upon this subject of Andromeda, Euripides wrote that most
excellent Tragedy whereof Athenaeus so much boasted, an Episode out of which
Alexander sung in the last Banquet of his Life: This Tragedy wrought wonderful
effects in the City Abdera, when it was Acted there by Archel^us, under the
Reign of Lysimachus. The two Parts of Perseus and Andromeda, the misfortunes of
this Princess when exposed to the Sea Monster, and all that moved terror and
pity in this Representation, made so strong and violent an impression on the
people, that they departed, says Lucian, from the Theater possessed (as it
were) with the Spectacle; and this became a public malady, wherewith the
imaginations of the Spectators were seized. See Ovid. Metam. lib. 4. Natalis
Comes Mythol. lib. 7.

[4] Amymone, was one of the fifty Daughters of King Danaus: she being shooting
in a Wood, by accident hit a Satyr, who was coming with violence to ravish her;
it is feigned, that she called upon Neptune for help, who to save her, threw
his Trident or three-fork'd Dart at the Satyr, and hit a Rock out of which
sprang a Fountain, quem Neptunus a nomine adamatae puellae Amymonem appellavit.
Nevertheless, Neptune is said to have done that to her, which the Satyr himself
designed, and to have got her with Child, on whom he begot Nauplius; Strabo
lib. 8. Pliny lib. 4. chapter 5. Also a Well in Argos near Lerna, so called from
this Amymone the Daughter of Danaus: Argos Amymonen, -- etc.
Ovid. Met. lib. 2.

[5] Orpheus, a Musician of Thrace, was (as some say) the Son of Apollo and
Calliope; as others, the Son of Eagrus and the Muse Polymnia. It is said that
Apollo or Mercury gave him a Harp, whereon he played so sweetly, that he caused
the very Birds, Beasts, Stones, and Trees to follow him: also that having lost
his Wife Eurydice, (who running away from Aristaeus, was stung to death by a
Serpent) he went down to Hell to bring her back again; where by his Harp he so
charmed Pluto and Proserpina, that they suffered her to depart with him, on
condition that he should not look back till he were quite out of Hell; but he
did look back, and so went without her* whereupon in discontent he dissuading
all men from women's company and marriage, was for so doing torn in pieces by
the Thracian women. The Application or Moral of this Fable is thus rendered by
the Lord Bacon, in his Wisdom of the Ancients: Orpheus's Music (says he) is
of two sorts; the one appeasing the Internal Powers, the other attracting
Beasts and Trees: whereof, the first may be fitly applied to Natural
Philosophy; the second, to Moral or Civil Discipline. The most noble work of
Natural Philosophy, is the restitution and renovation of things corruptible:
The other (as a lesser degree of it) the preservation of Bodies in their
estate, detaining them from dissolution and putrefaction* And if this gift may
be performed in Mortals, certainly it can be by no other means, than by the due
and exquisite Temper of Nature, as by the melody and delicate Touch of an
Instrument. But seeing it is of all things most difficult, it is seldom or
never attained unto; and in all likelihood, for no other reason, more than
through curious diligence and untimely impatience. And therefore Philosophy,
hardly able to produce so excellent an effect in a pensive humor, (and that
without cause) busies her self about Humane objects, and by persuasion and
eloquence, insinuating the love of Virtue, Equity, and Concord in the minds of
men, draws multitudes of people to a Society, makes them subject to Laws,
obedient to Government, and forgetful of their unbridled affections, whilst
they give ear to Precepts, and submit themselves to Discipline: whence follows,
the building of Houses, erecting of Towns, planting of Fields and Orchards with
Trees, and the like; in so much that it would not be amiss to say, that even
thereby Stones and Woods were called together, and settled in order. It is also
wisely said in the Fable, that Orpheus was averse from the love of women and
marriage, because the delights of Wedlock, and the love of Children, do for the
most part hinder men from enterprizing great and noble designs for the public
good, holding Posterity a sufficient step to Immortality, without Actions. Of
the attractive power of Orpheus's Music, all the Poets write: 1. Of his taming
the Winds, says Seneca, (in Medea de rebus Orpheis) Siluere venti; and
Antipater, (lib. 3. Antholog.) (...), i. e. ventorum impetum domitat. 2. Of his
moving the Trees, says Euripides, (in Bacchis de Orpheo) (...), i. e. conduxit
arbores. Dio Chrysostom. writes, concurrisse arbores ad illum, una cum fructibus
and floribus; Orat. 73. Seneca in Medea, Sylvas trahit. Ovid, (Eleg. 1. lib. 4.
Trist.) cum traheret sylvas Orpheus; and Horace, insecu^ae Orphea sylvae. 3. Of
his taming wild Beasts, Euripides (ibid.) amongst the things that Orpheus
subdued, enumerates (...), feras sylvestres. Dio Chrysostom. (Orat. 32.) (...),
feras mansuefecit. Saeva feris Natura redit, metuensque Leonem:
Implorat Citharae vacca tacentis opem.
Claud. 4. Of his attracting Stones, speaks Seneca in Medea, saying, Qui saxa
cantu mulcet: also Ovid in his Art Amandi, lib. 3. Saxa, ferasque Lyra movit
Rhodopeius Orpheus: and lib. 3. Amor. Duraque percussam saxa secuta Lyram. 5.
Of his moving Rocks and Mountains, Orpheus himself speaks, in Argon: (...)
(...). --
Cassius Parmensis. Convulsosque suis scopulos radicibus egit.
And Sidonius Apoll. in Panegyr. Anthemii Aug. writes, Qui cantu flexit
scopulos: 6. Of his charming the Infernal Furies in Hell, Virgil Georg. 4. Quin
ipsae stupuere domus, atque intim^ Lethi
Tartara, caeruleosque implexae crinibus angues
Eumenides, tenuitque inhian^ tria Cerberus ora.
Also Silius Italicus; -- Pallida regna
Bistonius vates, flammisque Acheronto sonantem
Placavit plectro, and fixit revolubile saxum.
Again, 7. Of his altering the motion of the Stars, Sil. Ital. writes, Tunc
silvas and saxa trahens, nunc sidera ducit. And 8. Of his stopping the current
of Rivers: Ars quae praebuerat fluminibus moras.
Seneca. Lastly, Of his charming the Gods: Auditus superis, Auditus manibus
Orpheus.
Sil. Ital. lib. 11. This Orpheus was an excellent Philosopher, as well as
Musician, being the first that recommended a solitary Life, and abstinence from
Flesh: wherefore Plato calls a solitary harmless life, entertained by Herbs and
Roots, (...). He was the first that introduced the Bacchinalia into Greece,
called by some for that cause, Sacra Orphica. Horace in his Art Poetica tells
us, that Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ab hoc lenire Tigres, rabidosque Leones
Dictus and, etc.
He was the first that in Thracia caused men to live under Laws and Government,
reducing them from their rude and barbarous Life, to a more gentle and
civilized. Some say that he prophesied of the Worlds continuance, and that
Aetate in sexta cessabit Machina Mundi.

[6] Datis drawing Naxos, and Artaphernes besieging Eretria; Darius Hystaspes
in his Expedition against Greece, (having taken away Mardonius's Commission, by
reason of his unprosperous Voyage near the Mountain Athos) bestowed the same
upon this Datis, a Mede, and Artaphernes his Brothers Son, creating them two
Admirals in chief, as well as Generals at Land. To these Darius gave in charge
to lay waste Athens with Eretria, and bring the Inhabitants thereof Prisoners
into his presence. In their passage they burnt Naxos, took some Forces and
Hostages out of those Islands, and then Landed their Horse upon the Coasts of
Eretria; Herodot. lib. 6. Naxos was one of the Cycladian Islands in the Aegean
Sea, heretofore called sometimes Strongyle, and sometimes Dia: its name of
Naxos it takes from one of their Captains of the same name; but at this day
it is called Nicsia, and is seven miles distant from D^los. This Island is
famous for the delicate white Marble it produces. Pliny very highly magnifies
the fertility of this place, either in respect of its Wine, or Women; for
besides the great plenty of Vines it bears, there is also a Fountain that is
said to run nothing but Wine; and their Women go but eight months with Child.
'Twas in this Isle of Naxos the Poets feign that Ariadne (being left by
Theseus) was married to Bacchus, where after having received her Crown, she was
translated up amongst the Stars: Bacchatamque jugis Naxum, viridemque Donysam:
Virg. Aen. 3:

[7] Victories of King Xerxes; this Xerxes was the Son of Darius Hystaspes, of
whom we have spoke before. His first Victory was over the Egyptians; his Army
was so numerous, that it drank up whole Rivers: one day as Xerxes was upon the
Bridge which he had erected over the Hellespont, looking back upon his vast
Army, he fell a weeping, and being asked the cause why he did so, his answer
was, That it was upon the consideration of Man's mortality, to think that of so
many hundred thousand Valiant men, not one of them would be left alive once in
an hundred years: Xerxes with weeping eyes surveyed his numerous Host,
Thinking by deaths surprise how soon they would be lost:
Concerning this King Xerxes, I have written at large in my foregoing Chapter.

[8] Thermopylae, a Mountain in Greece, where Leonidas King of Sparta only with
400 men, defeated 100000 of the Persians; it is called at this day Scelos.

[9] Mount Athos, a Mountain lying between Macedony and Thrace, the shadow
whereof reaches unto the Isle of Lemnos. This Mountain lies upon the Aegean
Sea, through which Xerxes cut a Channel for his Fleet to sail through: Cum Medi
peperer^ novum mare, cumque Iuventus
Per medium classi barbara a novit Atho.
Catull. This Mountain was once famous for the great number of Hares bred in
it, which makes the Poet say, Quot Lepores in Atho, quot Apes pascuntur in
Hybla? Ovid. 2. Art. Amand.

CHAP. XIX. Apollonius being entered into Babylon, would not worship the Kings
Golden Image: His words to the Kings Officers; and how he was brought before
the King; as also concerning the Kings dream.
WHen therefore Apollonius had made his entrance into Babylon, the Officer that
guarded the great Gates, having heard that he was come only to see the City,
presented to him the [1] Kings Golden Image, which if any one refused to
worship, he might not be admitted entrance; only those that came Ambassadors
from the Roman Emperors, were exempted from this Ceremony. But with that
Barbarian, if any one came only to view the Country, it was an affront for him
not to worship the Image; so foolish Customs have great Officers set over them
among the Barbarians. Apollonius therefore beholding the Image, asked who it
was? and when they told him, it was the King; Apollonius replied, This man whom
ye worship in this manner, if I commend him as appearing to be a good and
virtuous person, it shall be a great honor to him. And having thus spoken,
passed through the Gates; but the Officer admiring at the man, followed him, and
taking him by the hand, asked him by an Interpreter, what was his Name? his
Family? his Employment? and the cause of his coming into those parts? Then
setting down Apollonius's Answer in a Writing-Table, together with his habit
and feature, he bad him stay, when running to the men that are called the Kings
Ears, he describes Apollonius to them, telling them that he would not worship
the Kings Image, and was unlike to other men. Whereupon they commanded the
Officer to bring him in an honorable manner before them, and to offer him no
affront. Who being come, the Eldest man asked him, what it was that made him
thus slight the King? whereto he answered, I have not yet slighted him. The man
asking him, But would you slight him? By Jove, I may do so (said Apollonius) if
by conversing with him, I find him not to be a good and virtuous person. Do you
bring the King any Presents? said the man. I bring (said Apollonius) Fortitude,
Justice, and the like. Do you (said the other) bring these to the King as
supposing him destitute of them? By Jove, (said Apollonius) only as to one that
shall learn how to use them, if he has them. The King (says the man) has by
the use of such Virtues, both recovered his lost Kingdom which thou see, and
regained his Palace, not without much Toil and Trouble. How many years is it
since he recovered his Kingdom? said Apollonius. The other answered, Two years
and two months. Hereupon Apollonius raising his voice, (as he in like cases was
used to do) said, O Keeper of the Kings person, (or by what Title soever you
are called) [2] Darius the Father of Cyrus and [3] Artaxerxes, having possessed
this Kingdom about 60 years, when he suspected that the end of his Life drew
near, is reported to have sacrificed to Justice, and to have said these words,
O Lady, whosoever thou art! as having a long time been a Lover of Justice, but
not yet knowing her, nor possessed her; in that he educated his Children so
foolishly, as that they waged War upon one another, and one was wounded, the
other slain. But you (though the King perhaps scarcely knows how to sit in
the Kingly Throne) suppose him to have already acquired all kinds of Virtue,
and so puff him up beyond measure: if he become better than he is, I bring
profit to you, and not to my self. Whereupon another Barbarian standing hard
by, looking upon Apollonius, said, This man was brought hither as a Present of
the Gods: For so good a man as this, conversing with so good a man as the King,
will make him far better, more modest, and of a sweeter disposition; in as much
as he seems not a little to surpass other men. Wherefore they ran to divulge
the good news to all, that there stood at the Kings doors a certain Greek, who
was a Wise man, and an excellent Counselor. It happened when this News was
brought to the King, he was offering up Sacrifice in the presence of the
Magicians; (for Sacred Rites are performed by their direction:) wherefore
calling one of them, he said to him, I perceive my Dream is out, which I
related to you this day, when you came to visit me as I lay in bed: For such a
Dream as this had happened to the King; He that examines the Greek Copy about
this Dream, shall find the Latin Translation very erroneous.
He seemed to himself to be [4] Artaxerxes the Son of Xerxes, and that his
countenance was changed to be like him. Wherefore the King was much afraid,
lest his affairs should fall into some alteration, interpreting to that purpose
the change of his countenance. But when he had further heard that the Stranger
which was come was a Greek, and a Wise man, he called to mind the Plutarch in
Themist.
Story of [5] Themistocles the Athenian, who sometime coming out of Greece,
conversed with Artaxerxes, and did improve the King, as well as show his own
worth: Wherefore stretching forth his right hand, he bid them call in the man,
that so he might both sacrifice and pray with him.

Illustrations on Chap. 19.
[1] THe Kings Golden Image, which if any one refused to worship; this manner
of Adoration was anciently much used among the Eastern people, who paid the
highest Veneration to the Statues of their deceased Princes. This Ceremony
which our Author here mentions, was much for the same purpose as our Oath of
Allegiance, to show their Respect and Fidelity to the Prince. The sacred Images
of the Heathens, were a great part of their Religion; to them they addressed
themselves, when many times their Imaginations were so much stronger than their
Reasons, that they fancied they either heard the Image speak, saw her Nod, or
found her Sweat, etc. like timorous persons, who in looking steadfastly on a
dead corpse, fancy they see its Eyes open, or its Lips or Nose move. Thus at
the sacking of Vrii, some of the Roman Soldiers entering into the Temple of
Juno, accosting her Image, and asking it, vis venire Romam, will you come to
Rome? to some of them she seemed to becken by way of consent, and others
fancied she said Yes; For those men being more then ordinary Religious, (as
Titus Livy infers from the Devotion, Reverence, and Quietness wherewith they
entered the Temple) fancied they heard that Answer, which it is possible they
expected before; and Camillus, with the other Magistrates of the City, promoted
their belief. The reason why many of these Images have been observed to sweat,
(says Vaninus) is either from the warmth of the Air, or from Candles melting
the colors of the Image, or else the Priests did secretly die the Skin of the
painted God with the blood of a Beast or Man, or privately convey a small
stream of blood by certain Pipes to the Eyes of the Idol; whereupon when the
doors of the Temple were opened, the people that came thither were amazed, and
not understanding or considering the Natural cause of the Event, said it was a
Miracle. Now when any one was in danger of his Life, he presently made his
address to these Images, with Vows, Supplications and Prayers; then if perhaps
he obtained his wish, he thought himself bound by his Vow to return thanks for
it to the Gods, otherwise he was declared by the Priest to be guilty of
breaking his Vow: and if the thing did not succeed according to his wish, and
the Votary as yet survived, the Priests did then inculcate, that his own
wickedness was the cause why his Prayers were not heard by the Gods. Again, if
a pious man was deluded, they endeavored to persuade him to acknowledge the
mercy of the Gods, who chastise in this life those whom they Love; but if he
that had Vowed, did perish, there would none be then left to raise any such
objections against the Gods: Careat successibus opto quisquis ab eventu, etc.
and by these frivolous Superstitions the Priests deluded the People. It Is true,
some object that Pyrrhus King of Epirus, having taken money out of the Treasury
of Proserpina Locrensis, was punished with the calamity of Shipwreck: To which
it may be answered, that after Dionysius had robbed the Treasury of the same
Proserpina Locrensis, he sailed with a prosperous Gale, and jeering the Gods,
spoke to his Companions in this manner: See what a prosperous Voyage is given
by the immortal Gods to Sacrilegious persons! Vanini Dialog. 55. Now to pray
to, to swear by, to obey, to be diligent and officious in serving; finally, all
words and actions that betoken fear to offend, or desire to please, i^ Worship.
Also an Image in the largest sense, is either the Resemblance or the
Representation of something visible; wherefore there can be no Image of an
Infinite, because it is not visible: Thus there cannot be made any Image of
God, nor of the Soul of Man, nor of Spirits, but only of Bodies visible;
therefore when Poets describe their Centaurs, although such Monsters were never
yet seen, yet however they compose the Figure of parts that they have seen,
adjoining to the Body of a Man, the Feet, Tail, or Horns of a Beast; for Nil
fuit in intellectu, quod non fuit prius in sensu. Having thus therefore showed
you the signification of the two words Worship and Image, we may infer from
thence, that to worship an Image, is voluntarily to do those external Acts
which are signs of honoring either the Matter of the Image, (which is Wood,
Stone, Metal, or some other visible Creature) or the Phantasm of the Brain,
every man applying a mental and whimsical Image of his own making, over and
above that which is visible to his Eyes. Now this kind of worshipping Images,
is that Idolatry which God so strictly forbad in his Commandments; being not
only a dishonor to the Infinite Being, (as much as in them lies) to attempt to
make his Image, but also it was a means to withdraw them from the worship of
the True God, for a False. Images were used as well by the ancient Heathens, as
by our modern Catholics, of which you may read 2 Kings 10.26, 27. And Mons.
Daillee (in his most excellent Treatise called, La Religion Catholic Romain
instituee par Numa Pompile) demonstrates with great Learning and Wit, that the
Papists took their Idolatrous worship of Images, as well as all their other
Ceremonies, from the old Heathen Religion; so that they may justly plead for
the Antiquity of their Church-worship, it being many hundred years older than
Christ himself. The Trojans had their Paladium, or Statue of their Goddess
Pallas, in whom they confided: The Rhodians dedicated to Apollo that famous
Colossus of Brass, 800 foot in height, which was broken down by the Saracens,
Anno Dom. 684. We read also of the Statue of Jupiter Olympias, made by Phydias,
150 cubits high; Apollo Capitolinus, that stood at Rome, cum multis aliis, etc.
Eusebius (Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. chapter 17.) affirms, that Images are taken from
the Pagans, who were wont to honor after this manner such as they accounted
Saviors: Also Arnobius spends most of his sixth Book in confuting this
practice of Images. Now to compare the use the Romanists put their Images to,
with the use the Heathens made of theirs, let us consider; First, how the
Heathens adorned their Images? they decked them with Silver and Gold, as you may
see, Ier. 10.4, 5. Isa. 30.22. Also Tursellinus mentions several Garments
richly embroidered and adorned with Gold and Jewels, presented by Princes and
Noblemen for the Blessed Virgin: Iustus Iusteius Earl of Verona, gave to the
Lady of Loretto a Garment of Cloth of Gold, faced with costly Skins and Furs,
gotten at the Games of Florence* the Duchess of Cleves presented her with a
Chain of Gold, and other rich Jewels; Hist. Lauret. lib. 6. chapter 13. Secondly,
the Heathens dedicated their Images with Prayers and Solemnities, before they
paid any Veneration to them; Dan. 3.2, Then Nebuchadnezzar the King sent to
gather together the Princes and Governors, to come to the Dedication of the
Image which he had set up; and Arnobius mentions as much, lib. 1.6.8. Minucius,
Tertullian, and others: Also the Romanists do as much at the Consecration of
their Saints; for which (it being too tedious here to insert) I shall refer you
to Pontif. Romans page 367. Thirdly, the Heathens paid great honor to the
Statues and Images of their Gods, which they expressed several ways: As first,
by cringing, bowing, and kneeling, adorant simulachra in terram prostrati,
says Arnobius, lib. 6. Secondly, by kissing them, as it is 1 Kings 19.18. Yet
I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed
unto Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him. Now the Papists do as
much as this; for the Council of Trent speaking of Images, ( Sess. 25.) says,
We kiss them, uncover the head, and fall down before them. Fourthly, the
Heathens lighted Candles* and burnt Incense before their Images, Baruch 6.19,
21. and Arnobius tells us, that the Images perfumed and discolored with Smoke,
grew black, lib. 6. Now the Papists use the same; for Thomas Ar^ndel
(Archbishop of Canterbury) in his Provincial held at Oxford, A. D. 1408. made
this Constitution: From henceforth let it be taught commonly, and preached by
all, that the Cross and Image of the Crucifix, with the rest of the Saints
Images in memory and honor of them whom they represent, as also their Places
and Relics, ought to be worshipped with Processions, bendings of the Knee,
bowings of the Body, Incensings, Kissings, Offerings, lighting of Candles, and
Pilgrimages, together with all other manners and forms whatsoever, as has been
accustomed to be done by our Predecessors; Lindwoods Constit. Provinc. lib. 5.
chapter de Haret. Durantus also speaks of these Rites used in the Roman Church, de
Ritib. Eccles. Cath. lib. 1. chapter 9. n. 11. Fifthly, the Heathens prayed before
their Images, Isa. 44.17. He falls to it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art
my God: also Minucius witnesses the same. And thus do the Papists; Whosoever
(being in the state of Grace) shall devoutly say these seven Prayers before an
Image of Piety, with seven Pater Nosters and Ave Maria's, shall merit a Pardon
for 56000 years; which was granted by three Popes, Gregory the 14. Nicholas the
5. and Sixtus the 4 Hor. B. Virg. secund. usum Sar. p. 67. Also hear the Prayer
they use before Veronica: Hail holy Face impressed in Cloth, purge us from
every spot of Vice, and join us to the Society of the Blessed, O Blessed
Figure, etc: Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trident. de Imaginib* And thus you see the
Romanists give the very same Adoration to the Images of their Saints, as the
Pagans did to the Statues of their Gods. I know they object, that the Heathens
worshipped the very Images themselves, whereas they pretend only to adore the
thing represented, and not the Image: To which I answer, First, the Heathens
did no more, as you may see it in Arnobius, where it is said, We worship only
the Gods by these Images; for we do not believe the substance of Brass, Silver,
Gold, or any other thing whereof these Statues are made, to be in themselves
Gods, but we worship the Gods in these; Arnob. lib. 6. Secondly, the Papists
however do more than this: for Suarez (one of their own Writers) tells us, That
the Image may and ought to be worshipped with the same Adoration with the
Original: moreover the Authority of the seventh General Synod, as also the
Council of Trent, part 3. say, That it is the constant opinion of Divines, that
the Image is to be honored and worshipped with the same honor and worship,
which is due to the person whereof it is an Image; Azor. Inst. Moral. Tom. 1.
lib. 9. chapter 6. This made Ludovicus Vive^ (a learned Catholic) confess, that
there could be found no other difference between Paganish and Popish worship
before Images, but only this, that Names and Titles are changed; Comment. in
Aug. Civit. Dei, lib. 8. chapter 27. for as the Italian Proverb has it, They are
both one Broth, only mutatis Nominibus: so that when the Spaniards conquered
the West Indies, they pulled down one Idolatry, to set up another; and in my
opinion, the New was worse than the Old.

[2] Darius, the Father of Cyrus and Artaxerxes; this was Darius Nothus, the
6th King of the Persians, and Son of Artaxerxes Longimanus, as some say, by a
Concubine; or as others say, he was Longimaenus's Son-in-law, by marrying of
his Daughter Parysatis; Philip Melancthon (lib. 2. p. 137.) and Sleidan
believe, that this Parysatis was the Sister of Longimanus, and accordingly that
Darius Nothus was by Marriage his Brother-in law. But Plutarch (in the Life of
Artaxerxes) writes, that Parysatis was the Daughter of Longimanus, and that she
was incestuously married to her Brother Darius Nothus. This Darius had two
Brethren, Xerxes and Sogdia^us, that reigned before him, but their Behavior
was so unworthy, and their Reign so short, (ending within the compass of one
year) that there is little notice taken of them in History. So that this third
Brother (who was at first called Ochus, and afterward Darius Nothus) took
possession of the Throne, wherein he was no sooner seated, but by the advice of
his Wife Parysatis, (who was a Woman of great cunning and cruelty) he
endeavored to get into his possession another of his Brothers, called
Secundianus, who was yet alive, (as thinking it his safest way to spend and
destroy all such of the Blood Royal, that might contend with him for Title.)
Wherefore alluring Secundianus by fair promises and oaths, he at last prevailed
with him to trust himself in his hands, notwithstanding M^nostanes the Eunuch
had dissuaded him from so doing. Now Darius Nothus had no sooner gotten
Secundianus into his power, but he immediately put him to death. This King had
one policy beyond his Ancestors; for seeing his Forces had been often routed,
he chose rather to bribe and conquer with the Purse, than to fight upon an
uncertainty with the Pike. The old observation was, that no Town is so strong,
but an Ass laden with Gold might enter therein. The corruption of men's Natures
is so great, that all honesty depends upon who bids most. This will (I fancy)
in time render all strong holds and fortified places useless, since if any one
of the Officers within the same be dishonest, (and what principles can such men
have, who live upon Rapine, Fire, and Sword?) the place is lost. Moreover, if
Princes considered the lives of their common Soldiers when lost in their
service, any more than dead Dogs or Crows, they would all follow the example of
this Darius, and rather purchase a Fort with the Bribe of 10000 l. than with
the loss of 10000 men's lives. But of this more hereafter. Now Darius by this
means closed with the stout Lacedaemonians, and recovered most of what his
Predecessors lost in Asia. In Scripture it is said, that he promoted the
building of the Temple, which by his Father had been interrupted, Ezra 6. His
chief Favorites were three Eunuchs, Artoxares, Artibarxanes, and Athous; but
his chiefest Counselor was his Wife Parysatis, by whom he had thirteen
Children, whereof only his Daughter Amistris, and his three Sons, Artaxerxes
his first Cyrus his second, and Oxendras his third, outlived him. Ctesias
writes, that Arsites, the King's own Brother, together with Artyphius, the Son
of Megabyzus, joined with the Greeks in a revolt, whereupon they were both
taken by Darius's General Artasyras, and immediately by Parysitis's advice put
to death, both being cast into ashes; which manner of death, Valerius Maximus
says, was invented by Darius, the Son of Hystaspes, though others attribute it
to this Darius Nothus. Now soon after this, P^sathnes, Governor of Lydia,
began another Rebellion, which succeeded as the former; for Darius's General
Tissaphernes, by corrupting with money some of Pisathnes's men, took him
Prisoner, and cast him into ashes; whereupon Darius bestowed the Government of
Lydia upon Tissaphernes. Afterward followed the Treason of Artoxares, (a great
Favorite with Darius) who conspired about killing him, and transferring the
Kingdom to himself; for which purpose, he being an Eunuch, caused his Wife to
disguise him with a counterfeit Beard: but this Plot being detected, Parysatis
had him put to death. At this time it was, that Artaxerxes (Darius's eldest
Son) married Statira, the Daughter of Idarnes, a man of great quality among the
Persians; and Terituch^es (the Son of Idarnes) married Amistris, Darius's
Daughter, which cross Match proved very unhappy; for Terituchmes falling in
Love with his Sister Roxana, (a Woman of great Beauty, and well skilled in
Shooting) detested his Wife, in so much as he resolved to murder her by the
help of 300 men, with whom he also practiced to revolt. In the mean while,
Vdiastes (a man that had great power with him, being promised a high reward if
he could preserve Amistris from the danger of her Husband) slew his Master
Terituchmes: but the Son of this Vdiastes, (who was Armor-bearer to
Terituchmes, and not present at his death) after he had notice thereof, cursed
his Father, and seizing upon the City Zaris, delivered it up to Terituchmes's
Son. Thereupon Parysatis did bury alive the Mother, Brethren and Sisters, of
Terituchmes, also commanded Roxana to be cut in pieces alive. Darius would have
had her to have made away Statira his Daughter-in-law, as well as all the rest;
but through the importunity of her Husband Artaxerxes, she gave her her life;
of which Darius told her she would afterward repent, and it fell out
accordingly. Against this Darius Nothus the Medes rebelled, but were after some
time reduced again into obedience. At this time the States of Greece being
embroiled in the P^l^ponesian War, he made great advantages by siding with the
Lacedaemonians against the Athenians, who did him much hurt in Asia by their
great skill in Navigation. In the 17th year of his Reign, he dispatched away
his second Son Cyrus (who was born since he came to the Government) down to the
Seaside, as Satrapa, or Lievtenant-General over all his Forces, which were
used to muster at the Plains of Castolus* with orders to assist the
Lacedaemonians in their War against the Athenians; by whose assistance, they
recovered all that they had formerly lost. Cyrus had not continued in this
Employ above a year or two, before he grew so high, that he killed his two
Cosin-germans, Autobaesaces and Mittraeus, because they came not to him with
their hands folded under their clothes; which Ceremony was only observed in the
presence of a King. Their Parents making complaint of this Cruelty to the King
his Father, he summoned Cyrus to come before him, alleging he was not well.
Whereupon, Cyrus leaving the Command of all his Cities, Treasure, and Tributes,
to Lysander the Spartan, he began his journey, taking along with him
Tissaphernes as his Friend, and 300 Greeks for his Guard, under the Conduct of
Xenias the Parrhasian. His Father lived not long after his Arrival; and in the
time of his sickness, Parysatis his Wife (having ruled him all his life, and
loving her younger Son Cyrus above her eldest) endeavored to make her Husband
leave Cyrus his Successor, as Darius the Son of Hystaspes did Xerxes; for that
he was born to him when he was a King, and the other when he was but a private
person. However, Darius not thinking it just, refused to do it, and therefore
left Cyrus only those Cities whereof he had made him Governor, but his Kingdom
he left solely to his eldest Son Artaxerxes; and so died after he had reigned
19 years; in the 4th. year of the 93d. Olympiad; the 27th. of the Peloponesian
War, then ending; A. M. 3600. and 403 years before the Birth of Christ. From
the 2d. year of this Darius Nothus's Reign, Sulpicius Severus, Joseph Scaliger,
Lively, Iunius, and other learned men, reckon the beginning of the 70 weeks of
Daniel. Our Author Philostratus differs from all other Chronologers, in making
Darius possess the Kingdom of Egypt 60 years. Now as Apollonius here accuses
Darius Nothus of his indiscreet education of his Children, so Plato (lib. 7 de
Legib.) did condemn Cyrus the Great, and Darius Hystaspes, for the same crime,
in that they educated their Children so weakly, as gave occasion for their
future Animosities and Wars.

[3] Cyrus and Artaxerxes; this Artaxerxes (the Son of Darius Nothus, and
Grandson of Artaxerxes Longimanus) was in his minority called Arsa^es, or as
Plutarch has it, Darses: but afterward he received for his surname,
Artaxerxes Mnemon; Artaxerxes, from the great virtue of his Grandfather; and
Mnemon, or Memor, so called from the excellency of his Memory. He had many
Wives, and many Concubines. We find mention in Story but of three of his Wives,
viz. Statira, the Daughter of Idarnes, Atossa and Amestris, his own two
Daughters. The first of these, Statira, was poisoned by her Mother-in-law
Parysatis, for that she had been so great an enemy to her Son Cyrus, as also
had so great power with her Husband Artaxerxes. His second Wife was Atossa, his
own Daughter, whom (being moved by the excitements of his own incestuous Lust,
as well as by the obsequious recommendations of his impious Mother Parysatis)
he married. Plut. in Artax. His third Wife was another of his own Daughters
called Amestris, who was at first married to one Tirabazus, but afterward to
this her own Father Artaxerxes Mnemon. Some will have this Prince to be the
same with Ahasuerus, and so give him Vasthi or Esther to Wife, but Matthius,
and other Historians, have sufficiently quashed this er^our: for Esther was
divorced from Ahasuerus, which none of Artaxerxes's Wives were, Esth. chapter 1.19:
Also Queen Esther was an Hebrew by Birth, which neither Statira, Atossa, nor
Amestris were, for they were all Persian Women, Esth. 2.17. Plutarch (Vita
Artax.) writes, that Artaxerxes had 360 Concubines, whereof Aspasia being the
most eminent for Beauty and Wit, is the only one that is mentioned by Name: she
was at first his younger Brother Cyrus's Concubine, but when he was dead, the
elder Brother received her into favor, to the misfortune of his whole Court.
Aelian, lib. 12. chapter 1. Artaxerxes Mnemon had many Children, as well legitimate
as illegitimate: of those that were legitimate, three Sons and five Daughters;
Darius the eldest Son, who was executed for a Rebellion; Ariaspes the second,
and Ochus the youngest. Pl^t. in Artax. Of his Daughters, Atossa was the
eldest, whom afterward he married; Amestris the second, whom he also married;
Sisygambis the third, who married her natural Brother Arsames, Rhodagune the
fourth, married to Orontes, General of all the Landforces in Persia; and Apame
the fifth, married to Pharnabazus, Admiral of the Persian Navy. Plut. in Artax.
O^ his illegitimate or natural Sons there were many; Plutarch says, 160. and
Justin (lib. 10.) says, 115. whereof only Arsames is mentioned by Name. The
Ingratitude of his Sons was so great, that when Artaxerxes had made his Son
Darius King in his lifetime, thinking to make him sincerer to his paternal
Interest, nevertheless the same Darius was so inhumane, to enter into a
Conspiracy with 50 of his Brethren to kill their Father; wherein (as Justin
observes, lib. 10.) two things are most prodigious; first, the occasion of
Darius's Conspiracy, which was to commit Incest with Aspasia, who had been
formerly a Concubine to their Uncle Cyrus, and was now the same to their Father
Artaxerxes. And the second thing remarkable is, that in so great a number, the
Parricide should not only be agreed on but concealed, and that amongst 50 of
his own Children, there was not one ^ound, whom either the majesty of a King,
reverence of an ancient Man, or indulgence of so kind a Father, could recall
from so horrible an act: bu^ this execrable Treason being detected, they were
all most deservedly put to death, together with their very Wives and Children,
Ne quod vestigium tanti sceleris extaret, ^aith Justin, lib. 10. As for
Aspasia, when the old man first heard their demands, he had put her into a
Religious House called, The Temple of the Sun, which so exasperated Darius into
this unnatural Revenge which soon after broke his Fathers heart. Having thus
therefore described the several Marriages and Children of Artaxerxes, give me
leave in the next place to acquaint you with the Dissentions betwixt his
younger Brother Cyrus and him, occasioned (as I said before) by the Legacy of
their Father Darius Nothus, who bequeathed to Artaxerxes his Kingdom, and to
Cyrus those Cities whereof he was before Lieutenant. For Cyrus thinking this
Legacy unequal, as also being encouraged by his Mother Parysatis, did secretly
prepare to levy War against his Brother; whereof Artaxerx^s having notice, sent
for him; who pretending his great innocence, immediately surrendered himself,
and was by his Brother bound in Chains of Gold, also had been put to death had
not his Mother interceded for him: as having likewise designed to have murdered
his Brother, whilst he was shifting his Robes in the Temple, whereof
Tissaphernes was the discoverer. But Cyrus being thus dismissed; did now again
begin to levy War upon his Brother, not clandestinely, but openly* therefore
with some Auxiliary Greeks to encourage his own Forces, he marches up boldly to
engage his Brother, who was at the head of a far greater number; yet
nevertheless Cyrus his men, and especially the Greeks, had the better of the
day, till by the fatal wound and unhappy death of Cyrus, the scales were
turned; some say, he received the wound from Artaxerxes own hand, but Ctesias
Cnidius (who was the King's own Physician) writes, that it was given him by a
Caunian of mean condition. Now Cyrus being thus slain, Artaxerxes commanded his
Head and his right Hand to be cut off; after which, marching to plunder his
Camp, he there ^eiz'd on his Brother's Phoc^an Concubine Aspas^a, and took her
for his own; as I have already showed. After this, the King beginning his March
homewards, and Parysatis the Queen Mother being informed of her beloved Son
Cyrus's death, medi^ated upon nothing else but how to be revenged on those that
were the chief Instruments of it. Wherefore the Caunian and one Mithridates
being both condemned to die, (each of them for bragging that they had killed
Cyrus with their own hands, because thereby they robbed the King of that
honor, which he pretended unto himself) Parysatis begged to have the torturing
of them, which Artaxerxes granting her, she performed with such feminine
cruelty, that they were 17 days in dying. The next Tragedy she acted was upon
Megates the Eunuch, whom having won of Artaxerxes at Dice, she caused to be
f^ea'd alive, for that he was the person who cut off the Head and Hands of her
Son Cyrus. Afterward her Revenge fastened upon the Queen Statira, with whom
although she carried it fair outwardly, yet she hated mortally, partly by
reason of her former enmity to Cyrus, partly for her great interest with the
King her Husband, and partly upon the account that she had put to death many of
those, who by Parysatis's means had formerly murdered her Brother Terituchmes,
and her other Relations; wherefore being at Supper together, Parysatis cutting
a Bird in the middle with a Knife that was poisoned on one side, gave that part
which was next the Poison to Statira, who seeing Parysatis her self eat of the
same Bird suspected nothing, nevertheless Statira died of the same with great
Torment and Convulsions: some time before she died, she began to suspect the
true cause of her illness, and acquainted the King with it; who knowing the
implacable malice of his Mother, soon credited it, and thereupon tortured her
nearest Servants; but she kept one Gygis, a waiting Woman, who had been
accessory to the fact, and would not deliver her up to him, till at length
having notice that she designed to escape by night, he surpised and condemned
her to have her Head bruised to pieces between two Stones, which is the Persian
Law for Poysoners. As for his Mother Parysatis, he hurt her not in the least,
either in word or deed, but she desiring to go to Babylon, he sent her only
with this farewell, that then he would not see that City so long as she lived.
And this is the true state of the domestic Affairs of Artaxerxes. Plut. in
Artax. Xenoph. exped. Cyri, lib. 6. lib. 7. Artaxerxes after the overthrow of
Cyrus, sent down Tissaphernes (and not Pharnabazus, as Diodorus writes) to the
Seacoasts to recover them again into his power, which belonged to him, both by
Inheritance from his Father, and by Conquest from his Brother: all which
readily submitted to his Summons. Soon after the Greek Cities, under, Thymbro
their Captain General, declared against the King, and from a small power grew
very considerable, and successful, chiefly from an Emulation and Dissension
between the two Persian Generals, Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus: which produced
frequent Miscarriages abroad, and Accusations at home, one of another, to the
King, till at last Agesilaus obtaining a considerable Victory over the Persians
near the River Pactolus, for want of their Foot, which was occasioned by
Tissaphernes's absence, they accused him to the King of Treachery, which
Accusation being vigorously prosecuted by Parysatis, (who bore him a mortal
grudge upon the account of her Son Cyrus) Artaxerxes made Tithraustes General
in his stead, with a particular Commission to put to death Tissaphernes, which
accordingly was done; for Ariaeus alluring him to Colossus in Phrygia, under
pretense of a new Commission for him, did there seize Tissaphernes in the
Baths, and send him Prisoner to Tithraustes, who forthwith cut off his Head,
and sent it to the King, also the King sent it as a Present to his Mother
Parysatis, who greatly rejoiced at the sight. Of this read more in Plutarch,
Xenophon, Diodorus, and Pausanias. Now concerning this King's Reign Historians
vary; Plutarch makes his Rule to be 62 years; others say, 55 years; others, 49.
and others 43. or 44. but the most credible opinion is that of Beda, in his six
Ages of the World, and of Eusebius, in his Chronicle, who say, that Artaxerxes
for grief of his Sons wickedness, died in the 43 d. year of his Reign, being
Anno Mundi, 3610. ante Christi Nativit. 361.

[4] Artaxerxes, the Son of Xerxes, whose surname was Longimanus, so called, a
Longitudine manus, for that as Strabo tells us, ( lib. 15.) his Hands and Arms
were so long, that standing straight and upright with his Body, his Hands
reached down below his Knees. But Plutarch (Vita Artaxerx.) says, that he had
one Hand longer than the other, excepting which blemish, he was the most
beautiful man of his time. Xerxes, the Father of this Prince, being murdered by
his Uncle Artabanus, left behind him three Sons, viz. Darius, Hystaspes, and
Artaxerxes Longimanus; at the time of Xerxes's death, the eldest and the
youngest were resident in his Court, but Hystaspes was absent, as being then
Governor of Bactria. Now Artabanus having murdered their Father, went
immediately in the dead time of the night to Artaxerxes the third Son, and made
him believe that his elder Brother Darius was the person that had killed his
Father, out of an ambition to reign himself, as also that he had a design upon
his life; whereupon Artabanus promising him the assistance of his Guards if he
would kill his Brother Darius, Artaxerxes giving credit to all that he had
said, did forthwith put Darius to death. When this was done, Artabanus calling
his Sons together, told them, that if ever they thought to obtain the Kingdom,
then was the time, and that it could only be done by Artaxerxes's death.
Hereupon they drawing their Swords with a design to kill him, Artaxerxes
receiving but one slight wound, defended himself so bravely, that he slew
Artabanus on the place, as some will have it; though others with more reason
defer the time of Artabanus's death, to whom also seven months in the Empire
are attributed by Eusebius. Now by this means, Darius being slain, Artaxerxes
came to the Empire in his youth, being the 4th. year of the 78th. Olympiad, or
in the beginning of the 79th. Lysitheus being then Archon at Athens, A.M. 3540.
and 463 years before the Birth of Christ. Those Author^ who write, that
Artabanus survived his first Conflict, say also, that he made a second Attempt
upon Artaxerxes's Life, which design he communicated to Megabyzus, who had
married the Daughter of Xerxes, and for her loose life was fallen into a
discontent; which Artabanus did, as thinking nothing would make a man more
valiant and desperate than an ill Wife: accordingly Megabyzus took an Oath of
secrecy, yet nevertheless soon after discovered the whole business, so that
Artabanus was instantly put to death for the same; at which time, all his other
Treasons came out, concerning the Murder of X^rxes and Dari^^. After
A^tabanus's death, (which is at large described by Justin) great Troubles
ensued, his Party being very strong and numerous, till at length by the courage
of Megabyzus, (who was dangerously wounded in the Conflict) three of
Artabanus's Sons being killed, the Tumult ceased. The next Disturbance that
alarmed Artaxerxes was a Revolt of the Bactria^s, occasioned, as some say* by
his Brother Hystaspes their Governor, out of indignation, to see his youngest
Brother preferred before him. Two Battles were fought in this Quarrel, in the
latter of which, the Wind blowing in the Faces of the Bactrians, Artaxerxes
became victorious, and reduced all that Country to his obedience. After this,
Artaxerxes had no sooner ^ett^ed the Affairs of his Kingdom, and removed all
such Officers as were not for his turn, but the Egyptians having heard of the
Disorders in Persia upon the death of Xerxes, began to think of recovering
their Liberty* for which purpose, setting up Inarus King of Lybia, and Son of
Psammetichus, for their Prince, they began a Revol^ under his Conduct: they
furthermore sent to crave aid of the Athenians, who desiring as well to get
^ooting in Egypt, as to reduce the power of the Persian Monarch, furnished
them with 300 Ship^* Against these Preparations Artaxerxes dispatched (besides
a great Fleet) also an Army of 3 or 400000 Foot, under the Command of
Achaemenid^s, who (as Ctesias says) was his Brother, but (as Diodorus says)
his great Uncle, being the Son of Darius Hystaspes. This Persian Army was
encountered and beat by the Egyptian and Lybian Forces, wherein Achaemenides
the General, and 100000 Persians were slain. After this Artaxerxes offered
great Bribes to the Laced^monians, for their assistance in this War, which they
refused; his design being to make them fall out with Athens, that so the
Athenians might be compelled to withdraw their Forces out of Egypt.
Nevertheless Artaxerxes by the next Spring raises a new Army of above 300000*
which he sent against the Egyptians, under the Command of Megabyzus, (the Son
of that Zopyrus who recovered Babylon to Darius) joining Artabazus in
Commission with him. In this second Expedition, Megabyzus wounded King Inarus
in the Thigh, and obtained so great a Victory, that he totally reduced the
Egyptians to obedience, and having taken King Inarus Prisoner, Artaxerxes made
him be crucified. The Athenian Fleet was likewise destroyed by a stratagem; for
the Persians diverting the course of the River wherein they lay, by making new
Channels at the mouth of it, left the Ships at Anchor upon dry ground, and so
assaulted them with their Land-Army, and took them. Now Artaxerxes having thus
composed his Troubles in Bactria and Egypt, did in the 7th. year of his Reign
make a Decree in behalf of the Jews, that whosoever of them would, might go up
with Ezra, and inhabit Jerusalem. He also contributed several sums of Money for
their Sacrifices, and other uses, to be disposed of according to the discretion
of Ezra; wherewith Ezra began to build the Walls of Jerusalem. In the 15th.
year of Artaxerxes, the Athenians having recruited their former losses, did
with their Fleet, under the Convoy of their Admiral Cimon, very much infest the
Persians at Cyprus, in so much that Artaxerxes was glad to clap up a Peace with
them upon disadvantagious terms; viz. that all the Greek Cities in Asia should
be free from the Persian yoke. In this last Engagement at Cyprus, Cimon
perished, and in him the true Gallantry of the Greekish Nation; for none of
their Captains after him did any thing considerable against the Barbarians,
excepting Agesilaus, whose War also was short, and of little consequence. In
the 20th. year of Artaxerxes* Nehemiah his Cup Bearer ( Nehem. 1.11.) hearing
that the Wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the Gates burnt with fire,
obtained leave of him to go with a large Commission for the rebuilding of the
Walls, as also with a Mand^mus to the Keeper of the King's Forests, to furnish
him with Wood for that purpose. About this time it was that Megabyzus,
Artaxerxes's General, who had done him that service in Egypt, was disobliged by
the King, in putting those Egyptian Prisoners to death, whom he had promised
their Pardons; in so much, that Megabyzus leaving the Court in discontent, and
retiring to his Command in Syria, did there with the assistance of some Greeks,
begin an open Rebellion against the King his Master, and obtained two famous
Victories over him. Nevertheless, by the mediation of Friends betwixt both,
together with the assurance of a free Pardon, Artaxerxes and Megabyzus were
again reconciled, and he brought into the King's presence. But soon after being
both together hunting of a Lion, and Megabyzus happening to kill the Lion just
as the King was going to strike him, the King was so greatly offended thereat,
that he commanded Megabyzus his Head to be cut off; however, by the
intercession of Friends, the King for that time gave him his life, and only
banished him; so unmindful are Princes of all past services! when after five
years exile, he made Friends with Artaxerxes, and was restored again to his
Favor, so as to eat at his own Table: but soon after he died, being 76 years
of age, whose loss was much lamented by the King, and all others. Nor did the
King himself Artaxerxes Longimanus long survive him, but departed this life,
having reigned, according to Diodorus, 40 years; according to Sulpitius
Severus, 41 years; according to Ctesias, 42 years: but the most probable
opinion is, that he died in the beginning of the 42d. year of his Reign, being
the 2d. year of the 89th. Olympiad; A. M. 3582. and 421 ante Not. Chapter Ctesias
(in Excerpris Histor. Persi^.) writes, that Artaxerxes had only one legitimate
Son by his Wife Damaspia, named Xerxes; but 17 by Concubines, amongst which the
three chief were, Sogdianus, Ochus, (called afterward Darius Nothus) and
Arsi^es; whereof Sogdianus killing Xerxes, and Sogdianus himself being put to
death by the Army, Ochus (or Darius Nothus) succeeded his Father Longimanus to
the Crown. Some write that Artaxerxes Longimanus had one Daughter named
Parysatis, but this is uncertain.

[5] The story of Themistocles the Athenian, who sometimes coming out of
Greece, conversed with Artaxerxes, etc. This Themistocles was a person of great
eminency amongst the Athenians, who having spent his youth in Luxury and
Extravagancy, attoned for the same by the great Virtue of his riper years: for
he first fortified that famous Harbor Piraeeus, and afterward overcame the
Persians in a Sea-Engagement at Salamines. Plutarch (who has written his Life
at large) says, that none of the Greeks excelled him, and few equaliz'd him.
Now the Story which Philostratus here mentions concerning him, is this: That
Themistocles being falsely accused by the Athenians, for joining with Pausanias
in a Conspiracy to assist the Persians against their own Country, was forced to
save his Life by flying into Persia, where by Artaxerxes Longimanus (the then
King) he was honorably received, and bountifully entertained, having three
Cities given him, one for Bread, another for Wine, and a third for Victuals; to
which some add two more for Clothes and Linen; and that afterward he died a
natural death at Magnesia. However, others write, that Themistocles being
unable to perform his promise to the King, of conquering Greece, (which by this
time had Cimon, and many other experienced Captains amongst them) poisoned
himself for grief. But of this see more in Plutarch, Cornelius Nepos,
Thucydides, and Valerius Maximus.

Now for as much as in this Chapter, (and elsewhere in this Book) are written
the Lives of some of the Persian and Grecian Monarchs, it may not be improper
to give you a compendious Account of the Succession of the four Monarchies,
which (although I design for a distinct Treatise hereafter by it self, in a
general Body of History, if Life, Health, and Peace, will permit me) may
nevertheless at this time prove useful to such as read the foregoing part of
this Chapter. Know then, that History is the Commemoration of things past, with
the due Circumstances of Time and Place, in distinct Distances, Intervals,
Periods, or Dynasties, by lineal Descents, for the more ready help of Memory
and Application. And this (as the learned Prideaux observes) may be divided
into Either, 1. Ecclesiastical. 2. Political. 3. Of Successions in States,
Countries, or Families. 4. Of Professions, as the Lives of famous men in any
Faculty. 5. Natural, as that of Pliny, the Lord Bacon's Natural History, etc.
6. Various, such as we have from Valerius Maximus, Plutarch, and Aelian. Or 7.
Vain, Legendary or Fabulous, such as are comprehended under the Name of
Romances.


But of these, the two first being only to my purpose at this time, I shall not
trouble you with the other five.

First, For Ecclesiastical History, that insisteth chiefly on Church Matters,
and has precedence before others in respect of its Antiquity, Dignity, and
pretended Certainty.

Now that is generally reckoned after this manner, Beginning, 1. From the
Creation to the end of the Flood, 1657 years. 2. From the Flood to the calling
of Abraham, 367 years. 3. From the calling of Abraham to the Israelites
departing out of Egypt, 430 years. 4. From the Egyptians coming out of Egypt
to the building of Solomon's Temple, 480 years. 5. From the building Solomon's
Temple to the erecting of the second Temple by Zorobabel, 497 years. 6. From
the building Zorobabel's second Temple to the Nativity of our Savior Christ,
529 years. 7. From the Nativity of our Savior to this present time, 1680 years.


Secondly, To Ecclesiastical History thus briefly comprehended, Political in
the same method succeeds, treating of Civil Matters in Kingdoms, States, or
Commonwealths; and this is, according to profane Chronology, carried along in
these Periods,

Beginning, 1. From Nimrod (or rather Belus) to Cyrus. 2. From Cyrus to
Alexander the Great. 3. From Alexander the Great to Julius Caesar; and the
fourth Monarchy beginning* 4. From Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great, in
whom it ended.


For thus Historians have ever divided the Series of profane Story into these
four Empires, called the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman. As
for the first of these, viz. the Assyrian Monarchy, it was first begun by
Nimrod, and destroyed by Cyrus; as for what passed before the beginning of this
Empire, we have no other account but in sacred Writ, wherewith since every one
either is or ought to be already acquainted, I shall take no further notice of
it in this place. We read therefore that after the Division of the Earth,
Nimrod (the Son of Chush, and Nephew of Cham) fixed his Seat at Babel, and
therein first began that Kingdom or Empire, which was called by some the
Babylonian, from Babel, the place of the King's Court or Residence; by others
the Chaldaan, from the Country Chaldaea, wherein the City Babylon was seated;
and by others the Assyrian, from Ashur, the Son of Sem, who is called by
profane Authors, Ni^us, and whom Justin out of Trogus would have to be the
first Founder of this Empire, as also the first King that made War upon his
Neighbors. Justin, lib. 1. Now as this Monarchy was at first instituted by
Nimrod or Belus, (which from Julius African^s and the best Authors I find to be
the same) so was it enlarged by Ninus and his Wife Semiramis, in whose time it
was at the height of glory and grandeur; for afterward by reason of the
effeminacy of its Princes it declined, till by the ruin and fall of that
Monster, Sardanapalus, (who was Mars ad opus Veneris, Martis ad arma Venus) the
Empire became divided between those two Rebels, Arbaces and Bel^chus, in whose
Successions it lasted, till by the death of Belshazzar, last King of the
Babylonians, and of Darius, last King of the M^des, the whole Empire was again
united, and so descended upon Cyrus the Great, who began the second Empire of
the Medes and Persians. This first Empire began in the year of the World, 1788.
it lasted 1646 years, and was subverted or translated into Persia in the year
of the World, 3434. Now the several Races and Successions of Kings that
governed this first Assyrian Monarchy, are as follows: I. Familia Beli.
1. Nimrod, or Belus. 2. Ninus. 3. His Wife Semiramis. 4. Nin^as, or Ninus the
II. 5. Arius, of whom together with these that follow* there is little known,
till we come to Sard^^^palus. 6. Arali^s. 7. Bal^^^ the I* 8. Armatrites. 9.
Belachus the I. 10. Baleus the II. 11. Altadas. 12. Mamitus. 13. Mancaleus. 14.
Shaerus. 15. Ma^^elus. 16. Sparetus. 17. Asca^^des. 18. A^yntas. 19. Beloch^s
the II. 20. Bellopares. 21. Lamprides. 22. Sosares. 23. Lampar^s. 24. P^nnias.
25. S^sarmus. 26. Mitreus. 27. Tau^an^s. 28. Teutaeus. 29. Ti^aeus. 30.
D^^^ilus. 31. E^pa^^s. 32. L^^sthenes* 33. Pyrithidias. 34. Ophra^^^s. 35.
Ophraga^^^s. 36. Ascrazape^. 37. Sardanapalus; after whose death the Empire was
divided between Arbaces and Belochus; Arbaces enjoyed the Government of the
Medes, and Belochus of the Assyrians: their Successions were are as follows:
1. Arbaces. 2. Mandauces. 3. Sosarmus. 4. Artycas. 5. Arbianes. 6. Arsaeos, or
Deioces. 7. Phraortes. 8. Cyaxares. And 9. Astyages, the Father of Darius Medus.
1. Phul-Belochus. 2. Tiglat-Philassar. 3. Salmanassar. 4. Sennacherib. 5.
Assar-Haddon. 6. Merodach. 7. Ben-Merodach: 8. Nabopalassar. 9. Nabuchodonosor.
10. Evil-Merodach. And 11. Belsazar.



For Astyages and Belsazar gave a period to this first Monarchy, whereof Cyrus
became sole Monarch.

Now concerning this second Monarchy, some will have it that Darius Medus, the
Son of Astyages, began it, and that Cyrus (Astyages his Grandson by his
Daughter Mandana) did enlarge and perfect it, for that (they being both Kings,
one of Media, and the other of Persia) when joining their Forces together, they
overthrew Belsazar Darius, thereupon annexed Babylon to his part of the Empire.
Yet nevertheless the most general and most reasonable opinion is, that Cyrus
alone was the first Founder of the second Monarchy, because that whilst Darius
lived, the Empire was divided betwixt Cyrus and himself; for as Xenophon
testifies, Cyrus out of his liberality and bounty, permitted Darius to possess
the Kingdoms of Media and Babylon during his life, both which, after Darius's
death, he united to his own: from which union we may most properly derive the
original of the second Monarchy, and by consequence attribute its sole
foundation to Cyrus. It was called the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians,
because the Empire did chiefly consist of those two Kingdoms. The principal
Enlargers of this second Monarchy were Cyrus the Great, Darius Hystaspes, and
Artaxerxes Longimanus; as for the rest of the Kings that ruled it, they were so
tyrannical and vicious, that the Empire suffered much under their Government,
till it was totally subverted under the Reign of Darius Codomannus, who being
overcome by Alexander the Great, lost both his Life and Empire; which was
immediately thereupon translated into Greece, where Alexander began the third
and Grecian Monarchy from that fall of Darius Codomannus. This second Monarchy
of the Medes and Persians lasted (from its beginning under Cyrus to its
subversion under Darius) 228 years: wherein there were two Families possessed the
Empire; the first was of Cyrus; the second of Darius Hystaspes: as for the
Family of Cyrus, it expired in his Son Cambyse^; who killing his own Brother
Smerdis, and committing Incest with his Sisters, did afterward lose his life
by a Rebellion of the Magi, who, pretending the King's Brother Smerdis was not
slain, set up a Pseudo-Smerdis of their own to reign, which was soon discovered
by his cropped ears, and made away by the Nobles. After which, Cambyses having
left behind him but only one Daughter Pantaptes, and the Empire being left
without a Prince to govern, it was agreed on by those seven Noblemen, ( Otanes,
Intaphernes, Gobryas, Megabysus, Aspathines, Hydarnes, and Darius, afterward
called Hystasp^s, who had lately conspired together, and destroyed both the
Magi and their Pseudo-Smerdis) that from amongst themselves a new King should
be elected after this manner: viz. that each of them riding the next morning
into the Suburbs, he whose Horse first neigh'd should obtain the Empire; which
thereupon (as I have showed els^where) fell to Darius Hystaspes, by the cunning
of his Groom O^bares, who giving his Master's Horse a Mare in the same place
overnight, the Horse immediately fell a neighing so soon as he came thither
again the next morning: and so won his Master Darius the Kingdom; whose Family
was the second and last Race of Kings that governed this second Monarchy of the
M^des and Persians, as appears in this Line of their Succession: I. Familia
Prima.
1. Cyrus the Great. 2. Cambyses.
II. Familia Secunda.
3. Darius Hystaspes. 4. Xerxes. 5. Artaxerxes Longimanus. 6. Darius No^hu^^.
7. Artaxerxes Mnemon. 8. Artaxerxes Ochus. 9. Arsames. And 10. Darius
Codom^^nus; who was the last of the Persian Monarch^ and in whose death the
second Monarchy was extinct: for Alexander the Great robbing him both of his
Life and Empire, did thereupon begin the third great Monarchy in Greece.


As for the third Empire or Monarchy, which immediately took its rise from the
fall of the second, it is called the Grecian or Macedonian Monarchy, from its
(...) Founder Alexander the Great, who was of Macedon, and a Grecian born: for
he ^aving overcome Darius, the last King of the Persians, first established
this third Monarchy of Greece, in the year of the World, 3642. a^te Christi
Not. 329. This Dominion of Alexander's excelled all others that had been
before; for that having annexed the Kingdoms of Media and Persia to his own
Empire of Greece, he in the space of twelve years rendered himself almost Master
of the whole Universe. But this third and Grecian Monarchy lasted not long in
this united flourishing condition; for Alexander dying without Sons, and
leaving his Dominions, (...), to the worthiest, occasioned many Competitors,
every one in his own esteem claiming a share, till after many sharp Contests
amongst them, four of the most eminent shared the Empire between themselves,
dividing it into four Dynasties or Kingdoms, viz. the Kingdom of Macedon, the
Kingdom of Asia Minor, the Kingdom of Syria, and the Kingdom of Egypt: all
which were in process of time reduced to the Roman Yoke. 1. Asia Minor was
conquered by the Romans, when Antiochus the Great was vanquished by L. Scipio
the Proconsul; who for that Victory was ever after called Asiaticus: Justin,
lib. 31. and Livy, lib. 37. 2. The Romans subdued Macedon, when Paulus Aemylius
the Roman Consul took Perseus (the last King of Macedonia) Prisoner, which was
A. M. 3803. and about 156 years after the death of Alexander the Great. 3. The
Romans conquered Syria, when Tigranes was defeated by Pompey, which was 260
years after the death of Alexander. M. Justin, Plutarch, Livy. 4. and lastly,
Augustus Caesar added the Kingdom of Egypt to the Roman Empire, upon his
Victory over Anthony and Cleopatra, reducing it into the form of a Province,
which happened 294 years after Alexander's death. Plutarch in Anton. Polem.
lib. 3. chapter 8. So as this Grecian Monarchy lasted completely 300 years; that is
to say, from the death of Alexander the Great, to the death of Cleopatra, 294
years, as Ptolemy writes; whereunto if 6 more are added for the Reign of
Alexander, from the death of Darius Codomannus, to his own death, it will
amount to the just and full time of 300 years. Arrianus, Diod^rus. Now for the
Succession of those several Kings that possessed the four Divisions of this
third Grecian Monarchy, they were as follows:

I. Over the whole Grecian Monarchy, reigned Alexander M. 6 years, beginning
his Reign, A. M. 3642.

II. Over the Monarchy as it was divided, reigned four several Kings; the
Macedonian, Asiatick, Syrian, and Egyptian.

I. The Kings of Macedon were, 1. Aridaus, the Brother of Alexander M. 2.
Cassander, the Son of Antipater. 3. Philippus, the Son of Cassander. 4.
Antipater and Alexander, both Sons of Cassander. 5. Demetrius Poliorcetes, Son
of Antigonus, King of Asia. 6. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus. 7. Lysimachus of
Thrace, Alexander's Officer that killed the Lion. 8. Ptolemaus Ceraunus, Son of
Ptolomaus Lagus. 9. Meleager, one of Alexander's old Officers. 10. Antipater
the II. 11. Sosthenes* 12. Antigonus Gonatas, Son of Demetrius Poliorceres. 13.
Demetrius, the second Son of Antigonus. 14. Antigonus the second, surnamed
Doson. 15. Philippus (Son of Demetrius the 11th) was overcome by the Romans.
16. Perseus, the last King of Macedon; who being overcome by Paulus Aemy^^us,
the Roman Consul, was imprisoned during life: by which means, the Kingdom of
Macedon coming under the Roman Jurisdiction, they were nevertheless permitted
to enjoy their freedom, till being betrayed into a Rebellion by a counterfeit
Philip, their Commander, the Romans upon that reduced them into a Province. And
this was the end of that one part of the third and Grecian Monarchy called
Macedonia, A. M. 3803.


II. The Kings of Asia Minor were, 1. Antigonus, Philip of Macedon's Natural
Son. 2. Demetrius Poliorcetes, who was expelled this Kingdom by his Son-in-law
Seleucus Nicanor, after which, this Asia Minor was annexed to the Kingdom of
Syria, A. M. 3683.


III. The Kings of Syria were, 1. S^leucus Nicanor. 2. Antiochus S^ter, the Son
of Seleucus Nicanor. 3. Antiochus the second, surnamed Theos. 4. Seleuchus
^^llinichus, the Son of Theos. 5. Seleucus Ceraunus, the Son of Callinicus. 6.
Antiochus Magnus, the Brother of Ceraunus. 7. Seleuc^s Philopater, or Soter,
the Son of Antiochus M. 8. Antiochus Epiphanes, the Brother of Seleucus
Epiphanes. 9. Antiochus Eupator, the Son of Antiochus Epiphanes. ^0: Demetrius
Soter. 11. Alexander Bala, or Veles: 12. Demetrius Nicanor, the Son of
Demetrius Soter. 13. Antiochus Entheus. 14. Tryphon. 15. Antiochus Sidete^,
alias Soter, the Son of Demetrius Nicanor. 16. Demetrius II. Nicanor redux. 17.
Alexander Zebenna. 18. Antiochus Grypus, the Son of Demetrius. 19. Antiochus
Cyzicenus, Seleucus the 5th. Antiochus Eusebes, Philippus, and Demetrius, were
all the Sons of Grypus, who being at variance amongst themselves, became a prey
to Tigranes of Parthia. 20. Tigranes himself was soon after subdued likewise by
Pompey, and Syria made a Province by the Romans, A. M. 3890.


IV. The Kings of Egypt were, 1. Ptolemaeus Lagus, Philip of Macedon's Natural
Son. 2. Ptol. Philadelphus, that married his own Sister Arsinoe. 3. Ptol.
Evargetes. 4. Ptol. Philopator. 5. Ptol. Epiphanes. 6. Ptol. Philometor. 7.
Ptol. Physcon. 8. Ptol. Lathurus, or Lamyrus. 9. Ptol. Alexander. 10. Ptol.
Lathurus, recalled again from Banishment. 11. Ptol. Auletes. 12. Ptol.
Dionysius. 13. Cleopatra (the Daughter of Ptol. Auletes) was at first the
beloved Mistress of Julius Caesar, and afterward of Mark Anthony, whose
overthrow at Actium broke her heart, so that she voluntarily threw away her own
life with the biting of an Asp; after which Egypt was reduced into a Roman
Province, whereby the third Monarchy did totally expire.


Wherefore the Roman Power having in this manner swallowed up the four several
Divisions of the third Monarchy, the fourth Monarchy must by consequence take
its beginning at Rome; and so we find it: for Julius Caesar is reckoned to be
the first Founder of this fourth Empire, which derives its Name of Roman from
the City of Rome it self: Plutarch speaking of the greatness of this Empire
says, Romanum imperium velut Anchora fuit fluctuanti Mundo. The City of Rome
was called the Head of the World, and the Romans the Lords of the Universe.
Terrarum Dea, gentiumque Roma,
Cu^ par est nihil, and nihil secundum*
Mart* Also Propertius: Omnia Romanae cedant miracula terrae;
Natura hic posuit, quicquid ubique fuit.
Again Ovid: Gentibus est ali^s Tellus datalimite certo,
Romanae spatium est urbis and orbis idem.
Lib. 2. Fast. Likewise Petronius Arbit. Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat,
Qua mare, qua terre, qua sidus currit utrumque
This Roman Empire is divided into several Periods: whereof the first (which
comprehends all the Heathen Emperors, and lasts about 355 years) is reckoned
from Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great; the second from Constantine the
Great to Justinian, the third from Justinian to Charles the Great; and the
fourth from Charles the Great down to our present Times, therein containing the
Government of the Western Franks. But for as much as Philostratus lived long
before any of these late Periods, so that I can have no occasion to mention any
part of their History, I shall therefore at this time descend* no lower than
the first Period of this fourth Monarchy, which begins with Julius Caesar, and
ends in Constantius C^l^^us, the Father of Constantine the Great, and so
conclude. The Succession of this Empire was thus: 1. Caius Julius Caesar. 2.
Octavianus Caesar Augustus. 3. Cl. Tiberius Nero. 4. Cajus Caligula. 5.
Claudius Tiberius Drusus. 6. Cl. Domitius Nero. 7. Sergius Galba. 8. Salvius
Otho. 9. Aulus Vitellius. 10. Flavius Vespasianus. 11. Titus Vespasianus. 12.
Fl. Domitianus. 13. Nerva Cocceius: 14. Ulpius Traianus. 15. Aelius Hadrianus.
16. Antoninus Pius. 17. M. Aur. Antoninus Philosoph. 18. Aurelius Commodus. 19.
P. Aelius Pertinax. 20. Didius Iulianus. 21. Septimius Severus. 22. Antoninus
Bassianus Caracalla. 23. Opilius Macrinus* 24. Heliogabalus. 25. Aur. Alex and.
Severus. 26. Maximinus Thrax. 27. Gordianus, Father and Son. 28. Pupienus and
Balbinus. 29. Gordianus the third. 30. Philippios Arabs, and his Son. 31.
Decius, and his Son. 32. Tre^onianus Gallus. 33. P. Licinius Valerianus. 34. P
Licinius Gallienus. 35. Cla^d^us. 36. Valerius Aur^lianus. 37. M. Claudius
Tacitus* 38. M. Aurelius Probus. 39. M. Aurel. Ca^us. 40. Valerius
Dio^lerianus, and 41. Constantius Chlorus, the Father of Constantine the Great.
This compendious Scheme of History is what I some years since composed for my
own private use, as an assistant to my bad memory, and whereby I have found no
small benefit in my reading ancient Story; for without some such general
knowledge of the Succession as well of Empires as Kings at first obtained, a
man will find himself at a great loss when he reads any one Prince's Life,
which generally relates to former Occurrences, wh^reof he is ignorant; as also
not so well able to digest and remember what he then reads. To be first well
acquainted with the Rise, Progress, Declension, and final Subversion of an
Empire, is above all things the greatest help to him that shall afterward read
the Lives of its several Princes; he that knows how the first Assyrian Monarchy
was founded by Nimrod, enlarged by Ninus and Semiramis, divided upon the death
of Sardanapalus, and destroyed by Cyrus, may afterward launch with pleasure
and confidence into the Chronicles of that first Monarchy* He that understands
how Cyrus by the defeat of Belsazer, and by his Uncle Darius Medus's death,
possessed himself of the whole Assyrian and Babylonian Monarchy, and
translating the same into Persia, did there begin the second Monarchy; how
Cyrus's Family extinguishing in his Son Cambyses, Darius Hystaspes won the
Empire by his Horse's neighing; and how it continued in his Family, till by
Darius Codomanus's Luxury, this second Monarchy was subverted and translated
into Greece by Alexander the Great, shall very easily acquaint himself with all
other parts of the Persian Story. Also he that is at first acquainted with the
beginning of this third Grecian Monarchy, by Alexander the Great his Victory
over Darius, with the division of the same by his death into four several
Kingdoms, and how each of those four Kingdoms were afterward subdued by the
Romans, will be able the more easily to inform himself not only of the several
Decays and final Ruin of the third Empire, but likewise of the many Advances
which the Romans made to the fourth, till at last it began under Julius Caesar,
and extended its first Period to Constantine the Great. So that nothing is a
greater help to an Historian, than a right understanding of the several
Descents and Falls of one Monarchy into another, which method being so useful,
brief, and new, I hope may not prove less beneficial to others than to my self.
Yet nevertheless, since I design this but as an assistance to their reading the
Histories at large, those who are so minded may please for the first Assyrian
Monarchy, besides the Scriptures, to peruse Josephus, Diod^rus Siculus, and
Justin, the Epitomizer of Trogus; other ancient Authors there were who treated
of those Times, as Ctesias, Berosus* and Megasthenes, whereof we have now only
some few fragments remaining in Photius and Josephus; unless you will give
credit to that counterfeit Monk Annius Viterbiensis, who has imposed upon the
World his own Impostures under the Names of Berosus, C^esias, Megasthenes, and
other ancient Writers. For the second Monarchy which was called the Persian,
they may read Herodotus, wherein he that distinguishes between what he delivers
of his own knowledge, and what from the report of others, shall not be
deceived: let them also read Thucydides, who faithfully delivers an Account of
the Peloponesian War, which happened in his own Time: neither must that great
Captain, Philosopher, and Historian, Xenophon, be omitted, notwithstanding his
History of Cyrus seems rather to be a political Romance, and Character of what
a Prince should be, than the true History of what Cyrus really was: also
Plutarch, Diodorus, and Justin, must be again inspected for this second
Monarchy. Now for the third and Grecian Monarchy, Arianus Nicomediensis and
Quintus Curtius must be perused, as treating altogether of the Deeds of
Alexander; also Plutarch, Justin, Polybius, and Diodorus, who treat of
Alexander's Successors. Lastly, For the well understanding of the fourth
Monarchy, which was called the Roman, and began under Julius Caesar, must be
read, Caesar's Commentaries, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Titus Livy, Valerius
Maximus, Plutarchus, Cornelius Tacitus, Plinius secundus, Suetonius, Appian,
Lucius Florus, Herodian, Dion-Cassius, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius,
Flavius Vopiscus, Aelius Spartianus, Vulcatius Gallicanus, and Ammianus
Marcellinus; not to mention such Authors or Ecclesiastical Writers, who either
wrote after Constantine, or intermixed sacred and prophan^ Story together. Now
of each of these four Monarchies, we have many eminent modern Authors treat;
such as the learned and venerable Primate Usher his Annals, famous for
Chronology; that martial and ingenious Knight Sir Walter Rawleigh, eminent for
his critical Learning, wherein notwithstanding he is too prolix; the
industrious and learned Dr. Hoel, more famous for his Method than Style; and
the learned Prideaux, whose Introduction to History has not a little benefited
the Youth of this English Nation. But when all is done, it is most safe and
satisfactory to go to the Fountainhead, and search the ancient Authors
themselves: for, Dulcius ex ips^ font bibuntur Aqua.
Horat:

CHAP. XX. Apollonius as he was brought to the King, discoursed concerning the
Wife of a certain Pamphylian, who was acquainted with Sappho, to the end he
might not seem to admire the King's Bravery: afterward being come into the
King's Presence, he had a large Conference with him; and how the King admired
him.
THereupon Apollonius made his entrance, being attended with a numerous Train;
for they thought to [1] gratify the King by so doing, in that they perceived
him to be delighted with the Arrival of Apollonius; who being come into the
Palace, did not so much as cast an eye upon those things which were admired by
others, but passed by them unconcerned, as if he were traveling; and calling
Damis, said unto him, You asked me of late what was the Name of that [2]
Pamphylian's Wife which is said to be acquainted with [3] Sappho, and to have
composed those Hymns which are at this day sung in honor of [4] Diana Pergaea,
after the [5] Aeolian and Pamphylian manner. I asked you indeed, (said Damis)
but you told me not her Name. I did not, (replied Apollonius) but only declared
to you the measure of the Verses, with their Names, and how the Aeolian in
their highest pitch and propriety differ from the Pamphylian* Afterward we
turned our Discourse to some other thing, and you no more asked me concerning
the Woman's Name: wherefore now know, that her Name is Demophyla, and she had
like her, Virgins to her Scholars, and composed Poems, partly of Love, and
partly of the Praises of Diana, in imitation of her, and taken out of the Poems
of Sappho. Wherefore how far he was from admiring a King and his Grandeur, he
made appear by this, in that he vouchsafed not so much as to cast an eye on
them, but all the way discoursed of other things. The King seeing him come,
(for the Court of the Temple was somewhat large) spoke to his Attendants, as if
he knew the man, and when he drew near, cried out with a loud voice, This is
Apollonius, whom my Brother Megabetes said he saw at Antioch, honored and
admired by all good men; for he then described him to be such an one, as the
person I now see. Apollonius coming to the King, and saluting him, the King
spoke to him in Greek, and bade him sacrifice unto the Gods with him, for he
was then about to offer a choice [6] Nisaean Horse to the Sun, having adorned
him as if he was to be led in pomp. Whereupon Apollonius answered, Do you (O
King) sacrifice after your manner, and give me leave to sacrifice after mine.
Having thus spoken, he took Frankincense, and said, O Sun, conduct me so far as
it seems good to me and thee! and let me know virtuous men! but as for the
wicked, let me neither know them, nor they me! When he had spoken thus, he
threw the Frankincense into the fire, and then beholding how the smoke
ascended, what turnings it made, and with how many heads it lifted up it self,
and how high; also touching the fire, and observing it appeared of a good Omen,
he said to the King, Do you now sacrifice according to the custom of your
Country, for I have observed the fashion that we have. Thereupon he withdrew
himself from the Sacrifice, that he might have nothing to do with blood. After
the Sacrifice was ended, he returned to the King again, saying, O King, Are you
acquainted with all the Greek Tongue, or only with some little thereof, to the
end you may more freely converse, and not seem unpleasing, if any Grecian come
hither? I understand the whole Language (said he) as well as my Mother Tongue,
wherefore speak what you please, for that is the reason why you ask. It is so
indeed, replied Apollonius, therefore hearken to what I shall say! The
intention of my Journey is to visit the Indians, but I was unwilling to pass by
you, hearing you to be such a man, as I now apparently perceive you are; and
desiring to understand the Wisdom which the Magicians amongst you do profess,
as namely, whether they be skilled in divine matters, as report goes of them.
As for me, I am addicted to the Wisdom of [7] Pythagoras the Samian, who taught
me in this manner to worship the Gods, and to understand from them both the
things that are seen, and those that are not seen, also to talk with the Gods,
and cloathe my self with this fleece of the Earth, which was not shorn from the
Sheep's back, but springs up purely from the pure, being a gift of Water and
Earth, even made of linen. Likewise the length of my Hair was taken up from
Pythagoras, as also my abstinence from living Creatures comes to me from his
Wisdom. Wherefore you must not expect that in Drinking and Revelling I should
be a companion to you or any other. As for doubtful and intricate matters, I
can resolve them; for I do not only know, but also foreknow the things that are
to be done. This is the Discourse that Damis said he had with the King, and
Apollonius himself has written an Epistle of the same, as he also digested
many of his other Discourses into Epistles.

Illustrations on Chap. 20.
[1] FOr they thought to gratify the King by so doing, etc. This may justly
give us occasion to reflect on the servile and obsequious Flatteries of
Courtiers toward their Prince. Titus Livy well observes, that the speech of
men educated in Courts is ever full of vain ostentation and flattery; every man
indifferently extolling the King beyond all the bounds of modesty and reason.
Quicquid calcaverit hic, Rosa fiat. If a Prince knows but the four corners of
the Winds, (whereof no mean Subject is ignorant) yet how greatly is this virtue
extolled in him, for being so Weather-wise? If he understands but how to steer
a small Barge or Cock-boat in a calm River, (wherein many thousand Tarpawlins
exceed him) yet how greatly do they magnify his wonderful skill in Navigation?
If he knows but when a Fiddle is out of tune by its squeaking, they presently
cry him up for a Musician; if he can ride a Horse but a foot pace, for an
expert Horseman; and if he can distinguish between a Sign-post, and some famous
Italian piece drawn by an eminent Master, for his great knowledge in Painting.
Thus are they abused by the servile Wretches about them, and never suffered to
come to the knowledge of truth. What the King loves, they love; and what the
King does, they do, be it never so mean and base. All Alexander's Followers
carried their Heads sideling, as he did; and those that flattered Dionysi^s,
run their Heads against Posts, and tumbled over Chairs, to be thought as
purblind as their Master. For the same Reason Montaign writes, that he has
seen Deafness affected in the Court of France. And because the King hated his
Wife, Plutarch says, the Courtiers (in his time) sued out a Divorce from
theirs, although they loved them never so well. Mithridates pretending to skill
in Physic, his Flatterers came about him to have their Members incized and
cauterized by him, well knowing that when a Prince sets up for Doctor, you
cannot oblige him more than in becoming his Patient. Favorinus the Philosopher
being in a Dispute with the Emperor Adrian about the interpretation of some
word, yielded the victory to the Emperor, and being asked why he did so,
replied, Would you not have him who has the absolute Command over thirty
Legions to be wiser than I? Asinius Pollio re^used to answer those Verses which
Augustus had written against him, because (said he) it is no wisdom to contend
in writing with him who may prescribe. And they had reason so to do; for
Dionysius not being able to equal Philox^nus in Poetry, or Plat^ in Discourse,
condemned the one to the Stone-quarry, and sent the other to be sold as a Slave
in the Isle of Aegina. Nevertheless the good and the bad King are served both
alike* he that is hated, and he that is beloved, are both equally courted by
those about them: they wait upon him as the Crows do upon a dying Horse, not
out of love to him, but to themselves. This made Julian the Emperor (when
commended by his Courtiers for his justice) say, He should soon grow proud of
those praises, if they came from men that du^^^ speak otherwise. The Flatterers
of Alexander the Great made him believe that he was the Son of Jupiter; but
being one day much hurt, and seeing the blood gush out at his wounds, he asked
them what they thought of that, whether the blood was not of a lively red
color, and merely humane* Also Hermodorus the Poet calling Antigonus the Son
of Phoebus in one of his Poems, Antigonus very wisely replied, My Friend, He
that emptieth my Close stool, knows it to be otherwise. Seneca makes this one
of the greatest Blessings of Royalty, that Subjects are forced to bear with,
and to commend even the very extravagancies of their Prince. -- Maximum hoc
regni bonum est,
Quod facta domini cogitur populus sui
Quam far, tam laudare. --
Thyest. Act 2. Scen. 1. If a Prince be as effeminate as Sardanapalus himself,
his Courtiers shall indulge him in his Lusts, and be more ambitious of
Cleopatra's favor, more proud of a smile from her, than of the greatest honor
in the World. This made an ingenious Author observe, that a Courtier's Face as
well as his Clothes must ever be in the fashion, for that he amongst them who
cannot upon all occasions shift his Countenance, will not in time be able to
shift his Linen. When Sempronius so basely killed Pompey on the Egyptian shore,
it was only to curry favor with Caesar, and had Caesar himself been in the
like adversity, they could have done the same for him. There is nothing so
treacherous and base which to gratify their Prince they will not undertake,
even to the ruin both of King and Kingdom. If he be inclined to Tyranny, they
shall promote it, by advising to a standing Army, to oppress the people with
illegal Exactions, and to govern without Law: and if he be addicted to Women,
they presently turn his Pimps. Now he that most eases the Prince of Care and
Business, or she that contributes most to his pleasures, are always his
chiefest Favorites, and these (though the greatest grievances of the Subject)
are idolized by the inferior hangers on; for every young Courtier is like a
Hop, that must have a Pole to support him; and therefore in the fall of one
great Favorite, several others perish* Now as it is said of the Whale, that she
is steered in her course through the guidance of a far smaller Fish, so fares
it with too too many Princes, who hearing less truth than any one sort of men,
are in their weightiest affairs guided by no higher Dictates, than those of a
perfidious Mistress or Favorite.

[2] Pamphylia, a Country in Asia the Less, on the East Side of Cilicia, by
the Mountain Taurus. Sit. Clim. 5.

[3] Sappho, the famous Lesbian Poetess. Concerning her Father, Authors vary
who he was: some say Scammon Dronymus, others Simon, others Eunonimus, or
Eumenes, others Eregius, or Eucrytus, others Semas, others Camonus, and others
Etarcus; however they all agree that Cleis was her Mother. She had three
Brothers, viz. Larycus, Eurygus, and Cheraxus, whereof Larycus was her
Favorite and beloved, for she hated Cheraxus so much as to write several
invective Poems against him. She was married to a wealthy man named Cercola, or
as others call him, Cercylla, by whom she had one only Daughter called Cleis,
after her Grandmothers Name. Afterward becoming a Widow, some (who make her to
be very lascivious) say, she fell in Love with Phaon, who being gone into
Sicily and she being jealous of him in his absence, fell into such a rage and
passion, that she cast her self headlong from the top of a Rock into the Sea;
A. M. 4684* and before Christ, 515 years, according to Monsieur Thevet, who
makes her contemporary with Xenophanes the Philosopher, with Theogonus and
Pindar the Grecian Poets, and with Lucretia the Roman Matron. But Vossius (do
Poet. Graec.) says, some think that she lived in the time of Archilochus and
Hipponactes, or rather in the 42d. Olympi^d. Of her passionate Love Fits speaks
Plutarch (de Amore) wherein he says, she lost her Voice, became speechless,
pale and wan, fell into cold sweats, tremblings and shakings, her Brains turned
round, being surprised with a dizziness, fainting and swounding Fits, whenever
her Love came in her sight; which he proves out of a Copy of Verses of Sappho's
own writing; nevertheless Monsieur Thevet (Cosmographer to Henry the third of
France) stands up in vindication of her Chastity, and imputes these Crimes to
another Lesbian Poetress of the same Name; however the Latins do commend but
one, who is by Gyraldus styled Mascula, whether for her Lusts, or for her manly
Studies, I know not; which Epithet is likewise given her by Horace, Temperat
Archilochi musam p^de mascula Sappho. She is also called Pulchra, a Carminum
Pulchritudine: and in the Greek Anthology they characterize her the swe^t
Pierian Be. Those who mention two famous Poetresses of this Name, say, that
one invented a kind of Verse, which after her own Name was called the Saphick,
consisting of a Trochee, Spondee, Dactyle, and two Trochees, as Sedibus gaudens
vari^s dolisque and having at the end of every three Verses an Adonic, which
consists of a Dactyle and a Spondee, as Diva dolor. Now the other Sappho, who
(if there were two, which is difficult to be decided, the History of each being
so confounded) was the person which Apollonius here means, and is said by
Suidas to have wrote several Epigrams, Elegies, lambicks, and nine Books of
Lyrick Verses, whereof she is said to be the first Inventress: these Lyrick
Verses or Songs composed to the Harp are so called from Lyra the Harp, the
original of which Instrument both Athenaeus and Stobaeus attribute to her. The
ingenious and learned Monsieur Rapin (in his Reflections on Aristotle's Poesy)
says, that Demetrius and Longinus have great reason to boast so highly, in
their Works of the admirable Genius of this Lyrick Poetress; for that, in those
fragments which are left of her, are found some strokes of delicacy, the most
fine and most passionate in the World: whatsoever was extant of her composure,
is printed in Greek and Latin by Henry Stephens. That this Sappho had many
Disciples, is mentioned here by Philostratus, and named by Suidas, who calls
them Anagora Milesia, Gongyla Colophonia, and Eunica Salaminia. Now besides
Sappho, we read of many others of that Sex famous for Learning, as Demophila
the Pamphylian's Wife whom Apollonius here mentions; Proba the Roman Consul's
Wife, who ( A. D. 424.) wrote in Heroic Verse the Contents of the Old and New
Testament, so far as the descending of the Holy Ghost; Corinna, who was Ovid's
Beloved; Elpia, the Wife of Boethius; Polla, Wife to Lucan the Poet, who often
helped her Husband in the composure of his Pharsalia; Lesbia, Mistress to
Catullus; Cornificia, the Roman Poetess; Thesbia, the Compositress of Epigrams;
and the other famous Poetess Corinna, who five times vanquished Pindar in the
Poetical Art, wherein he had challenged her to contend in the City of Thebes;
neither must we here omit the late ingenious Mrs. Phillips, our English Sappho.

[4] Diana Pergaea. Perge or Perga is a Town of Pamphylia, 8 miles distant
(Westward) from the City of Attalia; in this Perga was a Temple consecrated to
Diana, whereof Cicero speaks, Verr. 3. Now from hence was Diana called Pergaea,
as says Mela; or Pergasia, as Stephanus has it; also Dionysius, verse 854.
(...)
(...).


[5] Hymns sung after the Aeolian and Pamphylian manner. Plutarch (in his
Discourse of Music) and Glarean (in his 2d. Book, and 10th Chapter of his
Dodecacord) tell us, that the Ancients distinguished their Music into four
Moods, deriving them from sundry Countries, for whose particular Genius they
seem to have been at first contrived: Of these, the three first were named the
Phrygian, the Lydian, and the Dorick; which, according to the opinion of
Polimestres, and Saccadas, a Native of Argos, are said to be of greatest
Antiquity. Now to these three former Sappho the Lesbian added a fourth, termed
the Myxolydian, thereby completing the number of the four Tetrachords: she
called it the Myxolydian, because it was intermixed with the Lydian:
nevertheless, of this some make Tersander, others Pythoclides the Piper, and
others Lamprocles, the Inventer. Others there be who to these four have added
three more, which they term Collateral, as the Hypodorian, Hypolydian, and
Hypophrygian; to the end there might be seven corresponding to the number of
Planets: and to all these Ptolomy adds an eighth, called the Hypermyxolydian,
being sharper and shriller than any of the rest. But Lucius Apuleius (in his
Florid. lib. 1.) names only five, viz. the simple Ionian, the various Iastian,
the complaining Lydian, the warlike Phrygian, and the Religious Dorick.
Marcian, according to the Tradition of Aristoxenus, numbers five principal
Moods, and ten Collateral. Now this whole Structure or Fabric they call
Encyclopedie, or the Sphere of Sciences, says Agrippa* as if Music did
comprehend all Sciences, seeing, as Plato observes in his first Book of Laws,
that Music cannot be understood without the knowledge of all the other
Sciences. Amongst the four first and most ancient Moods, they approved not of
the Phrygian, for that it distracts and ravishes the Mind; wherefore Porphyrius
gave it the Name of Barbarous, as exciting men to fury and battle: others gave
it the Appellation of Bacchick, furious and turbulent; which being generally
used in Anapesticks, were those Charms that formerly incited the Lacedaemonians
and Cretans to War. The Lydian Mood Plato refuses as too sharp and shrill,
coming short of the modesty of the Dorian; being most agreeable to mirth and
jollity: this made the Lydians, a merry and jocund people, to be very much
affected with that sort of Music. The Dorick Mood, being more grave and
solemn, was most agreeable to the serious Affections of the Mind, and in great
esteem amongst the Cretans, Lacedaemonians, and Arcadians: we read that
Agamemnon being to go to the Trojan War, left behind him at home a Dorick
Musician, to the end he might by his grave Spondaick Songs preserve the
Chastity of his Wife Clytemnestra; in so much that Aegysthus could not obtain
his desires of her, until he had murdered the said Musician. Lastly, As for the
Myxolydian Mood invented by Sappho, it was only fit for Tragedies, to move pity
and compassion. Agrippa de Vanit. Scien. Our modern Scale of Music compared
with that of the ancient Greeks is thus: Nete hypaton. A, la, mi, re. Paranete
hyperboleon. G, sol, re, ut. Trite hyperboleon. F, fa, ut. Nete diezeugmenon.
E, la, mi* Paranete diezeugmenon. D, la, sol, re. Trite diezeugmenon. C, sol,
fa, ut. Paramese. B, fa, b, mi* Mese. A, la, mi, re. Lycanos meson. G, sol, re,
ut. Parhypate meson. F, fa, ut. Hypate meson. E, la, mi. Lichanos hypaton. D,
sol, re. Parhypate hypaton. C, fa, ut. Hypate hypaton. B, mi. Proslambanomene:
A, re. Let them that would read more upon this Subject, inspect Glarean, lib.
2* Z^olin, Apuleius, and Plutarch. As for Music in general, Pliny says, it
was invented by Amphion, the Son of Jupiter and Antiope; the Grecians ascribe
it to Diodorus; Eus^bius to Zephus and Amphion; Solinus to the Cretans; and
Polybius to the Arcadians. As for the particular kinds of Music, some ascribe
the invention of the Harp to Mercury, others to Amphion, and others to Apollo;
the Pipe they attribute to Pan, or as Eusebius will have it, to Cybele, and
some to Apollo; the silver Trumpet to Moses; Drums to the Romans; Fiddles to
Haliattes, King of the Lydians; and Lutes to the Grecians. Hermophilus
distributed the Pulse and beating of the Veins to certain measures of Music
Lastly, The Troglodites invented Dulcimers. Now as for the praise or dispraise
of Music several things may be said: First, By way of commendation, Music
being the Art of Harmony; they who love it not, are as extravagant, as they who
make no difference between a fair and an ugly Face, proportion being the chief
difference of both, Music cures some Diseases, as the biting of the Tarantula
and Melancholy* it asswage^ the raving of Daemoniacks, as we read in the Story
of Saul; the crying of new born Children is quieted by the jingling of Keys, or
knocking a Basin, and when they are become bigger, they are diverted with the
singing of their Nurses; the Cretans made their Laws to be more easily learnt
by their young people, by causing them to sing them; and we see the Rules of
Grammar are for the same reason contrived into Verse. Achilles in Homer
diverted himself with his Harp, when he was at leisure from his military
Employs; the Gally slave, Plowman, Carter, and Labourer, ease the tediousness
of their Toil and Journey with singing and whistling; Artificers and Shepherds
sweeten their Labors with Songs, and Maids spin more nimbly with the humming
of an old Ballad or Song. The Romans sung Spondaick Verses whilst they offered
their Sacrifices; and David danced before the Ark, all his Psalms being fitted
to the Harp, and other harmonious Instruments. Music excites both sadness and
mirth; for as Physic either quiets or purges the Humors of our Bodies, so
does Music the Passions of the Mind. The Emperor Theodosius was averted from
destroying the City of Antioch, by the melodious Sonnets of little Children,
instructed therein by Flavianus their Bishop. The Prophet Elisha caused the
Harp to be played on to him, before he prophesied the overthrow of the
Moabites; and Michaia in the presence of King Aha^ refused to prophecy, till
one had first played before him on a musical Instrument. Mr. Osborn says, that
a handsome Woman who sings well is a Mouse-Trap baited as both ends: and thus we
see Stratonice captivated Mithridates with a Song. Therefore considering the
great influence which Music has over the Minds of men, it is no small policy
in Ecclesiastics to assign the use of Organs in Churches, which gets men a
stomach to their devotion, whether it be good or bad; as in an Italian Air, the
young Ladies mind not the sense and words, but the Music. Finally, The
Ancients had no small Veneration for Music, when they feigned Apollo the God
of Wisdom, to be the God of Music too. However some there have been that have
decry'd it; thus Antisthenes, Scipio, Aemylius, and Cato, utterly despised this
Science; thus Alexander was reproved by Philip for singing, and had his Harp
broke by his Schoolmaster Antigonus. The Egyptians (as Diodorus witnesses)
forbad the use of Music to their youth, as rendering them luxurious and
effeminate; also Ephorus (according to Polybius) condemns it as an Art invented
only to deceive and debauch men. Mr. Osborn is a great enemy to this Art,
saying, that Music is so unable to refund for the time and cost required to be
perfect therein, as he cannot think it worthy any serious consideration or
endeavor; the owner of that quality being still obliged to the trouble of
calculating the difference between the morose humor of a rigid Refuser, and
the cheap prostituted levity and forwardness of a mercenary Fiddler; denial
being as often taken for pride, as a too ready compliance for ostentation.
Omnibus hoc vitium est cantoribus, inter amicos
Vt nunquam inducant animum cantare rogati,
Injussi nunquam ^^sistant. --
Horat. lib. 1. sat. 3. Those so qualified seldom know when it is time to begin,
or give over; especially Women, who often decline in modesty, proportionably to
the progress they make in Music. As for my own part, I have spent some time in
practicing Music, and repent not my self of it, since though I pretend not to
divert others, yet can I divert my self, when retiring from my more tedious
Studies, I play over some new set of Lessons, which is neither so dangerous or
expensive as almost all other Recreations are. Senectam non cithar^ ^ar^ntem:
it is a diversion even in old age, when being disabled from all other
Recreations without doors, yet may he enjoy this within, if he have but the
free use of his Fingers lose him. Concord and Harmony are so universally
grateful, that he seems a Rebel to Nature who is not pleased therewith. And
however some few may delight in this Science, and nevertheless ^e ill-natured,
yet did I never observe any one that was averse to all kinds of Music, but who
was morose, froward, peevish, and of an evil disposition. The Italians were
formerly the best skilled in this Science, and the French have lately boasted
of the famous Compositions of Monsieur Baptist; but at this present time the
English are not inferior to either in our number of ^minent Masters, such as
the late famous Mr. Lock Mr. John Baniste^ (...) many others living now amongst
us.

[6] A (...) Horse; because as Herodotus says (in his Thal.) all four-footed
Beasts are greater in this Island than in any other, but more especially
Horses. Likewise S^rabo (lib. 11.) highly magnifies the Nisaan Horses. Thus on
the 13th day (or (...)) of December, did the Romans sacrifice a Horse to Mars^
Nisaea was a Country whereon Alexandropolis stood, near the Gulf of Megaris.
See Strabo, lib. 11:

[7] The Wisdom of Pythagoras; notwithstanding I have written several things
already concerning this Philosopher, yet give me leave in this place to sum up
his whole History, with Monsieur Rapin's Character of him, which is this:
Thales and Pythagoras (says he) were the two Founders of ancient Philosophy;
the one in Greece, the other in Italy. Nevertheless there appeared in the
School of Pythagoras somewhat more regular and better established, than in that
of Thales and his Successors. For as in the Doctrine of Pythagoras every thing
was made mysterious; so submission was its principal Character: that Relig^ous
Silence which with so much rigor he imposed upon his Disciples, was an Art to
procure himself the more respectful attention. The Life of that Philosopher, as
well as his Doctrine, is even at this day a great Subject of Controversy: he
was indeed a man of a deep reach, a quick penetrating apprehension, and of
indefatigable industry and application. His usual way of teaching was by
Geometry and Numbers: he explained material and sensible things by Geometry,
and intellectual by Music and Numbers. He was of too solid a Judgment, to
imagine any reality in Numbers, which are but only intentional Beings, as
Aristotle proves in his Metaphysics. It is true, he found so great a facility
in explaining the perfection of every thing by harmony and proportion, after
the manner of the Egyptians, that he expressed himself no other way; and that
he made use of Numbers as of Symbols and Signs to teach with: and all that
Science of Numbers which was so familiar to Pythagoras, is still to this day a
kind of Mystery, whereof the Secret is not very well known. Iamblicus in the
Life of that Philosopher says, that he invented a Music proper for the Cure
and quieting of the Passions. In his Moral Philosophy there is nothing regular;
only fair Maxims without Principles: his Natural Philosophy is the same almost
with that of the Platonists. His Doctrine of two Principles, the one of good,
and the other of evil, whereon the Manichees built their Faith, is false* for
of real Beings there is but one real Principle. Pythagoras in Plutarch boasts,
that the greatest fruit which he had reaped from Philosophy was, (as his
Disciple Apollonius here does) not to wonder at any thing: for that Philosophy
discovered to him the cause of every thing, as Horace expresses it to Numicius,
Nil admirari prope res est una Numici. In fine, Pythagoras had so extraordinary
a Genius for Philosophy, that all the other Philosophers have gloried to stick
to his Sentiments: Socrates and Plato have hardly any thing that is good but
from him. And if we consider more narrowly, we shall even find, that amongst
all other Sects almost, there is somewhat of the Spirit of Pythagoras
predominant in them.

CHAP. XXI. The King grants to Apollonius, that he may be entertained by a
private Host: An Eunuch is sent to Apollonius, to acquaint him that he should
ask twelve Boons of the King, and a time is appointed for that purpose: The
advice of Damis about the Boons to be received.
NOw the King telling him that he was more pleased with his coming, than if he
had added the Riches of the Persians or Indians to his own wealth, and that he
made him his Guest, and partaker of his Royal Court; Apollonius replied, If you
should come into my Country Tyana, and I should entreat you to abide in that
House which I did inhabit, would you do so? No, by Jov^, said the King, unless
it were such an House as could conv^niently receive me and all my Attendants.
The same is my case, said Apollonius, for should I dwell in an House unsuitable
to my condition, I could not live at ease; for all [1] excess is more irksome
to wise men, than any defect is to you great men, wherefore I had rather be
entertained by some private man that is my equal: notwithstanding I will be as
frequent with you as you please. Wherefore the King condescended to his
Request, to the end he might not displease him, appointing a certain honest and
good Babylonian to entertain him. Now as they were at Supper, an Eunuch (one of
the King's Messengers) came to them with this Message to Apollonius, The King
gives you liberty to ask of him twelve Boons, such as you your self please,
entreating you that they may not be small ones, in that he has a desire to
make known his Magnificence as well to your self, as to us. Apollonius
commending the Message, asked him, When it would be seasonable to make his
Demands? To whom the Eunuch replied, To morrow: and moreover went to all the
Friends and Kinsmen of the King, and enjoined them to be present with the
Petitioner, a man whom the King so much honored. But Damis said, He understood
that Apollonius would ask nothing, in that he knew his disposition, and had
sometimes heard him pray to the Gods in this manner, O ye Gods, grant me to
have a few things, and to stand in need of none! But nevertheless, observing
him to stand in a brown study, he concluded that he would ask something, and
that he was then pondering within himself what it should be. But Apollonius
said to him, O Damis, I am musing with my self this evening why the Barbarians
should think Eunuchs to be modest, and should make use of them to keep Women? I
(said Damis) think this to be manifest even to a Child, in as much as gelding
having deprived them of the faculty of Copulation, they are permitted not only
to keep Women, but even to lie with them. Whereto Apollonius answered, Do you
think that gelding cutteth away their loving, or Copulation with Women? Yes,
replied Damis, for if the part be extinguished that does infuriate the whole
Body, none will be stricken with Love. Whereupon Apollonius after having paused
a while, said unto him, To morrow Damis you shall understand that [2] Eunuchs
are in Love, and that the Lust which comes in through the Eyes is not
extinguished, but that there remains some heat and vigor in them: for
something shall come to pass that will disprove your Discourse. But were there
any humane Art that is so powerful to expel such Lusts out of the Mind, yet
should I not think fit to reckon Eunuchs in the number of the chaste, as being
enforced thereunto, and by a violent Art drawn to an abhorrency of Love: for it
is the part of Chastity, when a man is exceeding lustful, not to yield to the
allurements of Venus, but to abstain and overcome that rage. Whereunto Damis
replied, O Apollonius, we will consider of these things again hereafter: but
now we must advise with our selves what answer is to be made to morrow, to the
great and excellent Offers of the King; for you perhaps will ask nothing, but
you ought to beware that you seem not out of pride to refuse the King's Bounty.
This therefore is to be heeded, as also in what Country you now are, and that
we lie at the King's mercy* But above all you must take heed of Calumny, lest
you be thought to reject good Offers out of arrogance. Besides, you must
consider, that the Victuals which we now have, will serve us till we come into
India, but they will not suffice to bring us back, nor do we well know where to
get others.

Illustrations on Chap. 21.
[1] ALl Excess is more irkesom to wise men; that Virtue consists in
Mediocrity, has been the common opinion; and as the French Virtuoso in his
Philosophical Conference observes, It Is the property of every thing destitute
of Reason to be carried into Extremes: The Stone to the Center; Fire to the
Circumference; the Earth imbibes as much Water as it can; an Animal eats as
much Food as it can cram in; the Spider weaves as long as it has wherewithal;
the Nightingal often sings till she bursts; and every Passion guided by it self
alone, is carried to the utmost point: in Discourse, or Writing, profound Sense
borders upon the Confines of Nonsense, and a strong Line shows a weak Author.
Wit, like a Faulcon towering in its flight,
When once it soars above its usual height,
Lessens till it becomes quite out of sight.
Prol. to Psyche. Therefore of all such Writings St. Ierom used to say, Qui non
vult intelligi, debet negligi* Likewise, what can be more absurd or ridiculous
than the extremity of any Mode or Fashion? such as are, Narrow Tr^uck Breeches,
and the broad-brimm'd Hat,
The dangling Knee-Tye, and the Bibb-Crav^^?
From hence it was, that Doedalus in the Fable enjoined his Son Icarus to take
his flight, neither too high, for fear lest the wax of his Wings should be
melted with the heat of the Sun; nor yet too low, for fear of wetting them in
the Sea: which course all men have followed that were happy. Liberality (which
all men commend) is a mean between Avarice and Prodigality: the Avarous being
excessive in receiving, and defective in giving; as the Prodigal on the
contrary is excessive in giving, and defective in receiving* The Prodigal by
doing good to others, does hurt to himself; the Miser does no good to others,
and much less to himself: wherefore he alone that keeps a mean in his expenses,
deserves the name of virtuous, and makes his Liberality esteemed. Now
Magnificence has the same respect to great expenses, that Liberality has to
less, being the midway between two extremes. Again, Rashness does oftentimes
prove of as ill consequence as Cowardice; but true Valor holding a mean
between both, prevents it. The regular desire of moderate Honors, has for its
extremes, contempt of Honor, and Ambition. Clemency is between Choler, which
is offended with every thing, and Stupidity, which is offended with nothing;
Veracity, between Boasting and Dissimulation; Facetiousness, between Buffoonry
and Rusticity; Amity, between Flattery and Hatred; Modesty, between Bashfulness
and Impudence; Anger, between Malice and Neglect. In fine, all Virtues have
their extremes, which gave occasion for that saying, In medio consistit Virtus;
in consideration whereof, the wise man prays neither for plenty nor want, but
for a Mediocrity; to which the Ancients to show their esteem thereof, gave the
attribute of Golden. In the same manner we see Apollonius here prays neither
for Poverty nor Riches, but only to have a few things, and to stand in need of
none. We should avoid as well the Gulf of Charybdis, as the Rocks of Scylla.

[2] Eunuchs are in Love; Cael. Rhodiginus (lib. 13. chapter 19.) says, that
Eunuchs were first made by Semiramis. And Herodotus informs us, ( lib. 8*) that
among the Barbarians and Eastern people Eunuchs were of great esteem and value.
Also Mr. Ricaut (in his late ingenious Tract of the Turkish Polity) shows, that
the Grand Seigniour makes use of Eunuchs for all his great Offices and Employs.
Herodotus writes, that Hermotimus being taken Prisoner in War, was sold to
Panionius, who caused him to be gelded; for that Panionius making Merchandise
of such kind of Ware, gelded all the fair Boys he could lay his hands on, and
afterward carrying them to Sardis and Ephesus, sold them almost for their
weight in Gold: so highly were Eunuchs esteemed of amongst the Barbarians,
says Herodotus, lib. 7. Xenophon brings in Cyrus to be of that opinion, and
therefore makes him commit the keeping of his Body to Eunuchs rather than to
others. Nevertheless the Roman Emperors have always rejected Eunuchs, placing
them in the rank of those that were neither Men nor Women, as appears by
Valerius Maximus, who says, that one Genutius having gelded himself, was
adjudged unworthy to have the benefit of a man's last Will and Testament,
because (says Valerius) the Tribunals of Justice should not be polluted with
the presence of Eunuchs; for such were all Cybele's Priests, whereof Genutius
was one. Val. Max: lib. 7. chapter 7. Basil (lib. 4. chapter 4.) in a Letter to
Simplicia, makes a bitter Invective against such; and so does Claudia the
Poet, ( lib. 7. Parerg. chapter 23.) and others. Luitprand, Deacon of Pavia, tells
us, that Theobald, Duke of Spoleto, making War upon the Grecians, cut off the
privy Members of all such Enemies as fell into his hands, and so dismissed
them; whereupon a poor Grecian Woman throwing her self at the Duke's Feet, said
thus unto him, Oh Theobald, what have we poor Women done unto thee, that thou
should thus wage War upon us with such extremity? we are no Warriers, nor
ever learned to handle any other weapons than the Distaff and Spindle:
wherefore then do thou de prive us of our pleasures, by taking away our
H^sbands instruments of Generation? are there no Eyes, no Noses, no Ears? must
thou needs extend the power of thy War upon that only which Nat^re has lent us
the use of? Whereupon Theobald was so taken with this Woman's Arguments, that he
ever after forbore that kind of Cruelty. Dr. Brown says, that all Castrated
Animals (as Eunuch^, Spadoes, etc.) are longer lived, than those which retain
their Virilities. Now concerning the Lust of Eunuchs, whereof Apollonius here
speaks, there have been many famous Examples of the like nature, sufficient to
verify his Assertion, that Eunuchs are in Love: Favorinus the Philosopher, who
lived in Adrian's time, was an Eunuch, and yet nevertheless accused of
Adultery. So likewise is it reported of the Eunuch Bagoas, that he was actually
taken committing Adultery; as in the three and twentieth Chapter of this first
Book of Philostratus, we have another Example of the like nature. Nay, it is a
thing seen almost every day amongst Horses, to have Geldings cover Mares, and
that to all outward appearance, as well as any stone-Horse. But what I most
wonder at, is a Story related by Suidas, viz. that Hermias the Eunuch begat
Pythiades; for Galen (lib. 15 de usu part.) positively declares, that Eunuchs
are altogether unapt for Generation* nevertheless, whether it be through an
imperfect Castration, leaving some Fibers or smal^ Vehicles belonging to those
parts undissected, or no, yet most certain it is, that some among them have had
very strong and amorous Inclinations: and this has made lascivious Women ever
so fond of them: Cur tantum Eunuchos habeat tua Gellia, quaeris? etc.
Martial Epig.

CHAP. XXII. Apollonius at first makes a show, as if Damis had by his
persuasions prevailed with him to accept the King's Gifts, in that Aeschines,
Plato, Aristippus, Helicon, Phyton, Eudoxus, and Speusippus, were lovers of
Money: Afterward he gravely disputed, that Money is to be contemned,
especially by a wise man.
NOw with such Art did Damis allure him not to refuse the King's Liberality.
But Apollonius, as taking part with him in his Reasoning, said to him, O Damis,
you forget the Examples of others: among which this is one; that [1] Aeschin^s,
the Son of Lysanias, sailed into Sicily to [2] Dionysius for Wealths sake: and
[5] Plato in like manner passed [3] Charybdis thrice for Sicilian Riches:
Likewise [4] Aristippus the Cyrenean, [6] Helicon of [7] Cyzicus, and [8]
Phyton, when he fled away from [9] Rhegium, so plunged themselves in
Dionysius's Treasuries, that they had much ado to recover themselves from
thence. Moreover they say, that [10] Eudoxus the Cnidian, having made a Journey
into Egypt, did openly confess that he come for Riches, and discoursed with the
King of the same. But not to traduce any more learned men, they report, that
[11] Speusippus was so in love with Money, that he traveled into Macedonia to
[12] Cassander's Wedding, carrying along with him certain frigid Poems, which
he there recited to get Money. But as for me, Damis, I suppose that a wise man
is in greater peril, than they that cross the Sea, or go into the Wars; for
envy attends him both when he speaks, and when he holds his peace: when he is
very earnest, and when he is remiss: when he does something, and when he does
nothing: when he saluteth, and when he salutes not. Wherefore he had need to be
well guarded on every side, and to know, that if a wise man be overcome with
Sloth, or with Anger, or with Love, or with Drunkenness, or do some other
unseasonable thing, he may perhaps have pardon: but if he subject himself to
Money, he is unpardonable, and odious, as being obnoxious to all other Vices;
for that he would not be overcome with the Love of Money, if he were not
likewise overcome with the Love of his Belly, of Apparel, of Wine, and of
Wenching. Bu^ you are perhaps of opinion, that it is a less crime to offend at
Babylon, than at Athens, or at Pythia, or at Olympia: and consider not, that to
a wis^ man every place is Greece. Neither will he esteem or think any Country
wild or barbarous, for as much as he lives under the eyes of Virtue, and does
see indeed but a few men, but looks on them with a thousand eyes. Now if you
Damis were acquainted with an Athleta, (one of those who [13] exercise all the
Grecian Games of Manhood) do you think he would show himself a stout and good
Champion, if he were to contend in the Olympic Games, and go into Arcadia? or
that he would take care of his Body, if he were to contend in the Pythian and
Nemoean Games* because these ar^ the noted Games and Exercises that are
practiced in Greece; but that if Philip should institute Olympic Games for the
Cities he had taken, or if his Son Alexander for the many Victories he had
obtained, should set up public Sports, he would have the less care to prepare
his Body, or would contend the more remisly, because he was to do his Feats at
[14] Olynthos, or in Macedonia, or in Egypt, and not in Greece, and the places
for Exercise thereunto belonging. Damis writes, that he was so confounded with
this Reason, that he hid himself for shame of those things he had spoken, and
begged pardon of him, for that having not yet thoroughly understood him, he
adventured on such advice and persuasion. But Apollonius comforting him, said,
Be of good cheer, for neither did I speak these things to chide you, but only
that I might expound my self to you.

Illustrations on Chap. 22.
[1] AESchines the Son of Lysanias; Laertius (lib. 2.) reckons up eight eminent
men of this Name: whereof the first was Aeschines the Philosopher; the second a
Rhetorician; the third an Orator, contemporary with Demosthenes; the fourth an
Arcadian, Scholar to Isocrates; the fifth of Mitelene, surnamed Rhetoromastix;
the sixth a Neopolitan, and Academick Philosopher, Disciple to Melanthius the
Rhodian; the seventh a Milesian, and Friend to Cicero, a Writer of Politics;
the eight a Statuary. Now the first of these, viz. Aeschines the Philosopher,
is the person mentioned by Apollonius; for he was (as Plato writes) the Son of
Lysanias, though others will have him to be the Son of Charinus: and for his
Country, an Athenian of the Sphettian Tribe. In his Youth being very
industrious, but poor, he applied himself to Socrates, who esteemed him as a
Jewel, and reckoned him one of his best Disciples; for he never forsook his
Master: this made both Plato and Aristippus envy him. Idomeneus says, it was
he who counseled Socrates to escape out of Prison, notwithstanding Plato
ascribes that advice to Crito. Now Aeschines being very poor, Socrates gave him
some of his Dialogues to make money of, which Aeschines reading at Megara,
Aristippus derided him for a Plagiary. Plat. de Ira cohib. As for his Voyage
into Sicily, (whereof Apollonius speaks) L^ertius, and from him Suidas, write)
that being instigated by poverty, he went into Sicily, there to visit Dionysius
the Tyrant, which was at the same time that Plato and Aristippus were resident
there; and that Plato being out of Favor with Dionysius, took occasion, by
presenting Aeschines unto him, to reingratiate himself; as Plutarch testifies:
But Laertius says, that Aeschines coming thither, was despised by Plato, and
recommended only by Aristippus. He imparted some Dialogues to Dionysius, who
gratified him for the some; in so much that he lived with him till he was
deposed. Afterward he returned to Athens, where not daring to contend with
Plato and Aristippus in Philosophy, he taught, and took money for the same only
in private. At length he applied himself to the making Orations for the Forum,
wherein, Timon says, he was very persuasive: Lysias wrote one Oration in
Answer to him, wherein he asperses Aeschines for many things very improbable,
as patronizing an unjust Cause, borrowing without intent to restore, selling
Unguents contrary to the Laws of Solon, and Precepts of Socrates, and for
injuring Hermans, his Wife and Children: but of this see more in Athenaeus. He
wrote Dialogues, Orations, and Epistles, as you will find in Laertius, and in
the ingenious Mr. Stanly, his Live^ of the Philosophers.

[2] Dionysi^s; there were several eminent men of this Name: It was sometimes
appropriated to Bacchus; besides there was Dionysius Alexandrinus, a Grammarian
under Trajan; Dionysius Milesius, an Historian that wrote the Transactions of
Persia after Darius; Dionysius Halicarnasseus, who flourished in the time of
Augustus, a famous Historian and Orator; Dionysius, a Philosopher of Heraclea,
and one of Zeno's Scholars, who being tormented with the Stone, exclaimed
against his Master, for teaching that pain was no ^vil; Dionysius Atticus, of
Pergamus, the Disciple of Apollodorus, and a great Familiar of Augustus's;
Dionysius Periegetes, who lived at the same time, and wrote Geography in
He^ameter Greek Verses, which are at this day extant; Dionysius Areopagita* who
being in Egypt, where he beheld the unnatural and wonderful Eclipse of the Sun,
at the Passion of our Savior, cried out, Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut Mundi
machina dissolvetur: Either the God of Nature suffers, or the frame of the
World will be dissolved. There were also (besides many others) two eminent
Tyrants of Sicily, whereof the latter (who was banished to Corinth) is the
person Apollonius here cites: for that Laertius (as I have already showed)
tells us, how Aeschines continued with him till the time of his Exile. Now this
Dionysius the younger having heard, that his Father in the time of his sicknes^
was contriving with Dion, how to impede his sole Succession, conspired with the
Physicians to get him poisoned; which being effected, the Government devolved
solely upon him. At the beginning of his Reign, the people promised themselves
much happiness under him, for he recalled back Plato from Banishment, as if he
meant to follow his Advice and Instructions; but in a short time fell out with
him, and sent him back to his Friends at Tarentum in Italy. Plato being thus
dismissed, the next thing Dionysius did, was the striking up a dishonorable
Peace with the Carthaginians, upon whom his Father had begun a War, which his
Son's Sloth and Luxury permitted him not to prosecute. He likewise banished his
Uncle Dion to Corinth, (for being the peoples Favorite) which occasioned the
falling out betwixt Plato and him, for that Dion had been Plato's Disciple. Now
Dion remaining thus discontented at Corinth, raised an Army of Mercenaries, and
invaded Sicily, where pretending he came to vindicate the ancient Liberties of
the people, they flockt into his assistance from all parts, in so much that he
took the principal City Syracuse with little or no opposition. Hereupon
Dionysius retired into a strong Castle of the Island, from whence being
likewise forced, he afterward fled into Italy. Nevertheless the Citizens of
Syracuse falling into Distractions for want of Money, and growing weary of
Dion's Government, several Plots were laid against him, whereof one (through
the Treachery of his pretended Friend Callicrates) cost him his Life. Now after
Dion's death, Callicrates first, and then several others, possessed the
Government of Sicily for some few months, till at length Dionysius coming
unawares upon them, in the 10th year of his Expulsion recovered again Syracuse,
and the whole Principality, which he had formerly lost. Now as the Restoration
of a Prince may be esteemed the more secure, when the people having so lately
tasted of the Ruins of a Civil War, will be the less apt to run speedily into
the same again; so on the other side there is always left remaining some of the
old leaven, that will be ready to set things into the old Fermentation upon any
slight occasion: And thus it fared with Dionysius, who being no sooner returned
to his old Dominions, but likewise beginning his old Extravagancies, was in
less than four years time after his Restoration, banished by Timoleon a second
time to Corinth, where being very poor and necessitous, he turned Paedagogue
for his livelihood, and so ended his Life in great poverty and disgrace; being
the 2d. year of the 109th. Olympiad, and A. M. 3661: Plutarch Vita Dionys.
Aelian Var. Hist. Justin. It is said of this Dionysius, that an old Woman
praying very much for his Life, and he asking her why she did so, her Answer
was, I can remember (says she) one cruel Tyrant, and I would ever be wishing
his Death; then came another, and he was worse; then came thou, who art worse
than all the former: and if thou were gone, I wonder what would become of us,
if we should have a worse? From this Prince's Misfortune, came the old Proverb,
Dionysius Corinthi, which signifies any one that is fallen from high Honors
into Contempt.

[3] Charybdis, is a Gulf in the Straits of Sicily, now called Golofaro; it is
very dangerous, by reason of the whirling Streams flowing contrary each to
other; it is situated over against Scylla, no less dangerous for its Rocks: The
Moral of this Fable teaches us Mediocrity, to avoid running out of one extreme
into another; wherefore, Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim, is no
more than our common English Proverb, To fall out of the Drying Pan into the
Fire. Charybdis is (says Bochartus) no other than Chorobdan, i. e. Foramen
perditionis. The Poets feign this Charybdis to have been a Woman of a savage
Nature, that ran upon all Passengers to rob them. Also, that having stolen the
Oxen of Hercules, Jupiter killed her with his Thunderbolts, and afterward
converting her into a furious Monster, he cast her into a Gulf, which bears her
Name: See more of this in Homer's Odyss. 12. Ovid Met. lib. 7, 8. Ovid Pontic
4. and Virgil Aen. 3.

[4] Aristippus the Cyrenean, a Disciple of Socrates, and Son of Aretades,
after the death of his Master Socrates, returned home into his own Country
Cyrene in Africa* from whence the Doctrine which his Scholars retained, had the
Name of Cyrenaick. Suidas, and Laertius. Whilst he was under the Instruction of
Socrates, he resided at Athens; afterward he dwelt sometime at Aegina, where
he became acquainted with Lais, the famous Corinthian Courtezan, who came there
once a year to the Feast of Neptune, and with whom ( Athenaeus writes) he
returned to Corinth: Deipn. 13. To Corinth Love the Cyrenean led,
Where he enjoyed Thessalian Lais Bed;
No Art the subtle Aristippus knew,
Whereby he might the power of Love subdue.
Deipnos. 13. We read in Laertius of his Voyage to Dionysius's Court, which
Philostratus here mentions; he soon became a Favorite with Dionysius, being of
such an humor, as could conform it self to every place, time, and person,
acting any part, and construing whatever happened to the best: as Horace speaks
of him, Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and res.
Lib. 1. Ep. 17. When Dionysius spit upon him, he took it patiently; for which
being reproved, Fishermen (says he) suffer themselves to be wet all over, that
they may catch a Gudgeon, and shall I be troubled at a little Spittle, who mean
to take a Tyrant? This servile compliance rendered him more acceptable to
Dionysius, than all the other Philosophers. He begged money of Dionysius, who
said to him, You told me, A wise man wanted nothing* Give it me first (said he)
and we will talk of that afterward: when Dionysius had given it him; Now
(says he) you see I do not want: Laert. Dionysius asking him why Philosophers
haunted the Gates of rich men, but rich men not those of Philosophers: Because
(says he) the one knows what he wants, the other not. Diog^nes deriding
Aristippus, called him, The Court-Spaniel; Afterward Aristippus passing by
whilst Diogenes was busied about washing of Herbs, Diogenes derided him,
saying, If you had learned to do thus, you need not have followed the Courts of
Princes; And you (said Aristippus) if you had known how to converse with men,
needed not to have washed Herbs. Si pranderet olus patienter, Regibus uti
Nollet Aristippus; si sciret Regibus uti,
Fastidiret olus. --
Horat. Ep. 1.17 Thus ingeniously rendered by Mr. Stanly: Diog. On Herbs if
Aristippus could have dined,
The company of Kings he had decli^'d.

Aristip. He who derides me, had he wit to use
The company of Kings, would Herbs refuse.

His Life was wholly addicted to Voluptuousness and Luxury, in so much that his
Philosophy was tainted therewith; the Doctrine that he taught being soft and
voluptuous, and therefore condemned by Xenophon, Plato, Phaedo, Aeschines, and
Antisthenes. He used to say, that good Cheer was no hindrance to a good Life.
The Pleasures which he had, he used; and those which he had not, he despised.
When he traveled to increase his Knowledge, he made his Servants cast away
their Money, that they might travel the lighter. He said, Pleasure was the end
of good men, and Sorrow of ill. He liked no Pleasure, but that which might
concern a man's own Happiness. But of his Doctrines, Apothegms, Writings, and
Epistles, see them in Mr. Stanly's Lives of the Philosophers, collected at
large out of Laertius, Cicero, Athenaeus, Plutarch, Stobaeus, and others. For
the manner of his Death, it was thus: Having lived long with Dionysius, at last
his Daughter Arete sent for him to come and order her Affairs at Cyrene, she
being in danger of oppression by the Magistrates. Hereupon Aristippus took
leave of Dionysius, and being on his Voyage, fell sick by the way, and was
forced to put in at Lipara, an Aeolian Island, where he died. His Disciples and
Successors in his Doctrine were his Daughter Arete, Aethiops of Ptolemais, his
Grandson Aristippus, Theodorus the Athiest, Antipater, Epitimides, Paraebates,
Hegesias, and Anniceris.

[5] Plato, etc. Plato, the Prince of the Academick Sect, was born at Athens,
in the 88th Olympiad, as Ludovic. Vives writes in August. Civit. lib. 8. chapter 4.
Apuleius (lib. 1. de Dogm. Plato) tells us, that Plato was so surnamed from the
large Habitude of his Body, for he was at first called Aristocles; however some
think he was called Plato, from the Amplitude of his Speech and Eloquence. As
for his Parents, they were Ariston, and Perictione; his Father's Family was
related to Codrus, the last King of Athens: his Mother Perictione (by some
called Potone) was descended from Solon, the famous Athenian Lawgiver, whence
Plato in his Timaeus speaking of Solon, calls him his Kinsman. Nevertheless
Apuleius says, there are some who assert Plato to be of a more sublime Race:
and Aristander (who is followed by many Platonists) thinks he was begotten on
his Mother by some Spectrum, in the shape of Apollo: for Plutarch, Suidas, and
others affirm, that Apollo Perictione se miscuit. Whilst Plato was yet an
Infant, carried in the arms of his Mother Perictione, Aristo his Father went to
Hymetus, (a Mountain in Attica, eminent for abundance of Bees and Honey) to
sacrifice to the Muses, taking his Wife and Child along with him; as they were
busied in divine Rites, she laid the Child in a Thicket of Myrtles hard by; to
whom, as he slept ( in Cunis dormienti) came a swarm of Bees buzzing about him,
and (as it is reported) made a Honeycomb in his mouth: which was taken as a
presage of his succeeding Eloquence. Plato's first Master was Socrates, with
whom it is said he lived eight years; in which time, he committed the substance
of Socrates his Discourses to writing, but with great mixture and addition of
his own; which much offended Xenophon his co-Disciple, who in an Epistle to
Aeschin^s Socraticus, upbraids him with it: Eusob. Praepar. Evang. l. 24. From
Socrates he received the chiefest of his Morals. After Socrates's death, Plato
applied himself to Cratylus, the Disciple of Heraclitus, from whom we may
presume he received good Instructions, for that he makes him the chief Subject
of one of his Dialogues. Now Plato being the first of all the Heraclian Sect,
and afterward determining to be of the Socratick Discipline, became the most
famous of all Philosophers. Apul. lib. 1. de Philosoph. After this, Plato
addressed himself to Hermogenes, who followed Parmenides's Philosophy, from
whom we may suppose he borrowed many of his Metaphysical Contemplations about
divine Idea's, whereon he discourses at large in his Dialogue called
Parmenides. Then Plato had recourse to Euclid, Founder of the Megarick Sect:
from whence he went to Cyrene, there to be instructed by Theodorus the
Mathematician. In the next place, Plato having a strong inclination to the
Pythagorick Philosophy, traveled into Italy, that part of it which was called
Magna Graecia, where Pythagoras had Philosophized, and left behind him many
Sectators of his Discipline. Now amongst these Pythagoreans, Plato heard at
Tarentum, Archytas the elder, and Euritus; amongst the Locrians he heard
Timaeus the Locrian, from whom he is supposed to have borrowed many Traditions
touching the Origin of the Universe, its parts, etc. See Lud. Viv. on Aug.
lib. 8. chapter 11. Moreover, at Croto, Plato heard Philolaus the Pythagorean; as
also Lysis of the same Sect, whom he makes the Subject of his Dialogue called
(...): and perused the Books of Epicarmus, alias Cous, that famous Pythagorean
Philosopher. Hence it is, that from Plato's great imitation of the Pythagorean
Philosophy, the Names of Plat^nists and Pythagoreans are often confounded in
ancient Authors. Eusebius. lib. 14. Afterward Plato (being not content with the
Knowledge which he had learnt at Athens, and from the Pythagorick Sect in
Italy) traveled into Egypt, accompanied with E^ripides, or (as Vossius has
it) with Eudoxus, where he had 13 years Conversation with the Egyptian Priests,
as Strabo writes, lib. 17. Cicero tells us, that Plato's design of traveling
into Egypt, was to inform himself in Arithmetic, and the celestial
Speculations of the Barbarians. After this, some will have it that Plato
traveled into Phaenicia, for that he seems so well acquainted with their
Learning. Now Plato having in this manner collected what stock he could of
Oriental Wisdom, returned home to Greece, where in a Village near Athens he
instituted his School called the Academy, so called from one Ecademus; the
place (as Laertius tells us) was woody and moorish, therefore very unhealthful.
Now concerning Plato's going to Dionysius, which Apollonius here speaks of, we
read that he made three several Voyages into Sicily; whereof, the first was to
see the fiery Ebullitions of Aetna; the second to visit Dionysius the elder,
whose anger as it once made him depart, so did his Son's ( Dionysius the
younger's) love and earnest entreaties, make him return again, and give Sicily
a third Visit Afterward he died in the 13th. year of the Reign of Philip of
Macedon, and in the first of the 108th Olympiad, being the 81. year of his Age,
according to Hermippus, Cicero, Seneca, and others; Age alone being his death:
Hermippus says, he died at a Nuptial Feast; Cicero, as he was writing; but
some falsely report, he was devoured with Lice, as Pherecydes. His Doctrine and
Precepts are at large treated of by Mr. Stanly; but as for his Character, it is
thus given us by a late ingenious modern Author: Plato has the smoothest tongue
of Antiquity, and takes pleasure to make men hear him attentively, though he is
not much concerned whether they believe him or not: he is always florid, but
not always solid; the false relish that was then in vogue through the credit of
the Sophists, obliged him to that flourish of expression which he used. He is
wirty, quick, and elegant, and as ingenious as a man can be; for with little
Coherence and Method he observes in his Discourse a secret Economy, which
fails not to hit the Mark. And seeing he teaches only by way of Dialogue, that
he may follow a free and disentangled Style, which has the Air of Conversation,
he is rich in Prefaces, and magnificent in his entry on Discourses; yet he
decides but little, no more than Socrates, and establishes almost nothing at
all* however, what he says is so naturally expressed, that nothing can be
imagined more taking. The slight matters which he mingles with great in his
Discourses, and the Trifles wherewith he circumstantiates what is essential and
weighty in the Subjects he treats of, render him alluring; and it is by this
way alone that he amuses. But through the great desire he has to be pleasing,
he is too much for telling of Wonders. Most part of his Discourses are nothing
else but Fables, Metaphors, and continual Allegories; he affects often to be
mysterious in what he says, that he may keep himself the more within the verge
of his Character; and it is commonly by Lying that he undertakes to persuade
Truth. Rhodiginus pretends, that his sense is more to be minded than his words,
which are often Allegorical: Moreover, he was too much a Politician to be a
Philosopher: for in one of his Letters to Dionysius of Syracusa, he
acknowledges that he published none of his Maxims, but under the Name of
Socrates, that he might not be accountable for his own Doctrine, in a time when
the Nicety of the people of Athens was offended at every thing The Condemnation
of Socrates made Plato so cautious, that to be in good terms with the public,
and to dispossess the people of the opinion, that he was addicted to the
Sentiments of his Master, he turned Pythagorean. Now how beit he was a man of
vast Capacity, (for what did he not know, says Quintilian?) and had a wonderful
Genius for S^iences, whereof he always speaks better than others did; yet must
it be acknowledged, that he gave greater Reputation to Philosophy by the
Conduct of his Life and Virtue, than by his Doctrine: for he it was who first
taught, that true Philosophy consisted more in Fidelity, Constancy, Justice,
Sincerity, and in the love of ones Duty, than in a great Capacity. After his
death, his Disciples so altered his Doctrine, and filled his School with such
rigid Opinions, that scarcely could there be known amongst them the least print
of the true Doctrine of Plato: which was divided into so many Sects, as there
started up Philosophers in the Ages following. Cicero (in his Book de
Divinatione) tells us, that Plato was accounted Deus Philosophorum; also
Antimachus (in Cicero's Brutus) says, Plato unus mihi instar omnium millium.
Maximus Tyrius affirms, that Nature her self never saw any thing more eloquent,
no not Homer excepted; wherefore Panaetius styles him, the Homer of
Philosophers: Pliny calls him, Sapientiae Antistitem; and Salvianus, Romanum
Catonem; also others term him, another Socrates of Italy. The ancient School of
Plato degenerated by the Sentiments of the new, into the Sects of Scepticks and
Pyrrhonists, who doubted of every thing. Marcilius Ficinus pretends, that Plato
knew the Mystery of the Trinity. The Emperor Julian preferred the Doctrine of
Plato, to that which St. Paul taught the Athenians. The Logic of Plato (which
is the same with that of Socrates) consists more in Examples, than Precepts; it
has nothing that is particular for Reasoning, because Socrates valued not that
part of Philosophy. Though both of them placed the first discerning of Truth
and Falsehood in the Senses, yet they pretended, that the Mind ought to be Judge
thereof. And seeing the Soul of man was but a small spark of the universal Soul
of the World, and according to them a Beam of the Divinity; they thought, that
that particle united to its principle was ignorant of nothing; but that entering
into the Body, by that Alliance it contracted Ignorance and Impiety, from
which, Logic served to purify it. Alcinous, who gives us an exact Explanation
of the Dialectick of Plato, says, that this Philosopher made use of Division,
Definition, and Induction, to resort to the fountain of the first Truth:
Division was as a Ladder, whereby to ascend from things sensible to things
intellectual; Definition was a way to lead from things demonstrated to those
that were not; and Induction the means to find the Truth by the principle of
Suppositions: for by Division he came to Definition, as by Definition to
Induction and Demonstration. Moreover, it appears by the Principles of the
Logic of Plato* which allowed no Truth but in the Idea's, that his School made
profession of knowing nothing; because men cannot judge of single and individual
Beings, but by the Senses, which are fallacious: So that the Disciples of Plato
placed all their Logic in not believing any thing too slightly, and in
retaining the entire Liberty of Judgment, among the Uncertainties which are
found almost in every thing: In fine, Upon that great Maxim of a general
Incomprehensibility of all things, was that Academy reformed under Lacydes and
Arcesilas, and the Sect of the Scepticks and Pyrrhonists raised. As for Moral
Philosophy, Plato brought it to greater perfection, upon the Model that
Socrates had left him: for by his Idea's which he gave to every thing, as the
universal Principle of Philosophy, he raised all Virtues to their highest
perfection. In his Phaedrus he explains the Nature of Moral Philosophy, the end
whereof is to purify the Mind from the Errors of Imagination, by the
Reflections that Philosophy suggest to him: However, the greatest part of his
Dialogues are but good Discourses without Principles, which nevertheless fail
not to hit the Mark, and to instruct in their way; for the Morals of this
Philosopher are full of Instructions, which always tend either to countenance
Virtue, or to discourage Vice: and that Morality is spread in all his
Discourses, though there be nothing in it extraordinarily singular. Some
pretend, that the Metamorphosis of Apuleius his golden Ass, is an Allegory of
the Moral Philosophy of Plato. Plato was the first that rectified the Opinion
of the Souls Immortality, which he learnt of Socrates, Socrates of Pythagoras,
Pythagoras of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians (as some will have it) of the
Hebrews, by the means of Abraham, whilst he sojourned in Egypt. Plato made it
the most important Principle of Pagan Morality, thereby obliging men to Virtue,
out of hope of Reward, and fear of Punishment. His Doctrine had a tendency to
that of the Stoics; as appears by the Example of Antiochus of Ascalon, who
having been bred in his Academy, afterward turned Stoic. As for Natural
Philosophy, Plato has hardly written any thing on this Subject, which he did
not take from the Pythagoreans. Also for his Doctrine of Visions, Spirits, and
Intelligences, (in his Dialogues of Epinomie and Cratilus) he took it from
Pythagoras, and Zeno had it from Plato; as Lipsius writes. Apuleius says, that
Plato of all the ancient Philosophers, has discoursed best of God, Providence,
Spirits, and divine matters. And it must be granted, that he appears more
knowing in that kind of Science, than any of the rest; but seeing he learnt of
Pythagoras, most part of what he delivers on that Subject, it is not safe to
follow him. Tertullian says, the Platonists as well as the Stoics assigned
even God a Body. Cardan speaking of Plato's Opinion of the Immortality of the
Soul, shows, that his Arguments prove the Immortality of the Souls of Beasts,
as well as of Men, either of both, or none* Now touching this Philosopher's
Works, they are common, and well known* There are ten Dialogues, wherein the
sum of his Philosophy is comprehended; for his Writings are by way of Dialogue:
and in all these, we must distinguish betwixt Plato's proper Opinion, and the
Opinion of others. His own he lays down in the person of Socrates, Timae^s,
etc. Other men's Opinions he deposites in the person of Gorgias, Protagoras,
etc. Amongst these Dialogues, some are Logical, as his Gorgias, and Eutydemus:
some are Ethical, as his Memnon, Eutyphro, Philebus, and C^ito: some are
Political* as his Laws and Commonwealth: some are Physical, as his Timaeus: and
some are Metaphysical, as his Parmenides, and Sophistra, which yet are not
without somewhat of Logic. His Epistles are by some thought spurious: as also
the Platonic Definitions adjoined to his Works, are supposed to be compiled by
his Successor Pseusippus. This great Philosopher Plato was not without his
Detractors and Emulators, for such were Xenophon, Antisthenes, Aristippus,
Aeschines, Phaedo, Diogenes the Cynick, and Molon. Now by these Enemies of his,
many scandalous Imputations were forged upon him; as, that Plato professed one
thing, and practiced another; that he inordinately loved Aster, Dion, Phaedrus,
Alexis, Agatho, and Archeanassa, a Curtesan of Colopho; that he was a
Calumniator, envious, proud, and a gluttonous lover of Figgs; that he was the
worst of Philosophers; a Parasite to Tyrants; and many other Accusations alike
improbable. However, from hence the Comic Poets took occasion to abuse him: as
did Theopompus in Autochare; Anaxandrides in Theseo; Alexis in Meropide;
Cratylus in Pseudobolymaeo, etc. see Laertius. Lastly, As for his Disciples and
Friends, (who were called Platonists, or Academicks, from his own Name, and the
Name of his School) they were Speusippus, Xenocrates, Aristotle, Philippus,
H^stiaeus, Dion, Amyclas, Erastus, Coriscus, Temolaus, Evaemon, Pithon,
Heraclides, Hippothales, Calippus, Demetrius, Heraclides of Pontus, Lastheni^
and Axiothia, two Women, Theophrastus, Hyperides, Lycurgus, Demosthenes,
Mnesistratus, Aristides a Locrian, Eudoxus a C^idian, Evagon, Hermodorus,
Heracleodorus, Euphratus, Timaeus, Chaeron, Isocrates, Aster, Phadrus, Alexis,
Agatho, Aristonymus, Phormio, and Mededimus: and many other of later Ages have
been followers of his Doctrine: Cardinal Bessarion, and Marcilius Ficinus, made
the Italians in Love with this Philosophy of Plato; the Heresy of the
Gnostics sprung out of this Academy; Agrippa (as he himself confesses) weakened
his Spirit, by reading the Platonic Philosophy in Porphyry, Proclus, and
Plessus. Many of Plato's Disciples gave themselves to be burnt for the Doctrine
of their Master. Finally, All that has been written by the late Platonists
under the Roman Emperors, carries no solid Character. The most part of the
Greek Fathers, who were almost all Platonists, are not exact in what they say
of Angels and Spirits, by reason of the false Notions they imbibed in Plato's
School. He that would know more of the Life and Doctrine of this Philosopher,
let him search such ancient Authors, as Laertius, lib. 3. Apuleii Dogm. Plat:
Suidas, Plutarch, Athenaeus, Cicero, Aelian, Augustini Civita^em Dei, cum Notis
Ludovici Viv. Porphyry, Val. Maximus, Eusebius, Josephus, Clemens Alexand.
Strom. Stobaeus, and such modern Authors as Marcilius Ficinus, Monsieur Rapin's
Reflections on ancient and modern Philosophy, Stanly's Lives, and Theophilus
Gale his Court of the Gentiles.

[6] Helicon of Cyzicus, was he who Plutarch says (in the Life of Dion)
foretold the Eclipse of the Sun; also that this Helicon was a Friend of
Plato's; and that the coming to pass of his Prediction of the Eclipse, gave him
great repute with the Tyrant, who presented him with a Talent of Silver for his
happy Guess.

[7] Cyzicus (called at this day Chizico) was an ancient City of Mysia in Asia,
witness Ferarius.

[8] Phyton, when he fled from Rhegium, etc. This Phyton was of a noble Family
of Elis; who being reduced into Captivity with the rest of his Countrymen, was
compelled to use all dishonest Artifices for gain, as Diogenes mentions in his
Life.

[9] Rhegium, a City in the Coast of Italy, seated in that Cape or Promontory
which lies over against Sicily, now called Reggio, or Riggio, and not Rezzo, as
Ortelius would have it.

[10] Eudoxus the Cnidian, was (as Laertius writes, lib. 8.) the Son of
Aeschinus; he was skilled in Astrology, Geometry, Physic, and Law. His
Geometry he learnt of Archytas; his Physic of Philistion the Sicilian, as
Callimachus says in his Tables; also Photion (in success.) w^^tes, that he was
a Disciple of Plato's. When he was 23 years old, having a great desire after
Learning, and yet by reason of his poverty wanting wherewithal to purchase it,
also much envying the glory of Socrates his Disciples, he traveled from his
own Country Cnidus (one of the Cycladian Isles) to Athens, there to learn
Philosophy, where after two months abode, he returned home again* And from
thence, being supplied with moneys through the bounty of his Friends, he
afterward traveled into Egypt, in company of Chrysippus the Physician,
carrying along with him Letters of Recommendation from Agesilaus to Nectanabis,
by which means he was admitted into the Converse of their Priests, amongst whom
he continued the space of 16 months, where he wrote a History, comprehending
their Transactions the last 8 years. After this he returned to Athens, being
followed by many Disciples, and died in the 53* year of his Age. See Laertius,
lib. 8.

[11] Speusippus, was an Athenian, born at Myrrhinus, (which belonged to the
Pandonian Tribe) his Father named Eurymedon, his Mother Potone, and Sister to
Plato. He was educated under his Uncle Plato, whose Neece's Daughter he
married, having with her 30 Minae for a Portion, which Dionysius sent her; to
which sum Chio added a Talent. When Dion came to Athens, Speusippus was his
constant Companion, which he did by his Uncle Plato's Advice, to soften and
divert the morose humor of Dion; whereupon Timon (in Sillis) calls Pseusippus
a good Jester: Plat. Vit. Dion. The last Voyage that Plato made into Sicily,
Speusippus accompanied him, and grew much into favor with the Citizens of
Syracuse, by reason of his free Behavior. Afterward Pseusippus at his return
to Athens, instigated Dion (who was there in Banishment) to levy War upon
Dionysius, which accordingly he did with great success, as I have already
showed in the Life of Dionysius: upon this, when Dion had recovered Sicily, he
bestowed upon Speusippus his Countrey-house, which he had purchased at Athens,
as a reward for his good counsel. Now Plato dying in the first year of the
108th Olympiad, Theophilus being Archon, Speusippus succeeded him in the School
of his Academy, whom he followed also in his Doctrine: he continued Master of
this School 8 years, till at last being very infirm, and disabled by the
Palsy, he relinquished it to Xenocrates. As for the profession of Philosophy
which Speusippus made, it was the same with that of Plato. He first (as
Theodorus affirms) looked into the Community, and mutual assistance of
Mathematical Disciplines, as Plato did into that of the Philosophical. He
affirmed, that the Mind was not the same either with good or one, but of a
peculiar nature, proper to it self. And he exacted Money of his Disciples,
contrary to the custom of Plato. For though he followed Plato in his Opinions,
yet did he not imitate his Temper, Speusippus being austere and choleric, nor
had so great command over his Pleasures. In Anger he threw a Dog into a Well;
and indulging himself in Pleasure, he went to Cassander's Wedding in Macedonia:
Laert. Philostrat. He was likewise a great lover of Money, as Apollonius here
mentions, and also Laertius says the same. In so much, that some indifferent
Poems which he had made, he himself sung publicly for profit. These Vices,
Dionysius writing to him, derides, saying, Plato took no money of his Scholars,
but you exact it whether they are willing or not: as is extant in Athenaei
Dipnos. lib. 12. chapter 24. He was (as Timotheus says) very infirm of Body, in so
much that he was fain to be carried up and down the Academy in a kind of
running Chair. At length he died of grief, as Laertius (lib. 4.) affirms: who
elsewhere citing Plutarch, in the Lives of Lysander and Scylla, says, that
Speusippus died of the Phthiriasis; but there is no such passage in Plutarch,
as now extant. Lastly, Concerning his Writings, Phavorinus (in the second Book
of his Commentaries) says, that Aristotle paid three Talents for them. He
wrote many things, chiefly in Philosophy, as Commentaries and Dialogues;
whereof you may see a large Collection in Stanly's Lives, out of Laertius,
Suidas, Plutarch, Apuleius, Stobaeus, and Athenaeus.

Now for the further Illustration of those Philosophers Lives and Doctrines,
which are made use of in this Treatise, give me leave (as I did before in
History) so now to do the like in Philosophy; and for the better Explanation
thereof, present you with this short Scheme, as well of the principal Sects, as
Successions of the most eminent Philosophers, which is thus digested and
collected out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Laertius, and others.

Typus sive Epitome (uti Clemens ipse vocat) Successionis Philosophorum ex
Clem. Alexandr. Stromat. 1. Aliter Laert* Proens, p. 9, 10.

(...) (septem scil. Sapientes) (...).

1. Italica a Pythagora, Olympiad. 62 In Metapente, (...).
2. Ionica a Thalete, Olymp. 50. Anaximander. Anaximenes. Anaxagoras Hic
Scholam suam ex Ionia Athenas traduxit; ait Clemens. Archelaus. Socrates Plato
Peripatetica in Lyceo.
Aristoteles Theophrastus Straton. Lyco^. Cristolaus. Diodorus.
Academia vetus.
Speusippus. Xenocrates. Polemon. (...)
Stoica secta.
Crates Zeno Citicus Cleanthes. Chrysippus (...)
Academica media
Cranto^ Arcesiaus, etc. usque ad Hegesilaum Carn^^des. (...)



Antisthenes (...)

3. Eleatica a Zenophane, Oly. 40 Parmenides Zeno. Leucippus. Democritus.
Protagoras Metrodorus Diogenes Smyrnaeus fort. Diome^es apud Laert. in vit.
Anaxarc Anaxa^hus. Pyrrho Nauliphan^^. Epicurus uti Quidam







[12] Cassander 's Wedding, this Cassander was King of Macedonia, and Son of
Antipater, who nevertheless (respecting the public Good more than that of his
own Family) left the Kingdom at his death to Polysperch^n, and not to his own
extravagant Son, our Cassander here mentioned.. Which he rese^^ing very i^^,
resolved notwithstanding to push for the Kingdom of Macedonia; wherefore
entering into a Conspiracy with Ptolomy King of Egypt, as also with Antigonus,
and diverse other Captains, he prepared all things ready for a War both by Sea
and Land. At the same time Polysperchon (who was a cunning old Soldier, and
had been one of Alexander's Officers) the better to secure Greece from a
Revolt, did abolish all such Oligarchies, as since the passing of Alexander
into Asia, had been erected in any of the Greek Cities, thereby restoring them
to their former liberty, in hopes to secure them from adhering to Cassander.
Now Cassander having obtained of Antigonus 35 Ships, and 6000 Men, sailed with
them to Athens, which together with the Haven he had got into his power, by
means of Nicanor, whom he had sent beforehand for that purpose. Against him
came Polysperchon, intending to besiege him, but his Provisions failing him, he
was forced to raise his Siege; when leaving his Son with a Party in Attica, he
marched himself with the chief of his Army into Peloponesus against
Megalopolis, which was the only City amongst them that had adhered to
Cassander; where he being worsted, soon after the rest of the Greek Cities did
thereupon revolt to Cassander. After this ill fortune of Polysperchon's,
Cassander marching into Macedonia, found likewise many Friends there, who were
for the Rising Sun. The year following, Polysperchon by the help of Aeacida
(King of the Molossians) brought back Olympias, with Alexander, the Son of
Roxane, her Grandchild, into Macedonia; whereupon Eurydice, the Wife of King
Aridaeus, fortified her self, and sent to Cassander for aid; but the
Macedonians fearing the Majesty of Olympias, fell away from her; so that she
and her Husband being both committed to Prison, he was first killed, and then
Olympias sent her a Sword, an Halter, and Poison, to choose which of them she
pleased; who having prayed to the Gods for Revenge, hanged her self with her
Garter. This happened after Aridaeus had enjoyed the Title of King 6 years and
4 months. Olympias also killed Nicanor, the Brother of Cassander. But Cassander
hearing she was arrived in Macedonia, marched out of Peloponesus against her;
he also bribed all the Soldiers of Aeacida, as well as Polysperchon's Army, on
whose assistance she solely depended, when she being fled to Pydna, he there
besieged her, took her, and afterward put her to death, she refusing to fly
for her Life. And such was the end of Olympias, the Mother of Alexander, whom
she had outlived 8 years. In the next place, he privately ordered Roxane and
her Son Alexander to be slain. Now Polysperchon to revenge himself on
Cassander, set up Hercules, the Son of Alexander by Barsine, who was a Youth of
14 years of age, and had been educated at Pergamus. Hereupon Cassander fearing
lest the Macedonians should be too well affected to this young Hercules, for
his being descended of Alexander, did by way of Counterplot take to Wife
Thessalonice, the Daughter of Olympias, and Sister of Alexander the Great: And
this I conceive was the Wedding, whereat Speusippus recited his Poems, as
Apollonius here mentions. Afterward Cassander waged a second War, which was
against Antigonus; and soon after died of a Dropsy himself, having reigned 19
years, and leaving behind him three Sons of his Wife Thessalonice, viz. Philip,
Antipater, and Alexander, who came all to an ill end. See Justin, Diodorus,
Plutarch, and Laertius, Vita Phocion.

[13] Exercise all the Grecian Games; There were four principal Games or Shows
in Greece; whereof the first and most eminent were the Olympiads, the second
Pythii, the third Istmii, the fourth Nemei. Now designing to treat of all these
separately, I shall begin first with the Olympiads, as being the principal of
the Grecian Games. Know then, that these Olympic Games were first instituted
by Hercules, in honor of Jupiter: they were celebrated once every five years,
beginning from the 11th. and lasting to the 16th. day of the first Month. Now
an Olympiad (which comprehended the space of 5 years) was an Epoch of time,
where by the Greeks reckoned their Chronology; for as we count by years, and
the Romans by their Lustra, so did they by their Olympiads, beginning their
first Olympiad, A.M. 3174. from which time, instead of saying, 26 years, they
would say, the first year of the sixth Olympiad, etc. Also they received their
Name from their Situation, as being near the City Olympia, in the Province of
Elide: Now the use made of these Games, was to initiate the Youth of Greece in
Feats of Activity, for that the greatest numbers of men that ever met upon any
such Assemblies, used to resort thither, some as Spectators, and others, in
hope of Victory. The original of this Institution was said to be thus: That
Hercules, with his four younger Brethren, Paenaeus, Ida, Iasius, and Epimedes,
being returned from the Mountain Ida to Elis, proposed a Match of Running
betwixt them all, only to make Sport; also that he who outrun should be crowned
with Olive Branches, which accordingly Hercules was, he being then the Victor:
who thereupon (from the number of those five Brethren) instituted the like
Sport to be practiced every 5th year, to the honor of Jupiter, as I said
before. Also the Victor was according to the first practice, ever after crowned
with Olive, which gives Aristophanes in Plato occasion to deride Jupiter's
poverty, as being unable to bestow a Crown of Gold upon the Victor, when
instead thereof he presented him with a Crown of Olive Branches; Nam magis auro
decuit, si dives is esset: Transl. out of Aristoph. Some say, that Jupiter
himself instituted these Pastimes upon his Victory over the Titans, when Apollo
outran Mercury. In these Games, Eusebius writes, that Corilus an Arcadian wan
the first Prize; but Pliny and Isacius affirm, that Hercules, the Son of
Alcumena, (and not the Hercules beforementioned) was the first Founder and
Victor of these Sports and Prizes. For the Exercises used at these Olympiads,
that Epigram of Simonides shows what they were wherein he enumerates, (...).
Et saltus, and pugnis, and levitate pedum
Atque Palaestra.
Leaping, Fighting, Running, and Wrestling, were the principal Subjects of
their Contention; notwithstanding they had many others, as running Races with
Chariots, D^sputations betwixt Poets, Rhetoricians, Musicians, and
Philosophers. Also the manner was then to proclaim Wars, or enter Leagues of
Peace. Of this Subject see more in Cael. Rhodig, Natal Com. Mythol. Polyd.
Virg. and in all the Greek Poets and Historians.

The second of the Grecian Games were the Pythian, so called from Pythion, a
place in Macedonia, wherein they were dedicated to the honor of Apollo, in
commemoration of his Activity in vanquishing the great Serpent Python, that was
sent by Juno to persecute his Mother Latona, as the Fable says: which Python,
Strabo (lib. 6.) expounds to be a bloody wicked man, and enemy to Latona, whose
Name was Draco. In these Games the Conquerors were crowned with Laurel, as
appears by Lucian and Ovid, Huic Iuvenum quicunque manu, pedibusve, rotave,
Vicerat, esculeae capiebat frondis honorem,
Nondum Laurus erat. --
Metam. lib. 1. The Victor was at first adorned with other Boughs, but
afterward they made use of the Laurel, which Tree was appropriated to Apollo.
Pausanias (in Corinth.) writes, that Diomede at his return from Troy having
escaped the danger of Shipwreck, did in the nature of a Thanksgiving first
institute these Pythian Games: which were celebrated once a year at the
beginning of Spring, as Dionysius in his Book de situ Orbis has it, Instituere
choros omnes, victoria quando
Grata suit, cum jucundum ver incipit, and cum
Arboribus dulces nidos subtexit aedon.
Sic interpr* The persons who chiefly frequented these Sports, were the
Inhabitants of the Cyclades, and all the Islanders about Delos. Pythia was also
the Name of Apollo's Priestess.

The third of the Grecian Games were the Isthmean, celebrated every fifth year
in the Isthmus of Corinth, from whence they received their Name. They were
instituted by Theseus, in honor of Neptune, as Plutarch (in Vita Theses)
testifies: Some say, they were dedicated to Palaemon, the God of the Havens,
and I conceive that both Opinions may possibly be true, for as much as Neptune
and Palaemon are sometimes Synonyma in the Greek Poets; however, they were both
Gods of the Sea: Neptune of all, Palaemon only of the Harbors and Sea-shores.
In these Sports the Victor was crowned with a Garland of Pine Tree.

The fourth and last of the most eminent Games in Greece, were the Nemaean; so
called, because they were kept in the Forest Nemea. These Feasts were
celebrated by the Argives, in honor of Hercules, who had so valiantly overcome
a Lion in that place, and afterward wore his Skin for his Armor.
Notwithstanding some say, that these Nemaean Games were ordained in remembrance
of Archemorus, the Son of King Lycurgus.

Now besides these four abovementioned, they had several inferior Sports and
Recreations; such as Pyrrhus's Dance, (invented in Creet by one of Cybeles
Priests, so called) as a preparative of Youth for War, dancing it in Armor,
and with Weapons on Horseback; Naked Games, invented by Lycaon: Funeral Plays,
by Arastus; Wrestling, by Mercury; Dice, Tables, Tennis, and Cards, invented by
the Lydians, not for any pleasure or lucre, but for the Commonwealths good;
when in time of Famine, they assuaged their Hunger by eating every other day,
and fasting by the help of these sedentary Pastimes the next. Also the Game of
Chess, invented, A. M. 3635. by a Politician, one Xerxes, thereby to
demonstrate, how inconsiderable and impotent any Tyrant or Magistrate is,
without the strength and assistance of his Subjects. They used casting of the
Bar, which was made either of Iron or Brass, and of a vast weight, which
whosoever cast highest or farthest wan the Prize. They used Wrestling, when two
men having anointed themselves, whosoever flung the other first to the ground,
was esteemed the Victor. They sometimes disputed at Cuffs, which Combatants
(named Pugiles) did tie about their Hands hard Thongs of an Ox's Hide, called
(...); and these Sports were called Gymnici, because the parties fought naked.
Palaestra was the place where they exercised Feats of Activity; and the Masters
who taught there, were called Gymnastae. About this time there were in Greece,
Athletes, (such as Apollonius here mentions) or Combatants of incredible
strength, as Milon of Crotone, and Polydamas: whereof the one carrying a Bull
along the Stadium, did afterward knock him down with a blow of his Fist; and
the other Polydamas strangled a Lion in Mount Olympus with his bare hands. Now
these Games and Exercises of the Grecian Youth, caused them to be such good
Soldiers, that with a small number of men they defeated millions of the
Persians who invaded them. Neither were these Plays and Combats esteemed of
only as relating to War, or to divert the people; but they were also instituted
(as appears by the four first I mentioned) in honor of their Gods, whose
Festivals were celebrated with such kinds of Sports. Thus Homer tells us, how
in the Temples they exercised themselves at many pretty Plays, when he speaks
of those who did handle the Dice before the Altars of Minerva. See more of this
Subject in Panciroll. Cael. Rhodigin. and Gualtruchius.

[14] Olynthos, a Town in Macedon, which is called to this day Olintho. Ferrar.

CHAP. XXIII. Apollonius asks of the King, only that he would be merciful to
the Eretrians, saying, that he for his part needed nothing but Bread and
Fruits: A certain Eunuch taken with one of the King's Concubines, is by the
intercession of Apollonius saved from death: Apollonius tells the King what
is to be done that he may reign safely: Of the Embassy sent to the King.
IN the mean time an Eunuch came and called him in to the King, to whom
Apollonius returned this Answer, that he would come so soon as he had finished
to his desire what concerned the Gods. Accordingly, having finished his
Offerings and Prayers, he approached the King in such a Garb and Habit as
procured the admiration of the Spectators. When he was come into the presence,
the King said to him, I give you ten Boons, judging you to be such a man, as
never yet came out of Greece. To which Apollonius answered, Oh King, I refuse
not all your Gifts, but there is one which I would ask rather than many tens;
and withal, began to fall upon the Story of the Eretrians, taking his Rise
from Datis. I pray you therefore (said Apollonius) let not these poor Wretches
be driven out of their Borders, and the Hill that has been assigned them, but
constitute you unto them that portion of Land which Darius appointed for them.
In as much as it is a sad case, if being driven out of their Country, they
shall not enjoy that Morsel which was assigned them instead of their own Land.
Wherefore the King assenting to him, said, The Eretrians even till of late have
been the Enemies both of me and of my Ancestors: and seeing they had begun the
[1] War against us, they have been looked upon with an evil eye, so that their
whole Generation is almost extinct; but for the time to come they shall be set
down among my Friends, and I will appoint a good Governor over them, who shall
do them right as touching the place assigned them. But why will you not accept
the other nine Gifts? Because (said Apollonius) I have as yet acquired no
Friends here. But do you your self need nothing, said the King? Yes, (said
Apollonius) Bread and Fruits, which to me are pleasant and sumptuous Fare. As
they were thus discoursing, a great noise was heard out of the Palace, both of
the Eunuchs, and of the Women: for a certain Eunuch was taken lying with one of
the King's [2] Concubines, and acting as Adulterers are wont to do: whereupon
they dragged him by the Hair about the Woman's Chamber, after that manner as the
King's Servants were used to be dragged. But when the eldest of the Eunuchs
related, that he had long since observed this Eunuch to be in Love with that
Woman, and therefore had forewarned him not to speak with her, nor touch her
Neck or Hand, and to abstain from dressing her only of all that were within the
Chamber* nevertheless he had now found him lying with her, and doing the work
of a man: Thereupon Apollonius looking upon Damis, tacitly admonished him, that
now he had a demonstration of that Discourse, which was formerly Philosophised
between them, concerning Eunuchs being capable of Lust. But the King said to
the standers by, It is a shame that we should in the presence of Apollonius,
adventure to discourse of Modesty or Chastity, and not refer the determination
of such matters to him. What therefore do you (Apollonius) appoint this Eunuch
to suffer? Apollonius, contrary to the opinion of all that were there present,
answered, What else but to live? At that the King blushing, replied, Think you
that such a Fellow is not worthy of many deaths, who durst violate my Bed? But,
said Apollonius, I spoke not this for his pardon, but for his punishment, which
shall gnaw him continually: for if this Lovesick Eunuch be permitted to live,
longing for Impossibilities, neither will his Meat nor Drink please him, nor
those Shows, which give great content to you and your Attendants. Moreover, his
Heart will often pant, whilst his Sleep suddenly departs from him, as it is
used to happen to those that are in Love: and what Consumption can so pine him
away, or what Pestilence can so fret his Bowels? Nay, if he be not a very [3]
Coward, he will often supplicate you to kill him, or else will dispatch
himself, much lamenting this present day, wherein he was not put to death. Such
was the Answer of Apollonius, so wise and so mild, that the King permitted the
Eunuch to live. Afterward the King going forth to hunt in the Parks, where
Lions, Bears, and Panthers, were enclosed for the Barbarians, asked Apollonius,
whether he would go a hunting with him? To whom Apollonius answered, You have
forgotten (Oh King) that I would not be present with you whilst you sacrificed:
and besides, it is no pleasing thing to look on while Beasts are tortured, and
brought into bondage, contrary to their own Nature. Then the King demanding of
him, by what means he might reign firmly and securely, Apollonius answered, If
you honor many, and trust few. When a certain Prince of Syria had sent Envoys
to him, concerning two Towns that lay near the Confines of his Country,
saying, that they had sometimes belonged to Antiochus and Seleucus, but now
were under his jurisdiction, as being part of the Roman Empire: And though the
Arabians and Armenians durst not make any attempt upon those Towns, yet the
King had invaded them, that he might enjoy the Profits of so remote a Country,
as pertaining rather to him, than to the Romans: The King having caused the
Ambassadors to withdraw a little, said to Apollonius, These Towns were by the
aforesaid Kings granted to my Ancestors, for the breeding of these wild Beasts,
which being taken by us, do pass over Euphrates unto them; but they forgetting
these matters, do seek after unjust Innovations. What therefore think you
(Apollonius) is the meaning of this Embassy? Apollonius replied, Their meaning
seems very fair and reasonable, if being able to retain the possession of
those Towns situate in their Confines whether you will or no, they had rather
receive it of you of your own accord. He further added, that he ought not for
the sake of certain Towns, (than which, many private persons have possessed
greater) to enter into contention with the Romans, or to undertake a War upon
so small an occasion.

Illustrations on Chap. 23.
[1] THey had begun the War upon us, etc. Man is nothing but Self-interest
incarnate, which consists totally in love of Life, and fear of Death: These are
in effect to man, as two Ears to a Pot, whereof the one is to be held by Love,
the other by Fear; Love is the fairer, but Fear the surer, and of greater
operation: wherefore Pallas the God of Wisdom is always pictured armed, and the
modern Inscription upon our great Ordnance is, Ratio ultima Regum, to show,
that in persuading people to Submission and Obedience, after all Arguments of
Conscience and Law used in vain, the Death-thundring Cannon is the last and
surest Motive; for Self-love is deaf to all Motives, but that of Death the King
of Terrors: therefore Princes to express their Character by Herald
Hieroglyphics, are usually observed to choose Birds or Beasts of prey, as the
Roman Eagles, the English Lions, etc. only France to outshine the Glory of
Solomon, chose the Lillies. The Ancients to decipher the best Education of a
Prince, report Achilles to have been bred up under Chyron the Centaur, who was
half a Man, and the other half a Beast, and that very fierce. The Camel, a
great and strong Creature, yet by reason of his meek and harmless Nature, is
led by Boys, and heavy laden; whereas the Leopard, a small but mischievous
Beast, frees himself from that slavery, by his own fierceness. What makes the
Subject of England enjoy that Liberty and Property which other neighboring
Subjects want, but our own happy ill Natures? And when others called the King
of England, Rex Diabolorum, they did it only out of envy, for that his Subjects
were Men, and not Cowards, Leopards, and not Camels. In like manner, if Princes
are tame and unwarlike, their Neighbors will invade them, as well as their own
Subjects rebel; for if men continue long in peace, it is metu, non moribus. War
either public or private, is almost the only thing which commands and governs
mankind; the Thief on a sudden with his Pistol against your breast, commands
your Purse: a poor man's Back and Belly lay siege against him, and force him to
hard labor: vulgar Souls are often forced from their lewd Lives, by the
continual War which Preachers make against them, with their spiritual Weapons
of Fire and Brimstone. The Life of all Creatures supports it self by a daily
warfare upon one another; some upon living Creatures, some upon Plants, and
Plants upon the Water of the Earth. Torva Leoena Lupum, sequitur Lupus ipse
Capellam,
Florentem Citysum sequitur lasciva Capella.
As for the Antiquity and Original of Wa^, Diodorus says, it was invented by
Mars; Tully says, by Pallas; and (...) writes, that Tubulcain practiced
Chivalry before the Flood; but Trogus will have it, that Nin^^ (the Husband of
Semiramis) was the first King that ever made War upon his Neighbors. However,
he that studies the Nature of men will find, that mankind has ever continued
in a state of War from its first Original: and if to disobey, be to offend, and
to offend, is War, then was Adam in a state of War before his Fall, which made
him have a desire to violate the Commands of God, in eating the forbidden
Fruit, since his appetite to commit the sin, preceded the sin it self; and
therefore not wholly innocent before. For War (as Mr. Hobbs well observes,
Leviath. part 1. chap. 13.) consists not only in Battle, or the act of
Fighting, but in a tract of Time, wherein the Will to contend by Battle is
sufficiently known: and therefore the notion of Time is to be considered in the
nature of War, as it is in the nature of Weather. For as the nature of foul
Weather, lies not in a shower or two of Rain, but in an inclination thereto of
many days together, so the nature of War, consists not in actual Fighting,
but in the known disposition thereto, during all the time that there is no
assurance to the contrary. Now that this War betwixt man and man proceeds
originally from Nature, is evident: for Nature having made all men equal in the
faculties of Body and Mind, at least in their own conceit, from this equality
of Ability there arises equality of Hope, in the attaining of our ends: And
therefore if any two men desire the same thing, which nevertheless they cannot
both enjoy, they become Enemies, and in the way to their end endeavor to
destroy or subdue one another; from whence arises a diffidence betwixt them,
and from that diffidence, War. Again, Every man looks his Companion should
value him at the same rate he sets upon himself; and upon all signs of
contempt, or undervaluing, naturally endeavors (even to their destruction, if
not prevented by some higher Power) to extort a greater value from his
contemners by Victory, and from others by the Example: Moreover, To this War of
every man against every man, this also is consequent, that nothing can be
unjust. The Notions of Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice, have there no
place. Where there is no common Power, there is no Law; where no Law, no
Injustice. Force and Fraud are in war the two Cardinal Virtues. Justice and
Injustice are none of the Faculties neither of the Body, nor the Mind; if they
were, they might be in a man that were alone by himself in the world, as well
as his Senses and Passions: they are Qualities that relate to men in Society,
not in Solitude. It is consequent also to the same condition, that there be no
Propriety, no Dominion, no Mine and Thine distinct, but only, that to be every
man's, that he can get; and for so long, as he can keep it. Methinks Horace
gives us a pretty description of this state of war, and much to the same effect
with Mr. Hobbs's, in these lines: Quum prorepserunt primis animalia terris,
Mutum and turpe pecus, glandem atque cubilia propter,
Unguibus and pugnis, dein fustibus atque it a porro
Pugnabant armis, quae post fabricaver at usus.
Donec verba, quibus voces se^susque notarent,
Nominaque invenere, dehinc absistere bello,
Oppida caeperunt munire: and ponere Lege^,
Ne quis fur esset, neu latr^, neu quis adulter.
Nam fuit ante Helenam cunnus teterrima b^lli
Causa: sed ignotis perierunt mortib^s illi,
Quos venerem incertam rapientes, more ferarum,
Viribus editi^r caedebat, ut in grege Taurus.
Horat. Lib. 1: Sat. 3. Now the Passions that incline men to Peace, are fear of
Death, desire of such things a^ are commodious to a happy Life, and a hope by
their Industry to obtain them: from whence spring Arms, Laws, Magistrates, and
all Civil Government, which (in respect that man is more rapacious, false, and
perfidious, than any other Creature) are more essentially necessary for him,
than for them. Birds feed on Birds, Beasts on each other prey,
But savage man alone does man betray;
Pressed by Necessity they kill for food,
Man undoes man, to do himself no good.
With Teeth and Claws by Nature armed they hunt
Natures allowance, to supply their want:
But man with smiles, embraces, friendship, praise,
Most humanely his fellows Life betrays;
With voluntary pains works his distress,
Not through Necessity but want^nness.
For Hunger or for Love they fight and tear;
Whilst wretched man is still in Arms for fear:
For fear he arms, and is of Arms afraid,
By fear to fear successively betrayed.
Base fear the source whence his best actions came,
His boasted honor, and his dear bought fame.
That Lust of Power to which he is such a slave,
And for the which alone he dares be brave;
To which his various projects are designed,
That make him generous, affable, and kind:
For which he takes such pains to be thought wise,
And skrews his actions in a forced disguise;
Leading a tedious Life in misery,
Under laborious mean Hypocrisy.
Look to the bottom of this vast design,
Wherein man's w^sdom, power, and glory join*
The good he acts, the ill he does endure,
It Is all from fear to make himself secure:
Merely for safety after fame we thirst;
For all men would be Cowards if they durst.
Satyr against Man* It may (says Mr. Hobbs) seem strange to him, that has not
well weighed these things* how Nature should thus dissociate and render men apt
to invade, and destroy one another: wherefore, not trusting to these
forementioned Inferences made from the Passions, he may perhaps desire to have
the same confirmed by Experience. Let him therefore consider with himself, what
opinion he has of his Fellow Subjects, when he rides armed upon the Road; of
his fellow-Citizens, when he locks his Doors; of his Children and Servants,
when he locks his Chests and Truncks? Does he not there as much accuse mankind
by his actions, as I do by my words? Nay, as well the Civil Law, which ordains
a punishment for Murder in this World, as the Sacred, which prohibits it upon
pain of damnation in the next, are sufficient Arguments to justify the
rapacious and fraudulent Natures of men. Men naturally desire to be governed by
them that will govern them cheapest, and care not how often they change their
Masters, so that they may gain but two pence in the pound by so doing: Thus we
see the common Soldier fights for him that gives him the most Pay, when,
without ever considering the justice of the Cause, or any thing but their own
Interest for a brown George, and a Groat a day, they murder such as never did
them wrong, and like Mastiffs upon a Bear, are set on by no other Motives, but
the Claps of a luxurious and ambitious Master; never considering, that he who
has least to lose, ought to venture least: like that most wise Cobbler, who
refusing to ^eep Holiday as others did, upon a Victory his Prince had obtained,
and being asked why, replied, As he was a Cobbler before, so he should neither
mend nor mar his condition, let the Victory go how it would, for that he was
sure both parties must need men of his Trade. And this may suffice to show the
ill condition, which man by mere Nature is actually placed in.

[2] Kings Concubines; The Eastern Princes, as well ancient as modern, have
never wanted their Seraglio of Concubines; notwithstanding some were more
addicted to them than others, and accordingly have their success been: for that
Monarch who keeps but one hand upon his instruments of Pleasure, and the other
hand upon his Sword, may happily succeed well; but he, who like Sardanapalus,
pinnions both hands upon those lower parts, and quits the possession of his
Sword, for a spinning Wheel and a Mistress, will inevitably fall into the same
ruin: neither indeed (as Cyrus bravely spoke) does it belong properly to that
man to command, who is not of more worth, than those whom he commands. When a
Woman governs a Prince, she wears not only the Breeches but the Crown, War and
Peace are wholly in her hands, to her Ambassadors solely address themselves, to
her all persons make their applications for Debts, Offices, and places of
preferment, both in Church and State, she only can play the Donna Olympia, when
either by stealing his Papers of State, she betrays his most secret Counsels to
Foreigners, or by constituting men of wicked principles in all Offices of
Trust, she scandalizes both Church and State. Again, As with private men, so is
it with Princes, the very expenses of such women are often destructive to both;
for as the one may bring himself to beggary, by paying a hundred pounds for
that which is worth but a shilling; so may the other by raising his expenses
proportionably, so oppress his Subjects with Taxes, as shall endanger an
Insurrection, leaving himself unable to oppose his Enemies, either abroad or at
home. Therefore well might Solomon say, that women will bring a man to a morsel
of Bread; since one Cleopatra can consume 600000 Sesterces at a draught, as if
nothing but the richest Oriental Pearl would serve to quench her thirst: Hanc
volo quam redimit totam Denarius alter.
Mart: Now how much those Eastern people are addicted to this Vice, would seem
incredible, did not our daily Experience inform us of the truth thereof: When
Sultan Achmet (who lived but in the year of our Lord, 1613.) had 3000
Concubines and Virgins listed in his Venereal Service. Purchase's Pilgrimage,
page 290. Nay, in those Countries, the Wives are not all offended at the Rivals
of their Bed, for as custom has taken off the shame, so also has it
extinguished their anger: Thus we read in holy Writ, that Leah, Rachel, Sarah,
and Jacob's Wives, brought their fairest Maiden-servants unto their Husbands
Beds; also Livia seconded the lustful Appetites of her Husband Augustus, even
to her own prejudice; and Stratonica, wife of King Deiotarus, did not only
accommodate the King with a handsome Maiden, but also enrolled the said
Concubine for one of the Ladies of her Bedchamber, educating her Children, and
using all means possible to have them succeed in his Thron^; of so base a
Spirit was Queen Stratonica! Again, Princes have been as often ruined by their
Wives, as by their Concubines: Thus Livia is infamous for the poisoning of her
Husband; Roxalana, Solyman's Wife, was the destruction of that renowned Prince,
Sultan Mustapha, and otherwise troubled his House and Succession; Edward the
Second of England his Queen, had the principal hand in the deposing, and
murder of her Husband. Now this kind of danger is then chiefly to be feared,
when the Wives have Plots, either for the raising of their own Children, or for
the promoting of their own new Religion, or else when they be Advowtresses: of
all which, her differing from her Husband in Religion, (whether she be Wife or
Concubine) renders her the most dangerous; for then, she looking upon him as
out of the reach of God's mercy, can think nothing an injury to his person, or
a loss to his Estate, if her ghostly Fathers are pleased but to encourage her.
Lastly, Upon another account Women have many times been the destruction of
States; Nam fuit ante Helenam Cunnus teterrima Belli
Causa: --
Horat. Lib. 1. Sat. 3. Paris his Robbery committed upon the Body of the fair
Helena, Wife to Menelaus, was the original cause of that fierce War between the
Greeks and Trojans; the Rape of Lucreece lost the Tarquins their Government;
the Attempt upon Virginia, was the ruin of the Decem-viri; the same armed
Pausanias against Philip of Macedon, and many other Subjects against many other
Princes: in so much, that Aristotle (in his Politics) imputes the abomination
of Tyranny, to the injuries they do to people on the account of Women, either
by Debauchments, Violences, or Adulteries: and this he delivers the rather, for
that no one Vice reigns more amongst Princes, than this of Venery. Semiramis is
said to have had conjunction with a Horse; and Pericles to have begun the
Peleponesian War, for the sake of Aspasia, the Socratick Curtezan; Judah, the
Jewish Patriarch, was a Fornicator; and Sampson (one of the Judges of the
people of God) married two Harlots; Solomon, the wisest King of the Jews, kept
whole Troops of Curtezans; Sardanapalus, that great Assyrian Monarch, lost his
Kingdom for a spinning-Wheel and a Whore; Julius Caesar, the Dictator, was
called, the Man of Women; Mark Anthony was ruined by Cleopatra; and Thalestris,
Queen of the Amazons, marched 35 days Journey through strange Countries, only
to request Alexander the Great to lie with her, which having obtained, she
returned home again well satisfied: Much such another was Joan, Queen of
Naples, of fresher memory; as also Pope Joan, which though denied by modern
Papists. I find confirmed in some Books I have now by me, that were both
written and printed before the Reformation; as for instance, Polycronicon, and
another old great Chronicle entitled, Chronicon Chronicorum. Again, Queen
Pasiphae was another Example of Lasciviousness; Heliogabalus much advanced the
Art of Bawdery; and Domitian is reported to have acted Sodomy with a Bull. And
many other great persons were there, whom History mentions, that forsook their
noble Enterprises for the Snares of Love, as did Mithridates in Pontus,
Hannibal at Capu^, Caesar in Alexandria, Demetrius ^n Greece, and Anthony in
Egypt. Hercules ceased from his Labors for Iole's sake; Achilles hid himself
from the Battle for Love of Briseis; Circe stays Ulysses; Claudius dies in
Prison for Love of a Virgin; Caesar is detained by Cleopatra, and the same
Woman ruined Anthony. For being false to their Beds, Clytemnestra, Olympia,
Laodicea, Beronica, and two Queens of France, called Fregiogunda, and Blanch,
as also Joan, Queen of Naples, all slew their Husbands. And for the very same
reason, Medea, Progne, Ariadne, Althea, and Heristilla, changing their maternal
Love into Hatred, were every one the cause and plotters of their Sons Deaths.

[3] Nay, if he be not a very Coward, he will kill himself, etc. All things are
importuned to kill themselves, and that not only by Nature, which perfects
them, but also by Art and Education, which perfects her. Plants quickened and
inhabited by the most unworthy Soul, which therefore neither will nor work,
affect an end, a perfection, a death; this they spend their Spirits to attain,
this attained, they languish and wither. And by how much more they are by man's
Industry warmed, cherished, and pampered, so much the more early they climb to
this perfection, and this death. And if amongst men, not to defend be to kill,
what a heinous self-murder is it, not to defend it self? This defense because
Beasts neglect, they kill themselves, in as much as they exceed us in Number,
Strength, and lawless Liberty: yea, of Horses and other Beasts, they that
inherit most courage, by being b^ed of gallantest Parents, and by artificial
Nursing, are bettered, will run to their own Deaths, neither solicited by
Spurs, which they need not; nor by Honor, which they apprehend not. If then
the Valiant kill himself, who can excuse the Coward? Or how shall man be free
from this, since the first man taught us this, except we cannot kill our
selves, because he killed us all. Yet lest something should repair this common
Ruin, we daily kill our Bodies with Surfets, and our Minds with Anguishes. Of
our Powers, Remembering kills our Memory; of Affections, Lusting, our Lust; of
Virtues, Giving kills Liberality. And if these kill themselves, they do it in
their best and supreme perfection: for after perfection immediately follows
excess, which changing the Natures and the Names, makes them not the same
things. If then the best things kill themselves soonest, (for no Affection
endures, and all things labor to this perfection) all travel to their own
death, yea, the frame of the whole World, if it were possible for God to be
idle, yet because it began, must die. Then in this Idleness imagined in God,
what could kill the World but it self, since out of it, nothing is? Donn's
Paradoxes. The two chief Objections against self-Homicide, are the Law of God
commanded in the Scriptures, and the Law of Nature, which obliges every man to
self-Preservation. As for the first of these, I refer you to that excellent
Treatise entitled, (...), and written by that eminent Poet and Divine, Dr.
Donn, the Dean of Paul's; wherein, with no weak Arguments, he endeavors to
justify out of Scripture, the Legality of self-Homicide. As to the second
Objection of self-Preservation, those that are for self-Murder, urge, that
self-Preservation is no other than a natural Affection, and appetition of good,
whether true, or seeming; so that if I propose to my self in this self-Killing
a greater good, although I mistake it, I perceive not (says the Doctor)
wherein I transgress the general Law of Nature, which is an Affection of good,
true, or seeming: and if that which I affect by death, (as Martyrs, who expect
a Crown of Glory, and to lie snug in Abraham's bosom, under the umbrage of his
Beard) be really a greater good, wherein is the Law of self-Preservation
violated? Therefore some that are Enemies to our Faith, will have Afflictions
to be God's Call out of this Life, and by the same Reason as we preserve our
well-being, ought we then to destroy our ill-being. Another Reason which
prevails with them, as showing self-Homicide to be consistent with the Law of
Nature is this, that in all Ages, in all places, and upon all occasions, men of
all conditions have affected i^, and inclined to do it; when man, as though he
were Angelus sepultus, labors to be discharged of his earthly Sepulcher, his
Body. And though this may be said of all other sins, that men are propense to
them, and yet for all that, frequently they are against Nature; yet if this sin
(says the Doctor) were against the particular Law of Nature, and that so it
wrought to the destruction of our Species, any otherwise than intemperate Lust,
Surfets, or incurring penal Laws, and the like, it could not be so general;
since being contrary to our sensitive Nature, it has not the advantage of
pleasure and delight to allure us withal, which other sins have. When I frame
to my self a Martyrology (says he) of all which have perished by their own
means for Religion, Country, Fame, Love, Ease, Fear, and Shame, I blush to see
how naked of Followers all Virtues are in respect of this Fortitude; and that
all Histories afford not so many Examples, either of Cunning, subtle Devices,
or of forcible and violent Actions, for the safeguard of Life, as for the
destroying. Petronius Arbiter, who served Nero, a man of Pleasure, in the
Office of Master of his Pleasures, upon the first frown went home and cut his
Veins. How subtlely and curiously Attilius Regulus destroyed himself? whom
Codrus exceeded, in forcing his own Death. Comas, Captain of the Thieves, died
by stopping his own Breath. Herennius, the Sicilian, beat out his own Brains
against a Post. Annibal, for fear of being reduced to the necessity of being
beholden to others, died with poison, which he always carried in a Ring; as
Demosthenes died with poison carried in a Pen. Aristarchus starved himself; and
Homer is said to have hanged himself, because he understood not the Fishermens
Riddle. Democles scalded himself to death. Portia, Ca^o's Daughter, and Catulus
Luctatius, died by swallowing burning Coals. Poor Terence, because he lost his
108 translated Comedies, drowned himself. And the Poet Labienus, because his
Books were burnt by public Edict, burnt himself also. Zeno, upon a small hurt
of his Finger, hanged himself, when he was almost an hundred years of age; for
which reason Laertius proclaims him to be, Mira faelicitate vir, qui incolumis,
integer, sine morbo excessit. Portius Latro killed himself for a quartan Ague;
and Festus, Domitian's Beloved, only to hide the deformity of a Ringworm in his
Face. Hipponi^s the Poet rimed Bubalus the Painter to death with his Iambicks;
and so Cassius Licinius, to escape Cicero's Judgment, choked himself with a
Napkin. These and many other Examples could I instance, were it necessary* as
those who die voluntarily for Religion; and the Wives among the Indians, who
burn themselves upon their Husbands death. One of the most cruel Roman Emperors
said of his Prisoners, that he would make them feel death; and if any fortuned
to kill himself in Prison, he would say, That Fellow has escaped me. Lastly,
Cato alone, that pattern of Virtue, may serve instead of all other Examples.
Moreover, I do verily believe, that he who hangs himself in a Garret, (as the
late Parson of Newgate did) feels less pain, horror, and trouble, than such as
die of Fevers in their Beds, with Friends and Relations weeping about them.

CHAP. XXIV. Apollonius whilst the King lay sick, told him many things of the
Souls Immortality: Diverse Speeches passed to and fro between them: Apollonius
is at length dismissed by the King, with Camels and other Necessaries for his
Journey into India.
NOw the King being fallen sick, Apollonius standing by him, uttered so great
and so divine things concerning the Soul, that the King-plucking up his
courage, said to the standers by, that Apollonius had by his words caused him
not only to contemn a Kingdom, but even [1] Death it self; when the King showed
the Trench to Apollonius, which was made under Euphrates, and whereof we See
lib. 1. chapter 18.
spoke before, and asked him whether he thought it not a great wonder:
Apollonius depressing the strangeness thereof, said to the King, It would be a
wonder indeed, if you were able to pass over so deep and unpassable a Current
on your feet. Afterward, when he showed him the Walls of Ecbatana, saying,
that they were the Dwelling of the Gods; Apollonius replied, They are not
certainly the Dwelling of the Gods, and whether they be the Dwelling of men, I
cannot tell; for the City of [2] Lacedemon (Oh King) is inhabited without
Walls. Again, when the King had been administering Justice to certain Towns, and
boasted to Apollonius, that he had spent two days in hearing and determining
Causes; Apollonius answered, You were very slow in finding out what was just.
A^ another time, after the Tributes coming in thick from his Subjects, the King
opening his Treasury, showed his Wealth to Apollonius. alluring him to the
desire of Riches: But Apollonius admiring at nothing which he saw, said to the
King, To you (Oh King) these are [3] Riches, but to me, nothing but Straw. When
the King demanded what he should do to make good use of his Riches,
Apollonius's Answer was, If you make use of them, considering you are a King.
Now having had many such Conferences with the King, and having found him ready
to do what he advised him to, also thinking that he had sufficiently conversed
with the Magicians, he said to Damis, Go to now Damis, let us begin our March
toward the Indians; for they that sail toward the Eaters of [4] Lotus, being
taken with the sweetness of that Plant, forget their own proper manners; but
we, though we have not tasted of any thing that is here, do yet tarry in these
parts longer than is fitting. I my self had the same thoughts, said Damis; but
reckoning the time which we conjectured from the Lioness which we saw, I waited
till that space was expired, which is not yet passed; for it is now but a year
and four Months I have here supplied, the Greek being defective.
months with us; nevertheless, could we now get away from hence, it would do
well: But the King (answered Apollonius) will not dismiss us before the end of
the eighth month; for you see that he is full of Courtesy and Humanity, too
good to reign over Barbarians. But when he was resolved to depart, and the King
had given him leave so to do, Apollonius called to mind the Gifts which
hitherto he had forborne to receive, until he had gotten Friends in that
Country; wherefore going to the King, he said to him, Best of Kings, I have
hitherto bestowed no Benefit on my Host, also I owe a Reward to the Magicians;
wherefore my Request is, that you would be mindful of them, and for my sake,
take care of them, being wise men, and full of good will toward you. The King
being exceedingly well pleased, said unto him, You shall see these men to
morrow made marks of Emulation, and greatly rewarded; moreover, in as much as
you your self have need of none of my Riches, permit at least that these men,
pointing to those about Damis, may receive something of my Wealth, even what
they will. But when they also turned away at this word, Apollonius answered, Do
you see (Oh King) my Hands, both how many they are, and how like one another?
However, said the King, take a Guide to direct* you in your Journey, and [5]
Camels whereon you may ride, for the way is too long to travel it all on foot.
Let this be done (Oh King) answered Apollonius, as you command, for they
report, that the way cannot be passed over by any who does not so ride; also
this Creature is easy to be provided for, and fed, where there is but little
Forage: I suppose likewise, that we must provide Water, and carry it in
Bottles, as men do Wine; for three days Journey (said the King) the Country is
without Water, but after that, there is great plenty of Rivers and Springs. I
conceive it best for you to travel over Caucasus; for that Country is fertile,
and affords good Accommodation. Now when the King asked him what Present he
would bring him from thence, Apollonius answered, It should be a pleasing one;
for if (said he) my Converse with the men of that Country improve my Wisdom, I
shall return to you far better than I leave you: Whereupon the King embracing
him, said unto him, Go on your way, for this Present will be great.

Illustrations on Chap. 24.
[1] CO^temn even Death it self* etc. It is worthy the observing, (says the
Lord Bacon) that there is no Passion in the Mind of man so weak, but that it
masters the fear of Death: Revenge triumphs over Death; L^ve slights it, Honor
aspireth to it; Grief flies to it; and Fear pre-occupateth it. Nay, we read,
that after the Emperor Otho had slain himself, Pity (which is the tenderest of
Affections) provoked many to die, out of mere compassion to their Sovereign.
Moreover, Seneca adds Niceness and S^tiety, saying, that a man would die,
though he were neither valiant nor miserable, only upon a wearisomness, to do
the same thing so often over and over. Hence it is, that the Approaches of
Death make so little alteration in good Spirits, that they appear to be the
same men, to the very last instant: Thus Augustus Caesar died in a Complement,
Livia, conjugii nostri memor, vive, and vale, Tiberius in Dissimulation, as
Tacitus says of him, Iam Tiberium vires, and corpus, non dissimulatio,
deserebant; Vespasian in a Jest sitting upon a Stool, Vt puto, Deus fio; Galba
with a Sentence, Feri, si ex re sit Populi Romani, holding forth his Neck,
Septimius Severus in Dispatch, Adeste, si quid mihi restat agendum, etc. Bac.
Ess. Again, many vulgar persons are seen to bear Deaths, intermixed with Shame
and Torments, with an undaunted assurance; some through stubbornness, and some
through simplicity; who without any visible alteration, take leave of their
Friends, and settle their domestic Concerns, but an hour before they die;
sometimes singing, jesting, or laughing, and sometimes drinking to their
Acquaintance with their very last breath, even as unconcerned as Socrates
himself could be. One (says Montaign) when he was led to the Gallows, desired
it might not be through such a Street, for fear a Merchant should arrest him
for an old Debt. Another wished the Hangman not to touch his Throat, because he
was ticklish. Another answered his Confessor, who promised him he should sup
that night with our Savior in Heaven, Go thither your self to Supper, for I
use to fast at nights. Another calling for Drink upon the Gibbet, and the
Hangman drinking first, said, he would not drink after him, for fear he should
take the Pox of him. Another seeing the people running before him to the place
of Execution, told 'em, they need not make such haste, for that there would be
no sport till he came. Another being upon the Ladder ready to be turned off, a
lame Weneh came and offered to save his Life by marrying him; but he perceiving
her Lameness, cried out, Away, away, good Hangman, make an end of thy Business,
she limps. And many other Stories of the like nature I could here produce, to
show with how little Concern some men look Death in the face. Quoties non modo
Ductores, etc. How often (says Tully) have not only our Commanders, but also
our whole Armies, run violently on to an undoubted Death? Tusc. Qu. lib. 1.
Pyrrho being in a violent Storm at Sea, made those that were timorous ashamed
of themselves, by showing them a Hog that was on board the Vessel, what little
Concern he had for the Storm. What cause have we then to boast of our Reason,
if it only robs us of our Tranquillity and Courage, making us more fearful and
unhappy than Pyrrbo's Hog? Mont. Ess. Death is a debt due to Nature, our Lives
are borrowed and must be restored. What is it makes Death so irksom to us, when
Sleep the image of Death is so pleasant? Is it the parting with a rotten
Carcass, that is hardly one hour free from trouble, sickness, or pain? Is it
the leaving that which we shall not need, our Estates? Is it the loss of
Conversation, such as belied you, betrayed you, abused you, and deceived you?
Is it the fear of pain, or the fear of what shall become of you hereafter? If
it be the fear of pain, and that you esteem of Death only as you do of drawing
a Tooth, Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum nihil estimo, wish it were out, yet
fear to have it drawn, then take this for your comfort, Si gravis, brevis; si
longus, levis. Cic. de fin. lib. 2. You shall read (says the Lord Bacon) in
some of the Friars Books of Mortification, that a man should think with himself
what the pain is, if he have but his Fingers end crushed or tortured, and
thereby imagine what the pains of Death are, when the whole Body is corrupted
and dissolved; whereas many times Death passes with less pain, than the
torture of a Limb; for the most vital parts are not the quickest of sense.
Death is but felt by Discourse, because it is the motion of an instant: Aut
fuit, aut veniet, nihil est praesentis in illa. The Sickness that occasions our
Death, is perhaps less painful than many other Sicknesses we have formerly had,
however that is antecedent to Death, and so relates not to it; and for Death,
(which is nothing but the separation of Soul and Body) I cannot concei ve it to
be any pain, or at most so short, as not worth an hours fear. If it were Death
it self which caused the pain, then all men would have the same Agony at their
departure, since Death is common to all. Secondly, If it be the fear of what
shall become of us hereafter, that depends altogether upon Faith, which Faith
ought to be regulated by the holy Scriptures; but at this time writing in a
Philosophical way, I shall treat only of such Opinions, as have been maintained
according to un-enlightned Nature. Know then, that some have denied any Reward
or Punishment hereafter, as thinking that the supreme Being concerned not
himself with humane Affairs: Ipsa suis pollens opibus; ni^il indiga nostri,
Nec been promeritis capitur, nec tangitur ira,
Lucr. 1. Rich in himself; to whom we cannot add,
Not pleased with good deeds, nor provoked with bad.
Others deny any future Account, believing that when we are dead, we shall be
as though we had never been born; according to these lines of the Poet: Post
mortem nihil est, ipsaque mors nihil,
Velocis Spatii meta novissima.
Spem ponant Avidi. Solliciti metum.
Quaeris quo ja^^as post obitum loco?
Quo non nata jacent.
Tempus nos avidum devoraet, and chaos.
Mors individua est noxia corpori,
Nec parens animae. Taenara, and aspero
Regnum sub domino, limen and obsidens
Custos non facili Cerberus ostio,
Rumores vacui, verbaque inania,
Et par sollicito fabula somnio.
Senec. Troas. Act. 2. Chor. Thus Englished by a Person of Honor: After Death
nothing is, and nothing Death,
The utmost limit of a Gasp of Breath.
Let the ambitious Zealot lay aside
His hopes of Heaven; whose Faith is but his Pride.
Let slavish Souls lay by their Fear,
Nor be concerned which way, nor where,
After this Life they shall be b^rl'd;
Dead, we become the Lumber of the World:
And to that Mass of Matter shall be swept,
Where things destroyed, with things unborn are kept:
Devouring Time swallows ^s whole;
Impartial Death confounds Body and Soul.
For Hell and the foul Fiend that rules
God's everlasting fiery Iayls,
(Devised by Rogues, dreaded by Fools)
With his grim grisly Dog that keeps the Door,
Are senseless Stories, idle Tales,
Dreams, Whimsies, and no more.
Many other as vain and impious Tenants were held amongst the un-enlightned
Heathens, which I shall treat of more at large in my Illustration of the Souls
Immortality, and have only instanced these at present, to show, that before the
Gospel shined amongst them, many denied a future Reward and Punishment, and
those who did so, could have no fear of Death, upon the account of what would
become of them hereafter. But now writing in a Christian Government, I shall
wave all such Arguments, and fly only to the infinite Attribute of God's Mercy,
which were not infinite, did it not extend to the vilest Sinner in Hell. He
delights not in the death of a Sinner, and we have found daily Experiments of
his Mercy; may such a thought never enter into my heart, that the De^s optimus
maximus and communis Pater of all Mankind, should create men to damn them. The
best natured of the Fathers, viz. Origin, had another opinion of God, and
thought the very Devils themselves would not suffer eternally* which if it was
an error, was an error on the right hand. Has God brought us into the World,
preserved us in it several years, given us a comfortable subsistence, brought
us to our Journeys end in peace and happiness, and shall we then at last
distrust him? We knew not how he would dispose of us when we came into this
World, and we know not how he will dispose of us when we go out of it; but
since he dealt so bountifully with us before, why may he not do the same again?
The very Dogs that wait at out Trenchers will upbraid us with this Diffidence,
when after two or three meals meat, and one days sport, they cheerfully follow
us without any distrust at the first whistling Summons. Neither will I despair,
when our Divines tell me, I have offended an infinite Majesty, unless I had
infinitely offended him; which I neither can, nor would do. For I consider him
not only as my God and Creator, but also as my heavenly Father, who will own me
for his, so long as I do nothing purposely to offend him; and that if through
the sensual Nature in me I commit any frailties, he will give me only a filial
chastisement, and with that his pardon. I think I may without vanity affirm,
that the thoughts of Death are not at all frightful to me, and though an
unprepared Death I dread, yet a sudden Death of all others appears to me least
terrible. Mitius ille perit, subita qui mergitur unda,
Quam sua qui liquidis brachia lassat Aquis.
Ovid. de Ponto, l. 3. Lastly, As for a future Account, I find the Bill to
swell rather than shrink by continuance. From all which I conclude, that Death
needs not seem terrible to any, out of a fear of what shall become of them
hereafter, unless it be to such, who by their hard censures of God Almighty,
make Salvation seem almost impossible: and of those, I wonder any will marry,
since according to their belief, it is above ten thousand to one but the
Children they get are damned. Men (says the Lord Bacon) fear Death, as
Children fear to go in the dark: and as that natural Fear in Children is
increased with Tales, so is the other. Nevertheless, the Groans, Convulsions,
discolored Face, Friends weeping, Mourning, and Obsequies, represent Death
more terrible than really it is: Pompa mortis magis terret, quam mors ipsa. It
is as natural to die as to be born; and to a little Infant perhaps the one is
as painful as the other. Moreover, Death has this advantage also, that it
opens the Gate to Fame, and extinguisheth Envy: -- Extinctus amabitur idem:
Horat. However, this fear of Death, which Nature has implanted in us all; is
one of the greatest Benefits Mankind enjoys; since without it, there would be
no Peace, no Meum or Tuum, and no security either for Life or Estate, all Laws
then being rendered uneffectual. Now some are so base-spirited, to judge of men
according to their Deaths, if they be of a Persuasion different to their own;
when if the Heretic (as they call him) repent on his Deathbed, then they
boast of such repentance, as a victory over his former Opinions, although
perhaps it was occasioned only by the decay of his understanding with sickness:
Also if he keeps firm and resolute to his old Principles, then they cry his
heart is hardened; so that in effect it is no more than, Cross I win, Pile you
lose; let either way happen, they will have something to say for themselves.
But let them have a care of stamping the impress of divine vengeance upon other
men's sufferings, lest in so doing they pen a Satyr against themselves: -- Te
Pater Alme,
Expertus fidensque sequar, quo duxeris ibo.


[2] The City of Lacedaemon; the most famous City of all Peloponesus, called
heretofore by some, Sparta, but at this day, Mi^itrae; it was, as our Author
here mentions, without any Walls; situate 120 miles South from Athens, and 30
miles Eastward from Megalopolis, being at present under the Dominion of the
Turk. They were heretofore governed by the Laws of Lycurgus; but Aulus Gellius
(lib. 11, 18.) writes, that amongst them, Theft was not only permitted, but
commended.

[3] These Riches are to me nothing but Straw, etc. What Apollonius here speaks
against Riches, I conceive to be meant rather as an Invective against
Superfluity, than an Encomium of Beggary and Want, for to that purpose was his
former Prayer, To have a few things, and stand in need of none. Neither is
Poverty less obstructive to the study of Philosophy than Superfluity: the
inconveniences of Body and Fortune, are hindrances in the acquiring those
Goods of the Soul, namely, Knowledge and Virtue; for Knowledge requires a
generous and liberal, not a sordid Soul, like that of a poor man, (whom
Alciat's Emblem very well represents by a Lad, with one hand stretched up into
the Air, with wings fastened to it, intimating a desire to fly higher, but the
other hand fastened to a heavy stone, hinders him) for their spirit being laden
with misery, thinks of nothing but the means how to live, and to be delivered
from the heavy yoke of Necessity, which deprives them of the opportunity of
having either living or dumb Teachers. He that has this Frierly contempt of
Riches* let him consider, how comes it to pass, that in a cold Winters night,
whilst others lie abroad starving in the Fields, I have my warm Bed to go to,
read, made and warmed, without any care of mine? Is it not Money makes the
difference? When after I have rid a Journey, that another man takes my Horses,
rubs their heels and dresses them, without giving me any further trouble; what
may I thank for this but Money? When I sit down to a Table well furnished with
several dishes of meat, have no other care but to please my Palate in eating
them, whilst other poor Creatures stand starving at my door, desiring only to
go halfs with the Dogs in the scraps that come from my Servants Table; to what
can I impute this difference betwixt them and me, who are all one flesh and
blood, but to Riches? So that in fine, he who contemns Money, does in so doing
contemn all quiet, peace, and content of Life, without which a man would have
but a very ill mind to Philosophize. Moreover, Poverty makes men despise the
rigor of all Laws, and oft-times abandons them to rage and despair, which
making them hate their own miserable Life, renders them Masters of those of
others. Hence, not only Mutinies, Seditions and Revolts, are commonly made by
the poor and miserable, lovers of Innovation, wherein they are sure to lose
nothing, and may possibly gain; but also are almost the sole Authors of Theft,
Murders, and Sacriledges. Whereas rich persons, having from their Birth
received such good Instructions as the poor want, are more stayed in their
actions, and better inclined to Honesty and Virtue, which without Fortunes and
Estates can never produce any thing great or considerable; whereupon in our
Language Riches are justly styled Means; without the assistance whereof,
Justice can neither render to every man what belongs to him, nor repel the
Enemies of the State by a just War; whereof Money is by some called the Sinew.
Upon this account they are sought after by all the World, as being the only
support of Nobility and Families in a State; in which, for this Reason some
Politicians place Nobility; but all agree them to be the chiefest ornament
belonging to it. And in Policy, whether Riches be acquired, or come to by
Succession, they are always in esteem; as on the contrary, Poverty is
disparaged with reproach, as a sign either of base Extraction, or of Negligence
and Profusion. He that is born to be poor, is born to be a Slave; and such a
one is as unfit to be trusted with a public Charge, as with a sum of Money:
whereas Wealth raises the Courage, incites to great Attempts, and serves as a
Spur to Virtue. I confess, I am not Philosopher enough to desire to beg from
door to door, or to lie starving under a Hedge in a cold Winters night, for so
they must endure who want Money: no, I would not do so much as Democritus did,
to fit contemplating on the Stars, whilst the Cattle was eating up his Corn.
Miramur si Democriti pecus edit agellos,
Cultaque dum peregre animus sine corpore velox.
Horat. Lib. 1. Ep. 11. When I hear a young pert Master of Arts new launched
from the University, begin to decry Riches as Muck, Dirt, Straw, and the like,
I cannot but call to mind the Fable of Aesop's Fox, who complained the Grapes
were sour, when he could not reach them. But in this matter I think it is safest
to refer this Subjects Debate to Agar, who prays of God to give him neither
Riches, for fear of Pride, nor Poverty, for fear of becoming a Thief: since
there is many a man hanged for committing a Robbery, who had he been born to a
plentiful Fortune, might have been as honest a man as the Judge that condemned
him; and on the other side, we who are now his Spectators, might have been his
fellow-Criminals, had we been born under the malevolent Influence of the same
Poverty. But however in this as in all other things, a mean is best; and he
that as a single man cannot live with 600 pounds a year, would not subsist with
6000. As the Baggage to an Army, so is excessive Wealth to Virtue; it cannot be
spared, nor left behind, but yet it hinders the March; yea, and the care of it
sometimes loses or disturbeth the Victory. Wherefore I am as great an enemy to
Superfluity as to Poverty; for as Solomon says, Where much is, there are many
to consume it; and what has the owner, but the fight of it with his eyes? Of
great Riches there is no real use, except it be in distribution, the rest is
but concelt; there is a custody of them, a power of Dole, or donative of them,
or a fame of them, but no solid use to the owner. For my own part, although my
poor Fortune would not admit of Extravagancies, yet did it never restrain
(...), even in my youth, from things convenient; nor do I think, the coming
early to a moderate use of Money, does a (...) prevents him from using those
many base actions of cozening, cheating, pawning, and selling Clothes, and the
like, which necessity inclines them to. I ever observed, that Plenty produces
Covetousness sooner than Want; for as Bion said, The hairy man grieves as much
at the pulling out of his hair, as he that is bald: and he that has once
accustomed, and fixed his thoughts upon a neap of Money, it is no longer at his
service, he dares not diminish it; it is a Building which if he touch or take
any part from it, he thinks it will all fall; nay, he will sooner pawn his
Horse, or sell his Clothes, than make a breach into his beloved Purse; he is
only a keeper or treasurer of his own Money, and deserves no more the name of a
rich man, than he that keeps another man's flock of Sheep, which he dares
neither sell nor kill. A covetous man is the person in the World, to save whose
House from firing, I would not lend my helping hand; the bounty of Providence
is shipwrackt on him; there is no villainy he will not perpetrate for the lucre
of Money. The Poets feign, that when Plutus (which is Riches) is sent from
Jupiter, he limps, and goes slowly; but when he is sent from Pluto, he runs;
meaning, that Riches gotten by good means and just labor, pace slowly; but
when by the deaths of others, or by any unjust means, they come full gallop.
According to the Italian Proverb, He that resolves to be rich within a year,
it is an even Wager but he is hanged before half the year comes about. The
Expenses whereby young men are most commonly ruined, are Gaming and Women; a
little good fortune at first, which like Water put into a Pump, to make it give
ten-fold, draws them to the love of Play, a Vice whereby none thrive but the
Box keeper: and for Women, many thinking it cheaper to buy a quart of Milk for
a penny, than to keep a Cow, run into the Extravagancies of keeping Misses at
such a rate, till at last the charitable Miss is fain to keep them. As for the
Vices that bring men of riper years to poverty, they are commonly living above
their Fortune in Equipage and Hospitality, or else being bound for a dear
Friend over a glass of Wine. For the first of these, when by keeping a good
Table, you fall into the distress of poverty, those that have lived upon your
Bounty, shall only say, you are a brave Fellow, it is a thousand pities, and the
like, but will not go one step out of their way to relieve you. And for being
bound for men, they are commonly Relations that desire it, and I am confident,
eighteen in twenty that are so bound, are left in the lurch by their
Principals; which made me so soon as ever I came of age, voluntarily enter into
a Bond, never to be bound for any one living but my own Children. These and the
like Follies of our own bring us into misery, and then we lay the blame upon
Fortune, as vicious and intemperate persons cast their own wickedness upon
Nature, when Fortune no more than Nature is in the fault: -- Natura beatis
Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit uti.
Claud. lib. 1.

[4] They that sail toward the Eaters of Lotus; this relates to a passage in
Homer, in the 9th Book of his Odysses, where he writes after this manner: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
For the description of this Lotus, Pliny (lib. 16. chapter 30.) gives it thus:
There are some Trees (says he) that branch only toward the top, as the Pine
and the Greek Bean, which at Rome, for the pleasant taste of the Fruit, (much
resembling Cherries, although it be of a wild nature) they call Lotus. This
Tree is much planted about great Houses in the Court-yards, by reason of the
large spreading of the Boughs; for albeit the stock or bodyit self be but very
short and small, yet it brancheth so, as that it yields much shade; yea, and
oftentimes the Boughs reach to the neighboring Houses. Nevertheless the shade
of this Tree expireth as soon as any, for when Winter comes, the Leaves drop
off, and no longer exclude the heat of the Sun. Moreover, no Tree bears a
fairer Bark, nor more pleasant to the eye, nor carries either longer Boughs,
more in number, or stronger, insomuch that whosoever sees them, would think
each Bough a several Tree. Now, for the use that is made of this Tree; the Bark
serves to color Skins and Leather; the Root to dye Wool* and the Fruit or
Apples which it bears* they are a distinct kind by themselves, resembling the
Snouts or Muzzles of wild Beasts; and many of the smaller sort seem to be
joined to one that is bigger than the rest. Also the same Author tells us, (
lib. 13. chapter 17.) that the Fruit is as big as a Bean, and of a yellow color
like Saffron. See more of this in Homer's Iliad. 2. in Polybius, lib. 2. and in
Athenaeus. The Lotophagites are Islands over against the Coasts of Barbary, as
says Pliny, lib. 5. chapter 7. It is now called L'isle des Gerbes by the French.
It is a little Island of the Kingdom of Tripoly in Africa, lying upon the
Mediterranean Sea. It is 18 miles in compass; and there were in it formerly two
great Cities, whereof only one Castle and two Villages remain. It was
heretofore possessed by the Spaniards, but now by the Moors.

[5] Camels whereon you may ride; of Camels there be chiefly three sorts: The
first called Hugiun, of great stature and strength, able to carry a thousand
pound weight; the second less, with two bunches on the Back, and sometimes one
upon the Breast; these are called Becheti, being found only in Asia, and are
fit both for Carriage and to ride on. The third sort is meagre and small, not
used to Burdens, yet able to travel above an hundred miles in a day; this kind
they call Raguabill. Swan's Specul. Mund. The Arabian and Bactrian Camels,
although they want Horns, yet have they Teeth but on one side. And of all the
sorts, their Necks are most long and nimble, by which the whole Body is much
relieved, seeing it can reach to most parts; their Heads are small, and Feet
fleshy, in regard of which, they use to be shod with Leather, for fear of
graveling; I mean, such as are tame, and made serviceable. They love Grass,
especially the blades of Barley, and when they drink, the Water must not be
clear, but muddy; the surname therefore of the Camel is, Trouble-bank, for they
will mud the Water with their feet, before they take any delight to drink it.
The servile Tameness of this Creature is so great, that when their Masters load
them, they will (like the Subjects of France) bow themselves, and stoop down to
the very ground with their knees, patiently enduring to take up their Burden.
Again, The Horse and the Camel are at great enmity, in so much that with his
very sight and strong smell, the Horse is terrified; wherefore Cyrus being
excelled by the Babylonians in Cavalry, used this stratagem of the Camels.
Lastly, Our fine Stuffs, as Grogeram, and Chamblet, are made of Camels Hair, as
some affirm; also there is a courser hairy Cloth to be made of the worst of
this Hair, such as was that Garment worn by John the Baptist in the Wilderness.
But concerning the Nature of this Beast, see more in Pliny, lib. 8. chapter 18. as
also in Gesner's History of Animals. This Creature is much used and esteemed of
amongst the Turks, as being the only Beast employed by them in their
Pilgrimages to Mecca.

The End of the First Book of Philostratus.
THE SECOND BOOK OF PHILOSTRATUS, Concerning the LIFE of APOLLONIUS the
Tyanaean.
CHAP. I. Of Armenia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Caria; and of the height of Mount
Caucasus and Mycale: Likewise of Taurus, India, Scythia, Meotis, and Pontus:
How great the compass of Caucasus is: That Panthers delight in Spices: Of a
golden Chain found in the Neck of a Panther: Whence Nyseus is so called.
ABout Summer time they departed thence, riding together with the Guide, who
was the King's Stable-groom of his Camels. They were plentifully furnished by
the King with all things which they wanted: likewise the Inhabitants of the
several Countries gave them kind Entertainment; for the Camel that went
foremost, bearing a golden Boss on his Forehead, gave notice to such as met
them, that the King sent some one of his Friends. When they were arrived at [1]
Caucasus, they say, that they smelt a sweet odor breathing from the Country.
This Mountain we may call the beginning of Taurus, which runs through
Armenia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, even to [2] Mycale, which ending at the Sea where
the Carians inhabit, may be accounted the end of Caucasus, and not the
beginning, as some would have it. The height of Mycale is not very great; but
the tops of Caucasus mount up to so high a pitch, that the Sun seems to be
cleft by them. With the other part of Taurus it (viz. Caucasus) encompasseth
also that part of Scythia, which bordereth on India, lying on the [3] Meotis,
and having Pontus on the left hand, for the length of about 2000 furlongs; and
so far stretches the Elbow of Caucasus. But that which is said, that on our
side Taurus is extended through Armenia, (which thing has sometimes not been
believed) is apparent from the Panthers, which I have known to be taken in that
part of Pamphylia, that produces Spices; for they delight in Odours, and
smelling them at a great distance, they come out of Armenia through the
Mountains, after the tears of Storax, when the Winds blow from that quarter,
and the Trees distill their Gum. I have also heard, that there was a Panther
taken in Pamphylia, with a gold Chain about his Neck, whereon was written in
Armenian Letters, ARSACES the King, to the Nisean God. For Arsaces at that time
was King in Armenia: he, as I suppose, having seen that Panther, consecrated it
to Bacchus, for the bigness of the Beast; for the Indians call Bacchus, Nyseus,
from a place in their Country called Nysa: the same Appellation is also given
him by all the Eastern people. That Beast which I spoke of, did for a while
converse with men, suffering her self to be handled and stroked; but when the
Spring was come, and she stirred up with a desire of Copulation, she withdrew
into the Mountains to meet with a Male, having the same ornament upon her. And
she was afterward taken in the lower part of Taurus, being (as we have said)
allured by the odor of the Spices. But Caucasus bounding India and Media,
descends with another Elbow to the Red Sea.

Illustrations on Chap. 1.
[1] CAucasus, a famous Mountain in the North part of Asia, leading from
Scythia to India; it is at this day called by some Garamas, by others Cocas and
Cochias, and by others Albsor, or Adazar. It lies between the Euxine and
Caspian Seas, is situated above Iberia and Albania on the North-side, also is
part of the Mountain Taurus.

[2] Mycale, a Town and Mountain of Caria, or rather of Ionia.

[3] Moeotis; a dead Lake in the Country of Scythia, into which runs the
River Tanais, which divides Europe from Asia. It is called at this day
Mardelle Zabacche.

[4] Panthers; this Animal takes its Name from its Nature, for (...) signifies
cruel and fierce. For the color of this Beast, Pliny (lib. 8. chapter 17.) tells
us, that the ground of the Panther's skin is white, enameled all over with
little black spots, like eyes. They differ little from a Leopard; some think
there is no difference between them, but in Sex. In Greek the general Name is
Panther; the special Names, Pordalis and Pordalis. Pordalis is taken for the
Male, and Pardalis for the Female. And in Latin it is called Pardus and
Panthera; where it must be again observed, that Pardus signifies the Male, and
Panthera the Female. Neither indeed is the difference between the Leopard and
Panther only in Sex, but rather in respect of a mixed and simple Generation, for
there is no Leopard or Libbard, but such as is begotten between the Lion and
the Panther, or the Panther and the Lioness. This Beast has a sweet Breath,
and is very fierce and wild, in so much that some have therefore called him the
Dog-Wolf; and yet being full, he is gentle enough. He sleeps three days,
(says Munster) and after the third day, he washes himself, and cries out,
when with a sweet savor that comes from his Breath, he gathers the wild
Beasts together, being led by the smell: and then, says Pliny, does he hide
his Head very cunningly, lest his looks should affright them; whereupon, whilst
they gaze upon him, he catches his prey amongst them. Now the Reason why these
Beasts have such a sweet Breath, I take to be, in regard that they are so much
delighted with all kind of Spices, and dainty aromatical Trees: in so much that
(as some affirm) they will go many hundred miles, in the season of the year,
out of one Country to another, and all for the love they bear to the Spices,
But above all, their chief delight is in the Gum of Camphory, watching that
Tree very carefully, to the end they may preserve it for their own use.

[5] Storax; is thus described by Pliny, lib. 12. chapter 25. Storax Calamita
(says he) comes out of that part of Syria, which above Phaenicia confronts and
borders next to Jury; namely, Gabala, Marathus, and the Mount Casius in
Seleucia. The Tree that yields this Gum or Liquor, is also named Styrax, and
very much resembles a Quince-tree. It has at first a rawish austere taste,
which afterward turns to be more sweet and pleasant. There is found within
this Tree a kind of Cane or Reed full of this Juice. Next to this Storax of
Syria, great esteem is had of that which comes out of Pifidia, from Sidon,
Cyprus, and Cilicia; but least reckoning is made of that Storax which comes
from Candy. That which is brought from Mount Amanus in Syria, is good for
Physicians, but better for the Perfumers and Confectioners. From what Nation
soever it comes, the best Storax is that which is red, and somewhat glutinous,
by reason of the fattiness. The worst is that which has no consistence and
tenacity, but crumbles like Bran, being so moldy, that it is overgrown with a
white hoary Moss. The Merchants use to sophisticate this Drug with the Rosin of
Cedar.

CHAP. II. Of Prometheus, and the Bonds wherewith he is said to be bound: Why
the Inhabitants of Caucasus scare away Eagles: Of men of four and five Cubits;
and of a Hag chased away with Execrations: Anaxagoras used to contemplate in
Mimas; Thales in Mycale; and others in Athos: Also how men ought rightly to
contemplate.
THe Barbarians relate many Fables concerning that Mountain, which are also
chanted by the Greeks: namely, how [1] Prometheus, for the kindness which he
showed to men, was there bound. And that one [2] Hercules, (not he that was
born at Thebes) being troubled at this sad spectacle, sho^ the [3] Eagle that
fed on the Entrails of Prometheus. Now some say, that Prometheus was bound in a
Cave that is shown at the foot of the Hill, where also (according to the
Relation of Damis) you may yet see the Chains fastened to the Rocks; nor is it
easy to tell of what matter they are made. Others say, that he was bound on
the top of the Hill, which is double, and therefore that one hand was fastened
to one top, and the other to the other top, so great was his [4] stature; the
space between the two tops, being no less than a furlong. The Inhabitants of
Caucasus esteem Eagles as their Enemies, burning their Nests as many as they
make among the Hills, and to that end, shoot fiery Arrows at them. Moreover,
they set snares to take them, saying, that by so doing they revenge Prometheus,
so much are they addicted to the Fable! But as they passed over Caucasus, they
report, how they met with black men of four cubits high; and saw others of five
[5] cubits, when they came to the River Indus. Also in their Journey to that
River, they found these things worthy rehearsing: As they traveled in a clear
Moonshine, they saw the Apparition of an A supposed Spirit.
Empusa, one while turning her self into this shape, another while into that,
and sometimes vanishing away into nothing. But Apollonius knowing what it was,
both reproved the Empusa himself, and commanded his Companions to do the same,
as being the proper Remedy for such an Occurrence; whereupon the Apparition
fled away with a shriek like a Ghost. When they were got to the top of the
Mountain, and were walking thereupon, where it was very steep, Apollonius asked
Damis, saying, Where were we yesterday? Damis answered, In the Plain.
Apollonius asked him again, But where are we to day? Damis answered, On
Caucasus, unless I have forgotten my self. When therefore were you in a lower
place, said Apollonius? This is not worth the asking, replied Damis; for
yesterday we passed through a hollow Vale, whereas to day we are near to
Heaven. Think you then, said he, Oh Damis, that yesterdays Journey was beneath,
and to days above? Yes, said Damis, unless I am out of my Wits. Do you imagine
then* replied Apollonius, that these Walks do one exceed the other, or that you
have something more excellent to day than you had yesterday? I conceive so,
said Damis; for yesterday I went where the many use to go, but to day I travel
where few Passengers ever come. Even in a City, said Apollonius, you may turn
aside out of the common Road, and go where few men pass. Whereto Damis
answered, I did not speak to this purpose, because yesterday traveling through
Towns and Villages, we conversed amongst men, but to day we ascend into a
divine Country, untrodden by men; for even now you heard our Guide say, how
the Barbarians report, that this place is the Seat of the Gods. And with this
word, he erected his eyes to the top of the Mountain. Wherefore Apollonius
bringing him back to the first demand, said unto him, Can you, Damis, alledg
any thing that you have understood of the divine Nature, since you came nearer
to Heaven? Whereto he answered, I can produce nothing. But you ought, said
Apollonius, in as much as you are mounted on so vast and so divine a Frame, to
utter some clearer Opinions touching the Heaven, the Sun, and the Moon; for you
imagined your self to have come so near to the Heavens, as that you could touch
them with a Wand. Damis answered, What Opinions I had yesterday concerning
divine things, the same have I also to day, nor have I made an addition of any
new one. Then you are still beneath, said Apollonius, and have received no new
Light from so great an Altitude, and are as far from Heaven as you were
yesterday: wherefore the Question that I first proposed to you is pertinent;
for you thought I made a ridiculous Enquiry. Certainly, said Damis, I thought I
should come down far wiser, in as much as I have heard, that Anaxagoras the
Clazomenian, was used to contemplate of the things in Heaven, from [6] Mimas, a
Mountain of Ionia; and [7] Thales the Milesian, from Mycale, that is not far
from thence: Likewise some are reported to have made use of [8] Pangeum to the
same purpose; and others of Athos; but I, being gotten up into a Mountain
higher than all these, am like to come down never a whit the wiser. Neither did
they, (answered Apollonius) for such watch-Towers may perhaps show the Heavens
more blue, the Stars greater, and the Sun arising out of the Night, which
things are manifest even to the Swains and Shepherds: but how God takes care
of Mankind, and how he delights to be worshipped by them, and what Virtue,
what Justice, what Temperance is, neither will Athos show to those that ascend
up thither, nor the Olympus, so much renowned of the Poets; unless the Soul
contemplate and pry into those things, which will, if it come pure and
untainted to such Contemplation, rise higher (in my opinion) than this Caucasus.

Illustrations on Chap. 2.
[1] PRometheus was there bound, etc. This Prometheus is by the Poets feigned
to be the Father of Deucalion, and Son of Iapetus and Clymenes, or Asia, as
Herodotus calls her, lib. 4. Prometheus is said to have been the first that
made Man of Clay, and therefore called the Father of Men. Fertur Prometheus
addere Principi
Limo coactus particulam undiq,
Desectam, and insani Leonis
Vim Stomacho apposuisse nostro.
Horat. Having artificially composed Man of certain parts taken from other
Creatures, and Minerva being delighted with his Invention, promised to grant
him any thing that was in Heaven, for the perfection of his Work: whereupon,
Prometheus being by her means conveyed up into Heaven, and there observing how
all things were animated with Souls of heavenly Fire, did with a bundle of
Sticks which he kindled at the flames of the Sun, bring down Fire upon Earth,
and therewith infused Life and Soul into the man that he had formed of Clay.
That crawling Insect which from mud began,
Warmed by my beams, and kindled into man.
This Robbery is often mentioned in the ancient Writers of Poetical Fictions;
as Horace, Lib. 1. Od. 3. Post ignem aethere a domo
Subductum, etc. --
Also Virgil in Sileno: Caucaseasque refert volucres, furtumque Promethei.
After this, it is said, that Jupiter being offended at Prometheus for his
Theft, thought to be revenged on him, by laying some grievous affliction upon
Mankind, in the forming of which, he so much boasted; for which purpose,
Jupiter commanded Vulcan to frame a beautiful Woman; which being done, every
one of the Gods bestowed a Gift on her, who thereupon was called Pandora: to
this Woman they gave in her hand a goodly Box full of all Miseries and
Calamities, only in the bottom of it they put Hope; with this Box she went
first to Prometheus, thinking to catch him, if peradventure he should accept
the Box at her hands, and so open it; which he nevertheless with good
providence and foresight refused. Whereupon she goes to Epimetheus, (the
Brother of Prometheus) and offers this Box to him, who rashly took it and
opened it: but when he saw that all kind of Miseries came fluttering about his
ears, being wise too late, he with great speed and earnest endeavor clapped on
the Cover, and so with much ado retained Hope, sitting alone in the bottom. At
last, Jupiter laying many and grievous Crimes to Prometheus his charge, cast
him into Chains, and doomed him to perpetual Torment; whereupon by Jupiter's
Command, Prometheus was fast bound, and fettered to a Pillar of the Mountain
Caucasus; as our Author here mentions: Also that there came an Eagle every day,
who sat feeding upon his Liver, which as it was devoured in the day, so grew
again in the night, that matter for Torment to work upon might never decay:
nevertheless it is said, there was an end of his punishment; for Hercules
crossing the Ocean in a Cup which the Sun gave him, came to Caucasus, and set
Prometheus at liberty, by shooting the Eagle with an Arrow. Moreover, in some
Nations there were instituted certain Games of Lamp-bearers, in honor of
Prometheus, in which they that strove for the Prize, were wont to carry Torches
lighted, which who so suffered to go out, yielded the place and victory to
those that followed; so that whosoever came first to the Mark with his Torch
burning, won the Prize.

Now concerning the Theogeny and Parallel of Prometheus, Vossins makes him to
be the same with Noah; De Idololat. lib. 1. chapter 18. The Patriarch Noah (says
he) is adumbrated to us, not only in Saturn, but also in Prometheus, etc. 1.
Because as under Noah, so also under Prometheus, the great Flood was supposed
to happen; for so says Diod^rus, lib. 1. That Nilus having broken down its
bounds, overwhelmed a great part of Egypt, especially that part where
Prometheus reigned, which destroyed the greatest part of men in his Territory;
nevertheless if the Flood were universal, this Parallel holds not. 2.
Prometheus is said to restore Mankind after the Flood; which (say they) exactly
answers to Noah, the Father of Mankind, etc. 3. Herodotus (lib. 4.) tells us,
that Prometheus's Wife was called Asia; and indeed Noah's Wife was no other
than Asia, or Asiatica, an Asiatick. Again, Bochartus makes Prometheus to be
Magog, the Son of Iapetus, or Iaphet: 1. In that he is styled the Son of
Iapetus; as Magog was the Son of Iaphet. 2. From the eating of Prometheus's
Heart; which Fable sprang from the Name, (...), Magog; which being applied to
the Heart, implies its consumption, or wasting away. 3. Prometheus is said to
have his Seat in Caucasus; because Magog and his Posterity planted themselves
there. 4. They feign, that Fire and Metals were invented by Prometheus, as well
as by Vulcan; because there are many subterraneous Fires and Metals in these
places. Boch. Phaleg. lib. 1. Of this see more in Stillingfleet's Origin. S^c.
lib. 3. chapter 5. and in Gale's Court of the Gentiles, lib. 2. chapter 6. part 1.

[2] Not that Hercules that was born at Thebes; there were several men of (...)
Name, the Ancients using to call all men of wonderful strength, Hercules:
Diodorus (lib. 4.) reckons up three of this Name; Arnobius, six; and Cicero (de
Not. Deor.) as many* but Varro says, there were forty three several men so
called; whereof the most famous was Hercules of Thebes, the Son of Jupiter and
Alcmena: for Alcmena his Mother having married Amphitrion, a Theban Prince,
upon condition that he would revenge the Massacre of her Brother; whilst
Amphitrion was employed in a War for that purpose, amorous God Jupiter gave a
Visit to Alcmena in Amphitrion's shape; and that he might enjoy the
satisfaction of her company the longer without discovery, he made that night to
continue longer than any other. Alcmena was then big with Iphiclus, she did
nevertheless conceive Hercules from Jupiter's Acquaintance, and was brought to
bed of them both together; but notwithstanding Amphitrion was not the Father of
Hercules, yet is he by the Poets called Amphitrioniades. Thus when Alcmena did
her Bed defame,
The lech'rous God belied bore all the shame;
Cuckold or Bastard was a glorious Name.
Some say, that Juno being earnestly solicited by Pallas, was so far reconciled
to her Husband, Jupiter, that she gave his spurious Son Hercules suck with her
own Milk; and that the little Hercules having spilt some of her Milk out of his
mouth, he whited all that part of the Sky, which we call, The milkie way.
Afterward, when Hercules was come of age, the Oracle informed him, it was the
will of the Gods that he should pass through twelve eminent Dangers or Labors;
which were these: 1. He slew a great Lion in the Wood Nemoea* whose Skin he
ever after wore. Theocrit. Idys. 25. And 2. he slew the monstrous Serpent Hydra
in the Fens of Lerna near Argos, whose many Heads he cut off, and then burnt
his Body: lib. 2. Apollod. 3. He slew the wild Boar of Erymanthus, which had
wasted Arcadia. 4. He slew the Amaz^nian Centaurs. 5. He took a Stag running on
foot in the Mountain Men^laus, after a whole years pursuit, the Deer's Feet
being made of Brass, and Horns of Gold. 6. He slew the Birds Stymphalides,
which were so numerous, and of so prodigious greatness, that they darkened the
Air, and hindered the Sun from shining upon men, wherever they flew^ nay, they
did often devour men. 7. (As Virgil informs us) he cleans'd the Stables of
Augeas, King of Elis, wherein many thousand Oxen had dung'd continually a long
time together; for turning the Current of the River Alpheus, and causing it to
pass through the Stables, he by that means carried away the filth all in one
day. 8. He brought a Bull from Crete into Greece, drawing him along the Sea;
which Bull breathed nothing but flames of Fire, and was sent by Neptune as a
punishment amongst them. 9. He took Diomedes, King of Thrace, Prisoner, giving
him to be eaten of his own man eating Horses, and afterward breaking the said
wild Horses, he brought them to Eurystheus. 10. He took Prisoner Geryon and his
Cattle, who was King of Spain, and reported to have three Bodies, because he
had three Kingdoms. 11. He went to Hell, and brought thence with him Theseus
and Pyrithous, as also the Dog Cerberus. And 12. he took the golden Apples out
of the Garden of the Hesperides, and killed the Dragon that kept them from him.
All which Actions rendered him terrible to the Tyrant Eurystheus, for whose sake
he had performed them. Now concerning these Labors of Hercules, mention is
made in Lucret. lib. 5. Ovid. Metam. 9. Senec. Agamemn. 806. Hercul. Fur. 214.
and 526. Herc. Oet. 15. Silius, 3, 333. Sidon, Carm. 9. Boet. lib. 4. Met. 7.
Claud. praef. in lib. 2. de Raptu Pros. Moreover, from hence arose these
Proverbs, Herculei Labores, signifying a Work impossible to be achieved;
Herculis Cothurnos; Frustra Herculem; Hercules and Simia; and Hercules
Hospitator. Suidas interprets Hercules's Club to be Philosophy, whereby he
slew the Dragon, i. e. Natural Concupiscence. Lastly, For his Death, it
happened, A. M. 2752. Ant. Christ. 1196. The learned Jesuit Galtru^bius (who
writes his Life more at large than any one I have met with) supposes this
Hercules of Thebes to have been the same that releas'^ Prometheus, contrary to
what Philostratus here asserts; and this may proceed from the obscure Records
of those Times, which attribute the Actions of all others of that Name to this
Hercules the Theban, or Lybian, as called by some, because he conquered Lybia.

[3] Eagles; Amongst all Fowls the Eagle only can move her self strait upward
and downward perpendicularly, without any collateral declining: Munster. This
Bird is commended for her faithfulness toward other Birds in some kind, though
she often shows her self cru^^^^ They all stand in awe of her, and when she
has gotten meat, she uses to communicate it only to such Fowls as accompany
her; but some affirm, that when she has no more to make distribution of, then
she will attack some of her Guests, and for lack of food dis-member them. Her
sight is sharp and quick, in so much that being in the highest part of the Air,
she can easily see what falls on the Land, and thereupon the sooner find her
prey. It is said, that she can gaze upon the Sun, and not be blind, and will
fight eagerly with the Dragon, who greedily coveting the Eagles Eggs, causes
many Conflicts to be between them. The Poets have called her Jove's Bird, and
Jupiter's Armor-bearer, because she is never hurt with Lightning. She has
great affection toward her young, in so much that she will endanger her own
Body to secure them, bearing her young ones on her back, when she perceives
them to be assaulted with Arrows. She usually preyeth on Hares, Geese, Cranes,
and Hearts; as for her practice in killing the Heart, Munster says, it is thus:
When she labors to destroy the Heart, she gathers much dust as she flies,
then sitting upon the Hart's Horns, shakes it into his eyes, and with her
wings beats him about the mouth, till she makes him fall fainting to the
ground. The Eagle builds her Nest-upon high places, as Rocks and Mountains;
and the property of the young Eagle is, when she finds a dead Carcass, first
of all to pick out his eye. Now although the Eagle be very tender over her
young, yet when they be able to fly of themselves, she casts them out of her
Nest, because she would have them shift for themselves, and no longer depend
upon their Dam. Moreover, Aristotle writes, that when the Eagle waxes old,
the upper part of her Bill grows so much over the under, that she dies of
Famine. But Augustine observes further, that when the Eagle is thus overgrown,
she beats her Bill upon the Rock, and so by striking off her cumbersom part,
she recovereth her strength and eating: to which the Psalmist alludeth, Psalm.
103.5. Which makes thee young and lusty as an Eagle. Swan's Specul. Mund.

[4] So great was his Stature. As for the bigness and stature of men's Bodies,
it decreaseth nor by succession of Offspring; but men are sometimes in the
same Nation taller, sometimes shorter, sometimes stronger, and sometimes
weaker; as the Times wherein they live, are more temperate or luxurious, more
given to labor or to idleness. And for those Narrations which are made of the
Giant-like statures of men in former Ages, (such as the Poets and Philostratus
here mention of Prometheus) many of them were doubtless merely Poetical and
Fabulous. I deny not, but such men have been, who for their strength and
stature were the Miracles of Nature, and the World's Wonder; yet may we justly
suspect that which Suetonius writes, That the Bones of huge Beasts, or
Sea Monsters, both have, and still do pass current for the Bones of Giants.
When Claudius with great strength entered this Island, (as Dion* Cass. speaks,
l. 60.) he brought with him a mighty Army both of Horse and Foot, as also
Elephants in great number, whose Bones being since found, have bred an error in
us, supposing them to be the Bones of Men and not of Beasts, as Speed our
Chronicler does. A notable Story to this purpose Camerarius reports of Francis
the first, King of France, who being desirous to know the truth of those things
spread abroad, touching the strength and stature of Rowland, Nephew to
Charlemain, caused his Sepulcher to be opened, wherein his Armor being found,
and the King putting it on his own Body, found it so fit for him, as thereby it
appeared, that Rowland exceeded him little in bigness and stature of Body,
though himself were no^ extraordinary big or tall. Likewise I have often heard
my Father say, that the Coffin or Tombstone he saw in one of the Egyptian
Pyramids, wherein it is thought one of their ancient Kings were buried, is of
no greater length than his own Coffin must be. If men have decayed in their
stature since the first Ages, then by consequence the first Man Adam must have
been a Giant of Giants, the highest and most monstrous Giant that ever the
World beheld; whereof we have no account in Scripture. Holy Writ makes mention
of Giants in the 6th. of Genesis, not long before the Flood, but long after the
Creation; Ther^^^^e Giants in the Earth in those days, says the Text.
Nevertheless it is the phrase of holy (...), to call such Giants as are in
behavior wicked, rude, or barbarous; And so speaks the Prophet Isaiah of the
Medes and Persians, ordained for the laying waste of Iude^, Giants shall come,
and execute my fury upon you. So that if we rest in this Interpretation, there
is no necessity we should conceive these Giants to have exceeded other men in
stature. Of the same opinion is St. Chrysostom, who says, Gigantes a Scriptura
di^i opinor non inusitatum hominum genus, aut insolitam formam, sed Heroas and
viros fortes and bellicosos, However, that some few men there have been of a
prodigious stature, cannot be denied; such in the Times of Abraham, Moses,
Joshua and David, are registered under the Names of Rephaim^, Zuzims,
Zanzummins, Emims, and Anakims. Also the Prophet Amos found among the Amorites
men of Giant-like stature, whose height is compared to the Cedars, and their
strength to O^ks. Such also were Og, the King of Basan, and Goliath, the
Philistin of Gah. The like has been found in all succeeding Ages: Florus (lib.
3. chapter 3.) mentions a Giant named Theut^bocchus, King of the Teutones, in
Germany, (vanquished by Marius, the Roman Consul, about 150 years before
Christ) as a spectacle full of Wonder, being of so excessive an height, that he
appeared above the Trophies themselves, when they were carried on the tops of
Spears. Pliny tells us, that during the Reign of the Emperor Claud^us, was
brought out of Arabia to Rome, a mighty man named Gabbara, who was nine foot
and nine inches high. There were likewise in the time of Augustus Caesar two
other, named Pusi^ and Secondilla, higher than Gabbara by half a foot, whose
Bodies were preserved, and kept for a Wonder within the Salustian Gardens.
Maximinus the Emperor, as Julius Capitolinus affirms, exceeded eight foot; and
Andronicus Comninus, ten, as Nicetas writes. Melchior Nunnez in his Letters of
China reports, in the chief City called Pagvin, the Porters are fifteen foot
high. In the West Indies, in the Region of Chica, near the mouth of the
Streights, Ortelius describes a people, whom he terms Pentagones, from their
huge stature, being ordinarily seven foot and an half high; whence their
Country is known by the Name of the Land of Giants. Of this Subject see more
in Hackinit's and Smith's Voyages, and Pureas's Pilgrims; as also in Hakwil's
Provid. of God.

[5] Five Cubits; A Cubit is commonly held to be the length of the Arm, from
the Elbow to the end of the middle Finger; or (after the Anatomists) to the
Wrist of the Hand. Of this s^e all Authors that treat of the Weights and
Measures used among the Ancients.

[6] Mimas, a Mountain of Ionia, called at this day, Capo Stillari; it is
situate near the City Colophon, and over against the Isle Chius.

[7] Thales the Milesian, Son of Examius and Cleobulina, was the first Founder
of ancient Philosophy in Greece. He was born at Miletus, the chief City of
Ioni^, in the 35th. Olympiad, as Laertius informs us out of Apollodorus; yet
others make him to be not a Milesian, but Phaenician by birth: T^ste Eusebius.
lib. 10. pr^par. chapter 2. and Hornius Histor. Philos. l. 3. chapter 12. Pliny (lib.
2.) says, that he lived in the time of Alyattis; and Cicero (lib. 1. de
Divinat.) tells us, that he lived under As^y^ges; both of which Relations
agree, in as much as these two Kings waged War each against other: as Vossius
de Philosoph. sectis, lib. 2. chapter 5. Hyginus (in his Poetico Astronomico)
treating of the lesser Bear, speaks thus: Thales, who made diligent search into
these things, and first called this lesser Bear, Arctos, was by Nation a
Phaenician, as Herodotus says; which well agrees with these words of Herodotus
Halicarnass* (...), etc. This was the opinion of Thales the Milesian, by his
Ancestors a Phaenician, i. e. He himself was born at Miletus, but his Ancestors
were Phaenicians. So V^ssius de Histor. Graec. l. 3. That Thales was of a
Phaenician Extract, is also affirmed by Di^genes, Laertius, and Suidas. So in
like manner Vossius (de Philosoph. Sect. lib. 2. chapter 1.) says, that Thales who
founded the I^nick Philosophy, drew his Original from the Phaenicians, whither
he traveled from Phaenicia to Miletus with Neleus, and there was made a
Citizen of that place. Some say, that Thales traveled into Phaenicia, and
brought from thence his knowledge of Astronomy, particularly his Observations
of the Cynosura, or lesser Bear, as Pliny, lib. 5. chapter 17. That Thales
traveled into Asia and Egypt, to inform himself in the Oriental Wisdom, he
himself affirms in his Epistle to Pherecydes: Laert. lib. 1. That the Grecian
or Ionick Philosophy owes its Original to Thales, is generally confessed* for
he traveling into the Oriental Parts, first brought into Greece Natural
Philosophy, the Mathematics, Geometry, Arithmetic, Astronomy, and Astrology:
whereupon was conferred on him that swelling Title of (...), i. e. The wise
man. About which time, the same Title was conferred on six others, for their
more than ordinary skill in Moral Philosophy* and Politics; viz. on Chilo the
Lacedemonian, Pittacus the Mitylenian, Bias the Prienean, Cleobulus the
Lindian, Periander the Corinthian, and Solon the Athenian; who with Thales made
up the seven wise men of Greece, of whom see Diogenes Laertius. The Wisdom of
these (...), was for the most part Moral, tending to the government of humane
Conversation, which they wrapped up in certain short Aphorisms or Sentences, as
appears by Quintilian, l. 5. chapter 11. These Sentences that they might have the
greater Authority, and seem to be derived from God rather than from men, were
ascribed to no certain Author. Whence that famous Sentence, (...), Nosce
teipsum, was ascribed by some to Chilo, by others to Thales. Concerning Thales,
Apuleius (18. Flor.) gives this honorable Character: Thales the Milesian, of
those seven wise men mentioned, will easily be granted to have the
pre-eminence; as being the first inventer of Geometry amongst the Greeks, the
most certain finder out of the nature of things, and the most skilful
contemplator of the Stars* by small Lines he found out the greatest things, the
Circumferences of Times, the Fl^tus, or blowings of Winds, the Meatus, or small
passages of the Stars, the miraculous sounds of Thunder, the oblique courses of
the Stars, the annual Returns or Sol^tices of the Sun, the Increases of the new
Moon, and Decreases of the old, also the Obstacles which cause the Eclipse. He
likewise in his old age found a divine account of the Sun; how often ( i. e. by
how many degrees) the Sun by its magnitude, did measure the Circle it passed
through: thus Apuleius. See more of the same in August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 8.
chapter 2. and Lud. Vi^es.

Now to come to the particulars of Thales's Philosophy: 1. In his disquisition
of the natural Causes of things, he conceived Water to be the first principle
of all natural Bodies, whereof they consist, and into which they resolve: see
Stobaeus placit. Philosoph. 2. He acknowledged God the first of Beings, and
Author of the World; asserting according to Laertius, that the most ancient of
all things is God. 3. He affirmed, (as Stobaeus has it) that the World is full
of Demons, which Demons were spiritual Substances, and the Souls of Heroes
departed: whereof there are two sorts, the good and bad; the good Heroes are
the good Souls, and the bad, the bad. 4. Plutarc^ affirms, that Thales first
held the Soul to be a self-moving Nature. 5. He said, there was but one World,
which being formed by God, was most beautiful; that Night is elder than Day;
that the World is animated, and that God was the Soul thereof, diffused through
every part of it; that the World is contained in place; that in the World there
is no Vacuum; that Matter is fluid and variable; that the Stars are earthly,
yet fiery; and that the Moon is of the same nature with the Sun, being
illuminated by him. 6. Thales was the Inventer of Geometry amongst the
Gr^cians: 7. That he took the height of the Egyptian Pyramids, by measuring
their shadow. 8. That he was the first of the Grecians that was skilful in
Astronomy. 9. That he first observed the Tropicks. 10. That he first made known
the apparent Diameter of the Sun. 11. That he first foretold Eclipses. 12. That
he first distinguished the seasons of the year, dividing it into 365 days.
Lastly, He was no less famous for his Astrological Predictions, moral
Sentences* judgment in civil Affairs, and his Writings to Solon; of which see
more in Laertius, Plutarch, Stobaens, and Stanly. As for his Chronology, he
received the title of wise, (as Demetrius Phal. says) when Damasias was
Archon. He traveled into Egypt in the Reign of Amasis, and being of a great
age, died in the first year of the 58th. Olympiad, when (according to
Pansanias) Erxyclides was Archon* He was 92 years old when he died. The most
eminent of his Auditors were Anaximander, and Anaximen^s.

[8] Pang^^um, a Mountain of Thrace in the Confines of Macedonia, called at
this day, Malaca, and C^stagua, Altaque Pang^a, etc. -- Virg. Georg. ^.

CHAP. III. Of the River Cophenus, and of Camels whose Knees are inflexible: Of
Wine made of Dates, yet being as able to inebriate, as that made of Grapes:
Also of Hon y from Trees.
HAving now traversed the Mountain, they light on men that rode upon Elephants,
and have their Habitation between Mount Caucasus, and the [1] River Cophenus:
They are a very rude people, and keepers of such Cattle; some of them sat on
such Camels as the Indians make use of for running, in that they will go a
thousand furlongs in one day, and have their Knees inflexible. Wherefore one of
them riding upon such a Camel, when he approached somewhat near, asked the
Guide whither they were going; and being certifi'd concerning the cause of
their Journey, he told it to the other Nomades, who rejoicing at the News, bade
them come near, and offered them Wine, which they by an Art they have press out
of Dates; likewise Honey made of the same Tree, as also the flesh of Lions and
Panthers, whose skins had been newly fley'd off. Now having received all these
things save the flesh, they passed by those Indians traveling toward the
East; and afterward dining near a certain Fountain, Damis tasting the Wine
which they had received from the Indians, said to Apollonius, This is the Cup
of Jupiter the Savior, whereof you have not drank a long time: but I suppose
you will not refuse this Liquor, as you do that which is wrung from the Grapes.
Having thus spoken, he offered a Libation, in that he had made mention of
Jupiter: At this Apollonius smiling, said unto him, Do we not abstain from
receiving Money? Yes, said he, as you have often made it appear. What then,
answered Apollonius, is to be done? Shall we abstain from Silver and Gold, not
being tempted with that Money, which not only private men, but even Kings
themselves, exceedingly affect; and yet if any man should offer us a piece of
brass Money instead of silver, or a counterfeit piece gilded over with gold,
shall we receive the same, only because it is not such Money as most men so
greedily pursue^? For the Indians have Money made of Copper, and black Brass,
wherewith all such as come into those Parts must traffic. If then the Nomades
(or Shepherds) had offered us such Money, would you, when you had seen me
refuse the same, have better informed me, by s^ying, that that only is to be
accounted [2] Money, which the King of the Medes, or Emperor of the Romans,
coyneth, and that this is another kind of thing which the Indians have devised?
Now should I be persuaded with such a Reason, what would you think of me?
Should I not pass for a counterfeit, and one that casts away Philosophy, in a
worse manner than Soldiers cast away their Bucklers? For he that has done so,
may get another Buckler as good as the former, as says Archilochus; but how
can Philosophy be recovered by him, that has once rejected or despised the
same? In like manner, Bacchus might pardon me, if I wholly abstain from all
sorts of Wine whatsoever; but if I prefer that made of Dates, before that which
distilleth from the Grape, I know he will certainly be moved with indignation,
and say, that his Gift is slighted. Neither are we far distant from him, for
even now you heard the Guide say, that the Mountain Nysa is hard by, where
Bacchus (as I have heard) does many strange things. Neither does it, Oh Damis,
proceed from Grapes only that men are drunken, but also from Dates; for we have
seen many of the Indians intoxicated with this sort of Wine, whereof some dance
and reel, others sing and nod, as they among us who sit up whole nights a
drinking. Now that you your self imagine this Drink to be Wine, is evident, in
that you offered a Libation thereof to Jupiter, using such a Prayer as is used
at a Drink offering of Wine. But these things are spoken to you Damis, only in
relation to my self; not that I would dissuade you, or the rest of our
Companions, from drinking it: nay, I would freely also give you liberty to eat
of the Flesh; for I see that the abstinence from these things would be nothing
advantageous to you, whereas they are suitable to that kind of Philosophy, to
the which I have addicted ^y self from a Child. The Companions of Damis heard
this with delight, and were glad to be feasting, thinking they should the
better perform their Journey, if they used a plentiful Diet.

Illustrations on Chap. 3.
[1] THe River Cophenus; or Cophes, disgorges it self into the River Indus.
Strabo, Mela, and other Geographers, reckon it as the chief River in India,
even bigger than the River Indus it self.

(...).
Dionys. Perleg. verse. 1140. Tertius hos sequitur splendenti gurgite Cophes.
[2] Money which the Emperor of the Romans coyneth; For as much as in several
places of this History, I have occasion to mention some of the Coyns of the
Ancients, it will not be amiss here to reduce some of their principal Sums to
our present Sterling; which finding already done to my hands by the Lord Bishop
of Hereford, as well as by the Learned Dr. Hakewill, I shall here present you
with their Tables of Calculation.

The Lord Francis, Bishop of Hereford, (who lived in the Reign of King Charles
the First) his Tables of Calculation.
Vnus Sestertius in masculine genere, sive unus nummus, valebat nostrae monetae
Anglicanae fere 2 d. Nimirum ut 10. valiant 19 d. Viceni Sesterti 0 3 2 d.
Sestertii, vel Nummi. ll sh. dd. 30 0 4 9 40 0 6 4 50 0 7 11 60 0 9 6 70 0 11 1
80 0 12 8 90 0 14 3 100 0 15 10 200 1 11 8 300 2 7 6 400 3 3 4 500 3 19 2 600 4
15 0 700 5 10 10 800 6 6 8 900 7 2 6 1000 7 18 4 Sestertia. Bina H. S. vel bina
Sestertia in neutro genere valebant 15 16 8 3 H. S. valebant 23 15 0 4 31 13 4
5 39 11 8 6 47 10 0 7 55 8 4 8 63 6 8 9 71 5 0 Dena H. S. sive Sestertia, vel
1000 Nummum valiant 79 3 4 Vicena Sestertia, vel XX. millia Nummum 158 6 8 30
H. S. 237 10 0 40 316 13 4 50 395 16 8 60 475 00 00 70 554 3 4 80 633 6 8 90
712 10 00 Centum millia vel C. vel 100 Sestertia valebant 791 13 4 Ducenta 1583
6 8 300 2374 0 0 400 3165 13 4 500 3957 6 8 600 4748 0 0 700 5539 13 4 800 6331
6 ^ Iam deinceps numerantur per adverbia, ut non dicamus mill millia, vel
mill Sestertia, ^ed decies, id est, decies millena millia. Decies continet
monetae nostrae supputatione paulo accuratiori 7914 13 4 Vieies 15829 6 8
T^icies 23774 0 0 Quadragies 31658 13 4 Quinquagies 39573 6 8 Sexagies 47488 00
00 Septuagies 55402 13 4 Octogies 63317 6 8 Nonagies 71232 00 00 Centies 79146
13 4 Ducenties 158298 6 8 Tercenties 237440 00 00 Quadringenties 316586 13 4
Quingenties 395733 6 ^ Sexcenties 474880 00 00 Septingenties 5^4026 13 4
Octingenties 633173 0 8 Nongenties 712320 00 00 Millies 791466 13 4 Bis millies
1582933 6 8 Ter millies 2374400 00 00 Quater millies 3165866 13 4 Quinquies
millies 3975333 6 8 Sexies millies 4748800 00 00 Septies millies 5540266 13 4
Octies millies 6331733 6 8 Novies millies 7123200 0 0 Decies millies 7914666 13
4 Vices millies 15829333 6 8 Talentorum apud Antiquos multa fuere genera,
Atticum, Euboicum, Aeginense, Hebraicum, Babylonicum, and alia. Sed hoc
observandum est, scriptores ubi Talenti mentionem faciunt absque ulla
adjectione, vix unquam aliud intelligere quam Atticum, quod valebat nostrae
monetae Anglicanae libras, 190.
Talentum Atticum 190 l. Talenta duo 380 3 570 4 760 5 950 6 1140 7 1330 8 1520
9 1710 10 1900 Talenta 20 3800 30 5700 40 7600 50 9500 60 11400 70 13300 80
15200 90 17100 100 19000 Talenta 200 38000 300 57000 400 76000 500 95000 600
114000 700 133000 800 152000 900 171000 100 190000 Talenta 2000 380000 3000
570000 4000 760000 5000 950000 6000 1140000 7000 1330000 8000 1520000 9000
1710000 10000 1900000 Talenta 20000 3800000 30000 5700000 40000 7600000 50000
9500000 60000 11400000 70000 ^300000 80000 ^^00000 90000 ^100000 100000
19000000 200 Millia 38000000 300 57000000 400 76000000 500 95000000 600
114000000 700 133000000 800 152000000 900 171000000 Mill millia Talentorum
190000000

But Dr. Hakewill, who differs some small matter from his Lordship's
Computation, reckons a Talent to be 750 ounces of Silver, which after five
shillings the ounce comes to 187 pounds. The Sestertius (says Hakewill) was
among the Romans a Coin so common, that Nummus and Sestertius came at length to
be used promiscuously the one for the other; so called it was, quasi
Semis-tertius, because of three Asses it wanted half a one, and is thus
commonly expressed, IIS, or H-S, whereby is understood two Asses and an half.
For the value of it, ten Asses make a Denarius, or Roman penny, so termed,
because it contained Dena era, which were the same with their Asses; so as the
Sesterce containing two Asses and an half, must of necessity be found in the
Denarius four times: now the Denarius being the eighth part of an ounce, and an
ounce of Silver being now with us valued at five shillings, it follows by
consequence, that the value of the Denarius is seven pence halfpenny: also the
Sesterces being the fourth part thereof, amount to penny halfpenny farthing
half farthing, which is half a farthing less than the Bishop's Computation.
Touching the manner of counting by Sesterces, a Controversy there is betwixt
Budae^s and Agricola, whether Sestertius in the Masculine, and Sestertium in
the Neuter, be to be valued alike, which Agricola affirms; but Budaeus upon
better reason (in my judgment) denies, and to him I incline, believing that
Sestertium in the Neuter contains a thousand Sesterties, according to my Lord
Bishop's Table above receited. But here two things are specially to be noted:
First, That if the Numeral, or word that denotes the Number, being an
Adjective, and of a different Case, be joined with Sestertium, (by an
abbreviation put for Sestertiorum) in the Genitive Case plural, then does it
note so many thousand Sestertii; for example, December Sestertium signifies December
millia, or ten thousand Sesterces. Secondly, If the Numeral joined with
Sestertium be an Adverb, then it designeth so many hundred thousand; ex. gra.
Decies Sestertium, signifies D^^ies centena millia, ten hundred thousand, or a
million of Sesterces; and sometimes the Substantive Sestertium is omitted, but
necessarily understood; the Adjective then, or Adverb set alone, being of the
same value, as if the Substantive were expressed: as thus, December standing by it
self, is as much as December Sestertium; and Decies the same. Dr. Hakewill.

Dr. Hakewill his Table of Calculation.
Sesterces are worth in English Moneys. l s d Twenty 0 3 1 ob. A Hundred 0 15 7
ob. Five hundred 3 18 1 ob. A Thousand 7 16 3 0 Five thousand 39 1 3 0 Ten
thousand 78 2 6 0 Twenty thousand 156 5 0 0 Fifty thousand 390 12 6 0 A hundred
thousand 781 5 0 0 Five hundred thousand 3906 5 0 0 A Million 7812 10 0 0 Five
millions 39062 10 0 0 Ten millions 78125 0 0 0 Twenty millions 156250 0 0 0
Fifty millions 390625 0 0 0 A hundred millions 781250 0 0 0 Two hundred
millions 1562500 0 0 0 Five hundred millions 3906250 0 0 0 A thousand millions
7812500 0 0 0

CHAP. IV. Of Nysa beset with Trees, like Tmolus in Lydia: Of Bacchus's Temple
surrounded with Ivy and Vines; and of his Statue: That there be various
opinions about the Country of Bacchus; but that by an Inscription on a certain
Quoite in Pythia, it is believed that he was a Theban: Concerning another
Bacchus, Son to the River Indus; as also of the Name of the Hill Nysa: Whether
Alexander the Macedonian did celebrate the Orgies of Bacchus in Nysa?
AFter this, having passed over the River Cophenus, they themselves in Boats,
and their Camels on foot, in as much as the River is not there very deep, they
arrived in the Continent that pertains to the King, where the Hill Nysa
reaching all along, is set with Plantations to the very top, as Tmolus in Lydia
is. It is an easy matter for any one to get up into the same, in that passages
are every where made by the Husbandry there used. When they were ascended, they
lighted on the Temple of Bacchus, which they say that he himself planted round
about with Laurels, in a circumference of so much ground, ^s would be
sufficient for an indifferent Temple: and that round about the Laurels he
planted Vines and Ivy; also erected his Image in the midst, as knowing that
time would bring the Bought to meet, and so frame a kind of Roof; which now is
so closely compacted, that neither can the Rain descend, nor Wind blow upon the
Temple. There be also Sickles, pruning Knives, and Wine-presses, with all
things belonging thereunto, made of gold and silver, and dedicated to Bacchus,
as to one concerned in the Vintage: but the Image of Bacchus being made of
white Stone, resembles an Indian Lad. When Bacchus begins his Orgies, and
moves Nysa, the under-lying Cities are said to hear him, and to be moved
together with it. Howbeit, there is no small Controversy between the Indians
and the Greeks about Bacchus; yea, the very Indians themselves are divided in
their Opinions concerning him. For we say, that Bacchus the Theban made an
Expedition into India, leading an Army after a mad antic fashion: to prove
which, we bring many probable Conjectures, more especially the Monument in
Pythia, which is there conserved in the Treasury of the Temple: it is a certain
Quoit or Discus made of silver, bearing this Inscription; [1] Bacchus, the Son
of Semele and Jupiter, from the Indies, to Apollo of Delphos. But the Indians
that dwell between Caucasus and the River Cophenus affirm, that Bacchus came
out of Assyria into those Parts, and are said to be acquainted with the whole
Story of Bacchus the Theban. Whereas they that inhabit the Region between Indus
and Hydraotes, and the residue of that Continent, which is bounded by the River
Ganges, report, that Bacchus was the Son of the River Indus, and that there
came to him that other Bacchus born at Thebes, who touched the Leavy-spear, and
communicated to him the Orgies, saying, that he was the Son of Jupiter, and was
quickened in his Father's Thigh till his birth, and that he found a Hill near
Nysa called Meros, [which signifies a Thigh.] They also report, that the
Inhabitants having fetched Grape-kernels out of Thebes, planted the whole Hill
with Vines in honor of Bacchus; and that Alexander celebrated the Orgies in
the Hill Nysa. But those that dwell in Nysa say, that Alexander ascended not
the Hill, (although he greatly desired it, as being both ambitious of Honor,
and studious of Antiquity) fearing lest the Macedonians tasting of the Vines,
which they had not done of a great while, should either long after home, or
fall into a love of Wine, after they had so long been accustomed to Water. For
these Reasons therefore he passed by Nysa, having only prayed and sacrificed to
Bacchus at the foot of the Hill. Nor am I ignorant that some will be displeased
with what I write, in that they who accompanied Alexander, and served under
him, have described these things otherwise than the truth required. Whereas I
am resolved to follow the truth above all things, which if they also had done,
they would not have defrauded Alexander of this commendation. For I suppose it
to be more glorious for him, not to have gone up into the Mountain, to the end
he might the better keep his Army within the bounds of sobriety, than to go up,
as they say he did, and there play the [2] Drunkard and Madman in celebrating
the Rites of Bacchus.

Illustrations on Chap. 4.
[1] BAcchus, the Son of Semele and Jupiter; was born in the City of Thebes.
The account which the Learned Jesuit Galtruchius gives us of this Fable is,
that Bacchus was the Son of Jupiter and Semele, according to Orpheus: (...).
(...).
Orph. in Hymnis. Wherefore Homer calls him, (...). But Hesiod says, he was
the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina: (...)* Semele suffered her self while she
was big with Child, to be deceived by the persuasions of Juno, who bore an
implacable hatred to all her Husband's Mistresses; for Juno disguising her
self, came in the habit of an old Woman to Semele, and told her, that it
concerned both her Interest and Honor to have Jupiter visit her in the same
manner as he did Juno, viz. with his Thunderbolts in his hand; and that if she
should request this favor of him, Jupiter would soon grant it her: which
Semele accordingly did, and was by this means consumed by fire. Now the Mother
Semele being thus destroyed, and Jupiter taking pity of the Child within her,
separated him from his dead Mother, and shut him up in his Thigh, until the
time of his Birth was expired; so that Jupiter doing him the office of a
Mother, Bacchus was for that reason called by some Bimater. Imperfectus adhuc
infans genetricis ab alvo
Eripitur, patrioque tener, si credere dignum est,
Insuitur femori, maternaque tempora complet.
Ovid. Metam. 3. Also Manilius, lib. 2. Atque iterum patrio nascentem corpore
Bacchum, Orpheus in his Hymn upon Sabazius Dionysius says, that Sabazius
inhabited Jupiter's Thigh, which Sabazius, some say, was the Son of Bacchus,
and some a Demon, though most think him to be Bacchus himself, as Orpheus
does: (...),
(...)
(...)
(...). --
Theocritus Idyll. 26. (...)
(...).
This God had several other Names besides Bacchus; as Hedereus, Servator,
Lysius, Lyaens, Nysaeus, Leneus, Dithyrambus, Briseus, Sebasius, Iacchus,
Elebeus, Thyoneus, and Nyctileus; Ovid. Metam. lib. 4. He is called Vitifer,
Thyon^us, Horat. lib. 1. (...), Maenoles, Methymnaeus Deus, (...), Osiris,
Hebo, Calydonius, Eubulus, optimi consilii Deus, Zagreus, Edonius, in Ovid.
Oreos, Viotalt, by the Arabians, etc. See Orpheus in Hymn. Dionysius. Nebrodes
was another Name of Bacchus, which Bochart derives from Nimrod; but this seems
very far fetched, and merely in complement to sacred Chronology. As soon as
Bacchus was born, he was delivered to Silenus and the Nymphs, and some say to
Ceres, to be educated by them, who in reward of their good service were
received up into Heaven, and there changed into Stars, now called Hyades. Ora
micant Tauri septem radiantia Flammis,
Navita quas Hyadas Graius ab imbre vocat.
Pars Bacchum nutrisse putat, pars credidit esse
Tethyos has neptes Oceanique senis.
Ovid. lib. 5. Fastor. When Bacchus came to be of age, he passed through
greatest part of the World, and made War upon the Indians, whom he overcame,
and in their Country built the City Nisa, here mentioned by Philostratus. He
is said to be the first that introduced the custom of Triumphing; at which time
he wore a golden Diadem about his head: his Chariot was drawn by Tigers; his
Habit was the skin of a Deer; and his Scepter was a small Lance, adorned with
branches of Ivy and Vine-leaves. He invented the use of Wine, which he gave to
the Indians to drink, who at first imagined he had given them poison, because
it made them both mad and drunk. They did at first frequently sacrifice men
unto him, but since his Expedition into India, he was content with other
Sacrifices, such as Asses and Goats; to signify, that those who are given to
Wine, become as sottish as Asses, and as lascivious as Goats. Sine Cerere and
Bacch^ frig^^ Venus. Bacchus was brought up with the Nymphs, which teaches us,
that we must mix Water with our Wine. He never had other Priests but Satyrs and
Women, because the latter had followed him in great companies throughout his
Travels, crying, singing, and dancing after him* in so much that they were
called Bacchanales, Mimallones, Lenae, Bassarides, Thyades, and Menades, Names
that express fury and madness. The greatest Solemnities performed in honor of
this God, were celebrated every three years, and called therefore Trieteria, or
Orgya, from the word (...), which signifies a transport of anger, because the
mad Women clothed themselves with the skins of Tigers, Panthers, etc. when
with their Hair hanging about their ears, they ran over the Mountains, holding
lighted Torches in their hands, and crying out aloud, Eu hoe Evan, eu hoe
Bacche, which is, Good Son, a Name given him by Jupiter, when in the War with
the Giants, this Bacchus in the form of a Lion ran violently upon the first,
and tore him in pieces. Bacchus was usually painted riding on a Tiger, having
in one hand a bunch of Grapes, in the other a cup full of Wine, with a Mitre on
his head, an ornament proper to Women, or with a bald pate, which signifies the
effect of the excess of Wine. He wore sometimes a Sickle in one hand, a Pitcher
in the other, and a garland of Roses on his head. He did always appear young,
because Wine moderately taken purifies the Blood, and preserves the Body in a
youthful strength and color. His Temple was next to Minerva's, to express how
useful Wine is to revive the Spirits, and enable our Fancy to invent; for which
reason, the Heathens did sacrifice to him the quick-sighted Dragon. The
chattering Pie was also sacred to Bacchus, because Wine does cause us to
prattle more than is convenient: his Sacrifices were usually performed in the
evening, and at night. Also it is reported of him, that he carried a Torch
before Proserpina, when she was led to be married to Pluto the infernal God.
Juno could never endure the sight of him, wherefore she labored to drive him
out of Heaven, and to banish him from all society; he fled from her fury, and
as he was reposing himself under a Tree, a Serpent named Ambisbaena bit him,
but he killed it with a Vine branch, which is a mortal poison to some Serpents.
Juno continued her hatred for him, because he was her Husband's Bastard, until
she cast him into a Fit of madness, which made him undertake an Expedition
against the Indians, and overrun all the Eastern Countries: Lusus was his
Companion, from whom Portugal is called Lusitania.

The truth of this Fable is; that Liber, otherwise called Dionysius, Bacchus,
or Osiris, by the Egyptians, was a King of Nysa, a City in Arabia Faelix, who
taught his people, and the Inhabitants of the adjoining Countries, many useful
Arts, as the ordering of the Vine, and the preserving of Bees. He established
several good Laws, and is therefore called (...). He persuaded the people to
sacrifice to their Gods, for the which he was much honored by all civil
Nations. The Grecians established several Festival days in honor of him; the
chief are their Trieteria, kept every three years, in remembrance of his Indian
Expedition, performed in that space of time; also their Apaturia, their
Phallica, and their Lenaea, in the beginning of the Spring, for his blessing
upon their Vines. This latter Festival was named Orgya, because his Proselytes
did express in it nothing but fury and madness, although this Name is sometimes
taken for all his other Festivals. The Romans had appointed the Ascolia in
honor of Bacchus, at which time they carried the Statues of this God about
their Vineyards, as the Papists do beyond Sea their Host, or the Priest's God
about their fields, that he might bless the Fruits of the Earth. Afterward the
Procession of Bacchus did return to his Altar, where raising the consecrated
Victim on the top of a Lance, they did burn it to the honor of Bacchus; then
taking his Statues and Images, they hung them on high Trees, imagining, that
they would contribute to the increase of their Grapes and Vines. This Festival
is called the Festival of God, and was celebrated about the month of May.

Tit. Livius (lib. 39.) relates a strange Story of the Festivals of Bacchus in
Rome, introduced by a Fortune Tellers of Greece: that three times in a year the
Women of all qualities did meet in a Grove called Simila, and there acted all
sorts of Villainy; those that appeared most reserved were sacrificed to Bacchus;
when, that the cries of the murdered and ravished Creatures might not be heard,
they did howl, sing, and run up and down with lighted Torches: but the Senate
being acquainted with these night-meetings, and filthy unclean practices,
banished them out of Italy, and punished severely the promoters of them.

Now the Beasts that were dedicated to Bacchus, were the Goats and the Dragons;
the Egyptians offered Sows. The Trees consecrated to him were the Ivy-tree, the
Oak, the Fig, the Vine, the Smilax, and the Fir Tree. It was the custom, that
all those who sacrificed to Bacchus, did approach the Altars with a Branch or
Grown of one of those Trees in their hands, which they offered unto him.
Bacch^s was sometimes seen with a Garland of Daff^dil or Narcissus about his
head. His Priests (as I said before) were Women painted in frightful shapes,
with Snakes for their Girdles, and Serpents twisted about their Hair, to
represent their Cruelty. This God did (as the Poets tell us) punish all those
persons who neglected or opposed his Worship: Thus Alcibous (as Philostratus
writes) was transformed into a Bat, because he would not sacrifice to him. And
the Pirates of Tire, that stole him with an intent to abuse him, were changed
into Dolphins; for when they had brought him on Shipboard, he forced them into
the Sea in the shape of a raging Lion. See Homer in Hymn* and Ovid in Metam.
Now besides this Son of Jupiter and Semele, there were several other Bacchus's,
of whom Cicero makes this mention, lib. 3. de Not. Deor. Dionysos (inquit)
multos habemus: Primum, F. Jove and Proserpina natum: Secundum, Nilo, qui Nysam
dicitur interemisse: Tertium, Caprio patre, eum Regem Asiae praefuisse dicunt,
cujus Abazea sunt instituta: Quartum, Jove and Luna, cuisacra Orphica putantur
confici: Quintum, Niso natum and Thione, a quo trieterides constitutae
putantur. At de nullo horum prope fit mentio a Poetis, nist de Iovis and
Semeles filio. Lastly, Some who have a pretty knack of extorting things
contrary to all sense and reason, only to serve their own turns, pretend to
fetch this Story of Bacchus, as well as all other profane Story, out of the
sacred Scriptures, some deriving the Name Bacchus, from the Hebrew word
Bar-chus, the Son of Chush, i. e. Nimrod, as does Bochartus. Others, as
Vossius, make Bacchus the same with Moses. But of this see more at large in
Bochartus, and in his Transcriber, Theophilus Gale, in his Court of the
Gentiles; as also Stilling fleet's Origines sacrae.

Thus Learned Fops with Beard in hand debate
Omnipotent Doubts, which they themselves create:
As Reverend Ape with no small care and pains,
Unties those knots he made in his own chains.
[2] Play the Drunkard and Madman; Drink, during the operation of the
Distemper* will act over all the Humors habitual in Madmen: other Vices but
alter and distract the Understanding, but this totally subverts both the Body
and Intellect. -- Cum vini vis penetravit,
Consequitur gravitas membror^m, praepediuntur
Crura vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet men's,
Nant oculi, clamor, singultus, jurgia gliscunt.
Lucret. lib. 3.479. Every man's Heart is a den of Beasts, which Drink lets
open: and this makes Drunkenness so much more dangerous to some than others;
for if some dull phlegmatic men open their dens with Drink, out will come only
some silly Cur-dog, or harmless Lamb, viz. some bawdy Jest, ridiculous old
Story, or the like. Whereas if others who have hotter brains, and more refined
spirits and sense, open their dens, out comes a Lion against the State, or a
Bear against the Church, or some mischievous Jest or Satyr against Superiors,
which may prove their ruin. Drink does not so much create new Thoughts or
Opinions in us, but rather divulge those which lay hid in us before; and he
that calls you Knave and Fool when he is drunk, thinks you neither a Saint nor
a Solomon when he is sober. -- Tu sapientium
Curas, and arcanum ^^coso
Consilium retegis Lyaeo.
Horat. Lib. 3. Od. 21. Plato writes, That for the finding out the
Dispositions of young men, Banquets were therefore sometimes permitted, wherein
great Drinking was used, that thereby the young people might discover their
most secret Inclinations. Josephus reports, that by making his Enemies
Ambassador drunk, he discovered all their Secrets. Some few I have known, who
are more cautious to buy, sell, or make Bargains, when they are in Drink, than
when they are sober; but such are very rare, and seldom arrive to that pitch,
till they have served out a Prenticeship in Drinking. Those that are of a dull,
cold, phlegmatic Complexion, Drink makes them stupid and sleepy, whereas the
hot and sanguinary become mad and frantic therewith; however both render
themselves sufficiently ridiculous, not only to others, but even to themselves,
when they become sober. Therefore he that thinks to drink away sorrow, does but
increase it, when on the morning after the Debauch, like a Clap ill cured, it
returns with a violent Pox of Melancholy and ill Humor. The many and dear
Fraternities that are made over the Pot, have ruined thousands; as if nothing
were too great or too good for him that helps to make me a Beast. To see the
Hugs, Kisses, and close Embraces, that pass between Pot-Companions, would be
most diverting to any slander by that were unconcerned. For an instance of the
ridiculous Fancies of men in Drink, Athenaeus ( lib. 2.) tells a pleasant Story
of some young men, who were so infatuated with Wine, that they fancied
themselves in a Storm at Sea; whereupon they cast out of the Window into the
Street, all the Bedding and Furniture that was in their Chamber, thinking to
avoid Shipwreck by lightning the Vessel: now when many came running, and
carrying away every one somewhat of the Goods that were cast out, and that this
drunken Crew, neither all that day nor the night following, could be brought
again to their right wits, there were some Officers that went into the House,
where they found these Drinkers vomiting, as if they were Sea-sick, and
giddy-headed; the Officers asking them what they were a doing, they answered,
that the Tempest had so beaten them, that to save their Lives, they were forced
to cast their Lading overboard. The Officers standing amazed hereat, one of
the eldest of the Drunkards said unto them, As for me, noble Tritons, (taking
them for Sea-gods) fear has made me throw my self on this Bed, to be so much
the safer in the bottom of the Vessel. The Officers pitying the madness of the
poor Fellows, advised them from thenceforward to drink less Wine, and so left
them. The young men thanking them replied, If after this Storm we ever come to
Land, we will acknowledge you among the other Sea-gods for our Saviors, seeing
you have appeared unto us as Patrons to save and preserve us. And ever after
this House was surnamed the Galley-Athen. lib. 2. Therefor considering the
irregular motions of men in Drink, were such capable of Counsel, I should
advise them, if unfortunately overtaken by such a Distemper, not to remove from
the place they received it in, whereby some part of the shame, and more of the
danger, may be avoided. The opinion that Coffee will recover men in Drink to
their right senses, have exposed many in that condition to the laughter of a
whole Coffee-house, and thereby cured them for the future, not with Coffee, but
shame. The Examples of this kind of Luxury are many and famous among the
Ancients, as well Greeks as Romans: Of this Art of Drinking, Alcibiades was a
Master, as also Alexander the Great; and Cyrus preferred himself before his
Brother Artaxerxes, for being the better drinker. Lipsius (in his Epistle de
potoribus Antiq.) tells us of one Firmus, who under the Emperor Aurelian drank
off two Buckets full of Wine. Bonosus (who lived about the same time) was much
such another, being used to say, Non ut vivat natus est, sed ut bibat; and
afterward he being hanged for some misdemeanour, they used to jeer him,
saying, Amphoram pendere, non hominem; that a Barrel or Tankard hung there, not
a man. Capitolinus reports of the Emperor Maximinus, Bibisse saepe in die vini
Capitolinam amphoram, which Amphora contains of our Measure nine Gallons,
counting a Gallon and a Pint to the Longius, whereof the Amphora contains
eight. Also Vopiscus, in the Life of Aurelian, tells of one Phagon, who drank
out in one day, plus Orca, which Orca (says Lipsius) is a Wine-Vessel, much
bigger than an Amphora. Nay, the Emperors themselves were so much addicted to
this Vice, that Tiberius Nero, propter nimiam vini aviditatem, (says
Suetonius, chapter 42.) was nicknamed Biberius Mero; also that for their great
drinking, he preferred Piso to the Provostship of the City, and Flaccus
Pomponius to be President of the Province of Syria, styling them in his Letters
Patents, Iucundissimos and omnium horarum amicos. He likewise preferred a mean
inconsiderable Fellow to the Treasurership, (before persons of great quality
that stood in competition with him) only for drinking off an Amphora of Wine at
a Feast. To these may be added that Epitaph which Camerarius (chapter 94.)
mentions to be found at Rome, without the Gate Capena: Heus, hic situs est
Offellius Buratius Bibulus,
Qui dum vixit, aut bibit, aut minxit; abi praeceps.
Which agrees with this other Epitaph of Timocreon the Rhodian, thus delivered
by Lilius Gyraldus in his Poetical History: Multa bibens, tum multa vorans,
male denique dicens
Multis, hic situs est Timocreon Rhodius.
In fine, how far this Vice prevailed among the Commons of Rome, may appear by
that of Macrobius: Saturn. lib. 3. chapter 17. who says, that at that time when the
Lex Fannia, was made against Drunkenness, things were at such a pass, Vt
plerique ex plebe Romana vin^, etc. that the greatest part of the common people
of Rome came laden with Wine into the Councel-house, and when drunk, consulted
of the safety of the State: much like the common Bores of this Kingdom, who at
our Elections for Members to serve in Parliament, seldom know which man to
choose for their Senator, till Drunkenness has enlightened their
Understandings. Of this Debauchery of the Ancients, see more in Plutarch, and
Pliny, lib. 4. chapter 22. Macrobii Saturn. Iuvenal, Lipsius, Camerarius, and
Hakewill's Apology, lib. 4. chapter 6.

As for the manner of their Drinking, Ammianus Marcellinus (lib. 22.) writes,
that their Pots were heavier than their Swords, Graviora gladiis pocula erant.
Among the rest, they had a kind of Cups which Horace calls Ciboria: --
Oblivioso laevia m^ssico
Ciboria imple. --
Lib. 2. Od. 7. At their drinking Assemblies they ever made choice of a Lord of
Misrule, who was to judge and decide all Controversies; and this Office was won
by casting Lots, wherein the principal Chance was Venus: -- Quem Venus Arbitrum
Dicet bibendi. --
Horat. Lib. 2. Od. 7. Their Rules of Drinking they borrowed for the most part
from the Greeks, who were the most debaucht people of all others. Of these
Rules, one was to drink down the evening Star, and drink up the morning Star,
Ad diurnam Stellam matutinam potantes, says Plautus. Another commonly
practiced among them was the drinking of so many Healths, as there were Letters
in their Mistresses Name: Naevia sex Cyathis, septem Iustina bibatur,
Quinque Lycas, Lyde quatuor, Ida tribus.
Mart. Yet Plutarch in his Symposiaks makes as if they were superstitious of
drinking four Healths, perhaps because of the even Number: Aut quinque bibe,
aut tres, aut non quatuor. Moreover Seneca assures us, that the Women excelled
the Men in this Vice of Drinking, saying, Non minus pervigilant, non minus
potant, etc. They no less sit up late in the night, they drink no less than
men; nay, they challenge men to the anointing their Bodies, and swilling down
of Wine, evacuating upwards what they eat and drink, as well as they: Senec.
Epist. 96. Above all others, their Poets were most infected with this kind of
Debauchery* in so much that Martial tells us of himself, that sober, he was no
body for Invention, but drunk, fifteen Poets strong: Possum nil ego sobrius,
bibenti
Succurrunt mihi quindeoim Poetae.
Lib. 11. Ep. 7. This made them pass that severe Censure upon Water-drinkers,
when Horace says, Nulla manner diu, nec vivere carmina possunt,
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus. --
For my own part, I never was a Poet, but I have been a Water-drinker, and must
so far disagree with the Ancients as to declare, that when I drank other
Liquors, (which I never did, but to prevent my-self from being the spy and
wonder of the Company, or out of the difficulty of procuring such Water as was
good) I ever found that small stock of Understanding I had much debilitated and
weakened, even by a moderate quantity of Wine, and other Liquors, whose Fumes
(if men rightly consider it) render them witty only in their own conceit:
neither is this all, but the Palsies, Convulsions, Fevers, and other
Sicknesses, which frequently attend upon Drinking, render other Liquors as
unwholsom, as Water may seem unpleasant. All hot things do in some measure
destroy natural heat; and to talk of comforting a healthful Stomach with
Cordials, is to talk like a Quack: since I have never known men have colder
Stomachs, than some that are great drinkers of Wine and Brandy. Now as this
natural heat causes our disgestion, and as all hot Liquors tend to the
destroying of this natural heat, so by consequence, Water (which many besides
my self, by a glass after meals have experienced) must be of all Drinks the
most helpful to a bad digestion. Water serving only for a Vehicle, agrees
better with variety of Meats, being like the Menstruum of the Chemists, and the
uniting Medium of the Lullists, which serves to reunite all different Bodies
into one alone; patiently attending their disposition without corrupting, as
Wine and Vinegar does; and without leaving behind in the Kidneys the Tartar, or
Lee of Wine, which is the seed of the Stone, wherewith Water-drinkers are not
so commonly troubled. Those that drink Water, have a better appetite than those
that drink Wine, which is an argument that Wine helps concoction less than
Water; and no wonder, since as Galen says, Wine increases thirst instead of
quenching it, as Water does. Besides Beasts, there are a hundred drink only
Water for one that drinks Wine, reckoning Tartars, Chinese, Indians, and the
common people among the Turks, who are prohibited it by the Law of their
Prophet. Lastly, To object the coldness of the Climate there is little reason,
since as I showed you before, Water cherishes and not destroys the natural heat
within us; nay, if Wine may be thought natural to any, I should think Nature
designed it rather for those Countries where the Vine prospers most, as France,
Italy, etc. Also the Life of man before the use of Wine, viz. before the Flood,
is said to have been much longer than it has been since. Of this see more in
that excellent Treatise of Cardan de Aqua.

CHAP. V. Of the Rock Averna, fifteen furlongs broad, called (...), i. e.
birdless, from (...) privative, and (...) a Bird; also the Reason why it was so
called: What a good Trooper and Soldier ought to do: Of a Boy driving an
Elephant; and also of the Elephant himself.
AS for the Rock [1] Aornus, not far from Nysa, Damis writes, that he saw it
not, in that it lay something out of their way, and the Guide was afraid to
turn aside out of the direct Road. Howbeit he writes, that he heard that this
place was taken by Alexander: also that it is called Aornus, not from its being
fifty furlongs high, for the sacred Birds are seen to fly much higher than
that; but because on the top of the Rock there is a certain Cleft, which
draws to it self the Birds that fly near it; as may be seen at Athens, in the
Porch of the Or Minerva's Shrine
Parthenon, and also in many places of Phrygia and Lydia: for this Reason was
the Rock called Aornus, and is so without Birds. As they were traveling
toward the River Indus, they light on a Lad who was about thirteen years old,
and sitting on an Elephant, did grievously beat him. All admiring at this
sight, Apollonius asked Damis, what he thought to be the part of a good
Horseman? To which he answered, What else but sitting fast on his Horse, to
govern him, to guide the Reins, and if he be unruly, to cudgel him; moreover to
take care that he fall not into a Pit, Ditch, or Hole, when he passes through
a Lake, or through the Dirt. Is nothing else required of a good Horseman, said
Apollonius? Yes, by Jove, answered Damis, when he goes up a steep place, he
must let loose the Reins to his Horse; and on the contrary, when he goes down,
he must hold him in. Likewise, sometime to stroke his Main or Ears, and not
always to beat him, seems the duty of a wise Rider; and I should commend a
man that rode in this manner. But what Arts must he have that rides a
War-horse, said Apollonius? Damis replied, He must have not only those which I
before rehearsed, but to be able also to strike the Enemy, and defend himself,
as also to pursue and retreat, and to enure his Horse not to startle at the
sound of the Buckler, or glistering of the Helmet, or at the shouting of the
Enemies when they begin to fight; for these things likewise belong to good
Horsemanship. What then think you (said Apollonius) of this Lad that rides on
the Elephant? Damis answered, He is a more admirable Rider, than those which I
have described; for to command a Beast of so vast a bulk, when he himself in
the mean time is of so small a Body, and to direct him with a Sheep-hook
whither he pleases, casting (as you see) the same upon him as it were an
Anchor, also not to dread the sight and height of the Beast, nor his great
strength, seems unto me to be more than humane Art. And (so help me Pallas) I
should not have believed another man, who should have told me this Story. But
what if one would sell the Lad (said Apollonius) would you buy him? Yes,
answered Damis, that I would, though I gave all I had for him. For to exercise
dominion over the greatest Beast the Earth seeds, as over a high Tower that he
had seized on, seems to me a thing agreeable to none but a most generous and
noble disposition. What would you do with the Lad (said Apollonius) unless you
bought the Elephant too? Damis replied, I would make him Comptroller over my
House, and all that I have, supposing that he would order them better than I
can do. But are not you your self (said Apollonius) able to manage your own
Affairs? Yes, answered Damis, as well as you are able; for laying aside the
care of my own Affairs, I go about with you, out of a desire to learn and
understand the things that are done in foreign Parts. But if you had bought the
Lad, (said Apollonius) and had two Horses, the one fit for the Race, the other
for the War, would you set him upon both indifferently? I would set him upon
the Race-horse, answered Damis, in as much as I see other men do so; for how
could he manage a War-horse, who is not yet able to bear a Buckler, or
Breast Plate, or Helmet, without which a Trooper cannot ride. Again, how could
he possibly handle a Spear, who is not able to manage a Bow and Arrows, being
as yet only accustomed to Bracelets? Then is it some other thing (said
Apollonius) that rules and governs this Elephant, and not this Rider, whom you
seem to adore for the strangeness of it. But what may that be, answered Damis,
for I see nothing but the Lad upon the Elephant? This Beast (said Apollonius)
is the most docible of all Beasts, and being once accustomed to live under a
man, endures any thing from him, confor^^^^ himself to the same manners, and
rejoices to take bread out of his hands, (...) little Dogs are wont to do. And
when the man is coming, the [2] Elephant fawneth with his Trunk, permitting the
man to thrust his head into his Iaws, holding them open so long as he pleases,
as we saw among the Nomades. But at night he is said to bewail his servitude,
not with a loud voice, as a^ other times, but with a low and gentle murmur. And
if a man chance to come upon him whilst he makes moan, the Elephant presently
cease as if he were ashamed. Wherefore the Beast it self (O Damis) is its own
Commander, and the persuasion of his own Nature does more move him, than he
that rides upon him, and directs him. Now when they were come to the River
Indus, they report, that they saw a whole Herd of Elephant, passing over the
River*

Illustrations on Chap. 5.
[1] THe Rock Aornus, or Aornis, quasi avibus inaccessa; a Hill or Rock amongst
the Indians, fifty furlongs high, over which (as Philostratus and other Authors
write) no Birds will fly: (...),
(...).
(...).
Dionys. Perieg. verse. 1149. This Mountain is famous amongst all those Authors
that (...) of the Expedition of Alexander the Great into India, as Lucius
Florus, lib. 2. Quint* Curti^s, lib. 8. and Arrianus, lib. 4. The River Indus
runs at the bottom of it, as Strabo delivers, lib. 15. (...)* Plutarch writes,
that Alexander the Great said, he feared not to make himself Master of this
place, it being possessed by a timorous kind of me^. Concerning this Rock,
Lucian (in Rhetor. Praecept.) thus speaks, (...). There are other Places of
this Name, as a Lake in Italy near Eridanus, into which Phaeton was said to be
struck with Lightning.

[2] The Elephant: There is no Creature (says Topsel) which has so great
demonstration of the Power and Wisdom of God, as the Elephant, both for
proportion of body, and disposition of spirit; which though like a living
Mountain for bulk, no little Dog is more easily handled, and rendered more
serviceable, tame, or tractable. These Beasts (says Pliny, lib. 8. chapter 11.)
are usually bred in hot Eastern Countries* for not being well able to endure
cold, they delight most in the East and South, as India, and some Parts of
Africa. Before the days of Alexander the Great, there were never any Elephants
in Europe, but he fighting against Porus, King of India, wan several Elephants
from him. How many wounds these Beasts received, and how bravely they fought
for their Masters, Curtius has related, lib. 8. The Indian Elephants are most
commonly nine cubits high, and five cubits broad; but in Africa, they be about
eleven foot high, and of bigness proportionable to their height. Their Color
is for the most part of a Mouse-dun, or black; yet there was once one seen in
Aethiopia all white. And in Pegu the King has many of that color, it being
part of his Title, King of the white Elephants. Purchase. Pilg. lib. 5. They
have a Skin so hard, (excepting on their Belly) that it is almost impossible to
pierce it with any Sword or Spear. It has on it very few hairs, and is full of
Chaps or Crevises, wherein there is such a savor, as invites the Flies to a
continual Feast, when by shrinking of his skin together, he incloses them, and
kills them, not being able to drive them away with his Tail. He has a long
trunk Nose, and mighty Teeth* whereof four being within his mouth, serv^ to
grind his meat, and two hang down from his upper Jaw. He has a Tail slender
and short like ^ Rat, but his Legs of an infinite strength. His Head is very
large; but his Ears small, like the Wings of a Bat; and some have no Ears at
all. Their Eyes are like the Eyes of Swine, but very red. Of their Teeth our
Ivory is made. His two chief Enemies are the Dragon, and the Mouse called
Rhinocero, which last destroys him by running up his Trunk. The Elephants are
long-lived, some being almost 200 years old. For the manner of taking them,
Mu^ster says, it is by cutting down a Tree against which they use to (...)
they sleep. Another way whereby they use to take them, is by setting wild
Elepha^^^ to fight with those that are tame, when in the mean while during the
combat they ^etter and ensnare them. These Creatures are said to be so modest
and bashful, that the Male never covers the Female but in secret, and that
never but once in two years, when the Male is five years old, and the Female
ten. Of this see more in Topsel, Ges^er, Purchase, and Swan's Speculum Mundi*
also Maffaeus, lib. 1.

CHAP. VI. That there are three sorts of Elephants: Of an Elephant above four
hundred years old; and that he had sometimes fought for King Porus against
Alexander: Also of another Elephant called Ajax, taken four hundred years after
a certain War in Lybia: Their Opinion untrue, who would have the Teeth of
Elephants to be rather Horns, than Teeth: Finally, what Teeth are bluish, what
white, what great, what small, and what easy to be cut.
MOreover, that they had heard how some Elephants live in the Fens, others in
the Mountains, others in the Plains; that they are taken for the use of War,
and fight with Turrets on their backs, wherein ten or fifteen Indians do stand,
and out of them as out of Forts they throw Darts, or discharge Arrows, against
the Enemies. The Beast himself accounts his Trunk as his Hand, and uses it
to dart things away from him. And as much as a Lybian Elephant is bigger than a
Nysaean Horse, so much is an Indian Elephant bigger than an Elephant of Lybia.
As for the Age of Elephants, and that they are very long lived, is recorded by
others. But they say, they lighted on an Elephant near [1] Taxilla, (the
greatest of all the Cities in India) whom the Natives anointed and crowned with
Garlands, for that it was one of them that fought for King [2] Porus against
Alexander; which for the ready service that he performed in that Battle,
Alexander consecrated to the Sun. He has also golden Chains about his Teeth,
or (if you had rather call them so) his Horns; and on the Chains, these Greek
Letters inscribed [3] Alexander the Son of Jupiter dedicateth Ajax to the Sun
For this Name (Ajax) he gave to the Elephant, as beautifying him being great,
with a great Name. Now the Natives conjecture, that it was about 350 years from
the abovesaid Fight; not relating withal how old the Elephant was when he
fought in the Battle. But Juba who sometimes reigned over the Lybians
reports, that the Lybian Riders mounted on Elephants, did on a time fall
together by the ears, and that the one party of the Elephants had a Tower
graved on their Teeth, but the other had nothing graved on theirs. Now when the
night grew on, and gave a period to the Fight, that party which had the Tower
graved on their Teeth being worsted, fled into Mount Atlas; one whereof he took
400 years after, and found the mark hollow in his Teeth not worn out by time.
The said Juba supposes, that they ought rather to be called the Horns, than
the Teeth of Elephants, in that they grow out of their Temples. And for that
they fasten them not on any other thing, they likewise abide the same that they
grew at first, without any shedding or growing again like Teeth. But I assent
not to those Reasons: for Horns, if not all, yet at least those of Elephants,
shed and grow again. But as for Teeth, indeed those of men do shed, and grow
again: nevertheless there is no Beast whose Teeth fall out of themselves, being
double or standing out, or come again in the place of them that fall out; for
Nature has implanted the Teeth in their Gums, to serve them instead of Arms.
Besides, the Horns do every year draw as it were a certain Circle about their
roots, like Sheep, Goats, and Beeves. The Teeth spring up very smooth, and
unless they be broken, remain so perpetually: for they seem to partake the
matter and substance of a Stone; likewise those living Creatures only have
Horns which part the Hoof. But an Elephant has five Claws, and a Foot parted
into many clefts, that he may not fasten his foot deep in the ground, when he
stands in a moist place. Furthermore, Nature giving hollow Bones to horned
Beasts, produces likewise outwardly a Horn; whereas the Bones of Elephants are
full, and every where alike: so that if any one open them, and inspect the
middle of them, he shall find in the midst a little hole, such as is wont to be
in Teeth. As for the Teeth of such Elephants as live in the Fens, they are
bluish, porous, and hard to be wrought: for in many places there are Crannies,
and in other parts certain Knobs, like to Hailstones, which do not yield to
the Artist. But the Teeth of such as live in the Mountains are less than those,
yet are white enough, and capable of being wrought: howbeit the Teeth of such
as live in the Plains are the best; for they are the greatest and whitest, also
easy to be cut, and may with little labor be wrought into any fashion you
please.

Illustrations on Chap. 6.
[1] TAxilla, a famous City of India, in the Kingdom of Varsa, situated between
the River Indus, and the River Hydaspes. See Pliny, lib. 6. chapter 17. Strabo,
lib. 15. Also Arrianus, and Curtius.

[2] King Porus, was a famous King of the Indians, against whom Alexander
fought, and took him Prisoner, as both Plutarch and Curtius write: after which,
Alexander asking him how he would be handled, Porus replied, In a Princely
manner; Alexander then demanding of him, if he had any thing else to say, I
have comprehended all (said Porus) in that word Princely. Whereupon Alexander
did not only restore to him the Viceregency of his own Kingdoms, but also of
many other Countries. It is reported, that this King Porus was four cubits and
a shaft in height; and of bigness proportionable to the Elephant he rode.
Suidas writes, that this King lived on nothing but Herbs and Water.

[3] Alexander, the Son of, etc. sirnam'd the Great, from the grandeur of his
Acts. He was descended of the two best Families in Greece; his Father being
Philip, King of Macedon, and of the Lineage of Hercules: his Mother Olympias,
the Daughter of Neopt^lemus, King of the Molossians. The time of his Birth was
the first year of the 106th Olympiad, in the 6th. day of the Month (...), or
August, according to the Julian Calendar. The day of Alexander's Birth was
famous for several things: 1. On that very day his Father Philip obtained a
Victory over the Illyrians, by the good Conduct of his General Parmeni^. 2. On
that very day Philip was declared Victor at the Olympic Games. 3. On that same
day the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was burnt by Erostratus: as say, Plutarch.
in Alexand. Pausan. S^lin. chapter 49. Cicero de Divinat. lib. 2. and de Natura
Deor. From hence it was that the Magicians delivered, that Alexander would one
day be the Firebrand of Asia. As for the manner of his Birth, it is said, that
his Mother Olympia dreamed on her Wedding-night, that Lightning fell into her
Belly, and that there was a great light Fire which dispersed it self in sundry
flames; also his Father King Philip, soon after he was married, dreamed that he
did seal his Wives Belly with the print of a Lion: which Aristander expounded
to signify, that his Queen was with Child of a Boy who should have a Lion's
heart. Some fabulous Writers say, that he was begotten of his Mother by Jupiter
Ammon, in the likeness of a Serpent: wherefore as Philostratus here mentions,
he was styled by many the Son of Jupiter, as in Gyrald, lib. 1^^ Hist. Deor*
and Varro in Fragm. also Plutarch. Both Alexander and his Father Philip were
born in a Greek City named Pella, situate in the Kingdom of Macedonia, from
whence they were called Pellaei, as well by Lucan as Iuvenal: Vnus Pellae^
Iuveni non sufficit orbis. Lastly, For his Person, his Complexion was white,
inlay'd with red, his Constitution hot and fiery, his Temper ambitious,
passionate and hasty, his Body of a sweet fragrant odor, and his Inclinations
addicted more to Wine than Women. He was easily persuaded to any thing by
Reason, but never by Force, and that even in his very youth; when as Quintilian
says, Mihi detur ille puer, quem la^us excitet, quem gloria juvet, qui victus
fleat.

As for the manner of Alexander's Education, at 15 years of age he was
committed to the tuition of that great Philosopher Aristotle, under whose
Instruction he spent 5 years, where he learnt all such Sciences as are
requisite in a Prince. He studied Ethics, Politics* and all other parts of
Philosophy, even in Physic he exercised not only the Theory but Practick,
administering Physic to many of his sick Friends. Leonides was also joined in
Commission with Aristotle for the instructing of him; nevertheless Alexander
had not that affection for any of his Masters, no not for his own Father, as
for his Master Aristotle; whereupon being asked by one of his Friends, why he
set a greater value upon Aristotle than upon his Father Philip, his Answer was,
Quoniam a patre accepi ut viverem, a praecep^ore vero accepi ut been viverem:
nay, King Philip himself had so great an esteem for Aristotle, that writing to
him he said, Gratias ago Diis, non tam quod mihi natus est fili^s, quam quod
eum nasci contigit temporibus vitae tuae; spero enim, ut a te edoctus, dignus
existat and nobis, and tanto regno. Moreover he rewarded him highly, when
besides other noble Presents, King Philip for his sake restored Aristotle's
ruined Country Stagir^. The greatness of Alexander's Spirit appeared in
nothing more, than in his dexterous manage of that wild Horse Bucephalus, which
his Father Philip had bought for 13 Talents, and which no man living was ever
able to ride but Alexander. This Horse by his great courage and speed, had in
several Engagements preserved Alexander's life, and relieved him from the fury
of his Enemies, till at last being slain by a Dart in his Indian Expedition,
Alexander in honor of his memory did there erect him not only a famous
Sepulcher, but also a great City in India, which he called after his Horse's
Name Buceph^lus. Pliny, lib. 6. chapter 20. Strabo, lib. 15. Gellius, lib. 5. chapter 2.

Now for the several Alliances which Alexander (being of man's estate)
contracted, they were these: He had 4 Wives: 1. Statira, the Daughter of Darius
Codomannus: 2. Barsine, of whom he begat his Son Hercules: 3. Parysatida: and
4. Roxana, of whom he begat his Son Alexander. And besides these, he had 365
Concubines, as Diodorus writes. Of all his men Favorites, he had the highest
veneration for Craterus, but the greatest affection for Hephaestion, being
often used to say, Craterus amat Regen^, Hephaestion autem amat Alexandrum: The
one loved his dignity, the other his person: And accordingly he conferred
honor on Craterus, but reserved his private familiarity and friendship for
Hephaestion: Plutarch. in Apotheg. All his Secrets he communicated only to
Hephaestion, as appears by that private Letter, which having received from his
Mother Olympias, he showed him, and afterward plucking a Seal off from his
finger, put it to Hephaestion's mouth, thereby importing his secrecy in that
Affair. Plut. in Alexand. Arcanis dictis linguam obsignare memento:
Dictor^m non majus depositum est opibus.
Lucian in Epig. lib. 3. Antilog. Tit. 51. To begin now with the Reign of
Alexander the Great, we must observe, that it lasted 12 whole years, whereof
the first six were only over the Kingdom of Macedon, the rest over the whole
Empire. King Philip being slain by Pausanias out of a private revenge, young
Alexander succeeded to his Kingdom in the 20th. year of his Age: when he had no
sooner settled himself in his Throne, and finished his Father's Ex^quies, but
was surrounded with Troubles on every side from his Neighbors, who thought to
take the advantage of his Youth, to dispossess him of his Kingdom: as did the
Athenians, in their Conspiracy with Attalus, also the rest of the Barbarians,
who were subject to the Kingdom of Macedon. Whereupon Alexander first reduced
the Barbarians, near the River Danubius, where in a great Battle he overthrew
Syrmus, King of the Triballians. 2. Having understood that the Thebans revolted
from him, his next Expedition was against Thebes, as well as against the
^thenians, who were in Confederacy with the Thebans; against both these he
proved very successful: the stubborn Theban^ refusing all o^^^rs of kindness
from Alexander, were together with their City utterly ruined and destroyed;
whereas the Athenians rendering themselves upon discretion, and imploring
remission for their faults, were again received into his favor: it is
remarkable in the subversion of Thebes, that Alexander showed his generous
esteem of Virtue and Learning, when he preserved and pardoned the virtuous Lady
Timoclea, the whole Family of Poet Pindorus, together with all the Priests and
Religious Orders; excepting which, he sold all the rest for Slaves. 3. By this
means, Alexander having settled all his Affairs at home, and being unanimously
elected General of all Greece, a Council of War was called, in order to the
enlarging his Empire abroad: wherein it was resolved, that his next attempt
should be upon Asia, when being interrupted his passage at the River Granicus,
by some Forces of Darius Codomannus, King of Persia, he there overthrew the
Persians, and forraged all Phrygia and the Asian shore, even to Cilicia: also
Diodorus writes, that he at that time subdued all Caria. Diod. lib. 17. And
that in the City Gordius in Phrygia, not being able to untye the Bark which was
wreathed about the Chariot, he cut the knot asunder with his Sword; thereby
fulfilling (as he thought) that Prophecy which said, that he who could undo
that knot should conquer all the World. 4. After this, Alexander conquered the
Paphlagonians and Cappadocians, also was informed of the death of Memnon,
Darius's Admiral at Sea, upon whom the Persians chiefly depended for their
success against Alexander. Nevertheless Darius, King of Persia, highly
resenting the Defeat which his Forces received at the River Grani^us, resolved
to revenge it himself in person: accordingly he levied an Army of 600000
fighting men, which he rendezvous'd at Susa; when in the mean while Alexander
remaining a long time in Cilicia, by reason of a Sickness befallen him with
drinking of the River Cydnus when he was hot, Darius not knowing the occasion
of his delay, supposed it to have been out of fear: whereupon he began to march
his whole Army toward Cilicia, in order to his encountering Alexander. At the
same time Alexander moved toward Syria upon the like design to meet with
Darius in the night, when happening both to miss of one another, the next day
they both returned to their several Posts. Now Dariu^ having (contrary to the
advice of Amyntas) encamped himself in the Streights and Valleys between the
Mountains, presented Alexander with great advantage of ground, which put Darius
upon a necessity of engaging or not engaging, according as his Enemies pleased,
being on every side encompassed with the Macedonian Forces from the Hills: in
so much that Alexander with a much smaller Army than that of his Enemies, put
Darius to flight, killing above 110000 of his men, seizing on all the Persian
Camps, wherein besides the incredible Riches, he took Prisoner Sisigambis the
Mother, Statira the Wife, and two Daughters of King Darius; whom he treated
with all the civility imaginable. This Battle was sought at Issus, wherein
Alexander himself received a wound in his Thigh, and (as some say) from the
very hands of King Darius. Plutarch, Arrianus, Curti^s, Diodorus. 5. After this
success against Darius, Alexander sent to the City Damas, to surrender all the
Men, Women, Children, and Treasure, that did therein belong to the Persians,
which accordingly was done; he likewise (to make himself Master of the
Seacoasts) summoned all the Kings of Cyprus and Phaenicia, to deliver into his
hands Phaenicia, and the maritime Parts adjacent, which was immediately
performed, all save the City of Tire; against which he began a strong Siege
both by Land and Sea, annoying them with 200 Galleys, till at last after a
seven months Siege he became Master of the City of Tire. 6. During this Siege,
he with another part of his Army made War upon those Arabians, that dwell on
the Mount Antilaban, whom he overcame, though not without much danger to his
person, occasioned by his kindness to his Tutor Lysimachus, as Plutarch says.
7. His next Expedition was against the City Gaza, the chief City of Syria,
which he wan, after having received two wounds in his Arm and Shoulder: Di^dor.
lib. 17. Curtius, lib. 4. Plut. in Alexand. Then he resolved to march up
against Jerusalem, and lay it waste, from which design he was averted by the
submissive prayers and entreaties of Iaddus their High Priest. 8. About this
time it was, that Alexander having conquered all Asia on that side the River
Euphrates, Darius sent Ambassadors to him to require his friendship, and offer
him 10000 Talents for the ransom of his captive Persians, and such Territories
as did formerly belong unto him, which offers Alexander refusing, Darius began
a third Expedition against him, having gathered together an Army of 1000000
fighting men. In the mean while Alexand^^ was employed in conquering Egypt,
wherein after his conquest of that Kingdom, he erect^^ that famous City called
after his own Name Alexandria. Now intelligence being brought to Alexander of
the new War which Darius intended against him, he began his March to meet him
at the River Euphrates: the place where this Battle was fought, is as some say
Arbela, though Plutarch says Gausameles, where both Armies being engaged,
Parmenio (Alexander's Lieutenant) was at the first onset forced to retire; also
the Macedonian Baggage, in danger of being taken by the Bactrians, till
Alexander himself coming into his relief with the main body of his Army, gave
so brisk a Charge upon the Persians, that they soon betook themselves to
flight, also Darius himself was forced to fly for his life. Alexander being
thus fleshed with Victory, marched forward into the Country of Babylon and
Ecbatan, where ^e made himself Master of the City Susa; from thence Al^xa^de^
proceeded into Persia, whither Dariu^ was fled, putting all men that opposed
him to the Sword, burning the Pal^ce of the Persian King's Persepolis, at the
instigation of Tha^^ the Strumpet. 9. Alexander continuing his pursuit after
Darius, Bessus (in hopes of a reward from Alexander) conspired with Nab^^^anes*
Captain of Darius's Guard, to take their Master Prisoner, which accordingly
they did, when fettering him with golden Chains, and putting him in ^ Chariot,
Da^ius immediately died of the wounds he had received from the Conspirators.
Soon after Alexander having notice of Darius's death, was much troubled
thereat, and highly offended at the Traitors, in so much that he immediately
commanded Bessus to be torn in pieces, which was instantly performed; as also
the Corpse of Darius nobly interred, and Exathr^s (Darius's Brother) made one of
Alexander's chief Favorites. 10. Thus in six years Reign, Alexander having
acquired to himself the universal Monarchy of all that side of the World, and
having firmly established under his Command the Government of those Territories,
which did formerly belong to Darius, his next progress was into Parthia, where
some of the wild Natives robbing him of his Horse Bucephalus, he vowed to
destroy the Inhabitants, Man, Woman, and Child, unless they did forthwith make
restitution of his Horse, and render themselves to his mercy; which being
accordingly done, he marched on into Scythia, where passing over the River
Orexartes, he overthrew the Scythians in a Battle. At this place (it is said)
that Thalestri^, Queen of the Amazons, ^^me to Alexander, out of a desire to be
got with Child by so brave a Prince, which request he generously granted,
admitting her to his Bed for ten days together: Curtius, lib. 6. Justin, lib.
12. Now Alexander had not been thr^^ years thus possessed of the third Grecian
Monarchy, (which may be reckoned from Dari^^'^ Defeat) but he resolves on an
Attempt upon I^dia: in order whereunto, having levied a numerous Army, he began
his March toward the River Indus, from thence to the City Nysa, which he soon
reduced; then marching on forward into India, an Indian King Taxiles (whose
Country was not inferior to Eg^pt) made a voluntary Alliance with Alexander,
who readily embraced his friendship, for that by this means he not only
increased his Army, but also was by Taxiles his advice thoroughly informed both
of the nature of the Country, its most easy and safe passages, as well as of
the Riches and Strength of King Porus, the chief Indian King, against whom
Alexander had undertaken this Expedition. Now Alexander understanding that King
Porus with a vast Army of Men, Horses, Chariots, and Elephants (...) as
encamped near the River Hydaspes, immediately marched thither to meet him;
where passing over the River in the night, he forthwith gave Battle to the
Indians, and overthrew them, taking King Porus himself Prisoner, who was four
cubits and a shaft high. In this Battle were subdued the Inhabitants of 15
several Nations, 5000 eminent Cities, besides an infinite number of Villages,
and thrice as many other Nations; says Plutarch. In this Encounter it was,
that Bucephalus the Horse of Alexander lost his life. 11. After this great
Victory obtained, having settled his Affairs amongst the Indians, and built two
Cities upon the River Hydaspes, the one called Nicaeus, in commemoration of his
late Conquests, and the other Bucephalia, in honor of his beloved Horse, who
was slain in that very place, he began his March forwards, when being arrived
at the River Ganges, he called his Soldiers together, and exhorted them to
pass over the River cheerfully; but many of his Army with tears in their eyes
requested him to put an end to his Wars, whereupon he proceeded no farther, but
returned back from the River without passing it. Notwithstanding in his March
homewards, being opposed by the Mallians, (the most warlike people of India) he
besieged the City of Mallia, in which Siege the person of Alexander was in
greater danger than ever, as well by a Fall from a scaling Ladder, as ^y
several other desperate wounds received from their Darts. From hence Alexander
returned to Susa, where he disbanded great part of his Army, reserving only a
Guard du Corpse for his person; and from Susa he marched to Ecbatan in Media,
where he diverted himself with all manner of Sports and Recreations: in which
place his beloved Hephaestion died, whose death was so much lamented by
Alexander, that he crucified his Physician Glauci^^. 12. From Media he removed
to Babylon, where after having conversed with all the wise men of those Parts,
he tasted of the highest perfection of humane Happiness, indulging himself
therein, till at last being seized by a Fever, he ^^parted this Life, after
having reigned (...) years over Macedon, and 6 over the whole Monarchy, leaving
that great Empire, which he with so much care and trouble had acquired, to be
torn in pieces after his death, for want of a Son to succeed him. Plutarch
says, that Alexander died on the 10th. day of his Sickness, in the 32d. year,
and 8th. month of his Age, being the first year of the 114th. Olympiad.
Nevertheless Curtius, Diodorus, and Justin, think, that he was poisoned by
Antipater. For the Burial of Alexander, Diodorus (lib. 18.) writes, that
Aridaeus, the Bastard Brother of Alexander, spent almost two years about it.
And concerning the place where he was buried, Historians vary: Pausanias (in
Attic.) says, that Ptolomaeus Lagus, King of Egypt, buried him at Memphis.
Diodorus (lib. 18) writes, that Aridaeus buried him at Alexandria. The Epitaph
inscribed on his Statue was this: (...).
Terram mihi subjicio: Jupiter vero coelum habet.


CHAP. VII. The Manners of Elephants, and Love of all living Creatures toward
their young: The Lioness is taken with the Love of Leopards: The Lions if they
see any spotted Whelps, presently tear them in pieces, as Bastards: A Sea-Calf
having brought forth a dead young one, did out of grief abstain from food three
days together: The Eagle her Nest with the Eagle-stone, and the Stork with the
Lamp-stone, to keep away Serpents.
IF we should also describe the Manners of Elephants, the Indians affirm, that
those of the Fens are foolish and light; those of the Mountains perverse and
treacherous; and unless they stand in need of something from them, unfaithful
to men: but those of the Plains are said to be good, gentle, and lovers of
Imitation; wherefore they will write, dance, and ^kip at the sound of a Pipe,
lifting themselves up from the ground. Now when Apollonius saw the Elephants
pass over the River Indus, being (as I think) about thirty in number, whereof
the least was the Guide, whilst the great ones carried-over their young ones on
their out-sticking Teeth, embracing them with their Trunk, as with a Girt to
hold them, he said to Damis, These living Creatures do this thing without the
bidding of any one, out of a natural instinct and knowledge; for you see how
like Porters they bear their young, and closely embrace them lest they should
fall. I see, answered Damis, how wisely and prudently they manage them. What
then means that foolish Question of Wranglers, whether or no the [1] Love of
Parents to their young be natural? for these Elephants openly proclaim that
this Love comes to them by Nature, in that they learned it not, as they have
done many other things, from men, having never lived amongst them, but received
it from Nature so to love their young ones. Say not this (Oh Damis) only of
Elephants, for this [2] Beast I rank next after men for Understanding and
Prudence; but I consider likewise, how ^^en Beasts exceeding other Beasts in
fierceness, do yet suffer any thing for their Cubs; also how [3] Wolves being
continually intent on their prey, make the Female keep the Whelps, whilst the
Male for the preservation of her young brings her in food. The like may be
observed of Panthers, who by reason of their heat rejoice to become Dams, for
that they then rule over the Males, and govern the House, whilst the Males in
the mean ^ime suffer all things for their Whelps sake. As for Lionesses, this
Story is related of them; that they draw the [4] Leopards to love them, and
take them into the Bed of the Lions in the Champain Fields: but afterward when
the time of their Delivery (...) come, they run away to the Mountains, and to
the dens of the Leopards. For the young ones which they then bring forth being
spotted, they secretly nourish them in the Woods, making (...) if they absented
themselves from the Males, that they may ^unt; for if the Lions happen to spy
the Whelps, they tear them in pieces as an adulterate Brood. You have also
observed in some of [5] Homer's Lions, how ster^ly they will look, and summon
up their strength to fight for their Whelps. Furthermore they report, that a
[6] Tiger being a most fierce Creature, will in this Country, as also about
the Red Sea, run to the very Ships to fetch back their young ones, and having
gotten them, will retur^ with much joy; when if the Sea man sail away with
them, she will howl most grievously on the shore, and sometimes die for grief.
Who likewise does not observe the Manners of Birds? how Eagles and [7] Storks
never build their Nests, but they place in them the [8] Eagle-stone, and the
Stork the Lamp-stone, both being to f^rther the laying and hatching of their
Eggs, as we^^ as to keep away Serpents. But if we reflect on the living
Creatures in the Sea, we shall not admire, that [9] Dolphins being naturally
very kind, love their young ones. But how shall we not admire at [10] Whales,
[11] Sea-calves, and those kinds that bring forth living young ones? when as in
the Island Aege, I saw ^ Se^-calf taken by Fishermen, so exceedingly to bew^^^
her dead young one, whom she had brought forth in the House, that for three
(...) together she abstained from food, though she (...) otherwise a most
ravenou^ Creat^^e. Likewise the Whale hides her young ones in the Cavities of
her Throat, if she fly from a greater Fish; and a Viper has been also seen to
lick the young Serpents which she had brought forth, and so to pollish them
with her Tongue.

Illustrations on Chap. 7.
[1] WHether the Love of Parents in the^r yo^ng be natural? Can a Mother forget
her Child? It was looked upon as a thing impossible, and ye^ we see there are
too many evil-disposed Parents in ^his World, who con^^th themselves no further
than with the getting of them. Such of old were those unnatural Lawmakers
amongst the Rom^ns: as Romulu^, who ^nacted, that all Children who were any
ways lame or imperfec^, should be put to death: Dionys* Halicar^^ss. Also the
Father in Apuleius, who going to travel when his Wife was big with Child,
commanded her is it proved a Girl to destroy it, S^ sexus sequipris edidisset
faetus, protinu^ q^^d^sset editi^^ necare^ur: The same Command does Chre^es
give to S^stra^^ in Ter^^ce, Aut^interfic^^e, (...) exponere, Either to kill
them, or expose them to wild Beasts: Hea^ront, Act. 4. Scen. 2. So frequent a
practice wa^ this amongs^ them, that the Christian Emperors ( Valentinian,
V^lens, and Gra^ian) were (...) to interdict it by a severe penal Law, Si q^is
n^candi infantis piaculum aggressus aggress^ve ^it, ^r it capitale istud malum:
which Law is extant in both the Codes, as well of T^eod^sius as Iustin^^n. Of
private Instances there were many amongst them to the same purpose: as Lucius
Iuni^^ Brutus, who caused his own Sons to be beheaded, for that they favored
T^rq^in^ and Cassius, who put his own Son to death, out of a jealousy that he
affect^d the Kingdom: Titus Manlius Torquatus, upon a complaint made by the
Macedonian Ambassadors against his own Son Sila^us, condemned him to be put to
death at which unkind sentence of his Father's, the Son in discontent hanged
himself: M. Scaur^s being put to flight by the (...), his Father commanded him
to fall upon his own Sword, rathe^ than outlive that shame, which accordingly
he did* in like manner did A. F^l^i^s put his own Son to death* for joining
with Catiline i^ the Conspiracy against his Country. Valor. (...) lib. 5. The
Cruelty of these was mixed with somewhat of Gallantry; but amongst us we have
many no less cruel, only out of selfishness and ill nature, who boa^^^ng that
they will not put off their Cl^aths before they be ready to go to Bed, keep
their Children often starving, till they be as fit for a Bed, (...) their
Parents. Commonly we are better pleased with the little prattling of our
Child^en* (which we so often repeat to others for wit) and with the apish
gestures of their Infancy; than with the actions of their riper years: as if we
only loved them for our pastimes, as we do Parrots and Monkeys. How often have
I heard a fond Father or affected Mother, persecute a whole meals conversation,
in venting to the company their own wittiness, as coming from young Master or
Miss^* with a thousand times more care and pains, than they take to provide
them Po^tions. Many that liberally furni^^t them with Toys and Rati^es while
they be Children, will g^udge at every small expense for Necessaries for them
when they be Men and Women. Some grieve to see their Children follow them so
close at their heels, as if they solicited their deaths. Others envy them to
think that they must enjoy the World after them* as if, since we must bequeath
our Estates to some body, we had not better bestow it on a piece of our selves,
than on a Stranger. It is (says Montaign) a mere piece of Injustice, to see an
old, crazy, Sinew-shrunk, and half-dead Father, sitting alone in a Chimney
corner, to enjoy so much Riches, as would suffice for the preferment of many
Children, when in the mean while for want of Estate, he suffers them to lose
their best days and years, without introducing them into any public Employ or
Acquaintance* whereby oftentimes being cast into despair, they seek by any
means how unlawful soever to supply their own necessary Wants: this forces them
to ply Women and Drink, which are the most frequent and fatal ruins that
attend the young Gentry of this Nation. Tyranny in a Parent is no les^
dangerous than in a Prince: since as well Children, as Subjects, Quem metu^ni,
^den^. Again, ^n some Northern Parts of this Kingdom* the Parents are guilty of
another sort of partial Cruelty, which extends only to their younger ^^ildren*
when for the honor of their Name and Family, they bequeath ^ast Estates to
(...) Sons, and leave the rest in a manner Beggars, or at most but a small
Annuity, (...) to make them their Brother's Faulconer or Huntsman, as if the
vainglorious F^^s ^alu'd the ridiculous Title of a Name or Family, more than
the true Off spring of their own Body. Such a person would (for want of
Children) bequeath his Estate to a drunken Porter of his own Name, rather than
to his Sister's Son of another Name. Is not my youngest Son as much my own as
my eldest? Had I not rather see my own Children that are immediately descended
from my own Loins prosper, than Grandchildren that are three or four removes
off from me? Certainly no custom can be more barbarous or inhumane than this:
The Scriptures allowed but a double Portion, and that only when the Priesthood
was annexed to the Eldership. Neither ought any man to be punished for that
which he could not help, such as (...) of Juniority. For my own part, not
Interest but Reason inclines me to this opinion, the Indulgence of my Parents
having been such to all of us, that none have cause to complain* few (except
themselves) have resigned up their. All amongst their Children even in their
own lifetime: which not out of vanity, but gratitude* I must ever acknowledge.
So that although some there are who want this natural Affection to their young
ones, which is here ascribed to Beasts, yet are they but rare, and not to be
cited as an Objection against this supreme Dictate of Nature, the preservation
of our own Species and Children. The getting Children is to satisfy our own
lustful Appetites, and no^ ou^ of consideration o^ good or ill to what we do
beget, which act of generation i^ rendered ju^^ and honorable* according to the
care we bestow upon our Children when born, since the most sinful act in
Marriage is to bring Children into the World, and then to take no care of them.
Nay, did not Religion teach (...) otherwise, I should think, that Child who is
left at another man's door in a Hand basket, had no other Parent, nor owed a
(...) duty to any, but those who were at the charge of breeding him.

[2] Elephants I rank next after men for Understanding, etc. In the great Shows
at Rome, Elephants were frequently seen taught to move and dance certain Dances
of strange turnings and changings, at the sound of a Voice* Arrius pro^esteth
to have seen an Elephant with Cimbals tied to his Thigh and Trunk, make variety
of Music to other Elephants whilst they danced. Also that they have been
observed to practice their Lesso^^ with much study and care, for fear of their
Master's anger. Pi^^n^ (lib. 2. d^ Hi^roglyph.) makes mention of an Elephant
called Hanno, (afterward presented by Em^nu^l* King of Portugal, to Pope (...)
the 10th) who understood the advice of his Master, as well as any man (...),
nor could ever be persuaded or compelled to do contrary thereunto. (...) (lib.
2. hist. Medit.) says, that the Lord of Busbeck, the Emperor of Germany's
Ambassador at Constantinople, saw an Elephant play very artificially at Tennis;
which is no less strange, than that Story of Terence, concerning an Elephant
that walked upon a Rope. Iuba, King of Barbary reports, that when any Elephant
happens to fall into those Pits that are laid for him, his Brethren will come
with Stones and pieces of Timber to help him out. An Elephant's Keeper in a
private House in Syria, being used to rob him of half his Provender, he
discovered it thus: his Master feeding him one time himself, and giving him his
whole quantity, the Elephant looking sternly on his Master, divided it in two
parts with his Trunk. Another having a Keeper, who to increase the measure of
his Provender, was used to mingle Stones with it, came one day to the Pot
wherein his Keeper's Meat was seething, and filled it with Ashes. By all which
we may justly conclude, that there is more difference in Understanding found
between some men and others, than between some men and this Beast. We find
mention of three sorts of Elephants, namely, of Marshes, of Mountains, and of
Fields: They that are born and bred in Marshes, have more agility, but less
wit; the Mountainers are wicked and traiterous; they of the Champain Country,
are easilyest tamed, and most apt to learn; the Elephants of the Indies are the
fiercest of all others, and very hard to tame; they of Lybia are the least,
which cannot abide the smell nor voice of man, and fly away before the
Elephants of India, as appeared in that memorable Battle fought between the
Kings Ptolomeus and Antiochus, near to Raphi^, and described by Polybius, lib.
5.

[3] Wolves being continually intent on their Prey. The Wolf is a ravenous and
devouring Beast, therefore rightly surnamed Spoil-Park; those of the common
sort have grizzled Hairs, being white under the Belly, with a great Head* long
Teeth, sparkling Eyes, short pricked Ears, and Feet like the Feet of a Lion,
therefore called Lupus, from Leopes, Quia pedem quasi pedes Leonis habet. Where
these Creatures live, the people are much infested with them. When they come to
the Sheep-folds, they observe which way the Wind blows, and then come
marching against it, that thereby they may the better deceive the Shepherd and
his Dogs. When they prey upon Goats, they hide themselves under the Leaves of
Trees, that they may the more easily obtain their desires. And when they catch
little Children, it is said, they will play with them for a while, (as a Cat
plays with a Mouse) and at last devour them. The great cunning of this Creature
appears by a Tradition they have in Ireland of a foot-Traveller; who having a
Gun upon his Shoulder, and passing through a Wood, was assaulted by a Wolf, who
no sooner observed his Gun, but presently quitted him; whereupon the man being
gone a mile or two from the place, far enough as he thought out of the Wolfe's
reach, and meeting a Passenger, who was going the same way as he had come, he
told him of the Wolf he had met, and lent him his Gun to defend himself; now
being come where the Wolf was, and he spying the same Gun, immediately pursued
the first Traveller, whom he overtook, and being then unarmed, tore him in
pieces: which must proceed from his knowledge of the Gun, as well as from his
observation, that the other must be therefore unarmed. Pliny (lib. 8. chapter 22.)
and from him Olaus Magnus write, that Egypt and Africa bring forth small
Wolves, in respect of those which are in the Northern Parts of the World; for
as the Elephant detests cold, so does the Wolf heat: therefore in those cold
Countries of Suetia and Norway, you may see whole herds of white Wolves upon
the Mountains. Olaus Mag. lib. 18. Heretofore Ireland was much infested with
them, especially the North part thereof, but of late years by the diligence of
the Inhabitants, and assistance of their Irish Greyhoun^^ or Wolf-dogs, they
are in a manner all destroyed: and so likewise was this Kingdom, till by our
good Englis^ Laws they were extirpated. Some say, that if the Heart of a Wolf
be kept dry, it will render a most fragrant smell; also in the Bladder of a
Wolf is a certain Stone of a Saffron or Honey color, which inwardly contains
(as it were) certain weak shining Stars. The Ravens are in a perpetual enmity
with Wolves, and the antipathy of their Natures is so violent, that if a Raven
eat of the Carcass of a Beast, which the Wolf has either killed or tasted of,
she presently dies. Wolves have no society but with Beasts of their own kind:
and above all Creatures, they and Dogs are most subject to Madness, because
their Bodies are choleric, and their Brains increase or decrease with the
Moon. Their manner of taking Fowl is by looking steadfastly on them, the
piercing power of their Eye being such, as the Fowl will nod till he falls off
from the Tree into his Mouth. As for seizing of Men or Beasts, they seldom
fasten before, but surrounding them, several times force them either to fall
down with giddiness, or to give them an opportunity of seizing on them behind.
Likewise it is reported, that when a Wolf thinks himself not able to set upon a
Traveller singly, he will make such a hideous howling, that his Companions will
presently come in to his assistance. Of this Subject see more in Gesner, Pliny,
Topsel, Olaus Magnus, and Swan's Specul. Mundi.

[4] Leopard; the difference betwixt the Leopard and Panther is only in Sex;
the Leopard is begotten between the Lion and the Panther, or the Panther and
the Lioness.

[5] Homer 's Lions; of this see the 17th Iliad, where Ajax being in a rage for
Patrocles, Homer speaks thus of him: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


[6] A Tiger being a most fierce, etc. Tigers like Lions are bred in the East,
South, and hot Countries, because their generation requires abundance of heat.
It is a Beast of wonderful swiftness: in the proportion of Body he is like the
Lioness; footed like a Cat, and spotted like a Panther, excepting that the
Spots be long, and all of a color. They be generally cruel, sharp, ravenous,
and never so tame, but sometimes they return to their former Natures: but above
all, in the time of their Lust, or when they be robbed of their young, they are
most raging and furious. His Mustachoes are held for mortal poison, causing men
to die mad, if they be given in meat. Pliny (lib. 8. chapter 18.) describes the
manner how the Hunters get away their Whelps, which is thus: They come on
Horseback, and finding the old Tigers from home, they take up their young ones,
and post away as fast as they can: and on the sudden finding themselves
pursued, when the old one comes near them, they let fall one of her Whelps on
purpose, that whilst she is carrying that to her Nest, they may escape securely
with the rest. And Munster tells us, they sometimes make round Spears of Glass,
which they cast before her when she comes, and thinking (by reason of her own
shadow) that she sees her young ones there, she rolleth it to her Den, where
breaking it with her Claws, and finding her self deceived, she in vain runs
again after the Hunters, who are then gone out of her reach. Topsel says,
there is an Herb near the River Ganges, growing like Bugloss, the juice whereof
is such, that if it be pointed into the mouth of their Dens, they dare not come
forth, but will lie howling there till they die.

[7] Storks; the Stork is a Bird famous for his natural Love to his Parents,
which he feeds being old and feeble, as they ^ed him when he was young: the
Egyptians and Thessalians so esteemed this Bird, that there was a severe Mulct
laid upon any one who should kill him. His English Name Stork comes from (...)
in Greek, which is Amor in Latin; proceeding from his natural Love and Kindness
to his Dam: being also humane and loving to Mankind, delighting to build on the
tops of Houses and Chimneys, as is usual to be seen in Germany; so well pleased
are they with the society of men! One reason of his being so highly esteemed of
in Thess^ly and Egypt, was his great service he did them in killing of
Serpents, and other venomous Creatures. Pliny calls him Ciconia; and says, that
from the Stork Ibis, men first learned to purge by Clyster; for with his Bill
he conveyeth Salt Water up into his own Fundament, and so purges himself. Some
have vainly reported, that Storks will live only in Republics, which is a
pretty conceit to advance the opinion of popular Policies, and from antipathies
in Nature to disparage Monarchial Government; but it is altogether false, as
appears by their living in Egypt and Thessaly, Places governed by Kings.

[8] The Eagle-stone, or Aetites, is a Stone of diverse colors, in so much that
the colors of other Gems are not sufficient for it: sometimes it is black with
white and yellow veins; sometimes it is as it were sprinkled with blood; and (
Proteus-like) of so many colors, that one would scarce believe it were one and
the same Stone. Many other Authors as well as Philostratus write, that Eagles
lay it in their Nests to preserve their young from Poison. And Pyrrhus, King of
Epirus, had one of these Gems in a Ring, wherein were the nine Muses to be
seen, and Apollo with his Harp, not engraven by Art, says Pliny, (lib. 37. chapter
1.) sed sponte natura ita discurrentibus maculis. He (in the same Book) shows
the diverse kinds of this Stone, chapter 10. affirming, that it is good against the
poison and stinging of Scorpions; and is supposed to procure Eloquence, and
make men fair: Scalig. Exerc. 117. Of its power to promote Delivery, or
restrain Abortion, see Brown's Vulg. Err. lib. 2.

[9] Dolphins; than the Dolphin (called by some King of the Fishes) there is
not any more swift, none more charitable to his Fellows, and (which is above
all the rest) none more loving to men. Pliny (lib. 9. chapter 8.) has written much
of this Fish: and so also have others; affirming, that he is not only sociable,
and desirous of man's company, but very much delighted with Music: however I
shall not lay any stress on that Story of Arion, which is no other than a
Fable. Now besides those things related in Pliny, of a Boy feeding a Dolphin;
and carried on his Back over the Waters to School, etc. othe^s have likewise
written things to the same purpose: Amongst the rest, Aelian tells this Story
of a Dolphin and a Boy: that a Boy being very fair, used with his Companions,
to play by the Seaside, and to wash themselves in the Water, practicing
likewise to swim: which being perceived by a Dolphin who frequented that Co^st,
the Dolphin fell into a great liking of this Boy above the rest, and used very
familiarly to swim by him side by side. The Boy at first was timorous of his
unwonted Companion, but through custom, he and the Dolphin grew so familiar,
that they would be frequent Antagonists in the Art of Swimming: in so much that
sometimes the Boy would get on the Dolphin's Back, and ^ide through the watery
Territories of Neptune's Kingdom, and the Dolphin at all times would bring him
safe to sh^^r; whereof the people in the adjoining City were frequently
eyewitnesses. At last it happened that the Boy, being uncareful how he sat on
the Fishes Back, unadvisedly laying h^s Belly too close, was by the sharp
pricks growing there, wounded to death: which the Dolphin perceiving by the
weight of his Body, and by the blood which stained the Waters, that the Boy was
dead, he speedily swimmed to shore, where laying himself down, he died for
grief. That Dolphins are crooked, is not only affirmed by the Hand of the
Painter, but commonly conceived to be their natural and proper Figure: when
besides the expressions of Ovid and Pliny, their Pourtraicts in some ancient
Coyns are so framed* as will appear by some in Gesner, others in Gol^sius, and
Laevinus Hulfius, in his description of Coy^s, from Julius Caesar to Rhodolphus
the second. However that great Naturalist Sir Thomas Brown (in his Vulg. Err.
lib. 5.) is of opinion, that the natural Figure of Dolphins is straight, nor
have their Spine convexed, or more considerably embowed, than Sharks, Porposes,
Whales, and other cetaceous Animals, as Scaliger plainly affirms: Corpus
habet non mag^^ Curvum, qu^m reliqui Pisces. Likewise Ocular enquiry informs
the same.

[10] Whales; the Whale is the biggest Fish that swims in the Sea, in so much
that Job (chapter 41. ver. 33.) says, In the Earth there is nothing like him. His
Jaws are resembled to D^ors, ver. 14. his Scales to Shields* ver. 15. Out of
his Nostrils goes smoke, as out of a seething Pot, or Ca^ldron, ver. 20. He
makes the Sea to ^oyl like a Pot, ver. 31. Munster (in his Cosmograph.)
writes, that near unto Iseland there be great Whales, whose magnitude
equalizes the Mountains, which are sometimes publicly seen; and these (says
he) will drown and overthrow Ships, except they be affrighted with the sound of
Drums and Trumpets, or except some round and empty Vessel be cast unto them,
wherewith they may play and sport themselves, being much delighted with such
things. But above all, this he affirms to be a good Remedy against such
dangerous Whales, viz. that which the Apothecaries call Castoreum, tempered
with Water, and cast into the Sea; for by this, as by a Poison, they are driven
to the bottom and destroyed. Other Authors mention far greater Whales than
these: and Olans Magnus (lib. 21.) writes, that there are several kinds of
Whales; some rough-skinned and bristled, which contain in length 240 foot, and
in breadth 120. Others are smooth, plain, and less, being taken in the North
and Western Ocean. Some again have Jaws with long and terrible Teeth, of 12 and
14 feet in length; and the two dog-Teeth are far longer than the rest, like the
Tusks of a Boar or Elephant. Pliny writes of a little Fish called Musculus,
which is a great Friend to the Whale; for the Whale being big, would many times
endanger her self betwixt Rocks, were it not for this little Fish who directs
her Conduct. Of the Whale see more in Pliny, Ola^s Magnus, and Swan's Speculum
Mundi.

[11] Sea-Calves: there be Sea-Cows and Calves, so called, because they do much
resemble such kind of Creatures living on the Land: the Sea-Cow is a great,
strong, and fierce Monster; brings forth young like her self: she is said to
be big ten months, and then delivered, sometimes of two, but oftenest she has
but one, and this follows her wheresoever she goes. Olaus writes, that the
Sea-Calf is a great devourer of Herrings.

CHAP. VIII. Whether that be true which some speak concerning the breeding of
Vipers: Hence that Iambick of Euripides, That the Children of all men are their
very Soul, altered by Philostratus into this sentence, That the young ones of
all living Creatures are their very Soul: Likewise the Reason why the least
Elephants are the Guides in passing over Rivers: What Juba wrote concerning
them: Then concerning the River its passage and breadth.
LEt us not assent (O Damis) to that foolish Story, which says, that [1]
Vipers are bred without a Dam; which neither Nature does admit of, nor
Experience justify. Whereunto Damis replied, Will you then give me leave to
[2] commend Euripides for that Iambick, where he brings in Andromacha
speaking thus: The Children of all men are their Soul?
Eurip. I grant it, said Apollonius; for it seems to be wisely and divinely
spoken: but he had spoken more wisely and truly, if he had extended that
saying to all living Creatures. You seem then (said Damis) willing to have the
Verse expressed in this manner: The young ones of all living Creatures are
their Soul. Herein I assent unto you; for it is better. But (said he) did we
not in the beginning of this Discourse say of Elephants, that there is a Wisdom
and Understanding in what they do? We said so indeed, replied Apollonius, and
it is very probable; for did not a Mind govern this Animal, neither would he be
produced, nor the Nations themselves exist, where these Creatures are bred. Why
then, said Damis, do they swim over so foolishly to so little advantage to
themselves? for the least of all (as you see) leads the way, and he that is
somewhat bigger follows him, after him another, and the greatest of all last;
whereas it seems requisite that they should observe a contrary order, that
the biggest should be made as it were the Ramparts and Bulwarks of the rest.
But Damis, said he, first they seem to fly the pursuit of men, whom we shall
meet following them by the print of their feet; wherefore it is very necessary
that the Rear should be well guarded, as we see is the custom in War: and you
must imagine this Creature to be the greatest observer of Tacticks of all
Beasts. Besides, should the biggest of them swim over first, their passing over
would be no sign to judge by of the depth of the Water, whether all of them
could be able to do the like; for perhaps they might easily pass through as
being taller, whereas these could not possibly do so, as being unable to
overcome the depth of the Water: but after the least of them has passed, it is
evident there is an easy passage for the rest. Moreover, should the biggest go
before, they would make the Channel deeper for the less, the mud yielding and
making Ditches with the very weight and greatness of their feet; whereas the
lesser are no whit prejudicial to the passage of the bigger, in that they make
a less Cavity in the River. Furthermore, I have found in the Writings of Juba,
how the Elephants help one another in their being hunted, and defend him that
faints; when if they bring him off, they stand about him, and anoint him with
the tears of Aloes, as if they were Physicians. Many such like things they
Philosophically discoursed of together, taking occasion from such passages as
seemed most worthy their remark. As for the things related by [3] Nearchus and
Pythagoras, concerning the River [4] Arcesinus, how running into the River
Indus, it bears Serpents of seventy cub^^^ length, they say they are so, as
it is by them reported. But we will adjourn the Relation of this Matter, to that
place where we intend to speak of Dragons, of whom Damis discourses, showing
in what manner they are taken. Now being arrived near the Banks of Indus, and
ready to pass the River, they asked the Babylonian their Guide, whether he was
acquainted with the Passage? who answered, He had never forded over it, nor
knew where it was fordable. Why then (said they) did yo^ not hire a Guide?
There is one (answered he) b^ne present who will direct you* which having said,
he showed them a Letter that should do it; for which, they say, Vardanes was
much admired for his kindness and care of them: in as much as he had written
this Letter to the Governor that was set over the River Indus, although he was
not in sub^ection to his Jurisdiction, recounting therein the many Favors he
had showed him, but not desiring any recompense, for that 'twas not his custom
so to do; only telling him, that if he did entertain Apollonius, and ^onvey him
whith^rsoever he pleased, he should acknowledge the courtesy. He had also
given Gold to the G^ide, that if he perceived Apollonius stood in need of any
thing, he should furnish him with it, that so he might not be put to ask it of
others. Wherefore the Indian receiving the Letter, said, he did much esteem it*
and that he wo^ld show no less respect to Apollonius, than if he had been
recommended to him by the King of the Indians* Accordingly he sent his own
Barge, wherein he himself was used to be was^ed, together with Vessels to c^rry
over his Camels. He likewise furnished him with a Guide for all that Country
which Hydraotes boundeth; and wrote to his own King, that he would be pleased
to show as much courtesy toward this Greek, who was a wise and divine man, as
King Vardanes had done. By this means therefore they passed the River Indus,
whose breadth where it is navigable reaches about forty Furlongs. Concerning
this River it is thus related* that it rises out of Mount Caucasus, and
runs with a greater Current than an^ River in Asia, in his passage receiving
in many Rivers* tha^ are navigable; likewise th^^ i^ [5] ove^floweth India like
to Nilus, leaving a great deal of Mud on the Land, which gives opportunity to
the Indians to s^we their Seed after the manner of the Egyptians.

Illustrations on Chap. 8.
VIp^rs ^re bred, etc. The Viper has a Body long and slender like an Eel or
Snake; a broad Head, with red flaming Eyes: As for his Teeth, they be enclosed
(as it were) (...) little Bladder, in which he carries his Poison, from thence
infusing it into the Wound (...) he has bitten* Pliny (lib. 10. chapter 62.)
writes, that when the Vipers engender* ^he Male pu^teth his Head into the
Females Mouth, which ^he (being overcome with the pleasure of Copulation)
biteth off; affirming moreover, that their young use to gnaw themselves out of
their Dams Belli^s, which put an end both to Male and Female* the one ^n time
of Conception, the other in time of Birth: and are therefore called Vipers, a
vi pa, riendo* Nevertheless Aristotle (Hist. Animal. lib. ^. cap. ultim) ^aith,
that the Viper puts forth her young ones infolded in a Membrane, which
breaks forth the third day^* and that also sometimes those which are within
the Bel^y issue forth* having gnawn asunder the fore^aid Membrane. Nichol^us
Damascenus, as also Strabo, make mention of Vipers sixteen Cubits long. Of this
Serpent is made that excellent cordial Wine called Viper-Wine, so effectual in
curing Leprosies, Surfeits, etc. Of the Viper's manner of Birth, see Brown's
Vulg. Err lib. 3.

[2] To commend Euripides; the Verse which Andromache speaks, is this: (...).
Concerning this Tragedy of Andromache in Euripides, the Intrigue is: That this
Princes^, after she had lost her Husband Hector, had seen her Father Priam
murdered, and the chief City of his Kingdom bur^t, became a Slave to
Neop^ol^mus. Now Hermione, the Wife of this Prince, being enraged with
jealousy against Andromache, determined to kill her: whereupon Menelaus,
Father of Hermione, causes her with her Son Astya^ax to be dragged to
Execution. And this is the Result of the Plot. As for Euripides, he was the Son
of one Mnesarchus and Clito, and had not (as some have reported) a seller of
Herbs for his Mother: Suidas vindicates him from the disparagement of so mean a
Descent, asserting, that he was of noble Birth, as Philochorus well
demonstrates. He was born on that very day wherein Xerxes was defeated by the
Athenians. He flourished in the time of Archelaus, King of Macedon, by whom he
was highly esteemed. He was at first a Painter, but afterward became most
eminent in writing Tragedies. For Rhetoric, he was the Scholar of Prodicus;
and for Philosophy, the Auditor both of Socrates and Anaxagoras. He sometimes
disputed with Plato; and traveled into Egypt, to be informed of the Wisdom of
their Priests; as Laertius testifies. His Name Euripides he took from Euripus;
but for his Austerity they called him, (...), a hater of Women: for as Suidas
^ffirms, he was a married man, and had two Wives, being divorced from the first
for her Unchastity; neither found he the second more loyal to his Bed. He died
in the 75th. year of his Age, being the 93d. Olympiad, and was torn in pieces
by Dogs, as Valerius Maximus and Gellius write: or rather, as Suidas has it,
was devoured in the night by barbarous and bloody Women. The Athenians
grievously lamented his death. He wrote 75 Tragedies, for every year he lived a
Tragedy: whereof he obtained five Victories, four in his lifetime, and one
after his death, his Brother's Son being the Actor of that Tragedy. It is a
great Question which was the better Poet, he or Sophocles, though they went a
different way. Quintilian says, That all moral Philosophy i^ comprehended in
the Verses of Euripides. And Heinsi^s speaking of him says, Omnium Oratorum
non minus Pater, quam optimus Poeta. Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, were
the three chief Princes of the Tragic Style, who exhibited to the people every
year their Poems at some public Solemnities, striving who should get the
victory by the approbation of the Judges, who (as we may gather from Plutarch
vita Cimoni^) were ten in number, and called (...), or (...). So highly
esteemed were these three Po^ts by the Ancients, that by a Law made by
Lycurgus, and ratified in Athens, Aeschyl^^, Sophocles, and Euripides, had
their Statues erected in Brass, for the continuation of their memory. Neither
were any permitted to act their Tragedies, without first reci^ing them to the
public Scribe: Plut. vi^a 10 Rhet. Euripides was the first who set out the
Argument of the Fable in the beginning of the Tragedy, leading the Auditor (as
it were) by the hand, to the last and principal point of that one Action which
he would represent. The several other Judgments that have passed upon this
Author I shall omit, and only touch upon some few Reflections made on him by
that ingenious modern Critic, Monsieur Rapin, in his Reflections on
Aristotle's Poesy, which is lately rendered into the English Tongue by the no
less judicious Mr. R^ymer; his Observations are these: How much does Euripides
teach us to contemn the Favors and Grandeurs of this World, in the Character
of his unhappy Queen Hecuba, who so pathetically deplores her Misfortunes? How
do^^ he wean us from the unguided Passion of a too violent Love, by his Fable
of (...) where the Passion of Phaedra for her Son-in-law, causes the
Misfortunes of (...) and the Disorders of Theseus's Family? What a compassion
for Virtue does the same Fable inspire us with, when one cannot see Hypp^litus
die by the Plot of his Stepmother Phaedra, without being highly touched
therewith, since he was a Martyr only for Chastity and Virtue? How agreeable
are all his words and persons with their Characters? Polyxena and Ipbigenia
truly generous. How conformable are his very thoughts, as well to the Persons
as Subjects whereon he treats? Thus Queen Evad^^, (in the Suppliants of
Euripides) after the death of her Husband Capane^s, may be seen to express all
the extremity of her grief by force of a sorrow, the most generous that ever
was, her affliction oppresses her, without extorting one word from her, that
betrays the least weakness. Nay, rather than be guilty of any undecent
passionate Clamours, he makes Hecuba fall into a Swound on the Stage, thereby
the better to express all the weight of her sorrow, which could not be
represented by words. The narration of the death of Polyxena in his Hecuba is
the most lively and moving in the World. The Tragedies of Euripides have more
of Action, of Morality, and of wonderful Incidents, than those of Sophocles.
Nevertheless, Euripides is not exact in the contrivance of his F^bles; his
Characters want variety; he falls often into the same thoughts on the same
Adventures; he is not enough a R^ligious observer of Decencies; and by a too
great affectation to be moral and sententious, he is not so ardent and
passionate as he ought to be: for this reason, he goes not to the heart so much
as Sophocles; there are precipitations in the preparation of his Incidents, as
in the Suppliants, where Theseus levies an Army, marches from Athens to Thebes,
and returns on the same day. The discoveries of his Plots are nothing natural,
but perpetual Machins: Diana makes the discovery in the Tragedy of Hippolytus;
Min^rv^, that of Iphigenia in Ta^rica* Th^ti^, that of Andr^mache; Cast^r and
Pollux, that of Helena and Electra; and so of others. Lastly, Aristotle
conde^^s Euripides, for introducing Menalippa, to speak too much like a
Philosopher, of the Sect of Anaxag^ras, whose Opinions were in his time but new.

[3] Related by Nearchus; this Nearchus was an Officer in Alexander's Army,
whom Arrianus mentions in his 8th. Book concerning the Deeds of Alexander.

[4] The River Arcesinus; of this River see Piiny, lib. 6. chapter 20. who speaks
but to the same purpose as does our Author Phil^strat^^.

[5] Overfloweth India like to Nilus; as Gang^s and Indus are the most famous
Rivers of Asia, and Danubius of Europe, so is Nilus of Africa, which as
Diodor^s (lib. 1.) writes* takes its Name from one Nileus, King of Egypt;
Eustathius says, it is so called from Nilus, the Nephew of Atlantis; but the
most general opinion of the Learned is, that (...) is derive^ from (...), quod
(...) i. e. novum limum singulis annis mittat. Of this River of Nile two things
have been much disputed among the Ancients, viz. its several Ostiaries, and the
true cause of its Inundation. First, For its several Ostiaries; Homer has
given no number of its Channels, nor we the Names thereof, in use wit^ all
Historians. Eratosthe^es in his description of Egypt has likewise passed them
over. Aristotle is so indistinct in their Names and Numbers, that in the first
of his M^teors he plainly affirms, the Region of Egypt (which we esteem the
ancientest N^tion in the World) was a mere gained ground, and that by the
settling of mud and limous matter, brought down by the River Nilus, that which
was at first a continued Sea, became raised at last into a firm and habitable
Country. Herodotus in his E^terpe makes mention of (...) in his Geography
naming but two* Pele^fi^eum and Canopicum, plainly affirms, ^^ere were more
than seven: There are (says he) many remarkable Towns within the Currents of
Nile, especially such which have given the Names unto the Osti^ries thereof;
not unto all* for they are eleven, and four besides, but unto seven, the most
considerable; that is, Canopicum, Bolbitinum, Selenneticum, Sebenneticum,
Pharniticum, Mendesium, Taniticum, and Pelusium. Ptolomy, an Egyptian, born at
the Pelusian mouth of the Nile, makes nine. Hondius in his Map of Africa makes
but eight, and in that of Europe ten. And Ortelius in his Map of the Turki^^
Empire sets down eight, in that of Egypt eleven. But Maginus, Gulielmus
Tyrius, and Bellonius, as well as all modern Geographers and Travelers say,
there are now but three or four mouths belonging to the River Nile. For below
Grand Cairo the River divides it sel^ into four branches, whereof two make the
chief and navigable Streams; the one running to Pelusium, which is now called
Damiata; the other to Canopium, that at present is named Roscetta: the other
two (says Mr. Sandys) ^un between these, and are inconsiderable. See Brown's
Vulg. Err. lib. 6. The Ancients were much in the dark concerning the Head of
this River, as appears by all the Writings as well of their Poets as
Historians: Nile pater, quanam possum te dicere causa,
Aut quibus in ^erris occuluisse caput?
Tibull. 1, 7. Ar^anum ^^ura caput non prodidit ulli,
Ne^ licuit populis pa^vum te, Nile, videre.
Amovitque sinus, and gentes maluit ortus
Mirari, quam nosse (...). --
Lucan, lib. 10. Te fontium qui celat origines
Nilus. --
Horat. lib. 4. Od. 14. Therefore Ammianus Marcellinus* (lib. 22.) says,
Origines fontium Nili, ut mihi quidem videri solet, ficut adbuc factum est,
posterae quoque ignor (...) aetates. Also Sido^. Apollin. in Panegyr* Aviti:.
-- Ignotui^ plus notus, Nile per (...)* S^^ostris, Cambyses, Alexander,
Philadelphus and Nero, made great enquiries after the Original of this River,
but all in vain; till of late (as Dr. Hakewil in his Apology, lib. 3.) says,
the head Spring of Nilus appears to be in vast Marshes, near the Mountains of
the Moon, not far from the Cape of Good-hope, where is the utmost Bound of the
Continent.

Secondly, For the Cause of the Nile's Inundation, there are various Opinions,
and various Reasons given: Diodorus, Seneca, Strabo, and others, upon good
grounds believed, that the Inundation of Nilus proceeded from the Rains in
Aethiopia, and the mighty source of Waters falling toward the Fountains
thereof. For this Inundation unto the Egyptians happens, when it is Winter
with the Aethiopians, where, although they have no cold Winter, (the Sun being
no farther removed from them in Cancer, than to us in Taurus) yet is the
fervor of the Air so well remitted a^ it admits a sufficient generation of
Vapors, and plenty of Showers ensuing thereon. This Theory of the Ancients is
likewise since confirmed by Experience of the Moderns, as Franciscus Alvarez;
Antonius Ferdinandus, and others; and is undoubtedly the most rational account
that is given thereof. That the Cause of the Increase of Nilus was the melting
of the Snow, and fleeting thereof from the tops of the Mountains of Aethiopia,
was the opinion not only of Auaxagora^, Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides,
but (as Seneca says) of the whole Body of Antiquity, in (...) opinione omnis
v^tustas suit, Nar. Qu. 4, 13. (...)
(...)
(...).
In Helen. Euripid. But this opinion, as I conceive, is very improbable, for
that the heat of the Ethiopian Climate will not so easily admit of Snow, as
Rain; as Philostratus well observes in the ensuing Chapter; at least of so vast
a quantity, as would be sufficient to produce so great an Inundation: Therefore
Lucan with good Reason calls it a vain opinion: Vana fides veterum, Nilo, quod
crescat in arva,
Aethiopum prodesse nives, etc. --
Lib. 10. Lucan. Pharsal. Neither do I know any of the modern Authors adhere to
this opinion, unless it be Cardan.

Again, Thales attributed the overflowing of the Nile to the Etesian Blasts,
which are Easternly Winds that blow yearly about the Dog Days. Of this opinion
was Pliny, (...) Marcellinus, lib. 22. and Lucretius: Nilus in aestate crescit,
campisque redundat
Vnicus in terris Aegypti totius amnis.
I^ rigat Aegyptum, medium persaepe calorem:
Aut quia sunt aestate Aquilones Ostia contra
Anni tempore eo quo Etesia flabra feruntur,
Et contra fluvium flantes remorantur, and undas
Cogentes rursus replent, coguntque manner.
Lib. 6. de rerum Not. For the Increase and Inundation of Nile, beginning at
the Summer Solstice, and this River running directly from South to North, from
one Tropic to another, which is just the middle part of the Earth, when it
comes to incline its Axis, and return the Antarctick part to the Sun, the
Stream of this River, which is contrary to that motion, waxes slower; and being
moreover augmented, by the continual Rains of Summer that descend from
Aethiopia, swells and overflows the Plains of Egypt: which made many of the
Ancients imagine, that the Etesian Winds blew against the Stream at that time,
and forced the Water back upon themselves. But Scaliger rejects this as a
childish opinion. Democritus thought, that the Etesian Winds blowing the Snow
from the North parts of Ethiopia, occasioned this Increase of the Nile.
Herodotus (as we find in Diodorus) imputed it to the very nature of the River,
which as it sunk in the Winter, when the Sun went away into Lybia, so did it
rise again in the Summer at the Sun's return. Ephorus says, it was the Sweat
of the Land, which evaporating with the heat of the Summer, occasioned the rise
of the Water. These and many other opinions there are (...) the Nile's
overflowing, of all which, the first I here mentioned is most generally
^^^eiv'd and approved, viz. that it proceeds from the Ethiopian Rains. Now for
the time when this Inundation happens, some affirm, that it constantly
increases on the 17th. day of (...); wherein perhaps a larger speech were
safer, than that which punctually prefixeth a day certain: for this expression
is different from the Ancients, as Herodotus, Diodorus, Seneca, etc. who
deliver only, that it happens about the entrance of the Sun into Cancer;
wherein they warily express themselves, and reserve a reasonable Latitude.
Again, Were the day definitive herein, it had prevented the delusion of the
Devil, nor could he have gained applause by its prediction; who notwithstanding
(as Athanasius in the Life of Anthony relates) to magnify his knowledge in
things to come, when he perceived the Rains to fall in Aethiopia, would presage
unto the Egyptians, the day of its Inundation. And this would also render
useless that natural Experiment observed in Earth or Sand about the River, by
the weight whereof, (as Mr. George Sandyes the Traveller, Alpinus a Physician,
Marchitus the French Consul, Elianus a Jesuit, Varrat an Englishman, and others
report) they have unto this day a knowledge of its Increase. Moreover, the
effects of this Inundation cannot be prognosticable with the same certainty as
Eclipses, for that it totally depends upon the Clouds, and descent of Showers
in Aethiopia, which having their generation from uncertain vapourous
Exhalations, must submit their existence to contingencies, and endure
Anticipation or recession from the moveable condition of their Causes:
Therefore (as many conceive) there have been some years without any Increase at
all, as the years of Famine under Pharaoh, and the like, as Seneca, and diverse
relate of the 11th. year of Cleopatra; not nine years together, as is testified
by Calisthenes. Some years it has also retarded, and came far later than
usually it was expected, as according to Sozomen and Nicephorus, it happened in
the days of Theodosius; whereat the people were ready to mutiny, because they
might not sacrifice to the River, according to the custom of their
Predecessors. For the fertility of the Egyptian Ground, occasioned by this
Rivers Inundation, I refer you to Monsieur Vanseleb, and other modern Authors*
whereof being absent from my own Study, I want the present perusal: Te propter
nullos tellus tua postulat imbres,
Arida nec pluvio supplicat berba Iovi.
Tibull. Lib. 1. Eleg. 7.

CHAP. IX. Of the Snows that are said to run down out of Ethiopia; and the
Hills Catadupi: Of the Sea-Horses and Crocodiles: The great Heats of India, and
how they are abated: Their Arrival at Taxilla, the Royal City: The Habit of the
Indians: Whence Silk grows: A very great Temple erected before the City,
wherein ar^ many Rarities, as the Tables concerning the Acts of Alexander and
Porus, so artificially done, that one would judge them to be the Works of
Zeuxis, Polygnotus, or Euphranor: Also of the Fight betwixt Alexander and Porus.
AS for the [1] Snows of the Ethiopians, and the Hills [2] Catadupi, I think
not fit to gainsay them, in respect to their Authority who have related such
things. Yet do I not assent to their Relations, considering with my self, how
it could be possible that [5] Indus should do like Nilus, since the Region that
lies above it, is not covered with Snow. Besides I know, that God has set the
Indians and Aethiopians as the utmost Horns of the Earth, and made both
swarthy, the one at the Eastern, the other at the Western part of the World;
which could not be, unless they were both warm in the Winter: and if the Sun be
hot there all the year, how is it possible that Snow should breed there? or
that it should be in so vast a quantity, as when they melt, to cause so great
Rivers to overflow? And if the Snow should descend into places so exposed to
the Sun, how it should be spread into so great a Sea? or how it should suffice
for a River to overflow all Egypt? In their passage over Indus they say, that
they met with many [3] Sea-horses, and many [4] Crocodiles, like them that swim
in Nilus. They likewise relate, that such Flowers grow about Indus, as about
Nilus; and that the Seasons of the year are in India warm at Winter, but at
Summer stifling: nevertheless they say, that God has well provided against
this, by causing much Rain to fall there. Furthermore they report, that they
have heard the Indians say, that the King (when the Seasons of the year call
him to it) goes to the River, and offers up Horses and black Bulls to it in
Sacrifice: for the Indians prefer the black color before the white* by reason
(as I suppose) of their own Complexion. After the Sacrifice is ended, they say,
the King sinketh a [6] golden Measure (like to that wherein they measure Corn)
into the River, and that the Indians do not certainly know for what end this is
done: but they suppose that the Measure is so sunk, either for the plenty of
those Fruits which Husbandmen measure with it, or for the moderation of the
River, that it might not too much overflow the Country. Now having passed the
River, the Guide whom the Governor had given them, led them the direct way to
Taxilla, where the King's Palace is. Moreover they report, that the men which
dwell by the River Indus, are clothed with Linen of that Country, and Shoes
made of the Bark of Trees, also a kind of Hat against the Rain. But persons of
greater quality go clad in [7] Silk, which they report, grows on Trees, like
a white Asp for growth, and Leaves like those of the Sallow. Apollonius said,
he was pleased with the Silk, in that it resembled the duskish Philosophical
[8] Pallium: this Silk, they say, is brought out of India into Egypt, for many
of their sacred Rites. As for Taxilla, they say, it is for bigness to be
compared with the old Ninus, and walled proportionably, as the rest of the
Greek Cities are: it was the Royal Seat of Mander, who governed that [9]
Kingdom, which was formerly ruled by Porus. Before the Walls they saw a Temple
erected, about an hundred feet high, of Or Shellstone.
purple-colour'd Stone, wherein stood a Chapel, though less than a Temple, yet
so large, and so beset with Pillars, that it was worthy of admiration. There
were several brazen Tables hanging on the Walls, whereon were written the [10]
Deeds of Alexander and Porus. Their Acts were engraven on Copper, Silver, Gold,
and black Brass, together with Elephants, Horses, Soldiers, Helmets, and
Shields. But the Lances, Darts, and Swords, were all made of Iron; and so
artificially engraved, as if it were the Work of [11] Zeuxie, [12] Polygnotus,
or [13] Euphranor, who were able to express the shadows, breath, descents, and
ascents of things: so they say it appeared there, the several matters being
inserted into the Pictures instead of Colors. Nor was it an unpleasant sight,
to discover the King's disposition by the Picture. For Porus set up the said
Table in the Chapel, after the death of Alexander, though Alexander be therein
described as conquering and restoring Porus, whom he had wounded in Fight, and
conferring upon him the Region of India as his own. Furthermore it is reported,
that Porus wept and lamented at the death of Alexander, as being a brave and
generous Prince. Likewise, after Alexander was departed out of India, Porus
never spoke any thing as a King, though Alexander permitted it; nor did he rule
the Indians as a King, but as a Deputy; doing and speaking all things very
modestly to the honor of Alexander. I cannot in reason here omit what is
related of Porus: for upon the entrance of Alexander into India, when some of
Porus's Friends advised him to make a defensive League wi^^ those that dwelt
near Ganges and [14] Hypasis, in as much as Alexander was not likely to engage
against all India, if he perceived the Inhabitants unite together; Porus
answered, If my Subjects be such, that I cannot be safe without the help of
Associates, it will be better for me to lay down my Kingdom. To one that said
Darius was called a King, Porus made Answer, But not a Man. When the Groom had
brought the Elephant whereon Porus was to ride, and sa^^ to him, This Elephant
(Oh King) will carry you; nay, rather (said Porus) I will carry him, if my
strength equal my stature. To one who advised him to sacrifice to the River,
that he might not receive the Macedonian Ships, nor afford a passage to
Alexander, Porus replied, It is not decent for them that take Arms, to
imprecate Curses. After the Battle, (wherein Alexander judged him to be a
divine man, and far exceeding humane Nature) when one of Porus's Frien^s told
him, That if he had humbled himself to Alexander, he had not been overcome in
Battle, neither had he caused so many of the Indians to be slain, nor been
wounded himself; the Answer of Porus was this: When I heard how Alexander was
more ambitious than other men, I thought that he would esteem me a base Slave,
if I humbled my self before him; whereas if I manfully opposed him, he would
esteem me a King, and rather worthy of admiration, than pity: neither indeed
was I mistaken; for showing my self to be such a man as Alexander saw me to be,
I in one and the same day both lost and recovered all I had. Such an one
Historians report Porus to have been; also, that he was the most lovely man of
all the Indians, and of so large a stature, as no man had been since the [15]
Trojan Worthies; likewise, that he was very young when he fought with Alexander.

Illustrations on Chap. 9.
[1] SNows; Snow is a Cloud congealed by excessive Cold, before it be perfectly
resolved from Vapors into Water: for if it should come to the density of Water
before the Congelation, then could it not fall so like locks of Wool as it
does, but would be more closely compacted or joined together, having little or
no spunginess in it. There is little difference between the matter of Snow, and
the matter of Rain and Hail; excepting (as some think) that the vapor for Snow
is of an hotter quality than the vapor for Rain, and yet not so hot as that
which is the material cause of Hail. For it is a Tenet among Philosophers, that
hot things being cooled are apter for Congelation than cold; as is seen in warm
Water taken from the fire, which will more suddenly and thoroughly be frozen,
than that which never felt the heat. And this comes to pass, in regard of the
pores or passages made into the Water through Heat, into which the Cold
entering, it both cools it sooner, and congealeth it the more. Neither is
there any difference between white Frost and Snow; excepting that Frost is made
of a Vapor before it be turned into a Cloud; and Snow of a Cloud before it be
turned into Water.

[2] Hills of Catadupi, etc. Catadupa (so called from (...), Cataracta) is a
place in Aethiopia, where Nilus falls from between two Mountains with so
great a noise, that the Catadupi or Inhabitants that dwell near are made deaf
therewith. Of this see Pliny, lib. 5. chapter 9. Senec. Not. Q^. 4, 2. Ammian.
Marcell. lib. 22. Vitruvius, lib. 8. chapter 2. Heliodor. lib. 2.

[3] Sea-horses; Equus-marinus, the Seahorse, is so called, because he has a
Head like an Horse, and will sometimes neigh; his Feet are cloven like to the
Feet of a Cow, but his Tail and hinder parts are like to other Fishes. He seeks
his Repast as well on the Land as Sea. In the Northern Seas he will sometimes
sleep upon a piece of Ice, as it floateth upon the Waters; and seldom do the
Fishermen desire to take him but only out of wantonness, when they want other
Sport, or have taken few Whales. This Sea Monster is most frequently seen
between Britain and Norway. Olaus Magn. lib. 21.

[4] Crocodiles are commonly found about the River Nilus in Egypt, and Ganges
in India; and later Discoveries affirm, that they are not only in Asia and
Africa, but very frequent in some Rivers of America. They inhabit as well the
Land as Water, and live almost as long as men. Munster (in his Cosmograph.)
writes, that of a little thing he waxes to be a very great Beast: in so much
that in the History of Congo, we read of one Crocodile that eat up nine Slaves
for his Breakfast. Purch. Pilgrimage, lib. 7. chapter 9. Gieza says, that in the
Province of Dariene, in the South part of America, a Crocodile was found 25
feet long. Ibid. lib. 9. chapter 1. His Eggs are like unto Goose Eggs, but the
young which comes of them takes increase to 16 or 18 cubits in length.
Strange it is (if true) that they tell, of the number of 60 in this Beast; as
that his Age is 60 years, his Teeth 60. his Eggs and days of Hatching 160. his
Back is hard, and full of Scales; his Teeth exceeding sharp, whereof two be far
more terrible than the other, and much longer. Aristotle says, that Crocodiles
have no Tongues; but Experience proves this to be false, for their Tongues are
very short, flat, and broad; his Eyes are said to be very dull in the Water,
but mavelous quick-sighted when he is out of it, his Tail extends it self to
a great length; his Bitings are so sharp and cruel, that they can never be
healed; his Feet are short, but Claws or Nails very sharp, wherewith he helps
to catch and dis-member either Man or Beast, which he can lay hold on:
nevertheless it is said, that he flies from those that persecute him, and
persecutes those that fly him. Aelian (Var. Hist. lib. 1.) says, that the
Egyptian Dogs are so fearful of him, that they use to lap their Water running,
when they come at the Nile, for fear of the Crocodiles there. And Munster
writes, that when this Serpent has devoured a man, and eaten up all but his
Head, he will sit and weep over it, as if he repented him of the cruelty of the
act, whereas indeed he weeps for want of such another prey: from hence came the
Proverb of Lachrymae Crecodili, Crocodiles Tears. In Pegu Crocodiles are
accounted Holy. Strabo writes, that he saw in the Nomus, or Shire of Arsinoe,
divine Honor given to a Crocodile, who being kept tame in a certain Lake by
the Priests, and named Suchus, was nourished with Bread, Wine, and Flesh, which
the Pilgrims that came to visit him offered. Thus the Ombites esteemed
themselves favored of their Crocodile God, if he filled his Paunch with the
flesh and blood of their dearest Children. And King Menas built a City called
Crocodilopolis, and dedicated the adjacent Fens to their sustenance.
Nevertheless we read, that in some Parts of China, and elsewhere, the Natives
feed upon Crocodiles.

[5] That Indus should do like Nilus, etc. This Annual Inundation is proper to
many other Rivers besides Nile; as to many Currents of Africa: for about the
same time the River Niger and Zair do overflow; and so do the Rivers beyond the
Mountains of the Moon, as Suama, and Spirito Santo. And not only these in
Africa, but some also in Europe and Asia, as Menan in India, and Duina in
Livo^ia; the same also is observable of the River Jordan in Judea, that it
overflows all his Banks in the time of Harvest: Josh. 3.

[6] The King sinketh a golden Measure into the River; this Custom has some
resemblance to the Duke of Venice's marrying the Sea with a golden Ring, which
he once a year casts into the same with much solemnity: being accompanied with
the Senate and Chief of the City to the mouth of the Venetian Gulf, where this
Ceremony is performed.

[7] Persons of greater quality go clad in Silk, etc. which Silk is thus
described by Julius Poliux: Bissina quoque, and Bissus Lini quaedam species
apud Indos; nunc apud Aegyptios ex arbore quaedam Lana sit, ex qua vestem
confectam Lino maxim similem esse quispiam dixerit, sola densitate excepta:
densior enim ex arbore fructus en^scitur nuci similis duplici munitus cortice,
qua di^emta, postquam instar nucis floruerit, interius hoc, quod Lanam refert,
eximitur: unde jubtegmen conficitur, stamen autem illi subtenditur Lineam.

[8] Pallium; a long Robe or Mantle, such as our Knights of the Garter wear at
their In^^alment, and worn heretofore by Philosophers.

[9] That Kingdom which was formerly ruled by Porus, is thus Geographiz'd by
Strabo, lib. 15. Inter Hid^spem and Acesinem est Pori terra multa sane and
opulenta 300 Civitatum. Item Sylva prope Emodos montes ex qua Alexander multam
abietem, and Pinum, and Cedrum, and varias alias arbore^ in Hyd^^pe^^^de duxit,
ex quibus Class^m construxit juxta Vrbes in utr^que fl^min^s Ripa ab eo
conditas, ubi Porum vicit, quarum alteram Bucephalum nominavit, alteram Niceam.

[10] The Deeds of Alexander and Porus; which are at large recited in the 8th.
Book of Q. Curtius.

[11] ^e^xis; a famous Painter of Heraclea, who lived in the 95th. Olympiad,
about the time of Ar^^xer^^s M^emon, and painted Grapes so like, that the Birds
flew to feed on the^. His Competitors with whom he contended in the Art of
Painting were Timanthes, Androcydes, Eup^^^pus, and P^^^bafius. He acquired
vast Riches by his Art. See Pliny, lib. 35. chapter 10. Cicero, lib. 2. d^ Inv^nt.
and Plut. in Pericle.

[12] Polygnotus; a Thasian Painter, eminent for his great skill in Limning
Shadows, and all manner of Drapery-Work. See Quintil, lib. 12. Pliny, lib. 35.
chapter 9. Also Pausanias, and Aelian's Var. Hist.

[13] Euphranor; a famous Isthmian Statuary, who was not only skilled in making
Statues of Brass and Marble, but also in Painting. He likewise wrote several
Tracts of Proportions and Colors. He flourished in the 104th. Olympiad. Hic
aliquid praeclarum Euphranoris --
Juven. Sat. 3. See more of him in Pliny, 35, 11. ibid. 34*8.

[14] Hypasis; a River of India, see Pliny.

[15] Trojan Worthies; such as were Agamemnon, Menelaus, Achilles, Hector,
Patroclus, Idomeneus, Ajax, Stenelus, Diomedes, Prothesilaus, Troilus, Priamus,
Ulysses, Antenor, Aeneas, etc. all O^ficers, and men of Note, at the Siege of
Troy.

CHAP. X. A Discourse about Pictures and Colors; also of the Picture Ajax, the
Workmanship of Timomachus.
WHilst they stayed in the Temple, which was some time, till the King was made
acquainted with their coming, Apollonius turning himself to Damis said, Do you
think that there is any Art of Painting? Yes, said Damis, if there be any truth
of the things themselves. But what does this Art perform, said Apollonius?
Damis answered, It mixeth Colors together, as blew with green, white with
black, and red with pale. Whereto Apollonius replied, For what end does it
mingle these Colors, since it is not merely for Show? Yes, said Damis, it is
done for Imitation's sake, as to resemble a Dog, a Horse, a Ship, a Man, or any
other thing that the Sun shine^ on: it also sets forth the resemblance of
the Sun himself; sometimes as if he rode on a Chariot drawn with four Horses,
as it is said he is to be seen in this place; sometimes again as bearing a Torch
in the Heavens, when he describes the very Sky and House of the Gods:
wherefore, Oh Damis, Painting is a certain Art of Imitation, said Apollonius.
Whereto Damis answered, It is nothing else; for if Painting cannot perform
this, it will seem very ridiculous, as making Colors to no purpose. Then said
Apollonius, What will you say to those things which are used to appear upon the
separating of Clouds, as Centaurs, and A mixture of Goat and Heart.
Hirco-cervi, nay even Wolves and Horses? Are not these wrought by some Art of
Imitation? To me it seeems so, said Damis. Then will God himself be a Painter,
answered Apollonius, and leaving his winged Chariot whereon he rides, and
orders divine and humane things, he will sit a sporting and painting these
things, as Children make Shapes in the dust. Hereat Damis blushed, his
Discourse appearing to conclude in such an Absurdity. But Apollonius not
casting any Contempt upon him, (for he was not bitter in reproving) said to
him, I suppose Damis you intended not to speak any such thing; only that for as
much as concerns the Deity, those many things are carried up and down through
the Air casually, and without any intended resemblance, but that we, who
naturally have in us the principle of Imitation, do frame and devise such
Forms. Let us therefore, Oh Apollonius, rather believe it to be so, said Damis,
for this is the best and most likely opinion. Whereto Apollonius answered,
There is a twofold Art of Imitation: one whereof does with the Hand and Mind
imitate whatsoever it pleases, and this is the Art of Painting; the other does
with the Mind alone frame Similitudes* Not twofold, said Damis; but that there
is a more perfect sort of Painting, which both with Mind and Hand does express
the Similitudes of things: and that the other is but a part of the same, since
by it a man can only conceive and imitate with the Mind, being not skilled in
Painting, nor able to express things by his Hands. Is it, said Apollonius,
because his Hand has been maimed with some Blow or Distemper? No verily,
answered Damis, but because he never used to handle a Pencil, or other such
Instrument, or Colors, being unskilled in the Art of Limning. In this
therefore, said Apollonius, we both agree, that the faculty of Imitating
proceeds from Nature, but that of Painting, from Art: the same thing may also
be said of Carving and Moulding. But you seem to imagine, that a Picture it
self consists not of bare Colors, in as much as the old Painters were
contented with one Color, whereas the modern have used four, and so by degrees
a greater number. Moreover, they sometimes Limn with mere Lineaments, and
without Colors, which kind of Pictures we ought to say consist only of Shade
and Light; for in them the similitude of things appears, the Form, Mind,
Modesty, and Boldness, although such things have no Colors. And however they
express not the Blood, the color of the Hair, nor the Down on the Chin, yet do
they with one simple kind of Draught represent the similitude of a tawny or
white man. Nay, if we describe an Indian in this manner, with white Lineaments,
yet will he be conceived as swarthy: for the flatness of the Nose, erected
Curles, flaggy Cheeks, and Stupor, (as it were) about the Eyes, do blacken the
Picture, and to them that view it without judgment, demonstrate the person to
be an Indian. Wherefore without any absurdity I may aver, that they who behold
Pictures, have also need of the Imitative faculty; for none can rightly commend
a painted Horse or Bull, but he that beholds those Creatures in his Mind,
whose likeness is presented in Picture. Neither indeed can any man judiciously
view the [1] Ajax of [2] Timomachus, represented in his mad Fits, unless a man
conceive in his Mind some Idea of Ajax, and how having slain Sheep and Oxen at
Troy in his rage, he sat down by himself very pensive, consulting how to make
away with himself. But now these curious Works which were made at the Command
of Porus, are not only the Work of Graving, for they are like to Pictures; nor
on the contrary, the Work of Painting only, in that they be made of Brass: but
they were wrought by the same man, who was skilled both in Painting and
Graving, such as [3] Vulcan is represented in [4] Homer, where he describes
the making of Achille's Arms; for there every place is full of such as kill and
are killed, and you would say, that it were the very Earth colored with blood,
though it be made of Brass.

Illustrations on Chap. 10.
[1] Ajax, the Son of Telamon, by Hesione, was, next to Achilles, the most
valiant Warrier in the Grecian Army, that fought against the Trojans. He, for
anger that the Judges had conferred Achilles's Armor upon Ulysses, and not
upon himself, grew mad, as Philostratus here mentions; when having slain many
Sheep and Oxen in his mad Fits, he at last slew himself, and (as is feigned)
was turned into a Flower of his Name, dict. (...), i. e. a Lugendo. Sophocl.

[2] Timomachus, a famous Painter of Greece, Contemporary with Julius Caesar.
This Timomachus drew the Picture of Medea and Ajax, which Julius Caesar bought
of him for 80 Talents, and afterward dedicated it to the Temple of Venus. See
Athen. lib. 14.

[3] Vulcan, was said to be the Son of Jupiter and Juno, and that when Jupiter
saw how ill-shaped and ugly he was to behold, at his first coming into the
World, he kicked him down from Heaven, so that the poor Babe fell upon the
Earth, and broke one of his Legs, whereof he ever after halted. Homer says,
that he was cast down into Lemnos, an Island on the Aegaean Sea: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Iliad. 1. verse. 590. That he was sometime Resident in Lemnos, Cicero writes in
his Not. Deor. where speaking of the several Vulcans, he says, Vulcani item
compl^res: Primus Coelo natus, cujus in tutela Athenas antiqui Historici esse
voluerunt: Secundus Nilo natus, Opas, ut Aegyptii appellant, quem Custodem esse
Aegypti volunt: Tertius ex tertio Jove and Iunone, qui Lemni fabricae tradi^ur
praefuisse: Quartus Maenalio natus, qui tenuit Insulas prope Siciliam, quae
Vulcani^ nominantur. Lucian (in his Dialogue de Sacrific.) makes merry with
this Story of Vulcan's being kicked out of Heaven. Apollodorus says, that
Jupiter kicked him down from Heaven, because he offered to rescue his Mother
Juno out of Jupiter's hands. Others feign, that he was thrown out of Heaven for
his Deformity. He was educated by Eurynome, the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis;
he is said to be the God of Fire, the Master of the Cyclops, and chief
Thunderbolt-maker in Ordinary to Jupiter. He made Hermione's Bracelet,
Ariadne's Crown, the Chari^^ of the Sun, the Armor of Achilles and Aeneas;
etc. He would have married Minerva, but she refusing him, he took to Wife
Venus, whom having caught in Bed with Mars, he threw a Net over them, and
exposed them to the public view of all the rest of the Gods. Now as these
things made him be thought most skilful in the Blacksmith's Trade, and gave a
reputation to his Forge above all others, so likewise (as Diodorus writes)
another Accident more strange, attributed to him the invention of Fire; for
(says he) some of the Egyptian Priests do hold for certain, that Vulcan, the
inventer of Fire, reigned first in Egypt, and for the benefit ensuing was made
Commander over the Egyptians, which was thus: A Tree on the Mountains of Egypt
being set on fire by Lightning from Heaven in the Wintertime, the flame
thereof caught hold on the neighboring Woods, which fell likewise a burning,
whereat Vulcan rejoiced, in regard of the heat which it yielded, but perceiving
the fire begin to fail, he added fresh matter unto it, by which means the fire
being continued, he called many other men to see it, as a thing by him found
out and invented. Diod. Sic. lib. 1. chapter 2. Again, Diodorus (lib. 5.) writes,
that by Vulcan, as they say; was invented the fabrication of Iron, Brass, Gold,
Silver, and all other Metals, which receive the operation of Fire; as also the
universal use thereof, as employed by Artificers, and others: whence the
Masters of these Arts offer up their Prayers and sacred Rites to this God
chiefly; and by these as by all others, Vulcan is called (...), Fire; and
having by this means given a great benefit to the common Life of men, he is
consecrated to immortal memory and honor. Diod. lib. 5. Now because Tubal-Cain
is said to be ( Genesis 4.22.) an Instructor of every Artificer in Iron and Brass,
etc. hence Bochart (in Pref. to his Phal.) will have Vulcan and Tubal-Cain to
be the same; and that the Character given us here of Tubal-Cain, agrees exactly
with Sanchoniathon's Character of Vulcan* See Bochart. Can. lib. 2. cap. 2.

[4] Represented in Homer: Concerning Homer several things may be considered:
His Name, Person Country, and Parents; the Age wherein he lived; his Life and
Death; and Writings; with the various Censures that passed upon him.

First then, As to his Appellation or Name of Homer, he was so called, says
Nepos, ( in libris Chronic.) from his Blindness, (...) in the Ionian Language
signifying blind, by the Figure Metathesis: nevertheless Plutarch gives us
another account of his Name Homerus, viz. that the Lydians in Smyrna being
infested with the Aeolians, so as they thought to leave the City, and being all
summoned to march by a Herald at Arms, Homer (who was then but a Child) cried
out, that he would also (...), that is, sequi; from whence, says Plutarch, he
received the Name of Homer. But his proper Name was Melesigenes, from the River
Meletes, near which some think he was born: though others have called him
Meonides, as supposing him to be descended from Maeone.

In the next place, For his Person, Country, and Parents; whereof to begin
with his Person, Spondanus says, His Statue teaches what the Person of Homer
was; which Cedrenus thus describes, before it was consumed with fire at
Constantinople: There stood (says he) the Statue of Homer, as he was in his
old age, thoughtful, and musing, with his Hands folded beneath his Bosom, his
Beard untrimm'd and hanging down, the Hair of his Head in like manner thin on
both sides before, his Face with Age and Cares of the World wrinckled and
austere, his Nose proportioned to his other parts, his Eyes fixed or turned up
to his Eyebrows, like one blind, (as it is reported he was) though not born
blind, which (says Velleius Paterc.) he that imagines, must be blind of all
Senses himself; upon his under-Coat he was attired with a loose Robe, and at
the Base beneath his Feet hung a Chain of Brass. Another famous Statue of his
(says Lucian in Encom. Demosth.) stood in the Temple of Ptolomy, on the upper
hand of his own Statue: which is also mentioned by Aelian, lib. 13. chapter 22. who
says, that Ptolemaeus Philopat^r having built a Temple to Homer, erected a fair
Image of him, and placed about that Image those seven Cities which contended
for his Birth; according to these lines of the Poet: (...);
(...).
Septem Vrbes certant de stirpe insignis Homeri;
Smyrna, Rhodus, Colophon, Salamin, Chius, Argos, Athenae.
Neither did only these seven lay claim unto him, but three times seven, if we
may credit either Plutarch or Suidas, amongst which Rome is very urgent, that
he may b^ ^ccounted hers: in so much that Appion the Grammarian invoked his
Ghost to come forth from the dead, and declare which was his Country* that so
the Controversy might be ended. Concerning his Country and Age, there is so
great variation amongst Authors, that no Question about Antiquity seems more
difficult to be resolved: Some make him a Native of Aeolia, and say, that he
was born about 168 years after the Siege of Troy; Aristotle (in 3. de Poetic.)
affirms, he was born in the Isle of Io; Michael Glycas places him under
Solomon's Reign; but Cedrenus says, that he lived under both Solomon and
David; as also that the Destruction of Troy happened under Saul. Nevertheless,
that Book of Homer's Life, which follows the ninth Muse of Herodotus, (and
whether composed by him or no, is very ancient) makes the Labor of those men
very ridiculous, who even at this day pretend to so much certainty of Homer's
Country, which was not then known: But of this Leo Allatius has written a
distinct Treatise. Neither is there less uncertainty concerning his Parentage:
Aristotle affi^ms, he was begot in the Isle of Io by a Genius, on the Body of a
Virgin of that Isle, who being quick with Child, for shame of the deed) retired
into a Place called Aegina, and there being seized on by Thieves, was brought
to Smyrna, to Maeon, King of the Lydians, who for her Beauty married her; after
which, she walking near the Flood Meletes* being on that shore overtaken with
the Throws of her Delivery, she brought forth Homer, and instantly died; the
Infant was received by Maeon, and brought up as his own, ti^l he himself
likewise died. Alex. Paphius (says Eustathius) makes Homer to be born of
Egyptian Parents, Dmasagoras being his Father, and Aetbra his Mother; also that
his Nurse was a certain Prophetess, and the Daughter of Oris, one of Isis's
Priests, from whose Breasts Honey often flowed in the Mouth of the Infant;
after which, in the night, he is reported to utter nine several Notes or Voices
of Birds, viz. of a Swallow, a Peacock, a Dove, a Crow, a Partridge, a Wren, a
Stare, a Blackbird, and a Nightingale: also that being a little Boy, he was
found playing in his Bed with nine Doves. Others make him the Son of Maeona and
Ornithus; and others the Offspring of some Nymph, as Gyraldus writes, Hist.
Poet. Dial. 2. But the opinion of many is, that he was born of Critheis,
Daughter of Melanopus and Omyris, who after her Father and Mothers death, was
left to a Friend of her Fathers at Cuma, who finding she was with Child, sent
her away in high displeasure to a Friends House, near the River Meles; where at
a Feast among other young Women, she was delivered of a Son, whose Name she
called Melesigenes, from the Place where he was born. That Critheis went with
her Son to Ismenias, and from thence to Smyrna, where she dressed Wool, to get
a Livelihood for her self and her Son: at which Place the Schoolmaster Phemius
falling in Love with her, married her, and took her Son into the School, who by
his sharpness of Wit surpassed all the other Scholars in Wisdom and Learning:
in so much that upon the death of his Master, Homer succeeded him in teaching
the same School, whereby he acquired great Reputation for his Learning, not
only at Smyrna, but all the Countries round about; for the Merchants that did
frequent Smyrna with Corn, spread abroad his Fame in all Parts where they came.
But above all, one Mentes, Master of ^ Leucadian Ship, took so great a kindness
for him, that he persuaded him to leave his School, and travel with him, which
he did, and was plentifully maintained by Mentes throughout their Travels.
Their first Voyage was to Spain, from thence to Italy, and from Italy through
several Countries, till at last they arrived at Ithaca, where a violent Rheum
falling into Homer's Eyes, prevented his farther progress, so that Mentes was
fain to leave him with a Friend of his called Mentor, a person of great Honor
and Riches in Ithaca, where Homer learned the principal Matters relating to
Vlysses's Life: but Mentes the next year returning back the same way, and
finding Homer recovered of his Eyes, took him along with him in his Travels,
passing through many Countries, till they arrived at Colophon; where relapsing
into his old Distemper, he quite lost the use of his Eyes: after which he
addicted himself to Poetry; when being poor, he returned back again to Smyrna,
expecting to find better Entertainment there, whereof being disappointed, he
removed from thence to Cuma, in which passage he rested at a Town called
New-wall, where repeating some of his Ve^ses, one Tichi^, a Leather-seller,
took such delight to hear them, that he entertained him kindly a long time.
Afterward he proceeded on his Journey to Cuma, where he was so well received,
that some of his Friends in the Senate did propose to have a Maintenance
settled on him for Life, though others opposed the rewarding so great a man.
Some will have it, that at this Place he first received the Name of Homer. Now
being denied Relief at Cuma, he removed from thence to Phocaea, where lived one
Thestorides, a Schoolmaster, who invited him to live with him; by which means
Thestorides procured some of his Verses, which he afterward taught as his own
at Chios. Whereupon, Homer hearing how Thestorides had abused him, immediately
followed him to Chios* and by the way falling into discourse with a Shepherd,
who was keeping his Master's Sheep, the Shepherd was so taken with Homer, that
he relieved him, and carried him to his Master, where he lived some time, and
taught his Children; till being impatient to discover Thestorides his Cheat, he
went to Chios, which Place Thestorides left when he heard of Homer's coming;
who tarried there some time, taught a School, grew rich, married, and had two
Daughters, whereof one died young, and the other he married to the Shepherd's
Master, that entertained him at Bollisus. When he grew old, he left Chios, and
went to Samos, where he remained some time, singing of Verses at Feasts, and at
New Mons, at great men's Houses. From Samos he was going to Athens, but (as
some say) fell sick at Ios, where dying, he was buried on the Sea-shoar. And
long after, when his Poems had gotten ^n universal Applause, the people of Ios
built him a Sepulcher, with this Epitaph upon it, (^s says Suidas:) (...),
(...).
Hac sacrum terra caput occultat^r Homeri,
Qui canere Heroum praestantia facta solebat.
Melancthon. Or rather as Gyraldus renders it: Sacrum hic terra caput divinum
claudit Homerum,
Her^um atque virum cecinit qui fortia facta.
Hist. Poet. Dial. 2. This is the most rational account of his Death, and not
that he pined away, upon the Riddle of the Fishermen, as others would have it;
and so says Herodotus, or whoever it was that wrote that Book de Vita Homeri:
Ex hac aegritudine (inquit) extremum diem clausit Homerus in Io, non (ut
arbitrantur aliqui) Aenigmitatis perplexitate enectus, sed morbo. Nevertheless
Solinus reports him to be buried in Chios; Martianus Capella in Naxes: and
Pliny in this matter varies from himself, one while saying, he was buried in
Io, another while in Scyros. Also Sotades apud Stob. has it, that he died for
Hunger: (...)* And Polycrates writes, that Homer lived to 108 years of age. And
Plutarch (Vita Sertorii) affirms, that he was born in Io, and died in Smyrna.
Some will have it, that Orpheus and Musaeus were more ancient than Homer; but
the learned Gerr. Vossius plainly shows the contrary, saying, that the Poems of
Orpheus are no older than the Age of Pifistratus, and that Musaeus was a
Grammarian under the Roman Empire, wherefore (says he) Nihil nunc Antiquius
habere Graecos Poematibus Homeri and Hesiodi: also he further says, that Homer
lived about the beginning of the Olympiads, or a little after, near the Times
of Romulus. Voss^ de Poet. Graec. chapter 2.

Now for the Writings of Homer, and those Censures that passed upon him, it is
well known to all men, that he never wrote any thing (at least that is now
extant) but Poetry: He wrote in 24 Books the Wars of Troy, which he calls his
Iliads; and in as many more the Travels of Ulysses, which he names his Odysses.
It was (says Aelian) long after Lycurgus, that the Lacedaemonians first brought
Homer's Poetry into Greece from Ionia, whether he traveled; nevertheless
Plutarch (Vita Lycurgi) affirms, that Lycurgus himself first brought them to
light amongst men. They were digested into that order we now have them, not by
himself, but by other men, and (as Suidas and Aelian report) chiefly by
Pisistratus the Athenian Tyrant: for he wrote sundry Poems scattered here and
there in the Countries where he traveled, which may be one reason why so many
Countries should challenge him to be theirs, they having the original Copies of
some of his Works, which in succeeding Times were gathered together to make up
complete Poesies, and were called from hence Rapsodia. Two of these Poems are
observed to comprehend the two parts of man: the Iliads describing the strength
and vigor of the Body; as does the Odysses, the subtilty and policy of the
Mind: by the one, he first represented Tragedy; by the other, Comedy. The
particular Subjects of the several Books, as well of his Iliads as Odysses, I
had designed to have given you a Compendium of, but find Mr. Hobbs has
anticipated me therein, by his English Translation of Homer, therefore shall
only give you the Judgments that some of the best Authors, as well ancient as
modern, have passed upon him, and so conclude.

That the Poems of Homer were highly esteemed of by the Ancients, is evident
from all their Writings: Aelian (lib. 13. chapter 14.) tells us, that the Ancients
sung the Verses of Homer, divided into several parts, to which they attributed
particular Names; as the Fight at the Ships, the Dolonia, the Victory of
Agamemnon, and the Catalogue of the Ships. Moreover, the Patroclea, and the
Lystra, (or redemption of Hector's Body) the Games instituted for Patroclus,
and the breach for Vows; comprehended in his Iliads. Now as concerning the
Odysses; the Actions at Pytus, the Actions at Lacedemon, the Cave of Calypso,
the Boat, the Discourses of Alcinous, the Cyclopias, the Neucia, and the
Washings of Circe, the Death of the Woers, the Actions in the Field, and
concerning Laertes. The same Author ( lib. 12. chapter 48.) also writes, that the
Indians sing the Verses of Homer translated into their own Language, and not
only they but likewise the Persian Kings. Morever, ( lib. 9. chapter 15.) he says,
that the Argives give the first Palm of all Poetry to Homer, making all other
second to him; and at all their Sacrifices invoked Apollo and Homer to be
present with them. Nay, Pindar affirms, that when unable to give a Portion with
their Daughter, they bestowed on her some of his Poems. Alcibiades used to
strike that Schoolmaster on the Ear, who wanted Homer in his School; as if a
man should find a Fanatick's Study without any of Hildersham's, Dodd's,
Baxter's, Owen's, or Vincent's Books in it. Alexander the Great having taken
that vastly rich Cabinet from Darius, could find out no better use for it, than
to make it a Repository for Homer's Works, which he carried with him wherever
he went. Arcesilaus could never take his rest at night, till he had read some
portion of Homer; and so soon as he was up in the morning, he used to say, Se
ad Amasium ire, meaning, that he was going to his beloved Homer. Aelian writes,
that Plato at the beginning studied Poetry, when having composed certain
heroic Poems, he compared and examined them by Homer's, but finding them far
short of his, he tore them in pieces. Plato in Ione calls him, Poetarum
omnium praestantissimum and divinissimum* in Phaedone, Divinum Poetam. Neither
did Aristotle less esteem him, being (as Plutarch has it) used to say of him,
That Homer was the only Poet, who made and devised words that had motion; so
emphatical were they, and so lively expressed. Also Plutarch says, That Homer
of all other Poets does excel, using such discretion in his Speeches, that at
one and the same time he reprehends the evil, and recommends the good. Lucian
(in Encom. Demosth*) affirms, all Poets celebrated Homer's Birthday, and
sacrificed to him the first Fruits of their Verses. Cicero speaking of him
says, Homero nemo similis. And Velleius Paterculus (lib. 1 chapter 5.) calls him,
that most bright and matchless Wit, who both for the greatness of his Work, and
perspicuity of his Verses, did alone deserve the Name of Poet, in whom this is
most glorious, Quod neque ante illum, quem ille imitaretur, neque post illum*
qui eum imitari possit* inventus est. Cleomenes (as both Plutarch and Aelian
write) used to say, that Homer was the Poet, of the Lacedaemonians, declaring
how men should fight; but Hesiod of the Slaves, instructing men how to till the
Ground. Pliny (lib. 25.) calls Homer the Father and Prince of all Learning and
learned men, as well as the best Author extant for Antiquity. Likewise Pliny
(lib. 7. chapter 21.) tells us out of Cicero, that the whole Iliads of Homer were
written in a Parchment so small, that it might be contained in a Nut-shell. And
Cedr^nus also writes of a Library in Constantinople, wherein (amongst other
Curiosities) was the Gut of a Dragon 120 foot long, on which, in Letters of
Gold, the Iliads and Odysses of Homer were inscribed; which Rarity was consumed
by Fire in Basiliscus the Emperor's Time. Dionysius Halicarnasseus calls Homer,
(...), etc. the Top of all, whence every River, Sea, and Fountain springs: no
wonder therefor if the Painter Galaton pictured him vomiting, and all the
other Poets like so many Dogs, licking up what he had spued out: To which may
be applied that of the Poet: Aspic^ Meoniden, a quo seu font perenni
Va^um P^eriis ora rigantur aquis.
Ovid. As also Manilius to the same purpose: -- Cujusque ex ore profusos
Omnis posteritas latices in carmina duxit.
Lib. 2. Montaign mentions three men, who in his opinion seemed to exceed all
other; whereof the first is Homer; from whom (says he) Virgil seems to derive
his Sufficiency; that Homer was his Schoolmaster and Guide; and that but one
only sentence of the Iliads* has given both Body and Matter to that great and
divine Poem, Virgil's Aeneads. I am often (says Montaign) amazed to think,
that he who by his Authority has brought so many Gods in credit with the
World, should not be reputed one himself: Add Heliconiadum comites, quorum
unus Homerus
Astr^ potitus. --
Lucrer. lib. 3. Notwithstanding his Blindness and Indigency* and that he lived
before Sciences were ever observed, or reduced into a method, yet had he so
perfect a knowledge of them, that all who have since established Policies*
founded Commonwealths, undertaken Wars, or written either of Religion,
Philosophy* or Arts, have made use of him and of his Books, as of ^ Seminary or
Magazine of all kinds of Learning: Qui quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid
utile, quid non,
Before ac melius Chrys^ppo, ac Crantore dicit.
Horat. Lib. Epist. 23. Homer* (says Monsieur R^pin) who had a Genius
accomplished for Poetry, was blessed with the vastest, sublimest, and most
universal Wit that ever was: 'Twas by his Poems that all the Worthies of
Antiquity were formed; from hence the Legislators took the first platform of
their Laws; the Founders of Monarchies and Commonwealths from hence took the
Model of their Polities; hence Philosophers learnt the first principles of
Morality* which they taught the people; Homer is the occasion, and almost the
only Subject of Plato's Dialogue of Inspiration; hence Physicians have studied
Diseases and their Cures* Astronomers have learned the knowledge of Heaven; and
Geometricians of the Earth; Kings and Princes have learned the Art to govern;
Captains to form a Battle, to incamp an Army, to besiege Towns, to fight and to
gain Victories; from this great Original, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, came
to be Philosophers; Sophocles and Euripides took the haughty Air of the
Theater, and Idea's of Tragedy; Zeuxes, Apelles, and Polygnotus, became such
excellent Painters; nay, one of the most famous Painters of this Age, used to
make Homer be read to him to heighten his Fancy, when he disposed himself to
draw; he made Alex^nder the Great so valiant. In fine, Homer has been (if I may
so say) the first Founder of all Arts and Sciences, as well as the Pattern of
wise men in all Ages. And as he has been in some measure the Author of
Paganism, the Religion whereof he established by his Poems, one may say, that
never Prophet had so many Followers as he: yet notwithstanding, this so
universal Genius, this Wit so capable of all things, he applied himself only to
Poetry, which he made his business. Homer is the most perfect Model of the
heroic Poesy, and he only says Aristotle, deserves the Name of Poet; it is
certain, never man had a more happy Genius; he is the first Copy a Poet should
propose to himself, that means to write well: for never person wrote more
purely nor natural than he; it is he alone that ever found the Secret of joining
to the purity of Style, all the sublimity and greatness that heroic Poesy is
capable of; for which reason, Longinus always proposes him as the most just and
exact Rule for the sublime Style. Neither can any thing be more passionately
expressed than Andromache's Adieu to her Husband Hector, when going to his last
Combat with Achilles, Iliad 6th. Diony^ius Halicarnass^us commends him chiefly
for the contrivance of his Design, the greatness and majesty of his Expression,
the sweet and passionate motions of his Sentiments. The design of Poetry is to
delight, and that does Homer, who is delightful even in the description of
L^ertes's Swineherd's Lodge, in his Odysses. Homer was never guilty either of
Obscenity or Impiety, but sweet and virtuous as a Philosopher: he begets in his
Readers a veneration for Piety, and an abhorrence for Vice, when he makes them
esteem Achilles, and contemn Therfites. Homer and Virgil are the only two Poets
that ever knew how to leave a thing when 'twas well, without being hurried by
their Poetical fury beyond the mark of Judgment. Now as each regular Poem must
consist of Truth and Fiction; so is Truth the foundation, and Fiction the
accomplishment of all Homer's Poems: Thus the Fable of Homer's Iliad is the
Anger of Achilles, who by his presence or absence from the Grecian Army, (
Almanxor-like) determines the good or ill success of his whole Party; the Anger
of this Prince, which proceeds of the discontent he received from Agamemnon, is
the Truth of the History, which is adorned with all the Episodes, and variety
of Adventures, that enrich this Poem, and give delight; which he could never
do, if he had nothing to say but Truth. Again, As the Painter draws Faces by
their Features; so must the Poet represent the Minds of men by their Manners:
And thus we see he makes Achilles retire from the Grecian Army, to show his
discontent; also the Silence of Ajax in Hell, ( lib. 11. Odyss.) declares
something more noble and glorious, than all he could have said. Homer has
excelled all others in the pleasant Numbers of his Verse; whether the nature of
his Language was favorable to him; by the variety in the Numbers, and by the
noble sound of the Words; or that the delicacy of his Ear made him perceive
this Grace, whereof the other Poets were not sensible. Athenaeus pretends, that
nothing is more proper to be sung than the Verses of Homer; so natural is the
Harmony of them: Virgil himself could not imitate him herein, by reason of the
harshness of the Latin Tongue. He above all others makes the deepest impression
upon the Heart; Homer animates, and Virgil heats, in comparison of whom all the
rest do (as it were) freeze their Auditors. Another Excellency of Homer's is,
that in the vast throng of Objects which he represents, he is never guilty of
the least confusion; never was Poem more charged with Matter than his Iliad,
yet never any thing appeared more regular, easy, and natural. How artificial,
unconstrained, and delightful, are all his Narrations? Homer, great Speaker as
he is, amuses not himself (says Lucian) to discourse of the unhappy in Hell,
when Ulysses descended thither; though this was a fair occasion for him. How
just and reasonable are all his Encomiums? He praises not Achilles, but by the
simple and bare narration of his Actions. And lastly, With what wonderful Art
and Cunning does he contrive his Fictions, taking from the most common and mean
Subjects, a Character of greatness and sublimity? Thus, from Thetis's
prostrating her self at Jupiter's Feet, the Gods assemble in Council, where
great Debates arise, their Spirits grow warm, and all Heaven is in a Mutiny,
only because Achilles's Mistress is taken from him, which at the bottom is but
a Trifle. It Is likewise by this great Art of Fiction, that all the Voyages, and
indeed every step that Telemachus made in the Odysses, to seek his Father
Ulysses, became considerable, because Minerva is of his Retinue, and of his
Council; and all became remarkable, by the ^mpression they received from the
Conduct of a Deity that presides over Wisdom. Rapin's Reflect* on Arist. Poes.
But to conclude this point, The greatest Excellency of Homer lies in his
Invention, in his Moral^ty, in the Elegancy of his Words, in his Epithets, and
Adverbs, wherein he surpasses all others. Yet notwithstanding all this that
has been said, some Exceptions have been raised against him; ex. gr. that by
the Fable of his Iliad, he has disgraced his Country, in taking for his Hero,
a person who occasioned the destruction of so many gallant Officers, whom he
sacrificed to his grief and discontent. That Homer's chief Hero, Achilles, is
made subject to great weaknesses and imperfections below his Character, when
(according to the Pourtraicture Horace has left of him) Achilles is a Bravo,
but withal hasty, impetuous, furious, passionate, violent, unjust, inexorable,
a contemner of Laws, and one that places all his Reason in his Sword: Impiger,
iracundus, inexorabilis, acer,
Iura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat armis.
Horat. Art Poet. Achilles is cruel even toward the Body of Hector, so far as
to take pleasure in exercising vengeance upon it, and out of an unparalled
Avarice, sells to his affl^cted Father the Body of his Son. I shall not say any
thing of his quitting (with a Lightness not to be pardoned) that great and
generous Enterprise, made by a general Combination of all Greece, upon the
occasion of a she-Slave, for whom he abandons himself to tears and complaints,
with many discoveries of weakness. That if the Action and principal Subject of
Homer's Iliad be the War of Troy, (according to the judgment of H^race, who
therefore calls him, Troj^ni belli scriptorem) then that Action is defective
and imperfect, in as much a^ that War has not in the Iliad either beginning or
end; according to that Verse of the Poets: Infaelix operis summa, qui ponere
totum
Nesciat --
Horat. Epist. ad Pison. But if the principal Subject be the Anger of Achilles,
as is more likely, and as Homer himself acknowledges by his Proposition; that
Anger has indeed a beginning, but neither end nor middle: for it is thrust out
of doors by another animosity of the same person against Hector, for the death
of Patroclus; so as there are two Angers, one upon the loss of his Friend, the
other upon the taking away of his Mistress. But the greatest defect is, that
the rest of the Poem has no connection with that Anger; and Homer during the
space of 18 Books, thinks no more of it, as if he had clearly forgot his
Proposition and Design; but during that long Interval speaks only of Sieges,
Battles, Surprises, Consultations of the Gods, and all things that relate to
the Siege of Troy; which made Horace (as I said before) think, that the Subject
of the Iliad was the War of Troy, according to the Name it goes under: So that
which way soever we look on that Poem, it will in that part appear defective:
Neither is the Odyssey an Action more correct than that of the Iliad: it begins
with the Voyages of Telemachus, and ends with those of Ulysses. All is made for
Telemachus in the four first Books; Menelaus, Nestor, and the other Greci^n
Princes, relate to him the Adventures of Troy, without any thought at all of
Ulysses, which is the principal Action: so that the four first Books of the
Odyssey are neither Episode, nor part of Action, nor have any connection with
the rest of the Work: in so much that the Fable of the Odyssey is apparently
double. Take them as they are, and one knows not what to make of them. In the
Representation of those Games and Pastimes, which Achilles (in the 23d. Book of
the Iliads) makes upon the death of Patroclus, there are abundance of things
utterly incredible. Also Homer introduces Miracles and Machines without any
just occasion: when Priamus has lost Hector, Jupiter sends the Goddess Iris
his Messenger, to caution him to take care of his Son's Body, and redeem it
from Achilles; as if his Father (who had so great a tenderness for his Son)
could not think of it himself, without a Machine to put him in mind that he was
a Father? If Telemachus in the Odyssey go to find out Ulysses in the Courts of
Greece, he cannot stir a foot (forsooth) without the assistance of his
Governess Minerva to lead him up and down by the Sleeves? Nay, this Machine
has not so much as any appearance of probability, in as much as Minerva
conducts Telemachus to seek for Ulysses all over Greece, save only to the place
where he is, which she ought not to have been ignorant of, upon the score of
her Divinity, from which nothing should be concealed. And yet this is Homer's
way to employ the Gods upon all trifling matters, as so many Porters, without
any regard to their rank: thus Mercury becomes Coachman to Priamus, as well as
his Scout. Again, Homer's Episodes are forced. His Kings and Princes speak as
scurrilously of one another, as so many Plowmen could do: Thus Agamemnon in the
Iliad treats Chryses the High Priest as an extravagant impious person, when he
only demands with much respect, nay, and with Presents, his own Daughter, which
Agamemnon had taken away from him by force. In like manner, the Priest
forgetting all Charity, did out of revenge implore Apollo to destroy the
Greeks. Ulysses, whom Homer proposes as an exemplar of Wisdom, suffers himself
to be made drunk by the Pheacians; for which Aristotle and Philostratus condemn
the Poet. How extravagant was it in that accomplished Sage, so soon to forget so
virtuous a Wife and Son, for the dalliances of his Prostitute Calypso, to run
after the famous Sorceress Circe, and being a King as he was, so far to debase
himself, as to go to Fifty-cuffs with a rascally Beggar, named Irus? Priamus,
in the 24th. Iliad, does not speak like a Father, when he wishes all his
Children dead, so Hector were alive again; his grief might have been expressed
some other way. How barbarous was the Inhumanity of Achilles upon the dead Body
of Hector? How immodest and undecent was the long though accidental interview
between Ulysses, and the Daughter of Alcinous, in the 6th. of the Odysseys? In
fine, There is but little observance of Decorum in Homer's Poems: Fathers cruel
and harsh; Heroes weak and passionate; Gods subject to miseries, unquiet,
quarrelsom and mutinous, etc. What can be more ridiculous, than the Discourse
which Antilochus's Son, Iliad 23. makes to his Father's Horses, telling them,
His Father Nestor will turn them out of his service, or cut their Throats, if
they do not do as they should do? Truly a most pathetick Orator to bruit
Beasts! The like does Hector in another place. How comical is the Entertainment
which he gives the Gods at a Comedy, Odyssey 8. some of whom he makes Buffoons,
by introducing Mars and Venus, surprised in the Nets laid for them by Vulcan?
The Battle between Irus and Ulysses, ( Odyss. 18.) savours strongly of the
Burlesque humor; as does also the Character of Therfitis, and the wounding of
Venus in the Iliad. How undecent is that comparison of Homer's, of an Ass
feeding in a Wheat-field, which the Children would drive out with Poles and
Staves, to be compared to Ajax in the midst of an Engagement, overwhelmed with
a shower of the Enemies blows, as it is in the Iliad? It Is but one degree above
the filthy expression of a great man in these late Times, who sitting as
Commissioner in the Star Chamber, had so mean a conception, that in open Court
he was fain to fetch his comparison from a Tinker and his Trull. The
Descriptions of Homer are too childish, too long, too affected, and too often
used: as the description of Alcinous's Garden, in the 7th. and that of the Port
of Ithaca, in the 13th. of the Odysseys* the description of the Port; and that
of the Grotto inhabited by the Nymphs, which takes up 18 Verses. Homer is
reprehended even by the Greeks themselves, for his intemperance and tediousness
in Discourse. Neither in his Iliad is the unity of Action so perfect as to be
without blame, where after the death of Hector, which ought to have closed the
Action, there are still two Books to come; the 23d. which comprehends the
Exercises celebrated for the death of Patroclus, and which contribute nothing
to the principal Action; and the 24th. which contains the Lamentation of the
Trojans, and the ransoming of Hector's Body, which have no connection to the
principal Action, that being complete without it. Nay, it may further be
objected, why a Poem that had no other design but to celebrate the Honor of
the Greeks, should be closed with that Honor, which is done to Hector's
Funeral Solemnities, which was the chiefest of their Enemies? Was it not a
mistake in him, thus to forget the design he proposed? -- Amphora caepit
Institui, currente rot a cur urceus exit?
Horat. Art. Poet. Again, He is sometimes accused for want of Variety and
Surprise: Thus in numbering the Grecian Fleet in the 2d. Iliad, all the
Squadrons are for the most part terminated in one Verse: -- (...). And all the
Banquets of the Iliad are served up in the same fashion, without any variety.
Nay, Vlysses's being known by his Wife Penelope, in 23d. of the Odyssey, though
so fit a Subject to set all the Subtleties of Art on work, has nothing in it
but flat and simple Surprises, cold and heavy Astonishments, with very little
of Delicacy. Last of all, Some would likewise make Homer seem a Plagiary;
Aristotle makes mention of a small Iliad (attributed by Suidas to one
Antimachus) which was the abridgement of a greater, upon which, some conceive
it possible that Homer might frame his Work: Besides, we read in Athenaeus
(lib. 3.) that one Hegesianax had wrote in Verse before Homer, what had passed
at the Siege of Troy. Cicero also makes mention of one Callisthenes, living in
the time of Alexander, that had written upon the same Subject of Troy; who,
although 'twas some Ages after Homer, it is to be conceived, had and made use of
some other Collections different from those of Homer. Suidas affirms, that one
Corinnus, a Disciple of Palamedes, had also written an Iliad in Verse, about
the time that Troy was taken: and that another Poet contemporary with Homer,
named Syagrus, had likewise written upon the same Subject; but that all those
Works were suppressed by the Endeavors of Homer, by which means, his alone
were transmitted to Posterity. Of this and the Premises, see Suidas, Sc^liger,
Spondanus, Eustathius, and Didimus, but more especially a little comparison
between Homer and Virgil, written originally in French, and extremely in favor
of Virgil. Others there have been, that reprehend some few things in Homer:
Rapin confesses, he is not altogether so scrupulous and regular in his
Contrivances, as Virgil is; his Machins are less just; and all the Measures he
takes to save the probability, are less exact. In short, Homer has more Fancy,
Virgil more Discretion and Judgment; so that if I should choose rather to have
been Homer than Virgil, I should also much rather wish, that I had written the
A^neid* than the Iliad and Odyssey; for which, I have the Approbation of
Propertius to justify me: Cedite Romani scriptores, cedite Graii,
Nescio quid majus nascitur Aeneide.
Hakwil objects against the ridiculous Fable of the Pigmies, and their mann^^
of fighting with the Cranes in Homer. Scaliger (who is no Friend to Homer)
objects against the long Narrations, which Homer makes his Heroes speak in the
heat of Fury and Battle, as neithe^ natural nor probable. Philostratus objects
against his Pourtraicts. Longinus cannot endure the Wounds, Tears, Adulteries,
Hatred, and other Weaknesses, to which he makes the Gods obnoxious, contrary to
their Character: I cannot, says Longin, but think, that at the Siege of Troy,
he endeavored to make his men Gods, and his Gods men. Longinus also writes,
that the Odyssey, which is as it were an Epilogue to the Iliad, was written
long after the Iliad, when the Poet's Fancy being drained, the Poem ( viz. the
Odyssey) became flat and thoughtless, consisting of tedious Speeches and
Relations, the symptoms of a decayed Fancy: In his Iliad his Discourses are
like the Beams of the Sun at midday, short but vigorous; in his Odysses like
the Sun a setting, when her shadow is long, and vigor small. Yet
notwithstanding all this, I look (says Longin) upon the faults in Homer, as
small insignificant mistakes, which (his thoughts being intent on great things)
were carelessly let slip; and that if all the faults which are in Homer,
Demosthenes, Plato, and those other famous Writers, were summed up, they would
not amount to the thousandth part of the good things they have said. It is not
(says Casaubon in Entheus. chapter 5.) so much want of Wit and Capacity, that
makes so few in these days admire the Wisdom of Homer, as our present
Ignorance of former Times: An old Hat, Ruff, or Fardingal, will make any one
now seem ridiculous; no wonder therefore if so ancient a Poet as Homer, seem
contemptible in the eyes of many of our young Masters, who are better read in
the Fashions of the Times, the modish Cravat and Perriwig, than in ancient
Books.

[5] Where he describes the making of Achilles 's Arms: This is in the 18th
Iliad.

CHAP. XI. Apollonius is brought to the King of the Indians: A Description of
the Houses of the City, and of the Temple, whose very Pavement was adorned with
Pearls: What Conference passed between Apollonius and King Phraotes: The King's
Modesty, Temperance, and Skill in the Greek Tongue.
WHilst he is thus busied in Discourse, certain Messengers come from the King,
bringing an Interpreter with them, and tell them, that the King had invited
Apollonius to be his Guest for the [1] space of three days, in as much as
Strangers might not longer abide in that City: wherefore they conducted
Apollonius to the Palace. With what Walls the City was encompassed, we have
before declared. They say, it was evenly and regularly divided into Streets,
after the Attick fashion. And that it was built of such Houses, as if a man
look on the outside of them, seem to be of but one Story; whereas if you enter
into them, you will find as many Rooms under ground as above. They likewise
report, that they saw the Temple of the Sun, wherein the Image of Ajax carved
in Ivory was erected, the Statue of Alexander in Gold, and others of Porus in
black Brass. The Walls of the [2] Temple are built of a red Stone, wherewith
Gold being artificially mingled, seems to dart out Rays. The Pavement was
inlaid with Pearls, in a kind of Checquer-work, which was much used in the
Temples of the Barbarians. But they say, that in the King's Palace they found
no sumptuousness of Building, nor [3] Guards, nor Halbardiers; but as in the
Houses of the best Citizens, a few Domestics, and such as desired to discourse
with the King, being in number but three or four at most. With which Show they
were far more delighted, than with that pompous one at the Court of Babylon;
and much more when they were entered in: for the Lodgings, Galleries, and whole
Court was under discipline, which was a sufficient argument to Apollonius, that
the Indian King was addicted to Philosophy. Wherefore speaking by the
Interpreter he said, I am glad (Oh King) to see that you study Philosophy. But
I (said the King) am much gladder that you have such an opinion of me. Then
answered Apollonius, saying, Are these things appointed and enjoined by your
Laws, or have you your self reduced your Kingdom to this good order? The King
replied, Though our Laws be modest, yet I use greater modesty than our Laws
enjoin, and possess more than other men, yet need very little, esteeming the
greatest part of my Wealth to belong unto my [4] Friends. Happy are you, said
Apollonius, who enjoy such a Treasure, preferring your Friends, from whom so
many Benefits ac^rue to you, before Silver and Gold. Nay, said the King, I
impart my Riches to my very Enemies: for I assuage and subdue with [5] Money,
the Barbarians that sometimes infested my Kingdom, making Incursions into my
Confines, in so much that I now use them as Guards to defend my Kingdom, for
they do not only abstain themselves from invading me, but also hinder other
neighboring Barbarians (who are very dangerou^) from molesting me. When
Apollonius asked, Whether Porus was used to give Presents to them, the King
answered, Porus was a lover of War, but I of Peace. With these Speeches he so
ravished Apollonius, that when on a time he rebuked one Euphrates for not
studying Philosophy, he said, Let us reverence the Indian Phraotes; for that
was the King's Name. A certain Nobleman, for the many and great Favors he had
received from the King, desired to set a golden Mitre adorned with several
Jewels on his Head; the King made answer, Though I were one of those who are
taken with such things, yet would I not admit them now, but in the presence of
Apollonius throw them from my Head. Yet for as much as I have never heretofore
used such Ornaments, how should I now assume them, as not knowing my Guest, and
forgetting my self? When Apollonius also demanded of him, What kind of Diet he
used, his answer was, I drink only so much Wine, as I sacrifice to the Sun; and
for the Quarrey which I take in Hunting, others eat it, the exercise it self
being enough for me; my Diet is Herbs, with the tops and fruit of Dates, and
whatsoever things the River makes my Garden bring forth. I have also many
Dishes from these Trees, which with my own hands I dress. As these words
Apollonius was overjoyed, often turning his Eyes toward Damis. Afterward,
when they had discoursed sufficiently concerning his Journey to the Brackmans,
the King commanded the Guide that came from Babylon to be entertained as his
Guest, in such a manner as he was used to receive those that came from thence;
but the Guide who was sent by the Governor, was dismissed, having received
Provision for his Journey. Then the King himself taking Apollonius by the hand,
and commanding the Interpreter to depart, asked him, whether he would admit him
into his company at Meals? Apollonius being amazed hereat, and asking the King,
why he did not speak to him thus in the beginning, the King replied, It was
that I might not seem over-bold, as not knowing my self, nor that it had
pleased Fortune to make me a Barbarian. But now being overcome by you, in as
much as I perceive you to take delight in me, I could not any longer conceal my
self; and how full I am of the Greek Tongue, I will manifest to you in many
things. But why (said Apollonius) did not you invite me to a Feast, but had
rather be invited by me? Because (said the King) I judge you to be the better
man: for Wisdom is a more royal thing than all others. Thus having spoken, he
led Apollonius and the rest of his company to the Bath, wherein he himself was
used to wash. The place was an Orchard about the length of a Furlong, in the
midst whereof was a Fountain dug, that received into it self certain Springs
of cool and potable Water. On either side were places to run in, where the King
was used to exercise himself with the Lance and Discus [6] after the Greek
fashion, for his Body was strong, having used such Exercises, and being but 27
years of age. Now when he thought he had exercised himself enough on Land, he
was used to leap into the Water, and there exercise himself in Swimming.

Illustrations on Chap. 11.
[1] To be his Guest for the space of three days: This Custom was, I conceive,
practiced amongst them, ever after Alexander's Conquest over them, and that for
no other Reason, but to prevent Strangers from being made acquainted either
with their Strength or Riches. Notwithstanding other Countries have used the
like Caution upon other Inducements; as the Iaponeses, who denied any admission
to the Christians for their Religions sake; and the Turks, who suffer not any
but Mahometans to approach within such a distance of Mecca; also the Chinese,
who permit not any Trade with the Portugueses, nor at this day with the
English, by reason of our Alliance with Portugal. Nevertheless, be it upon what
Motive it will, any such Custom is an infallible impediment to any City's
Wealth or Power; as on the contrary, nothing can be more advantageous to a
Kingdom, and would be so to this of ours, as to make it a free Port, rendering
his Majesty a full compensation for the loss of his Customs some other way.
Nay, had his Majesty no other recompense made him for the expiration of that
branch of his Revenue, (which however would be very hard and unreasonable) yet
am I well assured, that what he lost in the Penny one way, he would gain in the
Pound another, and soon find the benefit of a free Trade far to exceed that of
a Custom-house, with the chargeable Attendants belonging thereunto. Where there
is no Commerce* there can be no Wealth, nor increase of People; therefore the
Lacedaemonians never arrived to any manner of Greatness; nor could they with all
their valor and military Disciplin^* have kept their State so long as they
did, but for two Reasons, which seldom meet together: One was, that they using
none but Iron money, were so poor, as gave no temptation to an Invader, who
would in that case be like one that should set upon a Ship of Algiers, be sure
to get nothing but blows: The other was, that in those days all Greece was
divided into petty Republics, whose mutual Jealousies made them assist one
another against any others growing Greatness; for States are so rapacious, and
Princes so ambitious, as there is no protection against them, but either
Poverty or Power.

[2] The Walls of the Temple, etc. Templum anciently signified only that space
or portion of the Heavens, which the Augur designed or marked out with his
Lituus; after which, it was used to signify those Buildings we call Churches.
Clemens Alexandrinus is of opinion, that the first Original of their Temples
was the erecting of an Edifice to the Honor of the deceased. Concerning the
vastness of some of them, that place is very remarkable of Plato's Critias, who
sets down Neptune's Temple to be a Furlong in length, and three Acres broad,
with the height proportionable. The outward parts toward the top of the
Buildings were adorned with massy Silver, and the Studs or Spokes themselves
with Gold. The Roofs within were made of Ivory, Gold, Silver, and (Aurichalcum,
or mixed Metal, like) Copper. As for the Walls, Columes, and Pavements, they
were inlaid also with Copper, and in some parts engraved. Besides this there
were many other Temples of great renown in the World: such as the most famous
Temple of Jerusalem built by Solomon, whose Riches were inestimable, and
whereof no man verst in History can be ignorant: Josephus (lib. 5. chapter 14.)
says, that it had several golden Pinacles or Studs, which were therefore made
so sharp in the point, that no Bird could rest his foot thereon to defile it.
Whereupon a learned Author among the Papists makes this Objection, how our
Savior could stand upon them, or St. James be precipitated from them, unless
there were some place behind the said Pinacles whereon they might stand, which
is not yet mentioned by any Author. Another famous Temple was that of Jupiter
Capitolinus at Rome, the Beauty and Riches whereof was so great, that one
writing of it says, that the Sun never shined on the like: This did far exceed
those Temples mentioned by Ovid, when he says, Templa m^nent body vastis
innixa columnis,
Perque quater deno^ itur in alta gradus.
The ascent of this Temple being an hundred steps. There was likewise another
at Delphos whither all the Kings of the Earth sent gifts of the most precious
things they had: witness Craesus King of Lydia. That also of Jupiter Ammon,
whose situation in the Deserts, did not in the least impede the excellency of
its composure in Marbles, and other precious Stuffs, with a contribution of all
the Princes and People, which sent thither for the maintenance of it; and
likewise that of Diana at Ephesus, which all Authors have reckoned among the
seven Wonders of the World; together with many others very much renowned for
Antiquity: But never any Temple yet equalized that which Philostratus here
represents, which makes me a little uncertain of the truth of this Discourse;
for we do not find this Temple to be so highly reputed any where but in
Philostratus: whereas if it were so excellent as it is here mentioned to be,
methinks it merited some little place of Remark in the Writings of those
ingenious men, whose ambition was only to take notice of and observe all the
Rarities of the Universe: this being not less worthy of record, than the
Sepulcher of Simandius in Egypt, concerning which they have treated so at large.

[3] In the King's Palace they found no Guards nor Halberdiers. This is almost
as great an Error as a Prince can possibly commit: Not that these Guards are
able to protect him against a Rebellion at home, or Invasion from abroad, but
that such a splendid Equipage about him dazles the Peoples eyes, as if he were
something more than man, and so preserves him from contempt; which certainly is
one of the most dangerous Characters a Prince can lie under: for all other kind
of Infamy may by way of terror, give an ill Prince not only obedience, but some
measure of safety, whereas being grown contemptible, men will not only slight
his Commands, but in time make bold to assault him: Thus when the Senones Ga^li
had taken Rome, the common Soldiers entering the Senate, found the Senators
sitting with much gravity adorned in their Robes; whereat they stood in a great
amazement ready to adore them, till a Soldier stroking one of their long white
Beards, the Senator up with his Cane, and broke the Soldier's head; whereupon
finding them to be but men, and subject to Passion like other Mortals, they
presently made bold to put them all to the Sword. Now as Contempt more than any
other thing exposes a Prince to be disobeyed, and trampled on by their
Subjects; so will a high veneration for him, make men obey him awfully, fight
for him confidently, and every way support and secure his Throne. Wherefore it
is observable, how at this day all wise Princes are careful to preserve a
solemn Deference to their persons in public, appearing but seldom abroad, and
then not without Royal Robes, stately Guards, and other magnificent Equipage;
ad popul^m phateras: for certainly, did they frequently converse amongst us,
and render themselves cheap in the eyes of their people, the Commonalty would
soon grow faw^y, and then dangerous; for that overmuch familiarity breeds
contempt. Nevertheless, as a decent Retinue or Guard du Corpse is necessary, so
on the other side is a standing Army no less dangerous as well to the Prince as
People, whereof we see diverse Examples in the Ianizaries of Turkey, and
Praetoriax Bands of Rome. How often have they plucked down one Prince to set up
another? What havoc did they make in the old Roman Empire, in so much that the
Emperors themselves seemed to have held their Diadems by no stronger Title,
than their Armies good will and pleasure; being not half so arbitrary over
their People, as their Militia is over them. In effect, the General of the Army
is the only King, and the person that above all others I should most fear to
offend, did I live in such a Government.

[4] Esteeming the greatest part of my Wealth to belong unto my Friends. This
opinion of communicating ones Wealth with ones Friends, if it be not restrained
with due prudence and moderation, makes a man to be like a Tree, with a great
many young Succors growing out of its Roots, which if they be long suffered,
will draw away that Juice which should maintain the Tree, and make it decay, so
that instead of a fair Tree, there will remain only a few Shrubs. Wherefore the
natural conduct of our Life seems most properly to be taken, from observing the
ways of Nature in all her Works; who (we see) has framed every particular man
like a little World separate from others, and complete ^n himself: he lives not
by the meat which others eat, but by that which he himself eats; he sees not
with other men's eyes, but with his own; and in effect, every man is charged
with the care of himself; which if he either through softness of mind, or other
impertinent diversions, neglects, he is a Traitor to himself, and sins against
Nature: Nor is the punishment of this sin deferred to the next Life, but always
most severely punished in this both with poverty and scorn; scorn, I say, even
from those who have been cherished by his bounty, Prodigus and Stultus donat
quae sper^it and o^it*
Haec seges ingratos tulit* and feret omnibus (...).
Hor. Lib. 1, Ep. 7. Who betrays you in your Bed? your Friend; for your Enemy
is not suffered to come to your House. Who betrays you in your Estate? your
Friend; for your Enemy is not made your Trustee. And who betrays you in your
Reputation, but your Friend? for your Enemy is not believed against you. What
greater Lying, Treachery, Backbiting, and Dissimulation, is there seen under
Heaven, than in some private Families betwixt Brothers and Sisters, to supplant
one another in the affections of the good old wealthy Parents? What obsequious
bribing and caressing the favorite Servant, only to win him to their Party,
and make him whisper their Lies into his old Master's or Lady's Ears, to the
disadvantage of the other Children? Therefore (says Osborn) let not the Titles
of Consanguinity betray you into a prejudicial Trust; no blood being apt^^ to
raise a Fever, or cause a Consumption sooner in your Estate, than that which
is nearest your own. Likewise, how often have we Examples of the Infidelity of
Servants toward their Masters, as well as Favorites toward their Princes?
Thus did Perennius conspire against Commodus, Brutus against Casar, Pl^uti^nus
against Severus, and Seianus against Tiberius: neither is hardly any private
Gentleman's Family without its Seianus, as well for Perfidiousness, as Power.
The nature of Friendship is well deciphered in Aesop's Fable of the Lark and
her young ones, who hearing the Master of the Harvest invite his Friend to help
him reap on such a day the Corn wherein they lay, yet nevertheless removed not
their Lodging upon this invitation, well knowing how uncertain Friends are;
neither would they stir the next day, when the Master had ordered his Servants
to go to reaping, as knowing also the falseness of Servants; but on the third
day when they heard the Master give out that he would trust neither Friends nor
Servants, but go and reap it himself, then the Larks thought it high time to be
gone, and accordingly took their flight. True Friendship is so rare a thing,
that it is scarce ever to be met with; even the best Friends we have are made so
out of Love, not to us, but to themselves: Hunc, quem mensa tibi, quem Coena
paravit amicum,
Esse put^s fidae pectus Ami^i^iae?
Aprum a^at, and Mullos, and Sumen, and Ostrea: non^e.
Tam been si coenem, noster amicus erit.
Mart. Ep. 14. Lib. 9. Cosmus, Duke of Florence, had a desperate saying against
perfidious Friends, as if those wrongs were unpardonable: You shall read (says
he) that we are commanded to forgive our Enemies, but you never read that we
are commanded to forgive our Friends. The most famous Example of true
Friendship whereof the Ancients boasted was that of Pylades and Orestes;
nevertheless the Italians boas^ to have exceeded this and all other Stories of
Friendship, in the late Example of Barbadicus and Tarvisanus, two Gentlemen of
Venice, who rendered themselves not a little ridiculous thereby.

[5] I subdue with Money the Barbarians, etc. This whereof King Phraotes here
boasts as a liberal and politic Act, seems the most abject and base condition
a Prince can be in, when he is fain to hold his peace with his Neighbors by
paying them Annual Pensions: it shows he is in fear of them; nor will this hold
long, but when a fit opportunity shall present it self, they will infallibly
make a prey of him. The Roman State whilst it flourished, and after it came
under such Emperors as were wise and military men, were so far from securing
their peace by way of Presents, that they ever kept the Borders of their Empire
well guarded with standing Forces: We read that when the Romans were besieged
in the Capitol, though they were in expectation of Relief from the Veji and
Camillus, yet Famine constraining them, they proposed a Parley with the French,
and were to pay a sum of Money for their Liberty; the Articles were signed, all
things concluded, and Commissioners sent to receive the Money; when on a sudden
Camillus appears with his Army, as if Fortune had done it, (says Livy) ut
Romani auro redempti non viverent: and it is observable in the whole progress
of the Affairs of that Commonwealth, that they never got Town, nor made a Peace
with Money; till at last when living under bad Emperors, they began to
degenerate and neglect their military Discipline, they began to be
Pensionaries, first to the Parthians, then to the Germans, and so by degrees to
all the rest of their Neighbors; which course held not long, but they on all
sides were invaded and ruined by Inundations of those Barbarians, who would no
longer rest contented with Presents, but rather took the whole. Vid. Machiav.
disc. lib. 2. chapter 30. A Prince who in this manner takes up Peace upon Interest,
will fare like the man in the Fable, who being bit by a Dog, was advised to dip
a piece of Bread in the Wound, and give it to the Dog that bit him, to eat*
which would have made all the Dogs in the Town do the like, in hopes of the
same reward: so that the Remedy is worse than the Disease; since in buying off
one Enemy, you make ten.

[6] Discus after the Greek fashion; the Discus was a round Stone in manner of
a Bowl or Quoit, made sometimes of Iron, or Brass, the which whosoever could
cast farthest got the victory; the players thereat were called (...), from
(...) and (...), to dart or cast out any thing. Romans Antiq* Godwin; lib. 2.
Sect. 3.

CHAP. XII. Apollonius went with the King to a Feast; What manner of Feast it
was; The Indians Skill in Shooting; What Philosophers are in India; What in
Greece; At what year of the Age young men begin to study Philosophy in India;
That they must be free from all Vice; Some are appointed to examine them, to
see whether they are worthy to be Philosophers, which, as the King related at
the Feast, is chiefly to be known from their Eyes, Eyebrows, and Cheeks.
WHen therefore they had bathed, they went crowned to the Feast; for that is
the custom in India, as often as any drink at the King's Palace. It is also worth
the while not to o^it the fashion of their [1] Feasting, which is plainly
described by Damis. The King sits down on a Bed of Leaves and Grass spread
on the Ground, and near to him some of his Kindred, at most but five; the rest
feast together sitting on Seats. A Table is erected in the middle like an Altar
about the height of a man's Knees, which is able to contain about thirty men
round it, as a Chorus. On the Table Laurels are strewn, and other Boughs like
to a Myrtle, which produce sweet Ointments for the Indians use. Fish and Fowl
are set upon the Table, as also whole Lions, Goats, and Boars, with Legs of
Tigers; for the Indians refuse to feed on the other Joints of this living
Creature, because it is reported that when he is first born, he lifts up his
fore-feet ^owards the Sunrising. He that is bidden rises up out of his own
Seat, and comes to the Table, where having taken or cut off a piece of that
which lies on it, returns to his own Seat, eating ever now and then some
Bread with it. When they are almost satisfied with eating, Bowls of Silver and
Gold are brought in, each of which may seem sufficient for ten men to drink
off, and out of these they stooping down drink as if they were watered at some
River. As they are drinking, they introduce some Sports that are hazardous,
though full of Skill and Exercise; for a certain Lad like one of those that use
to dance on the Stage, suddenly skippeth out into the middle, whilst an Arrow
is shot up on high over his Head; but he in the mean time tumbleth, and as the
Arrow is ready to fall on the Earth, shifteth very nimbly out of the way, as
knowing that if he mi^^'d but a little in his tumbling, the Arrow would fall
upon him and pierce him. The Archer before he discharge his Arrow, carries it
up and down in his Hand, showing the head thereof to all the Guests, permitting
any one that is skilled to try it. Moreover, they are so expert at Slinging,
that they will hit to an hair. In this place the Greek is either corrupted or
defective.
They will likewise shoot so evenly, and stick their Arrow^ so artificially, as
shall resemble the visage of a young man, as well as a Painter could draw it
with a Coal. These Exercises are practiced by the Indians at their Feasts, and
though they be sometimes drunk, yet will they perform them well enough. When
Damis and his Companions saw these things, they were amazed, admiring at their
great Dexterity in shooting evenly. But Apollonius sitting by the King, who
used the same Diet that he did, gave little regard to these Feats, but said to
the King, Tell me (O King) how it is you have the Greek Tongue so ready, and the
( 2) Philosophy that you have about you, how it came here? for I suppose you
are not beholden to Masters for it, in as much as it is not likely that there be
any Masters of such things amongst the Indians. Whereat the King smiling,
answered, Our Ancestors asked all them that came in Ships to these Parts
whether they were Pirates, so common did they think this Vice, though so
mischievous: But you Greeks seem to me to ask them that come to you whether
they be Philosophers, as if you thought that this which is the divinest of all
things among men, may without distinction be found equally in all men, and I
know that this is with you the same thing as Piracy. For they say that there is
no man to be met with like to you; but the most of you having spoiled others of
their Philosophy, do as it were cloathe themselves with a garment that does not
fit them, and walk haughtily in others Robes: Also as Pirates who know
themselves liable to Justice live very luxuriously, so in like manner your [3]
Philosophical Pirates are found to give themselves up to Gluttony, Venery, and
fine Clothes. Now I suppose your Laws to be the cause of this evil; for if any
man coyns false money he is put to death; or if any man defraud an Orphan, or
commit any the like crime; But there is no Law that I can hear of, to restrain
the counterfeiters or corrupters of Philosophy, neither is any Ruler appointed
over these. Whereas amongst us there are very few that addict themselves to
Philosophy, and they are tried in this manner: The young Candidate being 18
years old, (for this I suppose is ripeness of age with you) must come unto
those Men near the River Hyphasis, for whose sakes you undertook your Journey
into these parts; Before them he must openly profess that he will addict
himself to the study of Philosophy, and they have power to prohibit him if he
come not pure. And pure I call him; first, in reference to his Father and
Mother, if no reproach appear concerning them; and then to their Ancestors to
the third Generation* and upwards; whether any one of them were an Injurious
Person, or Incontinent, or an unjust exacter of Gain: When no blemish, or mark
of Infamy is found upon them, then a diligent inspection is to be made into the
Young Man himself; and he is to be tried, first, whether he be of a good
Memory, and naturally Modest, not faining himself so to be. Next, whether he be
a Drunkard, Glutton, Boaster, lover of Laughter, Railer, or Headstrong; and
whether he be Obedient to his Father, Mother, and Teachers; or whether he
abuses his good Feature. And of what Parents every one is born, and who were
their Progenitors, is attested by sufficient Witnesses, and Writings, which are
upon Public Record. For when any one of the Indians dies, then comes a
certain Magistrate (hereunto by the Laws appointed) to the door of the
Deceased, to set down in writing how he lived: If any one of which Magistrates
is taken telling a Lie, or erring through the Lie of another, by the Laws his
Punishment is, that he shall never after bear any Office, as having depraved
the Life of a Man. They that are appointed to examine the Youths, collect many
things from their Aspect; For the Eyes discover much of Men's Disposition; and
much lies in the Eyebrows and Visages, whereby Wise Men, and skilful
Naturalists behold their Minds and Tempers as Images in a Glass. For in as much
as Philosophy is in high Honor amongst the Indians, it is fit that they should
be thoroughly tried, who addict Themselves to the study thereof: In what manner
therefore Young Men are examined, before they are assigned to their Masters,
has been sufficiently declared.

Illustrations on Chap. 12.
[1] THe fashion of their Feasting, etc. This Description of the Indian Feasts,
is so full of barbarous and foolish Customs, as deserves neither imitation nor
praise. Neither is it a pattern of the ancient Feasts, which were so various
both for Times and Countries, that no one History can describe them: but
generally full of Luxury and Excess; and for the most part, not without some
Superstition, which Parasites to render themselves welcome did expound to be
ingenious. But this passage of the Boy and the Arrow, was so sottish and
dangerous, as might well spoil all their mirth; only their admirable skill in
Shooting (especially where the Bow was a military Weapon) deserved highly to be
encouraged: In like manner that exquisite dexterity in Slinging mentioned in
the Old Testament, deserves great applause, since thereby little David slew the
mighty Goliath, which in effect gave the Israelites victory over the Philistine
Army: and by the same skill the Baleares were of greatest use in the Roman
Militia: Thus at this day in most Cities of the Venetian State, on every
Holiday there are Trials of Skill, both of small and great Artillery; the
charge of Powder, with reward to the Victors, being allowed out of the public
Treasury; and would be a custom worthy of imitation in other Countries. The
number of Guests at this Feast Philostratus tells us were at most but five; in
like manner at the Roman Feasts they seldom exceeded nine: whence Gellius
(Noct. At. lib. 13. chapter 13.) says, that the number of the Guests should begin
with the Graces, and end with the Muses, that is, they must not be fewer than
three, nor more than nine. This also has been the reason of that Adage, Septem
Convivium, novem Convitium faciunt. Heliogabalus seems to have been delighted
with the number eight, whence he invited to supper octo Calvos, octo Luscos,
octo Podogrosos, octo Surdos, octo Ra^^os, octo insigniter Nigros, octo
insigniter Longos, octo Praepingues, and octo insigniter Nasutos, delectans
illo Graeco Proverbio (...). Of this see more in Stukio de Conviv. Rosini Romans
Antiq. Athenaei Deipnosoph. Alexand. ^b Alexand. etc.

[2] And the Philosophy that you have, etc. Apollonius being himself by
Profession a Philosopher, seems much to glorify the King for his study of
Philosophy: Thus every man is apt to magnify in others those qualities,
wherein himself is reputed eminent. But if we consider things aright, we shall
find Philosophy to be a silly study for a Prince; whose chief or indeed only
virtue should be to govern his People wisely* and not vain-gloriously, so as
they may flourish in peace and plenty, free from doing injury among themselves,
and receiving injury from abroad; whereof, the one is performed by true
Justice; the other by a well ordering their Forces at Sea or Land, according as
the situation of his Country most properly requires. To do this, he need not
trouble his head with Plato or Aristotle, but rather observ^ the several
Humors of his own People, and Interests of his Neighbors: so that he become a
great Master in that Art which our wise King James was used to call King-Craft:
Tu regere imperi^ popul^s Roman memento,
Hae tibi ^runt arts. --
And as for Philosophy, if it signify any thing, (which the uncertainty and
contradictions found therein make men doubt) it is fitter to be assigned for a
diversion to private persons, who having little to busy their heads about,
might otherwise contrive mischievous devices, if they were not entertained in
such harmless speculations; which are as necessary a divertisement for the Men,
as Books of Devotion and Needles for the Women: for which reason* the setting
up Universities is not amiss; although amongst us, who are Islanders, the Art
of Navigation were more worth than all the seven Liberal Sciences.
Nevertheless, some of the wisest Politicians have thought it the Interest of
Princes to discourage and stifle all kinds of Literature whatever, as desiring
to keep their Subjects in a tame unthinking Ignorance; and perhaps upon this
account it was, that Ninus burnt those 14 Pillars, whereon Z^ro after had
engraven the seven Liberal Sciences. Now whether this act of his deserved
commendation or no, may be disputed; the noblest and most plausible opinion
runs high for Learning* and in most flourishing Kingdoms and Common wealths
there are public Schools and Universities endowed to propagate it: Also if we
look into Examples, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Marcus Antoni^us, and
many other famous Princes were persons of a very learned education; as likewise
many great Generals* I Will name only one who may stand for many, and that is
Xenophon. Yet on the other side if we depend upon Examples, there are upon
record a far greater number of Princes and Worthies, who neither had Learning
themselves nor promoted it in others; to instance only in two: One the greatest
that ever was upon Earth, (I mean as appears by any History not fabulous) is
T^merlain; the other the craftiest doubtless that ever the World knew, was
M^homet; neither of these did so much as seem to regard it, and yet were no
ways rude or weak in the management of their affairs. Nay Mahomet's
Institutions are totally averse to all vain Philosophy, and Liberal Sciences
whatever; and not only so, but to explain what kind of Life he best approved
of, he enjoins every man (not excepting the Emperor himself) to learn some
handicraft Trade. And ever since, the Turk finding Learning and Printing to be
the chief Fomenters of Division in Christendom, has hither to kept them out of
his Territories; neither were the Mohammedan Princes ever found to have been
outwitted by us of Christendom, who think our selves so much more learned and
knowing. The vanity of our knowledge is in nothing more evident than this, viz.
that our Students can easier ^^art ten Errors than kill one: moreover, learned
Men do most commonly resemble wanton Boys, who rather than be unemploy'd, will
do mischief. Sedition or Idleness are the chief results from our multitude of
Grammar Schools, whither (as Mr. Osborn well observes) all come that are but
able to bring a Bag and a Bottle; no unfit Emblem of the future poverty of
their Trade: wherein like ^ Lottery, ten take their chance of Beggary, for one
that meets with a Prize. Licinius (though no considerable Author, yet an
Emperor of Rome) would often say, that Learning was the very Pest of all
Commonwealths; and among the Goths there were severe Laws against it. Nay in
the very wisest and best governed Times of the Roman State, as also under most
of the Emperors, Philosophers were banished Rome, as corrupters of good
manners, and diverters of youth from spending their time in things of more
advantage both to the public and themselves. As for the public, those who get
their Living by some particular Art, that is for the most part useful to the
public: as he that knows how to make a Plow or a Cart, is forty times more
useful to his Country, than he that only knows what is Latin* Greek, or Hebrew
for a Plow or a Cart: or if in such an Employ he advantages not others, yet
each man who thereby maintains himself, does in so doing increase the number of
people without wrong to any; but he who spends his days in Contemplations,
which produce no useful or real effects, neither assists the public nor
himself; and if he have no paternal Inheritance to support him, must either
starve, beg or steal: nor could any moderate Estate suffice to maintain that
idle Humor wherewith Philosophers are possessed, who speculate into all
things, but their own most necessary Concerns, and understand every thing
better than their own Estates. The most prudent Scepticks have sufficiently
invalidated those men's Opinions, who spend their time, Deliri veteris
meditantes somnia vana; or who with Brutus, after they have all their Lifetime
studied the praises of Virtue, (till thereby with a bookish false Idea thereof
they have destroyed their Country and themselves) are forced at last when it is
too late with him to cry out* Te col^i virtus ut rem, ^st ^u nomen ina^^ es:
Virtue a^ real, I adored thy Fame,
But now I find thou art an empty Name!
Think therefore if such men had not better have been Shoomakers, Tailors, or
the like; wherefore in this point the Institution of our Universities is
exceedingly to be commended, where such as have but little means of their own
to trust to, are maintained to learn some Profession beneficial to themselves
and the public, as Divinity, Physic, or Civil-Law. However, those whose
Fortunes are able to subsist without a Vocation, need not enthral their Genius,
but indulge it in any Philology, what they most affect: And for such, if they
read History cursorily, it may make them discourse well; but if they study it
considerately, it tends much to instruct them in the Humors and Interests of
men, thereby teaching them the true Art of managing their Lives and Affairs:
when although few Examples square in all particulars, yet (as a skilful Tailor)
though he never made a Suit for one of your size, can after taking measure of
you, fit you by his old skill. Lastly, As for Philosophy, hear what Cicero
speaks of its Professors, Nil tam absurd^ dici potest, quod non dicatur ab
aliquo Philosophor^m. We are made to live in the World, and not to trouble our
selves about any thing that conduces not to our subsistence; Quod supra nos,
nihil ad nos: and he that throws away his time upon Speculations in Natural
Philosophy, does by the Pleasures of Life, as one did by his Entertainment as a
Feast: who being seated at Table, and a Knife lying before him, this
Philosophical Guest took it up, and begun to consider the Origin of it,
whereof it was formed; First, He made a speculation into the Handle, which led
him to the nature of Ivory, that to the Elephant's Tooth, and from thence to
the nature of Elep^^^ts. In the (...) place he undertook the Blade, which led
him to the nature of Iron, and that to the nature of Mines, when after a long
consideration thereof, he at length reduces his Reasoning either to Ignorance
or Uncertainty, and then bethinks himself of eating, when he finds the Cloth
taken away, his Companions to have dined, and his own Dinner lost. Which
Character (as I conceive) of a Natural Philosopher. Quod est ante pedes, nemo
spectat: Coeli s^rutantur plagas.
Cicero divin. lib. 2. Last of all, to show how much disadvantage and danger a
State receives by an overgreat esteem of Learning, no Age ever gave such a
remarkable Example as this wherein we now live, I mean that of China: That
great and rich Empire was totally governed by learned persons* none being
admitted to any considerable Office or Magistracy, but such as after a most
strict examination of their Learning were made Graduates in their public
Schools of Philosophy; this learned Nation about some five and thirty years ago
was invaded by the most illiterate rude Tartars, and by them overrun and
subdued. Thus were the Greeks overcome by the less learned Romans, and the
Roman Empire when flourishing in all Arts and Sciences, was destroyed by the
ignorant Goths and Vandals: which shows, that to maintain an Empire, a Sword is
a better Instrument than a Pen. If this great Example of China were not
sufficient to show how mischievous a thing too much Bookishness is in a People,
mark it more particularly when it possesses the persons of Princes or other
great Comm^nders themselves: The Greek and Asiatick Principalities afford very
many Examples, where (except only Zenophon and two or three more) scarce any of
them governed with ordinary commendation; but either weakly like Pedants, or at
best with scandalous Avarice, and very often extremely cruel, but usually point
blank contrary to their professed Doctrines, like Seneca in his vehement
Invectives against Riches, when he himself was of any under the degree of a
King held to be the richest man of that Age. Finally, In all Professions it is
by experience found, that the Theory and Practice are two distinct Faculties,
with little real influence one upon another: Thus many have proceeded Doctors
of Music, who could learnedly discourse of Harmony, with the several Keys and
Scales of Music, but not play half so well as any common
Countrey-Alehouse-Fidler: so in most contemplative Sciences, Discimus Scholae,
non Vitae. Nothing does more betray the Vanity of Philosophy, than the
Insufficiency of man's Reason, which as St. Paul says, is foolishness before
God: for he that thinks he knows any thing, that man knows nothing; which
made the wise Socrates confess, Hoc scio me scire nihil. I shall conclude this
Discourse with so many lines as are to my purpose, out of a late ingenious Copy
of Verses written upon this Subject, by a Person of Honor; which are th^se:
Were I (who to my cost already am
One of those strange prodigious Creatures Man)
A spirit free to choose for my own share,
What case of flesh and blood I pleased to wear,
I Would be a Dog, a Monkey, or a Bear;
Be any thing but that vain Animal,
Who is so proud of being rational;
The senses are too gross, and he will contrive
A sixth, to contradict the other five;
And before certain Instinct will prefer
Reason, which fifty times for one does err;
Reason, an Ignis fatuus in the mind,
Which leaving light of Nature, sense, behind,
Pathless and dangerous wandering ways it takes
Through Errors, fenny Bogs, and thorny Brakes;
Whilst the misguided follower climbs with pain
Mountains of Whimsies, heaped in his own Brain;
Tumbling from thought to thought falls headlong down
Into Doubts boundless Sea, where like to drown
Books bear him up a while, and make him try
To swim with Bladders of Philosophy.
In hope still to overtake the escaping light,
The vapor dances in his dazzled sight,
Till spent, it leaves him to eternal night.
Then old age and experience hand in hand
Lead him to death, and make him understand,
After a Search so painful and so long,
That all his Life he has been in the wrong.
Huddled in dirt the Reasoning Engine lies,
Who was so proud, and thought himself so wise.
Pride drew him in, (as Cheats do Bubbles catch)
And made him venture to be made a wretch.
His wisdom did his happiness destroy,
Aiming to know that World he should enjoy.
This supernatural gift that makes a mit^
Think he is the Image of the Infinite.
This busy puzling stirrer up of doubt,
That frames deep myst'ries and then finds them out:
Trifling with frantic Crowds of thinking Fools
Thos^ Reverend Bedlams, Colleges, and Schools;
Born on whose wings each heavy Sot can pierce
The fla^ing Limits of the Universe:
So cheating Ointments make an old Witch fly,
And bear a crippled Carcass through the Sky.
It Is the exalted power whose busines^ lies,
In Nonsense and Impossibilities.
This made a whimsical Philosopher
Before the spacious World his Tub prefer.
And we have modern cloistered Coxcombs, who
Retire to think, 'cause they have naught to do.
But thoughts were given for Actions government,
Where Action ceases thought's impertinent.
Our Sphere of Action is Life's happiness,
And he who thinks beyond, thinks like an As^.
Satyr against Man.

[3] Philosophical Pirates give themselves to Gluttony, Vene^y, etc. It was
ever the Reproach of the ancient Philosophers, that their Lives were no way
correspondent to their Doctrines, and that Probitas laudatur and alget. Their
long Robes, great Beards, and affected Gravity, were so notoriously defamed by
their Avarice and dishonest Lives, as made them often banished from several
States, and at last quite ruined the profession. In those Times the Heathen
Religions did little meddle with Morals, but especially with the Rites and
Ceremonies of divine Adoration, leaving the moral part of humane Conversation
to be managed by moral Philosophers, who with their loud praises of Virtue
gulled the World for many Ages; till after notorious and universal experience
of their lewd Lives and gross Hypocrisy, it was found that such talkative
Virtue was but ^ Chimaera, or Nomen inane. Lucian in his Dialogue concerning
the Manners of Philosophers brings in Menippus speaking thus of them: Because I
was (says he) uncertain what course of Life to hold, I thought good to go to
the Philosophers and take their advice, that they might direct me herein, not
considering, that as the Proverb says, I cast my self out of the drying pan
into the fire; for I found amongst them all things more uncertain than amongst
any sort of men* in so much that the Life of the veriest Idiot, seemed unto me
more happy than theirs. For when I beheld their Lives, I perceived they were
clean contrary to their own precepts and doctrines; those who taught that Money
and Riches were to be contemned, did gape after nothing more than Gain, lending
to usury, teaching for hire, and doing all for money; those who in words seemed
most to contemn glory, referred all the whole course of their Lives thereto;
and finally, those that openly spoke most against voluptuousness and pleasure,
secretly sought and embraced nothing else. Thus far Lucian* But to justify
this by Example, let us reflect upon some few of the most eminent amongst them.
What can be more absurd than the Laws of Plato, wherein (following the
Doctrines of his Masters Socrates and Pythagoras) he not only tolerates but
enjoins community of Women, and a promiscuous generation, also that young Men
and Women should be stark naked when they performed their Exercises at the
Gymnasian Games? Likewise what shall we say of Aristotle, Plato's Scholar, whom
diverse that lived in the same Age did testify to be a most wicked man?
Cephisodorus the Disciple of Isocrates charged him with Delicacy, Intemperance,
and Gluttony; Lieon the Pythagorean said he was so covetous, that he used to
sell the Oil wherein he bathed himself; Demochares objected against him, that
he betrayed his own Country Stagira to the Macedonians; and finally, one of
his Followers, who undertook to defend him against others, confesses, that two
things commonly reported of him were probable, that is to say, that he was
ungrateful to his Master Plato, and that he secre^ly debauched the adopted
Daughter of his Friend Hermias the Eunuch and married her, of which Eunuch he
had been also before so much enamored, that Eubulides says, he made a kind of
Marriage with him; and Theocritus of Chio wrote an Epigram of their brutish
Love and Conversation. Eusebius. contra Philosoph. Lastly, Let us examine the Laws
of Aristotle, than some of which, nothing could be more barbarous: One was,
that if a man had any lame or deformed Child, he should cast it out like a
Whelp, and expose it to perish: Another Law of his was, that if a man had above
such a certain number of Children, (which number he would have determined
according to every man's ability) that then his Wife should destroy the fruit
in her Womb, when ever after she conceived; than which nothing could be more
inhumane: Neither can I forbear to mention another Constitution of his, which
was no less absurd or ridiculous; when prohibiting the use of lascivious
Pictures for fear of corrupting the Youth, he nevertheless in the same Law
excepteth the Images and Pictures of certain Gods, in whom (says he) the
custom allows Lasciviousness. Again, Aristotle, who has written so exactly
of all moral Virtue in his Book de Ethicis or de Moribus, and was himself the
Prince or Head of the Peripatetick Philosophers, was forced to fly privately
out of Athens, for fear of being punished for his wicked Life; he most
ungratefully (as some say) poisoned his best Benefactor Alexander the Great,
who had restored to him his Country, and trusted him with his Life; he denied
to the Soul any place of Joy after this Life* he collected the Writings of
others* whose several other Copies having stifled, he published them under his
own Name; and last of all running mad out of an immoderate desire of Knowledge,
he is said to be the Author of his own Death. And so much for Aristotle. See
Agrip. vanit. scient. In the next place, Our great Seneca, whom notwithstanding
St. Ier^^^ would have inserted into the Catalogue of Saints, as little deserved
it as either Plato or Aristotle; for I do not think any of the Heathens lived
worse than he did, as we may find if we trace him right: In the time of the
Emperor Claudius we find he was banished for suspi^ion of Incontinency with
Iulia the Daughter of Germanicus; and if it be said, that this proceeded merely
from the spite of Messalina, why then did she not cause him to be put to
death, as well as she did the other, who was her Husba d's Niece? But it is most
certain, whatever his Life were, he had paginam L^scivam, as (...) appear by
what he has written de Speculorum usu, l. 1. Not. Qu. cap. 16. which
(admitting it may in a Poet, yet) how it should be excused in a Philosopher, I
know not: In his exile he wrote his Epistle de Consolatione to Polybius,
Claudius's Creature, and as honest a man as Pallas or Narcissus) wherein he
extolls him and the Emperor to the skies, seeking a discharge of his exile by
so fordid a means, whereby he lost much of his Reputation. Upon Claudius's
Marriage with Agrippina, he was recalled from Banishment by her means, and made
Praetor; when, having no need of him, he forgets the Emperor, laboring all he
can to depress him, and the hopeful Brittanicus, also procured his Pupil Nero
to be adopted Successor, and the Emperor's own Son to be disinherited; likewise
against the Emperor (whom he so much praised when he had need of him) after his
Death he writes a scurrilous Libel. In Nero's Court, how ungratefully does he
behave himself toward Agrippina! who although she were a wicked Woman, yet she
deserved well of him. Also toward Nero himself what a treacherous part did he
play, in becoming an associate in Piso's Conspiracy. No^ must we here omit his
vast Riches and Avarice. Moreover, He does in extremo actu defic^re, when he
must needs persuade his excellent Lady Paulina to die with him, which according
to his opinion (for he believed not the Souls Immortality) could be no
advantage to her. Last of all, The Philosopher Theodorus, who was honored with
the title of a God, delivered i^ as his opinion, that wise men would not stick
to give their minds to Thieving, Adultery, or Sacrilege, when they found a
seasonable opportunity; that none of these are evil by Nature; and that setting
aside the vulgar opinion, there is no Reason but a Philosopher might go
publicly to a Whore without Reproof. Many more Instances could I produce, to
show not only the ill precepts which were taught but likewise the evil Lives
which were led by many of the ancient Philosophers, whose practices have
continually run counter to their Theory. Now from hence it is, that the wisest
Governments grew to manage the Peoples Conscience rather by Religion than
Philosophy, since the terrors of Hell and hopes of Paradise would more
effectually reform mankind, than any Philosophical Notions: And whereas the
Philosophers were so multiplied into Sects, as St. Austin out of Varr^ reports
them to have been almost 300. and in effect, each giving the other the Lie; now
Religion seemed likely to be more agreeable to its own Doctrine, and more
united in it self. Yet in after* Ages, even that divided into so many Schisms,
as made a kind of necessity of setting up one supreme Judge, whose Dictates
(right or wrong) should decide all Controversies about Religion, and regulate
the manners of the Clergy; this raised the Pope over the Christians, and Mafti
over the Mahometans: Yet in both of these (so prone is flesh and blood to
corruption) that many times the greatest Doctors are forced to bid men do as
they teach, and not as they do; which nevertheless is apt to discredit the very
Doctrines themselves among vulgar people, who are more inclined to believe what
they see, than what they hear. But to speak as a moral man, their pretended
Religion and Philosophy consisted in this: Compositum Ius, fasque Animi;
Sanctosque recessus
Mentis and incoctum gener^so pectus honesto.
Pers.

CHAP. XIII. The Narration of King Phraotes touching his Parents and himself;
namely, how his Father being in his youth cast out of his Kingdom, studied
Philosophy amongst the wise men; and how he himself being instructed by his
Father in the Greek Tongue, was sent to the same wise men to be taught
Philosophy; but after the death of his Father was recalled by his Father's
Friends to the Kingdom.
AS for my self, this is the History of what has befallen me. I am descended
of a Grandfather who was a King, and of the same Name with me; but my Father
was a private man: for being left very young, two of his near kindred were
according to the Laws of India made his Guardians, and managed the Government
for him very tyrannically. Whereupon they appeared grievous to the Subjects,
and the Government was evil spoken of; in so much that many of the Nobility
conspiring together against them, did at the great Solemnity when they were
sacrificing to the River Indus, set upon them, and kill them: when seizing on
the Government, they shared it amongst themselves. Wherefore my Father's
kinsmen being very solicitous of his safety, when he was not yet 16 years old,
sent him to the King that reigns near the River Hyphasis; which Kingdom is
far greater than that which I possess, and the Country much more pleasant.
When the King would have adopted him his Son, my Father refused it, saying,
that he was unwilling to strive against Fortune, who had already deprived him
of Rule. Wherefore he entreated the King to give leave that he might be brought
up in Philosophy by the wise men of that Country, which would make him the
better undergo his domestic evils. Now when the King was willing to restore
him to his own Kingdom, my Father answered, If you perceive me to be a true and
genuine Philosopher, you shall restore me; if not, suffer me to continue as I
am. When the King heard this, he himself went with him to the wise men,
promising to bestow no small Benefits on them, if they used their utmost
diligence in educating that Youth who was by nature so generous. They
discerning something more than ordinary in him, very freely assented to
communicate their Wisdom to him, and readily instructed him, who was as fully
intent upon Learning. After 7 years were expired, the King falling sick of a
Disease which ended his Life, sends for my Father, and makes him co-partner
with his own Son in the Kingdom, giving him his Daughter (then marriageable) to
Wife. But he, when he perceived the King's Son to be overcome by Flatterers,
Drinking, and such like Vanities, as also to have a suspicious eye over him,
said to him, Take your Estate to your self, and order it how you please; for it
is a ridiculous thing, that he who is not able to recover his own Kingdom,
should boldly intrude into another: grant (...) only your Sister, for this
alone of all your Estate will satisfy me. Wherefore taking his Wife, he
withdrew into those Places that are near to the wise men, wherein he had 7 very
pleasant Towns which the King gave to his Sister for her privy Purse. Now I
being sprung from this Marriage, and my Father having instructed me in the
Greek Learning, he brought me to the wise men sooner perhaps than was fitting,
(for I was but 12 years old) however, they took me and bred me up as their own
Child, for they show far greater kindness to such as are skilled in the Greek
Tongue before they receive them, in as much as they are more capable of their
Instructions. My Parents afterward dying soon after one another, the wise men
brought me to my Towns, that I might look to my own Affairs, as being now about
19 years of age. But my good Uncle had by this time taken away the 7 Towns, so
that he did not so much as leave me the Fields which my Father had purchased,
saying, that they all belonged to his Kingdom, and that it was a favor he
suffered me to live. Wherefore having gathered up a small stock from my Mothers
freed men, I lived poorly, having but four Attendants. In this condition as I
was reading the Tragedy called Heraclidae, there came a Messenger to me from
this Place, bringing a Letter from a certain Friend of my Father's, who bade me
pass over the River Hydraotes, and consult with him about recovering this
Kingdom, for there were great hopes for me that I might easily attain it, if I
were not wanting to my self. I thinking that some of the Gods had brought that
Tragedy into my thoughts, followed the Presage. Now when I had crossed the
River, I heard that one of them who had usurped the Kingdom was dead, and that
the other was besieged in his Palace. Wherefore complying with these things, I
came with open mouth in all the Towns wheresoever I passed, crying out, that I
was the Son of such a one, and that I came to possess my own Government.
Whereupon they received me with very great joy, and thinking me to be very like
my Grandfather, embraced me, and accompanied me with Swords and Bows in great
numbers, which continually increased. Wherefore coming to the Gate of the City,
those that were here received me so cheerfully, that they lighted Torches at
the Altar of the Sun, wherewith came to the Gates, and conducted me hither,
singing praises of my Father and Grandfather. As for that Drone within, they
thr^w him over the Walls, notwithstanding I interceded for him, that they would
not put him to such a death.

Illustrations on Chap. 13.
[1] TO strive against Fortune, etc. It is a very fa^n^ Opinion for any man*
although Fortune has given him one shrewd Blow, (...) to despond; or though in
a great Design his second or third Attempt be ^oyl'd, yet the works of Destiny
are kept so secret from us till enlightened by time, as for ought we know, that
success which is denied to our first, second, or third Attempt, may be reserved
to a fourth; nothing is more ^^^ally seen, than in the sealing the Walls of
strong Place^, after one or two desperate repulses, an obstinate perseverance
carries them: and so in men's civil Undertakings, perseveranti dabitur; for in
persevering, many times strange and unthought of Accidents are found to come
in, by means whereof the success is beyond what could have been imagined; for
God does as well disappoint our Fears as our Hopes. Therefore in the old Roman
way of such as slew themselves, if they did it out of scorn to endure any base
disgrace, then it was set upon the score of Magnanimity; or if it was to ease
them of some grievous pai^, then it excused it self upon that Dictate of
Nature, Of Evils choose the least; but if in case of adverse Fortune, and an
overhasty Despair, it was certainly then the effect of a pusillanimous Spirit,
which had not courage enough to hold out till a better condition might appear.

[2] The Tragedy of Heraclidae; this Tragedy was written by Euripides.

[3] I would not be wanting to my self, etc. The main Reason why there are so
few gallant Exploits done among men, and how it comes to pass that they suffer
such base Oppressions as they do, is for the most part because they are wanting
to themselves; that is, they either see not the opportunities they have of
helping themselves, or else they want the courage to undertake them: The Reason
of the first is, not so much the daily diversion of their minds upon pleasures
or other impertinencies, as a mere thoughtlessness and stupidity, wherein we
pass most of our time in thinking seriously upon nothing. This perhaps is a
great cause of public Quiet, in not observing those Emergencies which more
vigilant and hot Heads would lay hold of for turbulent Attempts; and therefore
in our Institutions is not censured: but Mahomet has by an express Edict
prohibited it as a mortal sin; and I am of opinion, that his strict Injunction
for such perpetual Meditation and Advertency, is one great cause of the daily
growth and progress of his Church and Empire. Yet indeed were I a Prince,
especially if I did not exactly govern as the Peoples good required, I should
not much fancy my thinking Subjects, lest observing things too narrowly, their
thoughts might not be to my advantage. The second way wherein men usually fall,
is want of Courage, Magnis conatibus obstat impunitatis ^^pido: If man were not
a Creature as timid as he is crafty and malicious, how could one man or a few
enslave a whole Nation? Yet most certainly it was the great wisdom of God to
plant this fear of Death in the heart of man; without which, the poor would
rifle the rich, the People would disobey their Governors, and every
superstitious Fool would to escape Purgatory, murder whomsoever his Confessor
bid him. Now besides these two Deficiencies, men are wanting to themselves in
many other Points, but above all in Industry; how many appear in the Streets
half naked, and begging for a farthing, when others, as feeble as they, support
themselves by Labor; and others who lie tortured with Diseases, have usually
failed themselves in point of Temperance, when rather than restrain their
Gluttony or Drunkenness, they choose as the easier, to fall a praying: Poscis
opem nervi^, corpusque fidele senectae
Esto age, sed patinae grandes, Tucetaque crass^
Annuere his superos vetuere Iovemque morantur.
Thus in all kind of Afflictions that men endure, upon a severe scrutiny they
shall find, that their endurance, or at least their long endurance, proceeds
from their being wanting to themselves one way or other.

[4] Received me with great joy, etc. The Case in brief was thus: This King
Phraotes his Father came young to the Crown, which being by some great men
usurped from him, he not long after dying, they still deta^n'd it from his
young Son Phraotes, who thereby was constrained to live poor in exile, till
after that the Usurpers had with much oppression for some years exasperated the
People: they then revolted from the Usurpers and sent for the right Heir
Phraotes, and settled him in the Throne of his Ancestors. The People are so
basely in love with their own ease and safety, as they many times suffer horrid
Injuries to be done to their Prince, although he never offended them; but when
any hope arises of Revenge, then they are apt enough to assist: Thus when our
Richard the III. murdered with his own hand King Henry the VI. and caused the
two young innocent Princes to be destroyed, all was quiet, until the next He^r
landed, although with but a handful of men; then People flockt in to him in
such numbers, as soon enabled him to overthrow the Usurper; who although in his
short Reign had very wisely enacted diverse popular Laws, to win the Love of his
People, yet all would not suffice; for he being observed to be bloudily
revengeful and false, it was believed, if he was once settled, his good Laws
would not have long prevailed against his Tyranny: But if instead of those good
Laws, he had begun with Violence and Oppression, then infallibly he had not
been endured so long, nor found so many to assist him as he did. This plainly
appeared in the case of Rehoboam, who though he was the right lawful Heir, yet
because he would not give any way to the Peoples Petition, ten parts of twelve
fell from him, and God Almighty owned the thing to have been from him; not that
God is the Author of Rebellion, but that by the Instinct of Nature which God
has planted in all men, there is a desire to live comfortably; when if they
perceive all hope of that to be taken from them, and no hopes in obedience,
then what courses that despair will drive men into, may easily be foreseen by
any who observe the proceedings of uncatechized Nature, which teaches more what
men formerly have done, what they do, and what hereafter they will do, than
what by the Rules of Duty they should do. When a People is oppressed by a
Prince, they should make use only of their Preces and Lachrymae; however some
are so mutinous as to fly to their Sword, and others so treacherous, as by
opposing all Petitions from the People, they take away their Preces, and leave
them only their Lachrymae. Now this want of softning and easing the Government
was the ruin of these Usurpers, and is the usual Rock upon which most Usurpers
split; for their many Enemies and want of Title makes them keep a standing
Army, which sooner or later brings inevitable Ruin to the Government: first by
their Rapine they make the Prince odious; for all men hate the Master who sets
his Dog upon them, more than they do the Dog himself; and then when he is
odious to all men, he is totally at the Soldiers mercy: and if you observe,
the usual Method of the old Pretorian Bands, was to knock their Emperor on the
head, and set the Crown at sale to who will give most, the People all the while
looking on with applause. And we who have seen the late Tragedy acted by our
Usurpers on the Scene of England, do well know, that His Majesty's Restoration
and the Usurper's Ruin was (next under God) brought to pass by their own Army
under the Command of General Monck, who was since for his special Service
created Duke of Al^^marle.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Oxydracks, and their impregnable City; That they chase away
their Enemies, not with Arms, but with Thunder and Lightning sent from Jupiter,
which were heretofore made use of against Hercules and Bacchus; That the
Egyptian Hercules came to Gades, not the Theban; A long Dispute whether the
Drinkers of Wine or Water be the best Sleepers; Of Medicines provoking Sleep;
And of the Prophet Amphiaraus.
APollonius hereunto replying, said, You have indeed acted the Return of the
Heraclidae, and the Gods are to be praised for their good will, that they
concurred to the Voyage of a good man returning to his own. But I entreat you
to tell me whether these are the wise men which were with Alexander, and being
brought to him discoursed to him Philosophically concerning the Heavens? The
King answered, They were the [1] Oxydracks, which Nation lives free, and is
trained up to War; moreover they pretend to [2] wisdom, but know nothing that
is good. The true wise men inhabit in the midst between Hyphasis and Ganges,
into which Parts Alexander never came, not that he stood in fear of them, but
was (I suppose) prohibited by sacred Presages. For if he had crossed Hyphasis,
and been able to seize on the Territories of that People, yet the Tower which
they inhabit he could never have taken* though he brought with him ten thousand
Achilles's, and thirty thousand Ajaxes; for neither do they fight with those
that come against them, but with prodigious Tempests and Thunderbolts chase
away the Enemies, as being themselves accounted sacred and beloved by the Gods.
Howbeit they relate, that the Egyptian Hercules and Bacchus, who marched with
their Armies through India, did both come against that People, and frame all
manner of Engines, and attempt the Place; notwithstanding the Citizens seemed
to make no resistance, but to remain unmoved, till the Enemy came close to the
Tower, and then [3] fiery Tempests beat them back, with Thundrings descending
and falling upon their Armies. At which time Hercules is reported to have flung
away his golden Buckler, which those wise men did for a Monument hang up in the
Temple, as well out of an opinion they had of Hercules, as for the Sculpture of
the Buckler it self; for Hercules was thereon pictured, setting Bounds to the
Earth near Gades, and erecting Mountains as Pillars to exclude the Ocean: from
whence it may manifestly be gathered, that it was the Egyptian Hercules, and
not the Theban that came to [4] Gades, and there prescribed Limits to the
Earth. As they were discoursing in this manner, the sound of singing with a
Pipe began to be heard. And when Apollonius asked what this mirth meant, the
King's Answer was, That the Indians do by such kind of Music admonish the King
when he goes to Bed, that he have good Dreams, and that he arise kind to and
careful of his Subjects. In what manner (said Apollonius) are you (O King)
affected toward such things, for they play on the Pipe, and sing of you? The
King answered, I deride not such things; for one must admit of them for the
Law's sake, although I stand not in need of any such admonition; for in what a
King shall do modestly and kindly, he shall more gratify himself than his
Subjects. Having thus discourst together, both betook themselves to sleep.
After the day began to appear, the King came to the Chamber where Apollonius
and his Companions lay, when having found out his Bed, he saluted the man, and
asked him what he was musing upon; for I suppose (said he) that you are not now
sleeping, in as much as you drink Water and deride Wine. Whereto Apollonius
answered, Do you not think they sleep who drink Water? Yes, said the King, but
very gentle sleep, such as we say seizes only on the Eyes and not on the Mind.
Nay, said Apollonius, they sleep both with Eyes and Mind, but most perhaps with
the Mind; for unless the Mind be quiet the Eyes can take no rest: wherefore
madmen cannot sleep by reason of the continual agitation of their Mind, which
leaping from one thing to another, they look somewhat terrible and staring, as
sleeping Dragons. Therefore O King, that we may manifestly declare what sleep
works, and what it signifies to men, let us enquire what it is that makes
the sleep of Water-drinkers to be lighter, than that of drunken persons? I pray
you (said the King) do not play the Sophister; for I will grant you if you
suppose a man to be drunk, that he sleeps not, because his Mind being in a
drunken fury causes him to tumble to and fro, filling him with diverse
perturbations: for all that go to sleep in a drunken Fit, think that they are
one while tossed up to the roof of the house, another while thrust down to the
ground, and whirled about in the same manner that [5] Ixion is said to be.
Wherefore I spoke not of such a drunken man, but of one who has drunk some
Wine, but continues sober, to consider whether such a one will not sleep much
better, than he that drinks no Wine at all. Apollonius having heard this,
called out to Damis, saying, I am discoursing with an acute man, and one that
is very well exercised in disputing. I see it, said Damis, and this perhaps is
that which is hinted in the common Proverb, To fall into Hucksters hands. And
indeed I am much moved with the Reason which he alleged; wherefore it will be
time when you are got up to finish this Discourse about Sleep. Thereupon,
Apollonius having erected his Head a little, said, I will according to your
advice now show what sweeter sleep we take that drink Water, than those that
drink Wine. That the Mind of Drunkards is tossed with many perturbations, and
vexed as it were with Furies, I confess was well declared by you; for we see
them that are distempered with Wine think they behold a double Sun, and double
Moon, whereas they that are sober have no such apprehension, but enjoy great
tranquillity of mind and delight, though many times they be of mean Fortunes.
But on the contrary, drunken persons fall a making Orations, whereas they never
pleaded in the Court so much as once, and boast of their Riches, whereas they
are not worth a Great. These, O King, are frantic Distempers, for mere joy
(...) wont to transport the mind: as I have seen men, who having lighted on
good Fortune, are not able to sleep, but suddenly start up; which is a
sufficient Argument that even good things afford care and anxiety. There have
been also certain Medicines invented to procure Sleep, which if any man drink
or anoint himself therewith, they sleep stretching themselves out at length, as
if they were dead: afterward they rise with a certain oblivion, and be rather
somewhere else, than where they seem to be. Now that Potions procure to the
Body neither proper nor natur^l Sleep, but either so profound, that they seem
half dead, or else so light, that any the least noise will break it, I suppose
you will soon grant, (though they should be good) unless you had rather be
obstinate, than a fair Disputant. But those that drink as I do, see all things
as they are, nor do they [6] fancy or feign to themselves things which are not;
nor are they light, or dull and sottish, or more jocund than is meet; but they
are steady and rational, being still the same, whether in the morning, or at
noon. For such men will never fall asleep, although they do business till it be
late at night; neither does Sleep violently force them as a Master bowing down
their Neck enslaved by Wine, but they are always free and erect; and when they
betake themselves to sleep with a pure and quiet Soul, they take a gentle Nap,
being neither elated with prosperity, nor depressed with adversity; for a sober
Soul is moderate in both, and not overcome with either perturbation: besides he
sleeps most sweetly and undisturbed, not startled out of his Sleep.
Furthermore, a Soul that is not suffocated with Wine, does more easily discern
Divination by Dreams, which is amongst men accounted a most divine thing,
receiving it sincerely, and clearly perceiving it. Wherefore the Interpreters
of Visions* whom the Poets call Oneiropolists, are never wont to interpret any
Vision, till they have first enquired the time wherein the man saw it: for if
it were early, and of the morning Sleep, they then thought that they might make
a good conjecture thereof, in that the Soul was then fitted for Divination, as
being dis-encumbred from Wine. But if in the first Sleep, or at midnight,
whilst the Soul was as yet suffocated and drowned in Wine, they being wise,
refused to give any Interpretation thereof. Moreover I will briefly
demonstrate, that the Gods themselves are of this opinion, and send their
Oracles rather unto sober minds. There was heretofore amongst the Greeks a
Prophet called Amphiaraus. I know it, said the King; for I suppose you mean the
Son of Oecleus, who returning from Thebes was by the Earth swallowed up alive.
This very man (replied Apollonius) does even at this time give Oracles in
Attica, and send Dreams to those that consult his Oracle: but the Priests
taking him who does so consult, keep him one day from Meat, and three days from
Wine, that he may in a clear Soul receive the Oracles delivered. Now were Wine
a fit Medicine for the procuring of Sleep, certainly the wise [7] Amphiaraus
would have commanded those that frequent the doors of his Temple, that having
prepared themselves in a contrary manner, they should go into the Sanctuary
like Vessels filled with Wine. I could likewise relate sundry other Oracles
very famous both amongst the Greeks and Barbarians, wherein the [8] Priest
after he had drunk Water, and not Wine, gave his Answers from the Tripos:
wherefore, O King, imagine me and other Water-drinkers to be fitted for
reception of the divine Influence, possessed by the Water-Nymph, and transported
with Sobriety, as the Worshippers of Bacchus with their Furies. Whereto the
King answered, But you shall initiate me into the same Society. So I will, said
Apollonius, unless you shall seem too troublesome to your Subjects: for
Philosophy being professed by a King in a moderate and looser way, produces an
admirable Temper, as appears in you: but being accurate and strained to the
utmost, it becomes somewhat irksome, and below the Character you bear;
moreover, envious persons are used to debase it with the imputation of Pride
and Arrogance. Having discoursed in this manner, and it being now broad day,
they went forth.

Illustrations on Chap. 14.
[1] THe Oxydracks; Plutarch in the Life of Alexander the Great reports, that
it was in this City of the Mallien Oxydracks, where that Prince received so
many Wounds, and amongst the rest a Blow with an Arrow, that every one thought
would have cost him his Life. Strabo (lib. 15.) says, that the Lands near this
City abound with Vines, and all manner of Provision. Arrianus (lib. 6.) makes
the Malliens and the Oxydracks two distinct People, but near Neighbors and
Allies.

[2] They pretend to Wisdom, but know nothing, etc. This Character of the wise
men among the Oxydracks, does not really belong to them alone, but perhaps to
most of the solemn pretenders to Wisdom throughout the whole World. We have all
an ambition to be highly esteemed among men; but this we strain more or less,
according as we are more or less vain. Many are so irrational, as to extend it
beyond their Life, when they shall never so much as hear of it: one principal
way to attain to this high Honor, is by setting up for wonderful skill in some
notable Science: Thus some value themselves upon their Natural Philosophy;
others upon their Astrology; others upon their Magic; others upon their having
read History and Poets, and being thorow^^ versed in the seven Liberal
Sciences: With these and the like pretenses, they make a great Parade, and
glorify themselves as far wiser than the vulgar; but if you search to the
inside of this Wisdom, you will find it very impertinent and of no use, I mean
either to the public or private: We see those which these learned Fops do so
much despise as illiberal, are able to maintain themselves, and do good to
their Country; as the Mariner for Navigation; the Plowman for tilling the
ground; the Shepherd for Wool and Sheep; and the Bricklayer for building
Houses; so that in one kind or other, the very meanest Trade does both support
the Artificer, and accommodate the rest of Mankind. But these contemplative
Monsieurs spend their time in waking Dreams, and the imaginary Whimsies of
other men, who were no more admitted to the inside of Heaven and Earth than we
are. And it is more than probable, that neither they nor we ever understood the
business of the heavenly Luminaries, more than the Sparrows do the Statutes and
Designs of Parliaments, when they see the Members sitting in the House.
Therefore considering the uncertainty of all humane Knowledge, the wisest way
to value each kind, is by the profit it brings to Life; and so I reduce it to
that Touchstone, which the wise Lord Bacon borrowed from Ovid to make a Motto
both for his Study and Life: Viderit Vtilitas. Last of all, to conclude this
point, and as a further demonstration how much a submissive Ignorance is to be
preferred before this pretended Wisdom, the learned Erasmus in his ingenious
Moriae encomium, shows even out of divine Writ it self, that Ignorance is the
Mother of all true Devotion. It is not (says he) without ground, that Fools
are so acceptable with God: the Reason perhaps may be this, that as Princes
carry a suspicious eye upon those that are over-wise, and consequently hate
them; as Caesar did Brutus and Cassius; Nero, Seneca; and Dionysius, Plato; in
like manner Christ ever abhors and condemns ((...) istos) such as confide in
their own wisdom: and this St. Paul evidences, when he said, ( Quae stulta sunt
mundi, etc.) God has chosen the foolish things of this World. And when Christ
gives him thanks that he had concealed the mystery of Salvation from the Wise,
but revealed it to Babes and Sucklings, that is to say, Fools: for the Greek
word for Babes is (...), i. e. Fools. To this appertains that throughout the
^ospel you find him ever accusing the Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the
Law, but dilig^^tly defending the ignorant multitude; for what other is that
Woe to ye Scribes and Pharisees, than Woe to ye wise men? and seems chiefly to
be delighted in little Children, Women and Fishers: Besides, among bruit Beasts
he is best pleased with those that have least of the Foxes subtlety; and
therefore he chose rather to ride upon an Ass, when if he had pleased, he might
have bestrid the Lion without danger; and the Holy Ghost came down in the shape
of a Dove, not of an Eagle or Kite. Add to this, that in Scripture there is
frequent mention of Hearts, Hinds, and Lambs; and such as are destined to
eternal Life, are called Sheep, than which Creature, there is not any thing
more foolish; and yet Christ professes to be the Shepherd of this Flock, and is
himself delighted with the Name of Lamb; according to St. John, Behold the Lamb
of God! And what does all this drive at, but that all Mankind are Fools? And
Christ himself that he might the better relieve this Folly, being the Wisdom of
the Father, yet in some manner became a Fool, when taking upon him the Nature
of Man, he was in shape as a Man; and thus was he made Man, that he might heal
Sinners: Nor did he work this Cure any other way, than by the foolishness of
the Cross, and a company of fat Apostles, not much better; to whom also he
carefully recommended Folly, giving them Caution against Wisdom, and drawing
them together by the Example of little Children; Lillies, Mustardseed, and
Sparrows, things senseless and inconsiderable, living only by the Dictates of
Nature, and without any Craft or Care. Moreover to the same purpose it is, that
that great Architect of the World, God, gave Man an Injunction against his
eating of the Tree of Knowledge, as if Knowledge were the bane of Happiness;
according to which, St. Paul disallows it as puffing up, and destructive. But
to speak briefly, All Christian Religion (says he) seems to have a kind of
Alliance with Folly, and in no respect to have any accord with Wisdom; of
which, if ye expect proofs, consider first, That Boys, old Men, Women and
Fools, are more delighted with Religious and sacred things than others, and to
that purpose, are ever next the Altars, which they do by mere Impulse of
Nature. In the next place, You see that those first Founders of it were plain
simple persons, and most bitter Enemies of Learning. Lastly, There are no sort
of Fools seem more out of the way, than are these, whom the Zeal of Christian
Religion has once swallowed up; in so much that they waste their Estates,
suffer themselves to be cheated, put no difference between Friends and Enemies,
abhor Pleasure, are crammed with Poverty, Watchings, Tears, Labors,
Reproaches, abhorrence of Life, and wish Death above all things: In short, They
seem senseless to common Understanding, as if their Minds lived elsewhere, and
not in their Bodies; what else is this but to be mad? For which Reason, you
must not think it so strange, if the Apostles seemed to be drunk with new Wine,
and if Paul appeared to Fe^tus to be mad. For holy men, their Minds being taken
up with those things that are most repugnant to these grosser Senses, seem
brutish and stupid in the common use of them: whereas on the contrary, the
ordinary sort of people are best at these, and can do least at the other; from
whence it is, that some of these Zealots have by mistake drunk Oil instead of
Wine. Finally, Haec Stultitia parit Civitates, hac constant Imperi^,
Magistratus, Religio, Consilia, Iudicia; ne^ alind omnino est Vita humana, quam
stultitiae Lusus quidam: Thus far Erasmus, Moriae Encom. Children and old Men
(says Montaign) are found to be most susceptible of Religion, as if it were
bred and held her credit from our Imbecility: as likewise sick men, when their
Intellects are weakened by pain, are more devout than at any other time. In
like manner (says Agrippa) we find in the Gospel how Christ was received of
Idiots, of the vulgar people, and of the simpler sort, while he was rejected,
despised and persecuted even to death, by the Highpriests, Lawyers, Scribes,
Doctors, and Rabbis: for which cause, Christ chose his Apostles, not Scribes,
not Doctors, not Priests, but unlearned persons of the vulgar people, void of
knowledge, unskilful, and Asses. Vanit. scie^. Now the sum of all this is, that
worldly Wisdom is foolishness before God, since the revealed Will of God does
surpass the comprehension of man's Wisdom, and therefore unintelligible to the
wise men of this World. Wherefore these forementioned Quotations, as spoke in
the person of Folly, I thought fit to insert, as being to my purpose, and
already severally printed under the Authority of an English License.

[3] Fiery Tempests beat them back with Thundering, etc. This Report of these
Oxydracks's defending their Walls with Thunder and Lightning, is verily
believed to have been the use of Guns; which although in these Parts of the
World unknown, till invented by Bartold Swartz, (though others will not have
his Name to be now known) about 300 years ago, yet perhaps in those remotest
Parts of India, they might have been above 1000 years before, without our
hearing of them: for neither the Romans or any other (excepting Alexander the
Great) ever went so far into India; nor was the use of the Loadstone invented
much above 300 years since; so that our Commerce by Navigation did not reach so
far in those Times. Furthermore it may be observed, that by this Computation
Guns were here with us invented within less than 100 years after the Seaman's
Compass; so that within one Age after, our Navigation might reach to those
Parts, and not before. Nevertheless it has been observed, that diverse men in
far distant Times and Countries have happened to light upon the same Invention,
where the latter never heard of the former; as for example, in that most
ingenious Engine for raising of Water, called with us the Water-Screw, first
found out by Archimedes, who was thereupon so ravished with joy, that he ran up
and down the Streets crying (...), I have found it, I have found it. The very
same manner of Engine Cardan writes to have been in his Time invented at Millan
by a Blacksmith, who had never heard either of Archimedes or the Engine, but
was so unlearned as he could neither write nor read, and was so overjoyed at
his Invention, as his Brains were never well settled again: Thus is it not
impossible but Swartz might light upon the Invention of Gunpowder, although it
had been before in India and he never heard of it. The Accident is said to have
been thus: He having set a Pipkin over the fire wherein was a mixture of
Brimstone, Saltpeter, and powder of Coal for a Medicine, the bottom of the
Pipkin growing too hot, and the Stuff taking sudden fire, blew up the Cover of
the Pipkin with great vehemence; whereof he being a contemplative man
considered, and made further Experiments thereof, till by degrees he improved
the Invention in long Barrels of Iron, and so devised Guns. Hereby we may
observe, how prodigiously Chance does excel the Wit of man in producing of new
and rare Effects! For if all Mankind had set their Wits on work to invent an
Engine of greater force than any of the old ones, they would have confined
their thoughts to the old Idea's, but with addition of more strength or weight;
or else by transposition of some parts; but it would never have entered into
their heads to have grounded it upon the Fundamentals of Nature: first to avoid
vacuum; then to avoid penetration of Bodies without enlargement of room; and
lastly to employ Fire as the fountain of violent motion: for thus when the
corns of Powder opened and swelled by Fire require more room, which being
denied them by the narrow Iron or brass Barrel, there will be a most furious
eruption, which finding the least resistance from the Bullet, drives that
before it with such violence, as no other Engine could ever do the like: Facile
est inventis addere. This prodigious Invention does at this instant take
universally, and to several Uses not thought upon, till daily Experience had
improved it: As first to Mines, which experienced Artists will now spring so
exactly both for time and distance, as if they wrought above ground without any
disturbance: Their Bombs shoot with a perfect certainty where to fall, and at
such an Elevation, as the highest Wall or Castle cannot intercept: And now of
late the hand-Granadoes disorder in a moment all ranks and files of Horse and
Foot, so that the exactest Roman Discipline if it were again upon Earth, would
be at a loss: And then for Sea, it is dreadful to behold what execution it does
both upon Men and Ships, when sometimes a great Bullet without touching any
man, kills and maims several by the Splinters it makes* so ingenious are men to
destroy one another* Sed jam Serpentum major concordia: parcit
Cognatis maculis fimilis fera. Quando Leoni
Fortier eripuit vitam Leo? quo nemore unquam
Expiravit Aper majoris dentibus Apri?
Ast homini ferrum Lethale, etc. --
Juven. Sat. 15.

[4] Gades; called by Ptolomy, Gadir^* by Strabo, Erythia and Gaddir, or Cadiz,
(and not Cales) is an Island without the Straits of Gibral^ar, at the
South-part of Spain, in length twelve miles, in breadth three, the Riches
whereof has been the Magazine of Spain: it was sacked one day by the English,
under the Conduct of Essex, Nottingham, and Raleigh, A. D. 1596.

[5] Whirled about like Ixion, etc. Ixion, the Son of Phlegyas, or as Hyginus
will have it, of Leontius, having s^ain his Son-in-Law Erion^us, or Deione^s,
(as some call him) when he could not be absolved either by God or man, was at
length pityed by Jupiter* who took him up into Heaven, and expiated him. But
Ixion after his purgation remaining among the Gods, fell in Love with Juno, and
solicited her to Unchastity, which the making known to Jove, he formed a Cloud
in the shape of Juno, and I^cion thinking to have been the Goddess, embraced,
and thereon begat a Race of Centaurs. When being soon after sent down to the
Earth, he every where boasted that he lay with Juno, for the which being struck
down to Hell with a Thunderbolt, he was there condemned to be always rolled on
a Wheel. Hereto several of the Poets refer; As Ovid, Volvitur Ixion, and se
refugitque fug^t que.
Metam 10* And Claudian, Non rota suspensum praeceps Ixiona torquet.
De Raptu Pros.

[6] Nor do they fancy to themselves things which are not, etc. When I observe
Ovid's Metamorphosis, and other the strange Fictions of the Heathen Poets,
which our Mythologists undertake to expound mystically, but vulgar Heathens
believed historically, and so had need of a Faith as strong as an Ostrich's
Stomach, that can digest Iron; I verily think they might as really and truly
expound the every days Dialogues at Bedlam: Nor could those monstrous Fictions
ever have been devised or believed any where, but in Countries where the
Liquors which they usually drank had intoxicated and depraved their Brains; for
to clear Understandings, they appear nothing but Frenzies. Yea, although you
have read Natalis Comes, or the ingenious Lord Bacon his Wisdom of the
Ancients, you could never receive them without an habitual previous infatuation
of your Judgment. Therefore Mahomet after he had most wisely prohibited the
drinking of Wine, was fain to be more circumspect what Fables he delivered, as
knowing they would never pass with Water-drinkers. We daily see many Songs pass
with great applause among our Drunkards, that in the Poet's head had some
little intentional sense, and by himself esteemed a Rapture, which if one
should (as Horace advises) turn into Prose, and then examine the strength of
the Fancy, you would evidently perceive to be flat and vulgar. So that before a
man can admire them, he must first drink as much Wine as the Poet did when he
made them, and so wind himself up to the same pitch to fit him for the Consort:
Aut bibe, aut ubi.

[7] The wise Amphiaraus, the Son of Oecleus, was a famous Greek Prophet, whom
King Adrastus desired to go along with him to the War of Thebes, but Amphiaraus
foreseeing it would cost him his Life absconded himself, till being betrayed by
his Wife Eriphile, who was bribed by a golden Bracelet, he was forced to go,
and the first day he came to Thebes he was swallowed up alive by the Earth. Of
this see Homer's Odys. 15. After his Death, he was worshipped for a God. See
his History at large written by Diod. Sicul. lib. 5. chapter 5. Cicer. lib. 1. de
Divin. Pausan. in Attic. Stat. Theb. and Plut. in Paral.

[8] The Priest after he had drunk Water, and not Wine, gave his Answers: The
Priests of Amphiaraus, whose Oracles were of great repute in old Time, had a
constant Custom, that before the Priest declared the Oracle to those who came
for Counsel at their Temple, to abstain three days from Wine, and one day from
Flesh, that so he might have his Understanding the better prepared to receive
the pretended Inspiration; which otherwise he was not thought so capable of,
while his Brain might be clouded and darkened with the gross Vapors, which by a
full Diet might ascend from his Stomach to his Head. This was certainly a very
wise Institution; for he being upon each Demand to consider what Answer was fit
to be given, as most safe for the reputation of his Order, and withal
satisfactory to the Supplyant, he had need to keep his Wits about him* and to
enable him so to do, nothing was better than a thin Diet: for the Brain is much
of the nature of a bright Looking glass, which if moistened by Mists, cannot
represent an Object clear. Also, as the Devil is said to imitate God, as Apes
do Men, so it may be they had heard of the Prophet and divine Lawgiver Moses,
who by God's own appointment had commanded as a perpetual Ordinance, that the
Priest when he entered into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, should that day
drink neither Wine nor strong Drink.

CHAP. XV. Apollonius sacrifices to the Sun, whilst Phraotes tarryeth for him,
that he might be present, and give his advice touching a Field that had been
sold, and which was now in Controversy, by reason of Treasure found therein,
which Field by the Sentence of Apollonius was adjudged to the Buyer, because he
was a good and just man, and pious toward the Gods, whereas the Seller was
evil and impious, and a contemner of the Gods; The Story of the white Camels,
and the King's Letter in behalf of Apollonius to Jarchas his Master, one of the
wise men; A Description of the Gates whereon were the Statues of Alexander and
Porus; Concering the Altars inscribed with an Epigram; Also of the Pillars
whereon was engraved this Sentence, Alexander here made a Stand.
WHen Apollonius perceived that the King was now to give Answers to Embassies,
and such like Matters, he said to him, Do you, O King, those things that
pertain to the government of your Kingdom, and leave me at this time to the
Sun, for I must pray my accustomed Prayers unto him. And let him hear your
Prayers, said the King, for he delights in all that love Wisdom; and I will
in the mean time wait your Return, for I must determine certain Controversies,
at which if you be present, you will be very assistant to me. The Morning being
well spent, Apollonius returns, and asks the King, What those things were which
he had determined? To whom the King made Answer, That he had determined nothing
that day, in as much as the service of Religion did prohibit him. Apollonius
replied, Do you then perform the service of Religion before you determine
Causes, as well as before you undertake a Journey, or an Expedition with an
Army? Yes, said the King, because here also is danger, if he that determines
Causes be turned aside from what is right. Wherefore Apollonius judged that the
King spoke well; and further asked him, What that Controversy was which he was
that day to determine? For (says he) I see you in suspense, and doubtful on
which side you should pass sentence. Whereto the King answered, I confess I am
in no small doubt, and therefore make you my Adviser: A certain Man sold a
piece of Land to another, wherein Treasure had been hidden, but was known to no
man; and not long after the Earth being opened, was discovered a Pot of Gold:
The Seller of the Land claimed it, in that he would not have sold the Land, had
he known that such Wealth had layn therein: The Purchaser on the contrary said,
that all was his which he found in the Land that he had bought: The Plea of
both seemed to have some Right in them; neither should I avoid the imputation
of Folly, should I command them to share the Gold between them; for such a
decision any old Woman would give. Hereunto Apollonius answered, That these men
are not Philosophers is apparent, in that they contend about Gold. But I
suppose you will pass a right sentence, if you thus reckon with your self, that
the Gods take an especial care of them who are both Philosophers and virtuous
men; but they regard them in the second place who are not vicious, and not used
to wrong any one: wherefore they grant to the Philosophers, that they may
rightly know divine and humane things; but to other good-natured men they
afford a sufficient Estate, lest at any time for want of Necessaries they
should become unjust. Wherefore my opinion is, O King, that the Parties be as
it were [1] weighed one against another in a Balance, and the Life of both be
accurately scanned: for neither do I think that the Gods would have taken away
the Land from the one, had he not been a vicious Fellow; nor on the other side
have given to the other even the things hidden under the ground, were he not
better than the Seller. Wherefore on the morrow both Parties came to plead
their Cause, and the Seller was convicted to be a contumelious Fellow, and one
that slighted the Sacrifices that were to be offered unto the Gods in the
Earth; the other appeared to be a ^^ld just man, and one who worshipped the Gods
most religiously: Wherefore the sentence of Apollonius prevailed, and the good
man went away, as having obtained those things of the Gods. When therefore the
Controversy had been decided in this manner, Apollonius coming to the King,
said, This is the third day that I have been your Guest, and therefore
according to your Laws, I must depart from you to morrow. But the Law reaches
you not as yet, said the King, for you may also stay to morrow, because you
came after Noon. I rejoice (answered Apollonius) at your Hospitality, in that
you seem more subtlely to interpret the Law for my sake. Certainly, said the
King, might I break the Law, I would do it for your sake. But tell me this,
Apollonius, Have not the Camels whereon you rode brought you as far as from
Babylon? Yes, said Apollonius, for we received them from Vardanes. Think you
then, said the King, that they are able to carry you further, when they have
already gone so far as from Babylon? Hereat Apollonius held his peace.
Wherefore Damis interrupting him, said to the King, This Man, O King, does not
yet understand our Journey, nor to what People we shall afterward come, but as
if he should find every where such men as you and Vardanes are, he thinks it a
sport to travel through the Indies, and therefore does not tell you in what
case the Camels are; for they are so ill disposed, that we are forced rather to
carry them, than they us, so that we have great need of others; for should they
fail in the Deserts of India, we must of necessity abide there, driving away
the Vultures and Wolves from the Camels, but there will be none to drive them
away from us, and so we must perish. I (said the King) will remedy this, for I
will give you others; four I suppose you want; and the Governor over the River
Indus shall send back to Babylon the four Camels that you brought; now I have
by Indus Camels that are all white. But will you not also give us a Guide, said
Damis? Yes, answered the King, and I will give a Camel to the Guide, and
Provision for your Journey. I will also write to Iarchas the eldest of the wise
men, that he would courteously entertain Apollonius, being a man nothing
inferior to himself, together with you also, as Philosophers and Companions of
a divine man. Having said thus, he commanded Gold to be given them, with
precious Stones, and linen Garments, and a thousand other such things. But
Apollonius replied, that he had Gold enough already, Vardanes having given it
privately to our Guide. As for the linen [2] Garments I shall willingly receive
them, in that they seem very like to the Garments of the old Athenian
Philosophers. Then taking up one of the Jewels in his hand, he said, O rare
Stone, how opportunely have I lighted on thee, not without the Favor of the
Gods? seeing, as I suppose, some secret and divine virtue in the Stone. But
Damis and his Companions though they took no Gold, yet took plentifully of the
precious Stones, as intending to offer them unto the Gods, when they returned
home into their own Country. Now when they had tarried there that other day,
(for the King permitted them not to go thence) he gives them a Letter to
Iarchas in these words:

King Phraotes to Iarchas his Master, and to the wise men that are with him,
sends greeting.
APollonius being himself a very wise man, but thinking you to be wiser, is
coming to you, that he may be acquainted with your Discipline. Send him
therefore away from you instructed in whatsoever ye know, as being assured that
none of your Learning shall be lost. He is the most eloquent of all men, and
has an excellent Memory. Let him also see the Throne wherein I sat when you
Father Iarchas gave to me my Kingdom. Furthermore, his Companions deserve much
praise, in that they love such a man. Farewell.


Then departing from Taxilla, and being gone two days Journey, they came to the
Place where Porus is reported to have fought with Alexander. And they also say,
that they there beheld certain Gates, not erected to shut any Place, but only
as a Trophy, and that on them Alexander is set up riding on his Chariot with
four Horses, so as he stood at Issus among the Nobles. They further relate,
that there are two other Gates, not far distant from one another, whereof on
the one stands the Statue of Alexander, on the other that of Porus, as they
met together after the Fight, as I conceive: for Alexander seems to embrace,
and Porus to do obeisance. Afterward, having passed over the River Hydraotes,
and traversed many Nations, they came to the River Hyphasis. But thirty
Furlongs off, before they came to the River, they lighted on certain Altars
with such Inscriptions, To Father Ammon, and to Brother Hercules, to Provident
Minerva, to Olympian Jupiter, to the Samothracian Cabiri, to the Indian Sol,
and to Brother Apollo. They say also, that there was a brazen Pillar in the
same Place erected with this Inscription, Alexander here made his Stand. And we
suppose that the Altars were Alexander's Work, gracing the Bounds of his
Empire: but I conceive that the Pillar was consecrated by the Indians beyond
Hyphasis, glorying over Alexander, that he came no farther.

Illustrations on Chap. 15.
[1] THe Parties be as it were weighed: Justice ought to have no regard to
Persons; but to state the Case upon its own Merits, without any reflection upon
the Parties; and according to our old English Proverb, Give the Devil his due:
Wherefore Apollonius his Judgment in this Case of the found Treasure, or as
our Lawyers call it Treasure Trove, was most unjust, I mean upon unjust
grounds, although by mere luck he did adjudge it to him whose Right it was: for
according to the Parable in the Gospel, and also to right Reason, the man who
bought the Field wherein lay the hid Treasure carried it clear, as right owner
by his purchase, notwithstanding that he secretly knowing of it concealed it
from the Seller: which circumstance were perhaps to the Buyer's disadvantage,
if the Parties Integrity were to have been taken into consideration. But here
Apollonius not minding the absolute transferring of Right, which a Purchase
makes, looks only at the Parties, and passes Sentence on his side who seemed
the most devout, as if men's Proprieties in their temporal Estates, were
grounded upon Godliness, rather than upon a legal Right. This Position that
Dominium fundatur in Gratia, is more or less owned by all Religions at this day
in the World, excepting only the Protestants: ex. gr. to begin with Mahometism,
although it professes to force no Conscience, yet the pretenses of all their
Wars are only to enlarge the Mohammedan Faith. And the Church of Rome declares
more openly in this Tenet, affirming all States and Princes that are not Roman
Catholics to be at the Pope's disposal. In like manner the Anabaptists in
Germany pretending to be those meek ones who should inherit the Earth, took
Arms, and had undoubtedly proved successful, but that Charles the V. and the
Duke of Alva prorogued the Prophecy to a further day. For as all particular
men have each man his private Interest separate from the rest, in so much that
most of the greatest Governments, Assemblies, and Conventions of Mankind,
notwithstanding all their grave pretenses of the public Good, are nothing but
a commerce of private Interests; so has each Religion (excepting only ours) a
particular Interest of their own Hierarchy. This perhaps is that which the
Apostle calls the Mystery of Iniquity; and if mankind could be so clear-sighted
as to discern this Mystery of Iniquity, and sever it from the pure Conceern of
men's Souls, in the worship of God in spirit and truth, then perhaps all such as
are neither very malicious nor barbarous, would be of one mind, serving God in
simplicity and singleness of heart* But while men are men and not Angels, they
will have a main respect to their great Diana, and that Interest which the
craftiest of them understand well enough, does through education and long
practice so dazzle ordinary Capacities, as they will verily imagine themselves
to be in the right, and are by that means intentionally honest.

[2] As for the linen Garments, I shall, etc. Though Apollonius to save his
Reputation with the King refused his Gold, yet he accepted the linen Garments,
as being like those of the old Athenian Philosophers. He likewise himself and
his Followers took plenty of the rare precious Stones, pretending at their
return into their Country to offer them up to the Gods. Here is plain to be
seen, that although Vainglory and Hypocrisy may sometimes seem to refuse
offered Riches, yet Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum respuit aurum; Do what we
can, when the Booty is important, and the Opportunity fair, Nature will be
nibbling: and as the Dog that dares not eat the Shoulder of Mutton before him,
will now and then give a lick at it; so here to excuse the matter, they wanted
not to allege Curiosity for the Garments, and Devotion for the Jewels: Thus
according to the old Proverb, It is ill Wool that will take no Dye.

The End of the Second Book.

