THE Signal Diagnostick WHEREBY We are to judge of our own Affections; And as
well of our Present, as Future State. OR THE LOVE of CHRIST PLANTED Upon the
very same TURF, on which It once had been Supplanted by The Extreme Love of Sin.

BEING The substance of several Sermons, delivered at several Times and Places,
and now at last met together to make up the Treatise which ensues.

By Tho. Pierce. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, 1670.

A Premonition to the Reader.
HAVING been many times importuned, since the Fire of London, both to permit a
new Impression of my Sinner Impleaded, and to gratify my Stationer with some
Enlargement, I could not think of a fitter Subject, in relation to the Method I
first proposed to my self, than that of which I am writing this brief Account.

My method was avowedly That of the Husbandman in the Parable; who does not
only think fit to cleanse the Jer. 4. 3.
fallow ground of the Heart, before he sowes it, but sowes it thoroughly when it
is clean too. And so accordingly having endeavored, in my first Practical
Essay, (and in hope of God's Blessing on it) to weed out of mine own, and out
of other men's Natures, the Love of Sin; I was to labor in my second, (and by
the same Blessing of God, on which alone we depend for any Proportionable
success,) to Stock the very same ground with the Love of Christ. It being
certainly not enough, (however absolutely needful,) Jer. 10. 12.
not to sow among Thorns, or merely to break up the fallow ground; but (as the
same Prophet words it,) we must sow in Righteousness, to reap in Mercy. And,
to be Positively glorified, we must not think it of force sufficient, that we
be negatively good. It Is vain and fruitless that we endeavor, to eradicate out
of our hearts the love of our Sins and Sensualities, unless it be that our Love
of Christ may therein take both the deeper and faster Root. And because the
Love of Christ does seem as rarely understood, as it is often talked of, we must
be taught wherein it lies, and the several ways of its Attainment. To the
Knowledge of the First, and to the Practice of the Second, I have directed both
the First and Second Part of my Enlargement.

As they are now put together, I know not at present what more to add, besides
my humble and hearty Prayers unto the Lord of the Vineyard in which we labor,
Matt. 9. 37. Luke 10. 2. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
(and whose Harvest we are in one sense, as well as his Husbandry in the
second, and his Laborers in a third,) that whilst we are Plowing what we have
fallow, and are Planting what we have Plowed, and are Watering what we have
Planted, He who is said Jer. 10. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 6, and 7.
to rain Righteousness will bless our Labors with Increase.

A Table of Particulars in the SIGNAL DIAGNOSTICK.
A
ANtinomianism an Epidemical disease, 1 Introd. Sect. 1. its Antidote, Sect. 2.
its danger* page 68, 69. Aemulation, its use, p. 113, 114, 110, 120.
Affections, things indifferent in themselves, p. 112, 113. Assurance, how to be
founded, p. 75, 76, 77, 129, 137.
B
Beauty, even that of the Body does wholly depend upon the Soul, p. 109, 110.
how to behold That above, p. 111, 112.
C
Caution, to be used about the object, and measure of our Love, p. 58. Charity,
see Love. Christ, how natural to love him, p. 7. 8, 9, 88, 89. wherein his love
consists most, p. 15, 16, etc. and ours to him, p. 41, 42. how to make his yoke
smooth, p. 62, 63. as a Bridegroom most apt to melt, p. 85, 89 90, 126.
Christians, capable of Friendship with Christ, p. 24, 43, 44. their character,
41, 42, 63, 64, 72, 73. their lot, 95, 96. their characteristic, 133, etc. 142,
143, etc. 154, etc. Christianity, little of it even in Christendom, 156, 157,
etc. Commandments, the art of making them pleasant, 11, 12. the keeping of them
is the strongest Argument of our Love, 13, 14. Christ's command to keep them,
the strongest Proof of his Love, 15, 16, etc. to keep them is a reward, 18, 19,
20, etc. the best expression of our love, 37, 38, etc. the Art of keeping them
entire, 80, 81. Conversation, of what importance, 61, 122, 123, etc. 127.
Curse, due to them, who love not Christ, 99, 100. Custom, how an artificial
nature, 10, 11, 61, 62, 122, 123, etc.
D
Danger, how made to save us, 101. David, how he valued the Commandments, 20,
21, etc. 80, 81. Decrees, the influence on practice which our opinions of them
have, 102, 103. Devils, how we may profit by their example, 3, 4. Disobedience,
the greatest expression of our hatred, 41. Duty, how it is our happiness to do
it, 31, 32. how to make it delightful to us, 61, 62, etc. wherein the whole of
it does stand, 79. not impossible to be don, 112, 113. its ease and pleasure,
124, 125.
E
Election, how to know it, and make it sure, 74, 75, etc. Enemies, how they are
a sort of Friends, 142, 143. Epicurus, and Eudoxus, how Proselytes to virtue,
61. Excommunication, threefold among the Jews, 99, 100, Experience of virtue
apt to make her most converts, 19, 20, etc. 61, 62, 63, 123, 124.
F
Faith, how easily mistaken, 68, 69, etc. 74, 75. in what sense it is all in
all, 79, 80. little of it in the world, 164. Fear, how made wholesome, 83. and
saving to us, 101. Flatterers, Christ's distinction 'twixt them and his
friends* 37, 38. how many Christ has, and how few true friends, 65, 66.
Friendship, instances of its force, 138, 139. of its counterfeits, 140. its
ground Religion, 145.
G
God, in Christ, more endearing, than God as God, 89, 90. Godliness, a material
part of it is moral honesty, 155, etc. Goodness, how it commands Affection, 50,
51, 72, 73. Gospel, the Christian school, 149. Grace, sufficient in them in
whom it is not effectual, 45, 46, 104, 105, 112, 113. Gratitude, how we should
work our selves to it, 83.
H
Happiness, Desired by men of all Sects, 29, 30. wherein it properly does
consist, 31. how it is our duty to be happy, 32. Heathens, a shame to many
Christians, 158. 165. Heart, its deceitfulness, 65, 66, 67, 68, etc. Humility,
the greatest honor, 34, 35.
I
Jews, how they shame Christians by mutual Love. 158, 165. Industry and
Endeavor how conducible to Salvation, 104, 105, 106, 107. Infallibility, how
mistaken, 75, 76, etc. Ingratitude, ugly enough to fright us from it self, 8,
9, 47, 48. Invisible, how to be conversed with, 110, 111, 124, 125. Justice,
how it yields the greatest pleasure, 34, 35.
K
Knowledge, how it differs from Love, and how many ways, p. 49.
L
Liberty, wherein it really consists, 23. 24. Love, ever jealous of its repute,
2, etc. why it ought to be disinteressed, 5, 6, 7. how the fulfilling of the
Law, 33, 149, 150, etc. wherein it really consists, 38, 39, etc. we have both
means, and motives to it, 46. 47. ever attended with obedience, 49, 50, etc. A
fire, 54. and is according to the fuel on which it feeds, 55, 56, etc. its
proper Touchstone, 65, 66, etc. 71, 72, etc. more worthy, than Faith and hope,
85, 86. its other Prerogatives, 87, 88. in what degree it is due to Christ, 93,
94. the several means of attaining that pitch of Love to Christ Jesus which is
required, 108, 109, etc. examples of it in Paul and Magdalene 113, 114, 115. in
God himself, 116, 117. what begins in the flesh may be perfected in the spirit,
125. unites and inebriates, 127, 128, 129. of man to man, 131, 132, etc. 141,
etc.
M
Magdalen, her love to Christ, 114, 115, etc. Man, as man does love virtue, 8,
9. Martyrdom, how it may stand with prosperity, 97. Mercy, how it yields the
most profit to show it unto others, 34, 35. Method, of great Moment in
Christian practice, 107, 108, 109.
N
Nature, its good inclinations even in its state of depravation, 8. how far it
is able to work with grace, 104, 105, 106, 107.
O
Obedience, pleasant, and a reward unto it self, 18, 19, 20, etc. 'twas every
thing to David, by which he could be made happy, 21, 22. etc. the great
condition, on which the promises are made, 25, etc. the one infallible proof of
Love, 38, 39, etc. 73, 74. the art of getting it, 80, 81. it must be Impartial
and Universal, 82, 94, 95. Orthodoxy, nothing worth without obedience, 73, 74,
95.
P
Perseverance, its necessity, 76, 77. Persecution, how to sweeten it, 82, 83.
how it reigns amongst Christians, 156, 157. Pleasures, the greatest are the
most innocent, 19, 20, 62, 63, 64. Poverty, a Preference due to it, 163, 164,
165. Prayer, how to make it most infallibly effectual, 25, 26, etc. 124.
Preaching, to whom of no use, 102, 103. to whom useful, 104, 105. Promises, the
greatest that Christ could make, 26, 27. not absolute, but conditional, 28, 29,
77. Prosperity, how reconcilable with sufferings. 97. 98.
R
Rebellion, the greatest Tyrant. 23. Redemption, universal. 141. 142.
S
Salvation, its Requisites. 1 Introd. Sect. 2. and p. 10. 75. 76. Security, the
disease of most Christians. 1 Introd. Sect. 1. its danger. 69. 70. 102. 103.
Self-love, its mischievous effects. 57. how commonly more, than our Love to
God. 125. 126. Self-denial, how to be learnt. 60. 61. etc. how ^ supplies the
place of Martyrdom. 97. 98. Shame, how subservient to Love. p. 3. 4. etc. 9.
47. 48. 60. 115. 118. 119. 120. 126. Sin, what pains we take to make it seem
lovely. 56. 57. Sincerity, the great Requisite of Love. 146.
V
Virtue, of greatest Sensuality. 19. 61. 62. etc.
W
Will, how God works on it, not as on agents merely Natural. 43. 44. etc. How
it works with God. 104. 105. 106. 107. 124. World, how to wean our selves from
it. 59. 60. 61. 108. 109. etc.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno. Gilberto divina
Providentia Archi-Episc. Cantuar. a sac. dom.
Ex Aedib. Lambethanis, Martii 13. 1669.
THE INTRODUCTION TO The First Part.
Sect. 1. AS nothing is easier to a Christian, than the gross knowledge of his
Duty, so there is nothing more difficult, than a just Decorum in the
Performance. And this is certainly the reason, that though the Kingdom of Grace
has been (...). Philo (...). p. 365. Romans 10. 20.
found by many who never sought it, yet the Kingdom of Glory has been Luke 13.
24.
sought by more who never found it. It being the custom of most Professors in
their Spiritual Travels, only to gaze with greedy eyes on their Iourneys end,
without Employing their Indeavonrs to hit the way. Like some of Those under the
Pole in an half years night, who have in story been so blinded at the return
of the Sun, as not to see their way toward him; we behold the glorious
Promises of our exalted Sun of Righteousness with both our eyes, but are so
dazzled with their Brightness, as (in comparison of Them) to have scarce a
glimmering of his Precepts. We look on the other side our Work, we are so
Partially and Supinely taken up with our Wages; and do so sasten our Sanguin
memories upon Christ's love to us, that we forget the great Requisites of ours
to Him. Whilst God is speaking from mount Gerizim, we listen to him Deuteronomy. 11.
29.
with willing Ears; But are as deaf as any Adders, when he calls to us from
mount Sinai. Our Savior Ex. 19. 18, 20.
is welcome to us still, in his Priestly office, Heb. 12. 19, 20
which is to Bless us; but in his Kingly, which is to Rule us, he finds a
different entertainment. Every man has his (...), or naked Appetite of the
End; but cares not greatly for the (...), or Consultation about the Means. We
would arrive at our Haven, but not encounter with the Tempest; preserve our
Vessel, but not cast away our Fraught; pass over into Canaan, but not through
the Wilderness, or the Red Sea. Dye the Death of the Righteous we would all by
all means; but without either the care, or the pains to live like him. And
would gladly ly with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, but are contented that the
Dogs should have the licking of his Sores. We love to put a misconstruction on
several Articles of our Creed; and take the Captain of our Salvation to have
sinally so subdued our Ghostly enemy, as to have left for his Soldiers no
harder Task, than the easy Enjoyment of the Spoil. As if the Heb. 13. 13.
Apostle had exhorted us to follow Christ without the Camp, not to Fight, but
Triumph; not to strive for the Masterie, but supinely to receive it.

Sect. 2. Whereas it ought to be remembered, that as the way which leads to
Heaven is both narrow, and Encumbered, (which the word (...) Mat. 7. 14.
does well import,) So the Gate that opens to it is Low, and straight. And
being so, it admits not of all Promiscuous comers; but, as Low, of such as are
Lowly; and as straight, of such as are Slender. The Ambitious man therefore has
too much stature, and the Worldling has too much Bulk: Through the one, they
are too high; and through the other, too unweildy. They would Both enter in,
but upon their own Terms. For the first would not be Lower, nor the second
Less. Not at all laying to heart, (what our Lord himself has told us in his
Sermon upon the Mount,) that Bliss and Glory are for the Meek, and the Poor in
Spirit; for them that mourn, and are merciful; Mat. 5. 3, 4, etc.
for them that make Peace, and are Pure in heart; for them that even hunger and
thirst after Righteousness; to verse 12.
and for them that suffer hardship for Righteousness sake; that is to say (in
fewer words,) for them alone that Love Christ, and that keep his Commandments.
When he compares the Kingdom of Heaven unto a Treasure hid in a Field, (though
perhaps it may be found for little or no Cost at all,) yet he tells us that all
must be sold to buy it, Mat. 13. 44, Whatsoever that Treasure shall stand us
in, be it our Pleasures, or Reputations, be it our Livelyhoods, or our Lives,
it is plain the Master of the Treasure is still to have his own Asking; and if
we resolve upon the Jewel, we must not stand upon the Price. When our Master
does vouchsafe to liken himself unto a Merchant, and Eternity in a Parable is
put to sale; Love and Obedience are the two Talents, wherewith Eternity is to
be Purchac't, Not that the Jewel is worth so little, but the Merchant exacts no
more. That is to say, (without a parable) Love and Obedience are the
Conditions, on which the Promises are made. And obedience is the Criterion, by
which alone we are enabled to (...). Apollin.
know our Love. So that as soon as a wealthy Ruler put this Question to our
Savior, [ What shall I do, that I may inherit Eternal life?] our Savior gave
him this in answer; [ If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.] And
no sooner had He made this glorious Promise to his Disciples, That he would
give them whatsoever they should ask in his name, but straight he added the
Condition which was the way to its Attainment,

If ye love me, keep my Commandments. John 14. 15.
Sect. 3. Which words, though they are few* are so full of matter, that here is
hardly any word, which is not weighty, and emphatical; and hardly an Emphasis
on a word, which affords not matter of Meditation.

Let us put our first Emphasis upon the Particle I.
[ If] a conjunction conditional. For it is not Peremptorily said, my Love to
you has been so great, and my Favors to you so many, as that ye cannot choose
but love me, or ye must love me of necessity; but the Proposal is ex hypothesi.
Our Savior does not say Because, but If ye love me; thereby making it a
question, whether we love him or love him not.

And this deserves to be the Subject of no small Trouble or Humiliation, whilst
we pretend to be the Followers and Friends of Christ, that we should be of such
barbarous and inhuman dispositions, as to be able to be cold in our affection
toward Him, who is inflamed toward us in His affection.

A second Emphasis is to be put on the Pronoun II.
me. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. One would have thought he should have
said [If ye love your own selves, if ye love your own souls, if ye will escape
the Payns of Hell, or if ye will attain the Joys of Heaven, and so if ye love
your own Interest, keep my Commandments.] For what is it to Him, whether we
keep them, or keep them not? He is not the better for our obedience, and sure
our Rebellions can much less hurt him. Has He need of our Salvation to make
him happy? no, no more can our Enjoyments improve his Bliss, than can our
Miseries interrupt it* And yet he says, if ye love me, keep my Commandments.
From whence arises this second Inference,

That the greatest expression of our Lords love to us, is his taking it as a
kindness, that we be kind unto Our selves; that we will love him at least so
well, as to do our selves good; that we will not once meddle with that which
hurts us; but let misery alone; and apply our selves wholly to do those
things, wherein our only true happiness must needs Consist.

Let us put a third Emphasis upon the keeping of III.
his Commandments, as that relates in this place to the supposed Love we bear
him. And let this our third Emphasis be subdivided into three. For it will
easily afford us a threefold Importance of the words, and thence will follow a
threefold Inference.

First, the words may be thus pronounced. If 1.
ye love me, if ye have any the least affection, or kindness for me, do so much
as observe what I have appointed you to Perform. And this is as if the words
were spoken in the Optative mood. O that ye were wise! that ye knew those
things which do belong unto your Peace! that ye would but so love me, as to
keep my Commandments! from which Acception of the words the Inference certainly
must be this.

That the best Instance and Expression of our Love to Christ, is to do those
things which he Injoyns us.

Or else the words may be accented thus, (as 2.
if indicatively spoken, and by way of Asseveration,) If ye love me in good
earnest, not in word, but in Reality, If ye affect me from the Heart, and not
from the Teeth-outwards, ye will be sure to do whatsoever I Command you. Your
obedience then will be infallible; I shall not miss of its Emanations. And
hence arises this other Inference,

That Love and Obedience in a Christian are two inseparable Companions; every
whit as inseparable, as Hippoclides and Polystratus; or as the Parent rather,
and the Child; the Cause, and the effect; or whatsoever else they are which are
Relata secundum esse, whereof the one does of necessity infer the other.

Or the words may be read, and expounded 3.
thus, (as being in the Imperative mood;) If ye love me, be sure ye keep my
Commandments; make it evident that ye love me; give me the Proof of your
Affection, by doing that which I require. No other Love will I accept, than
what does prove its own Truth by the constant keeping of my Commandments. From
which Acception of the words the Inference cannot but be This,

That our obedience to the Precepts of Jesus Christ, is the only warrantable
Touchstone, whereby to try and examine the love we bear unto his Person. This
will teach us what mettle our Love is made of. And because by the force of our
Love to Christ, (if it is solid, and sincere,) there is a mutual 1 John 3. 24.
Cohabitation betwixt Him and Us John 14. 23. and chapter 17. 23.
( He in us as our Head, and We in Him as his Members,) this will also become a
Rule which cannot possibly deceive us, (as other Rules are wont to do,) in what
it most of all imports us to labor in without Error, even 2 Pet. 1. 10.
the making of our Calling and Election sure.

Having thus far proceeded in laying out the several matters, in which I think
is swallowed up the whole Importance of the Text: I shall begin my Contrivance
with the Conjunction Conditional; and try how much to our Advantage, a word so
commonly overlook't may be made to serve.

CHAP. I. A Question made of our Love to Christ.
Sect. 1. INdeed if we never have been Lovers, we may hear those words with
unconcernment, (...), [ If ye love me.] But if we are any whit acquainted with
what it is to be in love, if we have any kind jealousies, any Pantings, and
yernings, and gaspings of soul, after Him who is the Bridegroom of all our
Souls; we cannot choose but take it tenderly, that the sincerity of our Love
should once be questioned. When Agabus prophesyed of the Bonds Acts 21. 12, 13.
which Paul should suffer at Jerusalem, and thereupon his Friends besought him
not to go to that City, Paul rebuked his friends for their love to Him, as
seeming to derogate from his to Christ. What mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart? I am ready not to be bound only, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of
the Lord Jesus. Nothing wounded him so deeply, as that what was his glory
should be the cause of their grief. So when our Lord put the Question unto some
of his Disciples, (upon the Cowardice and Falsehood he saw in others,) John 6.
67.
will ye also go away? they presently gave him such an Answer, as implied their
being wounded in the tenderest part of their Soul. Lord, to whom should we go?
Verse 6^.
thou have the words of Eternal life. Why do thou kill us with such a
Question, as seems to scruple at our Loyalty, and to derogate from our Love?
where is he in all the World, whom we are able to leave thee for? or what is
that that we can Covet, in exchange for Eternal life? Can we be so besotted, as
to part with our Jewel, in hopes of Dirt? why then do thou intimate, that it
is possible for us to leave thee? or possible for us not to love thee? or
possible for us to love thy absence? so again when he ask't no less than three
times together? Simon Peter love thou me? Peter was grieved (says the Text)
because he had said to him the third time, love thou me; and therefore gave
him such an Answer three times together, as I cannot John 21. 17.
better express then by this short Paraphrase. Lord, when thou know that I
love thee, why do thou ask if I love thee? though all should forsake thee,
yet will not I. My love is stronger than Death it self. Why do thou grieve me
with such a Question, as wounds the honor of the love that I bear unto thee?

Sect. 2. Just so when our Savior does say to us, [ If ye love me keep my
Commandments,] it ought to go somewhat near us, that we should give him any
occasion of putting it to us with an If. Were we piously enamored with him who
is fairer than the children of men; did our Souls love Him who is the Lover of
Souls, in as passionate a manner as he deserves; and were we as jealous of the
honor of our Fidelity as we ought; we would be ready to expostulate in such a
case. Blessed Lord! do thou, by saying [ If ye love me] imply it possible
that we do otherwise? behold what 1 John 3. 1.
manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the
sons of God. When we were Bondmen, ready to perish, not in Egypt, (like the
Poor Syrian,) but that other land of darkness, even Hell it self, it cost him
himself to buy our Freedom. And is it possible not to love him, whilst we
believe it to be true, that he has thus loved us, and that he loved us first
too? Can we possibly be able not to love him at the Rebound? Observe the force
of those words in the best beloved of his Disciples. We love him, because he 1
John 4. 19.
loved us first; or let us love him, because he loved us first. For the word
(...) does equally signify them both. It affirms, and it exhorts. It is at
once of the Indicative and of the Subjunctive mood. (...), we do love him, and
(...), let us love him; and if for no better reason, at least for this, because
he loved us when we were Enemies; and because he then loved us, when we
deserved nothing but hatred.

Sect. 3. But what a sad thing is this, if we shall love him only for that, for
which the worst sort of men are wont to love one another? For if we love them
that love us, what thank have we (says our Savior) do Matthew. 5. 46.
not even the Publicans the same? nay do not the Devils do somewhat like it, by
being still at agreement amongst themselves? never was Satan divided yet
against Satan; for then his kingdom had not continued. It was a witless and
foolish calumny raised by the Pharisees of our Savior, that he did cast out
Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. For the Devils have Matthew. 12. 24.
more wit, than to invade each others Rights. And is not that a kind of Love,
by which, as by a Bond, they are kept together in Peace and Unity, for mutual
interest and preservation? And then what great matter is it, if we love Christ
for this, that he loved us first? It is no more than we are tied to by the law
of good nature, to return at least a little, for the great deal we have
received; yet He desires no more of us, than that we will pledge him when he
begins to us; that we afford him what he has bought, and deerly paid for; and
at least that we will love him, because he loved us first. Now if we have no
love to give him, or spare him freely, we should at least have some to sell
him, or some to retribute, and restore him; love for love, obedience for
obedience, patience for patience, and blood for blood. Seeing the Publicans
themselves do love their lovers, how much worse must we be, if we are no lovers
of Him, who loved us better than his Life? Solomon thought it a great
expression to say that Love is as strong as Death, thereby meaning nothing more
than Cant. 8. 6.
the love of the Bride. But the love of the Bridegroom was very much stronger;
as being that that overcame the sharpness of Death. And shall we so much
disparage either Him or our selves, as to let a Peradventure, or an if be made
of it, whether or no we have attained to such a secondary love, as may suffice
at least to prove us one degree better than Devils? Shall we think it is
sufficient to serve the turn, (to make us Competent Christians, and good
enough,) that we approve of Christ's Innocence, and own his Power, have no
aversion to his goodness, and are glad if we can serve him with ease and
Pleasure to the Flesh? As, when we Pray in his Name, and make Profession of his
word, and sing Hosannas to his glory, and never deny him but in our works, nor
ever forsake him but in his sufferings?

Sect. 4. Nay (to shame ourselves yet farther out of the coldness we labor
under) shall an if be made of our love to Him, the love of whom does most
conduce to our greatest Interest and Advantage? All the Promises in the Context
are no more sequels of our obedience, than our obedience is the Fruit and
effect of Love. From whence it follows that on our Love to the Lord Jesus
Christ, all his great and precious Promises must needs depend for their
performance. For if we love him not enough, how then can we delight in him? And
if we cannot delight in Him, how much less in his Commandments? and if not so,
how then can we obey him? and if not that, how then can we hope he will receive
us with an Euge, well don good and faithful servants? What heart has a servant
to do his work, when he neither loves the Master, nor has pleasure in his
Commands? And yet what hope has a servant to earn his wages, who for want of
affection neglects his work? It is therefore for our Interest the most that may
be, to love our Savior and our Prince, Acts 5. 31.
to whom it belongs to reward, or punish; and so to love him as to keep his
Commandments.

Sect. 5. But suppose it were not useful to love this Savior, and that nothing
were to be got by being loyal to this Prince; yet he being so lovely as well as
great, that whilst he awes us with his Commands, he seeks to melt us with his
Entreaties, methinks we should be so charmed, as still to love him, only to
love him. And shall we niggardly put him off with such a mercenary love, as
with which Diana's Silver-smiths did love their Idol, (or as the Daughters of
the Horse-leech are wont to love Blood,) rather because we live and thrive by
the love we bear him, than because he is so lovely, as to make us die for him,
with ease and pleasure? Those words of Job were the most suitable to a Lover, [
although he kill me, yet will I trust in him.] And as in those words of Job,
(speaking them heartily as he did) consisted the Triumph of his Faith; (to wit,
that Faith which overcomes the world;) So for us to be able to say as heartily
of Christ [that we would love him though he should hate us,] This alone would
be of force to show the Triumph of our Affection. And sure we ought to love our
Savior, (seeing pure love indeed has eyes behind it) rather because he has
already deserved our love, than to the mercenary end that he may* reward it.
Indeed it is most for our Interest (as well as honor) to love him simply for
what he is, and not for what he brings with him by way of Dowry; because in the
conduct of our love, the less we look on our Advantage, the more advantageous
our love will be.

Sect. 6. I confess this is more than He does rigidly exact. Because he is an
High Priest who has a feeling of our Infirmities; and as in his Person he once
did bear them, so for that very reason he does the rather with them. He does
not look for such a perfect and disinteressed love, as stands in need of no
helps, for its Improvement, or support. Carry's not water in the one hand,
wherewith to extinguish the Flames of Hell, nor a Firebrand in the other,
whereby to burn up the Ioys of Heaven, (like the woman so met by Bishop Ivo in
the streets,) to the end that we may love him the more sincerely, without fear
of the first, and without hope of the second. He knows that Hell is very useful
for the driving us off from the love of Evil, and that Heaven is as useful for
the drawing up our love to the Sovereign Good. And as he desires that we will
love him upon any rational Terms; So would he have our love cherisht by any
means to be imagined; even the hope of Reward, in case we do; and fear of
Punishment, if we do not. He would have us to reflect on our own advantage, and
afford him some love, for the love we bear unto our selves.

Sect. 7. It Is true indeed if we consider, that in Him is all goodness, and
that goodness is Beauty in its Perfection, and that Beauty is not the Common,
but the more proper object of Love, (as Colors are of sight, and Sounds of
hearing,) And that Beauty in its Perfection is Loves last object and resort,
the very Center wherein it rests, and wherein when it rests, it cannot possibly
go astray, (all extravagance of desire being quite lost into Fruition,) and by
consequence that there is nothing more natural to a Christian, than to place
his whole Love upon Jesus Christ; if (I say) we consider such things as these,
it may be matter of some Amazement, how a true member of Christ can make a
shift not to love him, and not to love him for Himself too. And yet we see by
Christ himself, it is but indefinitely proposed; it is but (...), if ye love me.
Though Jesus Christ is the Head, and we do hope we are his members, and it is
natural for the members to love the head; though Jesus Christ is the Vine, and
we conceive we are the Branches, and it is natural for the Branches to cleave in
love unto the vine; yet it seems a thing questionable, whether we love him, or
love him not. And since it is impossible for a true member, not to love its own
Head; we may know by this Token, whether we are members of Christ, or not. S.
Paul says expressly, that as many as are members of Jesus Christ are members of
his Body, his Flesh, and Bone, and that no man yet did ever hate his own Flesh.
So that Ephesians. 5. 29, 30.
if it is a question, whether or no we love our Savior, it must be also
another question, whether or no we are his members. Whether members of his
mystical, or (...) of his visible Church only; whether genuine, and natural, or
counterfeit Branches of the Vine. And herein lies the sadness of our condition
(so far forth as we fail in our love to Christ,) that if we suspect we are not
his members, we can yet be so well satisfied or unconcerned in our unhappiness,
as not to take any great thought what shall happen to us hereafter; and if we
think we are his members, that we can seek out occasions of slacking our love
toward a Savior, in loving whom we must confess, our endless happiness does
consist.

Sect. 8. In the beholding of an Interlude, or in the reading of a Romance, men
will be often so affected with the lively representation of some incomparable
Lover, and of his Admirable sufferings for the dear object of his Love, as to
let fall Tears at the Solemnity. Now what other reason can be given, why men
should thus be real Lovers of an Imaginary virtue, and unfeignedly concerned in
another man's Fiction, (whilst they know and consider, it is but a Fiction,) but
that it is in the nature of man as man, (before he degenerates into a Brute,)
both to love the virtuous, and to compassionate the miserable? To espouse the
cause of the best-deserving, and to side with Innocence in her Afflictions?
From whence it follows unavoidably, that he who cannot love goodness without
any reference to himself, (his private Interesses, and ends,) has deerly
bought that disability; which he could never have got at a lower rate, than
that of parting with his Humanity, and plucking up by the Root those Flowers of
Paradise, which the God of good nature had planted in him. And if these things
are so, Lord! how strange is the Impiety, and how mysterious the unhappiness,
to be less affected with the Beauty and bleeding Innocence of a Savior, than
with the Tragical Chimaeras of a Dramatick Poem? How great and manifold is the
guilt of being niggardly and cold in our love to him, whom to love, is so easy,
so advantageous, nay whom it is hard not to love? What a sin against nature, not
to love them that love us? What a sin against Reason, not to love such an
object as we confess is most lovely? What a sin against Grace, not to love even
Him, who has poured out upon us the Spirit of love, and so has offered us at
least the Grace to love him? What a sin against Gratitude, not to love Him who
so loves us, as that he loves to forgive us the scandalous littleness of our
Love? What a sin, to be wanting in love to Him, who dyed to expiate our want of
love to him? What a barbarous sin is it, to love him lamely, and with
indifference, who Rev. 3. 20.
stands knocking at our Door, and importunes us to open with much Entreaty, and
that from morning till midnight, until his Head is Cantic. 5. 2.
filled with Dew, and his locks with the drops of the night? what an amazing
sin is it, (and almost incredible,) to love our Savior any whitless, than we
love our sins? To have a much weaker love for the Proper object of our love,
than we are wonted to bestow on the proper object of our Hatred? Yet is there
any thing more usual, than for many not to love Christ who are called
Christians, and to demonstrate they do not love him, by their not keeping his
Commandments? So very great reason there is to put a strong Emphasis on the
Particle If, that even the best of us perhaps may call our love into Question,
whether it is such as will serve the turn? whether such as does employ us in
the due keeping of the Commandments.

Sect. 9. And therefore, for a conclusion, let us thus reckon within our
selves. That in as much as Heb. 11. 6.
without Faith it is impossible to please God; and seeing no Faith is true, but
that which Gal. 5. 6.
works by love; and seeing no love will prove effectual, but that which
brings forth Matt. 7. 22, 24, 26. John 14 21, 23, 24.
obedience to the Commandments of Christ; (in which respect it is called fitly
the Romans 13. 10.
fulfilling of the Law;) seeing also we must 2 Cor. 13. 5.
know that Christ is in us, or among us, which we can very hardly do but by the
love we bear to John 14. 23. chapter 17. 23. 1 John 3. 24.
him, as well as by the love which he bears to us, ( Shed abroad in our hearts
by the holy Ghost which he has given us;) And seeing by consequence that our
love appears to be one of the greatest Hinges, upon which the very Door of our
Hope does turn; it concerns us as much as Salvation comes to, that we raise up
our hearts to things invisible, and future, and that we work up our affections
toward the right hand of God (where Jesus Heb. 12. 2.
sits, and is enthroned,) by all the Instruments and Engines to be imagined.
Never must we cease from our work of Faith, (which is obedience,) from our 1
These. 1. 3.
labor of love, (which is Industry and diligence in that obedience,) from our
Patience of Hope, (which is indurance unto the end in that industrious way of
obedience,) until the Flame of our Affection has burnt up all unclean Fires,
(obstructing the passage 'twixt us and Christ,) and made its way to
Immortality, in contempt of all Ifs, or Peradventures; that it may never more
be said, If we love him, but because we love him, and because we cannot but
love him, we are resolved not to be able not to keep his Commandments.

Sect. 10. For by the Custom of our obedience, (that I may touch before hand on
what will properly be handled in other places,) we shall contract unto our
selves so great an easiness to obey, that 'twill be difficult and hard to be
disobedient. We shall be ready to object to any masterful temptation, what
Joseph did to his tempting Mistress, how can we do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? wilful sin will become such a stranger to us, we shall so lose
its acquaintance by discontinuing to commit it, that we shall neither have the
heart, nor the Face to own it. I say, by a long and constant practice in the
keeping of the Commandments, and going on a great while in the path of
Righteousness, we shall forget the way back to our old Rebellions; and shall
arrive at an averseness to those enticements, with which we were wont to
converse with Pleasure. Ever saying (when we are tempted,) with the spouse in
the Canticles, we have cast off our coat, how shall we put it on? We have washed
our feet, how shall Cant. 5* 3.
we defile them? An inveterate habit of the soul (like such an habit of the
Body,) as it is not quickly gotten, so when it is, it is hardly lost. And as
the habit of living wickedly turns our wickedness into our nature, that to
cease from doing wickedly, all things in us must become new; so the habit of
doing well, does so rivet and ingrain the love of Piety in our hearts, that
it is well nigh as difficult to raze it out, as for a Leopard to change his
spots, or an Aethiop his skin. Is there any Jer. 13. 23.
among us who has been so accustomed to any sin, as that it has got the
dominion over him? let him but have the Curiosity to make an obvious
experiment, (for the sole want of which he understands not the pleasures of
virtuous living,) and, my life for his, it will set him free. Let him accustom
himself as much to the keeping of the Commandments, as he has don unto the
Breach and Transgression of them, and he will find himself as perfectly an
humble servant unto Righteousness, as before he was a servant and slave to sin.
Righteousness Romans 6. 12, 14.
will get the Dominion over him; 'twill Rule and Reign in his mortal body; it
will so lift up his reason above his Passions, and so bring down his Appetite
to a subjection chap. 7. 23.
under his Will, as that the law in his members will but timorously war against
the law in his mind. He will be passionately in love both with the Burden, and
the yoke, as with the Beauty and the Love of his master Christ. And like the
Bondsman in Exodus at the great Exodus 21. 6.
year of Manumission, will rather be bored through the ear, than be free from
Christ. The Apostles word is, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
He will be a new Creature; and even those which heretofore were his most
formidable Duties, will now at last so become his supreme delights, that as he
will not endure to do the things which he abominates, so as little will he be
able to abstain from the duties he so much loves. Thus at last he will be
brought into that blessed disability of wilful sinning, of which S. John speaks
in his first Epistle. He that is born of God sins not, 1. John 3. 9.
neither can he, (says the Apostle,) and that because he is born of God. That
is, he cannot sin wilfully, so as still to be regenerate; because he cease to
be regenerate by wilful sinning. Sins of Ignorance and frailty he cannot free
himself from; but he cannot, being regenerate, sin a sin unto Death. Cannot
endure to live habitually or indulgently in sin. For whilst we continue to be
regenerate, or born of God, the love we bear to Christ's person will beget such
a love of his precepts too, as will make the keeping of them at once our
Business, and our Delight.

Sect. 11. And until we arrive at this, we cannot go beyond Is in the School of
Christ; but must be held, as so many Dunces, to the first syllable of the Text.
We may say that we love him without the keeping of his Commandments; but it is
plain, without that* we cannot palpably demonstrate, or show our Love. We
cannot show it either to Christ, or to our Neighbor; or so much as to our
selves. For S. Paul tells us expressly, that the salvifick grace of God, or the
grace which brings Salvation, does teach as many as do receive Tit. 2. 12.
it without resistance, to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world. But now we cannot do either, unless we keep his Commandments, because by
these we are precisely tied up to all three. And so without the keeping of them
we have no love at all. For had we a real love to God, we should be Godly. Had
we any to our Neighbor, we should be Righteous. And did we but truly love our
selves, we should be Temperate, and Sober. That is to say, had we a solid and
sincere love of Christ, either considered in himself, or considered in his
Members, we should not fail, in good measure, to keep his Commandments. For
what disparity could there be, betwixt our loving; and our not loving Christ,
if it were possible for us to love him without the keeping of his Commandments?
If they can truly love Christ who still are breaking his Commandments; And if
they can but love him who are still keeping his Commandments, what great
difference can there be, betwixt love, and hatred? what difference in the
causes, when there is none in the effects? (to make it evident by a plain and
familiar Instance) It Is not the least of his Commandments by which he obliges
us to submit our selves to every ordinance of man, whether supreme, or
subordinate, 1 Pet. 2. 13. And therefore they who can flatter themselves, or
others, that when they violate this Commandment, (given by Christ in his
Apostle,) they only violate it in Love to the reformation of his Religion, and
so Rebel against him in love to the advancement of his Glory, or only fight
against him in Love to the propagation of his Gospel, do speak as absurd a
contradiction, as if they should say in plainer terms, that they hate him in
Love, that they Persecute him in Love, and that in love they cannot endure him.
And therefore let us resolve upon the keeping of his Commandments, that so we
may be sure we love him; that we may love him without an If; that we may not
fail to love him, with such a love as is undisputable.

Sect. 12. For this is one of the chiefest reasons, why he exacteth our
obedience, even because our obedience is the strongest Argument of our Love.
Could we love him without Obedience, he would not be so much offended (as now
he is) with our Rebellions. That which most of all wounds him, is our
unkindness; and this for our sakes, a great deal rather than for his own;
because our want of kindness to him is only mischievous to our selves; It being
That without which He is not able to make us Happy. And this does prompt me to
descend to the second Inference which I proposed,

CHAP. II.
That the greatest expression of Christ's love to us, is his taking it as a
kindness, and as a kindness unto himself, that we will be but so wise, as to do
our selves good: that we will not meddle with that which hurts us; but let
misery alone; and apply our selves wholly to do those things, in which our only
true happiness must needs consist.

Sect. 1. AS this was one of the great ends of our Saviors coming into the
world, to make us holy, as he is holy; and this in order unto the greatest, our
being happy, as he is happy; so he is still pressing upon us not to be
negligent of the means, whereby those ends may be accomplished. And this no
doubt must be the reason, why having given us his Commandments, to hedge us
about, and to fence us in, that so it may be hard for us to fail of bliss; he
adds to all the rest, this one Commandment, that (for the love we bear to him)
we will keep his Commandments; Not only for the reason which we find given by
S. John, because his Commandments are not grievous; but especially 1 John 5. 3.
for the reason which we find given by the Psalmist, because in keeping of them
there is great reward; Psalm. 19. 11.
and for the reason which is rendered by God himself, because if a man do them,
he shall live in them; or (which Levit. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 11.
is most to our purpose,) because the scope of the Commandments given by Christ
under the Gospel, is to make us such as He is, (so far forth as we are
capable,) both for Righteousness in this world, and for Beatitude in the next.
This must therefore of necessity be the greatest expression of his love, for
that the reason of his Commanding us to keep his Commandments, is not because
it is for his interest, but only because it is for (...) Philo. (...). P. 127.
128.
ours. Could we possibly be happy without the keeping of his Commandments, he
would not press the keeping of them with so much fervor. Were there two ways
to heaven, one by faith and obedience, another by faith without obedience; the
disobedience of our lives would never grieve him. He would not so rigidly urge
upon us the observation of his Law, if Salvation were to be had upon easier
Terms. For I say he is so urgent to have us keep his Commandments, not so
simply and precisely that his Commandments may be kept, as that by keeping them
strictly, we may be saved. Our being saved is the end, (at least his being
glorified in our Salvation,) of which our keeping the Commandments is but a
necessary medium conducing to it.

Sect. 2. To contemplate the case in some obvious color, let us suppose that a
carnal, but affectionate Father, being about to leave the world, (as our
Savior then was, when he spoke these words,) should give a farewell to his
children in such expressions. [My sons and daughters, if ye love me, observe
those precepts when I am gone, which I have many times given, whilst present
with you. Strive to make your selves happy, take care of your health; preserve
your fortunes, keep money in your purses; provide for the winter of Adversity;
hold close together for mutual help and preservation; beware of ^^^^^^ship;
take heed of Intemperance; do nothing that ^^y lead you into beggary, or
sickness; into Imprisonment, or Bonds; but study to live long in ease, and
safety, in peace and plenty, in pleasure and prosperity;] would we not esteem
him a very fond Parent, and extremely concerned in the outward happiness of his
children? would we not look upon those his last words, as the most eminent
expressions of his Fatherly care, touching the things of this perishing and
fading world? what then shall we think of our Blessed Savior? who having given
us such Commandments as he knew had an aptness to keep us safe, and (not only
so, but) to make us happy, does here entreat us in the words of a dying man,
that, if we love him, we will keep his Commandments. And what is this but to
say (in effect, and substance,) If ye love Me, be sure to love your own selves?
Do me this courtesy at least, to be but as Est and alia, in hoc seculo,
obtemperantibus merces, cum penitus a nobis evulsis Peccati radicibus,
caleatoque Mundi Fastu, atque edomita carnis petulantia, virtutibus ditamur;
nihilque non agimus, quo ex hominibus Dii efficiamur. Folengius in Psalm 19. 11.
happy as I would have you. Alas! in breaking my Commandments, ye break your
selves; and do not That, if ye love me. If there is any thing in the world
which ye will do for my sake, do not ruin yourselves forever. But for the love
ye bear to me, keep those Commandments, which unless ye duly keep, ye cannot
keep your own souls. Ye cannot keep them (I say) from the Roaring Lion, who
night and day goes about, seeking whom he may devour. My Commandments are the
Amulets, which, by being well kept, must keep you from him.

Sect. 3. Now if our Savior is so affectionate and kind to us, as to take it
for a kindness, that we be kind unto our selves, and that we keep his
Commandments, not at all for his good, but entirely for our Deuteronomy. 10. 13.
own; why should we either so despise or so hate our own Souls, as to be
negligent in the keeping of those Commandments, for the keeping of which we
shall not only be rewarded in time to come, but in the keeping of which there
is great Reward? great Reward even then when it is attended with Persecutions,
because they very well consist with our Receiving an hundredfold now in this
present world, besides the happiness in Mat. 10. 30.
reversion, which will fall to us in the next. There are such secret
Retributions, of Peace, and comfort, and Joy unspeakable, conveyed by God
into the Soul of one who truly loves Christ, and duly keeps his Commandments,
and is under persecution for doing both, that our Lord might well join the
(...) with the (...), the present Reward with the present sufferings. For in
this keeping of his Commandments, that Real Godliness does consist, whereof S.
Paul says to Timothy, that it is profitable for all things. And that for this
reason, because besides its own sweetness, (which makes it delicious unto all,
whose Spirits 1. Tim. 4. 8.
are not so incrassate as to have quite lost their (...). Philo (...), P. 351.
Taste,) It yields to those that are owners of it, often-recurring Praelibations
of the glory to be revealed. For this I humbly conceive to be the meaning of S.
Paul, when he says, It has the Promise even of this present life, as well as
of that which is to come. And not only so, but it is profitable besides, as to
our Bodily enjoyments, those of meat, drink, and clothing; so far forth as
they conduce to the solidest comforts of a man's life. For it is to these our Lord
referrs, when he makes this solemn promise, (unto such as seek first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness,) that all these things shall Mat. 6. 31,
33.
be added to them. Added (he means) in measure, though not excess. Added to
satisfy, though not to satiate. Added for health, though not for surseit.
Added as a Blessing, though not as turned into a Curse. For it is not the
Glutton, or the Drunkard, But it is the sober man and Temperate, who eats and
drinks with the greatest Pleasure, (And to whom his very meals are not only his
Delights, but his Duties too,) And that for this reason, Because his palate is
uncorrupted, and his Appetite undebaucht. Which when Gnephacthus the King of
Egypt (like v. Torquat. apud Cic. de Fin. l. 1. and 2. and Gatakeri Praeloquium
quod Antonino Imperatori a se edito praemisit.
Epicurus and Eudoxus.) had found to be true by some Experiments, he preferred
from thence forwards a Course of Abstinence and Sobriety, not as the better
habit only, but as the greater sensuality. For so it is ordered by our Creator,
(whose wisdom and goodness are in nothing more seen,) that the Innocentest
pleasures upon earth are still the greatest and the most lasting. Such as are
the high Pleasures (...). Philo (...), P. 769, 770.
of being perfectly in Health, which (in the Judgment of learned Philo the best
Philosopher of the Jews) is the most natural effect and reward of Temperance.
And sure the Pleasures of perfect Health are very much greater than can be
known, until revealed and set off by the pains of Sickness. Now as Temperance,
under God, is the Cause of Health, so are all other virtues the Guardians of
it. Which being Instances or Branches of our obedience to Christ's Commands, do
thus afford us one example of our very great Reward in the keeping of them. It
is a Paradox (I confess) to the Praeceptum est pythagoricum, (...). Vide
Philonem (...) P. 670. Hinc paradoxa sunt plerumque quae docent Pythagorai. sc.
exules esse, qui in media urbe Magistratus obeunt and e contra. Divitlis
scatentem Egenum esse, and vice versa.
men of this world, that our Christian Service should be its own Recompense;
that even our work should be one kind of wages; and that besides our reward for
the keeping of the Commandments, it should be (over and above) our Reward to
keep them. But as there is hardly any thing false, which does not seem to be
true, (to one or other,) so there is hardly any thing true, which (to one sort
or other,) is not seemingly false. As Christ himself, so the Commandments of
Christ, are a stumbling block to some, and arrant foolishness to others. For
men of sensual apprehensions cannot discern those felicities, which do
naturally arise from the constant keeping of the Commandments; partly because
they do not keep them, and so are ignorant of their sweetness for want of
trial; partly because they are fleshly minded, and so are blind to those things
which must be spiritually discerned.

Sect. 4. But now (besides that we have it in an express text of Scripture,
that in the keeping of the Commandments there is great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11.)
first we can prove it by the experience of excellent persons in holy Scripture.
Secondly, by the promise of Christ himself, in the two next verses before my
Text. Thirdly, by the evidence of such plain Reasons, as even the natural man
himself will not easily contradict.

Sect. 5. I cannot begin to prove this from a better Topic than experience;
nor from a better experience than that of David; who has put it upon Record in
the most notable of his Psalms, (I mean the 119) that of all the good things*
which were desirable here on earth, the very keeping of his Commandments did
still afford him a supply.

Sect. 6. First in the time of his Distress, he found it his Comfort, and
support. Unless thy law had been my Psalm. 119. 92.
delight, I should have perished in mine affliction. It was (it seems) the only
thing, that was able to make him outlive his sufferings. And agreeably to that,
we find him breaking out into this petition. I am a stranger upon Earth, O hide
not thy Commandments from me. verse 19.
As if he should have said in plainer terms, [O my God, since I am friendless,
and in a very strange Country, and am to take a great Journey through all the
difficulties and Horrors of an Inhospitable desert, wherein are many salvage
Beasts to be encountered in the way; O do not take away my staff, deprive me not
of my Provision, do not bereave me of my guide, let not thy Commandments be
kept from mine eyes. For without the Refreshment and help of Them, what can
accompany and conduct me into the land of the living? whatsoever thou do unto
me, give me not over to disobedience; or whatsoever thou hidest from me, O hide
not thy Commandments. Take away any thing, rather than Them. That is so
terrible a divorce, as I am not able to endure. For I am taught by my
experience, verse 50.
that thy Commandments have been my comfort in my trouble; And but for the
Anchor I took in them, the waters of the deep had gone over my soul; and a sea
of afflictions had overwhelmed me.

Sect. 7. Again, the keeping of the Commandments was David's wisdom. For no
sooner had he said I have verse 99. 100.
more knowledge than my Teachers, but straight he added this Reason, because I
keep thy Commandments. His Teachers were such fools, as to keep the statutes of
Omri; to wit the wide and broad way, by which they were led unto Destruction.
But 'twas the Policy of David, to keep the statutes of his Creator; to wit the
straight and narrow way which leads directly unto life. The Fool is He who
proudly walks upon a Precipice; but the meek man is wise, because he walks in
plain ground. And as the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; so the
keeping of his Precepts is its perfection.

Sect. 8. Thirdly, the keeping of the Commandments was David's Pleasure and
Sensuality. He had as verse 14. 16.
much delight in them, as in all manner of riches. Yea his soul was ready to
break for the longing he had to the Commandments. He was passionately in love
with the 20.
law of God, all the day long was his study in it. And as 97.
Darius, being in love, is said to have gaped upon Apame with open mouth, (1
Esdras 4. 31.) so we are told by King David, that he opened his mouth, and
panted, for the ardent desire which he had to the Commandments. 131. 143.
Nay, though trouble and anguish took hold upon him, yet the Commandments even
then were his great Delight.

Sect. 9. Again, the keeping of the Commandments was David's project of
Advantage. He seized upon them verse 3.
as his heritage for ever, and such an Heritage too, as was the joy of his
heart. He rejoiced in them as one that finds great spoils. The law of his
God was dearer to 162.
him: than were thousands of Gold and silver. The only 72.
Trade which he did drive was to negotiate thus with Heaven; and he found it
even here the most thriving course.

Sect. 10. Fifthly, the keeping of the Commandments was David's honor. Let my
heart be sound in thy verse 80.
statutes that I be not ashamed. So in one place he prays. And he professes in
another, that he had rather be a Doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, than to
dwell in the Courts of Princes. For he that keeps closest to the Commandments
of God, does hold the highest Rank in the Court of Heaven. An honor every way
adequate to the most infinite Ambition.

Sect. 11. Lastly, the keeping of the Commandments was David's liberty and
freedom. I shall run the way of verse 32.
thy Commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty. Agreeable to that of
our blessed Savior, henceforth I call you not servants, but Friends; ( Ioh.
15. 15.) and we know the word Friend does import a Freedom. But because the
word Commandment implies a Master, and a Servant, or else a Sovereign, and
Amicitia est inter pares.
a Subject; whilst Friendship by Philosophers is said to be amongst equals; we
must therefore distinguish betwixt liberty and looseness, betwixt a
Free-subject, and a Rebellious one, betwixt a servant set free, and freeing
himself before his time. Rebellion is to be reckoned the greatest Tyrant in the
world, as enslaving us to the meanness of being Rebels. The truest liberty of
the Subject consists in loyalty and obedience to just Authority and Command,
not as of necessity, but out of choice. The Prison makes me no prisoner, whilst
I choose the confinement which men inflict. Else a Prince would be a Prisoner,
whenever he pleases to be retired. Alexander the great was the greatest
Prisoner, when he childishly wept for a second world. For as we measure any
man's neediness, not by the littleness of his Possessions, but by the greatness
of his Desires; so a Prisoner is one who does want more room, who thinks his
House is too little, and his Territories too narrow, and therefore labors at
least to enlarge his Borders. But the Commandments of Christ do try us up to
Contentment; in which is the Absence of all Desire; and in this is perfect
freedom. For when the thing which is commanded is to be absolutely free,
(especially from the Tyranny and yoke of Sin,) we cannot be the less free, by
being obligingly commanded. There cannot sure be any servitude in our being
obliged to be happy. For then the Angels that never fell would be enslaved by
their confirmation. No, our Servitude does consist in our being overruled to
contrive our misery, not in our being only commanded to seek our Bliss. Suppose
a Master commands his Servant even to go whether he pleases, and to do what he
lists; that is, in effect, to be a very freeman. We cannot say he is enslaved,
because commanded to be at liberty. For a man to be commanded to use his
freedom, has nothing in it of Impropriety; but to be free, and yet enslaved,
imply's a flat contradiction. It was not by exemption from Gods Commands but in
regard of his rigid obedience to them, that Abraham was called the Friend of
God. And our Savior would have us rise, from the lowness of Servants, unto the
Dignity of Friends, not by being familiar with him, but by doing [and
suffering] whatsoever he does command us. The degrees of our obedience may
fitly be called the stairs of honor, by which we climb up into an intimate
Friendship with our Redeemer; yea, (which is more to be admired) into a mutual
Inherence, and Cohabitation. For S. John 1 John 3. 24.
tells us expressly, that he who keeps the Commandments of Christ, dwells in
Christ, and Christ in him.

Sect. 12. And this does lead me, from the first to the second Topic which I
proposed; from David's experience, attested to us in the Psalms, to the promise
of Christ, (the son of David) in the two next verses before my Text. A signal
promise, repeated twice in a Breath; as 'twere on purpose to rouse up our
drowzy souls, and to provoke us unto obedience by a redoubled Reflection on our
Advantage. What can be more for our Advantage, or more agreeable to the
Ambitions, both of the Flesh, and of the Spirit, than to have our own wills,
and to be masters of all we have a mind to, even all that we are able to want
or pray for? yet this is every man's portion, who does so really love Christ, as
to keep his Commandments. For so says the Oracle which cannot ly, or
prevaricate. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do. (v. 13.) and
in the very next words, If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. (v.
14.) A promise sufficient to make us startle unless we consider it long enough,
to grasp the whole of its Importance. For we see it is universal; (...), if any
thing, and (...), whatsoever; we shall have what we ask, without exception. And
universal as it is, it is inculcated, and insorc't, by a sacred kind of
Tautology. From whence it is obvious to infer, (as it is useful to observe,)
that although vain Repetitions are worthily blamed by our blessed Savior, yet
there are many Repetitions which are not vain. It is so far from being vain
for our Lord here to tell us the same thing twice, that it is to rivet it in our
memories, and to imprint it in our minds. And what is that which he desires may
take so deep an Impression in us, but that we shall have our own asking, if we
will but so love him as to keep his Commandments? Compare the Text with the
Context, the condition of the promise with the promise it self, and you will
find that the scope of the whole is this. If you will do my will, I will not
fail to do yours. If ye will but hear me, speaking to you in my Precepts, I
will be sure to hear you speaking to me in your Prayers. Give me the little
that I ask, and you shall have your own asking. Put your selves into a capacity
of enjoying as much as you can desire. Apply your selves to such a course, as
by which ye may make me your own, and have all my Mercies at your disposal. For
on condition that ye love me, and keep my Commandments, I will do what ye will
have me; setting no bounds unto my grant, but what ye do to your Petitions.

That this is here our Saviors meaning, will undeniably appear from those
parallel words, 1 John 3. 22. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we
keep his Commandments. Not whilst, but because. Not at that time, but for that
reason. Compare this again with those other expressions of Christ himself, John
15. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will,
and it shall be don: which is as if he should have said, do you but keep my
Commandments, and ye shall have me at your Command: for so run the words, ask
what ye will, and it shall be don. Let us be perfect in this point, before we
leave it. For besides that there is nothing, which more closely concerns the
Text, (I mean, as it stands in relation to the Context,) by how much the longer
we think upon it, we shall admire it so much the more. Admit that we were to
make the greatest promise to be imagined to Christ himself; we could not go
beyond this, [ Lord ask what thou will, and it shall be don.] And yet the very
same thing says He to us, ask what ye will, and it shall be don, if ye will
but so love me, as to keep my Commandments.

Sect. 13. Where now lies the difference betwixt God's doing our will, and our
doing His, since he is pleased to bind himself by such an astonishing kind of
promise, (no less than Joh. 14. 13, 14 John 15. 7. John 16. 23.
4 times repeated in the very same Sermon) that all we ask shall be don, ask
what we will? Certainly the difference is only this; that God does satisfy our
wills, by way of answer to our Petitions; and we do Homage unto His, by way of
Answer to his Commands. His compliance with us is an act of Grace; and ours
with Him an act of Duty. God reveals his will to us, by way of Empire and
Exaction, because he is our Creator, and we the work of his Hands. We exhibit
our wills to Him by way of Entreaty and Supplication, because he is as our
Potter, and we his clay. In this then we differ, that we entreat, whilst he
Commands; but in this we agree, that we would have our wills don; He by us, and
we by Him. Nay what will ye say, if he intreates us too as earnestly, as we do
him? It is the saying of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God. Here is God (ye see) beseeching us, and Jesus Christ
praying to us, (for what he does by his Ambassadors, he truly (...). Arist. Eth.
does,) that having don him all the wrong, we will admit of a Reconcilement,
that is to say, that we will love him, and keep his Commandments. Herein then
consists the great Advantage of our obedience, that whilst it is doing God's
will, it moves God to do ours. Which must not be accused as a bold expression,
because we are taught it by God himself. For if we keep his Commandments we
shall abide in his love, ( John 15. 10.) And if we abide in his love, all we
ask shall be don, ask what we will, John 15. 7.

Sect. 14. But here it may easily be objected to all that has hitherto been
spoken, that however our Savior has made this Promise, yet not one of his
Disciples has ever seen its Performance. For where is he in all the world, who
can say his Petitions have all been granted? how many sick and poor Christians
have prayed to Christ for health and honor, who yet have dyed of their
diseases in perfect beggary, and dropped unregarded into a grave of forgetfulness
and obscurity?

Sect. 15. The Answer to this will be short and obvious. That the great and
precious promise is not absolute but conditional. Had the promise been
absolute, the objection brought to it had not been capable of an Answer; it
would not lie in our power to clear our Savior from breach of Promise. But the
promise being conditional, is more or less to be performed by him that made it,
as the condition shall be observed by them on whom it is enjoined. Now thus
stands the Case betwixt our Savior and our selves. In the two next verses
before my Text, (and John 15. 7.) we have a general promise bestowed on his
part; and in the words next after we have a reasonable condition required on
Ours. The promise is on his part, that we shall have what we ask, ask what we
will. The Condition is on ours, that we abide in him, and that his words abide
in us; that we love him so far, as to keep his Commandments. Now the man being
named who has not broken the condition, it will be easy to name the man in
whom the promise has been accomplished. In the very Matthew. 7. 2.
same measure we mete to Christ, it is but just he should mete to us. If we
will needs reject his Precepts, how can he do less than neglect our prayers?
with what modesty can we expect, that he should give us what we desire, whilst
we pay him not the tribute which He commands? what encouragement has our
Savior to be still gratifying of us, whose common practice it is to incense or
grieve him? nay, (to deal freely with our selves, and but ingenuously with
Christ,) what man is there amongst us who is not ready to confess, that we have
cross't his will, more than he has cross't ours? had not he been more
inclinable to grant our Prayers, than we commonly have been to yield obedience
to his commands, what should we many times have don for Food and Raiment? how
could we sow in the spring, with any expectation to reap in Autumn? this may
therefore be sufficient to free his promise from the objection, that he
performs more of it, than we have don of the condition on which 'twas made.
Nay as his promise is vastly greater, than we have the goodness to deserve; so
his performance of it is more, than we have the Impudence to require. For if we
love him but little, he grants us much, if we obey him but seldom, he thanks us
often. And if he gives us not all we ask, it is because we do not love him with
all the love that he requires; such as employ's our whole strength in the
constant keeping of his commandments.

Sect. 16. The objection being thus answered, and the promise of our Savior
thereby made clear, I proceed from the second, to the third Topic which I
proposed; that is, to such a kind of reasoning, as the natural man himself will
not easily contradict.

Sect. 17. First twill be granted by all the world, as well by the Jew, as by
the Christian, as well by the heathen, as by the Jew, as well by the Atheist,
as by the Heathen, all will say with one mouth, that they desire to be happy,
and that happiness is so lovely, they cannot choose but desire it. Perfect
happiness is the object, which alone cannot fall under the liberty of the will.
It is as natural to desire it, as for a stone to tend downwards. Indeed it is
easy to mistake, but it is impossible to refuse it. I say it is easy to mistake
a false happiness for a true; and to refuse the true happiness in adherence
unto a false one. But happiness cannot be refused, by any man who does believe
it is truly such. Consummate happiness is the center toward which we all
travail, let our errors and vices be what they will; and however we may differ
about the way that leads to it, yet we agree in our Intentions to hit the end.
For though there are that seek death, and with Hell are at agreement, and pull
destruction upon themselves with the work of their Hands; yet it is because they
mistake their Bliss, not because they prefer their misery. Every man in the
world does love the quenching of his thirst; Desire is the thirst of every man's
Soul; Satisfaction is the quenching of all Desire. And though a man wanders
never so much in the way that he is going, yet the end of his Journey is
satisfaction. So that aiming (as we do) at being happy, and setting out (as we
do) from the pure hands of a Creator, we should not be able to miss of
happiness, were there not many ways of erring, betwixt the circumference, and
the center. Epicurus went one way, Eudoxus another, Diodorus a third, Herillus
a fourth, the Stoics a fifth, the Peripateticks a sixth, (as has been Sinner
Impleaded. part. 1. chapter 1. Sect. 6.
elsewhere observed) the Gymnosophists a seventh, the Herodians an eighth, the
Mahomedans a ninth, and we who are Christians do go a tenth; but all agree in
their desires of being as happy as it is possible. This I therefore set down as
my first postulatum, and as that which will be granted by men of all sects;
that though happiness is mistaken by several sects, and as diversely defined as
it is misunderstood, yet to be absolutely happy in the general notion of the
word, is the common desire of all the world.

Sect. 18. It will secondly be granted by men of all sects, that a man's
happiness does consist in the complete satisfaction of his desires. For our
desires are our capacities, or our emptiness of soul. How much soever we do
desire, so much we want, and stand in need of. Now because there is nothing
which nature hates more, than to be empty, or in want, there can be nothing
more natural, than to covet a fullness, or satisfaction. But the largest of
Vessels can want no more than it will hold, nor can it covet more than will
make it full. And therefore the filling of our desires (vessels of infinite
capacity) cannot choose but be that, wherein our happiness does consist. Which
fulfilling of our desires is nothing else but contentment, or satisfaction.

Sect. 19. Now hence it follows unavoidably, that if a man's Happiness does
consist in the complete satisfaction of his desires; and if that is nothing
else, but an absolute contentment, or self-sufficience; and if the Commandments
of Christ do ty us up, or oblige us to such contentment; then his Commandments
of necessity do make it our duty to be happy, and by consequence an happiness
to do our Duty. In this there is nothing to be denied, no not so much as by the
Atheist, unless it be that Christ's commandments do oblige us to contentment, or
self-sufficience; and that will easily be proved by the Tenor of them, which
himself has sum'd up in the 12 chap. of S. Mark v. 30, 31. where all the law
and the Prophets are said to hang upon these two hinges, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy mind, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength; and thy Neighbor as thy self. Now he that loves God
with all his heart, will in him set up his Rest; his whole delight will be in
him, his whole dependence will be on him; he will not love either the world, or
the things of the world; in whatsoever state he is, he will be sure to be
content; he will not (with Martha) be sollicitous and careful of many things;
but espowse (with Mary) the one thing that is necessary. Luke 10. 40, 41.
He will be inwardly full of joy in the Holy Ghost; his conversation will be in
Heaven; and the tranquillity of his Conscience will be the beginning of his
Bliss. Thus it must needs be with him, who is perfectly amorous of his Maker;
and perfectly amorous of his Maker he needs must be, who loves him with all his
heart and soul. This is the sum of our whole Duty toward God, and this is the
effect of discharging his duty, and so it is our duty to be happy, and therefore
an happiness to do our Duty. The sum of our duty toward our Neighbor, is to
love him as our selves; and the effect of this duty is full contentment and
satisfaction. For we are neighbors unto all, for whom Christ dyed; and he dyed
for our enemies, as well as Friends; and if we love all the world for which
Christ dyed, with such a singleness of love as we love our selves with, we
cannot fail of observing that other Precept of our Savior, Matthew. 7. 12. which
is the doing unto others, as we would that others should do to us. And then, by
a consequence unavoidable, we shall not covet another man's goods, because we
would not that another should covet ours. And coveting nothing that is
another, we cannot choose but be satisfied and contented with our own. And in
contentment or satisfaction, (which are Synonymous) it will be granted by all
the world that real happiness does consist.

Sect. 20. Now if the loving of one another, even as Christ has loved us, and
as our selves do love our selves, does infer our loving God, with all our
heart, (as S. John does clearly intimate, 1 Ioh. 4. 20.) And if the
Commandments of our Lord do amount all to this, that we love one another with
such a love; (as our Lord does clearly intimate in the 13, 14, 15, and 17.
chapters of S. John's Gospel;) then we discern the great reason of those
expressions of S. Paul, He that loves another has Romans 13. 8. 9, 10. Gal. 5.
14.
fulfilled the law. And all the law is fulfilled in this one word, thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. And if these things are so, then all the moral
law of Moses, which is withal the law of Christ, does make it our Duty to be
content, and by consequence to be happy, and by consequence an happiness to do
our Duty. For he that says in plain terms, thou shall not only not rob, or
defraud thy neighbor, (of his life, his wife, his goods, or his good name,)
but thou shall also not cove^ any thing that is another; does clearly say, (in
effect, and substance,) thou shall be satisfied with thine own; thou shall not
be in any want of the things without, but shall have happiness within thee; all
thy desires shall be fulfilled; thou shall have absolute contentment, and
satisfaction; and the Angels of Heaven can have no more. This is the precept
which I command, and this the Duty thou art obliged to perform, Thou shall not
covet what is not thine; that is to say in other words, Thou shall be as happy
as I would have thee.

And thus at last I have proceeded unto the (...), or thing proposed to be
proved.

Sect. 21. Another way whereby to prove it, will be to argue from that
Trichotomie, in the 6. chapt. of Micah, at the 8. verse; where the whole Body
of the Commandments is compendiously divided into these three members, to do
Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God. The first of which
bestows upon us a full Serenity of mind, the most desirable felicity of being
satisfied with our selves, and so by consequence it yields us the greatest
pleasure. The second is not only to make our Donor to become our Debtor, but to
lend him our Riches upon Increase; nor that for ten in the hundred, but for an
hundredfold the Principal, ( Mat. 19. 20.) and by consequence it yields us the
greatest gain. The third is that which speaks us masters of our selves, by
speaking us servants to a master, whose service is not only Freedom, but Empire
too. Illi servire, est regnare, says Espensaeus. And giving us the advantage
of that most honorable subjection, which in Tacitus his judgment does place
the Subjects above their Prince, makes us Favorites in the Court of the King of
Heaven; and by consequence it yields the greatest Honor. So that unless we are
professedly Platonic Lovers of Disobedience, all our Duties are conformable to
the very unruliest of our Desires. The doing of Justice does comply with our
Sensuality; the loving of Mercy with our Avarice; and to walk humbly with our
God, is very agreeable to our Ambition.

Sect. 22. Lest this should seem at first hearing to be but a phansiful way of
arguing, I shall show it once more by a clearer light.

As for the first, the doing of Justice, it entertains its entertainers with
peace of Conscience, which (in the wise man's Judgment) is a continual Feast.
It is so acceptable and pleasant to reflect in a man's Thoughts upon his having
don well, having wronged no man, defrauded no man, but dealt righteously with
all; that any man whose understanding has not quite lost its Taste, may make as
pleasant a meal on a mess of Honesty, (I speak of likeness, and not equality,)
as if he had dined that day in Paradise, and taken his Supper in Heaven it self.

Sect. 23. The second, the loving of Mercy, is the giving our selves a Right to
what we have, by our parting with the possession. For non videtur cujusquam id
esse quod casu auferri potest, says Caius the Lawyer. Nothing is properly our
own, which can possibly cease to be so, by being entrusted unto a Treasury
where rust and moth can corrupt, or where thieves break through and steal. From
whence it follows, that it is the Thrift (if not the Avarice) of a merciful man,
to make Heaven his Coffer, and to Inventory his Goods, by the number of the
persons to whom he has been a Benefactor. For in propriety of speech, we are
worth no more than we have wisely given away. And that the parting with our
possession is no infringing of our Right, appears not only by Gods, but
Justinians Law. For and eum habere dicimus qui Rei dominus est, aeque ac eum
qui Rem tenet, says Ulpian. And this Rule of the Civilians you may interpret
out of S. Paul, For when (says he) we are poor by making many rich, we are as
2 Cor. 6. 10.
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

Sect. 24. Lastly for the Third, the walking humbly with our God, it is not
only the safest, but noblest temper; not only the most christian, but the most
hansome quality. And thence is called by S. Peter, not only (...), (that is)
profitable, or gainful, in relation to God, of whom it looks for its Reward;
but (...) too, that is hansome or comely in the sight of men. 1 Pet. 3. 4. Where
having said wherein comeliness does but negatively consist, [ not in the
plaiting of the hair, or putting on of our apparel,] he proceeds to inform us
wherein it positively consists, to wit in the hidden man of the heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and a quiet spirit. It Is
this that makes us like the Queens Daughter, all glorious within. And therefore
when Celsus upbraided Origin with that degenerous modesty of the Christians,
(for so it was in his Account,) their withdrawing themselves from public
Business, and refusing the honors of the Court, or the Commonwealth; Origin
answers that they did it, [(...),] as keeping themselves for a diviner, and a
more honorable employment. For seeing Christ was the Master, whom 'twas their
Pride, and their Glory, and their Happiness to serve, they were most ambitious
of that Quality, which made them fittest for their obedience.

Sect. 25. Thus have I showed in some particulars, how the Goodness of every
Action is very sufficient for the Reward too; And how obedience to the
Commandments, were it not itself an abundant Recompense, has enough of Heaven
in it to give us happiness without one. In so much that our Savior might well
have said, (not if ye love me, but) If ye love your own selves, keep my
Commandments; even because the keeping of them can add no otherwise to His,
than as it makes for Our advantage.

And having hitherto considered our Saviors Precept touching* the keeping of
his Commandments, as the greatest expression of his love to us; I am next to
consider the keeping of them, as the greatest expression of ours to Him; And so
by consequence am to proceed to the third Inference I proposed,

CHAP. III.
That as the greatest expression of Christ's Love to us, is his taking it as a
kindness that we be kind unto ourselves; so the greatest expression of ours to
him, is to do those things which he enjoyn's us.

Sect. 1. ANd sure the Truth of this Inference will not need much labor to
make it evident. For all expressions of our Love, however many, or great, in
point of number, or degree, are comprehensively reducible unto one of these
Heads, either Formal, or Real; In show, or in substance; in word, or deed. And
in respect of these two, our Blessed Savior does distinguish betwixt his
flatterers and his Friends. We have an example of the former, Luke 6. 46. Why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? We have an example of
the later, 1 John 15. 14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.
And an example of both together, Mat. 21. 28, 29, 30, 31. Where the servant
that said, he would not go, but went, is more justified than the other, who
said he would, but went not. Our Savior's flatterers then are they, who make
Profession of their Love; who give him very good words; who in their Prayers
and Predications breath out nothing less than kindness, and Admiration; but not
proceeding any farther, than the bare wording, and professing, and breathing
out of their Affection, they cannot challenge a better character* than that
they love him from the teeth outward, and this because their Expressions are
merely verbal. Whereas the Friends of Christ are they, who add the Proof of
Love to the due Profession; study to live by his Example, and in obedience to
his Commands; espowse a Fellowship with his Death, and a conformity to his
Sufferings; are rather for Christ, though at the Bar, than for a Pilate,
though on the Bench; very much rather for the oppressed, than for the
persecuting side. Which evinceth that their Love must needs be Real, and from
the Heart, because they are sturdily at the cost, and the pains to prove it.

Sect. 2. That this indeed is the difference betwixt the flatterers and Friends
of Christ, as betwixt a mere verbal and Real Love, we have a full confirmation
from the words of S. John. My little children, (says 1 John 3. 18.
he,) Let us not love in word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed, and in Truth.
That is, let our Love be without dissimulation; let it be legible in our
Actions, not only audible in our Voice. Let us demonstrate our love to Christ,
by showing our love unto his Members. Nor that by speaking them fair, and
paying Civility to persons, But by opening the Bowels of our compassion to
verse 17.
their needs. S. James, in his Epistle, has set it out to the life. If a
brother or sister (says he) be naked, Jam. 2. 15. 16.
and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto him, depart in peace, be
ye warmed and filled, but ye give him not those things which are needful to the
Body, what does it profit? There we have in S. James, by way of Instance, what
we found in S. John, by way of Advice, and Exhortation. For he that says, go
in Peace, be ye Warm, or full, he expressly is the man that loves in word, and
in tongue. But he that gives those things which are needful to the Body, he is
properly the man that loves in Deed, and in Truth.

Sect. 3. Now that which is the greatest proof of our Love to Christ's Members,
does carry with it the greatest Proof of our Love to Christ. Who, what is don
unto his Members, does take as don unto Himself. He that persecutes and
plunders his Fellow-Christian, does persecute and plunder his Master Christ.
And Christ has said what he will say to such as these in the Day of Judgment,
In as much as ye have don it unto one of the least of these, ye have don it
unto me. Mat. 25. 40. So that the reason is very evident, why S. Paul sets out
our Love as the fulfilling of the Law; And summ's up all the Commandments into
this one Precept, Thou shall Romans 13. 9, 10.
love thy Neighbor as thy self; Because the Proof of our obedience to the
Commandments of the Law, is our doing unto others, (in Acts of Justice, and
works of Mercy,) as we would that others should do to us.

In a word, so very strict is the Connection betwixt the Love we have to God,
and our love to one another, as well as betwixt the Love of Both, and the
keeping of the Commandments, that S. John sets them down as the Marks and
Tokens of one another. 1 John 5. 1, 2, 3. The Love of our Neighbor is a sign
of our Love to God. ( v. 1.) Our Love to God is a sign that we love our
Neighbor. ( v. 2.) And our keeping his Commandments is the clearest
Diagnostick and Sign of Both. ( v. 3.)

Sect. 4. To make it yet more apparent, that our Obedience is the best Argument
and highest Expression of our Love, let us compare the way of reckoning by our
Savior in the Text, with that most general way of reckoning which we observe
amongst our selves. Do we not ever reckon Him the lovingst Subject to his
Sovereign, whom we find the most exact in keeping the Oath of his Allegiance?
And who, in reverence to his Loyalty, despises his Livelihood, and his Life
too? Do we not worthily reckon Him the lovingst Son unto his Parents, who
obey's them in all things, without Exception? And conforms to their will,
however cross unto his own? Do we not justly reckon Him the lovingst Servant to
his Master, who goes as soon as he is sent and comes as soon as he is called,
and does exactly as he is bid? And does not our Savior in the Text take the
very same measure of our Affection? Does he not send us to our obedience, as
the manifestation of our Love? He does not say, If ye love me, believe the
Truth of my Promises, and strongly rely upon my Merits; Be sure to honor me
with your lips, and call your selves by my Name; But, If ye love me, do the
things that I say. If ye love me, perform my Will. If ye love me keep my
Commandments. Men may talk what they please of their Love to Christ; and praise
themselves, as they do Him, as far as words and phrases come to. But if they
are Lovers of the World, and make it their Business to get its Favor; if they
either defraud or persecute, and seek to build their own Greatness upon the
Ruins of other men; if they are Servers of the Times, and lick themselves for
that Cause into every shape, and have men's persons in admiration because of
Advantage; they are as far from loving Christ, as from keeping his
Commandments. And so they are as distant from it, as Sincerity is from
Dissimulation. Which may be farther made appear by the Rule of contraries. For

Sect. 5. That must needs be granted to us as the greatest Expression of our
Love, the contrary to which is the greatest expression of our Hatred. And
suppose we hated Christ, as much as a Julian, or a Jew; could we do him a
greater Injury, than that of breaking his Commandments? we cannot whip him at a
post, or nail him again unto a cross, or thrust a Lance into his Side; for
which we are not thankworthy, because we cannot. His Body being out of our
reach, and lifted up above our malice at the right hand of God. But that which
is dearest to him on earth, is the whole Body of his Commandments. Which
whosoever breaks wilfully, would be as ready to break his bones too, had he but
Power, and Opportunity, as well for the one, as for the other. His Commandments
at the worst can be but voluntarily broken; And the Devil himself can do no
more; And yet how many are called Christians, who do no less? Now what are all
his Commandments, but Exhibitions of his Will? And therefore to violate the
former, what less can it be, than to make Head against the later? And sure when
Christians are Antichristians, by living in absolute opposition to the declared
will of Christ, they do not only labor to put him privately to the Blush, but
they paradigmatize him, and cast a public disgrace upon him; or (in the words
of the Apostle) they even tread him under their feet; and Heb. 6. 6. and chapter
10. v. 29.
put him to an open shame. And this being clearly the greatest expression of
their Hatred, it is plain the contrary to This is the greatest expression of
their Love.

Sect. 6. Shall I then give you the character of one that truly Loves Christ,
that we may judge of our selves in relation to him? The truest character I can
give him is briefly this. He who does not so profess and own the Godhead of
Christ in words, as to deny it in his works, with the ancient Gnostics; he who
does not fall down and worship the Idols and Images of opinion, which either
Haeresy or Schism would have engraven within his Head; he who takes not his
name in vain, either by preaching for a pretense, or by the Hypocrisy of his
Prayers; He who breaks not the Sabbath, by his preferring Acts of Sacrifice to
works of Mercy; or by the cheap and easy way of appearing Righteous unto men;
He who honors his parents, both public and private, Ecclesiastical and
Civil; and cannot swallow the least Rebellion, though in pretense of the
greatest liberty; He who commits not any Murder* under pretense of an Holy war;
but is so very far from that, as not to be angry with his Neighbor, without a
just cause, and an equal measure; he who commits not an Adultery, no not so
much as in his eye; nor admits of any whoredom, with his Inventions; He who
neither screws* himself into another man's Right by secret Fraud, nor breaks in
upon it by open violence; But chooses rather to be defrauded, and tamely
delivers up his Coat to him that takes his Cloak from him; He who instead of
being an anxious heaper up against hereafter, contents himself with his daily
bread, and trusts Providence for the morrow. He who does not smite his
Neighbor, no not so much as with the Tongue; does not invade his Neighbors
Goods, no not so much as in his wish; but does in all things to others, as he
would that others should do to him; it is he that truly loves Christ, because
it is he that truly keeps his Commandments.

Sect. 7. But here perhaps an Antinomian may thus object. If the case does
stand thus, that none can* truly love Christ, who do not keep his Commandments;
and that his Friends are they alone, who do impartially perform WHATSOEVER he
does Command them; (to use the words of Christ himself, Ioh. 15. 14.) None by
consequence are the Friends and the true lovers of Christ, but such an
irrational sort of Creatures as Wind and Water. For whilst the best men on
earth are a kind of Rebels, either by doing what he forbids, or by omitting
what he requires. These irrational things are doing WHATSOEVER he Commands
them. We know the Waters at his Command did very readily drown the world; and
as readily at his Command did they retreat into their Channels. At his Command
they stood up, and made a Wall of Defense on either side of his People Israel;
yet at his contrary Command too, they overran and swallowed up the Egyptian
Host. When he said unto the Wind which threatened an Hurrican in the sea, [
Peace, be still,] whereupon the wind ceased, and there was a great calm, ( Mar.
4. 39.) What manner of man is this (said his Disciples in a Fright) that even
the wind and the sea obey him? ( v. 41.)

Sect. 8. The Answer to this is extremely obvious. For Christ directed those
words, [ Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, and if ye love
me, keep my Commandments,] to Creatures capable of Friendship, because endued
with a principle of choice, and Reason. Not only subjects of a natural, but of
a voluntary obedience; an obedience sweetly streaming from the generous
Fountains of Love, and Gratitude. But to the Wind and the Sea he could not
speak in such language; Because however they were punctual in whatsoever he did
command them, yet it was not out of choice, but out of mere Necessitation. And
so their punctual obedience was but an Argument of their weakness. It Is true
indeed that in respect of our Saviors speaking unto the sea, with a [(...),
Peace, be Mark 4. 39.
still,] we may by a figure at least aver, he gave it a Law, or a Commandment.
And in as much as that sea did do exactly as he had bid it, we may figuratively
call it the sea's obedience. But in as much as our blessed Savior did bring to
pass what he Commanded by power perfectly irresistible, and that the sea could
not possibly no^ have don what it did, it did rather not resist, than obey the
precept. For the sea in that calm was merely passive. And by an usual
Catachresis was said to do, what in propriety of speech it did only suffer.

Sect. 9. Yet I shall venture to draw a motive to our Obedience by way of
choice, from the obedience of other Creatures which is by way of Necessity,
because I find it the very method which God himself is pleased to use, whilst
he is preaching to a Rebellious, revolting people, Ier. 5. 22, 23. For there he
presses them to obedience from the consideration of the sea; which though
unweildy, and impetuous, and apt to be gadding of itself, is yet so bound and
bridled up by the Command of its Creator, as that it never transgresses in any
kind. Now what Reason is there assignable, why we are abler to rebel than the
mighty Ocean? it is not sure that we are stronger, much less is it that God is
weaker, in reference to us, than he is to It. The reason therefore must be
taken from the condition of our Wills; and from the different operations which
God exerteth upon us, and Inferior creatures. On us he works by his Grace,
in such a competent kind of measure, as that he leaves us a possibility either
to use, or to abuse it. On Them he works by his Omnipotence, in such an
overruling and compulsatory way, as to make their obedience become their
Nature. If God should operate upon us by the same Almightiness, by which he
placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, and by which he is able to subdue 1
Cor. 15.
all things unto Himself, one of these two Absurdities would unavoidably follow
from it. Either first that it is as impossible for men to violate God's Law, as
for the sea to expatiate beyond the Bounds which he has set it; or that
secondly it is as easy for the sea to break forth beyond its Bounds, as for a
man to be a Sinner or a Transgressor of the Law. But because these two are most
insufferable Absurdities, it therefore follows of necessity, that God works
otherwise upon us, than he does upon irrational and senseless Creatures. On
them, by power irresistible; on us, by a moral persuasion only; which may
strongly incline, but not enforce us. Nor can any reason be given, excepting
only this one, why men and women who are endued with so much Reason and
Education, should show themselves more unruly, than the Fire, or the whirlwind
with which it is acted; than the sea, or the Tempest wherewith it is driven.
Never was it once heard that God did utter any such wishes, O that the sea had
been obedient! O that the wind had not revolted! O that the fire had don
exactly as I commanded! For these did never disobey the Absolute will of their
Creator. But God is oftentimes wishing throughout the Scriptures, O Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
that there were such an heart in them, that they would Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
fear me, and keep all my Commandments always! O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their later end! The reason is,
because we fail in our obedience to the conditional Will of God, although the
grace of God in us does give us Ability to obey. Nor do we only find him
wishing in relation to the present, or future times, O that they were wise!
that they would consider! But he has wishes also which look on what is
absolutely passed; O that my people had walked in my ways! O that thou had
hearkened to my Psalm. 81. 13. Isa. 48. 18.
Commandments! O that thou had known the things that belong unto thy peace!
which what less can it imply, than the sufficiency of Grace with the natural
freedom of the Will, whereby those Rebels had been enabled, before they
actually rebelled, to have abstained from those Rebellions. For had not Israel
once been able to have walked in God's ways, before the habit which they got
of walking only in their own, God could never have expressed himself by
wishing, O that Israel had walked in my ways! For that had been in effect as
if his wish had ran thus, O that Israel had don, what 'twas impossible for them
to do. So as it is evident even from hence, that men do break his Commandments,
not for want of an ability, but will to keep them. We want nothing but love to
make us as dutiful out of choice, as the other Creatures are out of absolute
Necessity. And it is our fault we want the Habit, because we want not the
motives, or means of love. For (not to repeat the means and motives which I
have Sinner Impleaded. part. 2. chapter 3. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
formerly reckoned up on the like occasion, it shall suffice me to say at
present, that) God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, as well as
by and through Christ reconciling himself unto the world. We have the means
from without, for he has given us himself to make us love him; which why
should we not do* when he is every way lovely, or rather loveliness itself? We
have the means from within, for he has given us his Grace whereby to love him.
And though by an argument ab effectu we often prove it not irresistible, yet we
cannot but confess it to be sufficient; because he commands us to love him,
and for the love we bear to him, to keep his Commandments. Nor does he Command
Impossibilities. He expects not to reap, but after the 2 Cor. 8. 12.
measure that he has sown. The highest pitch of his Commands is that we love
him with all our Hearts; that is to say, with all our might, or with the utmost
of our Ability. And *it is certain that we are able to love him as perfectly as
we are able, because the negative to that would be a flat contradiction. And so
it is very sound Logic, to say we can love our Savior, because we ought. What
it is a duty for us to do, is therefore possible to be d^n.

Sect. 10. Why then do we not love him, whilst it is so evident that we are
able? And if we do love him as we are able, why not give him our obedience as
the greatest expression of our love? why should the privilege of our Reason
make us more liable to Rebellion, and by consequence more unreasonable, than
that inferior sort of Creatures which have no reason at all? Are those Vassals
of the Almighty so wholly addicted to his Commands, and shall we who are his
children be most averse? shall we despise the Riches of his Goodness, and
Forbearance, because he is willing that his Goodness should fairly lead us into
Repentance, and not that his Omnipotence should dragg us to it? Shall we be
evil so much the rather, because He is good? And offend the more boldly,
because his Grace has abounded to us? Shall we break his Commandments, because
he has put it unto our choice, and not infor^'t us to keep them against our
Wills? Shall we convert that noble liberty, which he has given us, into
looseness? And take occasion to be Rebellious, from His leaving us to be free?
Shall we so very ill requite him for his great Favor and Partiality, as to
become the very worst of all his Creatures under Heaven, because He made us the
very best? Methinks it should melt us into Obedience, that God is pleased to
deal with us as noble Creatures; as Creatures capable of Friendship; as
Creatures made of the most liberal and most ingenuous Constitutions. That he is
pleased to persuade, where he has power to Compel; and so far forth to command
us, as still to leave us Freemen. That he is pleased to speak to us, (as here
he does) not in the style of an absolute Sovereign, [ If ye cannot resist me,]
nor in the style of an Angry Judge, [ If ye stand in fear of me,] but rather in
the style of a zealous Bridegroom, [ If ye love me, keep my Commandments.] This
is most for our Glory, as well as His, that we be not only punctual, but
cheerful also in our duties; and that we give him our Obedience, as the natural
Issue of our Love. It being a bravery of Devotion, and a generous nobleness of
Spirit, to be afraid of Disobedience to the Lord Jesus Christ, not so much
because a Judge, able to terrify and drive us from our Corruptions, as because
he is a Savior, who rather draws us to himself by the Bands of Love. Ho^. 11.
4.


But now it is time that I proceed to another Emphasis of the words, from whence
will arise another Inference. That, having showed how our Obedience is the
greatest Expression of our Love, I may prove it in the next place, an
unavoidable Effect too. And that as it appears already, to be the best, and the
most solid, so it may also be found to be, the most Inseparable instance of our
Affection.

CHAP. IV.
Of Love and Obedience, in a Christian, as two inseparable Companions, every
whit as inseparable as the Cause, and the Effect; or whatsoever else they are,
whereof the one does of necessity infer the other.

Sect. 1. AND first because there is a Fallacy which many impose upon
themselves, whilst they think it as possible to love their Savior, without the
keeping of his Commandments, as to know or apprehend him, without the keeping
of his Commandments, I shall begin with the great Difference betwixt the two
natures of Love, and Knowledge. The end of Knowledge is to possess that which
is True: but the end of Love is to possess that which is Good. Knowledge is an
act of the Understanding, but Love a motion of the Appetite. Knowledge is
seated in the Head, but Love especially in the Heart. Both are possessed of
their objects by way of union; but the union of Knowledge seems merely passive,
as being made in the understanding* which being possessed of its object is quite
at Rest. Whereas the union of Love is wholly Active, as being made in the
Appetite, and by consequence in the Heart; which being possessed of its object
by an Intentional union, is so very far from resting content with That, that it
employs every Faculty to gain the object that is beloved, not only by an
intentional, but real union. So great and wide is the difference 'twixt Love
and Knowledge, that knowledge is but an idle, unfruitful thing, till it is
quickened by the Industry and Heat of Love. Our Knowledge of Christ, as we are
taught by sad experience, is often Barren. But it is as evident by experience,
that the Love we bear to him is ever Fruitful; and the Fruit it brings forth is
ever the keeping of his Commandments. For

Sect. 2. Secondly, This we are taught by the light of Nature, That to perfect
our union with what we love, (by our Enjoyment of its possession,) we are to
use the best means whereby to make ourselves lovely; that so the person whom we
love, may himself be a Lover, as well as we. And sure the most effectual means
whereby to make our selves lovely, is our Conformity to the Humor and
Disposition of what we love. For a reciprocated love implies a Harmony and
Concord between two parties; whereby each object is Agent too; and each person
loved becomes a Lover, by the Conformity which he finds unto all his own
humors in That which loves him. Nor need we labor after this, as a thing
gainable by Art, for nothing but flattery can stand in need of such help; and
flattery is no more than the Ape of Love, just as Art is no more than the Ape
of Nature. But if indeed we do intensely and truly Love, it will not be an
artificial, but a most natural issue of it. To frame our manners and
Conversations in proportion to the temper of our Beloved. Now if Christ is the
object we truly love, we shall long after an union; and earnestly labor to
possess him, by being first possessed by him. Because till he stoops to our
embraces, we cannot possibly rise to His. And being convinc*t he will not have
us, until he finds us worth the having, (or at least in a capacity of being
Had,) how shall we search after the means whereby to be fitted for his
Acceptance? we shall incessantly cast about, which way to please him; and frame
the course of our Lives to what we think He loves best. We shall strive and
contend after the knowledge of his Will, with this intent only, that we may do
it. And having found that his Commandments are the Transcriptions of his Will,
we shall compose our whole selves to the keeping of them. And having don all we
can, shall never think we have don enough; for that our Love, being Infinite,
can never satisfy itself with any expressions which are not such. So that if
we love Christ with the whole Treasure of our Affection, our obedience will
know neither end, nor measure; but will be coveting to demonstrate itself as
Infinite, as is that object which does attract it. And this will farther appear
by a Third way of arguing. For

Sect. 3. Whatsoever it is we love, we love as Beautiful and Good. Goodness is
Beauty in its perfection. The Sovereign beauty then of Goodness does by an
absolute kind of Empire command Affection; at least from as many as have eyes,
whereby to behold it as it is. And seeing that which is so strong as to command
our Love, must needs predominate over all that our Love Commands, Therefore to
love, is to be subject; and, as being in subjection, to pay Obedience. The
truth of this universally, may be the better understood by a few particulars!
For wh^soever loves Honor, or worldly greatness, does live a Feudatorie or
Vassal to his Ambition. Whosoever loves money, is basely a servant unto his
Avarice, and to that is most ready to pay obedience. He who loves the hansom
outside of dust and ashes, lives in subjection to his Lust, and does but go in
those Errands on which It sends him. So whosoever he is that loves to live a
sober and righteous and godly life, is most affectionately a servant to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and does bestow his whole Time in doing the things that he
Commands. Let the object of our Love be what it will, whether God, or the
World; the Flesh, or the Spirit, still the Rule of the Apostle will be
unalterably true, That to whom we yield our selves servants Romans 6. 16.
to obey, His servants we are to whom we obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of
Obedience unto Righteousness. Love is ever so sure to beget obedience, that
when our Savior would give a reason, why no one man can serve two masters,
(meaning those two, called God, and Mammon,) he made his reason to stand in
this, that no one man can love two Masters. For either he Luke 16. 13.
will hate the one, and love the other, or will hold to the one, and despise
the other. So that if we love God, we shall be sure to hate Mammon; and if
again we hold to Mammon, we shall rebel against God. Whereas if it were
possible to love them Both, it would also be as possible to serve them Both;
because by the persons whom we love, we cannot but love to be employed. The
love of Christ does constrain us, says our Apostle to his Corinthians. And as
Christ's love of us, so ours of ^ Cor. 5. 14.
Him does even press upon us, and urge us, to keep his Commandments, and to do
those things which are pleasing in his sight.

But let us farther make it appear by a fourth way of arguing. For

Sect. 4. Whatsoever we love the most, is either present or absent. And as when
it is present, we most delight in it; so whilst it is absent, we do long the
most after it. But the Apostle tells us expressly, that whilst 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7.
at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord; for we walk by Faith, and
not by sight. So that if we love Christ, we shall long after his presence; and
if we truly long for it, we shall endeavor its attainment. And if we endeavor
to reach the end, there will be nothing more natural, than to inquire after the
means. And finding the means to be obedience, we shall undoubtedly obey. The
Helkesaitae proved nothing but that themselves were stupid sinners, in
conceiving it possible to deny Christ with the Mouth, and yet to love him with
the Heart. For the Heart in a Man; like the Spring in a Watch, is that that
sets all on work, both Tongue, and Eyes, and Hands, and Feet too. If with Romans
10. 10.
the heart a man believes unto righteousness, it is very certain that with the
mouth he will confess unto Salvation. He will obey his dear Master in every
kind; both by speaking, and living, and dying for him. If he is but once
mounted on the wing of pure Love, he cannot choose but be transported by the
wing of desire too, and will incessantly be flying in every errand, upon which
his Beloved shall please to send him. Which may once more appear by a fifth way
of arguing. For

Sect. 5. Carnal fear is the greatest and strongest Bar to our Obedience. But
there is no fear in love; perfect love casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. And as
it casts out fear, so it establishes a Hope too. And Hope is evermore a
Spur, by which we are urged to our Obedience, from its expectance of our
Reward. It was this Love and Hope, which made S. Paul follow Christ, through
every rough passage by sea, and land. He was so amorous of his Savior, and so
piously ambitious of the Glory to be revealed, that he rejoiced in his
afflictions; and was readier to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus, than to
fail in any point of yielding Obedience to his Commands. Nor is it truer of S.
Paul, than of all the meanest Soldiers in the Army of Martyrs, That neither
distress, nor persecution, nor nakedness, Romans ^.
nor famine, nor peril, nor sword, nor life, nor death, nor any other Creature,
had any power to step in betwixt their Love, and their Obedience. The reason of
it is obvious, as *it is to say that they were Members of Jesus Christ; not only
reputed, but real members. And it is natural for a member, as to love its own
Head, so to live in Obedience to its Direction.

Sect. 6. Thus I seem to my self to have made it evident, that Love is ever
that cause, of which Obedience is the most natural and most inseparable effect.
It Is still as ready to obey, as water is to wet, or fire to Burn. Nor can it
better be represented, than by the nature of that active and subtle Element.
Knowledge we may say is a kind of light; but Love is more properly a sort of
Fire; and with that when the Heart is once sufficiently inflamed, it cannot but
send up those sparks of Zeal and devotion to its Beloved, which do inkindle a
special Pleasure in doing the things that he commands. The Psalmists Heart
was hot within him, so hot, that he tells the fire was kindled; and though he
long held his Peace, yet his love did so burn, he was not able to suppress it,
and so at last he spoke with his Tongue. Psalm. 39. 3.
We may say therefore of Love, what the spowse in the Canticles does say of
Jealousy, (which is but one of Loves Daughters,) The Coals thereof are Coals
of Fire, which has so vehement a Flame, that many waters Cant. 8. 6, 7.
cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it. Love indeed is such a
flame, as must evaporate, or expire, or burn out its way through all that
labors to keep it in. A thing so busy, and industrious, as that in truth it*
can no longer be called Love, than it is doing somewhat or other in
complaisance and compliance with its Beloved.

Sect: 7. Having now passed through the Proof, proceed The Application.
we briefly to the use we are to make of this Inference. And first of all let
us consider, that if Love and Obedience are two inseparable Companions, (the
former as the Cause, and this later as the Effect,) It concerns us as much as
our Souls are worth, to take a care that our Love be rightly fixed and directed.
For it transforms us into the Image of whatsoever thing it is that we love the
most. And according as our object is good or evil, It either put's us upon the
noblest, or meanest offices in the world. If its object is right, we are the
best sort of men; but if it is wrong, the worst of monsters. It being with
love, as it is with fire, which in proportion to the matter on which it feeds,
does send up the sweetest, or noysom'st vapors. If it feeds on such matter as
Grass, and Tallow, it cannot choose but have a noxious and stinking breath; if
on Cinnamon and storax, it fills the Air with a perfume. And just thus it is
with the flame of Love. If it fixes upon Christ, it breaths forth nothing but
pure obedience, and so abounds with good works, which are a sweetsmelling 2
Cor. 2. 15. Ephesians. 5. 2.
savor; such a sacrifice of Incense, as with which God is well pleased. In
which respect alone it is, that the Bridegroom in the Canticles is thus expressed
to court his spouse; How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse? How much
better is it than wine, and the smell of thy garments Cant. 4. 10, 11* 12, 13,
14.
than all spices? A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; Thy plants are an
Orchard of Pomgranates, with pleasant Fruits, Camphire, and Spikenard, Calamus,
and Saffron, with trees of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes. Thus our Savior is
supposed, in Solomon's elegant Hypotyposis, to set out the Graces of his Church,
and so of every Soul in it, espousing Christ for her Bridegroom, and his
Commandments for her guide. Whereas if our Love does fix, and feed upon the
Creature, it se^ forth a dangerous and loathsome stench: a stench so odious to
God Almighty, that sin (for this reason only) is called (...) in Scripture,
which does equally signify (...). Rev. 21. ult.
what is abominated, and stinks. Yet in this very mire men of swinish
affections delight to wallow. For whatsoever it is we love, be it as ugly as the
Devil, we paint it hansom in our thoughts, and blot out all its deformities
with our Imaginations; and so we love it not as it is, but rather as it is
disguised and sancyed by us. And hence it is that we are able to be so
passionately in love with some Bosom sins, though so much uglier than the
Devil, that sin alone has been able to make him ugly. For when our Spirits are
so unworthy as to ask Counsel of our Flesh, our flesh presents it to us as
lovely. And from that instant forwards, we look upon it with a Fleshly, that is
to say, with a Lovers eye. And sure the Eye of a Lover sees no defect in its
Beloved. The blackest Crow in the world is much more doated on by a Crow, than
whatsoever we can commend in the whitest Turtle. But this is only a similitude,
cannot deserve to be a Proof. For we as Sinners do owe to Industry, what the
Crow does to Nature Being naturally unable to dote on sin, as it is sin, we are
fain to dress it up with some Turtles Feathers. And having so don, we are fain
to use our wits, to make ourselves become stupid. Speaking no better of sin
than this, that it has comeliness in its kind, and is proportionably hansom,
and comparatively good too. Not good in itself, nor good in others, but yet the
Flesh represents it as good for us. Avarice is good to increase our Treasure.
Ambition is as good to advance our Credit. Luxury good to banish Melancholy and
Sadness. Another man's Avarice is flat Idolatry; but our own is Good-husbandry,
because our own. Another man's Knavery deserves a Gallows; but when it lies in
our Bosom, it is a most necessary Prudence. We hate the Proud and the Aspiring
the most that may be; whereas in us it is but Bravery to be Ambitious. Another
man's Excess is a scandalous Sin; whilst our own is but an Argument of the
Right which we have to the Creature Comforts. Now by what are we betrayed to
all these mischiefs, but by the mere misapplying of our Affections? And what
then have we reason to be more afraid of, than of setting our Affections upon
the Earth? We find by evident Experience, (and in all manner of Cases,) that
such as is our Love, such will be our Submissions, whether to that which is
above, or which is infinitely below us. It Is This has made so many womanish
uxorious Husbands; so many childish indulgent Parents; so very many servile
obedient Masters. 'Twas this made Ahab, (I do not say the Husband, but) the
Wife of Iezebel; and Eli a slave unto both his Sons; Herod, though a King, an
humble servant to Herodias; Darius, though an Emperor, meanly gaping upon
Apame; 1 Esdr. 4. 3. (...). Lucian.
and Hercules, though an Hero, submitting tamely to the blows of a feeble
Omphale. Nor will it be otherwise with ourselves, who are called Christians;
who having the Earthiness of their Love, shall not be able not to stoop to
their Idols too. If we love Herod, as He Herodias, we shall keep his
Commandments, as He did Hers; though this be one of his Commandments, that we
slay our own Infants, put to flight the child Jesus, and join ourselves with a
Pilate to plot his Death too. But if we love the same Jesus, as much as Herod
did Herodias, we shall obey him as exactly, as He did Her. For we shall turn
the right cheek to him that strikes us on the left. To him that takes away our
cloak we shall yield our coat also. When we do well, and are beaten, we shall
not threaten, but entreat. We shall lay up our Treasure, not in earth, but in
Heaven. And whethersoever Christ calls us, to Herod's Court, or Pilate's Hall,
to the Garden, or the Cross, we shall esteem it our greatest Riches, To leave
all we have and to follow Him.

Sect. 8. Seeing therefore it is so evident, that wheresoever there is Love,
there cannot choose but be obedience, and that our obedience cannot choose but
be agreeable to our Love; our first Endeavor is to be this, that we beware
what we love. And since it is natural for us to love the individuals of our own
species, who do carry God's Image as well as we, and betwixt whom
notwithstanding there is very great difference; let it be our next Endeavor,
that we beware whom we love. Lastly, because we are commanded to love our
enemies, and therefore more than permitted to love our Friends; let it be our
third Endeavor, that we beware how we love. We must love one another, or else
we cannot love Christ; not at least in such sort, as to keep his Commandments;
one of the chief of which is this, that we love one another. Our love is to
abound more and more toward all men; especially toward all the household of
Faith. But we must love them in measure, not at all in perfection; not in such
an high pitch, as to keep their Commandments without exception. We are in some
cases obliged to call no man Master upon Earth; and to obey him that says, be
ye not the Servants of men. We are to love one another, for Christ's sake only;
and only Christ for his own. Now to prevent our being careless, whether we love
him, or love him not, or whether so as will suffice for the due keeping of his
Commandments,

Sect. 9. Let us secondly consider the unspeakable danger of our Defect. As
first the perfect impossibility of ever entering into his Glory, without the
keeping of his Commandments; next the equal impossibility of ever keeping his
Commandments, whilst we are cold in our Affection to Him, or Them. One of the
chief of his Commandments, which he delivered to us as Christians, and by which
we are distinguished from Jews and Gentiles, is love your enemies, bless them
that Matt. 5. 44.
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully
use you. But how incapable are we of that, whilst we are wanting in our love
unto Christ himself, who is so far from being an enemy to any of us, that it is
a kind of a Meiosis to call him Friend? Again it is another of his Commandments,
that we rejoice in persecutions, that we deny our own selves; Matt. 5. 12.
and that taking up his Cross, we do so follow him, Mark 10. 21. Matt. 16. 24:
Luke 14. 26.
as to hate our own lives in comparison of Him, which (though absolutely Matt.
10. 37, 38. Luke 14. 26, 27* 33.
necessary to our being his Disciples, yet) how incapable are we of doing,
unless we love him a great deal better, then both our ease, and our Pleasures,
our Reputations, and ourselves too? And then how highly does it concern us to
wean ourselves from this world, with whose love the love of Christ is said to
be utterly inconsistent? ( Iam. 4. 4.) shall we then be verier Babes than our
sucking children, by being fonder of the world, which is a strange and a cruel
Nurse, than they are ever wont to be of the Mothers Breast, from which they
draw the very substance and means of Life? shall we not wean our selves from
the world, from whence we suck nothing but Poison, and the preparatories of
Death, by the same Art and Method, which we use in the weaning our sucking
Infants? Is it not a very sad and unexcusable Absurdity, that the Tall Parents
should go to School to their poor Brat of a span long, and yet complain of too
hard a lesson? That they should lay upon their Infant an heavier burden, than
they are willing to bear themselves? That the Babe of a year old who is not
able to distinguish between a Fish and a Scorpion, should be put upon the
practice of self-denial, whilst themselves, however aged, are hardly yet ripe
for the doctrine of it? An absurdity very shameful, but no whit strange, because
our customary experience that so it is, does extenuate the wonder that so it
should be. And yet as we never can obey Christ, until we love him; so the true
love of Christ can never enter into our Hearts, until the love of this world
has had its Exit; Nor can we cease from our love of a tempting world, until,
as children from the Breast, we are weaned from it. And hence it was that the
Cradle became the Pulpit, from whence the sucking child preached to the Prophet
David, whose choicest learning was to refrain, and to keep his soul, like as a
child that is weaned from his Mother. Psa. 1^, 1. 12, 3.
And from this very Topic did God upbraid his people Israel, who were rather
of years, than of discretion to be men, Isa. 28. 9, 10. For sooner will a Babe,
who is not weaned from the Breast, attain to knowledge, than his Parents to
Religion, being not weaned from the world. Now to enable our selves the better
for the transforming of our love from the world to Christ,

Sect. 10. Let us be resolute in the third place, to converse with it less, and
more with him than we are wont. For a competent familiarity ingenders love,
though too much of it begets contempt. But Discontinuance breeds coldness and
indifferency in our Affections. As therefore the way to wean an Infant, is to
sever him from the Breast, whereof the Infant grows careless, when sufficiently
accustomed to other meat; so to wean our selves also from the embraces of the
world, we must abandon its company, and discontinue our Acquaintance, and
accustom ourselves to another diet, that is to say, to the law of Christ. And
then by being so accustomed, we shall be careless, if not forgetful, of worldly
Pleasures and Delights. I do the rather crave leave to dwell on this somewhat
the longer, (notwithstanding what I have spoken to the same end and purpose in
other places,) because there are who do impose so great a Fallacy on
themselves, as to conclude against the pleasures of living strictly, merely
from their own want of a due experience. A thing of so very great importance,
that even (...). Aristot. ^thic. l. 10. cap. 1.
Eudoxus, and Virtutes coluit non tanquam per se bonas, sed in quantum
aptissimas ad quiet vivendum, vel quia vitam tutiorem, and voluptatem
efficient pleniorem. Nec justitiam censuit per se optubilem, sed quia
jucunditatem afferret. Torquatus apud Cic. de Fin. l. 1. (...). Epic. apud
Laert. l. 10.
Epicurus, though the great Patrons of Sensuality, did recommend a life of
virtue to all their Followers, not from a Principle of Piety, but Pleasure
only. Not as the nobler way of life, but the more voluptuous. The reason is,
they had tried both courses; and so were Proselytes not to virtue, considered
simply in it self, but to the Pleasure and Convenience they met with in it. So
important a thing it is to make an essay of a method, before we rashly conclude
against it. But how can any man pass a judgment, touching Colors and Shapes
which he never saw? or touching the savor of a dish which he never tasted? or
touching the happiness of a life, of which he never had the Patience to make a
trial? Let Christ but have as fair quarter, as the God of this world is wont to
meet with; let the keeping of his Commandments be tried as much, and as far,
as the breaches of them; and then if the greatest Apolausticks do not subscribe
to the delights of a new obedience, we may venture to give up our Christian
Cause. For though the yoke of Christ's Precepts is somewhat rough at the
beginning, yet there are thousands who can attest, that it grows smooth by
being worn, and much the fitter for our necks too. In every thing that can be
nam*d, be it an Art or a Science, a Faculty, or a Trade, we know it is usage and
practice which breeds perfection. He who first learns to write, or read, will
find it troublesome to the Flesh; which yet by using much and often, he will not
find inconsistent with ease and pleasure. And exactly thus it is in the School
of Christ; where the very same lesson which is most irksom in the beginning, is
by use and experience made most delightful. We may be wedded to the best
things, as we are commonly to the worst, by such a custom of conversing with
them alone, as will become an artificial acquired Nature. For as a sinner, when
you reprove him for his swearing, or drinking, or any other vicious Habit, will
say, he is so used to it, as not to be able to abstain; So if a man be as much
used to the Commandments of Christ, and is able to say with David, all the day
long is my study in them, he will not be able to abstain from thrusting his
neck into the yoke of his Master Christ. The yoke will keep his Neck so warm,
he will not dare to leave it off; and that for fear of catching so great a
cold, (that is to say, so great an Absence of love to Christ,) as will carry
him for warmth to the Fire of Hell. If he is asked why he refuses his partion
of vel^ptuousness, eats the course Bread of Honesty, or wears away himself in
Meditation and self-denial; his answer is, he is so used to this course of
life, victorious custom has so subdned him, and conscience keeps him so much
in Awe, that what with Fear on the one side, and pleasure on the other, he
hardly knows how to be more voluptuous. His Fasting, and Praying,
Mortification, and self-denial, Meditation, and Solitude, are grown agreeable
to his Temper, and Frame of mind. He is gratified by his strictness, and very
much pleased with his Severitie^. He is delighted with the thing which carnal
Cowards are afraid of, and vicious persons cannot endure. Has fought so long as
a Soldier under the Captain of his Salvation, that fighting is one of his
Recreations. Fighting, I mean, against the enemies of Christ, against the
world, and the Flesh, and the Powers of Hell. *It Is one of the highest of all
his Pleasures, to be above the Pleasures of Sin; and one of his innocent
ambitions, to tread ambition under his feet. All he covets, is contentment: and
all he lusts after, is a Dominion over his Flesh. The greatest of his aims, is
to be victor of all he fights with; and the greatest of his victories, is that
he gets over himself. So beneficial is the duty of being habituated in virtue,
that (as I said once before,) it makes the glorious Work of Grace become a kind
of second Nature. For as the Love we bear to Christ begets the keeping of his
Commandments, so does our keeping those Commandments as much improve and
cherish in us our love of Christ. We shall not be able to abstain from the love
of Christ, when there is something in ourselves to which the Nature of Christ
himself, does hold conformity and agreement; and our keeping his Commandments
will beget such a conformity. It will, I say, beget in us such an Harmony with
Him, as must needs infer in Him an equal Harmony with us too. And wheresoever
there is Harmony, there will be Love, in things rational; As wheresoever there
is Love, there will be keeping of Commandments.

Sect. 11. We may know therefore by this, whether or no our Hearts deceive us,
when they make us believe that we love our Savior. And so by consequence it is
a Transition to the fifth and last Inference the Text affords us.

CHAP. V.
That our obedience to the Precepts of Jesus Christ, is the only warrantable
Touchstone, whereby to try, and examine the love we bear unto his person. And
because by the force of our love to Christ, there is a mutual Cohabitation
'twixt Him and Us, this will also be a Rule which cannot possibly deceive us,
in what it most of all concerns us to labor in without Error, even the making
of our Calling and Election sure.

Sect. 1. AMongst the several sorts of men, who are commonly wont to call on
the name of Christ, and upon whom his name is called, there are not Two of Ten
Thousand who will not challenge him for a Savior, and make Profession of as
much Love, as if they could prove it by their Obedience. But we may say of God
himself, as of most great men, that his admirers are very many, but he has
very few Friends. It is agreed upon by all, that they all ought to love him;
but it is agreed upon by all too, that of the all who ought to love, few do love
him as they ought. For how many are there of them who do most of all profess to
be lovers of him, who yet do reckon their very Rebellions amongst the Arguments
of their Loyalty, and special Tokens of their Affection? As if our Lord had
said to Them, in a direct contrariety to what he said to his Disciples, [If ye
love me, break my Commandments.] Such as are keepers of Christ's Commandments,
with a Belief that it is the way whereby to enter into life, and that in this
they are to work out their own Salvation, are not allowed a better character,
than that of good legal and moral men. And the good works of such as These are
but glittering sins, in the opinion of those projectors, who are such Niggards
as to ingross the work of Redemption to themselves. But such as break Christ's
Commandments, with a Belief that they cannot, or need not keep them, (whilst
they can break them so securely, as not to fall into a doubt of their being
saved,) yea that they ought not so to keep them, as of necessity to Salvation,
these they peremptorily reckon amongst the Vessels of Election. And are not
they very sufficiently misconceipted of themselves, and their love to Christ,
who rather than acknowledge any want of love to him, will ascribe their foulest
crimes to the overflowings of their Affection? So very easy a thing it is for
men to be flatterers of themselves, and quite mistaken in their Affections,
that as they who flung stones at their Heathen God Hermes, made no doubt but
they did it in pure Devotion, so there are Christians who seem to think, that
they can break Christ's Commandments with every whit as good a zeal, as Moses
brake the two stones wherein the Commandments were but written.

And therefore in this consideration, it does concern us very nearly to bring
our Love to the Touchstone, before we pass it for current in our esteem. We
are to follow that advice which S. Paul gave to his Corinthians, That we examine
our selves whether we be in the 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Faith, and that we try our own selves. It being so ordinary a thing, for
Devils to be transformed into Angels of light, and for the worst kind of vices
to look like the greatest and fairest virtues, that the most talkative
Professors of Christian Purity and Knowledge are seldom able to distinguish
betwixt Hypocrisy, and Love; betwixt Attrition, and Contrition; worldly sorrow,
and Repentance; betwixt Presumption, and lively Faith; betwixt Security, and
Assurance; or a downright Stupidity, and Peace of Conscience; which shows the
use and the necessity of bringing them all unto the Test, that so we may not be
in danger to take them for more than they are worth; nor persevere in those
Habits, of which we cannot too soon be stripped. That we may not overgreedily
catch hold on a Fish, which will prove in conclusion to be a Scorpion; nor
please ourselves with an opinion of our great Love to Christ, which will be
found after Death to have been but a great Dissimulation. By what has hitherto
been spoken.

I do not doubt but 'twill be easily agreed by all, that men are apt to be
mistaken in the nature and measure of their Affections, and that by consequence
it concerns them to make a Trial, whether their Affections are right, or wrong.
All the difficulty will be, how to agree upon the Touchstone by which the
Trial is to be made. And seeing the world is to be divided about the choice of
this Touchstone, (some liking one thing, and some another,) I think it fit in
proportion that I divide my Discourse too. Speaking first of the Negative, by
showing what it is not; and then in the Affirmative, by showing clearly what it
is. A method the rather to be admitted, because to refuse that which is False,
is in itself of great virtue to discover that which is True.

The vulgar sort of professed Christians, who are the speculative Solifidians,
will not submit to any Trial, unless their own Fancy may sit as Judge. And
being destitute of obedience to the Commandments of Christ, which should be a
witness from without of the love they bear to him, whereby they might prove it
to other men; they appeal to the strength of their own persuasion, called a
witness from within of their Love to Christ, and whereby they pretend to prove
it inwardly to themselves. But this is an Error so full of danger, and indeed
so void of sense, that I know not if I may judge it more extravagant in itself,
or more pernicious in its effects. For it is apt to place presumption on the
right hand of Faith; and does make the sanguin'sts Hypocrites to pass in
disguise for the holiest men. Mistake's a callous, and a seared, for a quiet
Conscience; and sets up every man's heart as the great Touchstone of his
Affections, though itself needs a Touchstone the most of any. For what says
God by the Prophet Jeremy? The Heart of man is deceitful above Jer. 17. 9.
all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Touching our heads, and
our hands, and other parts of our composition, we may be easily supposed to
have some knowledge; But God alone is the searcher of all our hearts, Ier. 17.
10. And are not they in a goodly way of being rectified in judgment, both
concerning themselves, and their love to Christ, who take their measures from
the Fountain of all deceit? God was never more angry in the Times of the Law,
than with them who were Prophets of the deceit of their own Heart, Ier. 23. 25.
Those Plaisterers of Satan, whose custom 'twas to dawb with untemperd mortar,
and to Compare Isa. 5. 20, 23. with Jer. 23. 14. 33.
heal the wounds of the people slightly, speaking peace to their Consciences
before their Consciences had Peace with God. And it is as evident from the words
of the wise King Solomon, ( Prove. 24. 24.) that nothing but Woes and
Imprecations belong to those Temporizing and Popular Teachers, who do nourish
themselves with the peoples Favor, by nourishing the people with their
deceits. For there is no higher way whereby to gratify the Devil, and make him
glad, than by lulling poor souls into carnal security. Nor can a speedier
course be taken to make them carnally secure, than by making them believe, that
let their Sins be what they can be, they may be lovers of Christ, and vessels
of absolute Election, and can never fall totally, much less finally from Grace,
and that for this reason, because they think so; because they are inwardly
persuaded; because it is set upon their Hearts, (as they use to word it;)
because they take it for granted, and do not make the least doubt. A way of
reasoning I cannot tell, whether more common, or more irrational. For to say,
they are assured, because they steadfastly believe; or that they know they shall
be saved, because they are strongly persuaded of it; is to argue that they
know* even because they know not. For Faith, and Knowledge, (in the proper
acception of the words,) cannot be conversant at once about the very same
object. And that men may take that for the voice of Conscience, or else for the
whisper of God within them, which yet is nothing in the world, but either a
forgerie of the Head, or a Deceitfulness of the Heart, is very evident from the
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament. For there we read of a Generation
Prove. 30. 12.
who are pure in their own eyes, yet are not washed from their filthiness.
Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
Who bless themselves in their own Hearts, saying, we shall have peace, even
whilst they persevere in adding Drunkenness to Thirst. We read of the
Hypocrites ( c) Job 8. 13, 14.
having an Hope; but we read too, that it shall perish. Mic. 3. 11*
We read of Priests teaching for hire, and Magistrates judging for reward,
whilst yet they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? none
evil See the Confession of Faith, by the Assembly of Divines. chapter 18. p. 31.
can come upon us. Many will plead their great merit, who yet shall be damned
in the day of Judgment. Matthew. 7. 22, 23. And even the children of the Devil
may think that God is their only Father, Ioh. 8. 11. All which being
considered, I cannot approve of their skill or kindness (whereof we have an
account in Print) See the Penitent Murderer, in the Account of Thomas Parson.
who taught an horrible Malefactor to please himself with this Syllogism, after
his sentence of Condemnation for wilful murder. [ God has said, whosoever
repents, and believes, shall find mercy, and be saved. My Conscience tells
me, and witnesses to me, that I repent, and believe, and am one of those [
whosoever,] therefore Christ is mine, I shall find mercy, and be saved.] Now
admit that this Murderer was in a very safe state; yet sure he took not the way
to prove it, but only the way that he had been taught. For what he took to be
the dictate or suggestion of his Conscience, might be possibly nothing more
than the delusion of his Fancy, or the pleasant deceit of his Imagination.
And this is certain, that unless by Repentance he meant Amendment, (which he
could not well discover as he was hastening to the Gallows,) and unless by
believing, he meant an Operative Faith, such as works by love, and by such a
love too as is the fulfilling of the law, (which he could not well be sure of
as he was going into his Grave,) there was not so much as a possibility, that
he should prove himself sure of having an interest in Christ. The murderer
should therefore have argued thus, [ Whosoever believes and repents, and
does both sincerely, so as to lead a new life, and to bring forth fruits meet
for Repentance, He has an interest in Christ, and is in a state of Salvation.
But I believe, and repent, and I hope sincerely, and also hope that if I live,
I shall lead a new life; therefore I humbly hope I have an interest in Christ,
and, in consequence of that, am in a state of Salvation.] In the mean time he
should have prayed, (and his Teachers should have helped him, both by their
Prayers and their advice,) that God would deliver him from the danger of being
deceived by his own Heart, into security and presumption, which would only have
betrayed him into a mischievous consolation; he having deserved by his
Impieties to be one of their number, who are delivered 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
up unto strong delusions, and wholly left to believe a lie. This, I say,
should have been don; because there is nothing more agreeable to the condition
of such a Penitent, as had been lately (by his Confession) at once a Robber,
and a cheat, a fornicator, and a blasphemer, and even a murderer of his
brother, (sleeping innocently by him in the very same bed,) than to mingle his
Faith with pious Fear, and his Hope with that holy trembling, wherewith we all
are to work out our own Philip. 2. 12.
Salvation.

Now having hitherto made an Amulet for the contagion of the Times, by the
negative part of my undertaking, which has been only to discover how we must
not examine our love to Christ, and which is not the true Touchstone whereby
our state is to be tried; I am next, in the Affirmative, to recommend that
authentic, and only warrantable Touchstone, which is approved for the purpose
in holy writ.

And first the words of my Text may serve to be their own proof. Because our
Savior did not say, as he was going out of the world, if ye love me, make it
appear by being sorry for my departure; for they might easily be sorry, merely
in love unto themselves. Nor if ye love me, make it appear, by your inward
persuasion that ye love me; for such a persuasion is often false, and when it
is true, is not also Scientifical. Nor if ye love me, make it appear, by your
outward persuasion that ye love me; for every Hypocrite is a Professor, and
every one that hates him can love in Tongue. They who crucified their Savior
did give him very fine words too, Hail King of the Jews, when yet they clothed
him in the Purple of his own Heart blood. But the saying of our Master was
briefly this, If ye love me, keep my Commandments; which is as if he should
have said, make it appear by your Obedience. Let me see the solid Issue, let me
feel the good effects, and taste the fruits of your Affection.

We may know the true Test of our love to Christ, by what we find to be the
trial of one man's love unto another; which cannot possibly be made by an inward
persuasion in the one, or an outward profession in the other. But he who gives
us the richest presents, and is readiest to do us the greatest good, is most
unweariedly delighted in our converse, and most sensibly touched in our
Reputation, joys the most in our welfare, and most condoles in our affliction,
is not sparing of cost, or care, when he thinks he can spend them to our
Advantage, and is ambitious to indear us on all occasions, although it be at
the hazard of Life, and Fortune, He is the person of all the world, whom we do
reckon as our truest and solidst Friend. And by the very same measures, are we
to judge of that love which we bear to Christ. If the beauty of his Goodness is
really entered into our Souls, and has engraven in our Breasts the Image of
him; it does not only inkindle in us the fire of Love, but rouzeth it up into
Desire too, and apply's it to the Object which the fair Image does represent;
thence we are fixed with Attention in contemplation of his beauty, and take
such pleasure in that attention, as to distaste the very things with which we
were wont to be delighted; and that for this reason, because they offer to
divert, and as it were pluck us from our enjoyment. For we are pleased with his
presence in every thing that represents him; be it the strictest of his
Praecepts, the poorest of his Members, the most despised of his Messengers. We
love to think, and speak of him, when we consider him as he is absent. The very
Remembrance of him is sweet, and therefore frequently recurr's. And this our
Love is still improved, by him by whom it is begun. For we love him still the
more, the more we love him. At last the soul is set on fire, which burns up all
the dross in us, devours our love of the Creature, becomes Praedominant, and
unquenchable, the loss of our Blood cannot extinguish, or make it cooler. It
makes us sick of a pleasant Feavour, that is, of Love, (as the spowse in the
Canticles sets forth her love unto the Bridegroom;) Being once sick of love, we
are sick of life too, and therefore desire to be dissolved, that we no longer
may believe in, but be with Christ. The desire of this Union makes us to go out
of our selves, as 'twere ejaculating our Souls, by fervent Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, and all other acts of our obedience, expressed here in one word,
by the keeping of Commandments. These I say, are the Fruits, and therefore the
trials of our Affection, and as well of its nature, as its degrees. This is
that natural kind of Dialect, in which our love of Christ speaks, and makes
probation of it self; where there is not such obedience, there cannot be
possibly such a love; for an affectionate Rebel is a contradiction in adjecto.
Let the profession of our Religion be as right as it will, and our Judgment as
Orthodox as any can be, yet all is nothing without obedience. And this I take
to be the meaning of S. Paul's words to the Corinthians, Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision 1 Cor. 7. 9.
is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments. That is something to the
purpose, and with our Savior, all in all. For being told by the company, that
his Mother and his Brethren stood without to speak with him, He immediately
returned, who is my Mother? and who are my Brethren? even He that does the Will
of my Father which is in Heaven, (and it is the Will of the Father that we keep
the Commandments of the Son,) the same is my Brother, my Sister, and Mother.
Nay, by the keeping of the Commandments, we do not only know our love, but we
know our very knowledge, our affinity to the Truth, our being in Christ, and
Christ in us. And last of all it is by this, (continued in unto the end,) that
we make our Election and Calling sure. The first of these is very evident from
John 14. 21, 23. and 1 John 2. 5. The second is as plain from 1 John 2. 3, 4.
The third is as plain from 1 John 3. 19. The fourth is so too from 1 John 3.
24. Where we have two ways of knowing whether Christ abides in us and we in
Him: To wit, by our keeping his Commandments, and by the Spirit which he has
given us. Not by this without that; because it is no longer in us, than we keep
his Commandments. The first and last is most conspicuous in the 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, and 10, verses, where the Apostle does exhort us to give all
diligence, to make our Calling and Election sure. How then can our diligence,
and all our diligence be employed, unless in the keeping of the Commandments,
and in the keeping of them all too? For so he seems to explain himself in the
very next words, If ye do these things, ye shall never fall. And what is meant
by these things, but that long chain of Moral and Theological Graces, in the 5,
6, and 7, verses of that chapter, which in effect are nothing else, but several
Habits of Obedience to the Commandments of Christ? And by these S. Peter
teaches us how we must judge of our condition. For if these things be in us,
and abound, they make us fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
(v. 8.) But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see a far off,
and has forgotten that he was purged from his old Sins. (v. 9.) Which is as
much as to say, that the keeping of the Commandments is all in all, for if we
keep them, we are happy, and if we break them, we are undon. I say we are
happy, in case we keep them, because by keeping them we make our Election sure.
I do not say we Confession of Faith, chap. 18. Art. 2. 3.
make our selves infallibly sure of our Election, and that by ordinary means
too, without immediate Revelation; as an Assembly of Divines have made
profession of their Belief. For as Faith is a good man's, so infallible
assurance is God's peculiar. And it implies a contradiction, to say a man may
be infallible, in what he does but yet believe. For as infallibity implies a
knowledge in perfection, so belief implies strongly a knowledge only in 1 Cor.
13. 9, 12.
part, that is, in some measure, a want of knowledge. Which infers a
fallibility in him that wants it. When we say we do believe we shall never
fall, and that we do believe we are vessels of Election; our meaning is, we do
not doubt it, not at all that we cannot, or may not err. When Adam stood in a
state of Innocence, he did believe without doubt he should so continue. When
Lucifer stood in a state of Glory, he did not doubt in the least of his being
safe. But the event does show plainly in Him, and Adam, the possibility of
their falling, before they fell. So as long as we stand in a state of Grace.
and do so love our Savior as to keep his Commandments, we have reason to be
confident of our Election, but not infallibly assured, because we are not
omniscient, yea, do not know our own Hearts, and cannot tell what a Day, or
what an hour may bring forth. Whilst we are militant here on Earth, we do Hope
for Heaven; but shall then only be sure, when we shall take it into possession.
Ubi supra.
They who urge S. Peter's words for an infallible assurance, (2 Epist. chap. 1.
ver. 10.) where the word is (...), and notes the sureness of the Election, not
(...), implying assurance in the Elect, do prove no more from that Text, than
that they quite mistake its meaning. Not through an Ignorance of the original,
but a forgetfulness to consult it. It may suffice for our comfort, that God
himself is infallible, though we may err. And though we know not what we are,
much less what we shall be, yet this we know surely, That all the paths of the
Lord are Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies.
Psalm. 25. Heb. 11. 11. Heb. 6. 10*
10. We are infallible in our knowledge, that God is faithful, so as he cannot
fail possibly to make good his promise, if we shall manfully persevere in our
performance of the condition. And sure the sum of the Condition is briefly
this, that we love him so far, as to keep his Comandments.

Again, that this is the Test of our Love to Christ, and the means whereby to
make our Election sure, may be as easily collected from Heb. 6. 10, 11, 12.
Where the Apostle having premised the work and labor of their love, which they
had showed to Christ's Name, in their ministering to the Saints. (v. 10.) He
does immediately desire them to show the same diligence, to the full assurance
of Hope unto the end. (v. 11.) And not to be slothful, but followers of them
who through Faith and Patience inherit the promises. (v. 12.) From which words
of the Apostle we are to gather four things. First that he does not say
infallible, but full assurance of Hope. Nor is it He, but our Translation,
which says so much. For (...) is but a fullness of Hope, not at all a full
assurance, unless by full assurance is meant a fullness, and nothing else. Next
a diligence is required for the attainment of this Hope, and this must be unto
the end. The promise that we shall reap, is on condition that we faint not. We
must therefore so run, 1 Cor. 9.
that we may obtain. Thirdly, Our diligence must be showed too, that men may
see it, and be the better, and glorify God in our behalf. It must be showed in
a laborious and working Love, a Love exhibited to Christ, by being employed
upon his Members. The Love of Christ, if it is true, will be showed in this,
that instead of being idle, or empty-handed, it has its work and its labor,
is ever diligent, and industrious in the keeping of his Commands. Lastly, the
promises are not inherited through Faith alone, (which S. James calls a dead,
and a worthless Faith,) but through Faith mixed with patience, which is not a
barren, but a fruitful, not an idle, but working Faith. Such as works (by
Love) impartial obedience to the Commandments: And such as works (by
patience) with perseverance unto the end. Thus we prove, by our obedience, the
real solidity of our Love; and by our Permanency in both, make our Calling and
Election sure.

It were easy for me to argue from a very great number of such like Topics,
of which the old and new Testament afford much plenty. But that the proof of
this Doctrine, may not keep us too long from the Application, I shall conclude
with what I find in the 8th. chapter to the Romans. And thence the Point I am
upon may be irrefragably evicted. For they are true lovers of Christ, and real
vessels of Election, to whom there is no condemnation. There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus. (v. 1.) They alone are in Him, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And what other can they be, than such as
keep his Commandments? That this indeed is the evidence of our being in Christ,
does farther appear by the three Ifs, in the 10, 11, and 13 verses of that
chapter. If Christ be in you, the Body is dead, because of sin; but the Spirit
is life, because of Righteousness. And if the Spirit of Him who raised up Jesus
from the Dead, Romans 8. 10, 11, 13.
dwell in you, he also shall quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit which
dwells in you. And if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye; but if through
the Spirit ye mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Now by the Deeds
of the Body are meant the Breaches of the Commandments. And how are they
mortified, but by obedience? We have the same in S. John, but a little more
plainly. Hereby we know that we know him, even by keeping his word, 1 John 2.
5. He that says he abides in Him, ought himself also to walk, even as he
walked. (v. 6.) Now we know that Christ Jesus was so subjected to the Law, that
that was constantly the Path, wherein he walked. And when it is said by S. Paul,
that the end of the Commandment is charity out of a 1 Timothy 1. 5.
pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned. The Heart is
implied to be impure, the Conscience evil, and the Faith but hypocritical,
which is not evidenced by charity, and the keeping of the Commandments. All
agreeable to the words of our Blessed Savior, that men do not gather grapes
from Thorns, Luke 6. 44.
and every Tree is known by its fruit. But the fruit of all Graces is the
keeping of the Commandments, and therefore by that we may know them all.

Now then let us consider, that if the keeping of the The Application.
Commandments is the true Touchstone of our Love, whereby alone we may prove it
to be sincere; and withal the great Requisite, for the making of our Callling
and Election sure; then is the keeping of the Commandments the sum and upshot
of all that is called Duty. So that when Solomon, being penitent, turned his
Throne into a Pulpit, and of a King became a Preacher, He was not able, with
all his wisdom, either to teach, or to learn, either a plainer, or higher
lesson, than Fear God and keep his Commandments. For this (says Eccles. 12. 13.
he in the next words) is the whole Duty of Man. Men may spend their whole
lives in inventing Sermons, and Systems, and other discourses of Divinity, both
from the Pulpit, and from the Press; But the sum and conclusion of all is This,
Fear God and keep his Commandments* It concerns us therefore extremely to make
a strict examination, whether we find within our selves such a sincere love of
Christ, as does not only show it self in our mouths, and fancies, but
especially in our Hearts and our Conversations. Such a love as carries with it
a ready obedience to his Commands, and does by consequence amount unto the
whole Duty of Man. It being so natural for a Lover, to seek the benefit, or
pleasure, and satisfaction of his Beloved, by doing that which he desires, that
obedience and love, disobedience and hatred, are promiscuously used in holy
Scripture. For what S. Paul expresses thus, in his Epistle to the Corinthians,
[ Circumcision is nothing, 1 Cor. 7. 19.
and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments,] the same
S. Paul expresses thus, in his Epistle to the Galatians [ Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision Gal. 5. 6.
is nothing, but Faith which works by Love.] So that Faith is all in all, as
it works by Love. And Love is all in all, as it brings forth Obedience to the
Commandments of Christ. But obedience to his Commandments is all in all, as
including and supposing both Faith and Love. Christianity it self is nothing
worth without Faith; nor Faith it self, without Love; nor Love it self without
obedience to the Commandments of Christ. For being not kept, they must needs be
broken. And they that break his Commandments are said to hate him, as they that
keep them are said to love him, Exodus 20. 5, 6. So the carnal mind of man is
called enmity to God, Romans 8. 7. And that for this very reason (in the next
words following) Because it is not subject to the law of God. And

This may prompt us to descend unto a second consideration, that seeing love
and obedience, disobedience and hatred are terms equivalent, put the one for
the other in holy Writ; then, as we hope not to be reckoned amongst the
enemies, and haters of God in Christ, we must employ our utmost study upon the
keeping of his Commandments. And keep them we must with the greater care,
because (like Porcellane,) they are of very great worth, and the soonest
broken. Besides which, they have a property of being so wholesome, or so
destructive, that whilst we keep them entire, they keep us too in our
integrity; and if we customarily break them, they grind us certainly to powder.
The Prophet David had so smarted by having broken two of the number, (the one
with Bathshebah, and the other against Uriah,) as to have made a new Covenant
with God Almighty, that if he would teach him once more Psalm. 119. 33.
the way of his statutes, he would not fail for the future, to keep them whole
unto the end. And to the end he might keep them the more exactly, he laid them
up in a sure place, wherein the serpents piercing eye should not be able to
find them out. He locked them up in a Cabinet of which God only could keep the
key. For so we have him speaking to God himself, ( Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have
I hid within my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Exactly so did
blessed Mary by the sayings of Christ, (her Son, and Lord too,) which she kept
(says the Text,) and laid them up in her heart. After the very same manner,
let us manifest the love which we bear to Christ, and demonstrate the esteem
which we pretend to his Commandments, first by keeping them in our eyes, that
we may evermore see, and be mindful of them; next by fixing them in our Heads,
that we may rightly apprehend them; lastly by hiding them in our Hearts, that
no thievish lust may deprive us of them. Let our love be the ingraver, to carve
his Commandments in our Souls; to carve them in such deep, and indelible
characters, as no kind of Engine or Tool of Satan may be able to efface them, or
raze them out. Are not they bold people who dare be damned? who take the
confidence to sleep amidst the breaches of the Commandments, whilst their
Calling and Election are not only not ensur'd, but even neglected, and
undervalued, as if so cheap, and so easy, as to be got only by gaping, that
is, by saying Lord, Lord, or upon any cheaper terms than those of keeping his
Commandments? Let us religiously beware, that we be none of their number. And
because S. James tells us, that whosoever will be a Friend of this present
world, is Jam. 4. 4.
(not only not the Friend, but) the Enemy of God; Tremble we most at those
Felicities, which are most generally courted. Take we heed of nothing more,
than of our living too much at ease. If we are serious lovers of Christ, let us
not laugh, and be merry, with them that hate him; but rather shut up ourselves
in such a solitude and silence, as in which we may enjoy him without
disturbance, or interruption. Whenever we suffer in his behalf, from our selves
or others; let this be one of our Rewards, that he tells our sighs, and counts
the number of our attritions, puts our Tears into his Bottle, Psalm. 56. 8. Mal.
3. 16.
and enters our sorrows into his Book. Let our Ambition be to please him, by
all means possible; by observing his precepts; by accusing our selves before
him for any precept unobserved; by importuning him incessantly for ghostly
strength; and by thanking him for that which we now enjoy; by hating our
Rebellions already passed; and by making him vows of new obedience: Which
Vows having made, let us not fail to pay them all, how deerly soever they may
cost us. Let Us Act. 26. 26.
not reckon it enough, to be almost-Christians, with King Agrippa; nor yet,
with King Saul, to give God 1 Samuel 15. 9.
the Refuse of what we owe him. But as we are debtors to him for all, so let us
not niggardly withhold the least things from him which he expects, much less
the greatest which he requires. Our obedience unto Christ, like Christ's
obedience unto the Father, must not only be paid to some, but to all his
Commandments, without exception. All that Abigail could but say, Christ Jesus
acted: For she desired to wash the feet of the servants of her Lord; but He de
facto did wash the feet of 1 Samuel 25. 41.
the servants of Himself, who yet was their Lord, and David's too. So very low
went our Savior in the Active part of his Obedience; but his passive was lower
yet, not only to the Death, (which is the wages of disobedience,) but to the
Death of the Cross too, the worst of Deaths, and the most terrible, whether we
consider its shame, or torment. By such incomparable Obedience, both active,
and passive, did the love of our Savior express it self. And shall not our
love to Him express it self in our being clean? In the keeping of our selves
unspotted from the world? Shall we adventure to be the worse for his goodness
to us? or violate his precepts with peace and comfort, because we know he dyed
our Sacrifice, and is our Advocate with the Father, and the propitiation for
all our Sins? No, let us strive against sin, though we resist it unto Blood.
And resist it so much the rather, because obliged to it by Him who is a God
ready to pardon. If He was prodigal of his life, when he could spend it to our
advantage, why should we niggardly keep our Lives, when it is the thrivingst
course to lose them? That there is a certain case wherein we may save them to
our loss, and that again there is a case wherein we may lose them to our
advantage, is the peremptory assertion of Christ himself. He that will save
his life, shall lose it; and he that will lose his life for my sake, the same
shall save it. Now till we come to this pitch, of being able (in time of trial)
to lose a life for Christ's sake, we have not satisfied the Text in its full
Importance; and by consequence, till we have, we stand in need of being taught
from another Topic. I mean, we ought to be persuaded by seeing the terrors of
the Lord; or at least to be frighted by them. And considering that S. Paul has
comprehended them all at once, in that short pandect of Imprecations, his
dreadful Anathema Maranatha; as also considering that the sins by which those
Curses are all incurred, do all arise from this Fountain, a most unnatural want
of love to the Lord Jesus Christ; I cannot think of a fitter Text whereon to
continue my Meditations, than that Sentence of S. Paul in his first Epistle to
the Corinthians; If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. And this I mean shall be the subject of the second part of my Design.

THE INTRODUCTION TO The Second Part.
Sect. 1. AMongst the many obliging Titles, which God in reference to Man,
vouchsafes to take upon Himself, there is not any so apt to melt us, as that of
Eridegroom. For whilst in other Relations to us he is the object of our Fear,
our Adoration, our Admiration, and the like; still in the quality of a
Bridegroom, all he draws from us is Love. And, if we weigh the chief
ingredients which are prescribed to make up, and compound a Christian, every
grain of pure love, will go as far as many pounds of our Awe, and wonder.

Faith and Hope are great virtues, but Love is greater. And that as for many
other reasons, so in particular also for This, that God was never yet said to
be Faith, or Hope, (nor is it possible for him to be so,) but S. John has said
plainly, 1 John 4^.
that God is Love. And therefore Love, of all Graces, makes us most to resemble
the God that made us. It Is true indeed that Faith and Hope must help to carry
us into Heaven; But holy Love, (besides that,) will keep us company when we are
there. Our Love indeed shall there be perfected, but only perfected into Love;
that though it shall cease to be incomplete, it shall not cease to be it self*
Whereas our Faith and our Hope shall be for ever don away. For that shall die
into experience, and so shall this into Fruition.

Sect. 2. To fear and honor Him that made us, is a most acceptable service, (
Mal. 1. 6.) But very passionately to love him, does please him far beyond both,
It being absolutely in vain that we do honor him as a Father, or that we fear
him as a Lord, unless we Love him as a Bridegroom, who has betrothed us to
Himself. Take away Love, and Fear has Torment. Or take away Love, and Honor
degenerates into Hypocrisy. Both are servil in themselves, until our Love does
manumit them, and make them free. Our Fear and our Honor are only welcome for
our Loves sake, whereas our sole or single Love is welcome to him for its Per
se placet, and propter se, non requirit causam non Fractum. S. Bernard. super
Cantic. Cant. Sermon 83.
own.

Sect. 3. Nor may you think that I have named the utmost privilege of Love
above other Graces. For Love alone is that Motion or Affection of the Soul, by
which we render back to God (though not ex aequo, yet de simili,) a noble kind
of Retaliation. If he is Angry, we are to Tremble, not to be angry with him
again. If he Commands, we must obey; and if he censures, we must adore him; But
by no means presume to return the like. Nay if he saves us, or sets us free, we
cannot thank him for it in kind; we cannot make him a Retribution, either of
safety, or of deliverance. But when he condescends to love us, we can and must
love him, without the Arrogance of taking too much upon us. Nam cum ama^ non
vult aliud quam amari. Id. ibid.
For to this very end does he begin to us in Love, that (though we never can
requite, yet) at least we may pledge him with Love for Love.

Sect. 4. Again, of all the Emanations or Affections of the Soul, the Love of
God is that alone which carries with it its own Reward. I mean a Pleasure, Non
ad aliud amat Deus, nisi ut ametur sciens, ipso Amor^ Beatos qui se amav^. Id.
ib.
and Satisfaction, which cannot admit of an allay by either Repentance, or
Satietie. Indeed to love him for somewhat else, is to receive no greater
Pleasure, than somewhat else has the luck to affect us with. But to love him
for himself, is to Iussisti o Domine, ut diligam te, aut mihi Infernum minari^.
Sed mihi magnus satis infernus est, quod te digne amare non val^o. August.
Confess. l. 10* c. 28, 29, 30.
possess the very end, because the object of our Love. For the greatest
enjoyment of such a Lover, is still to love what he injoyes. Hence it was that
S. Austin did argue thus in his Confessions. Thou have commanded me ( Lord) to
love thee, and do threaten me with Hell, if I love thee not. Whereas it is
Hell enough to me, that I cannot love thee enough. For to love thee as I ought,
as thou deservest, and I desire, would be at once the greatest Duty, and
highest Reward to be imagined. It would not only be my Task, but my Heaven to
love thee.

Sect. 5. Now when Interest, and Honor, conspire with Pleasure and
Satisfaction, to make us kind; may it not seem a great wonder, that such a
thing should be supposed, as that a Christian should not love the Lord Jesus
Christ? Let us examine, if you please, how very natural it is to love him; that
so our wonder may be the less at the severity of the Curse, which our Apostle
thunders out against as many as love him not.

Sect. 6. First it is natural for us as men, to love the gifts of the Almighty,
because by them we have the pleasure of staying our hunger, and our thirst; the
pleasure of giving Satisfaction to all our Appetites and Needs. Next it is every
whit as natural, to love that Love of the Almighty, from whence those gifts are
derived to us. And then how natural is the Transition from our love of his
Love, unto a yet greater love of Him that loves us? For such a free Lover of
Souls must needs Himself be more lovely than all his Love, as much as the Agent
than the Act, or the Cause than the Effect.

Sect. 7, Again be we never so debauched, we cannot possibly abstain from being
kind unto ourselves: And as little from being kind unto the benefits and
Blessings which we enjoy. And being so kind unto the benefits, we should as
little methinks abstain from being kind to the Benevolence, from which those
Benefits must needs proceed. How much less should we be able to abstain from
being kind to the Benefactor, who is the Sourse and the Fountain of that
Benevolence? Certainly nothing Quid vitius, ^ qua^ pluris facere Dantis m^nera,
quam Datorem ipsum?
can be viler, than to love the mere Gifts, above the Giver; nothing more
contumelious to him that Gives them.

Sect. 8. And if it is natural for us as men, to love our God, as God only, or
at least as the Giver of our Enjoyments; how much more as God in Christ,
Reconciling us all unto Himself? He is the Maker, and the Preserver, and (so at
least) the Benefactor of all things else; but the Redeemer, the Restorer, the
Reconciler only of us. As God Incarnate he conversed with men on Earth; and as
such (in special manner) we still converse with him in Heaven. I therefore say,
in special manner, because to address our selves to God, as he is Infinite, and
Invisisible, a self-subsisting Existence from everlasting to everlasting, is
not only apt to dazzle, but to distract our understandings. Our Thoughts are
lost in this Ocean, as the drops of a Bucket. And where our Thoughts are hardly
fixed, it is hard to fasten our Affections. But now to address ourselves to God
in the man Christ Jesus, as he is manifest in the Flesh, and hypostatically
united to human Nature; to settle our Affections and Thoughts upon him, both as
our Sacrifice, and our Priest, our Elder Brother, and our Advocate; as one
incessantly pleading for us, and reconciling us to Himself; This is to take him
at the advantage of his descending to our Infirmities; and as it were to lay
hold both on his Majesty, and his Mercy, whilst he is thus stooping down to our
low embraces. And therefore if any man shall be found so void of Grace and good
Nature, as not to love the God of Heaven both as a Bridegroom, and a Redeemer,
who never had bought but to espouse us, and courts* our kindness under the
Title of The Lord Jesus Christ; he cannot deserve a milder Curse, than that of
Anathema Maranatha. Which, though the frightful'st and the most dismal, that
any poor Caitiff can undergo, is yet the mildest, and the most gentle, that our
Apostle could in Conscience condemn Them to, who should be found NOT TO LOVE
the Lord Jesus Christ. Should the very Souls of men be wholly dissolved into
Love, ^twould be no more than He deserves, for the excess of whose Love to the
Souls of men, the Holy Ghost has affirmed that He is Love. And considering how
much the Cause is more noble than the Effect, (as I said before,) it is very
evident that our Savior should be much dearer to us than our Salvation. The
name Mel in Ore, Melos in Aure, Iubilum in Cord. Bernard.
of Jesus, a Savior, how delicious to our mouths ought it to be when e're we
speak it? How melodious to our Ears, when e're we hear it? And what a Iubily to
our Hearts, whenever we do ruminate, or think upon it? Having therefore such
a name, as is above every name, the name of Jesus, a Savior, Philip. 2. 11, 12.
nor that temporal, but eternal; he needs must challenge such a Love, as is
above every Love, not only of our Sins, but of our selves too. And therefore
well might S. Paul, upon the foulest supposition that can be made of a
Malefactor, pronounce the formidabl'st Sentence that can be uttered by any
Judge.

If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be 1 Cor. 16. 22.
Anathema Maranatha.

Sect. 9. These words of the Apostle, (which I have thought a fit Subject for
the second Part of my Design,) are first of all to have a general, and then a
more special Consideration. Their Parts in the General are briefly Three.

First, the necessary Duty which is incumbent on a Christian; and that is the
love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Next, the Latitude or Extent of the obligingness of the Duty; which does not
reach only to some, but to all in general. And this is implied in the
Indefinite (...), [If any man love him not.]

Thirdly, the dreadfulness of the Danger to whosoever shall despise or neglect
the Duty. And this is expressed in the sentence of esto Anathema Maranatha.

So that in order to the more plain and useful handling of the Text, ( which is
proposed only to profit, and not to please us,) we are to fasten our present
Thoughts upon these three subjects of Meditation.

First, the Nature of the Love which is here required.

Next, the Quality of the Curse which is here denounc't.

Thirdly, the means we are to use, to attain the first; and in consequence of
that, to escape the second.

CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. TO understand the first aright, we are to Touching the Nature of the
Love which is due to Christ.
view the Grace of Love by several steps of Gradation. First of all we are to
view it as it is fastened upon God, and so is contradistinguish't to all other
Love. Such as is the love of men, whether our Neighbors, or our selves; the
love of our Bodies, and of our Souls, and so of all other Creatures; not only
such as are unlawful, and under a special prohibition, but also such as are
commanded, and of necessity to be loved. It must be opposite to the former, and
hugely transcendent unto the later. And then it is the Grace of Love as fastened
in general upon God. But we are secondly to consider it in its particular
application, I mean its Appropriation to the Lord Jesus Christ. And this again
in a threefold respect; as he is Dominus, the Lord, who is to rule and reign
over us; and as Jesus, the Savior, who is (like Joshua, and the Judges,) at
once to deliver, and to conduct us; and as Christ, the Messiah, in all his
Offices at once; in that of Teaching, and Blessing, and Swaying his Scepter
over our Hearts. This is properly the love of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this
again must be consider^d, in that degree of perfection, wherein it is taken in
the Text. As a love of Christ unto the Death; a love which casts out Fear;
and such as does not Matt. 24. 12. upon which place see Dr. Hammond's
Annotation. And upon Rev. 2. 4.
wax cold in the sharpest winter of Tribulation. For the curse which here
follows, seems to relate unto the Gnostics, and to as many of their posterity,
as should at any time be infected by their opinion. Such as were Prodicus, and
the Adamites, and the Sect of the Helkesaitae, who were totally for a
prosperous, not for a persecuted Religion; (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. (...).
zealous Followers of Christ, in Times of Peace, but in Times of Persecution,
Forsakers of him.

Sect. 2. The sum and upshot of all is this. The Love of Christ which is
required for the escaping of the Curse, is such a Love of his Person, as is
attended with a Love of his precepts too. And such a love of his precepts, as
shows it self in an Obedience without Exception or Reserve; and obedience both
active, and passive too. Nor with respect only to some, but (in the words of
the Psalmist) unto all his Commandments. Our love of Christ must be set off,
with a comparative detestation of all below him. For if any man come to me,
(says Christ himself to his Disciples) and hate not his Father, and Mother,
and Wife, and Children, and Brother, and Sister, yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26. There we see, though we are bound to love
our livelihood and our Lives, yet we are bound to hate Both, in comparison of
the Love which we owe to Christ. And that so high a degree of love is
indispensably required, many parallel words of Christ do put it out of all
Question. As, He that loves his life shall lose it; John 12. 25.
and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
Whosoever shall deny me before men, Matt. 10. 33.
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. Is any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, Luke 9. 23.
and take up his Cross daily, and follow me. For verse 26.
whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the son of man
be ashamed, when he shall come in his own Glory, and in his* Fathers, and of
the holy Angels. And when it is* said by the Apostle, If we 2 Timothy 2. 12.
suffer, we shall reign; it is implied we shall not, if we do not suffer. As
therefore he who puts to sea, (let his design be what it will,) is to resolve
before hand, to run the risque of the foulest weather, and not to go, but to be
carried, nor so much whither the Pilot shall please to steer him, as whither
the wind and the waves shall be pleased to drive him; so before we do resolve
to engage our selves in Christianity, we ought in prudence to make a Reckoning,
as well of the Price that it will cost us, as of the Profit and Advantage
'twill bring us in. If we conceive that our Reward, though yet but future, and
invisible, will yet prove at last an abundant Recompense, for whatsoever we can
do or suffer here for Christ's sake; then resolve we (with S. Paul) to reckon
all things but Dung, for the winning of Phil. 3. 8, and 14.
it. Ever pressing toward the mark, (by Mortifications, and Self-denials, and
laying aside the every weight which does so easily beset us, by a fellowship
with his sufferings, and a conformity to his Death,) for the Prize of the high
Calling of God in Christ Jesus. But if on the other side we esteem it too hard
a bargain, (which Christ has made in the New Testament,) And that to drink of
his deadly Cup will be a bitterer potion, than all his Love and his Promises
will be able to sweeten; then let us never so much as enter into a Covenant
with Christ; but, rather than begin, and only begin to do him service, fairly
leave it unto those who have the patience and the courage to go quite through
it. He is a mad kind of chapman, who Ad hanc sectam suscepta condition ejus
pacti venim^, ut etiam animas nostras autora^i in has pugnas accedamus. Ea qu^
repromittit consequi optantes, and quae comminatur pati timentes. Tertul. ad
seapulam. c. 1.
makes a contract with Christ for a participation of his Kingdom, without
resolving upon his Cross too. Himself has told us what it is like, Luke 14. 31.
It is just like a King, who going to war against another King, does not first
sit down, and consult, whether he be able with Ten thousand to meet him that
comes against him with Twenty thousand. For even so, says our Savior (at the
33. verse of that chapter,) whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that
he has, (be it his Pleasure, his Reputation, his livelihood, or his life,) he
cannot be my Disciple.

Sect. 3. Yet let not any man here object against his hope of Salvation, and
ground of Comfort, Infoelix ego sum, and infausto tempore natus, sad and evil
is my Condition, because I live in good times; I cannot possibly be a Martyr,
for want of a Nero, or a Domitian, a Dioclesian, or a Cromwell, whereby to
evidence my Love of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to exercise my Faith with a
fiery Trial. For (that I may take him out of the Agony which he possibly may be
in, whilst he considers how great a Love is indispensably required, for the
escaping of the Curse which is here denounced,) any man living, however
prosperous, may be a Confessor, or Martyr, by a generous Resistance of his
Prosperities; by being under a persecution he wisely brings upon Himself; by
destroying his wicked Appetites, though dearer to him than his Eyes; and by
retrenching those darling habitual lusts, which are as hardly parted with, as
his hands and feet. Be not therefore, like King Polycrates too much afflicted
with thy Prosperityes; nor, like the Emperor Mauritius, so much terrified from
within for want of Troubles from without, as to conclude thy self a Bastard in
God's account, through a defect of that chastisement which is the Heb. 12. 8.
character of a Son. For if thou usest those Talents of Grace and Reason, which
God has given thee, thy Ambition may be the Nero, whom thou resistest unto
Blood. Or thy Avarice the Domitian, by whom thou art plagued for thy
Noncompliance. Or thy lust the Dioclesian, from whom thou suffer'st for thy
Dissents. Or thy Cruelty may be the Cromwell, whom thou refusest to obey at thy
great Expense. Will thou know by what martyrdom thy Love to Christ may be
expressed in Times of Peace? and how to suffer for God, though never persecuted
by men? Be but contented with all Events; and ever rise with an Appetite from
the most warrantable Enjoyments; Envy no man's preferment; nor ambitiously covet
to make it Thine; pay Obedience to thy Superiors, though they may seem never
so froward; do whatever God bids thee, though it shall seem never so hard;
resist the Dalliance of the Flesh, though never so pleasant or Importuning; and
then, in all these together, thou art a Martyr of Patience, with holy Job; of
Abstinence, with Daniel; of Humility, with S. Paul; of Obedience, with Abraham;
and of chastity, with Joseph. Nor let this pass for a mere fancyful, and
conceited way of reasoning. For it is confirmed by the Judgment of old and
Orthodox Divines. Sanguinem si semel pro Christo ponere S. Bernardus in Medit.
devotiss. cap. 3. p. 1052.
non potes, saltem mitiori quodam, sed longiori Martyrio pone. If thou can
not all at once lay down thy life for the Love of Christ, lay it down for him
by a milder, but longer Martyrdom. For to forsake thine own will, to send a
Bill of Divorce to thy wedded pleasures, to crucify thy Flesh, with the
Affections, and Lusts, and so to mortify its members which are upon the earth,
is such a profitable and wholesome persecution of thy self, and (if it be any,
is) such a prudent Abbreviation of thy life, as does most of all tend to its
Preservation. It Is better Policy (says the Father) Si propriam deseris
voluntatem, si carnem tuam cru^ifigas, si mortifices membra, etc. probabis Te
Pauli imitatorem, qui non facies animam tuam pretiosiorem teipso. Probabis
Christi Discipulum, etiam illam perdendo salubriter. Et quidem prudenti^^ eam
p^rd^s ut custodias, quam custodis ut perd^s. Idem super Cant. Sermon. 30. p. 660.
to lose thy life that thou may keep it, than by keeping it for a time, to
lose it finally, and for ever.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. HAving already spoken enough touching Touching the danger of defect
in our Love to Christ.
the Nature and Degree of our Love to Christ, 'twill next be needful to
consider the sad condition of the Curse, to which the want of such Love is here
affirmed to make us liable. And in order to the right understanding of it, we
are to know the three degrees of excommunicating sinners among the Jews, which
were accommodated of old to the use of Christians. The first of these they
called Niddui, the second See Mr. Gregory's learned Notes. chap. 35. and
Buxtorf's Lexicon* is Talmud.
Cherem, the third Shammatha. And this last in signification is exactly the
same with Maranatha in the Text. For Shem in the Chaldee, imports as much as
Maran in Syriac. And Atha (we see) is affixt to both. Niddui signified an
exclusion, but for (...)
four paces only, and from no greater privilege than that of ordinary converse.
Cherem signified exclusion (...)
with the addition of Imprecations; out of which notwithstanding there was a
hope of being freed by a sound Repentance; Whereas Shammatha, or Maranatha (...)
was not only a giving up, but also a finally giving over the anathematized
person unto eternal condemnation. Maran Atha is an expression, under which the
Lords coming, and the most terrible of his Judgments are Synecdochically
contained. And for the better clearing of it, it may be explicated thus. The
Lord is come, and has suffered, and he who now loves him not, is for ever
unworthy of his Love. Or let the Lord come, (as Cornelius a Lapide,) or the
Lord shall come, to judge, and punish him. Or let such a sinner be Anathema, at
the coming of the Lord, as Zegerus words it. For though Atha is the
Preterperfect tense, yet it is common amongst the Hebrews, to set the
Preterperfect, for either the Present, or the future, or (as here) in an
Optative, which has also the force of an Imperative signification.

Sect. 2. So that the Duty, and the Danger, being thus explicated asunder,
will, if we take them in conjunction, admit of this Paraphrase. If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, so as a Savior does deserve, with all his heart,
and his Soul; so as to keep the very sowrest and most unpleasant of his
Commandments; as far as the taking up his Cross, and holding close to him in
Times of Trial, if any man love him not so entirely, as to hate his own life
for the love he bears him; let him sink under the weight of the heaviest
Censures of the Church. Let all the Curses light upon him which once were heard
from Mount Ebal. Let him not only be Anathema, which answers to the Hebrew
Cherem, and notes a giving up to Satan for the 1 Cor. 5. 5.
destruction of the Flesh; but Anathema Maranatha, which notes an absolute
cutting off, an utter Excision or Extirpation from the Body of Christ. Let him
not only be Anathema, a severity intended to purge the sinner of his Sin; but
Maran Atha, which is severer, as being intended to rid the Church of a Sinner.
Let him be cast out of the Favor as well of the Bridegroom, as of the Bride.
Let him for ever be destroyed, not only in this, but the other world.

Sect. 3. And now by this time I suppose we all are well enough acquainted, as
well with the Duty we are under, as with the Danger we are in; as well with the
nature of the Love which is here required, as with the quality of the Curse
which is here denounc't.

Sect. 4. And if the danger is so great of not performing this duty of loving
Christ, what kind of means should we not use for the obtaining of the one, and
(in consequence of that,) for the escaping of the other? By fervent Prayers,
and Importunities, and by watching thereunto with all Perseverance, how should
we wrestle, and contend, (as Jacob did) with the Almighty? resolving never to
let him go, till he has bless't us with an ability to love the Lord Jesus
Christ, as he requires? if there are any ways and methods, if any stratagems
of Reason, if any Pulleys of the Will, whereby to wind up our Affections to
things above; Lord! how incessantly should we labor, to put such Instruments
into use? How much more does it concern us than all the Riches and the Pomps of
the world are worth, to be as obstinate as it is possible, not only in the use
of the means of Grace, but also in the practice of all those methods, unto
which we may be prompted by Art, or Nature? never abating of our Endeavors, in
using the Artifice, and the Empire both of the Intellect, and the Will, until
we find that God's Grace has crowned our Endeavors with Success? Or if we
cannot love him so sensibly as we love many carnal and trivial things, so as to
spend all our Time in conversing with him, or so as evermore to fasten our
Thoughts upon him; yet atleast let us so love him, as to afford him all the
offices and fruits of Love, even by doing what he commands, and by forbearing
what he forbids, and by thankfully enduring what he shall suffer or appoint to
be laid upon us. For wheresoever these are, they are the Arguments, and the
Proofs, as well of our Faith, as our Affection.

Sect. 5. But here perhaps some will say, we cannot An Objection.
possibly be in love with the Lord Jesus Christ, until the Image of his Beauty
shall have been charactered in our Souls; because his Beauty is the Allective,
which is to draw up the Soul to a desire of its Fruition. And Quis amare potest
quae non vidit? quomodo amabile esse potest quod non est aliquatenus visibile?
S. Bernard. in lib. de Amore Dei c. 2. p. 1141.
we must certainly see our object, e're we are able to affect it. But our
object being Invisible cannot possibly be seen, unless it be by the Eye of
Faith; and Faith is entirely the work of Grace; a Gale that comes from that
spirit which only blows where it lists. Ioh. 3. 8. And seeing Love, as well
as Faith, is the work of Grace, which is not a thing at our own disposal; how
can we fasten our Affections on things invisible? or how create within our
selves a passionate Love of the Lord Jesus, by any Stratagems, or Engines of
Will, or Reason? If we do already love him (in that degree that is required,)
all this Preaching might have been spared; or at least have been spent to
another purpose. And if we want of such love in such a measure as is needful,
what can we do unto ourselves, whereby to make our selves love him? Or what can
any man do to us, for the increasing of the love which we bear unto him? who is
he that can add one cubit to our stature? or make an hair of our heads grow
white, or black? Nor are these the more peculiar Effects of Nature, than Faith
and Love are the Fruits of Grace; which Grace if he denies us, we cannot love
him, though we desire it; and which Grace if he will give us, we shall not be
able either to quench, or resist our Love. Can a man preach us into Affections
which we bring not with us to Church? or dispute us into a Love of what we see
not, nor comprehend? we come not hither with a Belief that we can possibly be
the better, for whatsoever can be spoken by any skilful Ecclesiastic; but only
because it is* a commanded, and so a commendable performance, to which by custom
and duty we stand obliged. For as touching our Affection and Love to Christ,
that can neither be more nor less, than was decreed to be given us from all
Aeternity, even according as we are destined to Heaven, or Hell. Which decree
of our End, being unconditional, infers the means conducing to it as
unconditionally decreed too. And therefore let us not be told of winding up our
Affections to things above. For we deny the Possibility of being made to love
Christ by such human means. There is not a Science, or an Art, of habits
insused, and divine. Nor is the Grace of God acquired by the Dexterities, or
diligence of learned men.

Sect. 6. Thus indeed it may be easily, and succesfully Answered.
objected, against a sort of well-meaning, but erring Christians; who
conceiving that the Regenerate have Grace irresistible, from which (they say)
it is impossible for them to fall; and that none besides them have Grace enough
to do them good, but only enough to make them utterly unexcusable; do unawares
infer Preaching to be a thing of no use. Of none at least unto the People, who
are but Hearers of the word preached, however temporally useful to them that
preach it.

And in good earnest could we believe, (as not a few in their writings contend
to have us,) that all things are as they must be, and that they must be as they
are, through the eternal Necessitation of a most peremptory Decree; we should
conclude it wholly useless, (as to the future state of Souls,) either to give,
or to take advice. And rather than continue to preach in vain, (that is to say,
without the hope, because without the possibility of winning Souls,) we would
betake our selves straight to some other Calling; as judging nothing more
sordid, than to sell our Instruction for Tithes or Stipends, or for any thing
less precious, than the Glory of God, and the good of Souls. But we do
seriously believe the blessed Apostle was in earnest, when he exhorted his
Philippians, both to work, and Philip. 2. 12.
work out their own Salvation. Nor can we think he was impertinent, in charging
Timothy, to stir up the Gift of God which was in him. But that S. Peter spoke
2 Timothy 1. 6.
sense, when he exhorted all Christians to give all diligence, for the making
of their Calling and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
And that God to good purpose gave command unto his Rebels, to turn themselves
from their evil ways. And Ezekiel. 18. 31. and 33. 11.
accordingly we our selves are extremely serious, in our exhortations to the
love of the Lord Jesus Christ. And though our labor is very often, yet we
believe it is not always, or unavoidably in vain, when we excite men's
Endeavors of loving Christ in such a measure, as to escape the dreadful
Sentence of Anathema Maranatha. For though we cannot so love him, until it is
given us from above, through the sanctifying Grace of the Holy Ghost; yet it is
a Duty incumbent on us, to use the means which God has given us; to seek his
Grace, when it is absent; and to receive it, when it is offered; and to retain
it, when it is given; and to improve it, being retained; and to recover it,
when it is lost; and lastly to keep it when it is recovered, with perseverance
unto the end. The ground and bottom of this Assertion it is very obvious to
observe in several passages of Scripture. Repent (says S. Peter to graceless
Simon the Sorcerer) and pray to God. And to what Acts 8. 22.
purpose should such a Person be so exhorted by S. Peter, if 'twere impossible
for a Magician to seek for Grace when it is absent? Let us have Grace, (says
the Heb. 12. 28.
Apostle to the Hebrews.) And what is that, but to receive it when it is
offered? Be strong in Grace, (says S. Paul to Timothy.) And what can that be,
but to retain 2 Timothy 2. 1.
it when it is given? Grow in Grace, (says S. Peter) 2 Pet. 3. 18.
And what is that, but to improve it being retained? Be reconciled unto God,
(says S. Paul to the Corinthians,) 2 Cor. 5. 20.
and wash ye, make you clean, Return ye, Return ye, (says Isa. 1. 16. Ezekiel.
33. 11. John 15. 4.
God to Israel.) And what is that, but to recover it when it is lost? Now that
ye are clean, abide in me, (says our Blessed Savior.) Nay it is said of Paul
and Barnabas, that, speaking to the Christians who dwelt at Antioch, they
persuaded them to CONTINUE in Act. 13. 43.
the Grace of God, And what else can that imply, but perseverance unto the End?

Sect. 7. Now from all this together it seems to follow, that to attain to such
an Habit and Pitch of Grace, as to be cordially affectionate to the Lord Jesus
Christ, we may not reckon it sufficient, that we speak to him in our Prayers,
and hear him speaking in his word, and feed upon him in his Sacrament, unless
we also make use of all other means that we have heard of, and employ our best
wits to discover more, and beg the help of our Teachers in this Inquiry. For
though indeed we cannot add one cubit to our Stature, or make Matt. 6. 27.
an hair of our heads grow white or black, yet we are taught by our Experience,
that we can add unto our Industry, and put a Bridle upon our Wills, and set a
trig to the Cariere of our vile Affections. It is (we know) as unavoidable,
that we should be both of the Stature and the Complexion that we are of, as
that the Fire should tend upwards, or water down. But it is not sure as
unavoidable, to hear a Sermon, or give an alms, or to have any degree of love
to the Lord Jesus Christ. Of which what reason can be rendered so plain and
satisfactory as this, that the former is proper to us, as we are Natural Agents
only; but the later, as we are rational? and in what Instance can we be
rational, wherein it is possible for us to cease from being voluntary Agents? It
does concern us therefore as such, to ask for Grace when it is wanting, and to
use it when it is granted, and again to pray God to increase our Talent, and to
beware that we receive not his Grace in vain too. 2 Cor. 6. 1. And therefore as
such we are enjoined, as well as entreated by S. Paul, not to grieve, not to
resist, not to quench the Spirit of God, when he begins to kindle in us that
love of Christ which he requires; plainly intimating unto us, that when the
Spirit of God is ready, to shed abroad in our hearts such a saving love; it
lies in us to shut a Casement, that is, an Eye; to open a Door, that is, an
Ear; to yield up a Castle, that is, a Heart; to draw a Curtain, that is, a
Prejudice; to put Impediments out of the way; and (by the assistance of the
same Spirit,) to employ the noble Faculties which God has given us, unto the
noblest of the Ends for which he gave them. We are able, as we are men, to
presentiate our Savior within our selves, and so to meditate upon Him, as we
ordinarily do upon other objects; we can frame Idaeas of him in our
Imaginations, and thereby bring him into our Heads by an Intentional Union,
although the Grace of God alone can unite him really to our Hearts, by servent
love, and Faith unseigned.

Seeing therefore the Scripture says, (in justification of the praemisses,)
That we are Laborers and 1* Cor. 3. 9.
Workers together with God, and again that we are Stewards of the manifold
Grace of God, and are diligently 2 Cor. 6. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Heb. 12. 15. 1 Cor.
3. 8.
to look, least any man fail of the Grace of God; and again that every man
shall receive his own reward according to his own labor; Let us never cease to
labor in the great work of our Salvation, till (by the help of God's Grace,
which never fails to work with any, who do not fail to work with it,) we have
wrought our selves up to a Love of Christ. Being comparatively neglectful of
all other duties, until we have thoroughly attained to this. We must remember
that as our Faith is pre-required to our Love, so is our Love to our obedience,
and our obedience unto our Bliss. And we must perfect our Foundation, before we
build. For debile Fundamentum fallit opus; the weakness of a Foundation must
needs betray the whole strength of a superstructure. In vain shall we labor to
raise the Fabric of obedience, unless we have a firm love whereupon to build
it. And therefore first let us be sure of loving Christ in Sincerity, before we
take upon our selves the effectual keeping of his* Commandments. And let us use
the best engines whereby to screw our Love up to the Pitch required. For what
we do not much Love, we cannot much long for; nor can we very much care to
espowse the means of its Attainment. And therefore in spite of the objection,
which has an aptness in its Nature to breed a carelessness of our Actions, an
unconcernment in our end, and a contempt of those Assistances, which onr
Authorized Teachers are wont to yield us, let us not cast away the care we
ought to have of our Immortality; nor be so blinded with the Opinion, that all
the actions of our Lives were pre-determin'd from Aeternity, as thereupon to
despair of being the better for our Endeavors; and by consequence to resolve,
never to do our selves any Good. But let us labor (on the contrary) after the
Duty of loving Christ, for the escaping of the Danger, (I mean the Curse, and
the Damnation,) denounced here to all Persons that love him not.

And to press this forwards, with at least some Hope, as well as Ambition of
good Success, will deserve to be the work of another Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. WHen we are setting about the means Touching the Means we are to use
to the Ends aforesaid.
which do most of all conduce to our greatest Ends, we must be sure of right
method, as well as of Diligence in our Endeavors. And because Cupiens i^choare
artem amandi Deum, primo debet labor are ad removendum contrarium, puta amorem
mundanum. Qui ut glutinum quoddam alas anim^ spirituales impedit, ne se in
altum possit sublevare. Gerson. de mont. contem. c. 11. James 4. 4. Phil. 3.
18, 19.
we are to cease from being Enemies to our Savior, before we can be in a
possibility of being denominated his Friends; First let us summon-in our
Affections which are scattered abroad upon the world, the love of which (S.
James says) is perfect Enmity with Christ. They that mind earthly things must
needs be Enemies to his Cross; and being Enemies to his Cross, they cannot be
Friends unto his Person. For the Apostle tells us of such, that their end is
Destruction. The reason of this is very evident. For whilst we have Friendship
with the world, which is Christ's Rival and Competitor, our Souls are
Adulteresses and Harlots, (to use the language of S. James in the place before
cited,) as being false and disloyal to him who betrothed us to himself, and is
verbally acknowledged to be our Bridegroom. Love is evermore so sure to be the
Mother of Obedience, to whatsoever object it is which is much beloved; that as
when we love Christ, we will keep His Commandments, so when we also love the
world, we will keep the Commandments of the world; to wit, the statutes of
Omri, and all the works of the Mic. 6. 16.
House of Ahab. So that our first labor must be, (for it is indeed a great
labor,) to disentangle our Affections, to take them off from the things of
this tempting world; and as it were twisting them all together, like the Rays
of the Sun in an Optic Pyramid, strive to concenter them (so united) in the
Sovereign Beauty of a Savior.

Now one of the proper Engines for this, (I mean, the rescuing of our love from
what is worldly, and to be seen,) is to chew, and to ruminate, long enough in
our Thoughts, upon this great Truth, that even our love of the Body does wholly
depend upon the Soul. And the titular Beauty of the Flesh must be confessed by
the most sensual to lie entirely in the spirit. For (if we except the sole case
of the (...) in Herodotus, which yet was not love, but another thing, and that
perhaps but a Fable too,) who ever heard of any Lover fixing his love upon the
Body, so much as one short minute after the vanishing of the Soul? Did the
Corinthians court their Lais, when nothing was left them but her Body? Did
Demosthenes take a Journey, in kindness to her when she was dead? no, there was
nothing then desirable, besides Forgetfulness, Quem hominum propones, qui secum
perpetuo non def^r at manticam stercoris, and matulam urin^, etiam in venis?
pleriqu^ gratiosiores ventrem habent vermibus refertum. Multi multaeque
p^diculis scatent. Aliis Al^, aliis ped^s, pluribus o^ foetet. Cardan. de vita
propria. cap. 35.
and a Grave. Nothing then, but the Worms, was able to covet her Embraces.
Methinks that this one observable, (were it as patiently considered, as it is
easily understood,) should conduce extremely much to the spiritualizing of our
Affections. For if we love nothing that we can see of our dearest Friends, but
for the love of somewhat else which cannot possibly be seen, what better reason
can we give of it, than that the Part which is material is arrant Rottenness,
and Corruption, nor only not lovely, but loathsome too, when abstracted from the
part which is immaterial? and for this reason it is, that the zealousest Lover
of what is worldly, and who has nothing in him of Christ whereby to qualify
and enable him for Spiritual love, He (I say) would not be able to love the
Body above the Soul, if the Beauty of the Soul did not shine through the Body.
And if we do not only hear this, but lay it up in our Hearts too, nor only
assent to it as True, but consider it also as useful; it will be sure of great
moment, first for the raising of our Thoughts, and after that of our
Affections, from the things that are seen, which are temporal, to the things
that are not seen, which are eternal. And then believing, with S. Paul, (for
without such Belief, no such love can be imagined,) That our Life is hid with
Christ in God, we shall be still making thither, to find it out. Our Love of
Christ will not leave him, for being but gone out of our sight; but will rather
soar up, in pursuit of him as far as Heaven; and find him out pleading for us
at the right hand of God. And there beholding him, as he is, full of Grace, and
Truth, and unimaginable Glory, ( such as eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
has ever entered into the heart of man to conceive,) (...); What Loves! (...);
What Longings! (...); (...) (says Plotinus;) what Exiliencyes of Soul will
then transport us! (...); with what weightiness Plotin. l. 6. (...). (...). 1.
(...):
of Bliss shall we then be smitten! whilst we love him as he is Good, we shall
desire him as he is lovely; and never cease from desiring, till we enjoy him as
he is Blessed, I mean as the Fountain of Bliss and Glory.

If any man shall here ask, by what means he may (...); -- (...). Ib. ibid.
behold the unspeakable Beauty which is above, that so beholding he may be
ravished with the sweet violence of its Attractions; the answer to it may be
had from the same Plotinus. No man (says he) can see true Beauty, but by
casting the sight of his eyes behind him. And again (says that learned and
pious Heathen,) we are to (...). -- (...). Id. ibid.
fly from those Pleasures which are but common to us with Brutes, as once
Ulysses from the charms of Circe and Calypso, which if he had not wisely don,
he had never gone back to his native Country. And we must do exactly like him,
if we are bound for that Country from whence we came; and would fain see the
place of our first extraction. Now what but Heaven is our Country? there dwells
our Father; from thence we came; and what we commonly call our life, is indeed
our Pilgrimage; For (in the words of the Psalmist) we are but strangers upon
Earth. So as the way to go thither, from whence we came in a kind of Exile, is
to leave both our Horses and Feet behind us, says the Platonist. And swiftly
mounting up ourselves on the wings of Love, and Desire, guide we our course
with those Eyes, which are not without us, but within us; and with which if any
of us are not accustomed to see, it is not because we want such Eyes, but only
because we will not use them. Unless we are got into their Classis, in whom the
God of this 2 Cor. 4. 4.
world has blinded the minds; in which case only our eyes are darkened, that we
not only will not, but cannot use them. But this is so wilful a Disability,
that whatsoever are the occasions, we ourselves are the Causes of it. For when
a people are abandoned to vile affections, and severely given over to a
reprobate mind; it is because of their Prove. 1. 25, 29, 30.
refusing the fear of the Lord, and because of their not liking to retain God
in their Knowledge. ( Romans 1. 26, 28.) where S. Paul's expression is, Naturae
nostrae dur^ necessitas ex merito praecedentis Necessitatis exorta est.
Augustine. Retract. l. 1. c. 1.
(...) and (...), They did not think good to have God in their acknowledgment.
But till then, the Apostle tells us, the invisible things of God are clearly
seen, ( v. 20.) not indeed with those eyes we carry outwardly, in our Heads,
but with those other more Angelical, which we have inwardly in our Hearts.

To sum up all in a word. Our affections in themselves are indifferent things;
apt to be cleaving to any object, whether evil, or good, as they shall happen
to be directed, by carnal Appetite, or Reason. And if it were not in our power
to set our love upon the world, in despite of God's Grace; or to take it from
off the world, by making use of its assistance; the Apostle would never have
exhorted us, with so much earnestness as he does, To love neither the world,
nor the things 1 John 2. 15.
in the world. To set our Affections on things above, and ^ol. 3. 2, 6, 9, 10,
14, 15, 16.
not to set them on things below. To mortify in our selves our earthly
members. To cast off the old man, to put on the new. To cloth our selves with
Love as with the bond of Perfection. To let the Peace of God reign in our
Hearts. To afford the word of God an Habitation and Dwelling within our selves.
From all which together it is very natural to infer, that if we have not yet
wasted the Talent of Grace which God has given us, which undoubtedly of itself
is sufficient for us, and does competently arm us with Ghostly strength; we can
see, and we can love; and can delight in the Lord Jesus; and by consequence (if
we will,) we can escape the sad effects of being Anathema Maranatha.

But now it is time that after the first, we put in 2. Legere vel audire
Sanctorum vitas multum prodest ad Contemplationem, and ad amorem mundanum
depellendum. Gerson. de monte Contempl. c. 14.
practice a second instrument, whereby to raise up our Love to the Lord Jesus
Christ. That is, as much as in us lies, we must provoke our selves to
jealousy, and a religious Aemulation, by considering how others have loved our
Savior, to whom he could not be a Savior, with more obligingness than he is
ours. We find S. Paul was so inflamed with the love of Christ, (who yet, a
little while before, had been a virulent Blasphemer, and Hater of him,) and did
so long after a time of being admitted into his presence, that in comparison of
Christ, he counted all things but loss; and all things Philip. 1. 21.
Gain on the contrary, which might any way help him in his approach. That
though there is nothing in the world which Nature hates more, than the terrible
Face of a Dissolution, yet there was nothing which that Apostle did so much
Verse 23.
long for. Not at all for the love of a Dissolution, (which he detested in one
sense, whilst he desired it in another,) but for the love of that Christ from
whom he was absent in the Body, and could not so well be present with, as by
the favorable Help of a Dissolution. That indeed was his Cordolium, There it
was his shoo pinch't him. 'Twas his most passionate aspiring to be with Christ,
which made him groan so very earnestly under the Burden of his Mortality. He
did not groan to be unclothed, with any desire of being 2 Cor. 5. 2. 3, 4, 8.
naked, but as a necessary condition of being clothed upon with his House from
Heaven. It was for this, and this only, (his extreme love of Christ,) that he
did glory in Tribulations; that he rejoiced in his Sufferings; Romans 5. 3. Col.
1. 24. 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10 2 Cor. 4. 10.
that he took pleasure in Persecutions; and loved to bear in his Body the Dying
of the Lord Jesus. For this alone did S. John embrace his Banishment into
Pathmos; S. Stephen his very stones, and the men that threw them; S. Thomas his
saw, and S. Peter his Crucifixion. It was for this that S. Ignatius could bid
defiance to salvage Beasts; that Anacharsis brake forth with a kind of Triumph
into his Tunde; and that others being tormented, would not let go their
Sufferings; not so much as accept of such a thing as a Deliverance, when they
might innocently have had it for taking up. For this it was that Mary Magdalen
perfumed the Head of her blessed Lord, and kiss't his Feet with the same
affection, and also washed them with her Tears, and after wiped them with her
hair, administered to him of her Substance, closely followed him all along as
far as from Galile to Jerusalem, from thence to Golgotha, and from thence unto
his Grave too; forgetting the tenderness of her Sex, the tedious passages of
the way, the ghastly presence of the night, the waking jealousy of the Elders,
the barbarous violence of the Guard; and being afraid of just nothing, unless
of not finding Him, whom with the pantings of her Soul she did love and long
for. Would ye know now the reason of so much love, to the end it may affect you
with somewhat like it? She had been a great sinner, and He had saved her from
her Sins. She had been seized by seven Devils, and her dear Lord had
dispossess't her; Had had the members of an Harlot, which (by a more than
creative power) He had converted into a Temple. She had purchac't a place in
Hell, and He had given her an Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. Or to give
you the sum of all in our Saviors own words, She loved much, because much had
been forgiven her.

Now what Marbles rather than Men may we be worthily esteemed, if such Examples
as I have named cannot provoke us to aemulation? Seeing Christ is our Savior
as well as theirs, what should hinder us from loving him, as well as they? Can
we think so hardly of him, as to believe he did decree that such as they only
should love him? did he not love that we should love him, as well as S. Peter,
and S. Paul? And did he therefore necessitate our want of kindness? Did he
accordingly praedetermin the several means of our disaffection? or give us any
discouragements from being kind? Let us expostulate with ourselves, as God
himself was pleased to do with his People Israel. Has Jesus Christ been a
wilderness to any of us? or have we found him a withered Tree, which has not
afforded us any Fruit? What kind of Iniquity have we ever seen Jer. 2. ^, 9.
in him? Which part of his Covenant has he not punctually performed? Did he
ever yet forsake us, when we forsook him not first? What has he don unto us?
and wherein has he wearied us? He desires us, if he has, that we will
testify against him. Mic. 6. 3. Nay who was ever more beloved, than he was
pleased to love us? For whose sake has he don better, or suffered worse, than
he did for ours? Has he forgiven us lesser sins than Mary Magdalen was
forgiven? Why then should we requite him with lesser Instances of Affection? Or
if the Affectionateness of others will not provoke us to aemulation, and that
we have not any Impatience of coming after them in Loyalty, as much as Time;
yet let us try, by a third Endeavor, how to make up the defects of the first
and second.

Let us display before our selves the several excellencies of Christ; That so
if any spark of Love is now discoverable within us, we may by the Grace which
he has given us, blow it up into a Flame. To speak of his Loveliness in
Himself, would be the business of an Age; and therefore must not be set about
in this poor Remnant of an Hour. But yet a little let us consider his great
obligingness to us, because the powerfull'st (...) Piut. in Praecept. conjug.
Incentive to Love, is Love.

When Love was supposed by the old Poets, to have brought down their Gods from
Heaven to earth, it was the highest flight of fancy their Wits could take,
whereby to celebrate the virtue and Power of Love. But we can say, without the
help of either a Fable, or a Figure, that 'twas the love of our Souls, (I mean
the love of their safety,) which made the God of all Glory to bow the Heavens
and come down; to take upon him, not the likeness, but the essentials of a man;
yea to become a man of sorrows, an intimate acquaintance with Grief and
Miseries; and this in the Form of a poor servant, yea and in the disguise of a
sinner too. Sure if the Heavens had not bowed unto the Scepter of his Love; his
Love was so strong, it must needs have broke them. When he reflected upon the
Torments he was to suffer soon after for our Enjoyment, he showed the vehemence
of his Love by a (...); How am I streightn'd? how am I press't? how am I
terrified, Luke 12. 50.
and pained, till it be accomplished? He longed to drink Luke 22. 15. John 19.
28.
of the cup of Trembling. He thirsted after the Potion of Gall and Vinegar. He
gladly sucked the very dregs of the wine of Gods wrath. Not at all for its own
sake, because 'twas bitter, (for as such it made him wish, that the Cup might
pass from him,) but because our Redemption Matt. 26. 39. John 12. 27.
was sweeter to him, than any thing else could be bitter, by which 'twas
purchac^t. Is not he a rare Physician, for skill, and kindness, (and certainly,
if it be possible, more for kindness, than for skill,) who takes no more unto
Himself than the Rancidity of the Medicine, and leaves his Patient to enjoy the
pleasant effects of a Recoverie? Yet this was perfectly our case with the great
Physician of the Soul. He took the nauseousness of the Physic, which made for
the Cure of our Diseases. We were desperately sick, and He would needs swallow
the ugly Pills. That we might be purged from our filthiness, He would needs
drink up the filthy potion. Would have the noisomest Ingredients as it were
strained through His body, that we might have nothing to pledge him in, but the
sweet Restorative of his Blood. Now what can more excite our Love, than thus to
meditate upon His? As there is no better way whereby to keep up our Patience,
than by looking up to Him, who did endure with so much Patience, such
contradiction of Sinners against himself; so Heb. 12. 3.
is there no better way whereby to keep up our love; and to raise it higher,
than by reflecting much and often, on him who loved us in such a measure, (I
might have said so out of measure,) as to have hated even Himself in a John 12.
25. Prove. 13. 24.
comparative signification. For neither was his life so dear, nor was his Blood
so precious to him, but that he was prodigal of them both, when both might fall
to our Advancement.

Methinks there is nothing more expressive of God's obliging us to love him,
than that word of S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, (...), He SPARED Romans
8. 32.
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. We know his Son was Himself,
as to the unity of the Godhead; yet (...), He did not spare him. Should we not
think that Father cruel, and void of natural Affection, who would not spare his
own Son, no not his Beloved and only Son, no not when 'twas in his choice, and
his power to spare him? yet when Abraham, being commanded, was ready to
Sacrifice his Isaac, 'twas not his Cruelty, but his obedience, and that was the
fruit of such a Faith as did work by love. I mean a love of his God, and not at
all of his Isaac, whom (in that case) he was to prosecute with a Luke 14. 26.
Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
comparative Detestation. And in like manner when the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ could not so wisely show his Mercy for all aeternity upon us, as for a
time by showing none upon the Lord Jesus Christ; it was the highest and best
expression, not of his Cruelty, but of his Love. For he could never have spared
us, his adopted Sons, if he had spared that Son, who was his only-Begotten. Nor
could it be Cruelty even to Him, not to be spared by his Father, because
volenti non fit injuria, he was willing, yea and desirous, not to be spared for
a Time, rather than millions of men and women should certainly fail of being
spared to all aeternity. What then shall we return him for so astonishing a
Love as is now described? Shall we spare any thing that is ours, when it is
well-pleasing unto Him that we should not spare it? Suppose he would not be
pleased, unless we gave our firstborn for our Transgressions; the Mic. 6. 7.
fruit of our Body, for the sin of our Soul. Should we spare our own child in
so great a Case? How then comes it to pass, we are so sparing to our lusts? and
do so grumble to be parted from our Destroyers? Are those enemies of our Souls
so extremely dear to us, as that we cannot find in our hearts, either to send
them out of our Bosoms, or to deliver them up to a Crucifixion, no not in love
to that God, who sent his Son out of his Bosom, and delivered him to be
crucified, in love to us? Sure if our Souls were all Flint, yet being smitten
with such a love, they should yield some Fire. Or if our Hearts were all Iron,
yet one would think that such a lodestone should draw them up. Or however if
it will not, yet let us try a Fourth Engine for the winding up of our
Affections.

Let us shame our selves out of our Coldness and Indifferency 4.
to Christ, by duly reflecting upon our warmth to Inferior things. Not
inferior only to Him, but to the Dignity of our Nature. A Nature common to us
with Him, being considered in his Humanity; and by so much the worthier both of
our Care, and our Respect too, What Love do we bestow upon the vanity of the
Creature, to please a Palate, an Eye, an Ear, a Fancy? And shall we have so
much love to fasten upon the Surface, and outside of Dust, and Ashes, whilst so
little for a Savior, as to permit it to be a Doubt, if we have any for him, or
not? All the noble men of Greece would ly like dogs at the door of the
Corinthian Harlot, and pay obedience to Her Commands, notwithstanding they did
lead in the paths of Death. And shall a Question be made of our love to Christ,
whose very deformities make him fairer than the children of men? I mean his
wounds, and his Bruises, which should to us be more lovely than all the Roses
of Sharon, and the Lillies of the Valley, as having been wholly suffered by him
on our Account? Or shall a Question be ever made of our obedience to his
Commands, which if a man do, he shall live in them? yet Ezekiel. 20. 11.
how many Trifles do we love, and with what vehemence of Affection, of which
the best consequent is this, that we shall heartily repent our having loved
them? and what a madness, what a shame, what a disparagement and a discredit
must it needs be unto our Reason, to lay out the Treasures of our Love upon
those Allectives, which we cannot but hope we shall be heartily sorry for,
because we cannot but fear, that if we are not both truly and timely sorry, we
shall be hopelesly sorry when it is too late? but how much a greater madness is
it, to be so negligent and illiberal in our Affection toward Him, whom the
longer we shall love, we shall love so much the more? and shall have nothing to
repent of, but that we ever loved him less? and that withal it was so late,
before we loved him? shall we be able to say less of our Love to Christ, than
the Apostle S. Paul could say of his to his Corinthians? observe him speaking
to that unkind and ungrateful People. Most gladly will I spend, and be spent
for you, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. 'Twas strange on
their parts, that they should love so much the less, the more abundantly they
were loved. But somewhat more strange on His, that he should spend, and be
spent, and both most gladly, notwithstanding the discouragements of their
Return, which was of nothing but of Hatred for the excesses of his Goodwill.
Lord! how happy were it for us, had we but half so much love for the Lord Jesus
Christ, as that expression of S. Paul does amount unto? it is impossible for
our Savior, to love us the less, the more we love him. So very far he is from
that, that he did spend, and was spent, and both most gladly, for the love he
bare to us when we had none. And therefore the least that we can do, is both to
spend, and to be spent, to part with all that we have, and with all we are too,
for the love we bear him who so dearly loves us. It is an hard heart indeed,
which is so far from bestowing, that it will not repay, or return Affection. We
will spend and be spent for our darling sins, although they love us the less,
the more abundantly we love them; (for the more we still love them, the more
degrees of Damnation they threaten to us.) Let us therefore, even for shame,
have as much kindness for our Preserver, as we have had for these Authors of
our Destruction. If in a very free manner we have been spending upon our sins,
both to nourish, and to adorn them, with Food, and Raiment; Let us spend upon
our Savior in a more liberal proportion; and that in such manner, as he
directs us. Let us spend out of our Treasures, to feed and cloth him in his
members. Let us spend to pay him Homage, in as many of his members, as, under
Him, are our Heads. And let us be spent for him as freely, (like Epaphroditus,
and S. Paul,) both by watching, and fasting, by meditating, and praying, by
suffering pains, and persecutions, whenever he shall call, or expose us to
them; not by the leaving of our lives, for the paying unto Nature her common
Debt; but by the laying of them down, for the paying to our Savior our Debt of
Grace.

And as we may help to shame our selves into a love 5.
of the Lord Jesus, by reflecting on our love to inferior things; so our love
to the Lord Jesus, just as our love to other things, is very apt both to be
bred, and to be very much nourish't by conversation. For Ignoti nulla Cupido.
We cannot possibly desire him, whilst we are ignorant of his beauty: And of
that we must be ignorant, whilst we are strangers to his converse. So that the
reason why most Professors are wont to love Christ so little, does seem
especially to be This, their having so little of his Acquaintance. Enough of
that will so charm us, as to beget in us a loathing of all that makes a
separation 'twixt Him and us. Unto how many things and persons are many men
passionately addicted, if not absolutely enslaved, for which they can give us
no better reason, than that of their having been wonted to them? let us but
wont our selves as much unto an heavenly conversation, and we shall find it
just as harsh to be weaned from it. Hence it follows that we must read, and not
only read, but strictly search into the Scripture, not only resting in its
literal, but also diving into its moral, and soaring up too into its mystical
significations; whereby to acquaint ourselves thoroughly with the Lord Jesus
Christ, and more and more to comprehend the great variety of his Perfections.
And then to the end that his Perfections may so affect us as they deserve, nor
only float in our Brains, but deeply sink into our Bowels, we must imprint them
within our selves by mental Prayer, and Meditation. To each of which we must be
resolute to be so wonted and inured, as not to be able without regret to admit
of any long Avocation from them.

Nor can we pardonably excuse our gross neglects of conversing with Jesus
Christ, by alleging our Inability of taking delight in his converse. For
conversation must be made easy, ere it can possibly be delightful. And the
easiness of any thing must come by use. First it is the diligence of our
converse by which we come to love Christ, and then 'twill be natural for our
Love to make us delight in his converse. It argues a shallowness of Reason, and
a great want of perspicacity, to think there are not any Pleasures upon the
Mount of Contemplation, (as Gerson calls it,) because we cannot yet perceive
them at the Foot of the Hill, or in the Act of contending to climb up thither.
It Is as great weakness as to conclude against the Pleasure of reaping a goodly
Harvest, from the labor of Cultivation, and charge of seed. Or to infer there
is no contentment in inhabiting a pleasant and well built house, from the cost
of the Materials, and Care of putting them together. Nemo Montis Cacumen uno
faltu conscendit. The Hill of Sion is a fair place, and Mount Tabor is a
delicious one. But we must not think to reach the Top of either at a Leap. For
as the lower and more earthy our pleasures are, they must needs be attained
with the greater ease; so we must use the greatest patience, and we must take
the greatest pains, to overcome the steep ascent of the highest pleasures. All
the Duties of a Christian (I mean the Acts, and not the Habits,) are so many
steps and degrees to the Hill I speak of: Which Acts of Duty, whilst they are
yet but Acts only, will cost the natural man Pain, and make him see he has
need of patience. But after a competent tract of Time, as soon as the Acts have
been so numerous as to produce their respective Habits, the Acts arising from
those Habits will requite the said Patience with ease and pleasure. Shall I
exemplify what I say by any one important duty, which at first gives us
Trouble, and after rewards us with Delight? I cannot instance in a fitter than
that of Prayer, because it is one of the chiefest means, whereby to enter, and
to continue, and to complete our conversation with him that bought us. How many
are there in the world who turn their backs on this Duty, upon no better Ground
than their erroneous Imagination, that it is of no use to pray, till they can do
it with Devotion? A way of reasoning as irregular, as if a man who is very
cold, should conclude it wholly useless to make a Fire till he is warm. Want we
Devotion in our Prayers? we are to pray for Devotion; and Devotion is apt to
grow from our customary Praying for other things. From when in spite of our
Indifferency, and perhaps our Averseness to such a Duty, we use the Empire of
our Wills in the work of Prayer; and, casting our selves upon our Knees, are
very resolutely bent to perform the Duty, (how much soever against the stream
of our Inclinations;) God will reward our Resolution, by turning our Labor
into delight; and so will make it as great a Pleasure, in time to come, as it
has been in time passed, a self-denial. If any man shall here ask, how we can
possibly converse with things invisible, or have a V. Espens. de Languore
Spirituali. c. 2. p. 977. Respondeant qus in libro Experien^ia Quaestionis
Solutionem legerunt. Frequenter ego ipse, (quod fateri non verecundor)
maximoque in initio Conversionis, Cord disrus, and frigid^, etc. Bern. super
Cant. Sermon. 14. Confer Huberti Scuteputaei c. 14. p. 2082. cum S. Bernardi lib.
de Deo diligendo. p. 951, 952, 953.
Languor after him whom we never saw; let them answer (says S. Ierom) who have
read the answer to it in the Book of Experience, and have not been able to
forbear crying out with David, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in
Mesech! O that I had wings, to fly away, and be at rest! my soul is athirst for
the living God: And even pants after Him, as the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks. O when shall I appear before the Presence of God! Devout S.
Bernard himself confess't, that in the beginning of his Conversion, he was
frequently of an hard and frigid Heart; who yet being accustomed to converse
with Christ by Grace, could not but thirst with great impatience to enjoy him
also in his Glory. Yea that love which of necessity does begin in the Flesh,
may (says he) by Degrees be well consummated in the Spirit. For (not to
mention the Apud Bartholomaeum de Martyribus, fol. 93, 94. Gustus, Desideria,
Satietas, Ebrietas, Securitas, Tranquillitas, Septimi vero nomen soli Deo
innotescit.
seven degrees which are assigned by Ubertinus, as being too nice, to be truly
useful,) First it is natural for a man as he is carnal and depraved, to love
himself above all things, and above all things for himself. Next when he see's
that of himself he cannot be, or be happy, and that he depends upon his maker,
not more for his being, than for his bliss, he then begins to love God, though
yet it is only for himself, and his private Interest. But when in time, upon
occasion of his several exigences and wants, he is compelled to seek God for
several comsorts and supplies; his conversation with the Almighty becomes so
customary, and natural (by his frequenting God's house, by his addresses to God
in Prayer, by getting knowledge out of God's word, and by admiring him in his
works,) that what was hitherto but easy, does now grow pleasant. And so at last
having tasted how good and gracious his Maker is, he does advance to love God,
for God's sake only: So as nothing does now remain, but that degree of
perfection in loving God, at his being bid to enter into the joy of his Lord,
when it is for God's sake alone that he loves Himself.

And though it is hard, if not impossible, whilst we Amor quo aliquis amat Deum
propter Temporalia, contumeliosus est Deo. Temporalia qui sic* amant,
praeferunt ei, propter quod enim unumquodque amatur, illud* magis amatur.
August. de Civ. Dei.
are in this world, to love ourselves for God only, and not at all for
ourselves; yet it is a duty indispensable, to love Him especially for himself,
and far above the consideration that it is our interest to love him. The Reason
of it does stand in This, that whosoever loves God not especially for God, but
more especially for himself, does by a necessary consequence love himself above
God. Because in such a case as that, God is only one of the objects, and
himself the final cause, or the end of love. For if God were that end, he would
rather love himself for God, than God for himself. And that for which we love
any thing, must needs be loved by us the most of any, because it is the very
cause, (meritorious, or final,) for which we love it. For, propter quod
unumquodque tale, and illud magis, is the maxim made use of by S. Austin
himself upon this occasion. And therefore he that loves God, not so much for
Gods sake, as for the sake of somewhat else, which either comes from, or
depends upon him, (such as the comforts of this life, or the Promises of the
next,) does indeed but use God, and enjoy the Creature. And how much soever he
may appretiate, or put a value in his judgment on what he uses, yet no doubt he
loves most what he most injoyes.

Bonaventure made it a wonder, how 'twas possible Vide Bonaventurae Tom. 7.
opusc. par. 3. sub initium Amatorii.
for a man, not to love that Creator with all his Heart, who when he might have
left him without a being, or have made him either a Toad, or any other sort of
Animal, was rather pleased to make him capable, to understand, and to love, and
enjoy his Maker? yea and when man had even forfeited all his Interest in God,
by an abuse of those Favors conferred upon him, was farther pleased to
reconcile and appease himself, not by accelerating our misery, but by
providing for our Amendment? suppose (says Bonaventure) thou Siquis amisisse^
oculum, quantum amaret cum qui sibi cum restitueret? -- nec minus amandus qui
cum ab initio dedit, and qui da^um conservavit, etc. Id. Ibid.
had but lost one of thine Eyes, which is a very small part of thy outward
man; could thou abstain from loving Him with a perfect love, who should not
only find it out, but put it again into thine Head too? and not only so, but
make it as useful to thee as ever? How then can thou forbear to love the Lord
Jesus Christ with an equal Love, who, when thou had lost thy whole self,
(both Soul, and Body,) had both the kindness, and the skill, to find thee out,
and to restore thee, and to make thee (as much as ever) a Vessel of Honor and
Immortality? Certainly nothing can make thee able not to love him for himself,
and with all thy soul, unless thy want of converse and Acquaintance with him.
For as the Fire of thy Affection, if fed with any unclean Fuel, produces
nothing with its ardour but smoke and stentch; so if the fuel it feeds upon
shall be pure, and spiritual, it will yield both a bright Cum amorisnatura ea
sit, amantem in amatum transformare, is plane efficeris, quale est illud quod
amas. Bonav. Amator.
and refreshing Flame. And if the love converts the Lover into the Nature of
the thing that is dearly loved, it is plain that such as is the object, such
must also be the Act, and the Agent too. To fix thy love upon the world, is
ipso facto to be a worldling. To fix thy love upon Christ, is ipso facto to be
a Christian. And to be really a Christian, is to be such a one as Christ. For
both he that Sanctifies, and they that are Sanctified are all of one. And
thence He is not ashamed to call them Brethren. ( Heb. 2. 11.) Nay he is not
ashamed to own them, in a more intimate Relation, than that of Brethren. For by
virtue of that unitive and inebriating love, which our mystical Theologists are
wont to speak John 6. 56. and John 15. 4, 5. 1 John 3. 24. and 1 John 4. 13,
15, 16.
of, real Christians and Christ do interchangeably inhabit the one the other.
They do dwell, and abide, not only with, but in each other. They in Him, and He
in Them, as both Himself and S. John (that Disciple of his Bosom) do often assure
us. And since it is so that our Bodies are called his Members, 1 Cor. 6. 15.
Sure our Souls cannot want much of being transfused into Himself. For S. Paul
says expressly, (to show how Christ is to the Christian, just as the Bridegroom
to the Bride,) that as the Husband and the wise are made one flesh, so he that
is joined to the Lord is ipso facto one spirit. 1 Cor. 6. 17. The Apostles word
is, (...), he that is caemented, or solder'd, ferruminated, or glued; that is
to say, he that cleaves to the Lord Jesus Christ, as fast as one board of Firr
cleaves to another to which it is glued, (in so much that you may burn them, but
can never break them asunder,) (...), He is one and the same spirit, as his own
Blessed spirit is pleased to phrase it, that is, he minds the same things which
his beloved Lord minds; desires the same things that his Lord desires; Injoyes
and suffers after the measure that his Lord suffers and Injoyes. In a word, he
has such an union, as is expresst by an Identity; since he that cleaves to
the Lord, is not only said to have, but to B E one spirit. S. Bernard speaks it
S. Bernard. de Deo diligendo. p. 953. quam confer. cum p. 958.
more than once in a very bold Paraphrase. Divino ebriatus amore animus,
oblitus sui, factusque sibi ipsi tanquam vas perditum, totus pergit in Deum,
and adhaerens Deo, unus cum eo spiritus fit. The mind (says he) being drunk
with the love of God, and grown forgetful of itself, yea wholly lost unto
itself, (and all its secular concernments,) does so Nam alibi dicitur ex toto
animae se exponere, and transire in Deum. ut p. 954.
pass over into God, as to become one spirit: not only one in itself, but one
with God.

It Is true the Father there speaks touching that last degree of Love, whereby
the Soul is so transported with the converse of its beloved, as to be emptied
out of itself, and in a manner quite annulled. That God in Christ may be All in
Te quodammodo perdere, omnino non sentire Teipsum, and a Teipso exinaniri, and
pene annulluri, coelestis est conversationis. id. Ibid. p. 953.

Omnem tunc humanam affectionem necesse erit a semetipsu liquescere, atque in
Dei peuitus transfundi voluntatem, alioquin quomodo omnia in omnibus erit Deus,
si in homine de homine quicquam supererit? -- Animas immersa^ ex toto credimus
immenso illi Pelago aeterni luminis. ib. p. 954.


All, which how can he be, (says the holy Father,) if any thing of man be left
in man? If the Souls of the just are not drowned and drunk up in the fathomless
Sea of Aeternal light; If humane affections do not dissolve and melt away from
themselves, and become so transfused into the sole will of God, as to be like a
drop of water in a great quantity of wine, wherein departing from it self, it
wholly puts on the color and taste of wine; or as an Iron red-hot does make a
defection from itself, by putting on the whole Nature and Form of fire; if (I
say) it is not thus after the general Resurrection, in what sense can it be
said (and said it is by S. Paul,) that 1 Cor. 15. 28.
God, in that day, shall be All in All? But in the place before cited from 1
Cor. 6. 17. S. Paul does not speak (however S. Bernard apply's his words,)
touching the union we shall enjoy after the general Resurrection, through the
perfection of our love to the Lord Jesus Christ. For when he says, he that
cleaves to the Lord is one spirit, he seems to mean no other cleaving, than
was commanded even by Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. where to * fear and * serve God, is
to cleave unto him. And so we are properly said to cleave unto the Lord Jesus
Christ: when the Caement of our union is an indissoluble Affection, and such an
obstinate Resolution not to depart from his Commandments, that Death it self
cannot separate 'twixt us and them. This alone is the Love which Saints are
capable of on Earth, and here is exacted under the penalty of Anathema
Maranatha. The other is competent to none, but Saints Beatified in Heaven. Sic
affici, Deificari est, in the bold Dialect Ubi supra.
of S. Bernard. This Love is our Duty, whereof that other is our Reward. And
therefore this is commanded, but that is promised. For this, we are praised;
for that, admired. This is difficultly had in a state of Grace; whilst that we
cannot but have in a state of Glory. For as this does not expire, but rather is
perfected into that; so, by the Tenor of the New Covenant, it does entitle us
to its Fruition. And therefore stoutly let us resolve, so to cleave in our
Affection to the Lord Jesus Christ, and so to express our cleaving to him by
keeping close to his Commandments, as that before we Rev. 22. 14.
have possession, we may not fail to have a Right to the Tree of Life. That in
the day when the Lord Jesus shall 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, when the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the Heavens be shrunk up like a
scrowl of Parchment, when every Valley shall be filled up, and every Mountain
brought low, we may be able to appear before Isa. 40.
the Judge with great boldness; and whilst they that would not love the Lord
Jesus in sincerity, shall send forth weepings, and wailings, and gnashings of
Teeth, (all alluded to in the sentence of Anathema Maranatha,) we may be called
to bear a part in the quire of Angels, and with the ten thousand times ten
thousand Rev. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13.
which are round about the Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has redeemed
us to God, unto whom he has made us both Kings and Priests, we may never rest
from singing with unimaginable delight, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, to
Him that lives forevermore.

THE INTRODUCTION TO The Third Part.
WHAT has hitherto been praemis'd touching Christ's Love to us, and ours to
Him, cannot better be succeeded (in point of pertinence or use,) than by that
which now follows touching our Love to one another. A subject which is the
rather to have its place in this Volume, because our Love to one another is
recommended to us in Scripture, as much as God's love to us, and ours to God.
And as that which does make us most like our Maker: 'Twas recommended * (...).
Philo. Judaeus (...) p. 557.
to us by Christ in his last Will and Testament, and that as one of the richest
Legacyes that he was able to bequeath us. The ever-blessed Testator (as the
Author to the Hebrews does fitly Heb. 9. 16.
call him) being to take his last leave in a farewell Sermon to his Disciples,
and having prepared them with an assurance that the time of his leaving them
was at hand, (to make them ponder what he was speaking, and lay it up as the
speech of a Dying man,) And being resolved not to leave them John 13. 33.
without some Legacy, some special Token of his Solicitude, both for their
present Consolation, and future Bliss, Peace (says he) I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, not as the world, a few good chap. 14. v. 27.
words in Civility, or at the most, a kind wish; and therefore let not your
heart be troubled at the sudden departure of my Person; for, as a supplement of
That, I leave you my cordial and solid Peace.

But knowing well, that His peaee could never quietly rest with them, in case
of War and Division amongst themselves, and being not able to indear them with
a greater Testimony of His love, than by obliging them strictly to the constant
loving of one another, He therefore bequeathed this Royal Precept (as a
previous part of their Patrimony, whereby to fit them for all the rest,) That
their reciprocal kindness should be like His; that they should all be so
affected, as they had Him for an Example; that just as He had John 13. 15.
been to All, they should be All to one another; for so runs the Instrument
whereby he conveyed his good Pleasure to them, a new Commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another, even as I have loved verse 34*
you.

But then to gain their Acceptance of his Bequest, and their religious
Execution of what he commanded them to observe, He showed them the value of
such a Legacy, as did accordingly tie them to such a Love.

(...); etc. By this all men shall know ye Verse 35.
are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

In which words of our Savior, there are two things supposed, and a third is
Taught.

First of all it is supposed, that All to whom the words are spoken, either
are, or ought to be Christ's Disciples. And that not only in profession, but in
singleness of heart; not only verbally, and by name, but very really such. This
is easily collected from three words in the Text, (...) Ye are my Disciples.

It is secondly supposed, that such as are really Christ's Disciples, (not in
hypocrisy, but in deed,) ought to endeavor to make it known to all THE WORLD,
that they are such. Their light must shine before men, by their Procope and
Growth in the SCHOOL of Christ. This is apparent from two words more, (...),
All men shall know it. And were it not so in good earnest, the Master would
never have directed them (as here he does) to the infallible means of it is
attainment. For

We are thirdly to observe the important Lesson which here is Taught, (and
which is now of all Lessons the most worth learning, especially if we reflect
on the Times we live in,) by what certain (...), or way of proof, we may make
men to know we are Christ's Disciples. This is delivered in the first and last
words of the Text, (...), they shall know it even by this, (...), If ye bear
love to one another.

From these three parts there are as many Propositions, into which the whole
Text is very naturally resolved.

That all who are Auditors of Christ, or all to 1.
whom he is revealed, do stand obliged by that means, to be really his
Disciples.

That their Discipleship, if it be real, will be 2.
eminent also, and exemplary, so far forth as to be known, and taken notice of
by All.

That the surest Testimony and Proof of sincere 3.
Discipleship under Christ, and the principal Instance or effect wherein its
eminence does consist, and that which by Christ is here pronounced as an
unerrable mark or Criterion of it, is this Divine Qualification of mutual Love.

And this alone must be the Subject upon which I am to fasten the following
part of my Design; because it seems to comprehend (I say not only the prime,
but) whole Importance of the Text; as we may judge by comparing the
proposition, with the fourfold Emphasis which may be put upon the words.

For first our Savior does not say, Men shall guess or conjecture that ye are
mine, but (...), they shall know it. Nor secondly does he say, Your
Discipleship shall be known as a special Secret, to very few, but as the Sun in
his Meridian; (...), All men shall know it. Nor thirdly does he say, All men
shall know ye seem to be, by a Disguise, but (...), that ye are my Disciples,
without a fiction. Last of all, he does not say, Your Discipleship shall be
known by such deceivable Tokens, as your Assembling your selves in the House of
Prayer, your crying Matt. 7. 22, 23.
Lord Lord, your doing Chrysostom. Hom. 71. in John.
wonders in my name, your being Orthodox in Judgment, and jumping together in
Opinions; but by This it shall be known, as by a Token which never fails,
(...), If ye have Love for one another.

CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. THE Proposition to be considered, though last in order, is first in
dignity. And being as the Heart of the whole Body of Christianity, deserves to
be (like the Heart in the body of man) (...), The first thing that lives, and
the Aristot.
last that dies in our consideration. For can there be any thing in the world
of greater consequence than This, which gives us a Token whereby to know we
have an Interest in Christ? and such a sure token too, as cannot possibly
deceive us? yet even such is that Love, of which I am now about to treat, and
which if we take into our hearts, as well as into our memories, It will (I
doubt not) carry with it that peace of Conscience, which is to all that feed on
Prove. 15. 15.
it, an endless Feast.

Sect. 2. But since there is hardly any word that is more equivocal than this,
I must Anticipate an Objection, by showing what Love it is which our Savior
meant, when he appointed it for the measure, by which his Scholars are to be
scanned.

Sect. 3. And to show the better what it is, I must first show what it is not.
For all sorts of men pretend to Love; not only Christians, but the professed
Enemies of Christ; and the nominal as well as real Christians. Nay in one kind,
or other, they all have Love in their possession; and many times the worst in
the greatest measure. For greater Love than this (our John 15. 13.
Savior tells us) there is none, that a man lay down his life for his friend.
And plentiful store of this Love we commonly find (in our reading) amongst the
Heathen. Their great (...). Arist. ^th. l. 9. c. 8. p. 887.
Philosophers did prescribe it, and not a few of their people obey^d the
Precept.

Sect. 4. To save a Friend ready to perish, we find Episthenes in Xenophon
Xenoph. in exp. Cyr^. l. 7. p. 319.
ready to lay down his life. And such was the love of Artapates to Cyrus
Junior, that he perfectly Idem ib. l. 1. p. 209.
hated his own life, as soon as Cyrus had quitted His. Nor Val. Max. l. 4. c.
7. p. 128.
would Lucius Pet^onius outlive his friend. Id. ib. p. 127
Pomponius and Laetorius dyed a couple of Martyrs for Caius Gra^chus. And Titus
Id. b.
Voluminous followed Lucullus into his grave. Ib. p. 129.
Terentius preferr^d the life of Brutus by many degrees before his own. And
Lib. 7. c. 8.
Valerius tells us of diverse servants, who for the saving of their Masters,
destroyed themselves. What transcendent lovers of one another were Q. Curt. l.
7. p. 211.
Menedemus and Hipsides, Xenoph. (...) l. 5. p. 446.
Cleonymus and Archid^mus, In exp. Cy^i. l. 5. p. 304, 305.
Agasias and Xenophon, Diod. Sicul. l. 16. p. 448.
Bagoo^ and Ment^k, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 34.
Hippoclides and Polystratus, Tacit. Aunal. 16. p. 331.
Ascl^piodotus and Soranus? 'Twere easy to name as many Ex Polyb. l. 10. p.
582. Tacit. Hist. l. 4. p. 491. Diodor. Sic. l. 17. p. 518. Q. Curt. l. 10.
316. Val. Max. l. 9. ^. 9. p. 283. Aristot. eth. l. 9. c. 11. p. 912. Homer.
Il. l. 13. p. 250. and l. 6. p. 109. Odys^. d. p. 44.
more, as would make a man weary to heart them named. Nor do I speak only of
Couples, but of Societies, and Sects; whose astonishing Love to one another
has raised them Monuments in story, will last as long as the Sun and Moon.
Such as the Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6. p. 50.
Cimbri and Celtiberians in Valerius Maximus; the Xen. exp. Cy. l. 1. p. 212.
friends of Cyrus in Xenophon; the Thucid. l. 2. p. 124, 125.
Athonians in Thucydides; the Polyb. l. 2. p. 147.
Megalopolitans in Polybius; the men of Val. Max. l. 6. c. 6. Live. l. 21. c.
14. l. 23. c. 20.
Saguntum and Petellia; the many S^lduni apud Aquitanos. Societas Hunnorum.
Sodales Antonini. Tauri apud Scytha^. Fratres Arvales. (...) apud Aegyptios.
Alex. ab Alex. Dier. Ge^ial. l. 1. c. 26. p. 74, 75.
Societies reckoned up by Alexander ab Alexandro, who had all things in common
of every kind, and as well their Sufferings, as their Enjoyments. Insomuch that
if one did lose a limb by any accident, all the rest were to cut off theirs,
that in every Circumstance of Adversity, they might all be equal, and alike.

Sect. 25. Thus there were multitudes of men who loved each other unto the
Death; and some beyond it, as far as Diodor. Sic. l. 4. p: 266 Talis etiam
(...), occidentalis Frisiae Rex ultimus, a Carolo magno profligatus.
Hell. Yet very far were those Pagans from being known by such love, to have
been either the Disciples of Christ, or Moses. 'Twas little better than the
love of King Porus his Elephant, and other generous beasts, which have exposed
their own lives, to save their Rider's. There is a Homer. Odyss. ^. p. 251.
256. (...). Id. Iliad. ^. p. 322. (...). Vid. Plin. l. 8. c. 42. Solin. c. 47.
Virgil. l. 11. Tranquillum in vita Caesaru. Aelian. de animal. l. 10. c. 17.
natural kindness and Generosity, which is common to men with the meanest
Creatures; and so has nothing of affinity with what is intended in the Text.

Sect. 6. Nay if we reflect upon our selves, upon whom the name of Christ is
called, we must not imagine we have attained unto that excellent Love which is
here required, because we find (upon inquiry) that we are loving to our
friends; or because we have often our Isa. 1. 13.
solemn meetings; or stand Sariaster adversus patrem cruenta conspiratione
foedus fecit. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 11. p. 287.
fast to one another, as drivers-on of a design. For as there are many sorts of
love which are not rational, and pure, as not proceeding from a right
principle; so there are many things too which are but the Counterfeits of love,
and yet are called by that Name, because they look extremely like it. The
Devils themselves have their combination; are still at Luke 11. 18.
agreement among themselves; but from a principle of Policy, and not of Love.
Even Rebels, and Schismatics, (the greatest enemies of Church, and state,)
are wont to Psalm. 56. 6.
hold together, and keep themselves close; but from a principle of Faction, and
not of Love. We read of Luke 23. 12.
Pilate, and Herod, that they were solemnly made friends; but from a principle
of Hatred to an innocent Christ, not of love to one another. The world is full
of such Merchants, as keep a good correspondence, and are punctual Dealers with
one another; but from a principle of Traffic, and not of true love. The
friends of Ceres and Bacchus, have their times of Vide Philonem (...). p. 693.
Feasting and good-fellowship, their times of enjoying the Creature Comforts;
but from a principle of looseness, and not of Love. Many love the merry meeting,
but not the men whom they meet. Or if they are Lovers of the men, it is from a
principle of Nature, and not of Grace. It being a mere Self-love, which makes
them so to love Others. Nay farther yet, a man may do the very things which are
the principal offices and works of Love, for which (not his Love, but) only his
vanity is to be thank't. He may bestow his whole substance to feed the poor,
and yet may perish for want of Love. May dare to dye a pretended Martyr, by
giving his body to be burnt, and yet may be frozen for want of Love. So I
collect from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 3.

Sect. 7. It concerns us therefore to know, what love this is, (having seen
what it is not,) by which a man may be known to be Christ's Disciple. And the
shortest way to know this, is to reflect a little while on the Love of Christ.
For such as was his Love to us, such must ours be to Him, and to one another.
We have his word for it in several places. If ye keep my John 15. 10, 12. chapter
13. 34.
Commandments, ye shall abide in my love. And this is my Commandment, that ye
love one another, even as I have loved you. Now we know the Love of Christ was
both Extensively, and Intensively great; and proposed (in both respects) not
more to our Wonder, than Imitation. First it was so Extensively Great, as as
that it reached to all in general, (1 Timothy 4. 10.) to every man in particular,
( Heb. 2. 9.) not to a world of men only, as that may signify a part, but to
all the whole world, without exception, (1 Ioh. 2. 2.) without exception of the
ungodly, (Romans 5. 6.) without exception of enemies, (Romans 5. 10.) without
exception of them that perish, (2 Pet. 2. 1.) And so Intensively great was the
Love of Christ, that it made him empty himself of glory, and become of Phil. 2.
7.
no reputation; Isa. 53. 3.
it made him a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; indeed an Intimate
Acquaintance of the most heartbreaking grief, that ever was suffered on this
side Hell. It put him upon the vassalage of John 13. 5.
washing and wiping his servants feet; It made him Phil. 2. 8.
obedient unto the Death, and to seek the lives of his Enemies, whilst his
enemies sought his; He in order to their safety, as they in order to his Ruin.
It made him once our Priest after the order of Aaron, and our Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck. For us he descended into Hell; for us he
ascended into Heaven; for us he makes intercession at the right hand of God,
Romans 8. 34.

Sect. 8. Thus Christ, as our Master, has set us a Copy of His Love, to the
end that we, as his Disciples, might do our utmost to take it out. Our Love
must be so extensive, that it must reach even to All. It must reach unto our
Enemies, and of them to all sorts too; not only to those without the pale of
the Church, (who do us little or no hurt) even Jews, Turks, Infidels, and
Heretics, for whom we pray once a year in our English Liturgy; but to our
Crueller sort of Enemies within the Church, our particular Persecutors and
Slanderers, for whom we pray in our Liturgy three times a week.

Sect. 9. Indeed the Hypocrites of the Synagogue did constrain the word
Neighbor to signify nothing but a Matt. 5. 43.
Friend; esteeming it Godliness, and Zeal, to hate an Enemy. And some there are
even in Christendom, who feigning God from all Eternity to have hated more than
he loved, think they acquit themselves fairly (and look upon it in themselves
as a God-like property) if they are much less inclinable to Love, than Hatred.
They know they need not love more, than the Savior of the world was pleased to
dye for; and easily taking it for granted, that he dyed only for some, they
think they need not exhibit their love to all.

Sect. 10. Such men must be minded that even our Enemies are to be treated as
one sort of friends, and that the Scripture-word Neighbor extends to both.
'Twas so extended even by Exodus 23. 4, 5. Lev. 19. 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 23. 7.
Moses; and so by Prove. 25. 21, 22. Vide Philonem (...). p. 550, 551.
Solomon; if by Moses, and Solomon, much more by Christ; who having first
commanded us to love our Enemies, to bless them that curse us, to oblige them
that hate us, and to pray for them that are spiteful to us, gives us his reason
in these words, because Luke 6. 35. (...). Hiereci. (...) (...). p. 70.
God also is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil. Which is as much as to
say, that in the Extension of our kindness, we must be Imitators of God. For so
he tells us in the very next words, Verse 36.
be ye merciful as your Father in Heaven is merciful. And when a Jew asked the
Question, Luke 10. 20.
Who is my Neighbor? Our Savior answered him by the Parable of a Jew and a
Samaritan, not of a Jew and a Jew. Whereby we are given to understand, that all
are our Neighbors who stand in Need. Let that need be what it will, a need of
our Pardon, or of our Purse, we must not only forgive them, in case they reduce
us to want of Bread, but we must give them our Romans 12. 20.
Bread too, in case they want it. We must pray for them, and pity them, and
labor to melt them to reconcilement; must do them all the good offices within
our power, excepting such as are apt to hurt them; we must show them such
favors as may help to raise them out of the Pit, not such as may sink them the
faster in; we must not be so rudely civil, so discourteously complaisant, as to
Lev. 19. 17.
suffer their sins to be upon them without disturbance, but must rather oblige
them with our Ibid.
rebukes; lest for want of such favors they go down quietly to destruction.
For so runs the precept, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, (on the
contrary) thou shall in any wise rebuke thy brother, and shall not suffer Sin
upon him. Although a man be so scandalous as to be shut out of our 2 These. 3.
14.
company, by the direction of the Apostle, yet the same Apostle tells us, we
must not count him as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother, 2 These. 3. 15.

Sect. 11. And from hence we are to argue a minori ad majus. For if our Love
must extend thus to Enemies, how much more to such as are friends? friends to
our Persons, and to our God too? The love of Christ had degrees, and so must
ours. As the Apostle tells us of Christ, he is the Savior of all, but
especially of 1 Timothy 4. 10. Gal. 6. 10.
them that believe; so the very same Apostle does also tell us of our selves,
we must do good unto all men, but especially to them who are of the household of
faith. And even of those that are faithful, a primary care is to (...). etc.
Clem. Romans in ^p. ad Cor p. 70. ^ Matt. 15. 24, 26.
be taken for them that are of our own Country. It was not only for Gods sake
that David was kind unto Jerusalem, but for his Brethren and Companions sake he
prayed to God for her, and did his utmost to do her good, (Psalm. 122. 8.) Our
Savior being himself an Israelite, did prefer the lost sheep of the House of
Israel. How kind was Moses to His Countrymen, when he became for their sakes
extremely cruel unto Himself? Lord (says he) if thou will, forgive their Sin;
and if not, blot me I pray thee out of the book which thou have written, Exodus
32. 32. As if salvation it self could hardly please him, unless his Countrymen
might have it, as well as He. Nor was the passion of S. Paul inferior to it,
who for the love he bare unto His Countrymen, whom he calls his brethren and
kinsmen according to the flesh, was ready to wish himself accursed, and utterly
c^ut off from the body of Christ. (Romans 9. 2.) As if he cared not what became
of him, so that his Countrymen might be saved.

Sect. 12. But many times our nearest Countrymen may become our worst
Neighbors; and, in respect of their Religion, dwell farthest off too. To a man
born in Iudaea, a good Samaritan ought to be dearer, than an hard-hearted Jew.
2 Cor. 11. 26.
S. Paul, and the Christians 1 These. 2. 14.
of Thessalonica, were never used with more rigor, than by the men of their
own Country. And our Saviors words are very remarkable, that except it be in
his own Country, a Prophet is never without honor, (Matt. 13. 57.) But let
him be in his own Country, and he has no honor at all, (John 4. 44.) Christ
himself had least there; and there he did the fewest Miracles; but that he did
not more there than in other places, the only Cause was their unkindness.

Sect. 13. This is therefore the firmest Bond whereby to hold us together in
peace and love, not that we are of one Country, but that we are of one Quanto
dignius ^rarres and dicuntur and habentur, qui unum patrem Deum agnoverunt, qui
de uno utero ignorantia ejusdem ad unam lucem expaveriut veritatis? Tert. Apol.
c. 39.
Christ; And can say of our selves, with better reason, than it was anciently
said of the Lomnini, that in all our bodies there is no more than one soul; or
(to express it with S. Paul) that we have all but one Faith, one Baptism, one
Spirit, one Lord, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all,
and in us all. (Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.) If we will manifest to the world, and prove
convincingly to our selves, that we are really the Followers and Friends of
Christ. It must be by a burning and shining Love. A love of men, and not of God
only. And a Love of men it must be, in which the true Love of God is not
excluded, but presupposed. Not a love of our selves only, (condemned so much by
the 2 Timothy 3. 2.
Apostle) but a Love of others as our selves; if not as much, yet as well; if
not in that measure, yet in the very same manner, in which we are obliged to
love our selves. And it must be Dilectio Amoebaea, a mutual Love; a giving and
taking of affections. Indeed rather than fail, we must pledge them in Love, who
do begin to us in hatred. But to make up such a Love as is especially here
required, (such as with which the blessed Apostles did once adorn both the
Doctrine and the Discipleship of Christ,) It must be (...), Love interchanged
with one another. For in how many things soever there may be a Jam. 1. 26.
seemingness of Religion, S. James assures us that it is verse 27.
Purity does consist in these two; the relief of the needy in their
Afflictions, and the keeping our selves unspotted from the world. Nor can we be
told a better course, (either for brevity, or clearness,) whereby to be
possessed of both together, than that of measuring and dealing our love to
others, by such a natural proportion as we have commonly for ourselves. For
this is perfectly the scope of that Law, to which as Christians we must be
subject. I say we must, (so much the rather,) because Gal. 6. 7.
what soever a man sows, that shall he reap. And with what measure we Matt.
7. 2.
mete, it shall be measured to us again. As it is the mercy of good men, which
is said to triumph over Gods Judgment, so there is Judgment without mercy for
them Jam. 2. 13. Matt. 6. 14, 15.
that show little or none.

Sect. 14. The chiefest requisites of our Love must be Sincerity and Fervor.
As S. Paul speaks to the Romans, we must be kindly affectioned one toward
another, so as our love may be brotherly, and without dissimulation. (Romans 12.
9, 10.) we must not be (...), double-sould men, (Jam. 1. 8.) but carry our
meaning in our foreheads, and hold our hearts in our hands. 1 John* 3. 18.
Not love in word, neither in Tongue, but in deed and in Truth. We must not
look every man at his own things only, but every man at the things of others,
(Phil. 2. 4.) If we are owners of such a love, as is a Testimony and proof of
our real Discipleship under Christ, The same mind will be in us which was in
Christ Jesus (Phil. 2. 5.) And if so, we shall be ready to stoop (as he Joh.
13. 5.
did) to the meanest offices of love, even to wash, and to wipe the very feet
of our Inferiors; we shall willingly bear one another burdens, (Gal. 6. 2.) by
love serving one another, (Gal. 5. 13.) And in honor preferring one another,
(Romans 12. 10.) Nay, if the same mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus, (as S.
Paul tells us it ought to be,) our love will be so Intensive, as to make us lay
down our lives for the Brethren. And so S. John tells us we ought to do, 1 John
3. 16.

Sect. 15. If no diviner love of one another were meant by our Savior under
the Gospel, then what was so frequently exacted under the paedagogie of Moses,
our Savior certainly would have said, An Old Commandment I give unto you; it
having been said to them of old, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
Levit. 19. 18. But here he calls it a New Commandment; which we cannot imagine
he would have don, had there been nothing in its subject but what was old. No,
he might very well call it a New Commandment, not only for that reason, (which
I find given by S. Novum mandatum appellatur, qui^ exuto vetere induit nos
hominem novum. Aug. Tract. 64. in Jo. in fi. Tom. 9. and Tract. 65. in Jo. in
initio Tom. 9.
Austin) because it prescribes us such a love, as by which we cast off the old
man, and put on the new; but because it prescribes us such a love, as never was
thought upon before, much less delivered under precept, to any Sect, or
Society, of Jews, or Gentiles. Had his Commandment been no more, than that we
love one another, it had been old with a witness; no doubt I may say, as old as
Adam. But because he added [a Sicut Ego] that we must love one another, even as
he has loved us, (which was with such a new Love, as till he came into the
world, was never heard of,) he had reason to call it a New Commandment. 'Twas
said by Moses to the Jews, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. But our
Savior says farther, that we must love one another, even as He has loved us;
which was not only as, but beyond Himself. For his loving us to the Death, was
(in the comparative sense of Scripture) to hate his own life for the love he
bare us. And although S. John says, Brethren, I write 1 John 2. 7. and 2 John
5.
no New Commandment, but an old Commandment which ye had from the Beginning, he
means no more by that last word, than the first Beginning of Christianity,
which was with the preaching of the Gospel by Jesus Christ. Remember we
therefore what Love this is, which is the Badge and Cognizance of our
profession; the mark of difference betwixt the Sheep and the Goats; and which
is not exacted from Men as Men, but from Christians as they are Christians. We
must not love as They do, who Psalm. 73. 8. Non ficut se diligunt qui
corrumpunt; nec ficut se diligunt homines, quia hominis sunt; sed sicut se
diligunt qui Dei sunt and filii altissimi, etc. August* loco supra cir.
corrupt one another (as S. Austin speaks) with a merely seditious, or
schismatical Love; nor must we love as they do, who only love one another for
filthy Lucre; much less as They do, who love one another for filthy Lust; Nor
must we love as They do, whose love consists only in this, that they agree in
the hatred of some third Party; Nor must we only love as they do, who love one
another as they are Men only, that is, as they are sociable and civil
Creatures. But we must love one another as being Lovers of God, and as being
such whom God loves; as being Luke 6. 35.
Children of the Highest, and Sic mutuo fatres vocamus, ut unius Dei Paren^es
omnes, ut consortes Fidei, ut spei Cohaeredes. Minut. Faelix, (...). Philo.
(...). p. 554.
younger Brothers of our Redeemer; as being all made Consorts of the very same
Hope, and all Coheirs of the very same Kingdom. Our Love must imitate both the
manner and the Degree of Christ's Love. For we must venture our Lives for the
good of others, and even in spite of all Dangers which may happen to the Body,
we must own, and propagate, and defend the Doctrines of the Gospel, which is
the utmost we can do for the good of other men's Souls; and that which makes us
most like a Savior. The Gospel (I may say) is the Christian School; thither it
is we go to learn; Christ is the Master of it in chief; all Christians are
School-fellows, or Condisciples. The Love I have hitherto described is the
highest lesson which there is taught. Those Titular Christians who do not
attain to this Love, are so many Dunces and Truants, fit to be turned out of
the School. It is indeed an hard Lesson, for us to love one another even as
Christ has loved us; a Lesson only to be found in the School of Christ. But
yet how Difficult soever, it is not impossible to be learned. For God is 1 Cor.
1. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
faithful; and expects not to reap, but after the measure that he has sown; He
will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able. If there is in us
ibid. 2 Cor. 8. 12.
a willing mind, He accepts according to what we have, and not according to
what we have not. The 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Grace of Christ is sufficient for us. And we can do Phil. 4. 13.
all things through him that strengthens us. And therefore let us not despair
of getting the Mastery over our Lesson; For we are all (...), (as S. Paul
speaks 1 These. 4. 9.
to the Thessalonians) immediately taught it by God himself.

Sect. 16. Now the more largely I have discovered, both what it is not, and
what it is, to love one another as Christ requires; the fewer words will
suffice to make it clear as the Sun at Noon, that by this we must be known to
be Christ's Disciples. For such a Love as This is, is the fulfilling of the Law.
So says the Lawgiver Matt. 7. 12. Luke 10. 27.
himself, Matt. 22. 40. and so his principal Apostle, Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. where
he speaks of Love in a Christian, as Demosthenes did of Pronunciation in an
Orator. As if it were not only the first Thing, but also the second, and the
third, and so indeed the (...), the All in All of a Christian. For mark the
words of that Apostle, whom we cannot accuse of vain, or needless Repetition.
He that loves another has fulfilled the Law (v. 8.) All the Commandments of
the Law are comprehended even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self (v. 9.) Love works no evil to his Neighbor, therefore Love is the
fulfilling of the Law (v. 10.) Three times in a breath, without so much as a
Parenthesis, love is reckoned to be the Pandect of all things requisite to make
a Saint.

Sect. 17. Nor let any man say within himself, How can this be? Since Gods word
tells us, that so it is. And yet I think it is easy to show you How too; For
the whole Body of the Law moral does consist of ten Members, which are commonly
called the Decalogue, or ten Commandments of the Law. The Lord Jesus has
reduced those Ten to these Two. Thou shall love thy God with all thy Heart, And
thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Hinges the very Door of Salvation does
clearly turn. For on these two Precepts hang all the Law and the Prophets,
(Matt. 22. 40.) But S. Paul has reduced them all to One. For thus he speaks to
the Galatians, Gal. 5. 14.
All the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. The reason is, because the Love of our Neighbor (in the
high degree I here speak of) does carry along with it, the Love of God: Either
of them (says Been intelligentibus utrumque inve nitur in singulis. Nam and
qui diligit Deum, non eum potest contemne^ praecipientem ut diligat proximum;
and qui superne ac spiritualiter diligit proximum, quid in eo diligit nisi
Deum? August. Tract. 65. in Joh. a med. Tom. 9.
Austin) is inferred by either; for if we really love God, we shall obey him
when he commands us to love our Neighbor; and if we really love our Neighbor,
it is for the Love which we bear to God. Observe the Logic, by which S. John
argues both backwards and forwards. By this we know we love the Children of
God, when we love God, and keep his Commandments, 1 John 5. 2. There he argues
from the first Table to the second. Now observe how he argues from the second
to the first, and that two ways, both in the Negative, and the Affirmative. In
the Negative thus; He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen? 1 John 4. 10. He that shuts up his Bowels of
Compassion from his brother, how dwells the Love of God in him? 1 John 3. 17.
Again he argues it in the Affirmative. We know that we have passed from death
unto life, if we love the brethren, 1 John 3. 1, 4. Hereby we know we are of
the Truth, and have Confidence toward God, if we keep his Commandments: And
this is his Commandment, that we love one another (v. 19. to v. 23.)

Sect. 18. Hence we see it is evident, There is not a clearer Demonstration of
our loving God with all our hearts, than the loving our Neighbor as our
selves. From whence it follows, that every sin must needs argue some want of
Love. For if against the first Table, it is through a want of some love to God.
And if against the second, it must needs be for want of some love to Men.
Again, it follows on the contrary, that where Love is perfect and entire, no
Commandment can be broken. For, loving God with all our hearts, we shall keep
the first Table; and loving our Neighbor as our selves, we shall not fail to
keep the second.

Sect. 19. What I have showed in the Great, I can easily show in the Retail
too, to wit, that Love is the fulfilling of the Law. For if we love God as we
ought to do, we shall certainly. have no God but Him: Much 1.
less shall we worship a Graven Image. We shall not lift 2.
up his Name in vain. Nor shall we fail to keep holy his 3.
Holy Days. And if we love our Neighbor as Christ 4.
requires, we shall be sure to render to every man his Due. And so by
consequence we shall honor all our Parents and Superiors, whether public, or
private, 5.
Ecclesiastical or Civil. Then for the Neighbor who is equal, or in any degree
inferior to us, we shall be sure not to injure him in any kind. From whence it
follows, we shall not kill; (for that were to injure him 6.
in his Life.) Nor commit Adultery; (for that were to 7.
injure him in his Wife.) Nor steal or Plunder; (for 8.
that were to injure him in his Goods.) Nor bear false 9.
Witness; (for that were to injure him in his good Name.) And as we shall not
thus injure him either in Deed, or in Word, so if we love him as our selves, or
as Christ loved us, we shall not do him any injury, no not so much as in our
Thoughts; we shall not covet, or be 10.
desirous of any thing that is our Neighbors. Thus the four Precepts of the
first Table, and the six Precepts of the second; or if there is any Romans 13. 9.
other Precept besides these Ten, they all are briefly comprehended in this one
word, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Sect* 20. And now I do not doubt but we are all of one mind, as touching the
Character and Badge by which we may be known to be Christ's Disciples; The
peculiar Note of Distinction, by which we are taken from out the world, as it
were severed and set apart, from all exorbitant societies and sorts of men,
whether their Ringleaders, and Masters, are Jews or Gentiles. First for the
Gentiles, we may know the Disciples of Zoroastres, by their belief of two gods,
and Incestuous wedlocks. We may know the Disciples of the Brachmans, by their
unparalled self-denials in food and raiment. We may know the Disciples of
Pythagoras, by their Reverence to the numbers of four and seven. The Disciples
of Plato, by their fanciful Idaea's in the concave of the Moon. The Disciples
of Zeno, by their Dreams of Apathie, and Fate. The Disciples of Mahomet, as
well by the filthiness of their Paradise, as by their desperate Tenet of God's
decrees. And then for the Jews, we may know the Disciples of the Scribes, by
their Traditional corruptions and Expositions of the Law. We may know the
Disciples of the Pharisees, by their Form of godliness, and their Matt. 23. 28.
appearing righteous unto men. We may know the Disciples of the Sadduces, by
their denial of Providence and dis-belief of the Resurrection. We may know the
Disciples of the Esseni, by their overstrict Sabbatizing. The Disciples of the
Nazarites, by their abstinence from the flesh of all living creatures. And the
Disciples of the Hemerobaptists, by their every day washings from Top to Toe.
We may know the Disciples of John the Baptist, by their remarkable Fastings,
and other Austerities of Life. But by this shall all men know that we are all
the Disciples of Jesus Christ, If we love one another, even as Christ has
loved us.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. WHilst I am thinking what proper Lessons we are to draw from Christ's
words, the words of S. Paul which he writ to Timothy do straight occur to my
remembrance; All Scripture (says he) is by divine Inspiration, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be furnished unto all good wooks, 2 Timothy
3. 16, 17. For were there no other Scripture, than that which has given me my
present subject, I should think it very profitable for each of those ends; and
think the workman well furnished for every good work.

Sect. 2. First, it is profitable for Doctrine, because it 1.
teaches such as are ignorant, the true importance of Christianity, which does
not consist (as some would have it) in our being born of godly Parents,
believing the History of the Gospel, making profession of zeal to Christ,
posting up and down from Sermon to Sermon, making many and long prayers, or
whatsoever is comprehended under the Form of Godliness, that is, the Image, the
Picture, the Counterfeit of Devotion, (as the word in the (...)*
Original does very naturally import, 2 Timothy 3. 5.) For many profess to know
God, who in their works deny him. And let a man's profession be Tit. 1. 16.
what it will, yet if he acts in contradiction to the Commandments of Christ,
that very acting is nothing better, than a Denial of the Faith. And so it is
called by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Christianity does not consist then, in such
a sanguin presumption, as some call Faith; in such a carnal security, as some
call Hope; in such a parcel of Jam. 2. 16.
fair words, as some call Charity; in such a 2 Cor. 7. 10. (...).
worldly sorrow, as some call Repentance: but it consist's in such a Faith, as
Gal. 5. 6.
works by Love; in such an Hope, as does 1 John 3. 3.
cleanse, and purify; in such a Charity as works no ill to his Neighbor;
but is (on the contrary) the Romans 13. 10.
fulfilling of the Law; and in such a Repentance, as shows it self by
amendment, and change of life, bringing forth Matt. 3. 8.
fruits meet for Repentance. Whatever some Mockers are wont to say; we find by
the Tenor of the Gospel, that a material part of Godliness is moral honesty.
The chief ingredients in a Christians life, are acts of Justice, and works of
Mercy; than which there was nothing more conspicuous in the life of Christ. The
second Table is the touchstone of our obedience unto the first. Our chiefest
duty toward God, is our duty toward our Neighbor. God will have Justice and
Mercy to be performed to one another, before he accepts of any sacrifice which
can be offered Matt. 5. 23, 24.
unto himself. For what says our Savior? If thou bring thy gift to the Altar,
and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. As if he should have said, Get thee gone, and be
Honest, before thou talk of being Godly. Now together with this, compare S.
John's way of reckoning 1 John 3. 10.
. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil,
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
Brother Verse 14.
. And we know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the
Brethren. Nor does our Savior say thus, by this shall all men know ye are my
Disciples, if they see ye love God, but by this they shall know it, is ye love
one another. Because our love of one another does presuppose we love God; which
it is 1 John 4. 20.
impossible that we do, in case we love not one another. For he that hates his
Brother is a Murderer, and abides in Death, 1 John 3. 14, 15.

Thus we see how this Scripture is profitable for Doctrine.

Sect. 3. And as for Doctrine, so also for Reproof. Because it serves to
convince us of the small proportion of Christianity, which is to be found
amongst men who are commonly called Christians. How much there is of the word,
and how little of the thing. When the Luke 18. 8.
son of man comes shall he find Faith on the Earth? Yes, store of that Faith,
which will ever be common to men with Jam. 2. 19.
Devils. But when the Son of man comes, shall he find Justice, shall he find
Mercy, shall he find Love upon the Earth? shall he find that Faith which
works by Love? and which works by such a Love, as is the mother of
Obedience? and the mother of such obedience, as is impartially due to the Law
of Christ? Alas! how frequent a thing is it, for Christians to persecute their
Fellow Christians, and then to reckon it as the character of their Discipleship
under Christ? As if they read the Text backwards, or understood Joh. 16. 2.
it by an Antiphrasis, supposing Christ had meant thus, By this shall all men
know ye are my Disciples, if ye Hate one another. It is a Crime the more
enormous, to hate and persecute a Neighbor, under color of Devotion and zeal
to God, because it breaks the Commandments against each other. For if the same
God who says [Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart] does also
say in the same instant, [Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.] It cannot
but follow that to persecute, or hate a Neighbor, in pretense of affection and
zeal to God, is to take up the Second Table in anger, and to dash it in pieces
against the first. And what is that, in effect, but to make the Law its own
Transgressor? The character of a Christian recommended here to us by Christ
himself, is not certainly such a praedatorie and Luke 11. 39.
ravenous love of one another, as was that of the Scribes and Pharisees,
wherewith they loved widows Houses, so far forth as to devour them, and (...)
Luke 23. 14. (...), etc. Herod. in Melp. c. 26. p. 233. confer ejusdem l. 1. c.
73 p. 30. etc. 119. p. 51.
eat them up. Nor such a cruel kind of love, as that of the Canibals in
Herodotus, who glutted themselves with the flesh of men, because they loved it
as well as Ven'son. For when Professors are transported with such an unnatural
kind of love, as gives them an appetite to bite and devour each other, (as the
Apostle speaks to the Ephesians,) or to eat up God's people as if they would
eat Bread, (as the Psalmist thought fit to phrase it,) it has a tendency to
nothing but mutual Ruin. No, the note of distinction, whereby to know a sincere
and a solid Christian, is such a divine kind of love as tends to Unity, and
Peace, and so (by a consequence unavoidable) to mutual safety, and
preservation. If we are rooted and grounded in such a love to one another, as
that of Christ unto us all, we shall be known by the Mat. 7. 16, 17.
fruit we bear, to have been (...) Ephesians. 3. 17.
grafted into him, who is indeed the John 15. 1. Quod tibi non vis fieri,
alteri ne feceris. Matt. 7. 12. Luke 6. 43.
true vine. We shall not only do to Romans 11. 19.
no man, what we would that no man should do to us, (which was the Motto an
Heathen Prince would needs have carved in all his Plate,) But what we wish that
all men would do to us, we shall earnestly endeavor to do to all men; we shall
love them for God's sake, whom, for their own sakes, we cannot love. If we are
mearly weak brethren, we shall manifest (by our weakness) we are not wilful.
And if strong, we shall bear the Infirmities Romans 15. 1.
of the weak. We shall walk in wisdom toward them that Colos. 4. 5.
are without, (I mean the Enemies of Christ, both Jews and Gentiles,) that we
may neither be in danger of being corrupted by their secular and sensual baits,
nor heighten their prejudice to the Gospel, by any matter of scandal in our
converse. Will it not be a very sad, and a shameful thing, if Jews and
Gentiles shall rise in judgment against a great part of Christendom, whilst
Christendom shall justify both Jews and Gentiles? First for the Jews, they
are so much at unity amongst themselves, that however covetous in their
particulars, and however cruel to us Christians; yet, they are kind to one
another, and full of good works too. They suffer not the needy to go without
his relief, nor the Captive without his ransom. Nay the Joseph, Antiq. 18. 2.
Philo Iud. in iibro cui Titulus, (...), p. 679. 680. (...). Philo (...). p. 539
Esseni (amongst the Jews) had all things in common; and, living Virgins
themselves, bestowed their cost and their care in breeding other solks
children. This was one of the Jewish Maxims, (as the most elegant of their
Writers has set it down,) that Godliness and Honesty, or the love of God and
the love of men, are a kind of Twin-sisters, which every Creature is to
espowse, who is not so wedded to the world, as to admit of a Divorce from the
caelestial Bridegroom. 'Twas never allowed unto the Jews, to Deuteronomy. 23. 7.
abhor an Edomite, or an Egyptian; or to count any man as an Enemy, (although
he were Ubi supra p. 548.
scaling the City-walls,) till he had absolutely refused their solemn offers of
Reconcilement. Then secondly, for the Gentiles, Iliad. p. 109.
Homer describes the love of Enemies; The Hierocl. in (...). p. 65, 66, 70.
Pythagoreans gave it in precept; and Val. Max. l. 7. c. 8. p. 193, 194.
Antius Restio's brave servant reduced the doctrine into practice. Whilst some
of the Heathens do love their Enemies, were it not well if some Christians
would love their Friends? What a scandal is it (at this day) to the Disciples
of Mahomet (that grand Impostor) that the Spirit of Division should seem to
reign, more amongst Christians than amongst them? Nay are there not diverse
great Potentates, who profess to be the followers and friends of Christ, and
yet are ready (at any rate) to buy peace of the Turk, to the end they may break
it with one another? Or, (not to go so far from home) how little is there of
Christianity, except the syllables and the sound, even in that part of
Christendom, where Christ is most talked of? Amongst the many who are followers
of the name of Christ, how few are followers of his Example? how far are they
from giving all to the Mar. 10. 21.
poor, who Isa. 3. 15. and 47. 2.
grind their faces as it were meal, and eat them up as it were Psalm. 14. 4. and
53. 4. Mar. 10. 20.
Bread? how unlikely are they to endure the bearing of the Cross, who lay it so
heavily upon other men's shoulders? how do They leave all, and follow Christ,
who take away all from them that follow him? how do they wrestle against powers
and principalities, Ephesians. 6. 12.
who flatter and syncretize with every thing that is mightiest? how do they
abstain from all appearance of 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
evil, who have nothing of good but in appearance? Where are those pieces of
Christianity, which are the grand characteristicks whereby a Christian should
be distinguished from Jew and Gentile? I fear the places are very few (though
God be thanked some there are) where Christ may be known, by solid Love, to
have real Disciples upon the earth.

Thus we see how this Scripture does furnish matter for Reproof.

Sect. 4. And as for Reproof, so withal for correction and instruction in
righteousness. Because it serves to Consule virum consummatissimum, D. D. H. in
2 Timothy 3. 16.
reduce such as are wandering out of the way, and to build up such as have
begun, or (as it were) set out in the way of righteousness. Whereby it brings
me nearer and nearer to the principal end of this Discourse, which we are not
only concerned in, as a people born in the very same Country, but as a people
brought up too in the very same School; and deservedly dear to one another, not
so much by being Contrymen, as Condisciples. Not Disciples under the Law,
which was a rigid Gal. 3. 24.
Schoolmaster to drive us on unto Christ; but Disciples under Christ, who was
a gracious Schoolmaster to lead us on unto God.

Sect. 5. Our Savior's last Will and Testament (a part of which I am upon) was
certainly made for the behoof as well of us, and of our children, ( upon whom
the ends of the world are come,) as for that dozen of 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Disciples to whom 'twas given by parole, and with whom the Depositum was left
in Trust. They were the Witnesses, Overseers, and Executors in chief; But we
the remotest of the Legataries have equal Right with the most Immediate. For
this Testament (like the Sun) is so communicated to All, that every Christian
in partiticular has a full right unto the whole. The reason of it is briefly
this. The true intent of the Testator was to make us 1 Timothy 6. 18.
rich in good works, rich toward God, and to one another. But I may say of
Right in such a Legacy, what Aristotle says of the soul of man, that the whole
is in the whole, and the whole in every part too. Nor is it left (as other
Legacies) to be accepted, or refused, without offense. For what is allowed to
be our privilege, is also enjoined to be our duty. In such a Legacy as this,
we are not only permitted, but strictly obliged to claim our portions. For so
run the words, A new COMMANDMENT give I unto you. His Command of our Acceptance
was one part of the the Gift; and made his Testament of force, not only Heb. 9.
17.
after, but before his death.

Sect. 6. Thus we see our obligation to fulfill the intent of the Testator. And
to the end we may see it, the will is registered by S. John in this indelible
Record. It lies upon us as we are Christians, to give a proof unto the world of
our Discipleship under Christ. Every man of us must endeavor (as S. Paul
exhorts his son Titus) to show himself a Pattern of good works. Our love, as
Tit. 2. 7.
well as our moderation, Phil. 4. 5.
must be known unto all men. Our light of love (like the Sun) must cast a glory
round about it, though not to this end, that men may see us, and glorify us,
yet at least to this end, that men may see our Matt. 5. 16.
good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Or that all men may
know we are Christ's Disciples. We must not walk after them, who open their
meeting with a Sermon, and shut it up with a Surfeit. But as often as we begin
with Acts of Sacrifice, so often should we end in works of mercy; very far from
being followers either of Herod, or the Israelites, who sat down (like Brutes)
to eat and drink, and then (like wantons) rose up to play, (Exodus 32. 6.) our
way to pass the time away merrily, must not be by a (...), or heathenish Feast
of good fellowship; but by a Christian (...), or Feast of love.

Sect. 7. If we will know what that means, we must consult the second Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles; where we shall find (in the conclusion) that they
did Act. 2. 46.
not only continue daily in the Temple, but they did also break bread from
house to house. They did enjoy their merry meetings of love and charity; for so
it follows in the Text, Ibid.
They did eat their meat with gladness, as well as with singleness of heart.
From whence I take out this Lesson, That Christianity is not a sullen thing,
making every man's life a continual Lent, as the Heretic Illi tres in anno
faciunt quadrage simas, quasi tres (...) sint salvatores. Hieron. in ep. ad
Marcellam. fol. 406. Verse 44, 45.
Montanus would fain have had it. There is a difference very sufficient betwixt
the Church of a Christian, and a Stoick' s Porch. But withal let us ruminate on
the two Verses going before, where they had all things in common, the rich
distributing to the poor, (to every man his proportion) just according as they
had need.

Sect. 8. Neither was it upon a sudden, that charity grew to that coldness in
which we find it. For Quia animo animaque (...), nihil de rei communicatione
dubitamus. Omnia indiscreta apud nos sunt praeter ^xores. Tertul. in Apol. cap.
39. 2 Cor. 8. 3.
Tertullian tells us, that (in his days) they had all things in common, except
their wives.

I do not press for an equality, (I think the Age will not bear it,) I only
plead for a similitude with what we find was the practice of better times. I do
not urge our being liberal beyond your power (like the Primitive Christians of
Macedonia,) nor our parting with our Riches in exchange for deep Poverty, that
through our poverty poorer men may grow Rich, (as S. Paul speaks of our
Savior, v. 9.) For when the Age is all Iron, we cannot hope to find ourselves
of such golden Humors, as to admit of being purged of so much Dross.

Sect. 9. All I press for, is but this, That we will be but as ingenuous as the
Heathen Emperor Severus; that is, that we will do as we would be don by, and at
least be liberal 2 Co. 8. 3.
to our power; and that we will so show mercy, as we hope to find it. We cannot
call any a Feast of Love, where some are drunk, whilst some are hungry, (as it
seems at 1 Cor. 11. 21.
Corinth some such there were.) A true Feast of Love must be for all comers, as
well for the poor, as for the rich, or rather for the poor before the rich. For
mark the words of our Savior to one who invited him to a Feast, Luke 14. from
v. 12. to v. 15. where first he advises in the Negative; When Luke 14. 12.
thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren,
neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee again,
and so recompense be made thee. From whence we learn, That it is true (...),
Aristot. Eth. l. 8. p. 816.
Courtesy indeed, to be afraid of a Requital. He is a Mercenary Feaster, whose
Guests are all Entertainers, as apt and able as himself. For one rich man to
invite another, is no more in effect, than to make an exchange of good Cheer;
to commute a Dinner for a Supper; and what is that to be esteemed, but a more
Gentlemanly Barter? A buying and selling of Entertainments? Our Savior
therefore goes on to the Verse 13.
positive part of his Advice. When thou make a Feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, and the blind, adding Verse 14.
this for a reason, because they cannot recompense thee again. Which is as much
as to say, that the noblest motive to our Beneficence should be the poverty of
the object on which it is fastened, and the greatest impossibility of the least
Requital upon earth. It is always Acts 20. 35.
more blessed to give than to receive, (as our Saviors words are written in
the Nazarene Gospel;) but then especially, when we give with an assurance of
not receiving. Yet in this case also, the merciful man is a Projector, and
driving on his own interest; bestowing a little here on earth, for a large
Recompense in Heaven. For so says our Savior in the next words of that Verse,
(giving the reason of that reason he gave before) Verse 14.
Thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Dead.

Sect. 10. Here then let us consider. When God professes to be our Prove. 19.
17.
Ibid.
Debtor for all we give unto the poor, and gives us his word for a Luke 6. 38.
Matt. 19. 29.
Repayment, and Christ becomes our security, that all we lend shall be returned
an hundred fold into our Bosoms; what kind of reason can be imagined why one
Rich man will lend his money unto another, for six pounds in the hundred, or
lay it out in some Trade (at most) for twenty in the hundred, rather than Prove.
19. 17
lend it unto the Lord, (by having pity upon the poor,) or Mat. 13. 45* 6
lay it out upon life eternal, whereby he shall not only receive six or twenty
in the hundred, but exceedingly more, than an hundredfold the very Principal?
If we inquire into the reason, I am afraid we shall find it to be but this,
that they cannot easily trust God, or believe the Scripture, or accept of
Christ for their security. Say we therefore to ourselves, as many of us as are
Rich, That if ever we do expect to be Luke 16. 22.
carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, we must think our selves obliged to
take Lazarus into our own. Or admit we may be said to be comparatively poor,
yet rather than fail of being merciful, we must Ephesians. 4. 2^.
work with our hands the thing that is good, that we may have to give to him
that needs. S. Paul's own hands did administer to his necessities; and not
only to his, but to theirs also that were with him, Act. 20. 43. The strong
ought by their labor to (...)* Philo. (...). p. 557.
support the weak, (v. 35.) Rather than any man should want, who is not able to
earn his Bread, he has a kind of right to eat it in the sweat of our Brows.
For there is one sort of poor, who are an Honorable Order and Rank of men, as
being Iure Divino, of God's immediate Deuteronomy. 15. 11. 1 Samuel 2. 7.
Institution. And our Lord himself, that Mal. 42.
Sun of righteousness, when he was here in his Hypogoeo, was pleased to make
himself free of that Company; did not think it unbecoming him to be the head of
that Order. For whilst he lived, he lived on Alms, (Luke 8. 3.) the Fexes were
not so poor, for they had holes; the Fowls of the Air were not so destitute,
for they had nests; but the Son of man (said the Son of man himself) had not
where to lay his head. Matt. 8. 20.
And then, when he was dead, he was fain to be buried upon other folks charges.
( Luke 23. 53, 56.) We must not therefore neglect the Poor, unless we dare
Prove. 14* 31. (...). Philo. (...). p. 544.
reproach our Maker; or unless we dare despise that, which Christ himself in
his person was pleased to honor. The Infidels provided, as well for those of
their own Country, as for those of their own House. And S. Paul implies by the
word [ 1 Timothy 5. 8.
especially,] that Christians ought to provide for Both, unless they dare be
worse than Infidels.

Sect. 11. But I am not at an end of my Exhortation. For in vain do rich men
conspire, to refresh the Bowels Phile^. 7.
of the poor, whilst by envy, or Animosity, or vexatious Suits at Law, they do
impoverish the Rich too. It is not true Charity they show to others, if they
nourish Contention among themselves. Men may be liberal to their Vanities,
bestow a great deal of Riches in Ostentation to the poor, and yet be still
strangers to Christian charity, in case they will not let fall a Suit at Law,
till they are utterly disenabled to hold it up. The wise Disciples of (...).
Hi^cl. (...). p* 61.
Pythagoras would rather quit their own right in matter of Riches, or Honor,
or worldly greatness, than run the hazard of breaking peace in any such carnal
considerations.

Sect. 12. Let every one therefore conjure himself, not so much by that common,
and civil Interest, which we have in one Country, as by that common, and
sacred Interest, which we have in one Christ, that all our Contentions (from
this day forwards) may be swallowed up in this one, who shall show the greatest
Zeal, and who shall use the best endeavors, to keep the unity of ^ph. 4. 3.
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. Let the saying of St. James be ever recurring
to our Remembrance, that to love one another, as we love our own selves, is to
fulfill the Royal Law, Jam. 2. 8. If Jesus Christ is a Royal Savior, and if his
Law is a Royal Law, then all true Christians must needs be Royalists; that is,
obedient to the Precepts of Christ their King.

Sect. 13. For as subjects to their Sovereign, so are Christians bound up to
the law of Christ. And as little let us forget that other saying of St. Paul.
that by one 1 Cor. 12. 15.
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body; whether Jews, or Gentiles, bond or
free, of different Countries, or of the same, we have been all made to drink
into one Spirit Verse 27.
. We are the Body of Christ, and members in particular, Verse 25. Phil 4. 8.
Let there be no Schism in the Body. But whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, if there be any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and
Mercies, let us Chap. 2. v. 1.
resolve, at least to meditate, and to Think on these things. And the very God
of Peace sanctify us wholly; that the 1 These. 5. 23.
whole of each of us, both body, soul, and spirit, may be kept blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now unto him who is able to keep us from falling, and Jud^. 24.
to raise us when we are down, and to present us being risen, before the
presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, To the only wise God our Savior,
even to God the Father, who has created us in love by his mighty power; to God
the Son, who has redeemed us in love by his precious Blood; to God the
Holy Ghost, who has prepared us in love by his sanctifying Grace, and thereby
given us a Pledge of our future Glory; to the holy, individual, and Glorious
Trinity, three Persons and one God, be ascribed by us, and by all the world,

Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and Power. Rev. 5. 12, 1^*
and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this day forwards for evermore.
THE END.
ERRATA'S, of the Signal Diagnostick.
Page 86. line 29. read, Jer. 23. 26. Page 76. line 11. read, (...). Page 111.
line 3. in marg. read, (...).

Books Printed since the Fire for R. Royston,
A Discourse concerning the true Notion of the Lords Supper, to which are added
two Sermons, by R. Cudworth. D. D.

A Disswasive from Popery in two parts, 4o by Jer. Tailor, Lord Bishop of Down
and Connor.

A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Non conformist, in two parts 8o.

The buckler of State and Justice, against the Design ma^ifestly discovered of
the Universal Monarchy, under the vain Pretext of the Queen of France her
Pretensions 8o

The Unreasonableness of the Romanist (...) ^quiring our Communion with the
present Romish C^rch 8o.


